letter could neither edify nor make him more perfect, seeing that such an
example was given him by his Gods. But to the Philosopher—especially the
Initiate—Hesiod’s _Theogony_ is as historical as any history can be. Plato
accepts it as such, and gives out as much of its truths as his pledges
permitted.

The fact that the Atlantes claimed Uranus for their first king, and that
Plato commences his story of Atlantis by the division of the great
Continent by Neptune, the grandson of Uranus, shows that there were
continents before Atlantis and kings before Uranus. For Neptune, to whose
lot the great Continent fell, finds on a small island only one human
couple made of clay—_i.e._, the first physical _human_ man, whose origin
began with the last sub‐races of the Third Root‐Race. It is their daughter
Clito that the God marries, and it is his eldest son Atlas who receives
for his part the mountain and the continent which were called by his
name.(1786)

Now all the Gods of Olympus, as well as those of the Hindû Pantheon and
the Rishis, were the septiform personations (1) of the Noumena of the
Intelligent Powers of Nature; (2) of Cosmic Forces; (3) of Celestial
Bodies; (4) of Gods or Dhyân Chohans; (5) of Psychic and Spiritual Powers;
(6) of Divine Kings on Earth, or the incarnations of the Gods; and (7) of
Terrestrial Heroes or Men. The knowledge how to discern among these seven
forms the one that is intended, belonged at all times to the Initiates,
whose earliest predecessors had created this symbolical and allegorical
system.

Thus while Uranus, or the Host representing this celestial group, reigned
and ruled over the Second Race and their then Continent, Cronus or Saturn
governed the Lemurians; and Jupiter, Neptune(1787) and others fought in
the allegory for Atlantis, which was the whole Earth in the day of the
Fourth Race. Poseidonis, or the last island of Atlantis—the “third step”
of Idas‐pati, or Vishnu, in the mystic language of the Secret Books—lasted
till about 12,000 years ago.(1788) The Atlantes of Diodorus were right in
claiming that it was their country, the region surrounding Mount Atlas,
where “the Gods were born”—_i.e._, “incarnated.” But it was after their
fourth incarnation that they became, for the first time, human kings and
rulers.

Diodorus speaks of Uranus as the first king of Atlantis, confusing, either
consciously or otherwise, the Continents; but as we have shown, Plato
indirectly corrects the statement. The first astronomical teacher of men
was Uranus, because he is one of the seven Dhyân Chohans of that Second
Period or Race. Thus also in the second Manvantara, that of Svârochisha,
among the seven sons of the Manu, the presiding Gods or Rishis of that
race, we find Jyotis,(1789) the teacher of Astronomy (Jyotisha), one of
the names of Brahmâ. And thus also the Chinese revere Tien (or the Sky,
Ouranos), and name him as their first teacher of Astronomy. Uranus gave
birth to the Titans of the Third Race, and it is they, personified by
Saturn‐Cronus, who mutilated him. For as it is the Titans who _fell into
generation_, when “creation by _will_ was superseded by physical
procreation,” they needed Uranus no more.

And here a short digression must be permitted and pardoned. In consequence
of the last scholarly production of Mr. Gladstone in the _Nineteenth
Century_, “The Greater Gods of Olympos,” the ideas of the general public
about Greek Mythology have been still further perverted and biassed. Homer
is credited with an inner thought, which is regarded by Mr. Gladstone as,
“the true key to the Homeric conception,” whereas this “key” is merely a
“blind.”


    [Poseidon] is indeed essentially of the earth earthy ... strong
    and self‐asserting, sensual and intensely jealous and vindictive—


but this is because he symbolizes the Spirit of the Fourth Root‐Race, the
Ruler of the Seas, that Race which lives above the surface of the
seas,(1790) which is composed of the giants, the children of Eurymedon,
the race which is the father of Polyphemus, the Titan, and the one‐eyed
Cyclops. Though Zeus reign over the Fourth Race, it is Poseidon who rules,
and who is the true key to the triad of the Cronid Brothers, and to our
_human_ races. Poseidon and Nereus are _one_; the former the Ruler or
Spirit of Atlantis before the beginning of its submersion, the latter,
after. Neptune is the titanic strength of the _living_ Race, Nereus, its
Spirit, reïncarnated in the subsequent Fifth or Âryan Race; and this is
what the Greek scholar of England has not yet discovered, or even dimly
perceived. And yet he makes many observations upon the “artfulness” of
Homer, who never names Nereus, at whose designation we arrive only through
the patronymic of the Nereids!

Thus the tendency of even the most erudite Hellenists is to confine their
speculations to the exoteric images of Mythology and to lose sight of
their inner meaning; and it is remarkably illustrated in the case of Mr.
Gladstone, as we have shown. While almost the most conspicuous figure of
our age as a statesman, he is at the same time one of the most cultured
scholars to whom England has given birth. Grecian literature has been the
beloved study of his life, and he has found time amid the bustle of public
affairs to enrich contemporary literature with contributions to Greek
scholarship, which will make his name famous through coming generations.
At the same time, as his sincere admirer, the present writer cannot but
feel a deep regret that posterity, while acknowledging his profound
erudition and splendid culture, will yet, in the greater light which
_must_ then shine upon the whole question of Symbolism and Mythology,
judge that he has failed to grasp the spirit of the religious system which
he has often criticized from the dogmatic Christian standpoint. In that
future day it will be perceived that the Esoteric key to the mysteries of
the Christian as well as of the Grecian Theogonies and Sciences, is the
Secret Doctrine of the pre‐historic nations, which, along with others, he
has denied. It is that doctrine alone which can trace the kinship of all
human religious speculations, or even of so‐called “revelations,” and it
is this teaching which infuses the spirit of life into the lay figures on
the Mounts of Meru, Olympus, Walhalla, or Sinai. If Mr. Gladstone were a
younger man, his admirers might hope that his scholastic studies would be
crowned by the discovery of this underlying truth. As it is, he but wastes
the golden hours of his declining years in futile disputations with that
giant free‐thinker, Col. Ingersoll, each fighting with the weapons of
exoteric temper, drawn from the arsenals of ignorant Literalism. These two
great controversialists are equally blind to the true Esoteric meaning of
the texts which they hurl at each other’s heads like iron bullets, while
the world alone suffers by such controversies; since the one helps to
strengthen the ranks of Materialism, and the other those of blind
Sectarianism of the dead‐letter. And now we may return once more to our
immediate subject.

Many a time Atlantis is spoken of under another name, one unknown to our
commentators. The _power of names_ is great, and has been known since the
first men were instructed by the _Divine_ Masters. And as Solon had
studied it, he translated the “Atlantean” names into names devised by
himself. In connection with the continent of Atlantis, it is desirable to
bear in mind that the accounts which have come down to us from the old
Greek writers contain a confusion of statements, some referring to the
great Continent and others to the last small island of Poseidonis. It has
become customary to take them all as referring to the latter only, but
that this is incorrect is evident from the incompatibility of the various
statements as to the size, etc., of “Atlantis.”

Thus, in the _Critias_, Plato says, that the plain surrounding the city
was itself surrounded by mountain chains, and the plain was smooth and
level, and of an oblong shape, lying north and south, three thousand
stadia in one direction and two thousand in the other; they surrounded the
plain by an enormous canal or dike, 101 feet deep, 606 feet broad, and
1,250 miles in length.(1791)

Now in other places the entire size of the _island_ of Poseidonis is given
as about the same as that assigned here to the “_plain_ around the city”
alone. Obviously, one set of statements refers to the great Continent, and
the other to its last remnant—Plato’s island.

And, again, the standing army of Atlantis is given as upwards of a million
men; its navy as 1,200 ships and 240,000 men. Such statements are quite
inapplicable to a small island state, of about the size of Ireland!

The Greek allegories give to Atlas, or Atlantis, seven daughters—seven
sub‐races—whose respective names are Maia, Electra, Taygeta, Asterope,
Merope, Alcyone, and Celæno. This ethnologically—as they are credited with
having married Gods and with having become the mothers of famous heroes,
the founders of many nations and cities. Astronomically, the Atlantides
have become the seven Pleiades (?). In Occult Science the two are
connected with the destinies of nations, those destinies being shaped by
the past events of their early lives according to Karmic Law.

Three great nations claimed in antiquity a direct descent from the kingdom
of Saturn or Lemuria, confused with Atlantis several thousands of years
before our era; and these were the Egyptians, the Phœnicians
(Sanchuniathon), and the old Greeks (Diodorus, after Plato). But the
oldest civilized country of Asia—India—can likewise be shown to claim the
same descent. Sub‐races, guided by Karmic Law or destiny, repeat
unconsciously the first steps of their respective mother‐races. As the
comparatively fair Brâhmans—when invading India with its dark‐coloured
Dravidians—have come from the North, so the Âryan Fifth Race must claim
its origin from northern regions. The Occult Sciences show that the
founders, the respective groups of the seven Prajâpatis, of the Root‐Races
have all been connected with the Pole Star. In the Commentary we find:


    _He who understands the age of Dhruva_(_1792_)_ who measures 9090
    mortal years, will understand the times of the Pralayas, the final
    destiny of nations, O Lanoo._


Moreover there must have been a good reason why an Asiatic nation should
locate its great Progenitors and Saints in Ursa Major, a _northern
constellation_. It is 70,000 years, however, _since the Pole of the Earth
pointed to the further end of Ursa Minor’s tail_; and many more thousand
years since the seven Rishis could have been identified with the
constellation of Ursa Major.

The Âryan Race was born and developed in the far North, though after the
sinking of the Continent of Atlantis its tribes emigrated further South
into Asia. Hence Prometheus is the son of Asia, and Deucalion, his son,
the Greek Noah—he who created men out of the stones of mother Earth—is
called a northern Scythe, by Lucian, and Prometheus is made the brother of
Atlas and is tied down to Mount Caucasus amid the snows.(1793)

Greece had her _Hyperborean_ as well as her _Southern_ Apollo. Thus nearly
all the Gods of Egypt, Greece, and Phœnicia, as well as those of other
Pantheons, are of a northern origin and originated in Lemuria, towards the
close of the Third Race, after its full physical and physiological
evolution had been completed.(1794) All the “fables” of Greece would be
found to be built on historical facts, if that history had only passed to
posterity unadulterated by myths. The “one‐eyed” Cyclopes, the giants
fabled as the sons of Cœlus and Terra—three in number, according to
Hesiod—were the last three sub‐races of the Lemurians, the “one‐eye”
referring to the wisdom‐eye;(1795) for the two front eyes were fully
developed as physical organs only in the beginning of the Fourth Race. The
allegory of Ulysses, whose companions were devoured while the king of
Ithaca himself was saved by putting out the eye of Polyphemus with a fire‐
brand, is based upon the psycho‐physiological atrophy of the “third eye.”
Ulysses belongs to the cycle of the heroes of the Fourth Race, and, though
a “Sage” in the sight of the latter, must have been a profligate in the
opinion of the pastoral Cyclopes.(1796) His adventure with the latter—a
savage gigantic race, the antithesis of cultured civilization in the
_Odyssey_—is an allegorical record of the gradual passage from the
Cyclopean civilization of stone and colossal buildings to the more sensual
and physical culture of the Atlanteans, which finally caused the last of
the Third Race to lose their all‐penetrating _spiritual_ eye. The other
allegory, which makes Apollo kill the Cyclopes to avenge the death of his
son Asclepius, does not refer to the three sub‐races represented by the
three sons of Heaven and Earth, but to the Hyperborean Arimaspian
Cyclopes, the last of the race endowed with the “wisdom‐eye.” The former
have left relics of their buildings everywhere, in the South as much as in
the North; the latter were confined to the North solely. Thus Apollo—pre‐
eminently the God of the Seers, whose duty it is to punish desecration,
killed them—his shafts representing human passions, fiery and lethal—and
hid his shaft behind a mountain in the Hyperborean regions.(1797)
Cosmically and astronomically this Hyperborean God is the Sun personified,
which during the course of the Sidereal Year—25,868 years—changes the
climates on the Earth’s surface, making frigid regions of tropical, and
_vice versâ_. Psychically and spiritually his significance is far more
important. As Mr. Gladstone pertinently remarks in his “Greater Gods of
Olympos”:


    The qualities of Apollo (jointly with Athenê) are impossible to be
    accounted for without repairing to sources, which lie beyond the
    limit of the traditions most commonly explored for the elucidation
    of the Greek mythology.(1798)


The history of Latona (Leto), Apollo’s mother, is most pregnant in various
meanings. Astronomically, Latona is the polar region and the night, giving
birth to the Sun, Apollo, Phœbus, etc. She is born in the Hyperborean
countries, wherein all the inhabitants were priests of her son,
celebrating his resurrection and descent to their country every nineteen
years at the renewal of the lunar cycle.(1799)  Latona is the Hyperborean
Continent, and its Race—geologically.(1800)

When the astronomical meaning cedes its place to the spiritual and
divine—Apollo and Athene transforming themselves into the form of “birds,”
the symbol and glyph of the higher divinities and angels—then the bright
God assumes divine creative powers. Apollo becomes the personification of
seership, when he sends the astral double of Æneas to the battle
field,(1801) and has the gift of appearing to his seers without being
visible to other persons present,(1802) a gift, however, shared by every
high Adept.

The King of the Hyperboreans was, therefore, the son of Boreas, the North
Wind, and the High Priest of Apollo. The quarrel of Latona with Niobe—the
Atlantean Race—the mother of seven sons and seven daughters, personifying
the seven sub‐races of the Fourth Race and their seven branches(1803)
allegorizes the history of the two Continents. The wrath of the “Sons of
God,” or of “Will and Yoga,” at seeing the steady degradation of the
Atlanteans was great;(1804) and the destruction of the children of Niobe
by the children of Latona—Apollo and Diana, the deities of light, wisdom
and purity, or the Sun and Moon astronomically, whose influence causes
changes in the Earth’s axis, deluges and other cosmic cataclysms—is thus
very clear.(1805) The fable about the never‐ceasing tears of Niobe, whose
grief causes Zeus to change her into a fountain—Atlantis covered with
water—is no less graphic as a symbol. Niobe, let it be remembered, is the
daughter of one of the Pleiades, or Atlantides, the grand‐daughter of
Atlas therefore,(1806) because she represents the last generations of the
doomed Continent.

A true remark, that of Bailly, which says that Atlantis had an enormous
influence on antiquity. He adds:


    If these mythical names are mere allegories, then all that they
    have of truth comes from Atlantis; if the fable is a real
    tradition—however altered—then the ancient history is wholly their
    history.(1807)


So much so, that all ancient writings—prose and poetry—are full of the
reminiscences of the Lemuro‐Atlanteans, the first _physical_ Races, though
the Third and the Fourth in number in the evolution of Fourth Round
Humanity on our Globe. Hesiod records the tradition about the men of the
Age of Bronze, whom Jupiter had made out of ash‐wood and who had hearts
harder than diamond. Clad in bronze from head to foot, they passed their
lives in fighting. Monstrous in size, endowed with a terrible strength,
invincible arms and hands descended from their shoulders, says the
poet.(1808) Such were the giants of the first physical Races.

The Iranians have a reference to the later Atlanteans in _Yasna_, ix. 15.
Tradition maintains that the “Sons of God,” or the great Initiates of the
Sacred Island, took advantage of the Deluge to rid the Earth of all the
Sorcerers among the Atlanteans. The said verse addresses Zarathushtra as
one of the “Sons of God.” It says:


    Thou, O Zarathushtra, didst make all demons [Sorcerers], who
    before roamed the world in human forms, conceal themselves in the
    earth [helped them to submersion].


The Lemurians, and also the early Atlanteans, were divided into two
distinct classes—the “Sons of Night” or Darkness, and the “Sons of the
Sun” or Light. The old books tell us of terrible battles between the two,
when the former, leaving their land of Darkness, whence the Sun departed
for long months, descended from their inhospitable regions and “tried to
wrench the Lord of Light” from their better‐favoured brothers of the
equatorial regions. We may be told that the Ancients knew nothing of the
long night of six months’ duration in the polar regions. Even Herodotus,
more learned than the rest, only mentions a people who slept for six
months in the year, and remained awake the other half. Yet the Greeks knew
well that there was a country in the North where the year was divided into
a day and night each of six months’ duration, for Pliny distinctly says
so.(1809) They speak of the Cimmerians and of the Hyperboreans, and draw a
distinction between the two. The former inhabited the Palus Mæotis—between
45° and 50° latitude. Plutarch explains that they were but a _small
portion_ of a _great nation_ driven away by the Scythians—which nation
stopped near the Tanais, after _having crossed Asia_.


    These warlike multitudes lived formerly on the ocean shores, in
    dense forests, and _under a tenebrous sky_. There the pole is
    almost touching the head, there _long nights and days divide the
    year_.(1810)


As to the Hyperboreans, these peoples, as expressed by Solinus Polyhistor:


    Sow in the morning, reap at noon, gather their fruits in the
    evening, and store them during the night in their caves.(1811)


Even the writers of the _Zohar_ knew this fact, as it is written:


    In the Book of Hammannunah, the Old [or the Ancient], we learn ...
    there are some countries of the earth which are lightened, whilst
    others are in darkness; these have the day, when for the former it
    is night; and there are countries in which it is constantly day,
    or in which at least the night continues only some instants.(1812)


The island of Delos, the Asteria of Greek Mythology, was never in Greece,
for this country, in that day, was not yet in existence, not even in its
molecular form. Several writers have shown that it represented a country
or an island, far larger than the small dots of land which became Greece.
Both Pliny and Diodorus Siculus place it in the Northern Seas. One calls
it Basilea, or “Royal”;(1813) the other, Pliny, names it Osericta,(1814) a
word which, according to Rudbeck,(1815) had


    A significance in the northern languages, equivalent to the Island
    of the Divine Kings or God‐kings—


or again the “Royal Island of the Gods,” because the Gods were born there,
_i.e._, the Divine Dynasties of the Kings of Atlantis proceeded from that
place. Let Geographers and Geologists seek for it among that group of
islands discovered by Nordenskiöld on his “Vega” voyage in the Arctic
regions.(1816) The Secret Books inform us that _the climate has changed in
those regions more than once_, since the first men inhabited those now
almost inaccessible latitudes. They were a Paradise before they became
Hell; the dark Hades of the Greeks, and the cold Realm of Shades where the
Scandinavian Hel, the Goddess‐Queen of the country of the dead, “holds
sway deep down in Helheim and Niflheim.” Yet it was the birthplace of
Apollo, who was the brightest of Gods, in Heaven—astronomically—as he was
the most enlightened of the Divine Kings who ruled over the early nations,
in his human meaning. The latter fact is borne out in the _Iliad_, wherein
Apollo is said to have appeared four times in his own form (as the God of
the Four Races) and six times in human form,(1817) _i.e._, as connected
with the Divine Dynasties of the earlier unseparated Lemurians.

It is those early mysterious peoples, their countries—which have now
become uninhabitable—as well as the name given to “man” both dead and
alive, which have furnished an opportunity to the ignorant Church Fathers
for inventing a Hell, which they have transformed into a burning instead
of a freezing locality.(1818)

It is, of course, evident that it is neither the Hyperboreans, nor the
Cimmerians, the Arimaspes, nor even the Scyths—known to and communicating
with the Greeks—who were our Atlanteans. But they were all the descendants
of their last sub‐races. The Pelasgians were certainly one of the root‐
races of future Greece, and were a remnant of a sub‐race of Atlantis.
Plato hints as much in speaking of the latter, whose name, it is averred,
came from _pelagus_, the “great sea.” Noah’s Deluge is astronomical and
allegorical, but it is not mythical, for the story is based upon the same
archaic tradition of men—or rather of nations—who were saved during the
cataclysms, in canoes, arks, and ships. No one would presume to say that
the Chaldæan Xisuthrus, the Hindû Vaivasvata, the Chinese Peirun—the
“Beloved of the Gods,” who rescued him from the flood in a canoe—or the
Swedish Belgamer, for whom the Gods did the same in the North, are all
identical as personages. But their legends have all sprung from the
catastrophe which involved both the Continent and the Island of Atlantis.

The allegory about the antediluvian giants and their achievements in
sorcery is no myth. Biblical events _are_ revealed indeed. But it is
neither by the voice of God amid thunder and lightning on Mount Sinai, nor
by a divine finger tracing the record on tablets of stone, but simply
through tradition _viâ_ Pagan sources. It was not surely the _Pentateuch_
that Diodorus was repeating when he wrote about the Titans—the giants born
of Heaven and Earth, or, rather, born of the Sons of God who took to
themselves for wives the daughters of men who were fair. Nor was
Pherecydes quoting from _Genesis_ when giving details on those giants
which are not to be found in the Jewish Scriptures. He says that the
Hyperboreans were of the race of the Titans, a race which descended from
the earliest giants, and that it was that Hyperborean region which was the
birthplace of the first giants. The Commentaries on the Sacred Books
explain that the said region was the far North, the Polar Lands now, the
Pre‐Lemurian earliest Continent, embracing once upon a time the present
Greenland, Spitzbergen, Sweden, Norway, etc.

But who were the Nephilim of _Genesis_ (vi. 4)? There were Palæolithic and
Neolithic men in Palestine ages before the events recorded in the Book of
the Beginnings. The theological tradition identifies these Nephilim with
hairy men or satyrs, the latter being mythical in the Fifth Race, and the
former historical in both the Fourth and Fifth Races. We have stated
elsewhere what the prototypes of these satyrs were, and have spoken of the
bestiality of the early and later Atlantean Race. What is the meaning of
Poseidon’s amours under such a variety of _animal_ forms? He became a
dolphin to win Amphitrite; a horse, to seduce Ceres; a ram, to deceive
Theophane, etc. Poseidon is not only the personation of the Spirit and
Race of Atlantis, but also of the vices of these giants. Gesenius and
others devote an enormous space to the meaning of the word Nephilim and
explain very little. But Esoteric Records show these hairy creatures to be
the last descendants of those Lemuro‐Atlantean Races, which begot children
on female animals, of species now long extinct; thus producing dumb men,
“monsters,” as the Stanzas have it.

Now Mythology, built upon Hesiod’s _Theogony_, which is but a poetized
record of actual traditions, or oral history, speaks of three giants,
called Briareus, Cottus, and Gyges, living in a dark country where they
were imprisoned by Cronus for their rebellion against him. All the three
are endowed by myth with a hundred arms and fifty heads, the latter
standing for races, the former for sub‐races and tribes. Bearing in mind
that in Mythology every personage almost is a God or Demi‐god, and also a
king or simple mortal in his second aspect,(1819) and that both stand as
symbols for lands, islands, powers of nature, elements, nations, races and
sub‐races, the Esoteric Commentary will become comprehensible. It says
that the three giants are three polar lands which have changed form
several times, at each new cataclysm, or disappearance of one continent to
make room for another. The whole Globe is convulsed periodically; and has
been so convulsed, since the appearance of the First Race, four times.
Yet, though the whole face of the Earth was transformed thereby each time,
the conformation of the Arctic and Antarctic Poles has but little altered.
The polar lands unite and break off from each other into islands and
peninsulas, yet remain ever the same. Therefore Northern Asia is called
the “Eternal or Perpetual Land,” and the Antarctic the “Ever‐living” and
the “Concealed”; while the Mediterranean, Atlantic, Pacific and other
regions disappear and reäppear in turn, into and above the Great Waters.

From the first appearance of the great Continent of Lemuria, the three
polar giants have been imprisoned in their circle by Cronus. Their gaol is
surrounded by a wall of bronze, and the exit is through gates fabricated
by Poseidon—or Neptune—hence by the seas, which they cannot cross; and it
is in that damp region, where eternal darkness reigns, that the three
brothers languish. The _Iliad_ makes it Tartarus.(1820) When the Gods and
Titans rebelled in their turn against Zeus—the deity of the Fourth
Race—the Father of the Gods bethought himself of the imprisoned giants
that they might help him to conquer the Gods and Titans, and to
precipitate the latter into Hades; or, in clearer words, to have Lemuria
hurled amid thunder and lightning to the bottom of the seas, so as to make
room for Atlantis, which was to be submerged and perish in its turn.(1821)
The geological upheaval and deluge of Thessaly was a repetition on a small
scale of the great cataclysm; and, remaining impressed on the memory of
the Greeks, was merged by them into, and confused with, the general fate
of Atlantis. So, also, the war between the Râkshasas of Lankâ and the
Bhârateans, the _mèlée_ of the Atlanteans and Âryans in their supreme
struggle, or the conflict between the Devs and Izeds, or Peris, became,
ages later, the struggle of Titans, separated into two inimical camps, and
still later the war between the Angels of God and the Angels of Satan.
Historical facts became theological dogmas. Ambitious scholiasts, men of a
small sub‐race born but yesterday, and one of the latest issues of the
Âryan stock, took upon themselves to overturn the religious thought of the
world, and succeeded. For nearly two thousand years they impressed
thinking humanity with the belief in the existence of Satan.

But as it is now the conviction of more than one Greek scholar—as it was
that of Bailly and Voltaire—that Hesiod’s _Theogony_ is based upon
historical facts,(1822) it becomes easier for the Occult Teachings to find
their way into the minds of thoughtful men, and therefore are these
passages from Mythology brought forward in our discussion upon modern
learning in this Addendum.

Such symbols as are found in all the exoteric creeds are so many landmarks
of pre‐historic truths. The sunny, happy land, the primitive cradle of the
earliest human races, has become several times since then Hyperborean and
Saturnine;(1823) thus showing the Golden Age and Reign of Saturn from
multiform aspects. It was many‐sided in its character indeed—climatically,
ethnologically and morally. For the Third, Lemurian Race must be
physiologically divided into the early androgynous and the later bi‐sexual
race; and the climate of its dwelling‐places and continents into that of
an eternal spring and eternal winter, into life and death, purity and
impurity. The cycle of legends is ever being transformed on its journey by
popular fancy. Yet it may be cleansed from the dross it has picked up on
its way through many nations, and through the countless minds which have
added their own exuberant additions to the original facts. Leaving for a
while the Greek interpretations, we may seek for some more corroborations
of the latter in the scientific and geological proofs.




Section VII. Scientific and Geological Proofs of the Existence of Several
Submerged Continents.


It may not be amiss—for the benefit of those who resolve the tradition of
a lost Miocene Atlantis into an “antiquated myth”—to append a few
scientific admissions on this point. Science, it is true, is largely
indifferent to such questions. But there are Scientists ready to admit
that, in any case, a cautious agnosticism as to geological problems
concerning the remote past is far more philosophical than _à priori_
denial, or even hasty generalizations on insufficient data.

Meanwhile two very interesting instances, that have been lately met with,
may be pointed out as “confirming” certain passages in the letter of a
Master, published in _Esoteric Buddhism_. The eminence of the authorities
will not be questioned (we italicize the corresponding passages):


    Extract from _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 70.

    (1.)

    The sinking of Atlantis (the group of continents and isles) began
    during the Miocene period ... and it culminated first in the final
    disappearance of the largest continent, _an event coincident with
    the elevation of the Alps_, and second with that of the last of
    the fair islands mentioned by Plato.

    Extract from a Lecture by W. Pengelly, F.R.S., F.G.S.

    (1.)

    Was there, as some have believed, an Atlantis—a continent or
    archipelago of large islands occupying the area of the North
    Atlantic? There is, perhaps, nothing unphilosophical in the
    hypothesis. For since, as geologists state, “_The Alps have
    acquired 4,000 and even in some places more than 10,000 feet of
    their present altitude since the commencement of the Eocene
    epoch_” (Lyell’s _Principles_, p. 256, 2nd Ed.)—_a Post‐Miocene
    depression might have carried the hypothetical Atlantis into
    almost abysmal depths_.(1824)

    Extract from _Esoteric Buddhism_, pp. 64, 65.

    (2.)

    Lemuria ... should no more be confounded with the Atlantis
    Continent than Europe with America. Both sank and were drowned
    with their high civilizations and “gods”; yet between the two
    catastrophes a period of about 700,000 years elapsed, Lemuria
    flourishing and ending her career just about that lapse of time
    before the early part of the _Eocene_ age, since its Race was the
    Third. Behold _the relics of that once great nation in some of the
    flat‐headed aborigines of your Australia_.

    Extract from an article in the _Popular Science Review_, v. 18, by
    Professor Seemann, Ph.D., F.L.S., V.‐P.A.S.

    (2.)

    It would be premature to say, because no evidence has yet been
    adduced, _that men may not have existed in the Eocene age_,
    especially as it can be shown that _a race of men, the lowest we
    know of, co‐exists with that remnant of the Eocene flora which
    still survives on the continent and islands of Australia_.

    Extract from _The Pedigree of Man_, p. 81.

    Hæckel, who fully accepts the reality of a former Lemuria, also
    regards the _Australians as direct descendants of the Lemurians_.
    Persistent forms of both [his Lemurian] stems are in all
    probability still surviving, of the former in the Papuans and
    Hottentots, of the latter in the _Australians_ and in one division
    of the Malays.


With regard to a former civilization, of which a _portion_ of these
degraded Australians are the last surviving offshoot, the opinion of
Gerland is strongly suggestive. Commenting upon the religion and mythology
of the tribes, he writes:


    The statement that Australian civilization [?] indicates a higher
    grade, is nowhere more clearly proved than here [in the province
    of religion] where everything resounds like the expiring voices of
    a previous and richer age.... The idea that the Australians have
    no trace of religion or mythology is thoroughly false. But this
    religion is certainly quite deteriorated.(1825)


As to Hæckel’s view of the relationship between the Australians and the
Malays, as two branches of a common stock, he is in error when he classes
the Australians with the rest. The Malays and Papuans are a _mixed_ stock,
resulting from the intermarriages of the low Atlantean sub‐races with the
seventh sub‐race of the Third Root‐Race. Like the Hottentots, they are of
indirect Lemuro‐Atlantean descent. It is a most suggestive fact—to those
concrete thinkers who demand a _physical_ proof of Karma—that the lowest
races of men are now rapidly dying out; a phenomenon largely due to an
extraordinary sterility setting in among the women, from the time that
they were first approached by the Europeans. A process of decimation is
taking place all over the Globe, among those races, whose “time is
up”—among just those stocks, be it remarked, which Esoteric Philosophy
regards as the senile representatives of lost archaic nations. It is
inaccurate to maintain that the extinction of a lower race is _invariably_
due to cruelties or abuses perpetrated by colonists. Change of diet,
drunkenness, etc., have done much; but those who rely on such data as
offering an all‐sufficient explanation of the crux, cannot meet the
phalanx of facts now so closely arrayed. Even the Materialist Lefèvre
says:


    Nothing can save those that have run their course. It would be
    necessary to extend their destined cycle.... _The peoples that
    have been relatively most spared, those who have defended
    themselves most valiantly, Hawaiians or Maories, have been no less
    decimated than the tribes massacred or tainted by European
    intrusion._(1826)


True; but is not the phenomenon here confirmed, an instance of the
operation of Cyclic Law, difficult to account for on materialist lines?
Whence the “destined cycle” and the order here testified to? Why does this
(Karmic) sterility attack and root out certain races at their “appointed
hour”? The answer that it is due to a “mental disproportion” between the
colonizing and aboriginal races is obviously evasive, since it does not
explain the sudden “checks to fertility” which so frequently supervene.
The dying out of the Hawaiians, for instance, is one of the most
mysterious problems of the day. Ethnology will sooner or later have to
recognize, with Occultists, that the true solution has to be sought for in
a comprehension of the workings of Karma. As Lèfevre remarks:


    The time is drawing near when there will remain nothing but three
    great human types.


The time is before the Sixth Root‐Race dawns; the three types are the
white (Âryan, Fifth Root‐Race), the yellow, and the African negro—with
their crossings (Atlanto‐European divisions). Redskins, Eskimos, Papuans,
Australians, Polynesians, etc.—all are dying out. Those who realize that
every Root‐Race runs through a gamut of seven sub‐races with seven
branchlets, etc., will understand the “why.” The tide‐wave of incarnating
Egos has rolled past them to harvest experience in more developed and less
senile stocks; and their extinction is hence a Karmic necessity. Some
extraordinary and _unexplained_ statistics as to race extinction are given
by de Quatrefages.(1827) No solution, except on Occult lines, is able to
account for these.

But we have digressed from our direct subject. Let us hear now what
Professor Huxley has to say on the subject of former Atlantic and Pacific
Continents.

He writes in _Nature_:


    There is nothing, so far as I am aware, in the biological or
    geological evidence at present accessible, to render untenable the
    hypothesis that _an area of the Mid‐Atlantic or Pacific sea‐bed as
    big as Europe_, should have been upheaved as high as Mont Blanc,
    and have subsided again any time since the Palæozoic epoch, if
    there were any grounds for entertaining it.(1828)


That is to say, then, that there is nothing to militate against _positive_
evidence of the fact; nothing, therefore, against the geological
postulates of the Esoteric Philosophy. Dr. Berthold Seemann assures us in
the _Popular Science Review_ that:


    The facts which botanists have accumulated for reconstructing
    these lost maps of the globe are rather comprehensive; and they
    have not been backward in demonstrating the former existence of
    several large tracts of solid land in parts now occupied by great
    oceans. The many striking points of contact between the present
    floras of the United States and Eastern Asia, induced them to
    assume that, during the present order of things, there existed a
    continental connection between South‐Eastern Asia and Western
    America. The singular correspondence of the present flora of the
    Southern United States with that of the lignite flora of Europe
    induces them to believe that, in the Miocene period, Europe and
    America were connected by a land passage, of which Iceland,
    Madeira, and the other Atlantic islands are remnants; that, in
    fact, the story of an Atlantis, which an Egyptian priest told to
    Solon, is not purely fictitious, but rests upon a solid historical
    basis.... Europe of the Eocene period received the plants which
    spread over mountains and plains, valleys and river‐banks (from
    Asia generally), neither exclusively from the South nor from the
    East. The West also furnished additions, and if at that period
    these were rather meagre, they show, at all events, that the
    bridge was already building, which, at a later period, was to
    facilitate communication between the two continents in such a
    remarkable manner. At that time some plants of the Western
    Continent began to reach Europe by means of the island of
    Atlantis, then probably just [?] just rising above the
    ocean.(1829)


And in another number of the same review(1830) Mr. W. Duppa Crotch, M.A.,
F.L.S., in an article entitled “The Norwegian Lemming and its Migrations,”
alludes to the same subject:


    Is it probable that land could have existed where now the broad
    Atlantic rolls? All tradition says so: old Egyptian records speak
    of Atlantis, as Strabo and others have told us. The Sahara itself
    is the sand of an ancient sea, and the shells which are found upon
    its surface prove that, no longer ago than the Miocene period, a
    sea rolled over what is now desert. The voyage of the “Challenger”
    has proved the existence of three long ridges(1831) in the
    Atlantic Ocean,(1832) one extending for more than three thousand
    miles, and lateral spurs may, by connecting these ridges, account
    for the marvellous similarity of the fauna of the Atlantic
    islands.(1833)...

    The submerged continent of _Lemuria_, in what is now the Indian
    Ocean, is considered to afford an explanation of many difficulties
    in the distribution of organic life, and, I think, the existence
    of a _Miocene Atlantis_ will be found to have a strong elucidative
    bearing on subjects of greater interest [truly so!] than the
    migration of the lemming. At all events, if it can be shown that
    land existed in former ages where the North Atlantic now rolls,
    not only is a motive found for these apparently suicidal
    migrations, but also a strong collateral proof that what we call
    instincts are but the blind and sometimes even prejudicial
    inheritance of previously acquired experience.


At certain periods, we learn, multitudes of these animals swim to sea and
perish. Coming, as they do, from all parts of Norway, the powerful
instinct which survives throughout ages as an inheritance from their
progenitors impels them to seek a continent, once existing but now
submerged beneath the ocean, and to court a watery grave.

In an article containing a criticism of Mr. A. R. Wallace’s _Island
Life_—a work devoted largely to the question of the distribution of
animals, etc.—Mr. Starkie Gardiner writes:


    By a process of reasoning supported by a large array of facts of
    different kinds, he arrives at the conclusion that the
    distribution of life upon the land as we now see it has been
    accomplished without the aid of important changes in the relative
    positions of continents and seas. Yet if we accept his views, we
    must believe that Asia and Africa, Madagascar and Africa, New
    Zealand and Australia, Europe and America, have been united at
    some period not remote geologically, and that seas to the depth of
    1,000 fathoms have been bridged over; but we must treat as
    “utterly gratuitous and entirely opposed to all the evidences at
    our command” [! !], the supposition that temperate Europe and
    temperate America, Australia, and South America, have ever been
    connected, except by way of the Arctic or Antarctic Circles, and
    that lands now separated by seas of more than 1,000 fathoms depth
    have ever been united.

    Mr. Wallace, it must be admitted, has succeeded in explaining the
    chief features of existing life distribution, without bridging the
    Atlantic or Pacific, except towards the Poles, yet I cannot help
    thinking that some of the facts might perhaps be more easily
    explained by admitting the former existence of the connection
    between the coast of Chili and Polynesia(1834) and Great Britain
    and Florida, shadowed by the sub‐marine banks which stretch
    between them. Nothing is urged that renders these more direct
    connections impossible, and no physical reason is advanced why the
    floor of the ocean should not be upheaved from any depth. The
    route by which [according to the Anti‐Atlantean and Lemurian
    hypotheses of Wallace] the floras of South America and Australia
    are supposed to have mingled, is beset by almost insurmountable
    obstacles, and the apparently sudden arrival of a number of
    subtropical American plants in our Eocenes necessitates a
    connection more to the South than the present 1,000 fathom line.
    Forces are unceasingly acting, and there is _no reason why an
    elevating force once set in action in the centre of an ocean
    should cease to act until a continent is formed_. They have acted
    and lifted out from the sea, in comparatively recent geological
    time, the loftiest mountains on earth. Mr. Wallace himself admits
    repeatedly that sea‐beds have been elevated 1,000 fathoms, and
    islands have risen up from the depths of 3,000 fathoms; and to
    suppose that the upheaving forces are limited in power, is, it
    seems to me, to again quote from _Island Life_, “utterly
    gratuitous and entirely opposed to all the evidences at our
    command.”(1835)


The “father” of English Geology—Sir Charles Lyell—was a uniformitarian in
his views of continental formation. We find him saying:


    Professors Unger (_Die Versunkene Insel Atlantis_) and Heer
    (_Flora Tertiaria Helvetiæ_) have advocated on botanical grounds
    _the former existence of an Atlantic Continent during some part of
    the tertiary period_, as affording the only plausible explanation
    that can be imagined of the analogy between the Miocene flora of
    Central Europe, and the existing flora of Eastern America.
    Professor Oliver, on the other hand, after showing how many of the
    American types found fossil in Europe are common to Japan,
    inclines to the theory, first advanced by Dr. Asa Gray, that the
    migration of species, to which the community of types in the
    Eastern States of North America, and the Miocene flora of Europe
    is due, took place when there was an overland communication from
    America to Eastern Asia between the fiftieth and sixtieth
    parallels of latitude, or south of Behring’s Straits, following
    the direction of the Aleutian islands. By this course they may
    have made their way, at any epoch, Miocene, Pliocene, or
    Postpliocene, antecedently to the Glacial epoch, to Amoorland, on
    the East coast of Northern Asia.(1836)


The unnecessary difficulties and complications here incurred in order to
avoid the hypothesis of an Atlantic Continent, are really too apparent to
escape notice. _If the botanical evidences stood alone_, scepticism would
be partially reasonable; but in this case all branches of Science converge
to one point. Science has made blunders, and has exposed itself to greater
errors than it would be exposed to by the admission of our two now
invisible Continents. It has denied even the undeniable, from the days of
the Mathematician Laplace down to our own, and that only a few years
ago.(1837) We have Professor Huxley’s authority for saying that there is
no _à priori_ improbability whatever against possible evidences supporting
the belief. But now that the _positive evidence is brought forward_, will
that eminent Scientist admit the corollary?

Touching on the problem in another place Sir Charles Lyell tells us:


    Respecting the cosmogony of the Egyptian priests, we gather much
    information from writers of the Grecian sects, who borrowed almost
    all their tenets from Egypt, and amongst others that of the former
    successive destruction and renovation of the world [_continental_,
    not cosmic, catastrophes]. We learn from Plutarch that this was
    the theme of one of the hymns of Orpheus, so celebrated in the
    fabulous ages of Greece. It was brought by him from the banks of
    the Nile; and we even find in his verses, as in the Indian
    systems, a definite period assigned for the duration of every
    successive world. The returns of great catastrophes were
    determined by the period of the Annus Magnus, or great year, a
    cycle composed of the revolutions of the sun, moon, and planets,
    and terminating when these return together to the same sign whence
    they were supposed at some remote epoch to have set out.... We
    learn particularly from the _Timæus_ of Plato that the Egyptians
    believed the world to be subject to occasional conflagrations and
    deluges. The sect of Stoics adopted most fully the system of
    catastrophes destined at certain intervals to destroy the world.
    These, they taught, were of two kinds—the cataclysm, or
    _destruction by deluge_, which sweeps away the whole human race,
    and annihilates all the animal and vegetable productions of
    nature, and the _ecpyrosis_, or _conflagration_, which destroys
    the globe itself [submarine volcanoes]. From the Egyptians they
    derived the doctrine of the gradual debasement of man from a state
    of innocence [nascent simplicity of the first sub‐races of each
    Root‐Race]. Towards the termination of each era the gods could no
    longer bear with the wickedness of men [degeneracy into magical
    practices and gross animality of the Atlanteans], and a shock of
    the elements, or a deluge, overwhelmed them; after which calamity,
    Astræa again descended on the earth to renew the golden age [dawn
    of a new Root‐Race].(1838)


Astræa, the Goddess of Justice, is the last of the deities to forsake the
Earth, when the Gods are said to abandon it and to be taken up again into
heaven by Jupiter. But, no sooner does Zeus carry from Earth Ganymedes—the
object of _lust_, personified—than the Father of the Gods throws down
Astræa on the Earth again, on which she falls _upon her head_. Astræa is
Virgo, the constellation of the Zodiac. Astronomically it has a very plain
significance, and one which gives the key to the occult meaning. But it is
inseparable from Leo, the sign that precedes it, and from the Pleiades and
their sisters, the Hyades, of which Aldebaran is the brilliant leader. All
these are connected with the periodical renovations of the Earth, with
regard to its continents—even Ganymedes, who in astronomy is Aquarius. It
has already been shown that while the South Pole is the “Pit” (or the
infernal regions figuratively and cosmologically), the North Pole is
geographically the First Continent; while astronomically and
metaphorically the Celestial Pole, with its Pole Star in Heaven, is Meru,
or the Seat of Brahmâ, the Throne of Jupiter, etc. For in the age when the
Gods forsook the Earth and were said to ascend into Heaven, the ecliptic
had become parallel with the meridian, and part of the Zodiac appeared to
descend from the North Pole to the north horizon. Aldebaran was in
conjunction then with the Sun, as it was 40,000 years ago, at the great
festival in commemoration of that Annus Magnus, of which Plutarch spoke.
Since that Year—40,000 years ago—there has been a retrograde motion of the
equator, and about 31,000 years ago Aldebaran was in conjunction with the
vernal equinoctial point. The part assigned to Taurus, even in Christian
Mysticism, is too well known to need repetition. The famous Orphic Hymn on
the great periodical cataclysm divulges the whole Esotericism of the
event. Pluto, in the Pit, carries off Eurydice, bitten by the Polar
Serpent. Then Leo, the Lion, is vanquished. Now, when the Lion is “in the
Pit,” or below the South Pole, then Virgo, as the next sign, follows him,
and when her head, down to the waist, is below the southern horizon—she is
inverted. On the other hand, the Hyades are the rain or Deluge
constellations; and Aldebaran—he who follows, or _succeeds_ the daughters
of Atlas, or the Pleiades—looks down from the eye of Taurus. It is from
this point of the ecliptic that the calculations of the new cycle were
commenced. The student has to remember also, that when
Ganymedes—Aquarius—is raised to heaven—or above the horizon of the North
Pole—Virgo or Astræa, who is Venus‐Lucifer, descends head downwards below
the horizon of the South Pole, or the Pit; which Pit, or the Pole, is also
the Great Dragon, or the Flood. Let the student exercise his intuition by
placing these facts together; no more can be said. Lyell remarks:


    The connection between the doctrine of successive catastrophes and
    repeated deteriorations in the moral character of the human race,
    is more intimate and natural than might at first be imagined. For,
    in a rude state of society, all great calamities are regarded by
    the people as judgments of God on the wickedness of man.... In
    like manner in the account given to Solon by the Egyptian priests
    of the submersion of the island of Atlantis under the waters of
    the ocean, after repeated shocks of an earthquake, we find that
    _the event happened when Jupiter had seen the moral depravity of
    the inhabitants_.(1839)


True; but was it not owing to the fact that all Esoteric truths were given
out to the public by the Initiates of the temples _under the guise of
allegories_? “Jupiter,” is merely the personification of that immutable
Cyclic Law, which arrests the downward tendency of each Root‐Race after
attaining the zenith of its glory.(1840) We must admit allegorical
teaching, unless we hold with Prof. John Fiske’s singularly dogmatic
opinion that a myth:


    Is an explanation by the uncivilized mind, of some natural
    phenomenon; not an allegory, not an esoteric symbol, for the
    ingenuity is wasted [!!] which strives to detect in myths the
    remnants of a refined primeval science—but an explanation.
    Primitive men had no profound science to perpetuate by means of
    allegory [how does Mr. Fiske know?], nor were they such sorry
    pedants as to talk in riddles when plain language would serve
    their purpose.(1841)


We venture to say the language of the initiated few was far more “plain,”
and their Science‐Philosophy far more comprehensive and satisfying alike
to the physical and _spiritual_ wants of man, than even the terminology
and system elaborated by Mr. Fiske’s master—Herbert Spencer. What,
however, is Sir Charles Lyell’s “explanation” of the “myth”? Certainly, he
in no way countenances the idea of its “astronomical” origin, as asserted
by some writers.

The two interpreters are entirely at variance with one another. Lyell’s
solution is as follows. A disbeliever in cataclysmal changes from the
absence (?) of any reliable historical data on the point, as well as from
a strong bias to the uniformitarian conceptions of geologic changes,(1842)
he attempts to trace the Atlantis “tradition” to the following sources:

(1) Barbarous tribes connect catastrophes with an avenging God, who is
assumed in this way to punish immoral races.

(2) Hence the commencement of a new race is logically a virtuous one.

(3) The primary source of the geologic basis of the tradition was Asia—a
continent subject to violent earthquakes. Exaggerated accounts would thus
be handed down the ages.

(4) Egypt, being herself free from earthquakes, nevertheless based her not
inconsiderable geologic knowledge on these cataclysmal traditions.

An ingenious “explanation,” as all such are! But proving a negative is
proverbially a difficult task. Students of Esoteric Science, who know what
the resources of the Egyptian priesthood really were, need no such
laboured hypothesis. Moreover, while an imaginative theorist is always
able to furnish a reasonable solution of problems which, in one branch of
Science, seem to necessitate the hypothesis of periodical cataclysmic
changes on the surface of our planet, the impartial critic who is not a
specialist, will recognize the immense difficulty of explaining away the
cumulative evidences—namely, the archaeological, ethnological, geological,
traditional, botanical, and even biological—in favour of former continents
now submerged. When each science is fighting for its own hand, the
cumulative force of the evidence is almost invariably lost sight of.

In the _Theosophist_ we wrote:


    We have as evidence the most ancient traditions of various and
    wide‐separated peoples—legends in India, in ancient Greece,
    Madagascar, Sumatra, Java, and all the principal isles of
    Polynesia, as well as the legends of both Americas. Among savages,
    and in the traditions of the richest literature in the world—the
    Sanskrit literature of India—there is an agreement in saying,
    that, ages ago, there existed in the Pacific Ocean, a large
    Continent, which by a geological upheaval was engulfed by the
    sea(1843) [Lemuria]. And it is our firm belief ... that most, if
    not all, of the islands from the Malayan Archipelago to Polynesia,
    are fragments of that once immense submerged Continent. Both
    Malacca and Polynesia, which lie at the two extremities of the
    ocean, and which, since the memory of man, never had nor could
    have any intercourse with, or even a knowledge of each other, have
    yet a tradition common to all the islands and islets, that their
    respective countries extended far, far into the Sea; that there
    were in the world but two immense continents, one inhabited by
    yellow, the other by dark men; and that the Ocean, by command of
    the Gods, and to punish them for their incessant quarrelling,
    swallowed them up. Notwithstanding the geographical fact that New
    Zealand, and Sandwich and Easter Islands, are at a distance from
    each other of between 800 and 1,000 leagues, and that, according
    to every testimony, neither these nor any other intermediate
    islands, for instance, the Marquesan, Society, Fiji, Tahitian,
    Samoan, and other islands, could, since they became islands,
    ignorant as their people were of the compass, have communicated
    with each other before the arrival of Europeans; yet they one and
    all maintain that their respective countries extended far toward
    the West, on the Asian side. Moreover with very small differences,
    they all speak dialects evidently of the same language, and
    understand each other with little difficulty, have the same
    religious beliefs and superstitions, and pretty much the same
    customs. And as few of the Polynesian islands were discovered
    earlier than a century ago, and the Pacific Ocean itself was
    unknown to Europe until the days of Columbus, and these islanders
    have never ceased repeating the same old traditions since the
    Europeans first set foot on their shores, it seems to us a logical
    inference that our theory is nearer to the truth than any other.
    Chance would have to change its name and meaning, were all this
    due but to chance alone.(1844)


Professor Schmidt, writing in defence of the hypothesis of a former
Lemuria, declares:


    A great series of animal‐geographical facts is explicable only on
    the hypothesis of the former existence of a Southern Continent of
    which the Australian mainland is a remnant.... [The distribution
    of species] points to the vanished land of the south, where
    perhaps the home of the progenitors of the Maki of Madagascar may
    also be looked for.(1845)


Mr. A. R. Wallace, in his _Malay Archipelago_, arrives at the following
conclusion after a review of the mass of evidence at hand:


    The inference that we must draw from these facts is undoubtedly
    that the whole of the islands eastwards beyond Java and Borneo do
    essentially form a part of a former Australian or Pacific
    Continent, although some of them may never have been actually
    joined to it. This continent must have been broken up not only
    before the Western Islands were separated from Asia, but probably
    before the extreme south‐eastern portion of Asia was raised above
    the waters of the ocean, for a great part of the land of Borneo
    and Java is known to be geologically of quite recent
    formation.(1846)


According to Hæckel:


    Probably Southern Asia itself was not the earliest cradle of the
    human race; but Lemuria, a continent that lay to the South of
    Asia, and sank later on beneath the surface of the Indian
    Ocean.(1847)


In one sense Hæckel is right as to Lemuria—the “cradle of the human race.”
That Continent _was_ the home of the first _physical_ human stock—the
later Third‐Race Men. Previous to that epoch the Races were far less
consolidated and physiologically quite different. Hæckel makes Lemuria
extend from Sunda Island to Africa and Madagascar and eastwards to Upper
India.

Professor Rütimeyer, the eminent Palæontologist, asks:


    Need the conjecture that the almost exclusively graminivorous and
    insectivorous marsupials, sloths, armadilloes, ant‐eaters and
    ostriches, once possessed an actual point of union in a Southern
    Continent of which the present flora of Terra del Fuego and
    Australia must be the remains—need this conjecture raise
    difficulties at a moment when, from their fossil remains, Heer
    restores to our sight the ancient forests of Smith’s Sound and
    Spitzbergen?(1848)


Having now dealt generally with the broad scientific attitude on the two
questions, it will, perhaps, conduce to an agreeable brevity, if we sum up
the more striking isolated facts in favour of that fundamental contention
of Esoteric Ethnologists—the reality of Atlantis. Lemuria is so widely
accepted, that further pursuit of the subject is unnecessary. With regard,
however, to the former, it is found that:

(1) The Miocene floræ of Europe have their most numerous and striking
analogues in the floræ of the United States. In the forests of Virginia
and Florida are found the magnolias, tulip‐trees, evergreen oaks, plane
trees, etc., which correspond with European Tertiary flora, term for term.
How was the migration effected, if we exclude the theory of an Atlantic
Continent bridging the ocean between America and Europe? The proposed
“explanation” to the effect that the transition was by way of Asia and the
Aleutian Islands is a mere uncalled‐for theory, obviously upset by the
fact that a large number of these floræ only appear _East_ of the Rocky
Mountains. This also negatives the idea of a Trans‐Pacific migration. They
are now superseded by European continents and islands to the North.

(2) Skulls exhumed on the banks of the Danube and Rhine bear a _striking
similarity_ to those of the Caribs and Old Peruvians (Littré). Monuments
have been exhumed in Central America, which bear representations of
undoubted _negro_ heads and faces. How are such facts to be accounted for
except on the Atlantean hypothesis? What is now N.W. Africa was once
connected with Atlantis by a network of islands, few of which now remain.

(3) According to Farrar the “_isolated_ language” of the Basques has no
affinities with the other languages of Europe,(1849) but with:


    The aboriginal languages of the vast opposite continent [America]
    and those alone.(1850)


Professor Broca is also of the same opinion.

Palæolithic European man of the Miocene and Pliocene times was a pure
Atlantean, as we have previously stated. The Basques are, of course, of a
much later date than this, but their affinities, as here shown, go far to
prove the original extraction of their remote ancestors. The “mysterious”
affinity between their tongue and that of the Dravidian races of India
will be understood by those who have followed our outline of continental
formations and shiftings.

(4) Stones have been found in the Canary Islands bearing sculptured
symbols similar to those found on the shore of Lake Superior. Berthollet
was induced by such evidence to postulate the unity of race of the early
men of the Canary Islands and America.(1851)

The Guanches of the Canary Islands were lineal descendants of the
Atlanteans. This fact will account for the _great stature_ evidenced by
their old skeletons, as well as by those of their European congeners, the
Cro‐Magnon Palæolithic men.

(5) Any experienced mariner has but to navigate the fathomless ocean along
the Canary Islands to ask himself the question when or how that group of
volcanic and rocky little islands has been formed, surrounded on every
side by that vast watery space. Frequent questions of this kind led
finally to the expedition of the famous Leopold von Buch, which took place
in the first quarter of the present century. Some Geologists maintained
that the volcanic islands had been raised right from the bottom of the
ocean, the depth of which in the immediate vicinity of the island varies
from 6,000 to 18,000 feet. Others were inclined to see in these
groups—including Madeira, the Azores, and the islands of Cape de Verde—the
remnants of a gigantic but submerged continent which had once united
Africa with America. The latter men of Science supported their hypothesis
by a mass of evidence in its favour, drawn from ancient “myths.” Hoary
“superstitions,” such as the fairy‐like Atlantis of Plato, the Garden of
the Hesperides, Atlas supporting the world on his shoulders, all of them
mythoi connected with the Peak of Teneriffe, did not go far with sceptical
Science. The identity of animal and vegetable species, showing either a
previous connection between America and the remaining groups of the
islands—the hypothesis of their having been drifted from the New to the
Old World by the waves was too absurd to stand long—found more serious
consideration. But it is only quite lately, and after Donnelly’s book had
been published several years, that the theory has had a greater chance
than ever of becoming an accepted fact. Fossils found on the _Eastern
Coast_ of South America have now been _proved_ to belong to the Jurassic
formations, and are nearly identical with the Jurassic fossils of
_Western_ Europe and _Northern_ Africa. The geological structure of both
coasts is also almost identical; the resemblance between the smaller
marine animals dwelling in the more shallow waters of the South American,
the Western African, and the South European coasts, is also very great.
All such facts are bound to bring Naturalists to the conclusion that there
has been, in distant pre‐historic ages, a continent which extended from
the coast of Venezuela, across the Atlantic Ocean, to the Canarese Islands
and North Africa, and from Newfoundland nearly to the coast of France.

(6) The great resemblance between the Jurassic fossils of South America,
North Africa, and Western Europe is a striking enough fact in itself, and
admits of no explanation, unless the ocean is bridged with an Atlantis.
But why, also, is there so marked a similarity between the fauna of the
(now) isolated Atlantic islands? Why did the specimens of Brazilian fauna
dredged up by Sir C. Wyville Thompson resemble those of Western Europe?
Why does a resemblance exist between many of the West African and West
Indian animal groups? Again:


    When the animals and plants of the Old and New World are compared,
    one cannot but be struck with their identity; all, or nearly all,
    belong to the same genera, while many, even of the species, are
    common to both continents ... indicating that they radiated from a
    common centre [Atlantis].(1852)


The horse, according to Science, originated in America. At least, a large
proportion of the once “missing links” connecting it with inferior forms
have been exhumed from American strata. How did the horse penetrate into
Europe and Asia, if no land communication bridged the oceanic interspaces?
Or if it is asserted that the horse originated in the Old World, how did
such forms as the hipparion, etc., get into America in the first instance
on the migration hypothesis?

Again:


    Buffon had ... remarked the repetition of the African in the
    American fauna, how, for example, the llama is a juvenescent and
    feeble copy of the camel, and how the puma of the New represents
    the lion of the Old World.(1853)


(7) The following quotation runs with No. 2, but its significance is such
and the writer cited is so authoritative, that it deserves a place to
itself:


    With regard to the primitive dolichocephalæ of America, I
    entertain a hypothesis still more bold, namely, that they are
    nearly related to the Guanches of the Canary Islands, and to the
    Atlantic populations of Africa, the Moors, Tuaricks, Copts, which
    Latham comprises under the name of Egyptian‐Atlantidæ. We find one
    and the same form of skull in the Canary Islands, in front of the
    African coast, and in the Carib islands, on the opposite coast
    which faces Africa. The colour of the skin on both sides of the
    Atlantic is represented in these populations as being of a
    reddish‐brown.(1854)


If, then, Basques and Cro‐Magnon Cave‐Men are of the same race as the
Canarese Guanches, it follows that the former are also allied to the
aborigines of America. This is the conclusion necessitated by the
independent investigations of Retzius, Virchow, and de Quatrefages. The
Atlantean affinities of these three types become patent.

(8) The sea‐soundings undertaken by H.M.S. “Challenger” and the “Dolphin,”
have established the fact that a huge elevation some 3,000 miles in
length, projecting upwards from the abysmal depths of the Atlantic,
extends from a point near the British Islands southwards, curving round
near Cape de Verde, and running in a south‐easterly direction along the
West African coast. This elevation averages some 9,000 feet in height, and
rises above the waves at the Azores, Ascension, and other places. In the
ocean depths around the neighbourhood of the former the ribs of a once
massive piece of land have been discovered.(1855)


    The inequalities, the mountains and valleys of its surface could
    never have been produced in accordance with any known laws for the
    deposition of sediment, nor by submarine elevation; but, on the
    contrary, must have been carved by agencies acting above the
    water‐level.(1856)


It is most probable that necks of land formerly existed knitting Atlantis
to South America, somewhere above the mouth of the Amazon, to Africa near
Cape de Verde, while a similar point of juncture with Spain is not
unlikely, as contended for by Donnelly.(1857) Whether the latter existed
or not, is of no consequence, in view of the fact that what is now N.W.
Africa was—before the elevation of the Sahara and the rupture of the
Gibraltar connection—an extension of Spain. Consequently no difficulty can
be raised as to how the migration of the European fauna, etc., took place.

Enough has now been said from the purely scientific standpoint, and it is
needless, in view of the manner in which the subject has already been
developed on the lines of Esoteric Knowledge, to swell the mass of
testimony further. In conclusion, the words of one of the most intuitive
writers of the day may be cited as admirably illustrative of the opinions
of the Occultist, who awaits in patience the dawn of the coming day:


    We are but beginning to understand the past; one hundred years ago
    the world knew nothing of Pompeii or Herculaneum; nothing of the
    lingual tie that binds together the Indo‐European nations; nothing
    of the significance of the vast volume of inscriptions upon the
    tombs and temples of Egypt; nothing of the meaning of the arrow‐
    headed inscriptions of Babylon; nothing of the marvellous
    civilizations revealed in the remains of Yucatan, Mexico, and
    Peru. We are on the threshold. Scientific investigation is
    advancing with giant strides. Who shall say that one hundred years
    from now, the great museums of the world may not be adorned with
    gems, statues, arms, and implements from Atlantis, while the
    libraries of the world shall contain translations of its
    inscriptions, throwing new light upon all the past history of the
    human race, and all the great problems which now perplex the
    thinkers of to‐day.(1858)


And now to conclude.



We have concerned ourself with the ancient records of the nations, with
the doctrine of chronological and psychic cycles, of which these records
are the tangible proof; and with many other subjects, which may, at first
sight, seem out of place in this Volume. But they are necessary in truth.
In dealing with the secret annals and traditions of so many nations, whose
very origins have never been ascertained on more secure grounds than
inferential suppositions, in giving out the beliefs and philosophy of more
than pre‐historic races, it is not quite as easy to deal with the subject
matter as it would be if only the philosophy and evolution of one special
race, were concerned. The Secret Doctrine was the common property of the
countless millions of men born under various climates, in times with which
history refuses to deal, and to which Esoteric Teachings assign dates
incompatible with the theories of Geology and Anthropology. The birth and
evolution of the Sacred Science of the Past are lost in the very night of
Time, and that even which is historic—_i.e._, that which is found
scattered hither and thither throughout ancient classical literature—is,
in almost every case, attributed by modern criticism to lack of
observation in the ancient writers, or to superstition born out of the
ignorance of antiquity. It is, therefore, impossible to treat this subject
as one would the ordinary evolution of an art or science in some well‐
known historical nation. It is only by bringing before the reader an
abundance of proofs all tending to show that in every age, under every
condition of civilization and knowledge, the educated classes of every
nation made themselves the more or less faithful echoes of one identical
system and its fundamental traditions—that he can be made to see that so
many streams of the same water must have had a common source from which
they started. What was this source? If coming events are said to cast
their shadows before, past events cannot fail to leave their impress
behind them. It is, then, by those shadows of the hoary Past and their
fantastic silhouettes on the external screen of every Religion and
Philosophy, that we can, by checking them as we go along and comparing
them, trace out finally the body that produced them. There must be truth
and fact in that which every people of antiquity accepted and made the
foundation of its religions and its faith. Moreover, as Haliburton said:


    Hear one side, and you will be in the dark; hear both sides, and
    all will be clear.


The public has hitherto had access to, and has heard but one side, or
rather the one‐sided views of two diametrically opposed classes of men,
whose _primâ facie_ propositions or respective premises differ widely, but
whose final conclusions are the same—the men of Science and Theology. And
now our readers have an opportunity of hearing the other, and so of
learning the defendants’ justification and the nature of our arguments.

If the public is to be left to its old opinions—namely, on one side, that
Occultism, Magic, the legends of old etc., are all the outcome of
ignorance and superstition; and on the other, that everything outside the
orthodox groove is the work of the devil—what will be the result? In other
words, had no theosophical and mystic literature obtained a hearing for
the last few years, the present work would have had but a poor chance of
impartial consideration. It would have been proclaimed—and by many will
still be proclaimed—a fairy tale woven out of abstruse problems, poised
in, and based on the air; built of soap‐bubbles, bursting at the slightest
touch of serious reflection, with no foundation to stand upon. Even the
ancient “superstitious and credulous” classical writers have no word of
reference to it in clear and unmistakable terms, and the symbols
themselves fail to yield a hint of the existence of such a system. Such
would be the verdict of all. But when it becomes undeniably proven that
the claim of the modern Asiatic nations to a Secret Science and an
Esoteric History of the world is based on fact; that though hitherto
unknown to the masses and a veiled mystery even to the learned—because
they have never had the key to a right understanding of the abundant hints
thrown out by the ancient classics—it is still no fairy tale, but an
actuality; then the present work will become but the pioneer of many more
such books. The statement that hitherto even the keys discovered by some
great scholars have proved too rusty for use, and that they are but the
silent witnesses that there do exist mysteries behind the veil which are
unreachable without a new key, is borne out by too many proofs to be
easily dismissed. An instance may be given as an illustration out of the
history of Freemasonry.

In his _Maçonnerie Occulte_, Ragon, an illustrious and learned Belgian
Mason, rightly or wrongly reproaches the English Masons with having
materialized and dishonoured Masonry, once based upon the Ancient
Mysteries, by adopting, owing to a mistaken notion of the origin of the
craft, the name of “Free Masonry” and “Free Masons.” The mistake is due,
he says, to those who connect Masonry with the _building_ of Solomon’s
Temple. He derides the idea, and says:


    The Frenchman knew well, when he adopted the title of Freemason,
    that it was no question of building the smallest wall, but that,
    initiated into the Mysteries veiled under the name of Freemasonry,
    which could only be the continuation or the renovation of the
    ancient Mysteries, he was to become a “Mason” after the manner of
    Apollo or Amphion. And do not we know that the ancient initiated
    poets, when speaking of the _foundation of a city_, meant thereby
    the establishment of a doctrine? Thus Neptune, God of reasoning,
    and Apollo, God of hidden things, presented themselves as masons
    before Laomedon, Priam’s father, to help him to build the city of
    Troy—that is to say, to establish the Trojan religion.(1859)


Such veiled sentences with double meaning abound in ancient classical
writers. Therefore, if an attempt had been made to show that, for
instance, Laomedon was the founder of a branch of Archaic Mysteries, in
which the earth‐bound material soul, the Fourth Principle, was personified
in Menelaus’ faithless wife, the fair Helen, and if Ragon had not come to
corroborate what we asserted, we might have been told that no classical
author speaks of it, and that Homer shows Laomedon building a _city_, not
founding an _Esoteric Worship_ or _Mysteries_. Who are those left now,
save a few Initiates, who understand the language and correct meaning of
such symbolical terms?

But though we have pointed to many a misconceived symbol bearing on our
thesis, there still remains more than one difficulty to be overcome. Most
important among several such obstacles is that of chronology. But this
could hardly be helped. Wedged in between theological chronology and that
of the Geologists, backed by all the materialistic Anthropologists, who
assign dates to man and nature which fit in with their own theories
alone—what could the writer do except what she has done? Since Theology
places the Deluge 2448 B.C., and the World’s Creation only 5890 years ago;
and since the accurate researches by the methods of “exact” Science, have
led the Geologists and Physicists to assign to the incrusted age of our
Globe between ten million and one thousand million of years(1860) (a
_trifling_ difference, verily!); and since the Anthropologists, to vary
their divergence of opinion as to the appearance of man, ask for between
25,000 and 500,000 years—what can one who studies the Occult Doctrine do,
but bravely present the Esoteric calculations before the world?

But to do this, corroboration by even a few “historical” proofs has been
necessary, though all know the real value of the so‐called “historical
evidence.” For, whether man appeared on Earth 18,000 or 18,000,000 years
ago, can make no difference to profane history, since it only begins about
a couple of thousand years before our era, and since, even then, it
grapples hopelessly with the clash and din of contradictory and mutually‐
destroying opinions around it. Nevertheless, in view of the respect in
which the average reader has been brought up for exact Science, even that
short Past would remain meaningless, unless the Esoteric Teachings were
corroborated and supported on the spot—_whenever possible_—by references
to historical names of a so‐called historical period. This is the only
guide that can be given to the beginner before he is permitted to start
among the, to him, unfamiliar windings of that dark labyrinth called the
pre‐historic ages. This necessity has been complied with. It is only hoped
that the desire to do so, which has led the writer to be constantly
bringing ancient and modern evidence as a corroboration of the archaic and
quite unhistoric Past, will not bring on her the accusation of having
sorely jumbled up, without order or method, the various and widely‐
separated periods of history and tradition. But literary form and method
had to be sacrificed to the greater clearness of the general exposition.

To accomplish the proposed task, the writer has had to resort to the
rather unusual means of dividing each Volume into three Parts; the first
of which only is the consecutive, though very fragmentary, history of the
Cosmogony and the Evolution of Man on this Globe. In treating of Cosmogony
and then of the Anthropogenesis of mankind, it was necessary to show that
on religion, from the very earliest, has ever been based entirely on
fiction, that none was the object of special revelation, and that it is
dogma alone which has ever been killing primeval truth; finally, that no
human‐born doctrine, no creed, however sanctified by custom and antiquity,
can compare in sacredness with the religion of Nature. The Key of Wisdom
that unlocks the massive gates leading to the arcana of the innermost
sanctuaries can be found hidden in her bosom only; and that bosom is in
the countries pointed to by the great seer of the past century, Emanuel
Swedenborg. There lies the Heart of Nature, that shrine whence issued the
early races of primeval humanity, and which is the cradle of _physical_
man.

Thus far have proceeded the rough outlines of the beliefs and tenets of
the archaic, earliest Races, contained in their hitherto secret scriptural
Records. But our explanations are by no means complete, nor do they
pretend to give out the full text, or to have been read by the help of
more than three or four keys out of the sevenfold bunch of Esoteric
interpretation; and even this has only been partially accomplished. The
work is too gigantic for any one person to undertake, far more to
accomplish. Our main concern has been simply to prepare the soil. This, we
trust we have done. These two Volumes only constitute the work of a
pioneer who has forced his way into the well‐nigh impenetrable jungle of
the virgin forests of the Land of the Occult. A commencement has been made
in felling and uprooting the deadly upas trees of superstition, prejudice,
and conceited ignorance, so that these two Volumes should form for the
student a fitting prelude for other works. Until the rubbish of the ages
is cleared away from the minds of the Theosophists to whom these pages are
dedicated, it is impossible that the more practical teaching contained in
the Third Volume should be understood. Consequently, it entirely depends
upon the reception with which Volumes I and II shall meet at the hands of
Theosophists and Mystics, whether the last Volume will ever be published.

SATYÂT NÂSTI PARO DHARMAH.

THERE IS NO RELIGION HIGHER THAN TRUTH.

END OF VOLUME II.





[Transcriber’s Note: Obvious printer’s errors have been corrected.]






FOOTNOTES


    1 See _Genesis_ ii. 19. Adam is formed in verse 7, and in verse 19 it
      is said: “Out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the
      field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see
      what he would call them.” Thus man was created _before_ the animals;
      for the animals mentioned in chapter i are the signs of the Zodiac,
      while the man, “male and female,” is not man, but the Host of the
      Sephiroth, Forces, or Angels, “made in his [God’s] image and after
      his likeness.” The Adam, man, is not made in that likeness, nor is
      it so asserted in the _Bible_. Moreover, the Second Adam is
      Esoterically a septenary which represents seven men, or rather
      groups of men. For the first Adam, the Kadmon, is the synthesis of
      the _ten_ Sephiroth. Of these, the upper Triad remains in the
      Archetypal World as the future “Trinity,” while the seven lower
      Sephiroth create the manifested material world; and this septennate
      is the Second Adam. _Genesis_, and the mysteries upon which it was
      fabricated, came from Egypt. The “God” of the 1st chapter of
      _Genesis_ is the Logos, and the “Lord God” of the 2nd chapter the
      Creative Elohim, the lower Powers.

    2 Thus saith Pymander: “This is the mystery that to this day was
      hidden. Nature being mingled with the Heavenly Man [Elohim, or
      Dhyânis], brought forth a wonder ... seven Men, all males and
      females [Hermaphrodite] ... according to the nature of the seven
      Governors” (ii. 29), or the seven Hosts of the Pitris or Elohim, who
      projected or created him. This is very clear, but yet, see the
      interpretations of even our modern theologians, men supposed to be
      intellectual and learned. In the _Theological and Philosophical
      Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Christian [?] Neoplatonist_, a work
      compiled by John David Chambers, of Oriel College, Oxford, the
      translator wonders “for whom these seven Men are intended?” He
      solves the difficulty by concluding that, as “the original pattern
      Man [Adam Kadmon of _Genesis_ i] was masculine‐feminine, ... the
      seven may signify the succeeding patriarchs named in _Genesis_” (p.
      9). A truly theological way of cutting the Gordian knot!

    3 George Smith’s _Chaldean Account of Genesis_, p. 103.

    4 Compare _Zohar_, _Siphra Dtzenioutha_, _Idra Suta_, 2928, Franck,
      _La Kabbale_, p. 205.

    5 _Siphra Dtzenioutha._

    6 As it is now asserted that the Chaldæan tablets, which give the
      allegorical description of Creation, the Fall, and the Flood, even
      to the legend of the Tower of Babel, were written “before the time
      of Moses” (Smith’s _Chaldean Account of Genesis_), how can the
      _Pentateuch_ be called a “revelation”? It is simply another version
      of the same story.

    7 _Philosophumena_, v. 7; Miller’s edition, p. 98.

    8 _Ibid._, p. 108.

    9 P. 86.

   10 See Pliny, iv, c. 12; Strabo, 10; Herodotus, vii, c. 109; Pausanias,
      vii, c. 4, etc.

   11 _Chaldean Account of Genesis_, p. 82.

   12 See _Bund._, 79, 12.

   13 By “original” we mean the Amshaspend, called “Zarathushtra, the lord
      and ruler of the Vara made by Yima in that land.” There were several
      Zarathushtras or Zertusts, the _Dabistan_ alone enumerating
      thirteen; but these were all reincarnations of the first one. The
      last Zoroaster was the founder of the Fire‐temple of Azareksh, and
      the writer of the works on the primeval sacred Magian religion
      destroyed by Alexander.

   14 In India called a “Day of Brahmâ.”

   15 x. 86.

   16 See Volcker, _Mythological Geography_, pp. 145 to 170.

   17 _Mythical Monsters_, p. 47.

   18 It is to be remarked, however, that Mr. Wallace does not accept Mr.
      Sclater’s idea, and even opposes it. Mr. Sclater supposes a land or
      continent formerly uniting Africa, Madagascar, and India but not
      Australia and India; and Mr. A. R. Wallace shows, in his
      _Geographical Distribution of Animals_ and _Island Life_, that the
      hypothesis of such a land is quite uncalled for on the alleged
      zoological grounds. But he admits that a much closer proximity of
      India and Australia did certainly exist, and at a time so very
      remote that it was “certainly pre‐tertiary,” adding in a private
      letter that “no name has been given to this supposed land.” Yet the
      land did exist, and was of course “pre‐tertiary,” for Lemuria, if we
      accept this name for the third Continent, had perished before
      Atlantis fully developed, and Atlantis had sunk and its chief
      portions disappeared before the end of the Miocene period.

   19 See _Esoteric Buddhism_.

   20 One more “coincidence”:

      “Now it is proved that in geologically recent times, this region of
      North Africa was in fact a peninsula of Spain, and that its union
      with Africa (proper) was effected on the North by the rupture of
      Gibraltar, and on the South by an upheaval to which the Sahara owes
      its existence. The shores of this former sea of Sahara are still
      marked by the shells of the same Gastropoda that live on the shores
      of the Mediterranean.” (Prof. Oscar Schmidt, _Doctrine of Descent
      and Darwinism_, p. 244.)

   21 iii. fol. 10a.

   22 A. Winchell, Professor of Geology, _World‐Life_, p. 369.

   23 Mr. Charles Gould, late geological surveyor of Tasmania, in
      _Mythical Monsters_, p. 84.

   24 Sir Charles Lyell, who is credited with having “happily invented”
      the terms Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene, to mark the three divisions
      of the Tertiary Age, ought really to have settled upon some
      approximate length for his “mind‐offspring.” Having left the
      duration of these periods, however, to the speculations of
      specialists, the greatest confusion and perplexity are the result of
      that happy thought. It seems like a hopeless task to succeed in
      quoting a single set of figures from one work, without the risk of
      finding it contradicted by the same author in an earlier or a
      subsequent volume. Sir William Thomson, one of the most eminent
      among the modern authorities, has changed his opinion about half‐a‐
      dozen times upon the age of the Sun and the date of the
      consolidation of the Earth’s crust. In Thomson and Tait’s _Natural
      Philosophy_, we find only ten million years allowed since the time
      when the temperature of the Earth permitted vegetable life to appear
      on it. (App. E _et seq._; also _Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin._, xxiii. Pt.
      1, 157, 1862, where 847 is cancelled.) Mr. Darwin gives Sir William
      Thomson’s estimate as “a minimum of 98 and a maximum of 200 millions
      of years since the consolidation of the crust.” (See Ch. Gould, _op.
      cit._, p. 83.) In the same work (_Nat. Phil._) 80 millions are given
      from the time of incipient incrustation to the present state of the
      world. And in his last lecture, as shown elsewhere, Sir William
      Thomson declares (1887) that the Sun is not older than 15 millions
      of years! Meanwhile, basing his arguments as to the limits of the
      age of the Sun’s heat, on figures previously established by Sir
      William Thomson, Mr. Croll allows 60 millions of years since the
      beginning of the Cambrian period. This is hopeful for the lovers of
      _exact_ knowledge. Thus, whatever figures are given by Occult
      Science, they are sure to be corroborated by those of some one among
      the modern men of Science who are considered as authorities.

   25 See _Proceedings_, Royal Society, London, xxviii. 281.

   26 Gould, _Mythical Monsters_, p. 91.

   27 Only forty‐nine Shlokas out of several hundred are here given, and
      not every verse is translated verbatim, a periphrasis being
      sometimes used for the sake of clearness and intelligibility, where
      a literal translation would be quite unintelligible.

   28 The idea and the spirit of the sentence only is here given, as a
      verbal translation would convey very little to the reader.

   29 The Fourth Globe, or our Earth. All the glosses on the translation
      of the text of the Stanzas and Commentaries are the writer’s. In
      some places they may be incomplete and even inadequate from the
      Hindû standpoint; but in the meaning attached to them in Trans‐
      Himâlayan Esotericism they are correct. In every case the writer
      takes any blame upon herself. As she has never claimed personal
      infallibility, that which is given on her own authority may leave
      much to be desired, particularly in the very abstruse cases where
      too deep metaphysic is involved. The teaching is offered as it is
      understood; and seeing that there are seven keys of interpretation
      to every symbol and allegory, a meaning which may not be suitable
      from, say, the psychological or astronomical aspect, will
      nevertheless be found quite correct from the physical or
      metaphysical.

   30 The Planetary Spirits.

   31 Loka Chakshus.

   32 The Planets.

   33 According to Dr. A. Wilder’s learned definition, Genesis, γένεσις,
      is not generation, but “_a coming out of the eternal_ into the
      Cosmos and Time”; “a coming from _esse_ into _exsistere_,” or from
      “Be‐ness” into “Being”—as a Theosophist would say.

   34 For a clearer explanation of the origins, as contained in the
      Esotericism of the _Bhagavad Gita_, see the Notes thereon published
      in _The Theosophist_ for February, March and June, 1887, Madras.

   35 See the Sephirothal Tree.

   36 _Zohar_, _Idra Suta_, Sec. VII.

   37 J. B. Alden; New York, 1888: ii. 432, 434.

   38 It has been repeatedly stated that the Serpent is the symbol of
      wisdom and of Occult knowledge. “The Serpent has been connected with
      the god of wisdom from the earliest times of which we have any
      historical notice,” writes C. Staniland Wake. “This animal was the
      especial symbol of Thoth or Taut ... and of all those gods, such as
      Hermes [?] and Seth who can be connected with him. This is true also
      of the third member of the primitive Chaldæan triad, Hea or Hoa.”
      According to Sir Henry Rawlinson, “the most important titles of this
      deity refer to ‘his functions as the source of all knowledge and
      science.’ Not only is he ‘the intelligent fish,’ but his name may be
      read as signifying both ‘life’ and a ‘serpent’ [an initiated Adept],
      and he may be considered as ‘figured by the great serpent which
      occupies so conspicuous a place among the symbols of the gods on the
      black stones recording Babylonian benefactions.’ ” (_The Great
      Pyramid_, p. 75). Esculapius, Serapis, Pluto, Esmun and Kneph, are
      all deities with the attributes of the serpent, says Dupuis. They
      are all _healers_, givers of health, spiritual and physical, and of
      _enlightenment_. The crown formed of an asp, the Thermuthis belongs
      to Isis, Goddess of Life and Healing. The _Upanishads_ have a
      treatise on the _Science of Serpents_—in other words, the Science of
      Occult Knowledge; and the Nâgas of the exoteric Buddhist are not
      “the fabulous creatures, of the nature of serpents ... being
      superior to man, and regarded as protectors of the law of Buddha,”
      as Schlagintweit believes, but real living men, some superior to men
      by virtue of their Occult Knowledge, and the _protectors of Buddha’s
      law_, inasmuch as _they interpret his metaphysical tenets
      correctly_, others inferior _morally_ as being “black magicians.”
      Therefore it is truly declared that Gautama Buddha “is said to have
      taught them a more philosophical religious system than to men, who
      were not sufficiently advanced to understand it at the time of his
      appearance” (_ibid._, p. 72).

   39 Compare the _Symbols of the Bonzes_.

   40 The Mandragora is the Mandrake of the _Bible_, of Rachel and Leah.
      The roots of the plant are fleshy, hairy, and forked, representing
      roughly the limbs, the body, and even head of a man. Its magical and
      mysterious properties have been proclaimed in fable and play from
      the most archaic ages. From Rachel and Leah, who indulged in
      witchcraft with them, down to Shakespeare, who speaks of
      “shrieking”—

      “Like mandrakes torn out of the earth
      That living mortals, hearing them, run mad”

      —the mandragora was _the_ magic plant _par excellence_.

      These roots are without any apparent stalk, large leaves growing out
      of the head of the root, like a gigantic crop of hair. They present
      little similitude to man when found in Spain, Italy, Asia Minor, or
      Syria, but on the Isle of Candia, and in Karamania near the city of
      Adan, they have a wonderfully human form, and are very highly prized
      as amulets. They are also worn by women as a charm against
      sterility, and for other purposes. They are especially effective in
      “Black Magic.”

   41 The Sun.

   42 Earth.

   43 Copernicus wrote his theories on the “Revolution of the Heavenly
      Bodies” in the sixteenth century, and the _Zohar_, even if compiled
      by Moses de Leon in the thirteenth century, states that:

      “In the Book of Hammannunah, the Old (or, the Ancient), we learn ...
      that the earth turns upon itself in the form of a circle; that some
      are on top, the others below; that ... there are some countries of
      the earth which are lightened, whilst others are in darkness; these
      have the day, when for the former it is night; and there are
      countries in which it is constantly day, or in which at least the
      night continues only some instants.” (_Zohar_, iii, fol. 10a, quoted
      in Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 139.)

   44 See also the 21st Fargard of the _Vendídád_ on the celestial
      militia.

   45 _Idolat._, II. 373.

   46 Science teaches that Venus receives from the Sun twice as much light
      and heat as the Earth. Thus this Planet, precursor of the dawn and
      the twilight, the most radiant of all the Planets, is said to give
      the Earth one‐third of the supply she receives, and has two parts
      left for herself. This has an Occult as well as an astronomical
      meaning.

   47 “As it is above, so below,” is the fundamental axiom of Occult
      Philosophy. As the Logos is seven‐fold, _i.e._, throughout Kosmos it
      appears as seven Logoi under seven different forms, or, as taught by
      learned Brâhmans, “each of these is the central figure of one of the
      seven main branches of the ancient Wisdom Religion”; and, as the
      seven principles which correspond to the seven distinct states of
      Prajnâ, or Consciousness, are allied to seven states of Matter and
      seven forms of Force, the division must be the same in all that
      concerns the Earth.

   48 Venus is thus ♀, the Earth ♁.

   49 In the Esoteric Philosophy it is male and female, or hermaphrodite;
      hence the “bearded” Venus in mythology.

   50 Therefore, putting aside its religio‐metaphysical aspect, the Cross
      of the Christians is symbolically far more phallic than the Pagan
      Svastika. Compare vol. i. pp. 34, 35.

   51 The ansated cross is the astronomical planetary sign of Venus,
      “signifying the existence of _parturient energy_ in the sexual
      sense, and this was one of the attributes of Isis, the Mother, of
      Eve, Hauvah, or Mother‐Earth, and was so recognized among all the
      ancient peoples in one or another mode of expression.” (From a
      modern Kabalistic MS.)

   52 See Moore’s _Hindû Pantheon_.

   53 Athenæus shows that the first letter of Satan’s name was represented
      in days of old by an arc and crescent; and some Roman Catholics,
      kind, good men, would persuade the public that it is in honour of
      Lucifer’s crescent‐like horns that Mussulmans have chosen the
      crescent for their national arms. Venus, ever since the
      establishment of Roman Catholic dogmatism, has been identified with
      Satan and Lucifer, or the Great Dragon, contrary to all reason and
      logic. As shown by symbologists and Astronomers:

      “The association between the serpent and the idea of darkness had an
      astronomical foundation. The position which the constellation Draco
      at one time occupied showed that the Great Serpent was the ruler of
      the night. This constellation was formerly at the very centre of the
      heavens, and is so extensive that it was called the Great Dragon.
      Its body spreads over seven signs of the Zodiac; and Dupuis, who
      sees in the Dragon of the Apocalypse a reference to the celestial
      serpent, says, ‘It is not astonishing that a constellation so
      extended should be represented by the author of that book as a great
      dragon with seven heads, who drew the third part of the stars from
      heaven and cast them to the earth.’ ” (Staniland Wake, _The Great
      Pyramid_, p. 79; Dupuis, iii. 255.)

      Only Dupuis never knew _why_ Draco, once the pole‐star—the symbol of
      Guide, Guru and Director—had been thus degraded by posterity. “The
      Gods of our fathers are our devils,” says an Asiatic proverb. When
      Draco ceased to be the “lode‐star,” the guiding sidereal divinity,
      it shared the fate of all the fallen Gods. Seth and Typhon was at
      one time, Bunsen tells us, “a great God universally adored
      throughout Egypt, who conferred on the sovereigns of the 18th and
      19th Dynasties the symbols of life and power. But subsequently, in
      the course of the 20th Dynasty, he is suddenly treated as an evil
      Demon, insomuch that his effigies and name are obliterated on all
      the monuments and inscriptions that could be reached.” The real
      Occult reason will be given in these pages.

   54 _De Civitate Dei_, LXXI. viii.

   55 Shukra is the son of Bhrigu the great Rishi, and one of the Seven
      Prajâpati, the founder of the Race of Bhârgavas, in which Parashu
      Râma is born.

   56 This is a flat contradiction of Swedenborg, who _saw_, in “the first
      Earth of the Astral World,” inhabitants dressed as are the peasants
      in Europe; and on the Fourth Earth women clad as are the
      shepherdesses in a _bal masqué_! Even the famous astronomer Huygens
      laboured under the mistaken idea that other worlds and planets have
      species of beings identical with those who live on our Earth,
      possessing the same figures, senses, brain‐power, arts, sciences,
      dwellings, even to the same fabric for their wearing apparel!
      (_Théorie du Monde._)

   57 This is a modern gloss. It is added to the old Commentaries for the
      clearer comprehension of those disciples who study Esoteric
      Cosmogony after having passed through Western learning. The earlier
      Glosses are too redundant with adjectives and figures of speech to
      be easily assimilated.

   58 “Beyond” the Great Range, means, in this case, India, as being the
      Trans‐Himâlayan region for the Tibetan region.

   59 The term Pitris is used by us in these Shlokas to facilitate their
      comprehension, but it is not so used in the original Stanzas, where
      they have distinct appellations of their own, besides being called
      “Fathers” and “Progenitors.”

   60 It is erroneous to take literally the _worship_ of the human
      Bodhisattvas, or Manjushrî. It is true that, exoterically, the
      Mahâyâna school teaches adoration of these without distinction, and
      that Huien‐Tsang speaks of some disciples of Buddha as being
      worshipped. But, Esoterically, it is not the disciple or the learned
      Manjushrî _personally_ that received honours, but the divine
      Bodhisattvas and Dhyâni‐Buddhas that animated (_amilakha_, as the
      Mongolians say) the human forms.

   61 The author of this work is Augustus Le Plongeon. He and his wife are
      well known in the United States for their untiring labours in
      Central America. It is they who discovered the sepulchre of the
      royal Kan Coh, at Cichen‐Itza. The author seems to believe and to
      seek to prove that the Esoteric learning of the Âryans and the
      Egyptians was derived from the Mayas. But, although certainly coëval
      with Plato’s Atlantis, the Mayas belonged to the Fifth Continent,
      which was preceded by Atlantis and Lemuria.

   62 More correctly _In Matrem Deorum_, _Oratio_ v.

   63 P. 143.

   64 These _seven caves_, _seven cities_, etc., etc., stand in every case
      for the seven centres, or zones, upon which the seven primitive
      groups of the first Root‐Race were born.

   65 The engraving is reproduced in the _Sacred Mysteries of the Mayas
      and the Quiches_ on p. 134.

   66 See _Source of Measures_, p. 50‐53.

   67 See _Isis Unveiled_, II. pp. 300 _et seq._, for a proof of the
      antiquity of the decimal system of figures.

   68 See _Masonic Review_, Cincinnati, June, 1886, Art. “The
      Cabbalah.—No. VI,” p. 10.

   69 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

   70 _Ibid._, p. 11.

   71 See _Source of Measures_, pp. 276, _et seq._, App. VII.

   72 Art., _Masonic Review_, pp. 11, 12.

   73 In the Book _Al‐Chazari_, by Jehuda‐ha‐Levi, translated by Dr. D.
      Cassel.

   74 Art. cited, pp. 12, 13.

   75 i. pp. 117 _et seq._

   76 Art. cited, p. 2.

   77 _Ibid._, p. 14.

   78 The appellation _Ak‐ad_ (or Akkadians) is of the same class as _Ad‐
      m_, _Ha‐va_ (Eve) _Æd‐en_ (Eden); _Ak‐Ad_ meaning “Son of _Ad_,”
      like the sons of Ad in Ancient Arabia. _Ad‐ad_, the “only one” and
      the “first,” was the _Ad‐on_ or “Lord” of Syria and consort of _Ad‐
      ar‐gat_ or Aster’t, the Syrian Goddess. And Gan‐Æden (Eden) or
      Gandunia was Babylonia and Mesopotamia. In Assyrian _Ak_ meant
      Creator, the letter _k_ being pronounced _kh_ (_ah_) gutturally.
      According to Swedenborg’s mysticism Adam was not a man but a church
      (?) of primitive light. In the _Vedas_, _Ad_‐iti is the primitive
      light, the Âkâsha of the phenomenal world.

   79 Adam‐Jehovah, Brahmâ and Mars are, in one sense, identical; they are
      all symbols for primitive or initial _generative powers_ for the
      purposes of human procreation. Adam is red, and so also are
      Brahmâ‐Virâj and Mars—God and Planet. Water is the “blood” of the
      Earth; therefore, all these names are connected with Earth and
      Water. “It takes _earth_ and _water_ to create a _human_ soul,” says
      Moses. Mars is identical with Kârttikeya, God of War (in one
      sense)—which God is born of the Sweat of Shiva, Shiva‐gharmaja and
      the Earth. In the _Mahâbhârata_ he is shown as born without the
      intervention of a woman. And he is also called Lohita, the Red, like
      Adam, and the other “first men.” Hence, the author of _The Source of
      Measures_ is quite right in thinking that Mars (and all the other
      Gods of like attributes), “being the _god of war_ and of
      _bloodshed_, was but a secondary idea flowing out of the primary one
      of shedding of blood in conception for the first time.” Hence
      Jehovah became later a fighting God, “Lord of Hosts,” and one who
      commands war. He is the aggressive Zodh—or Cain, by permutation, who
      _slew_ his (female) _brother_, whose “blood crieth from the ground,”
      the _Earth_ having opened _her mouth_ to receive the _blood_.
      (_Genesis_ iii.)

   80 Apollo Karneios is certainly a Greek transformation from the Hindû
      Krishna‐Karna. Karna means radiant, and Karneios, which was a title
      of Apollo with the Celts as with the Greeks, meant “Sun‐born.”

   81 Kumuda‐Pati.

   82 Pitri‐Pati.

   83 Budha, Mercury.

   84 The Moon.

   85 Ushanas‐Shukra, or Venus, is our Lucifer, the Morning‐Star, of
      course. The ingenuity of this allegory in its manifold meanings is
      great indeed. Thus Brihaspati (the Planet Jupiter), or
      Brahmanaspati, is, in the _Rig Veda_, a deity who is the symbol and
      the prototype of the _exoteric_ or ritualistic worship. He is
      priest, sacrificer, suppliant, and the medium through which the
      prayers of mortals reach the Gods. He is the Purohita (Family
      Priest, or Court Chaplain) of the Hindû Olympus and the spiritual
      Guru of the Gods. Soma is the Mystery God and presides over the
      mystic and Occult nature in man and the Universe. Târâ, the priest’s
      wife, who symbolizes the worshipper, prefers Esoteric truths to
      their mere shell, exotericism; hence she is shown as carried off by
      Soma. Now Soma is the sacred juice of that name, giving mystic
      visions and trance revelations, the _result of which union_ is Budha
      (Wisdom), Mercury, Hermes, etc.; that Science in short which to this
      day is proclaimed by the Brihaspatis of Theology as Devilish and
      Satanic. What wonder that by expanding the cycle of this allegory we
      find Christian Theology espousing the quarrel of the Hindû Gods, and
      regarding Ushanas (Lucifer), who helped Soma against that ancient
      personification of ritualistic worship (Brahmanaspati, the Lord of
      the Brâhmans, now become Jupiter‐Jehovah) as Satan, the “Enemy of
      God”!

   86 As shown elsewhere, it is only the Heavenly Man, Adam‐Kadmon, of the
      first chapter of _Genesis_, who is made “in the image and likeness
      of God.” Adam of the second chapter is not said to be made in that
      _image_ nor in the divine likeness, before he ate of the forbidden
      fruit. The former Adam is the Sephirothal Host; the second Adam is
      the mindless First human Root‐Race; the third Adam is the Race that
      separated, whose eyes are opened.

   87 The Earth.

   88 Achyuta is an almost untranslatable term. It means that which is not
      subject to fall or change for the worse: the Unfalling; and it is
      the reverse of Chyuta, the Fallen. The Dhyânîs who incarnate in the
      human forms of the Third Root‐Race and endow them with intellect
      (Manas) are called the Chyuta for they fall into generation.

   89 This is perhaps the reason why, in the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_, we are told
      that Brahmâ had communicated to Nârada in the beginning that all men
      whatsoever, even Mlechchhas, outcasts and barbarians, might know the
      true nature of Vâsudeva and learn to have faith in that Deity.

   90 See _Asiatic Researches_, i. 265.

   91 _Book of God_, 60.

   92 Shesha, who is also Ananta, the infinite, and the “Cycle of
      Eternity” in Esotericism, is credited with having given his
      astronomical knowledge to Garga, the oldest astronomer of India, who
      propitiated him, and forthwith knew all about the Planets and how to
      read omens.

   93 See _The History of Indian Literature_, p. 253, by Prof. A. Weber:
      in Trübner’s Oriental Series.

   94 Even the Maya Indians of Guatemala had their Zodiac from untold
      antiquity. And “primitive man acted in the same manner independently
      of time or locality in every age,” observes a French writer.

   95 _Ibid._, p. 2.

   96 The _Tirukkanda Panchanga_, for the Kali Yuga 4986, by Chintamany
      Raghauaracharya, son of the famous Government astronomer of Madras,
      and Tartakamala Venkata Krishna Rao.

   97 Of years, 300 million years, or Three Occult Ages. The _Rig Veda_
      has the same division. In the “Physician’s Hymn,” (X 97 1) it is
      said that “the plants came into being _Three Ages_ (Triyugam) before
      the gods” on our Earth. (See “Chronology of the Brâhmans” at the end
      of this Stanza.)

   98 Forms.

   99 Minerals.

  100 Vegetation.

  101 Sarísripa, svapada.

  102 The Earth.

  103 These two must not be confused with the Seven Creations or Divisions
      in each Kalpa. The _Primary_ and _Secondary_ Creations are here
      meant.

  104 In _Bereschith Rabba_, Parscha IX.

  105 i. 31.

  106 See _Hibbert Lectures_, 1887, Sayce, p. 39.

  107 Whence the identity of the ideas? The Chinese have the same
      traditions. According to the commentator Kwoh P’oh, in the work
      called _Shan‐Hai‐King_, “Wonders by Sea and Land,” a work which was
      written by the historiographer Chung Ku from engravings on nine urns
      made by the Emperor Yü (B.C. 2255), an interview is mentioned with
      men _having two distinct faces on their heads_, before and behind,
      monsters with bodies of goats and human faces, etc. Gould, in his
      _Mythical Monsters_ (p. 27), giving the names of some authors on
      Natural History, mentions _Shan‐Hai‐King_. “According to the
      commentator Kwoh P’oh (A.D. 276‐324) this work was compiled three
      thousand years before his time, or at seven dynasties’ distance.
      Yang Sun of the Ming Dynasty (commencing A.D. 1368) states that it
      was compiled by Kung Chia and Chung Ku (?)”—as stated above. “Chung
      Ku ... at the time of the last emperor of the Hia dynasty (B.C.
      1818), fearing that the emperor might destroy the books treating of
      the ancient time, carried them in his flight to Yin.”

  108 Cory’s _Ancient Fragments_, original edition, p. 25.

  109 _Qabbalah_, p. 246.

  110 From the mineral, vegetable, and animal remains.

  111 Rounds.

  112 Solar‐lunar.

  113 Gods and Planetary Spirits, especially the Ribhus. “The three
      Ribhus” who also become “thrice seven” in number of their gifts.

  114 Remember the “winged races” of Plato, and the _Popol Vuh_ accounts
      of the first human race, which could walk, fly, and see objects,
      however distant.

  115 See _Mythical Monsters_, by Charles Gould.

  116 In the first volume of the lately published _Introduction à l’Étude
      des Races Humaines_, by M. de Quatrefages, there is proof that since
      the Post‐Tertiary Period and even before that time—since many Races
      were already scattered during that Age on the face of the Earth—man
      has not altered one iota in his physical structure. And if man was
      surrounded for ages by a fauna that altered from one period or cycle
      to another, which died out, which was reborn in other forms—so that
      now there does not exist one single animal on Earth, large or small,
      contemporary with the man of that period—if, then, every animal has
      been transformed save man himself, this fact goes to prove not only
      his antiquity, but that he is a _distinct Kingdom_. Why should he
      alone have escaped transformation? Because, says de Quatrefages, the
      weapon used by him, in his struggle with Nature, and the ever‐
      changing geological conditions and elements, was “his _psychic
      force_, not his physical strength or body,” as in the case of
      animals. Give man only that dose of intelligence and reason with
      which other mammalia are endowed, and with his present bodily
      organization he will show himself the most helpless of creatures of
      Earth. And as everything goes to prove that the human organism with
      all its characteristics, peculiarities and idiosyncrasies existed
      already on our Globe in those far distant geological periods when
      there was not yet _one single specimen of the now‐existing forms of
      mammalia_, what is the unavoidable conclusion? Why this: Since all
      the human races are of one and the same species, it follows that
      this species is the _most ancient of all_ the now‐living mammalia.
      Therefore it is the most stable and persevering of all, and was
      already as fully developed as it is now when all the other mammalia
      now known had not made even their first approach to appearance on
      this Earth. Such is the opinion of the great French Naturalist, who
      gives thereby a terrible blow to Darwinism.

  117 They said.

  118 The Monads of the “presentments” of men of the Third Round, the huge
      ape‐like forms.

  119 The Waters.

  120 In the Esoteric System the seven “principles” in man are represented
      by seven letters. The first two are _more_ sacred than the four
      letters of the Tetragrammaton.

  121 The Intermediate Spheres, wherein the Monads, which have not reached
      Nirvâna, are said to slumber in unconscious inactivity between the
      Manvantaras.

  122 Explained elsewhere. The Three Fires, Pâvaka, Pavamâna, and Shuchi,
      who had forty‐five Sons, who, with their three Fathers, and their
      Father Agni, constitute the forty‐nine Fires. Pavamâna, Fire
      produced by friction, is the parent of the “Fire of the Asuras”;
      Shuchi, Solar Fire, is the parent of the “Fire of the Gods”; and
      Pâvaka, Electric Fire, is the Father of the “Fire of the Pitris.”
      (See _Vâyu Purâna_.) But this is an explanation on the material and
      terrestrial plane. The Flames are evanescent and only periodical;
      the Fires—eternal in their triple unity. They correspond to the
      _four_ lower, and the _three_ higher human “principles.”

  123 The Suras, who become later the A‐Suras.

  124 Âtmâ, Buddhi and Manas. In Devachan the higher element of the Manas
      is needed to make it a state of perception and consciousness for the
      disembodied Monad.

  125 _Catechism_, Book iii. Sec. 9.

  126 See _Vishnu Purâna_, Book I. Ch. V., closing Shloka. Fitzedward
      Hall’s rendering of the text, in Wilson’s Translation, i. 88. Also
      _Mânava‐Dharma Shâstra_, i. 30.

  127 This has in Esotericism a direct bearing upon the seven “principles”
      of the manifested Brahmâ, or Universe, in the same order as in man.
      Exoterically, it is only four “principles.”

  128 Wilson’s Translation, i. 81.

  129 Demons is a very loose word to use, as it applies to a great number
      of inferior—_i.e._, more material—Spirits, or minor Gods, who are so
      termed because they “war” with the higher ones; but they are no
      devils.

  130 The same order of principles in man: Âtmâ (Spirit), Buddhi (Soul),
      its vehicle, as Matter is the Vâhan of Spirit, and Manas (Mind), the
      third, or the fifth microcosmically. On the _plane of personality_,
      Manas is the first.

  131 Thus, says the Commentary, the saying, “by day the Gods are most
      powerful, and by night the Demons,” is purely allegorical.

  132 This “thinking of oneself” as this, that, or the other, is the chief
      factor in the production of every kind of psychic or even physical
      phenomena. The words “whosoever shall say to this mountain be thou
      removed and cast into the sea, and _shall not doubt_ ... that thing
      will come to pass,” are no vain words. Only the word “faith” ought
      to be translated by “Will.” Faith without Will is like a wind‐mill
      without _wind_—barren of results.

  133 The same idea is found in the first four chapters of _Genesis_, with
      their “Lord” and “God,” which are the Elohim and the Androgynous
      Eloha.

  134 P. 398.

  135 P. 107.

  136 Spirits.

  137 Also Spirits.

  138 vi. 2‐6.

  139 But see the difficulties suggested later, in the works of various
      Geologists, against this theory. Compare Sir R. S. Ball’s articles
      in _Nature_, xxv, 79‐82, 103‐107, Nov. 24 and Dec. 1, 1881.

  140 The Rûpas.

  141 The Goddess who gave birth to these primordial monsters, in the
      account of Berosus, was Thalatth, in Greek Thalassa, the “Sea.”

  142 See, for comparison, the account of creation by Berosus, as
      preserved in Alexander Polyhistor, and the hideous beings born from
      the two‐fold principle—Earth and Water—in the abyss of Primordial
      Creation: Narâs (Centaurs, men with the limbs of horses and human
      bodies), and Kinnaras (men with the heads of horses) created by
      Brahmâ in the commencement of the Kalpa.

  143 For a similar admission see Prof. Lefèvre’s _Philosophy_, 481.

  144 xii. 10,308.

  145 The Esoteric Doctrine says that this “Cosmic Evolution” refers only
      to our Solar System; while exoteric Hindûism makes the figures
      refer, if we do not mistake, to the whole Universal System.

  146 Another point of disagreement. Occultism says that the astral
      prototypes of the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms up to man
      have taken that time (300 million years) to evolve, reforming out of
      the cast‐off materials of the preceding Round, which, though very
      dense and physical in their own cycle, are relatively ethereal as
      compared with the materiality of our present middle Round. At the
      expiration of these 300 million years, Nature, on the way to the
      physical and material, down the arc of descent, begins with mankind
      and works downwards, hardening or materializing forms as it
      proceeds. Thus the fossils found in strata, to which an antiquity,
      not of eighteen, but of many hundreds of millions of years, must be
      ascribed, belong in reality to forms of the preceding Round, which,
      while living, were far more ethereal than physical, _as we know the
      physical_. That we perceive and disinter them as tangible forms, is
      due to the process of materialization or crystallization referred
      to, which took place subsequently, at the beginning of the Fourth
      Round, and reached its maximum after the appearance of man,
      proceeding parallel with his physical evolution. This alone
      illustrates the fact that the degree of materiality of the Earth
      changes _pari passu_ with that of its inhabitants. And thus man now
      finds, as tangible fossils, what were once the (to his present
      senses) ethereal forms of the lower kingdoms. The above Brâhmanical
      figures refer to evolution beginning on Globe A, and in the First
      Round. In this Volume we speak only of this, the Fourth Round.

  147 This difference and the change of cyphers in the last three triplets
      of figures, the writer cannot undertake to account for. According to
      every calculation, once the three hundred millions are subtracted,
      the figures ought to stand, 1,655,884,687. But they are given as
      stated in the Tamil calendar above‐named and as they were
      translated. The school of the late Pandit Dayânand Sarasvati,
      founder of the Ârya Samâj, gives a date of 1,960,852,987. See the
      _Ârya Magazine_ of Lahore, the cover of which bears the words:
      “Âryan era 1,960,852,987.”

  148 Vaivasvata Manu is the one Human Being—some versions add to him the
      seven Rishis—who in the Matsya Avatâra allegory is saved from the
      Deluge in a boat, like Noah in the Ark. Therefore, this Vaivasvata
      Manvantara would be the “post‐diluvian” period. This, however, does
      not refer to the later “Atlantean” or Noah’s Deluge, nor to the
      Cosmic “Deluge” or Pralaya of obscuration, which preceded our Round,
      but to the appearance of mankind in the latter Round. There is a
      great difference made, however, between the Naimitika, Occasional or
      Incidental, Prâkritika, Elemental, Atyantika, the Absolute, and
      Nitya, the Perpetual Pralaya; the latter being described as
      “Brahmâ’s contingent recoalescence of the Universe at the end of
      Brahmâ’s Day.” The question was raised by a learned Brâhman
      Theosophist: “Whether there is such a thing as Cosmic Pralaya;
      because, otherwise, the Logos (Krishna) would have to be reborn, and
      he is Aja (unborn).” We cannot see why. The Logos is said to be born
      only metaphorically, as the Sun is born daily, or rather a beam of
      that Sun is born in the morning and is said to die when it
      disappears, whereas it is simply reäbsorbed into the parent essence.
      Cosmic Pralaya is for things visible, not for the Arûpa, Formless,
      World. The Cosmic or Universal Pralaya comes only at the end of one
      hundred Years of Brahmâ, when the Universal Dissolution is said to
      take place. Then the Avyaya, say the exoteric Scriptures, the
      Eternal Life symbolized by Vishnu, assuming the character of Rudra,
      the Destroyer, enters into the Seven Rays of the Sun and drinks up
      all the waters of the Universe. “Thus fed, the seven Solar Rays
      dilate to _seven suns_ and set fire to the whole Cosmos.”

  149 Since a Mahâ Yuga is the 1,000th part of a Day of Brahmâ.

  150 _Op. cit._, Art. “Geology.”

  151 _Ibid._ This allows a chance even to the Biblical “Adam Chronology”
      of 6,000 years.

  152 _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, 48.

  153 To the Silurian period as regards molluscs and animal life—granted;
      but what do they know of man?

  154 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

  155 _Ibid._, 49.

  156 Winchell, _World‐Life_, 180.

  157 _Op. cit._, 49.

  158 Wilson’s _Vishnu Purâna_, i. 51.

  159 i. 32.

  160 The atmosphere, or the air, the firmament.

  161 _Harivamsha_, i. 36.

  162 _Genesis_, i. 6‐9.

  163 Lords.

  164 They were told.

  165 _i.e._, the Jivas or Monads.

  166 Mother Earth or Nature.

  167 For external bodies.

  168 According to the wonderful chronology of Bentley, who wrote in days
      when Biblical chronology was still undisputed; and also according to
      that of those modern Orientalists who dwarf the Hindû dates as far
      as they can.

  169 Now Shrî is the daughter of Bhrigu, one of the Prajâpatis and
      Rishis, the chief of the Bhrigus, the “Consumers,” the Aërial Class
      of Gods. She is Lakshmî, the wife of Vishnu, and she is Gaurî, the
      “bride of Shiva,” and she is Sarasvatî, the “watery,” the wife of
      Brahmâ, because the three Gods and Goddesses are one, under three
      aspects. Read the explanation by Parâshara, in _Vishnu Purâna_ (I.
      viii., Wilson’s Trans., i. 119), and you will understand. “The lord
      of Shrî is the moon,” he says, and “Shrî is the wife of Nârâyana,
      the God of Gods”: Shrî or Lakshmî (Venus) is Indrânî, as she is
      Sarasvatî, for in the words of Parâshara: “Harî [or Îshvara, the
      ‘Lord’] is all that is called male [in the Universe]; Lakshmî is all
      that is termed female. There is nothing else than they.” Hence she
      is female, and “God” is male Nature.

  170 Shrî is Goddess of, and herself “Fortune and Prosperity.”

  171 _Masonic Review_ (Cincinnati), June, 1886. Art. “The Cabbalah.—No.
      VI,” 15‐17.

  172 The Moon‐Gods.

  173 _Vishnu Purâna_, I. vii., Wilson’s Trans., i. 101.

  174 See _Mahâbhârata_, _Mokshadharma Parvan_.

  175 Because, as the allegory shows, the Gods who had no personal merit
      of their own, dreading the sanctity of those self‐striving
      incarnated Beings who had become Ascetics and Yogîs, and thus
      threatened to upset the power of the former by their _self‐acquired_
      powers—denounced them. All this has a deep philosophical meaning and
      refers to the evolution and acquirement of divine powers through
      _self‐exertion_. Some Rishi‐Yogîs are shown in the _Purânas_ to be
      far more powerful than the Gods. Secondary Gods or temporary Powers
      in Nature (the Forces) are doomed to disappear; it is only the
      spiritual Potentiality in man which can lead him to become one with
      the INFINITE and the ABSOLUTE.

  176 The Triangle becomes a Pentagon (five‐fold) on Earth.

  177 Seth, as Bunsen and others have shown, is not only the “primitive
      God” of the Semites—early Jews included—but also their “semi‐divine
      ancestor.” For, says Bunsen (_God in History_, i. 233, 234): “The
      Seth of Genesis, the father of Enoch (the man) must be considered as
      originally running parallel with that derived from the Elohim,
      Adam’s father.” “According to Bunsen, the Deity (the God Seth) was
      the _primitive god_ of Northern Egypt and Palestine,” says Staniland
      Wake, in _The Great Pyramid_ (p. 61). And Seth became considered in
      the later Theology of the Egyptians as an “evil demon,” says the
      same Bunsen, for he is one with Typhon and one with the Hindû Demons
      as a logical sequel.

  178 _I Corinth._, xv. 47.

  179 _Vâyu Purâna_; _Harivamsha_, 170.

  180 See Mather’s _Kabbalah Unveiled_, p. 302.

  181 Translated in Isaac Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 386.

  182 _Zohar_ iii., 135a, 292a, _Idra Zootah_. Brody Ed., _Idrah Zootah_.

  183 _Gen._ xxvi. 31 _et seq._; Myer’s _Qabbalah_, _ibid._

  184 _Zohar_, iii. 290a, Brody Ed. Indrah Zootah, quoted in Isaac Myer’s
      _Qabbalah_, pp. 387, 388.

  185 ii. 5.

  186 Or Mind‐born.

  187 Fohat.

  188 “Huxley, supported by the most evident discoveries in Comparative
      Anatomy, could utter the momentous sentence that the anatomical
      differences between man and the highest apes are less than those
      between the latter and the lowest apes. In relation to our
      genealogical tree of man, the necessary conclusion follows that the
      human race has _evolved gradually from the true apes_.” (_The
      Pedigree of Man_, by Ernst Hæckel, translated by Ed. B. Aveling, p.
      49.)

      What may be the scientific and logical objections to the opposite
      conclusion—we would ask? The anatomical resemblances between Man and
      the Anthropoids—grossly exaggerated as they are by Darwinists, as M.
      de Quatrefages shows—are simply enough accounted for when the origin
      of the latter is taken into consideration.

      “Nowhere, in the older deposits, is an ape to be found that
      approximates more closely to man, or a man that approximates more
      closely to an ape.”

      “The same gulf which is found to‐day between man and ape, goes back
      with undiminished breadth and depth to the Tertiary period. This
      fact alone is enough to make its untenability clear.” (Dr. F. Pfaff,
      Prof. of Natural Science in the University of Erlangen.)

  189 See _Yoga Shâstra_, ii. 32.

  190 Voltaire.

  191 _Mânava‐Dharma Shâstra_, iii. 196.

  192 _Matsya_ and _Padma Purânas_ and Kullûka on the _Mânava‐Dharma
      Shâstra_, iii. 195. We are quite aware that the _Vâyu_ and _Matsya
      Purânas_ identify (agreeably to Western interpretation) the
      Agnishvâtta with the seasons, and the Barhishad Pitris with the
      months; adding a fourth class—Kâvyas—cyclic years. But do not
      Christian Roman Catholics identify their Angels with Planets, and
      are not the Seven Rishis become the Saptarshis—a constellation? They
      are Deities presiding over all the cyclic divisions.

  193 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson, iii. 158, 159.

  194 Shll. 935, 936.

  195 The _Vâyu Purâna_ shows the region called Virâja‐loka inhabited by
      the Agnishvâttas.

  196 Wilson, _ibid._, iii. 17. Note by Fitzedward Hall.

  197 _Loc. cit._, _ibid._

  198 See _Theosophist_, February, 1887, p. 360.

  199 See Wilson, ii. 26.

  200 See _Vâyu Purâna_.

  201 Chhâyâs.

  202 Or Amânasas.

  203 Thus.

  204 Complexion.

  205 Also.

  206 Creator.

  207 Phantoms.

  208 Image or shadow.

  209 This was hinted at in _Isis Unveiled_ (I. xxxviii.), though the full
      explanation could not then be given: “The Pitris are not the
      ancestors of the present living men, but those of the [first] human
      kind or Adamic race; the spirits of _human_ races, which, on the
      great scale of descending evolution, preceded our races of men, and
      were physically, as well as spiritually, far superior to our modern
      pigmies. In _Mânava‐Dharma Shâstra_ they are called the _Lunar_
      ancestors.”

  210 See the “Laws of Manu”—_Mânava‐Dharma Shâstra_, iii. 203.

  211 “Sacred Books of the East,” Vol. IV, _The Zend‐Avesta_, Pt. I.
      lviii, Trans. by James Darmesteter.

  212 Compare also what is said about Makara and the Kumâras in connection
      with the Zodiac.

  213 Whence the subsequent assertions of St. John’s vision, referred to
      in his Apocalypse, about, “the great red dragon having seven heads
      and _ten_ horns, and seven crowns upon his heads,” whose “tail drew
      the _third part_ of the stars of heaven and did cast them to the
      earth.” (Ch. xii.)

  214 See _Harivamsha_, 932.

  215 The verse “did cast them to the earth,” plainly shows its origin in
      the grandest and oldest allegory of the Âryan Mystics, who, after
      the destruction of the Atlantean _giants_ and _sorcerers_, concealed
      the truth—_astronomical_, _physical_, and _divine_, as it is a page
      out of _pre‐cosmic_ Theogony—under various allegories. Its true
      Esoteric interpretation is a veritable Theodice of the “Fallen
      Angels,” so called: the _willing_ and the _unwilling_, the
      _creators_ and those who _refused to create_, being now mixed up
      most perplexingly by Christian Catholics, who forget that their
      highest Archangel, St. Michael, who is shown to conquer (to master
      and to assimilate) the _Dragon of Wisdom_ and of divine Self‐
      sacrifice—now miscalled and calumniated as Satan—_was the first to
      refuse to create_! This has led to endless confusion. So little does
      Christian Theology understand the paradoxical language of the East
      and its symbolism, that it even explains, in its _dead‐letter
      sense_, the Chinese Buddhist and Hindû exoteric rite of raising a
      noise during certain eclipses to scare away the “great red dragon,”
      which laid a plot to carry away the “light”! But here “light” means
      Esoteric Wisdom, and we have sufficiently explained the secret
      meaning of the terms Dragon, Serpent, etc., all of which refer to
      Adepts and Initiates.

  216 See _Genesis_ and Plato’s _Timæus_.

  217 In spite of all efforts to the contrary, Christian Theology—having
      burdened itself with the Hebrew Esoteric account of the creation of
      man, which it understands _literally_—cannot find any reasonable
      excuse for its “God, the Creator,” who produces a man devoid of mind
      and sense; nor can it justify the punishment following an act, for
      which Adam and Eve might plead _non compos_. For if the couple be
      admitted to be ignorant of good and evil before the eating of the
      forbidden fruit, how could it be expected to know that _disobedience
      was evil_? If primeval man was meant to remain a half‐witted, or
      rather witless, being, then his creation was aimless and even
      _cruel_, if produced by an omnipotent and perfect God. But Adam and
      Eve are shown, even in _Genesis_, to be created by a Class of lower
      divine Beings, the Elohim, who are so jealous of their personal
      prerogatives as reasonable and intelligent creatures, that they will
      not allow man to become “as one of us.” This is plain, even from the
      dead‐letter meaning of the _Bible_. The Gnostics, then, were right
      in regarding the Jewish God as belonging to a Class of lower,
      material and not very holy denizens of the invisible World.

  218 In _Isis Unveiled_ several of these Gnostic systems are given. One
      is taken from the _Codex Nazaræus_, the Scripture of the Nazarenes,
      who, although they existed long before the days of Christ, and even
      before the laws of Moses, were Gnostics, and many of them Initiates.
      They held their “Mysteries of Life” in Nazara (ancient and modern
      Nazareth), and their doctrines are a faithful echo of the teachings
      of the Secret Doctrine—some of which we are now endeavouring to
      explain.

  219 i. 18. See the translation from the Greek by François, Monsieur de
      Foix, Evesque d’Ayre: the work dedicated to Marguerite de France,
      Reine de Navarre. Edition of 1579, Bordeaux.

  220 _Asgard and the Gods_, p. 4.

  221 Mr. James Darmesteter, the translator of the _Vendidâd_, speaking of
      it, says: “The tree, _whatever it is_....”—“Sacred Books of the
      East,” vol. iv. p. 209.

  222 Plato’s _Timæus_.

  223 See _Asgard and the Gods_, p. 305.

  224 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

  225 “The father of the sacred fire,” writes Prof. Jolly, “bore the name
      of Tvashtri ... His mother was Mâyâ. He himself was styled Akta
      (_anointed_ χριστὸς) after the priest had poured upon his head the
      spirituous (?) Soma, and on his body butter purified by sacrifice.”
      (_Man before Metals_, p. 190.) The source of his information is not
      given by the French Darwinist. But the lines are quoted to show that
      light begins to dawn even upon the Materialists. Adalbert Kühn, in
      his _Die Herabkunft des Feuers_, identifies the two signs [Symbol:
      swastika] and [Symbol: swastika with dots around the center] with
      Arani, and designates them under this name. He adds: “This process
      of kindling fire naturally led men to the idea of sexual
      reproduction,” etc. Why could not a more dignified idea, and one
      more Occult, have led man to invent this symbol, in so far as it is
      connected, in one of its aspects, with human reproduction? But its
      chief symbolism refers to Cosmogony.

      “Agni, in the condition of Akta, or anointed, is suggestive of
      Christ,” remarks Prof. Jolly. “Mâyâ, Mary, His mother; Tvashtri, St.
      Joseph, the carpenter of the Bible.” In the _Rig Veda_, Vishvakarman
      is the highest and oldest of the Gods and their “Father.” He is the
      “carpenter or builder,” because God is called even by the
      Monotheists, the “Architect of the Universe.” Still, the original
      idea is purely metaphysical, and had no connection with the later
      Phallicism.

  226 The real Manushya.

  227 Barishad (?).

  228 The Kavyavâhana, electric fire.

  229 Shuchi, the spirit in the Sun.

  230 The Pitris and the two Fires.

  231 The form.

  232 It is not clear why Bhûtas should be rendered by the Orientalists as
      “evil spirits” in the _Purânas_. In the _Vishnu Purâna_ (I. v,
      Wilson’s Trans., Fitzedward Hall’s note, i. 83) the Shloka simply
      says: “Fiends, frightful from being monkey‐coloured and
      carnivorous”; and the word in India now means “ghosts,” ethereal or
      _astral_ phantoms, while in Esoteric Teaching it means _elementary_
      substances, something made of attenuated, non‐compound essence, and,
      specifically, the astral Double of any man or animal. In this case
      these primitive men are the Doubles of the first ethereal Dhyânîs or
      Pitris.

  233 See _Pymander_, Everard’s Trans., II. 17‐29.

  234 _Chaldean Account of Genesis_, p. 92.

  235 P. 91.

  236 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

  237 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

  238 Human Monad.

  239 Astral shadow.

  240 Kâma Rûpa.

  241 Shuchi, the fire of passion and animal instinct.

  242 Solar Fire.

  243 Nascent Man.

  244 Later.

  245 Race.

  246 See Shloka 22.

  247 See _Genesis of the Elements_, by W. Crookes, p. 21.

  248 _Pymander_, i. 6. The opponents of Hindûism may call the above
      Pantheism, Polytheism, or anything they may please. If Science is
      not entirely blinded by prejudice, it will see in this account a
      profound knowledge of Natural Sciences and Physics, as well as of
      Metaphysics and Psychology. But to find this out, one has to study
      the personifications, and then convert them into chemical atoms. It
      will then be found to satisfy both physical and even purely
      materialistic Science, as well as those who see in evolution the
      work of the “Great Unknown Cause” in its phenomenal and illusive
      aspects.

  249 _Sc._ Race.

  250 Shlokas, 153, 154.

  251 It is symbolized in the Pythagorean Triangle, the ten yods within,
      and the seven points of the Triangle and the Square.

  252 Whence the Kabalistic name of “Shells” given to the Astral Form, the
      Body called Kâma Rûpa, left behind by the Higher Angels in the shape
      of the Higher Manas, when the latter leaves for Devachan, forsaking
      its residue.

  253 Mackenzie’s _Royal Masonic Cyclopædia_, pp. 409‐411.

  254 viii. 20.

  255 _De Bell. Jud._, ii. 12.

  256 _De Gignat_, p. 222C.; _De Somniis_, p. 455D.; which shows that the
      Essenes believed in re‐birth and many reïncarnations on Earth, as
      Jesus himself did, a fact we can prove from the _New Testament_
      itself.

  257 I. vi. 3.

  258 _Zohar_, ii. 229b.

  259 It is corroborated, however, as we have shown, by the Esotericism of
      _Genesis_. Not only are the animals created therein after the “Adam
      of Dust,” but vegetation is shown _in_ the Earth before “the heavens
      and the earth were created.” “Every plant of the field before it was
      in the earth” (ii. 5). Now, unless the Occult interpretation is
      accepted—which shows that in this Fourth Round the Globe was covered
      with vegetation, and the First (Astral) Humanity was produced before
      almost anything could grow and develop thereon—what can the dead
      letter mean? Simply that the grass was in the earth of the Globe
      before that Globe was created? And yet the meaning of verse 6, which
      says that “there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the
      whole face of the ground,” before it rained, and caused the trees,
      etc., to grow, is plain enough. It shows also in what geological
      period it occurred, and further what is meant by “heaven” and
      “earth.” It meant the firmament and dry _incrustated_ land,
      separated and ridden of its vapours and exhalations. Moreover, the
      student must bear in mind that, as Adam Kadmon, the “male and female
      being” of _Genesis_ i, is no physical human being but the host of
      the Elohim, among which was Jehovah himself—so the animals,
      mentioned in that chapter as “created” before man in the dead‐letter
      text, were no animals, but the zodiacal signs and other sidereal
      bodies.

  260 _Book of Dzyan_, iii. 19.

  261 Kenealy, _The Book of God_, pp. 114, 115.

  262 To those who would enquire: What has Hydrogen to do with air or
      oxygenation?—it is answered: Study first the ABC of Occult Alchemy.
      In their anxiety, however, to identify Pymander, the “mouth of
      mystery,” with St. John the Baptist prophetically, the Christian
      Symbologists thus identified also the seven Kabiri and the Assyrian
      Bulls with the Cherubs of the Jews and the Apostles. Having,
      moreover, to draw a line of demarcation between the _four_ and the
      _three_ the latter being the _Fallen_ Angels; and furthermore to
      avoid connecting these with the “Seven Spirits of the Face,” the
      Archangels, they unceremoniously threw out all they did not choose
      to recognize. Hence the perversion in the order of the Elements, in
      order to make them dovetail with the order of the Gospels, and to
      identify the Angel‐Man with Christ. With the Chaldees, the
      Egyptians—from whom Moses adopted the Chroub (Cherubs in their
      animal form)—and the Ophites; with all these, the Angels, the
      Planets, and the Elements, were symbolized mystically and
      alchemically by the Lion (Mikael); the Bull (Uriel); the Dragon
      (Raphael); the Eagle (Gabriel); the Bear (Thot‐Sabaoth); the Dog
      (Era‐taoth); the Mule (Uriel or Thantabaoth). All these have a
      qualificative meaning.

  263 See _Hibbert Lectures_, 1887, pp. 370 _et seqq._

  264 Sepher _M’bo Sha‐arim_, near the end, translated by Isaac Myer,
      _Qabbalah_, p. 110.

  265 Form.

  266 Shadow.

  267 S. Laing, _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, p. 90.

  268 And why not all the progenitive First Races, human as well as
      animal; and why _one_ “remote progenitor”?

  269 Obviously so, on the lines of Evolutionism, which traces the
      Mammalia to some amphibian ancestor.

  270 Second Edition, p. 161.

  271 _Ibid._, p. 162.

  272 De Quatrefages, _The Human Species_, p. 124; “International
      Scientific Series,” Volume XXVI.

  273 _Ibid._, p. 125.

  274 Fol. 186.

  275 _Odyssey_, xi. 298‐305; _Iliad_, iii. 243.

  276 Hyg., _Fab._, 80. Ovid., _Fast._, 700, etc. See Decharme’s
      _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_, p. 6.

  277 See Decharme, _ibid._, p. 652.

  278 _Nem._, x. 80 _et seqq._ Theocr., xxiv. 131.

  279 XXXIV. v. 5. Theocr., xxii. 1.

  280 iii. 10. 7.

  281 Apollodorus, iii. 1.

  282 Castor’s tomb was shown in Sparta, in days of old, says Pausanias
      (iii. 13, 1); and Plutarch says that he was called at Argos the
      demi‐mortal or demi‐hero, μιξαρχαγέτας. (_Quæst. Gr._, 23.)

  283 Pindar, _Nem._, x. 60, _seqq._, Dissen.

  284 Schol. Eurip., _Orest._, 463, Dindorf. See Decharme, _op. cit._, p.
      654.

  285 The Monad is impersonal and a God _per se_, albeit unconscious on
      this plane. For divorced from its third (often called fifth)
      principle, Manas, which is the horizontal line of the first
      manifested Triangle or Trinity, it can have no consciousness or
      perception of things on this earthly plane. “The highest sees
      through the eye of the lowest” in the manifested world; Purusha
      (Spirit) remains blind without the help of Prakriti (Matter) in the
      material spheres; and so does Âtmâ‐Buddhi without Manas.

  286 _Moral._, p. 484f.

  287 This strange idea and interpretation are accepted by Decharme in his
      _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_ (p. 655). “Castor and Pollux,” he
      says, “are nothing but the Sun and Moon, conceived as twins.... The
      Sun, the immortal and powerful being that disappears every evening
      from the horizon and descends under the Earth, as though he would
      make room for the fraternal orb which comes to life with night, is
      Pollux, who sacrifices himself for Castor; Castor, who, inferior to
      his brother, owes to him his immortality; for the Moon, says
      Theophrastus, is only another, but feebler Sun (_De Ventis_, 17).”

  288 See _Book of Enoch_, Trans. by Bishop Laurence, 1883.

  289 Adam (Kadmon) is, like Brahmâ and Mars, the symbol of the
      _generative_ and _creative_ power typifying Water and Earth—an
      Alchemical secret. “It takes Earth and Water to create a human
      Soul,” said Moses. Mars is the Hindû Mangala, the planet Mars,
      identical with Kârttikeya, the “War‐God”; he is Gharma‐ja, born of
      Shiva’s _sweat_, and of the Earth. He is Lohita, the red, like
      Brahmâ also and Adam. The Hindû Mars is, like Adam, born from no
      woman and mother. With the Egyptians, Mars was the primeval
      generative Principle, and so are Brahmâ, in exoteric teaching, and
      Adam, in the Kabalah.

  290 Abel is Chebel, meaning “pains of birth,” conception.

  291 See _Isis Unveiled_, II. 398, where Jehovah is shown to be Adam and
      Eve blended, and Hevah, and Abel, the _feminine serpent_.

  292 See _Isis Unveiled_, I. 305: “The union of these two Races produced
      a _third_ ... Race.”

  293 _Genesis_, v. 2.

  294 _Ibid._, v. 3.

  295 P. 159.

  296 Jod in the Kabalah has for symbol the hand, the forefinger and the
      lingam, while numerically it is the perfect one; but it is also the
      number 10, male and female, when divided.

  297 _Vishnu Purâna_, i. ii.: Wilson’s Trans., i. 20.

  298 Quoted in Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 110.

  299 See _Source of Measures_, p. 277.

  300 II. 464, _et seqq._

  301 _Jeremiah_, x. 11.

  302 _Isis Unveiled_, II. 462, 463.

  303 See for comparison _Hosea_, xii. 6, where it is so punctuated.

  304 _Isis Unveiled_, I. 156.

  305 Race.

  306 The Moon.

  307 Hamsa.

  308 _Text‐Book of Physiology_, Third Edition, 1879, p. 623.

  309 See the _Timæus_.

  310 See Extracts from that Essay in _The Theosophist_, of February,
      1883, from which the following is condensed.

  311 Compare Ezekiel’s vision (chap. i) of the four Divine Beings who
      “had the likeness of a man” and yet had the appearance of a wheel,
      “when they went, they went upon their four sides ... for the spirit
      of the living creature was in the wheels.”

  312 Eugibinus, a Christian, and the Rabbis Samuel, Menasseh ben Israel,
      and Maimonides taught that “Adam had _two_ faces and _one_ person,
      and from the beginning he was both male and female—male on one side
      and female on the other [like Manu’s Brahmâ]; but afterwards the
      parts were separated.” The one hundred and thirty‐ninth Psalm of
      David was cited by Rabbi Jeremiah ben Eliazar as evidence of this:
      “Thou hast _fashioned_ me _behind_ and _before_,” not _beset_ as in
      the _Bible_, which is absurd and meaningless, and this shows, as
      Prof. Wilder thinks, “that the primeval form of mankind was
      androgynous.”

  313 See the union of Chokmah, Wisdom, with Binah, Intelligence, or
      Jehovah, the Demiurge, called Understanding in the _Proverbs of
      Solomon_ (vii). Unto men Wisdom (divine Occult Wisdom) crieth: “Oh,
      ye simple, understand Wisdom; and ye fools, be of an understanding
      heart.” It is Spirit and Matter, the Nous and the Psyche; of the
      latter of which St. James says that it is “earthly, sensual, and
      devilish.”

  314 _Pluralité des Mondes_, p. 69.

  315 A hypothesis evolved in 1881 by Mr. W. Mattieu Williams seems to
      have impressed Astronomers but little. Says the author of “The Fuel
      of the Sun,” in _Knowledge_, Dec. 23, 1881:

      “Applying now the researches of Dr. Andrews to the conditions of
      solar existence ... I conclude that the sun has _no nucleus_, either
      solid, liquid, or gaseous, but is composed of dissociated matter in
      the critical state, surrounded, first, by  a flaming envelope, due
      to the recombination of the dissociated matter, and outside of this,
      by another envelope of vapours due to this combination.”

      This is a novel theory to be added to other hypotheses, _all
      scientific and orthodox_. The meaning of the “critical state” is
      explained by Mr. W. Mattieu Williams in the same journal (Dec. 9,
      1881), in an article on “Solids, liquids, and Gases.” Speaking of an
      experiment by Dr. Andrews on carbonic acid, the Scientist says that:

      “When 88° is reached, the boundary between liquid and gas vanishes;
      liquid and gas have blended into one mysterious intermediate fluid;
      an indefinite fluctuating something is there filling the whole of
      the tube—an etherealized liquid or a visible gas. Hold a red‐hot
      poker between your eye and the light; you will see an upflowing wave
      of movement of what appears like liquid air. The appearance of the
      hybrid fluid in the tube resembles this, but is sensibly denser, and
      evidently stands between the liquid and gaseous states of matter, as
      pitch or treacle stands between solid and liquid.”

      The temperature at which this occurs has been named by Dr. Andrews
      the “critical temperature”; here the gaseous and the liquid states
      are “continuous,” and it is probable that all other substances
      capable of existing in both states have their own particular
      critical temperatures.

      Speculating further upon this “critical” state, Mr. W. Mattieu
      Williams emits some quite Occult theories about Jupiter and other
      Planets. He says:

      “Our notions of solids, liquids, and gases are derived from our
      experiences of the state of matter here upon this Earth. Could we be
      removed to another planet, they would be curiously changed. On
      Mercury water would rank as one of the condensible gases; on Mars,
      as a fusible solid; but what on Jupiter?

      “Recent observations justify us in regarding this as a miniature
      sun, with an external envelope of cloudy matter, apparently of
      partially‐condensed water, but red‐hot, or probably still hotter
      within. His vaporous atmosphere is evidently of enormous depth, and
      the force of gravitation being on his visible outer surface two‐and‐
      a‐half times greater than that on our earth’s surface, the
      atmospheric pressure, in descending below this visible surface, must
      soon reach that at which the vapour of water would be brought to its
      critical condition. Therefore we may infer that the oceans of
      Jupiter are neither of frozen, liquid, nor gaseous water, but are
      oceans, or atmospheres of _critical_ water. If any fish or birds
      swim or fly therein, they must be very _critically_ organized.”

      As the whole mass of Jupiter is 300 times greater than that of the
      Earth, and its compressing energy towards the centre proportional to
      this, its materials, if similar to those of the Earth, and no
      hotter, would be considerably more dense, and the whole planet would
      have a higher specific gravity; but we know by the movement of its
      satellites that, instead of this, its specific gravity is less than
      a fourth of that of the Earth. This justifies the conclusion that it
      is intensely hot; for even hydrogen, if cold, would become denser
      than Jupiter under such pressure.

      “As all elementary substances may exist as solids, liquids, or
      gases, or, critically, according to the conditions of temperature
      and pressure, I am justified in hypothetically concluding that
      Jupiter is neither a solid, a liquid, nor a gaseous planet, but a
      _critical_ planet, or an orb composed internally of associated
      elements in the _critical_ state, and surrounded by a dense
      atmosphere of their vapours and those of some of their compounds
      such as water. The same reasoning applies to Saturn and other large
      and rarefied planets.”

      It is gratifying to see how “scientific imagination” approaches
      every year more closely to the borderland of our Occult Teachings.

  316 _The Day after Death_, p. 23.

  317 Cremona Ed., iii. 76a; Brody Ed., iii. 159a; _Qabbalah_. Isaac Myer,
      p. 420.

  318 So destroyed.

  319 The first occurred when what is now the North Pole was separated
      from the later Continents.

  320 We must remember that at the head of all the Babylonian Gods were
      Ea, Anu, and the primeval Bel; and that Ea, the first, was the God
      of Wisdom, the great “God of Light” and of the Deep, and that he was
      identified with Oannes, or the Biblical Dagon—the Man‐Fish who rose
      out of the Persian Gulf.

  321 It is far later on that the Moon became a male God; with the Hindus
      it was Soma, with the Chaldæans Nanak or Nanar, and Sin, the son of
      Mulil, the older Bel. The Akkadians called him the “Lord of Ghosts”;
      and he was the God of Nipur (Niffer) in northern Babylonia. It is
      Mulil who caused the waters of the Flood to fall from Heaven on
      Earth, because of which Xisuthrus would not allow him to approach
      his altar. As the modern Assyriologists have now ascertained, it is
      the northern Nipur which is the centre whence Chaldæan (Black) Magic
      spread; and Eridu (the Southern) which was the primitive seat of the
      worship of the culture God, the God of Divine Wisdom—the Sun‐God
      being the Supreme Deity everywhere. With the Jews, the Moon is
      connected with Israël’s Jehovah and his seed, for Ur was the chief
      seat of the worship of the Moon‐God, and Abraham is said to have
      come from Ur, when from A‐bra(h)m, he becomes Abraham.

  322 When Nârada, the virgin‐ascetic, threatened to put an end to the
      human race by preventing Daksha’s sons from procreating it.

  323 x. 6.

  324 This is corroborated by a learned Brahman. In his most excellent
      Lectures on the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_ (_Theosophist_, April, 1887, p. 444)
      the lecturer says:

      “There is a peculiarity to which I must call your attention. He
      [Krishna] speaks here of four Manus. Why does he speak of four? We
      are now in the seventh Manvantara—that of Vaivasvata. If he is
      speaking of the past Manus, he ought to speak of six, but he only
      mentions four. In some commentaries an attempt has been made to
      interpret this in a peculiar manner.

      “The word ‘Chatvârah’ is separated from the word ‘Manavah,’ and is
      made to refer to Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumâra, and Sanatsujâta,
      who were also included among the mind‐born sons of Prajâpati.

      “But this interpretation will lead to a most absurd conclusion, and
      make the sentence contradict itself. The persons alluded to in the
      text have a qualifying clause in the sentence. It is well known that
      Sanaka and the other three refused to create, though the other sons
      had consented to do so: therefore, in speaking of those persons from
      whom humanity has sprung into existence, it would be absurd to
      include these four also in the list. The passage must be interpreted
      without splitting the compound into two nouns. The number of Manus
      will then be four, and the statement would then contradict the
      Paurânic account, though it would be in harmony with the Occult
      theory. You will recollect that it is stated [in Occultism] that we
      are now in the Fifth Root‐Race. Each Root‐Race is considered as the
      Santati of a particular Manu. Now, the Fourth Race has passed, or,
      in other words, there have been four past Manus.”

  325 Stockwell, _Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge_, xviii.; R. W.
      McFarland, _American Journal of Science_, III. xi. 450; and Croll’s
      _Climate and Time_. Lemuria was not submerged by a flood, but was
      destroyed by volcanic action, and afterwards sank.

  326 Coste, I. iv. 19.

  327 Agruerus is Kronos, or Saturn, and the prototype of the Israëlitish
      Jehovah. As connected with Argha, the Moon or Ark of salvation, Noah
      is mythologically one with Saturn. But then this cannot relate to
      the terrestrial flood. (See Faber’s _Cabiri_, I. 35, 43, and 45.)

  328 _Ibid._, II. 240.

  329 Sanchuniathon says that the Titans were the sons of Kronos, and
      seven in number; and he calls them fire‐worshippers, Aletæ (Sons of
      Agni?) and diluvians. Al‐ait is the God of Fire.

  330 _Ibid._, i. 130, note.

  331 Of which _seven_, let us remark, the Âryans, and not the Semites,
      were the originators, while the Jews got that number from the
      Chaldæans.

  332 Seven individual Sons of God, or Pitaras, Pitris; also in this case
      the sons of Kronos or Saturn (Kâla, “Time”) and Arkites, like the
      Kabiri and Titans, as their name—“_Lunar_ Ancestors”—shows; the Moon
      being the Ark, or Argha, on the Watery Abyss of Space.

  333 _Asiatic Researches_, v. 246.

  334 _Kabiri_, _ibid._, _loc. cit._

  335 Orpheus apud Proclum _in Timæum_, v. 295.

  336 Arnobius, _Contra Gentes_, iii. 124; quoted by Faber, _op. cit._, i.
      135.

  337 _Ant._, iii. 8.

  338 _Bibl._, iii. 170.

  339 Aretia is the female form of Artes, the Egyptian Mars. Thence the
      Chaldæan (and now Hebrew) word ארצ (Arets), “Earth.” Seyffarth, the
      author of _Beiträge zur Kenntniss_ (under “_Artes_,” _Mars_) quotes
      as follows: “Addit Cedrenus (Salm. I. c): Stella Martis ab Ægyptiis
      vocatur Ertosi (plantare, generare). Significat autem hoc omnis
      generis procreationem et _vivificationem_, omnisque substantiæ et
      materiæ naturam et vim ordinantem atque procreantem.” It is Earth as
      “source of being”; or, as explained by the author of _The Source of
      Measures_ (p. 186), Arts is the same in Hebrew and Egyptian, and
      both “combine the primal idea of _earth as source_; precisely as in
      the Hebrew itself, under another form, _Adam_ and _Mâdim_, _Mars_,
      are the same, and combine the idea of _earth_, with _Adam_ under the
      form of _h‐adam‐h_.”

  340 _Ant._, v. 64.

  341 Nonnus, _Dionys._, xviii. 319. Quoted by Faber, _op. cit._, i. 328.

  342 See _Isis Unveiled_, II. 420 _et seq._, where one or two of the
      seven meanings are hinted at.

  343 Chap. lxiv (Sect. xi).

  344 _Isis Unveiled_, II. 423, 424.

  345 _Ibid._, 423, note.

  346 One has to remember that, in the Hindû Philosophy, every
      differentiated unit is such only through the Cycles of Mâyâ, being
      one in its essence with the Supreme or One Spirit. Hence arises the
      seeming confusion and contradiction in the various _Purânas_, and at
      times in the same _Purâna_, about the same individual. Vishnu—as the
      many‐formed Brahmâ, and as Brahma (neuter)—is one, and yet he is
      said to be all the twenty‐eight Vyâsas.

      “In every Dvâpara (or third) age, Vishnu, in the person of Vyâsa,
      divides the Veda, which is (properly, but) one, into many
      portions.... Twenty‐eight times have the Vedas been arranged by the
      great Rishis in the Vaivasvata Manvantara, in the Dvâpara age; and,
      consequently, eight and twenty Vyâsas have passed away.” (_Vishnu
      Purâna_, iii. 3; Wilson’s Trans., iii. 33, 34.) “[They who were all]
      in the form of Veda‐Vyâsa; who were the Vyâsas of their respective
      eras.” (_Ibid._, _loc. cit._, p. 33.) “This world is Brahmâ, in
      Brahmâ, from Brahmâ ... nothing further to be known.” Then, again,
      in the _Harivamsha_: “There were (in the first Manvantara) seven
      celebrated sons of Vasishtha, who (in the _third_ Manvantara) were
      sons of Brahmâ (_i.e._, Rishis), the illustrious progeny of Ûrjâ.”
      (_Ibid._, iii. 6, note.) This is plain: the Humanity of the First
      Manvantara is that of the seventh and of all the intermediate ones.
      The Mankind of the First Root‐Race is the mankind of the Second,
      Third, Fourth, Fifth, etc. To the last it forms a cyclic and
      constant reïncarnation of the Monads belonging to the Dhyân Chohans
      of our Planetary Chain.

  347 The Dvâpara Yuga differs for each Race. All Races have their own
      Cycles, which fact causes a great difference. For instance, the
      Fourth Sub‐Race of the Atlanteans was in its Kali Yuga, when they
      were destroyed, whereas the Fifth was in its Satya or Krita Yuga.
      The Âryan Race is now in its Kali Yuga, and will continue to be in
      it for 427,000 years longer, while various “Family Races,” called
      the Semitic, Hamitic, etc., are in their own special cycles. The
      forthcoming Sixth Sub‐Race—which may begin very soon—will be in its
      Satya (Golden) Age while we reap the fruit of our iniquity in our
      Kali Yuga.

  348 See _Asiatic Researches_, viii. 280.

  349 See Dowson’s _Hindû Classical Dictionary_, _sub voce_ “Idâ.”

  350 See _Posthumous Humanity_: Translated by H. S. Olcott London, 1887.

  351 Professor Newcomb says the heat evolved by contraction would last
      only 18,000,000 years. (_Popular Astronomy_, 509.) While a
      temperature permitting the existence of water could not be reached
      earlier than 10,000,000 years ago. (Winchell’s _World‐Life_, 356.)
      But Sir William Thomson says that the whole age of the incrustation
      of the Earth is 80,000,000 years, though, this year, he has again
      altered his opinion and allows only 15,000,000 years as the age of
      the Sun. As will be shown in the Addenda, the divergence of
      scientific opinions is so great that no reliance can ever be placed
      upon _scientific_ speculation.

  352 The essay on _The Plurality of Worlds_ (1853)—an anonymous work, yet
      well known to have been the production of Dr. Whewell—is a good
      proof of this. No Christian ought to believe in either the plurality
      of Worlds or the geological age of the Globe, argues the author;
      because, if it is asserted that this World is only one among the
      many of its kind, which are all the work of God, as it is itself;
      that all are the seat of life, all the realm and dwelling of
      intelligent creatures endowed with will, subject to law and capable
      of free‐will; then, it would be extravagant to think that _our_
      World should have been the subject of God’s favours and His special
      interference, of His communications and His _personal visit_. Can
      the Earth presume to be considered the centre of the moral and
      religious Universe, he asks, if it has not the slightest distinction
      to rely upon in the physical Universe? Is it not as absurd to uphold
      such an assertion (of the plurality of inhabited worlds), as it
      would be to‐day to uphold the old hypothesis of Ptolemy, who placed
      the Earth in the centre of our system? The above is quoted from
      memory, yet _almost textually_. The author fails to see that he is
      bursting his own soap‐bubble with such a defence.

  353 _Man’s Place in Nature_, p. 58.

  354 _De Cœlo_, II. 13.

  355 Or what is more generally known as Protoplasm. This substance
      received the name of “Sarcode” from Prof. Dujardin Beaumetz far
      earlier than its present appellation.

  356 The Monera are indeed Protista. They are neither animals nor plants,
      writes Hæckel; “the whole body of the Moneron represents nothing
      more than a single thoroughly homogeneous particle of albumen in a
      firmly adhesive condition.” (_Journal of Microscopical Science_,
      Jan., 1869, p. 28.)

  357 Behold the Iguanodon of the Mesozoic ages—the monster 100 feet
      long—now transformed into the small Iguana lizard of South America.
      Popular traditions about “giants” in days of old, and their mention
      in every mythology, including that of the _Bible_, may some day be
      shown to be founded on fact. In nature, the logic of analogy alone
      should make us accept these _traditions_ as scientific verities.

  358 These are the opinions of Burmeister and Czolbe. See _Force and
      Matter_, by L. Büchner, edited, by J. F. Collingwood, F.R.S.L., p.
      61.

  359 _Vishnu Purâna_, II. viii; Fitzedward Hall’s rendering in Wilson’s
      Translation, ii. 241.

  360 _Ibid._, p. 242.

  361 _Introduction à l’Étude des Races Humaines._

  362 _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, by S. Laing, p. 32.

  363 _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 70.

  364 The same fate is in store for spiritualistic phenomena and all the
      other psychological manifestations of the _inner_ man. Since the
      days of Hume, whose researches culminated in a nihilistic Idealism,
      Psychology has gradually shifted its position to one of crass
      Materialism. Hume is regarded as a Psychologist, and yet he denied
      _à priori_ the possibility of phenomena in which millions now
      believe, including many men of Science. The Hylo‐Idealists of to‐day
      are rank Annihilationists. The schools of Spencer and Bain are
      respectively positivist and materialist, and not metaphysical at
      all. It is _Psychism_ and not Psychology; it reminds one as little
      of the Vedântic teaching as does the pessimism of Schopenhauer and
      von Hartmann recall the Esoteric Philosophy, the heart and soul of
      _true_ Buddhism.

  365 It must be noted that, though the astral and physical planes of
      Matter ran parallel with one another even in the earliest geological
      ages, yet they were not in the same phases of manifestation in which
      they are _now_. The Earth did not reach its present _grade of
      density_ till 18,000,000 years ago. Since then _both_ the physical
      and astral planes have become grosser.

  366 The conception and definition of the Absolute by Cardinal Cusa may
      satisfy only the Western mind, prisoned, so unconsciously to itself,
      and entirely degenerated, by long centuries of scholastic and
      theological sophistry. But this “recent philosophy of the Absolute,”
      traced by Sir William Hamilton to Cusa, would never satisfy the more
      acutely metaphysical mind of the Hindû Vedântin.

  367 Cudworth’s _Intellectual System_, I. 328.

  368 Issued from the Body of Brahmâ when it became Night.

  369 Intellectually vile.

  370 Still senseless Race.

  371 Race.

  372 Intensified.

  373 The vehicle of Desire.

  374 Higher knowledge.

  375 Monads.

  376 Primitive human species.

  377 _Inst. Div._, II. viii; quoted in Myer’s _Qabbalah_, 116.

  378 _Op. cit._, I. v; Wilson’s Trans., Fitzedward Hall’s rendering, i.
      72.

  379 _Ibid._, ii. 10.

  380 _Ibid._, i. 83.

  381 Whom Manu calls “paternal grandfathers” (iii. 284). The Rudras are
      the seven manifestations of Rudra‐Shiva, the “destroying God,” and
      _also_ the grand Yogi and Ascetic.

  382 To speak of _life_ as having arisen, and of the human race as having
      originated, in this _absurdly unscientific_ way, in the face of the
      modern Pedigrees of Man, is to court instantaneous annihilation. The
      Esoteric Doctrine risks the danger, nevertheless, and even goes so
      far as to ask the impartial reader to compare the above hypothesis
      (if it is one) with Hæckel’s theory—now fast becoming an axiom with
      Science—which we quote verbatim as follows:

      “How did life, the living world of organisms, arise? And, secondly,
      the special question: How did the human race originate? The first of
      these two enquiries, that as to the first appearance of living
      beings, can only be decided empirically [!!] by proof of the so‐
      called Archebiosis, or equivocal generation, or the spontaneous
      production of organisms of the simplest conceivable kind. Such are
      the Monera (Protogenes, Protamœba, Protomyxa, Vampyrella),
      exceedingly simple microscopic masses of protoplasm without
      structure or organization, which take in nutriment and _reproduce
      themselves by division_. Such a Moneron as that primordial organism
      _discovered_ by the renowned English zoologist Huxley and named
      Bathybius Hæckelii, appears as a continuous thick protoplasmic
      covering at the greatest depths of the ocean, between 3,000 and
      30,000 feet. _It is true that the first appearance of such Monera
      has not up to the present moment been actually observed_; but there
      is nothing intrinsically improbable in such an Evolution.” (_The
      Pedigree of Man_, Aveling’s translation, p. 33.)

      The Bathybius protoplasm having recently turned out to be no organic
      substance at all, there remains little to be said. Nor, after
      reading this, does one need to consume further time in refuting the
      further assertion that: “In that case man also has, _beyond a doubt_
      [to the minds of Hæckel and his like], arisen from the lower
      Mammalia, apes, the earlier simian creatures, the still earlier
      Marsupialia, Amphibia, Pisces, by progressive transformations” (p.
      36)—all produced by “a series of _natural forces working blindly,
      ... without aim, without design_.”

      The above‐quoted passage bears its criticism on its own face.
      Science is made to teach that, which, up to the present time, “_has
      never been actually observed_.” She is made to deny the phenomenon
      of an _intelligent_ nature and a vital force independent of form and
      matter, and to find it more scientific to teach the miraculous
      performance of “natural forces _working blindly without aim or
      design_.” If so, then we are led to think that the physico‐
      mechanical forces of the brains of certain eminent Scientists are
      leading them on as blindly to sacrifice logic and common sense on
      the altar of mutual admiration. Why should the protoplasmic Moneron
      producing the first living creature through _self‐division_ be held
      as a very scientific hypothesis, and an ethereal pre‐human race
      generating the primeval men in the same fashion be tabooed as
      unscientific superstition? Or has Materialism obtained a sole
      monopoly in Science?

  383 The Râkshasas, regarded in Indian popular theology as Demons, are
      called the “Preservers” beyond the Himâlayas. This double meaning
      has its origin in a philosophical allegory, which is variously
      rendered in the _Purânas_. It is stated that when Brahmâ created the
      Demons, Yakshas (from _yaksh_, to eat) and the Râkshasas, both of
      which kinds of Demons, as soon as born, wished to devour their
      Creator, “those among them that called out ‘Not so: oh! let him be
      saved [preserved]!’ were named Râkshasas.” (_Vishnu Purâna_, I. v.;
      Wilson, i. 82.) The _Bhâgavata Purâna_ (III. 20, 19‐21; _ibid._,
      _loc. cit._) renders the allegory differently. “Brahmâ transformed
      himself into night [or ignorance] invested with a body.” This the
      Yakshas and Râkshasas seized, exclaiming, “Do not spare it; devour
      it.” Brahmâ cried out, “Do not devour me; spare me.” This has an
      inner meaning of course. The “Body of Night” is the darkness of
      ignorance, and it is the darkness of silence and secrecy. Now the
      Râkshasas are shown in almost every case to be Yogîs, pious Sâdhus
      and Initiates, a rather unusual occupation for Demons. The meaning
      then is that while we have power to dispel the darkness of
      ignorance—“devour it”—we have to preserve the sacred truth from
      profanation. “Brahmâ is for the Brâhmans alone,” says that proud
      caste. The moral of the _fable_ is evident.

  384 The gradual evolution of man in the Secret Doctrine shows that all
      the later (to the profane the earliest) Races have their _physical_
      origin in the early Fourth Race. But it is the sub‐race, which
      preceded the one that separated sexually, that is to be regarded as
      the _spiritual_ ancestors of our present generations, and especially
      of the Eastern Âryan Races. Weber’s idea that the Indo‐Germanic Race
      preceded the Âryan Vedic Race is, to the Occultist, grotesque to the
      last degree.

  385 _Cf._ especially Schmidt’s _Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, pp.
      39 _et seqq._, and Laing’s _A Modern Zoroastrian_, pp. 102‐111.

  386 Every process of healing and cicatrization in the higher animal
      groups—even in the case of reproduction of mutilated limbs with the
      Amphibians—is effected by _fission_ and _gemmation_ of the
      elementary morphological elements.

  387 The term here means neither the dolicho‐cephalic nor the brachyo‐
      cephalic, nor yet skulls of a smaller volume, but simply brains
      devoid of intellect generally. The theory which would judge of the
      intellectual capacity of a man according to his cranial capacity,
      seems absurdly illogical to one who has studied the subject. The
      skulls of the stone period, as well as those of African races
      (Bushmen included) show that the first are above rather than below
      the average of the brain capacity of the modern man, and the skulls
      of the last are on the whole (as also in the case of Papuans and
      Polynesians generally) larger by one cubic inch than that of the
      average Frenchman. Again, the cranial capacity of the Parisian of
      to‐day represents an average of 1437 cubic centimetres compared to
      1523 of the Auvergnat.

  388 A. Lefèvre, _Philosophy_, p. 498.

  389 _Principles of Zoology_, p. 206.

  390 i. 154.

  391 The boneless.

  392 The _first_ Sweat‐born. This is explained in the Section which
      follows this series of Stanzas in the allegory from the _Purânas_
      concerning Kandu, the holy sage, and Pramlochâ, the nymph who is
      alleged to have hypnotized him; a suggestive allegory,
      scientifically, as the drops of perspiration which she exuded, are
      the symbols of the spores of Science.

  393 This will be explained as we proceed. This unwillingness to fashion
      men, or create, is symbolized in the _Purânas_ by Daksha’s dealings
      with his opponent Nârada, the “strife‐making ascetic.”

  394 Androgyne Third Race. The Evolutionist Professor Schmidt alludes to
      “the fact of the separation of sexes, as to the derivation of which
      from species _once hermaphrodite_ all [the believers in Creation
      naturally excepted] are assuredly of one accord.” (_Doctrine of
      Descent and Darwinism_, p. 159.) Such indeed is the incontestable
      evidence drawn from the presence of rudimentary organs. Apart from
      such palpable traces of a primeval hermaphroditism, the fact may be
      noted that, as Laing writes, “a study of embryology ... shows that
      in the _human higher animal_ species the distinction of sex is not
      developed until a _considerable progress_ has been made in the
      growth of the embryo.” (_A Modern Zoroastrian_, p. 106.) The Law of
      Retardation—operative alike in the case of human races, animal
      species, etc., when a higher type has once been evolved—still
      preserves hermaphroditism as the reproductive method of the majority
      of plants and many lower animals.

  395 Vehicle.

  396 _Vishnu Purâna_, I. vii; Wilson, i. 100.

  397 See _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 111.

  398 For explanations and a philosophical account of the nature of those
      Beings, which are now viewed as the “evil” and rebellious Spirits,
      the Creators by Kriyâshakti, the reader is referred to the chapters
      on “The Myth of the ‘Fallen Angel,’ in its Various Aspects,” in Part
      II of this Volume.

  399 _Vishnu Purâna_, III. ii.

  400 In the oldest MS. of the _Vishnu Purâna_ in the possession of an
      Initiate in Southern India, the God is not Indra, but Kâma, the God
      of love and desire.

  401 These are the exoteric figures given in a purposely reversed and
      distorted way, being the figure of the duration of the cycle between
      the First and Second human Race. All Orientalists to the contrary,
      there is not a word in any of the _Purânas_ that has not a special
      esoteric meaning.

  402 _Vishnu Purâna_, I. xv; Wilson, ii. 5. Compare also Vivien’s
      temptation of Merlin (Tennyson)—the same legend in Irish tradition.

  403 x. 129.

  404 The text has: “From Brahmâ, continuing to meditate, were born mind‐
      engendered progeny, with forms and faculties derived from his
      corporeal nature, _embodied spirits_, produced from the limbs
      (Gâtra) of Dhîmat (all‐wise deity).” All these beings were the abode
      of the three qualities of Devasarga, or divine creation, which, as
      the five‐fold creation, is _devoid of clearness of perception,
      without reflection_, dull of nature. “But as they _did not multiply
      themselves_, Brahmâ created other mind‐born sons like himself,”
      namely, the Brahmarshis, or the Prajâpatis, ten and seven in number.
      “Sanandana and the other sons of Vedhas (Brahmâ) were previously
      created,” but as shown elsewhere, they were “_without desire or
      passion_, inspired with holy wisdom, estranged from the universe and
      undesirous of progeny.” (_Vishnu Purâna_, X. vii; Wilson’s Trans.,
      i. 100, 101.) These Sanandana and other Kumâras are then the Gods,
      who after refusing to “create progeny” are forced to incarnate in
      senseless men. The reader must pardon unavoidable repetitions in
      view of the great number of facts given.

  405 Compare Schlagintweit’s _Buddhism in Tibet_, pp. 88‐90.

  406 See Edkins’ _Chinese Buddhism_, p. 208.

  407 The previous Third Round.

  408 Of this Round.

  409 An allegorical reference to the “Sacred Animals” of the Zodiac and
      other heavenly bodies. Some Kabalists see in them the prototypes of
      the animals.

  410 In _Hesiod_, Zeus creates his Third Race of men out of ash‐trees. In
      the _Popol Vuh_ the Third Race of men is created out of the tree
      Tzita and the marrow of the reed called Sibac. But Sibac means “egg”
      in the mystery language of the Artufas, or Initiation caves. In a
      report sent in 1812 to the Cortes by Don Baptista Pino it is said:
      “All the Pueblos have their Artufas—so the natives call subterranean
      rooms with only a single door where they (secretly) assemble....
      These are impenetrable temples ... and the doors are always closed
      to the Spaniards.... They adore the Sun and Moon ... fire and the
      great _Snake_ (the creative power), whose eggs are called Sibac.”

  411 There is a notable difference _esoterically_ between the words Sarpa
      and Nâga, though they are both used indiscriminately. Sarpa,
      serpent, is from the root _srip_, to creep, compare, Lat., _serp‐o_;
      and they are called Ahi, from _hâ_, to abandon. The Sarpas were
      produced from Brahmâ’s hair, which, owing to his fright at beholding
      the Yakshas, whom he had created horrible to behold, fell off from
      the head, each hair becoming a serpent. They are called “Sarpa from
      their creeping and Ahi because they had deserted the head.” (Wilson,
      i. 83.) But the Nâgas, in the allegories, their serpent’s tail
      notwithstanding, do not creep, but manage to walk, run and fight.

  412 Wilson translates the word as “demigods” (_Vishnu Purâna_, i. 130);
      but Raumas are simply a race, a tribe.

  413 xii. 10,308.

  414 Wilson, _ibid._, p. 123.

  415 _Ibid._, ii. 10.

  416 Serpents.

  417 Race.

  418 Also.

  419 Into male and female.

  420 Then.

  421 Man.

  422 The “narrow‐headed.” Compare Shloka 24.

  423 The “narrow‐headed.”

  424 See Commentary on Shloka 36.

  425 These “animals,” or monsters, are not the anthropoid or any other
      apes, but verily what the Anthropologists might call the “missing
      link,” the primitive lower man.

  426 The shame of their animal origin which our modern Scientists would
      emphasize if they could.

  427 _The Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, pp. 186, 187. The “unknown
      ancestry” referred to are the _primæval_ astral prototypes.

  428 “A very strong argument in favour of variability is supplied by the
      science of embryology. Is not a man in the uterus ... a simple cell,
      a vegetable with three or four leaflets, a tadpole with branchiæ, a
      mammal with a tail, lastly a primate [?] and a biped? It is scarcely
      possible not to recognize in the embryonic evolution a rapid sketch,
      a faithful summary, of the entire organic series.” (Lefèvre,
      _Philosophy_, p. 484.)

      The summary alluded to is, however, only that of the _store of
      types_ hoarded up in man, the microcosm. This simple explanation
      meets all such objections, as the presence of the rudimentary tail
      in the fœtus—a fact triumphantly paraded by Hæckel and Darwin as
      conclusively in favour of the Ape‐Ancestor Theory. It may also be
      pointed out that _the presence of a vegetable with leaflets_ in the
      embryonic stages is _not explained_ on ordinary evolutionist
      principles. Darwinists have not traced man through the vegetable,
      but Occultists have. _Why then this feature in the embryo_, and how
      do the former explain it?

  429 “The Proofs of Evolution,” a lecture by Hæckel.

  430 Vol. i. pp. 388‐390.

  431 See Cory, _Ancient Fragments_, pp. 21, _et seqq._

  432 _Origin of Species_, pp. 448, 449, first edition.

  433 Vol. i. p. 154.

  434 The sin committed with the animals.

  435 The Spirits, the “Sons of Wisdom.”

  436 Who had refused to “create.”

  437 Mindless.

  438 Mind.

  439 This verse in the _Rig Veda_ (x. 5, 6): “The Seven Wise Ones [Rays
      of Wisdom, Dhyânis] fashion Seven Paths [or Lines, and also Races in
      another sense]. To one of these may the distressed mortal come”—a
      verse interpreted solely from the astronomical and cosmic aspect, is
      one of the most pregnant in occult meaning. The “Paths” may mean
      Lines (Maryâdâh), but they are primarily Beams of Light falling on
      the Paths leading to Wisdom. (See _Rig Veda_, iv. 5‐13.) It means
      “Ways” or Paths. They are, in short, the seven Rays which fall free
      from the Macrocosmic Centre, the seven Principles in the
      metaphysical, the seven Races in the physical sense. All depends
      upon the key used.

  440 _Rig Veda_, x. 10, 5, 2.

  441 It is next to impossible to translate verbally some of these old
      Commentaries. We are often obliged to give the meaning only, and
      thus retranslate the verbatim translations.

  442 Rudra, as a Kumâra, is Nîlalohita—red and blue.

  443 This, regardless of modern materialistic evolution, which speculates
      in this wise: “The primitive human form, whence as we think all
      human species sprang, has perished this long time. [This we deny: it
      has only decreased in size and changed in texture.] But many facts
      point to the conclusion that it was hairy and dolichocephalic.
      [African races are even _now_ dolichocephalic in a great measure,
      but the palæolithic Neanderthal skull, the oldest we know of, is of
      a large size, and no nearer to the capacity of the gorilla’s cranium
      than that of any other now‐living man.] Let us, for the time being,
      call this hypothetical species _homo primigenius_.... This first
      species, or the ape‐man, the ancestor of all the others, _probably_
      arose in the _tropical regions_ of the old world from _anthropoid
      apes_.” Asked for proofs, the Evolutionist, not the least daunted,
      replies: “Of these _no fossil remains are as yet known to us, but
      they were probably akin to the Gorilla and Orang of the present
      day_.” And then the Papuan negro is mentioned as the probable
      descendant in the first line. (_Pedigree of Man_, p. 80.)

      Hæckel holds fast to Lemuria, which, with East Africa and South Asia
      also, he mentions as the possible cradle of the primitive ape‐men.
      So also do many Geologists. Mr. A. R. Wallace admits its reality,
      though in a rather modified sense, in his _Geographical Distribution
      of Animals_. But let not Evolutionists speak so lightly of the
      comparative size of the brains of man and the ape, for this is very
      _unscientific_, especially when they pretend to see no difference
      between the two, or very little at any rate. For Vogt himself showed
      that, while the highest of the apes, the Gorilla, has a brain of
      only 30 to 51 cubic inches, the brain of the lowest of the
      Australian aborigines amounts to 99·35 cubic inches. The former is
      thus “not half of the size of the brain of a new‐born babe,” says
      Pfaff.

  444 Ellis’ _Polynesian Researches_, Vol. II, p. 38. Missionaries seem to
      have pounced upon this name _Ivi_ and made of it _Eve_. But, as
      shown by Professor Max Müller, Eve is not the Hebrew name but a
      European transformation of חוה, Châvah, life, or mother of all
      living; “while the Tahitian _ivi_, and the Maori, _wheva_, meant
      bone, and bone only.” (_Introduction to the Science of Religion_, p.
      304.)

  445 _Chaire d’Hébreu au Collége de France_, p. 20.

  446 Of such semi‐animal creatures, the sole remnants known to Ethnology
      were the Tasmanians, a _portion_ of the Australians and a mountain
      tribe in China, the men and women of which are entirely covered with
      hair. They were the last descendants in a _direct_ line of the semi‐
      animal latter‐day Lemurians referred to. There are, however,
      considerable numbers of the mixed Lemuro‐Atlantean peoples produced
      by various crossings with such semi‐human stocks—_e.g._, the wild
      men of Borneo, the Veddhas of Ceylon, classed by Prof. Flower among
      Âryans (!), most of the remaining Australians, Bushmen, Negritos,
      Andaman Islanders, etc.

      The Australians of the Gulf of St. Vincent and the neighbourhood of
      Adelaide are _very hairy_, and the brown down on the skin of boys of
      five or six years of age assumes a _furry appearance_. They are,
      however, degraded _men_; not the closest approximation to the
      “pithecoid man,” as Hæckel so sweepingly affirms. Only a portion of
      these men are a Lemurian relic. (_Cf._ _Esoteric Buddhism_, pp. 64
      _et seqq._)

  447 In calling the animal “soulless” we do not deprive the beast, from
      the humblest to the highest species, of a Soul, but only of a
      conscious surviving Ego‐Soul, _i.e._, that principle which survives
      after a man, and reïncarnates in a like man. The animal has an
      Astral Body, that survives the physical form for a short period;
      nevertheless its (animal) Monad does not reïncarnate in the same,
      but in a higher species, and has no “Devachan” of course. It has the
      _seeds_ of all the human principles in itself, but they are
      _latent_.

  448 _Manual of Geology_, p. 302.

  449 The “fables” and “myths” about Leda and Jupiter, and such like,
      could never have sprung up in people’s fancy, had not the allegory
      rested on a fact in Nature. Evolution, gradually transforming man
      into a mammal, did in his case only what it did in that of other
      animals. But this does not prevent man from having always stood at
      the head of the animal world and other organic species, and from
      having preceded the former.

  450 See the Section on “The Chronology of the Brâhmans,” p. 69.

  451 To avoid confusion, let the reader remember that the term Root‐Race
      applies to one of the seven great Races, sub‐race to one of its
      great Branches, and family‐race to one of the sub‐divisions, which
      include nations and large tribes.

  452 In the Section on “The Fifth Race and its Divine Instructors,” in
      the Commentary on Stanza XII, the nature of these “Instructors” is
      explained.

  453 The present yellow races are the descendants, however, of the early
      branches of the Fourth Race. Of the Third, the only _pure and
      direct_ descendants are, as said above, a portion of the fallen and
      degenerated Australians, whose far distant ancestors belonged to a
      division of the seventh sub‐race of the Third. The rest are of mixed
      Lemuro‐Atlantean descent. They have since then entirely changed in
      stature and intellectual capacities.

  454 _Language_ is certainly coëval with reason, and could never have
      been developed before men became one with the informing principles
      in them—those who fructified and awoke to life the mânasic element
      dormant in primitive man. For, as Professor Max Müller tells us in
      his _Science of Thought_: “Thought and language are identical.” To
      add to this, however, the reflection that _thoughts which are too
      deep for words, do not really exist at all_, is rather risky, for
      thought impressed upon the astral tablets exists in eternity whether
      expressed or not. _Logos_ is both reason and speech. But language,
      proceeding in cycles, is not always adequate to express _spiritual_
      thoughts. Moreover, in one sense, the Greek Logos is the equivalent
      of the Sanskrit Vâch, “the immortal (intellectual) ray of spirit.”
      And the fact that Vâch (as Devasenâ, an _aspect_ of Sarasvatî, the
      Goddess of Hidden Wisdom) is the spouse of the eternal celibate
      Kumâra, unveils a suggestive, though veiled, reference to the
      Kumâras, those “who refused to create,” but who were compelled later
      on to complete _divine_ Man by incarnating in him. All this will be
      fully explained in the Sections that follow.

  455 Ptolemy, speaking in his ninth table of the Kabolitæ or Kabul
      tribes, calls them Ἀριστόφυλοι, Aristophyli, the aristocratic or
      noble tribes. The Afghans call themselves Ben‐Issraël, children of
      Is (sa) raël, from Issa, “woman and also earth,” sons of Mother
      Earth. But if you call an Afghan Yahoudi (Jew), he will kill you.
      The names of the supposed twelve tribes of the Jews, and the names
      of the real twelve tribes of the Afghans, are the same. The Afghans
      being far older (at any rate, their Arabic stock) than the
      Israëlites, no one need be surprised to find such tribal names among
      them as Youssoufzic, sons of Joseph, in Punjcaure and Boonere;
      Zablistanee (Zebulon); Ben‐manasseh, sons of Manasseh, among the
      Khojar Tartars; Isaguri, or Issachar, now Ashnagor in Afghanistan,
      etc. The whole twelve names of the so‐called twelve tribes are names
      of the signs of the Zodiac, as is now well proven. In any case, the
      names of the oldest Arabic tribes, re‐transliterated, yield the
      names of the zodiacal signs and likewise of the mythical sons of
      Jacob. Where are the traces of the Jewish twelve tribes? Nowhere.
      But there is a trace, and a deep one, that the Jews have tried to
      deceive people with the help of these names. For, see what happens
      ages after the _ten tribes_ had wholly disappeared from Babylon.
      Ptolemy Philadelphus, desiring to have the Hebrew Law translated for
      him into Greek (the famous Septuagint), wrote to the high priest of
      the Jews, Eleazar, to send him _six men from each of the twelve
      tribes_; and the _seventy‐two representatives_ (of whom sixty were
      ghosts apparently) came to the king in Egypt and translated the Law
      amid miracles and wonders. See Butler’s _Horæ Biblicæ_, Josephus,
      and Philo Judæus.

  456 The Commentary explains that the apes are the only species, among
      the animals, which has gradually, and with every generation and
      variety, tended more and more to return to the original type of its
      male forefather—the dark gigantic Lemurian and Atlantean.

  457 Androgyne.

  458 Dr. A. Wilder; who says that Gan‐duniyas is a name of Babylonia.

  459 Vol. i. pp. 575, 576.

  460 _Foĕ‐kouĕ‐ki; ou Relations des Royaumes Bouddhiques_; par Chy Fa‐
      hian: translated by Abel Remusat.

  461 Seventh year, 1855.

  462 De Mirville’s _Des Esprits_, ii. 423. See also Moses Maimonides,
      _More Nevochim_.

  463 _Sciences Occultes_, p. 464.

  464 _Révolution du Globe_, Vol. v. p. 247.

  465 We read in De Mirville’s “Mémoire â l’Académie” (ii. 431) of the
      “naïve astonishment of Geoffroy St. Hilaire, when M. de Paravey
      showed to him, in some old Chinese works and Babylonian tiles,
      dragons, ... ornithorhynchuses and saurians (aquatic animals _found
      only in Australia_), etc., extinct animals that he had thought
      unknown on earth ... till his own day.”

  466 See _Isaiah_, xxx. 6: “The viper and the flying serpent,” and the
      fiery serpents conquered by the brazen serpent of Moses.

  467 The fossils, reconstructed by Science which we know, ought to be
      sufficient warrant for the possibility of even a Leviathan, not to
      mention Isaiah’s flying serpents, or Saraph Mehophep, words which
      are translated in all the Hebrew dictionaries as “Saraph,” enflamed
      or fiery venom, and “Mehophep,” flying. But, although Christian
      Theology has always connected both Leviathan and Saraph Mehophep
      with the Devil, the expressions are metaphorical and have nought to
      do with the “Evil One.” Nevertheless, the word “Dragon” has now
      become a synonym for the latter. In Bretagne the word Drouk now
      signifies “Devil,” whence, as we are told by Cambry (_Monuments
      Celtiques_, p. 299), the Devil’s Tomb in England, Droghedanum
      Sepulcrum. In Languedoc the meteoric fires and will‐o’‐the‐wisps are
      called Drac, and in Bretagne Dreag and Wraie or wraith; the castle
      of Drogheda in Ireland meaning the Devil’s castle. (De Mirville,
      _ibid._, ii. 423.)

  468 The ultramontane writers accept the whole series of draconian
      stories given by Father Kircher, in his _Œdipus Ægyptiacus_, “De
      Genesi Draconum,” quite seriously. According to that Jesuit, he
      himself saw a dragon which was killed in 1669 by a Roman peasant, as
      the director of the Museo Barberini sent it to him, to take the
      beast’s likeness, which Father Kircher did and had it published in
      one of his _in‐folios_. After this he received a letter from
      Christopher Scherer, Prefect of the Canton of Soleure, Switzerland,
      in which that official certifies to his having seen himself, _with
      his own eyes_, one fine summer night in 1619, a living dragon.
      Having remained on his balcony “to contemplate the perfect purity of
      the firmament,” he writes, “I saw a fiery, shining dragon rise from
      one of the caves of Mount Pilatus and direct himself rapidly towards
      Fluelen to the other end of the lake. Enormous in size, his tail was
      still longer and his neck stretched out. His head and jaws were
      those of a serpent. In flying, he emitted on his way numerous sparks
      (? !).... I thought at first I was seeing a meteor, but soon,
      looking more attentively, I was convinced by his flight and the
      conformation of his body that I saw a _veritable dragon_. I am happy
      to be thus able to enlighten your Reverence on the _very real_
      existence of those animals”—in _dreams_, the writer ought to have
      added, of long past ages. (_Ibid._, p. 424.)

  469 As a convincing proof of the reality of the fact, a Roman Catholic
      refers the reader to the picture of the incident painted by Simon de
      Sienne, a friend of the poet, on the portal of the Church Notre Dame
      du Don at Avignon, notwithstanding the prohibition of the Sovereign
      Pontiff, who “would not allow this triumph of love to be enthroned
      in the holy place”; and adds: “Time has injured the work of art, but
      has not weakened its tradition.” (_Ibid._, p. 425.) De Mirville’s
      “Dragon‐Devils” of our era seem to have no luck, as they disappear
      most mysteriously from the museums where they are said to have been.
      Thus the Dragon embalmed by Ulysses Aldovrandus and presented to the
      Musée du Sénat, either in Naples or Bologna, “was there still in
      1700,” but is there no more. (_Ibid._, p. 427.)

  470 _Op. cit._, ii. 422.

  471 _Ibid._, p. 433.

  472 _Ibid._, pp. 432, 433. This is about as just as though, a few
      millenniums hence, a fanatic of some future new creed, who was bent
      upon glorifying _his_ religion at the expense of _ancient_
      Christianity, were to say: Everywhere the quadruped lamb was adored.
      The nun, calling it the Agnus, placed it on her bosom; the priest
      laid it on the altar. It figured in every Paschal meal, and was
      glorified loudly in every temple. And yet the Christians dreaded it
      and hated it, for they slew and devoured it. Heathens, at any rate,
      do not eat their sacred symbols. We know of no serpent or reptile‐
      eaters, except in Christian civilized countries, where they begin
      with frogs and eels, and must end with real snakes, as they have
      begun with lamb and ended with horse‐flesh.

  473 _Ibid._, p. 423.

  474 _Pantheon_, 3.

  475 The Solar Chnouphis, or Agathodæmon, is the Christos of the
      Gnostics, as every scholar knows. He is intimately connected with
      the Seven Sons of Sophia (Wisdom), the Seven Sons of Aditi,
      Universal Wisdom, her eighth being Mârttânda, the Sun, which Seven
      are the Seven Planetary Regents or Genii. Therefore Chnouphis was
      the Spiritual Sun of Enlightenment, of Wisdom, hence the patron of
      all the Egyptian Initiates, as Bel‐Merodach, or Bel‐Belitanus,
      became later with the Chaldæans.

  476 Hermes, or rather Thot, was a generic name. Abul Feda shows in his
      _Historia Anti‐Islamitica_, five Hermes, and the names of Hermes,
      Nebo, Thot were given respectively in various countries to great
      Initiates. Thus Nebo, the son of Merodach and Zarpanitu, whom
      Herodotus calls Zeus‐Belos, gave his name to all the great Prophets,
      Seers and Initiates. They were all “Serpents of Wisdom,” as
      connected with the Sun astronomically, and with Wisdom spiritually.

  477 _Pantheon_, text 15.

  478 i. 555.

  479 _Genesis_, xlix. 17, 18, and 5, 6.

  480 Dunlap, in his Introduction to _Sod, the Mysteries of Adoni_ (xi),
      explains the word “Sod” as _arcanum_, religious mystery, on the
      authority of Schindler’s _Penteglott_, 1201. “The secret of the Lord
      is with them that fear him,” says _Psalm_, xxv. 14. This is a
      mistranslation of the Christians, for it ought to read: “Sod Ihoh
      (the Mysteries of Ihoh) are for _those who fear him_.” “Al [El] is
      terrible in the great Sod of the Kedeshim (the Priests, the Holy,
      the Initiated).”—_Psalm_, lxxxix. 7 (_ibid._). The Kedeshim were
      very far from holy. See the Section on “The Holy of Holies,” in Part
      II of this Volume.

  481 “The members of the Priest‐Colleges were called Sodales,” says
      Freund’s _Latin Lexicon_ (iv. 448). “Sodalities were constituted in
      the Idæan Mysteries of the Mighty Mother,” writes Cicero in _De
      Senectute_. (Dunlap, _ibid._, p. xii.)

  482 xxx. 6.

  483 The priests of Baal who jumped over the fires. But this was a Hebrew
      term and a local one. Saraph means “fiery or flaming venom.”

  484 _Book of the Dead_, ch. xxxix.

  485 The same ram’s horns are found on the heads of Moses which were seen
      on some old medals by the writer in Palestine, one of which is still
      in her possession. The horns, forming part of the shining aureole on
      the statue of Moses in Rome by Michael Angelo, are vertical instead
      of being bent down to the ears, but the emblem is the same; hence
      the Brazen Serpent.

  486 But see Harris’ _Magic Papyrus_, No. v, and the ram‐headed Ammon
      manufacturing men on a potter’s wheel.

  487 Brasseur de Bourbourg, _Mexique_, pp. 135 and 574.

  488 Ulûpî (Ulûpl) has an entirely Atlantean ring about it. Like
      Atlantis, it is neither a Greek nor a Sanskrit name, but reminds one
      of Mexican names.

  489 _Mahâbhârata_, Âdi Parva, Shlokas 7788, 7789. The _Bhâgavata Purâna_
      (ix. xx. 31), as explained by Shrîdhara, the commentator, makes
      Ulûpî the daughter of the king of Manipûra (see _Vishnu Purâna_,
      Wilson, iv. 160); but the late Pandit Dayânand Sarasvatî, certainly
      the greatest Sanskrit and Paurânic authority in India on such
      questions, personally corroborated that Ulûpî was daughter of the
      king of the Nâgas in Pâtâla, or America, 5,000 years ago, and that
      the Nâgas were Initiates.

  490 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 293.

  491 Foh‐tchou, in Chinese meaning literally Buddha’s lord, or the
      teacher of the doctrines of Buddha—Foh.

  492 This mountain is situated south‐west of China, almost between China
      and Tibet.

  493 _Ibid._, pp. 293, 294.

  494 Let the reader be reminded that in the _Zohar_, and also in all the
      Kabalistic works, it is maintained that “Metatron united with
      Shekinah.” Now Shekinah as the Veil (Grace) of Ain Suph,
      representing the Logos, is that very Tree of Knowledge; while
      Shamaël—the dark _aspect_ of the Logos—occupies only the bark of
      that tree, and has the knowledge of _evil_ alone. As Lacour, who saw
      in the scene of the Fall (_Genesis_, iii) an incident pertaining to
      Egyptian Initiation, says: “The Tree of the Divination, or of the
      Knowledge of Good and Evil ... is the science of Tzyphon, the Genius
      of Doubt, _tzy_ to teach, and _phon_, doubt. Tzyphon is one of the
      Aleim; we shall see him presently under the name of Nach, the
      tempter” (_Les Œloim_, vol. ii. p. 218). He is now known to
      Symbologists under the name of Jehovah.

  495 This is the view taken and adopted by all the Church Fathers, but it
      is not the real Esoteric Teaching. The _curse_ did not begin with
      the formation of either man or woman, for their separation was a
      natural sequence of evolution, but with _the breaking of the law_.

  496 By which _human_ nature lives; not even the animal—but the
      misguided, sensual and vicious nature, which _men_, not Nature,
      created. See the Section “Cross and Circle.”

  497 See _Zohar_, i. 172, _a_ and _b_.

  498 Compare the Section on “The Mysteries of the Hebdomad” in Part II of
      this Volume.

  499 Gould’s _Mythical Monsters_, p. 1.

  500 _The Unicorn: a Mythological Investigation_, Robert Brown, junr.,
      F.S.A. London, 1881.

  501 _Mythical Monsters_, pp. 2‐4.

  502 _Ibid._, p. 20.

  503 _Ibid._, pp. 36, 37.

  504 _The Human Species_, p. 52.

  505 _Manual of Geology_, p. 301.

  506 _Ibid._, p. 17.

  507 Gould’s _Mythical Monsters_, p. 16. See also _Recherches, etc., des
      Mammifères_, plate 1. Paris, 1868 to 1874.

  508 Preface to the _Shan Hai King_, or “Wonders by Land and Sea.”

  509 Vol. i. pp. 589, _et seqq._

  510 There are Archæologists, who, like Mr. James Fergusson, refuse any
      great antiquity to even one single monument in India. In his work,
      _Illustrations of the Rock‐Cut Temples of India_, he ventures to
      express the very extraordinary opinion that “Egypt had ceased to be
      a nation before the earliest of the cave‐temples of India was
      excavated.” In short, he does not admit the existence of any cave‐
      temple anterior to the reign of Ashoka, and seems anxious to prove
      that most of these rock‐cut temples were executed during a period
      extending from the time of that pious Buddhist king until the
      destruction of the Andhra dynasty of Magadha, in the beginning of
      the fifth century. We believe such a claim to be perfectly
      arbitrary. Further discoveries will show that it is erroneous and
      unwarranted.

  511 America, at the time of its discovery, was called _Atlanta_ by some
      native tribes.

  512 Since then Donnelly’s _Atlantis_ has appeared, and soon its actual
      existence will have become a scientific fact.

  513 It is so divided to this day, and Theosophists and Occultists, who
      have learned something of the occult but undeniable power of
      Dugpaship at their own expense, know this but too well.

  514 See De Mirville’s _Pneumatologie: Des Esprits_, iii. 57, _et seqq._

  515 See Max Müller, _Chips_, i. 339; “Popol Vuh.” Compare also Holmberg,
      _Ethnographische Skizzen über die Völker des Russischen Amerika_.
      Helsingfors, 1855.

  516 _Op. cit._, pp. 13‐15.

  517 _Ibid._, p. 308.

  518 An approach to the statues at Bamian—also a Buddha 200 feet high—is
      found near a Jain settlement in Southern India, and appears to be
      the only one that remains at present.

  519 Even Wilson admits that Râma and Râvana were personages founded on
      historical facts. “The traditions of the South of India uniformly
      ascribe its civilization ... and the settlement of civilized Hindûs
      [the Fifth Race] to the conquest of Lankâ by Râma” (_Vishnu Purâna_,
      iii. 318)—the victory of the “Sons of Gods” over the Atlantean
      sorcerers, says the _true_ tradition.

  520 Thus we are shown one hero, to give an instance, first born as the
      “unrighteous but valiant monarch” (Purusha) of the Daityas,
      Hiranyakashipu, slain by the Avatâra Nara‐sinha (Man‐lion). Then he
      was born as Râvana, the giant king of Lankâ, and killed by Râma;
      after which he is reborn as Shishupâla, the son of Rajarshi (King
      Rishi) Damaghosha, when he is again killed by Krishna, the last
      incarnation of Vishnu. This parallel evolution of Vishnu (Spirit)
      with a Daitya, as man, may seem meaningless, yet it gives us the key
      not only to the respective dates of Râma and Krishna but even to a
      certain psychological mystery.

  521 Compare _Hibbert Lectures_, 1877, Sayce, pp. 134‐138.

  522 The Gods became No‐Gods.

  523 Race.

  524 Yellow‐white.

  525 Strictly speaking, it is only from the time of the Atlantean, brown
      and yellow giant races, that one ought to speak of _man_, since it
      was the Fourth Race only which was the first _completely human
      species_, however much larger in size than we are now. In _Man:
      Fragments of Forgotten History_ (by two Chelâs), all that is said of
      the Atlanteans is quite correct. It is chiefly this Race which
      became “black with sin,” that brought the divine names of the
      Asuras, the Râkshasas and the Daityas, into disrepute, and passed
      them on to posterity as the names of fiends. For, as said, the
      Suras, Gods or Devas, having incarnated in the wise men of Atlantis,
      the names of Asuras and Râkshasas were given to the ordinary
      Atlanteans. Owing to the incessant conflicts of the latter with the
      last remnants of the Third Race and the “Sons of Will and Yoga,”
      their names have led to the later allegories about them in the
      _Purânas_. “Asura was the generic appellation of all the Atlanteans
      who were the enemies of the spiritual heroes of the Âryans (Gods).”
      (_Man_, p. 77.)

  526 In the beginning.

  527 The sub‐races.

  528 Their colours.

  529 Stanza VII, Shloka 24.

  530 See Shlokas 32, 34.

  531 In general, the so‐called orthodox Christian conceptions about the
      “fallen” Angels or Satan, are as remarkable as they are absurd.
      About a dozen could be cited, of the most varied character as to
      details, and all from the pens of educated lay authors, “university
      graduates” of the present quarter of our century. Thus, the author
      of _Earth’s Earliest Ages_, G. H. Pember, M.A., devotes a thick
      volume to proving Theosophists, Spiritualists, Agnostics, Mystics,
      metaphysicians, poets, and every contemporary author on Oriental
      speculations, to be the devoted servants of the “Prince of the Air,”
      and irretrievably damned. He describes Satan and his Antichrist in
      this wise:

      “Satan is the ‘Anointed Cherub’ of old.... God created Satan, the
      fairest and wisest of all His creatures in this part of His
      Universe, and made him Prince of the World, and of the Power of the
      Air.... He was placed in an Eden, which was both far anterior to the
      Eden of Genesis ... and of an altogether different and more
      substantial character, resembling the New Jerusalem. Thus, Satan
      being perfect in wisdom, and beauty, his vast empire is our earth,
      if not the whole solar system.... Certainly no other angelic power
      of greater or even equal dignity has been revealed to us. The
      Archangel Michael himself is quoted by Jude as preserving towards
      the Prince of Darkness _the respect due to a superior_, however
      wicked he may be, until God has formally commanded his deposition.”
      Then we are informed that “Satan was from the moment of his creation
      surrounded by the _insignia of royalty_” (! !): that he “awoke to
      consciousness to find the air filled with the rejoicing music of
      those whom God had appointed.” Then the Devil “passes from the
      royalty to his _priestly dignity_” (! ! !). “Satan was also a
      _priest of the Most High_,” etc., etc. And now—“Antichrist will be
      Satan incarnate.” (Chap. III and pp. 56‐59.) The pioneers of the
      coming Apollyon have already appeared—they are the Theosophists, the
      Occultists, the authors of the _Perfect Way_, of _Isis Unveiled_, of
      the _Mystery of the Ages_, and even of the _Light of Asia_ ! ! The
      author notes the “avowed origin” of Theosophy from the “descending
      angels,” from the “Nephilim,” or the Angels of _Genesis_ (vi), and
      the Giants. He ought to note his own descent from them also, as our
      _Secret Doctrine_ endeavours to show—unless he refuses to belong to
      the present humanity.

  532 Compare x. 8, where it speaks of all who have come before Jesus,
      being “thieves and robbers.”

  533 Verse 14.

  534 _Luke_, x. 18.

  535 It is not correct to refer to Christ—as some Theosophists do—as
      Buddhi, the sixth principle in man. The latter _per se_ is a passive
      and latent principle, the Spiritual Vehicle of Âtmâ, inseparable
      from the manifested Universal Soul. It is only in union and in
      conjunction with _Self‐consciousness_ that Buddhi becomes the Higher
      Self and the Divine, discriminating Soul. Christos is the seventh
      principle, if anything.

  536 xix. 7.

  537 _Ibid._, verse 8.

  538 xviii. 24.

  539 To make it plainer, any one who reads the passage in _Luke_, will
      see that the remark follows the report of the _seventy_, who rejoice
      that “even the devils [the spirit of controversy and reasoning, or
      the opposing power, since Satan means simply ‘adversary’ or
      ‘opponent’] are subject unto us through thy name.” (_Luke_, x. 17.)
      Now, “thy name” means the name of Christos, or Logos, or the Spirit
      of true Divine Wisdom, as distinct from the spirit of intellectual
      or mere materialistic reasoning—the Higher Self in short. And when
      Jesus remarks on this that he has “beheld Satan as lightning fall
      from heaven,” it is a mere statement of his clairvoyant powers,
      notifying to them that he already knew it, and a reference to the
      incarnation of the Divine Ray—the Gods or Angels—which _falls into
      generation_. For not all men, by any means, benefit by that
      incarnation, and with some the power remains latent and dead during
      the whole life. Truly “no man knoweth who the Son is, but the
      Father; and who the Father is, but the Son,” as added by Jesus then
      and there (verse 22)—the “Church of Christ” less than any one else.
      The Initiates alone understood the secret meaning of the terms
      “Father” and “Son,” and knew that it referred to Spirit and Soul on
      the Earth. For the teachings of Christ were Occult teachings, which
      could only be explained at Initiation. They were never intended for
      the masses, for Jesus forbade the twelve to go to the Gentiles and
      the Samaritans (_Matth._, x. 5), and repeated to his disciples that
      the “mystery of the kingdom of God” was for them alone, not for the
      multitudes (_Mark_, iv. 11).

  540 So, for instance, in the _Purânas_, Pulastya, a Prajâpati, or son of
      Brahmâ—the progenitor of the Râkshasas, and the grandfather of
      Râvana, the great king of Lankâ in the _Râmâyana_—had, in a _former
      birth_, a son named Dattoli, “who is now known as the sage Agastya,”
      says _Vishnu Purâna_ (Wilson’s Trans., i. 154). This name of Dattoli
      alone, has six more variants to it, or seven meanings. He is called
      respectively, Dattoli, Dattâli, Dattotti, Dattotri, Dattobhri,
      Dambhobhi and Dambholi. These seven variants have each a secret
      sense, and refer in the Esoteric Commentaries to various
      ethnological classifications, and also to physiological and
      anthropological mysteries of the primitive races. For, surely, the
      Râkshasas are not Demons, but simply the primitive and ferocious
      Giants, the Atlanteans, who were scattered on the face of the Globe,
      as the Fifth Race is now. Vasishtha is a warrant of this, if his
      words addressed to Parâshara, who attempted a bit of Jadoo
      (sorcery), which he calls “sacrifice,” for the destruction of the
      Râkshasas, mean anything. For he says: “Let no more of these
      _unoffending_ ‘Spirits of Darkness’ be consumed.” (See for details,
      _Mahâbhârata_, Âdi Parvan, s. 176; also _Linga Purâna_, Pûrvârdha,
      s. 64; Wilson, _ibid._, i. 8, 9.)

  541 We have a passage from a Master’s letter which has a direct bearing
      upon these incarnating Angels. Says the letter: “Now there are, and
      there must be, failures in the ethereal Races of the many Classes of
      Dhyân Chohans, or Devas [_progressed entities_ of a _previous_
      Planetary Period], as well as among men. But still, as the
      _failures_ are too far progressed and spiritualized to be thrown
      back forcibly from Dhyân‐Chohanship into the vortex of a new
      primordial evolution through the lower Kingdoms, this then happens.
      Where a new Solar System has to be evolved, these Dhyân Chohans are
      borne in by influx ‘ahead’ of the Elementals [entities ... to be
      developed into humanity at a _future_ time] and remain as a latent
      or inactive spiritual force, in the Aura of a nascent World ...
      until the stage of human evolution is reached.... Then they become
      an _active force_ and commingle with the Elementals, to _develop
      little by little the full type of humanity_.” That is to say, to
      develop in man, and endow him with his Self‐conscious Mind, or
      Manas.

  542 Appendix XV, pp. 369, _et seqq._

  543 When the Earth with its Planetary Chain and Man were to appear.

  544 Our Earth and the physical plane of consciousness.

  545 When the pure, celestial Beings or Dhyân Chohans, and the great
      Pitris of various classes were commissioned—the one to evolve their
      Images or Chhâyâs, and make of them physical man, the others to
      inform and thus endow him with divine intelligence and the
      comprehension of the Mysteries of Creation.

  546 The “dynasties of kings” who all regard themselves as the
      “anointed,” reigning by the “Grace of God,” whereas in truth, they
      reign by the grace of Matter, the Great Illusion, the Deceiver.

  547 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._, verse 10.

  548 See the “Primeval Manus of Humanity.”

  549 The “Heavenly Man,” please mark again the word, is the “Logos” or
      the “Son” Esoterically. Therefore, once that the title was applied
      to Christ, who was declared to be God and the very God himself,
      Christian Theology had no choice. In order to support its dogma of a
      personal Trinity it had to proclaim, as it still does, that the
      Christian Logos is the only true one, and that all the Logoi of
      other religions are false, and are only the masquerading Evil
      Principle, Satan. See whereto this has led Western Theology!

  550 “For the Mind, a deity abounding in both sexes, being Light and
      Life, brought forth by its Word another Mind or Workman; which,
      being God of the Fire and the Spirit, fashioned and formed seven
      other Governors, which in their Circles contain the Phenomenal
      World, and whose disposition is called Fate or Destiny.” (Sect. ix.
      c. 1, ed. of 1579.)

      Here it is evident that Mind, the Primeval Universal Divine Thought,
      is neither the Unknown Unmanifested One, since it abounds in both
      sexes—is male and female—nor yet the Christian “Father,” as the
      latter is a male and not an androgyne. The fact is that the
      “Father,” “Son,” and “Man” are hopelessly mixed up in the
      translations of _Pymander_.

  551 The allegory of the fire of Prometheus is another version of the
      rebellion of the proud Lucifer, who was hurled down to the
      “bottomless pit,” or simply on to our Earth, to live as man. The
      Hindû Lucifer, the Mahâsura, is also said to have become envious of
      the Creator’s resplendent Light, and, at the head of inferior Asuras
      (not Gods, but Spirits), to have rebelled against Brahmâ; for which
      Shiva hurled him down to Pâtâla. But, as philosophy goes hand in
      hand with allegorical fiction in Hindû myths, the “Devil” is made to
      repent, and is afforded the opportunity to progress: he is a sinful
      man _esoterically_, and can by Yoga, devotion, and adeptship, reach
      his status of “one with the deity,” once more. Hercules, the Sun‐
      God, descends to Hades (the Cave of Initiation) to deliver the
      victims from their tortures, etc. The Christian Church alone creates
      _eternal_ torment for the Devil and the damned that she has
      invented.

  552 Why, for instance, should Éliphas Lévi, the very fearless and
      outspoken Kabalist, have hesitated to divulge the mystery of the
      Fallen Angels so‐called? That he knew the fact and the real meaning
      of the allegory, both in its religious and mystical, as well as in
      its physiological sense, is proved by his voluminous writings and
      frequent allusions and hints. Yet Éliphas, after having alluded to
      it a hundred times in his previous works, says in his later
      _Histoire de la Magie_ (pp. 220, 221): “We protest with all our
      might against the sovereignty and the ubiquity of Satan. We _pretend
      neither to deny nor affirm here the tradition on the Fall of the
      Angels_.... But if so ... then the prince of the Angelic Rebels can
      be at best the last and the most powerless among the condemned—now
      that he is separated from deity—which is the principle of every
      power.” This is hazy and evasive enough; but see what Hargrave
      Jennings writes in his weird, staccato‐like style:

      “Both Saint Michael and Saint George are types. They are sainted
      personages, or dignified heroes, or powers apotheosized. They are
      each represented with their appropriate faculties and attributes.
      These are reproduced and stand multiplied—distinguished by different
      names in all the mythologies [including the Christian]. But the idea
      regarding each is a general one. This idea and representative notion
      is that of the all‐powerful champion—child‐like in his ‘virgin
      innocence’—so powerful that this God‐filled innocence (the Seraphim
      ‘know most,’ the Cherubim ‘love most’) can shatter the world
      (articulated—so to use the word—in the magic of Lucifer, but
      condemned), in opposition to the artful constructions, won out of
      the permission of the Supreme—artful constructions (‘this side
      life’)—of the magnificent apostate, the mighty rebel, but yet, at
      the same time, the ‘Light‐bringer,’ the Lucifer—the ‘Morning Star,’
      the ‘Son of the Morning’—the very highest title ‘out of heaven,’ for
      in heaven it cannot be, but out of heaven it is everything. In an
      apparently incredible side of his character—for let the reader
      carefully remark that qualities are of no sex—this Archangel Saint
      Michael is the invincible, sexless, celestial ‘Energy’—to dignify
      him by his grand characteristics—the invincible ‘Virgin‐Combatant,’
      clothed ... and at the same time armed, in the denying mail of the
      Gnostic ‘refusal to create.’ This is another myth, a ‘myth within
      myths,’ ... a stupendous ‘mystery of mysteries,’ because it is so
      impossible and contradictory. Unexplainable as the Apocalypse.
      Unrevealable as the ‘Revelation.’ ” (_Phallicism_, pp. 212, 213.)

      Nevertheless, this _unexplainable_ and _unrevealable_ mystery will
      now be explained and revealed by the doctrines of the East. Though,
      of course, as the very erudite, but still more puzzling author of
      _Phallicism_ gives it, no uninitiated mortal would ever understand
      his real drift.

  553 “Creation”—out of preëxistent eternal Substance, or Matter, of
      course, which Substance, according to our teachings, is Boundless,
      Ever‐existing Space.

  554 The Luciferians, a sect of the fourth century who are alleged to
      have taught that the soul was a _carnal_ body transmitted to the
      child by its father, and the Lucianists, another and earlier sect of
      the third century A.D., who taught all this, and further, that the
      _animal_ soul was not immortal, philosophized on the grounds of the
      real Kabalistic and Occult teachings.

  555 This “Central Sun” of the Occultists even Science is obliged to
      accept astronomically, for it cannot deny the presence in sidereal
      space of a central body in the Milky Way, a point unseen and
      mysterious, the ever‐hidden centre of attraction of our Sun and
      System. But this “Sun” is viewed differently by the Occultists of
      the East. While the Western and Jewish Kabalists—and even some pious
      modern Astronomers—claim that in this Sun the God‐head is specially
      present, referring to it the volitional acts of God—the Eastern
      Initiates maintain that, as the Supra‐divine Essence of the Unknown
      Absolute is equally in every domain and place, the “Central Sun” is
      simply the centre of Universal Life‐Electricity; the reservoir
      within which that Divine Radiance, already differentiated at the
      beginning of every “creation,” is focussed. Though still in a Laya,
      or neutral condition, it is, nevertheless, the one attracting, as
      also the ever‐emitting, Life‐Centre.

  556 _Op. cit._, pp. 287‐289.

  557 See Commentary to Stanza VII, Volume I.

  558 The _fourth_ and the _fifth_ from _below_ beginning with the
      Physical Body; the _third_ and the _fourth_, if we reckon from Âtmâ.

  559 _New Aspects of Life._

  560 Angelic, Spiritual Essences, immortal in their Being, because
      unconditioned in Eternity; but periodical and conditioned in their
      Manvantaric manifestations.

  561 _Op. cit._, pp. 97, 98, 2nd ed., 1887.

  562 The history of Prometheus, Karma, and human consciousness, is to be
      found in Part II, Section V.

  563 By an Englishman whose erratic genius killed him. The son of a
      Protestant clergyman, he became a Mohammedan; then a rabid Atheist;
      after meeting with a Master, a Guru, he became a Mystic; then a
      Theosophist who doubted, despaired—threw up _white_ for _black_
      magic, went insane and joined the Roman Church. Then again turning
      round, anathematized her, re‐became an Atheist, and died cursing
      humanity, knowledge, and God, in whom he had ceased to believe.
      Furnished with all the Esoteric data to write his “War in Heaven,”
      he made a semi‐political article out of it, mixing Malthus with
      Satan, and Darwin with the Astral Light. Peace be to his—_Shell_. He
      is a warning to the Chelâs who fail. His forgotten tomb may now be
      seen in the Mussulman burial ground of Joonaghur, Kathiawar, India.

  564 The author talks of the _active, fighting_, damning Jehovah as
      though he were a synonym of Parabrahman! We have quoted from this
      article to show where it dissents from Theosophic teachings;
      otherwise it would be quoted some day against us, as everything
      published in the _Theosophist_ generally is.

  565 _The Theosophist_, vol. iii. p. 68.

  566 Explaining the _Kabalah_, Dr. Henry Pratt says: “Spirit was to man
      [to the Jewish Rabbin, rather!] a bodiless, disembodied, or
      deprived, and degraded being, and hence was termed by the ideograph
      Nahash, ‘Deprived’; represented as appearing to and seducing the
      human race—man through the woman.... In the picture from this
      Nahash, this spirit was represented by a serpent, because from its
      _destitution of bodily members_, the serpent was looked upon as a
      deprived and depraved and degraded creature.” (_New Aspects of
      Life_, p. 235.) Symbol for symbol there are those who would prefer
      that of the serpent—the symbol of wisdom and eternity, deprived of
      limbs as it is—to the Jod (י)—the poetical ideograph of Jehovah in
      the _Kabalah_—the God of the male symbol of generation.

  567 _Zohar_, iii. 61c.

  568 Daksha, the “intelligent, the competent.” “This name generally
      carries with it the idea of _creative power_.” He is a son of Brahmâ
      and of Aditi, and agreeably to other versions, a self‐born power,
      which, like Minerva, sprang from his father’s body. He is the chief
      of the Prajâpatis, the Lords or Creators of Being. In _Vishnu
      Purâna_, Parâshara says of him: “In every Kalpa [or Manvantara]
      Daksha and the rest are born and are again destroyed.” And the _Rig
      Veda_ says that “Daksha sprang from Aditi and Aditi from Daksha,” a
      reference to the eternal cyclic re‐birth of the same divine Essence.

  569 _Bhâgavata Purâna_, iv. 24, 4.

  570 No one of these Orders is distinct from the Pitris or Progenitors.
      As says Manu (iii. 284): “The wise call our fathers Vasus; our
      paternal grandfathers, Rudras; our paternal great grandfathers,
      Âdityas; agreeably to a text of the Vedas.” “This is an everlasting
      Vedic text,” says another translation.

  571 As now discovered by the late G. Smith in the Babylonian cylinder
      literature, it was the same in Chaldæan Theogony. Ishtar, “eldest of
      Heaven and of Earth.” Below him the Igigi or Angels of Heaven, and
      the Anûnaki, or Angels of Earth. Below these again various classes
      of Spirits and “Genii” called Sadu, Vadukku, Ekimu, Gallu—of which
      some were good, some evil. (See Smith’s _Babylonian Mythology_, also
      Sayce’s _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 141.)

  572 Some superior, others inferior, _to suit the Karma_ of the various
      reïncarnating Monads, which could not all be of the same degree of
      purity in their last births in other Worlds. This accounts for the
      difference of races, the inferiority of the savage and other human
      varieties.

  573 “There are,” says Topinard in the English edition of his
      _Anthropology_, with a preface by Professor Broca, “_three_
      fundamental elements of colour in the human organism—namely, the
      _red_, the _yellow_, and the _black_, which, mixed in variable
      quantities with the white of the tissues, give rise to those
      numerous shades seen in the human family.” Here is Science again
      unintentionally supporting Occultism.

  574 It must be remembered that the “last remnants” here spoken of, refer
      to those portions of the “Great Continent” which still remained, and
      not to any of the numerous islands which existed contemporaneously
      with the Continent. Plato’s “island,” for instance, was one of such
      remnants; the others having sunk at various periods previously. An
      Occult “tradition” teaches that such submersions occur whenever
      there is an eclipse of the “Spiritual Sun.”

  575 See the remarks on the Root and Seed Manus _infra_, and the Section
      on “The Primeval Manus of Humanity,” at the end of the Commentaries
      on this Stanza.

  576 Mr. Gladstone’s unfortunate attempt to reconcile the Genetic account
      with Science (see his “Dawn of Creation” and “Proem to Genesis,” in
      _The Nineteenth Century_, 1886), has brought upon him the Jovian
      thunderbolt hurled by Mr. Huxley. The dead‐letter account warranted
      no such attempt; and his fourfold order, or division, of animated
      creation, has turned into the stone which, instead of killing the
      fly on the sleeping friend’s brow, killed the man himself. Mr.
      Gladstone has killed _Genesis_ for ever. But this does not prove
      that there is no Esotericism in the latter. The fact that the Jews
      and all the Christians, the modern as well as the early sects, have
      accepted the narrative _literally_ for two thousand years, proves
      only their ignorance, and shows the great ingenuity and constructive
      ability of the Initiated Rabbis, who built the two accounts—the
      Elohistic and Jehovistic—Esoterically, and purposely confused the
      meaning by the vowelless glyphs or word‐signs in the original text.
      The six days (Yom) of creation do mean six periods of evolution, and
      the seventh day is that of culmination, of perfection—not of rest.
      These refer to the seven Rounds and the seven Races with a distinct
      “creation” in each; though the use of the words Boker, “dawn” or
      “morning,” and Ereb, “evening twilight”—which have Esoterically the
      same meaning as Sandhyâ, “twilight,” in Sanskrit—have led to a
      charge of the most crass ignorance of the order of evolution.

  577 _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, p. 337.

  578 Dowson’s _Hindû Classical Dictionary_, _sub voce_.

  579 _Op. cit._, p. 335.

  580 “Follow the law of analogy”—the Masters teach. Âtmâ‐Buddhi is dual
      and Manas is triple, inasmuch as the former has two aspects, and the
      latter three, _i.e._, as a “principle” _per se_, which gravitates,
      in its higher aspect, to Âtmâ‐Buddhi, and follows, in its lower
      nature, Kâma, the seat of terrestrial and animal desires and
      passions. Now compare the evolution of the Races, the First and the
      Second of which are of the nature of Âtmâ‐Buddhi, of which they are
      the passive Spiritual progeny, while the Third Root‐Race shows three
      distinct divisions or aspects physiologically and psychically—the
      earliest sinless, the middle portions awakening to intelligence, and
      the third and last decidedly _animal_, _i.e._, Manas succumbs to the
      temptations of Kâma.

  581 Laing, _op. cit._, _ibid._

  582 The whole trouble is this: neither Physiologists nor Pathologists
      will recognize that the cell‐germinating substance, the
      Cytoblastema, and the mother‐lye from which crystals originate, are
      one and the same essence, save in differentiation for certain
      purposes.

  583 Huxley, _Proceedings of the Royal Institution_, iii. 151.

  584 _Introduction to the Study of the Foraminifera_, p. xi.

  585 _Transactions of the Geological Society of Glasgow_, vol. iii. Very
      strangely, however, he has recently again changed his opinion. The
      Sun, he says, is only 15,000,000 years old.

  586 Bastian, _The Beginnings of Life_, ii. 622.

  587 Laing, _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, p. 171.

  588 In _Isis Unveiled_, vol. i. p. 389, this is noticed and half
      explained.

  589 Hence the philosophy in the allegory of the 7, 10, and finally 21,
      Prajâpatis, Rishis, Munis, etc., who all are made the “fathers” of
      various beings and things. The order of the seven classes, or orders
      of plants, animals, and even inanimate things, given at random in
      the _Purânas_, is found in several commentaries in the correct
      rotation. Thus, Prithu is the father of the Earth. He “milks” her,
      and makes her bear every kind of grain and vegetable, all enumerated
      and specified. Kashyapa is the “father” of all the reptiles, snakes,
      demons, etc.

  590 See vol. i. pp. 151, _et seqq._, concerning the “Tree of
      Evolution”—the “Mundane Tree.”

  591 Checked and modified, however, by the Law of Retardation, which
      imposes a restriction on the advance of all species when a _higher
      type_ makes its appearance.

  592 See _Origin of Species_, p. 145.

  593 Bastian, _Beginnings of Life_, ii. pp. 622, 623.

  594 Vol. ii. p. 278.

  595 _Op. cit._, i. 9.

  596 _Ibid._, ii. 283, 284.

  597 See his _Lettres sur l’Atlantide_.

  598 This is shown by Faber, again a pious Christian, who says that: “The
      Noëtic family also ... bore the appellations of Atlanteans and
      Titans; and the great patriarch himself was called, by way of
      eminence, Atlas and Titan.” (_Ibid._, ii. 285.) And if so, then,
      _according to the Bible_, Noah must have been the progeny of the
      Sons of God, the Fallen Angels, agreeably to the same authority, and
      of the “daughters of men who were fair.” (See _Genesis_, vi.) And
      why not, since his father Lamech slew a man, and was, with all his
      sons and daughters, who perished in the Deluge, as bad as the rest
      of mankind?

  599 In that wonderful volume of Donnelly, _Atlantis, the Antediluvian
      World_, the author, speaking of the Âryan colonies from Atlantis,
      and of the arts and sciences—the legacy of our Fourth Race—bravely
      announces that “the roots of the institutions of to‐day reach back
      to the Miocene age.” This is an enormous allowance for a modern
      scholar to make; but civilization dates still further back than the
      Miocene Atlanteans. Secondary‐period man will be discovered, and
      with him his long forgotten civilization.

  600 Nature is the _Natural_ Body, the Shadow of the Progenitors.

  601 Man is the “Heavenly Man,” as already stated.

  602 _Divine Pymander_, i. 16.

  603 The _Pymander_ of our museums and libraries is an abridgment of one
      of the Books of Thoth, by a Platonist of Alexandria. In the Third
      Century it was remodelled after old Hebrew and Phœnician MSS. by a
      Jewish Kabalist, and called the _Genesis of Enoch_. But even its
      disfigured remnants show how closely its text agrees with the
      Archaic Doctrine, as is shown in the creation of the Seven Creators
      and Seven Primitive Men. As to Enoch, Thoth or Hermes, Orpheus and
      Cadmus, these are all generic names, branches and offshoots of the
      seven primordial Sages—incarnated Dhyân Chohans or Devas, in
      _illusive_, not mortal bodies—who taught Humanity all it knew, and
      whose earliest disciples assumed their Master’s names. This custom
      passed from the Fourth to the Fifth Race. Hence the sameness of the
      traditions about Hermes—of whom Egyptologists count five—Enoch,
      etc.; they are all inventors of letters; none of them die; they
      still live, and are the first Initiators into, and Founders of, the
      Mysteries. It was only very lately that the _Genesis of Enoch_
      disappeared from among the Kabalists. Guillaume Postel saw it. It
      was most certainly in a great measure a transcript from the Books of
      Hermes, and far anterior to the Books of Moses, as Éliphas Lévi
      tells his readers.

  604 Uranus is a modified Varuna, the “universal encompasser,” the “all‐
      embracer,” and one of the oldest of the Vedic Deities—Space, the
      maker of Heaven and Earth, since both are manifested out of his (or
      its) seed. It is only later that Varuna became the chief of the
      Âdityas and a kind of Neptune riding on the “Leviathan”—Makara, now
      the most sacred and mysterious of the Signs of the Zodiac. Varuna,
      without whom “no creature can even wink,” was degraded like Uranus,
      and, like him, _fell into generation_; his functions—“the grandest
      cosmical functions,” as Muir calls them—having been degraded from
      Heaven to Earth by exoteric anthropomorphism. As the same
      Orientalist says: “The attributes and functions ascribed to Varuna
      [in the Vedas] impart to his character a moral elevation and
      sanctity far surpassing that attributed to any other Vedic Deity.”
      But to understand correctly the reason of his fall, like as that of
      Uranus, one has to see in every exoteric religion the imperfect and
      sinful work of man’s fancy, and also to study the mysteries which
      Varuna is said to have imparted to Vasishtha. Only “his secrets and
      those of Mitra _are not to be revealed to the foolish_.”

  605 _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_, p. 7.

  606 Cronus is not only Χρόνος, Time, but also, as Bréal showed, in his
      _Hercule et Cacus_ (p. 57), comes from the root _kar_, “to make, to
      create.” Whether Bréal and Decharme, who quotes him, are as right in
      saying that in the _Vedas_, Krânan (_sic_) is a Creative God, we
      have our doubts. Bréal probably meant Karma, or rather Visvakarman,
      the Creative God, the “omnificent” and the “great architect of the
      world.”

  607 See Stanzas III—X, _et seqq._, and also Berosus’ account of primeval
      creation.

  608 The Titanic struggle, in Theogony at least, is the fight for
      supremacy between the children of Uranus and Gæa (or Heaven and
      Earth in their abstract sense), the Titans, against the children of
      Cronus, whose chief is Zeus. It is the everlasting struggle going on
      to this day between the Spiritual Inner Man and the man of flesh, in
      one sense.

  609 Just as the “Lord God,” or Jehovah, is Cain, esoterically, and the
      “tempting serpent” as well; the male portion of the androgynous
      Eve—before her “Fall,” the female portion of Adam Kadmon—the left
      side, or Binah, of the right side, Chokmah, in the first Sephirothal
      Triad.

  610 Decharme, _op. cit._, p. 284.

  611 In the Egyptian legend, called the “Two Brothers,” translated by M.
      Maspéro (the ex‐director of the Boulaq Museum), the original of
      Pandora is given. Noom, the famous heavenly artist, creates a
      marvellous beauty, a girl whom he sends to Batoo, after which the
      happiness of the latter is destroyed. Batoo is man, and the girl
      Eve, of course. (See _Revue Archéologique_, March, 1878, and also
      Decharme, _ibid._, p. 285.)

  612 Yima is not the “first man” in the _Vendîdâd_, but only in the
      theories of the Orientalists.

  613 Bœotia was submerged and subsequently ancient Athens and Eleusis.

  614 _Opera et Dies_, v. 108.

  615 _Nem._, VI. i.

  616 See _Apollod._, i. 7, 2; and Ovid, _Metam._, i. 260, _et seqq._

  617 _Deutsche Mythol._, i. 545, 3rd edit., and Hanusch _Schlawische
      Myth._, p. 235. See Decharme, _ibid._, p. 288, who gives “nine
      times,” and not seven.

  618 Hesiod, _Opera et Dies_, 143‐155.

  619 See Æschylus, _Septem contra Thebas_.

  620 Decharme, _ibid._, pp. 289, 290.

  621 Races.

  622 It was said.

  623 In Sanskrit Dâkinî.

  624 The name is used here in the sense, and as a synonym, of
      “sorcerers.” The Atlantean Races were many, and their evolution
      lasted for millions of years. All of them were not bad, but became
      so towards the end of their cycle, as we, the Fifth Race, are now
      fast becoming.

  625 The “Gods of the Elements” are by no means the Elementals. The
      latter are at best used by them as vehicles and materials in which
      to clothe themselves.

  626 Cain was the “sacrificer,” as shown at first in Chap. iv. of
      _Genesis_, of “the fruit of the ground,” of which he was the _first
      tiller_, while Abel “brought of the firstlings of his flock” to the
      Lord. Cain is the symbol of the first male, Abel of the first female
      humanity, Adam and Eve being the types of the Third Race. The
      “murdering” is blood‐shedding, but not taking life.

  627 _Genesis_, vi.

  628 It is, perhaps, with an eye to this _degradation_ of the highest and
      purest Spirits, who broke through the intermediate planes of lower
      consciousness, the “Seven Circles of Fire” of _Pymander_, that St.
      James is made to say “This wisdom (_sophia_) descendeth not from
      above, but is earthly, sensual, _devilish_”; now this Sophia is
      Manas, the “Human Soul,” the Spiritual Wisdom or Soul being Buddhi,
      which being so near the Absolute, is, _per se_, only _latent_
      consciousness, and is dependent upon Manas for manifestation beyond
      its own plane.

  629 This is the “Undying Race,” as it is called in Esotericism, and
      exoterically the fruitless generation of the first progeny of
      Daksha, who curses Nârada, the divine Rishi, for having dissuaded
      the Haryashvas and the Shabalâshvas (the sons of Daksha) from
      procreating their species, by saying: “Be born in the womb; there
      shall not be a resting place for thee in all these regions.” After
      this, Nârada, the representative of that race of _fruitless_
      ascetics, is said, as soon as he dies in one body, to be reborn in
      another.

  630 Âdi Parvan, p. 113.

  631 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., ii. 12.

  632 The traditions of every country and nation point to this fact.
      Donnelly quotes from Father Duran’s _Historia Antigua de la Nueva
      España_ of 1885, in which a native of Cholula, a centenarian,
      accounts for the building of the great pyramid of Cholula, as
      follows: “In the beginning, before the light of the sun had been
      created, this land [Cholula] was in obscurity and darkness ... but
      immediately _after the light of the sun arose in the East_, there
      appeared gigantic men ... who built the said pyramid, its builders
      being scattered after that to all parts of the earth.”

      “A great deal of the Central American history is taken up with the
      doings of an ancient race of Giants called Quinanes,” says the
      author of _Atlantis_ (p. 204).

  633 _Histoire de la Terre_, p. 154.

  634 There are critics who, finding no evidence for the existence of
      Tertullian save in the writings of Eusebius, “the veracious,” are
      inclined to doubt it.

  635 _Heroica_, p. 35.

  636 _Hist. Nat._, VII. xvi.

  637 See for the above De Mirville, _Pneumatologie Des Esprits_, iii.
      46‐48.

  638 _Élévations_, p. 56.

  639 And that, notwithstanding the formal prohibition at the great Church
      Council of Elyrus in A.D. 303, when it was declared that “the form
      of God, which is immaterial and invisible, shall not be limited by
      figure or shape.” In 692, the Council of Constantinople similarly
      prohibited the faithful “to paint or represent Jesus _as a lamb_,”
      as also “to bow the knee in praying, as it is the act of idolatry.”
      But the Council of Nicæa (787) brought this idolatry back, while
      that of Rome (883) excommunicated John, the Patriarch of
      Constantinople, for showing himself an enemy of image worship.

  640 _Genesis_, v. Treating of the Chinese Dragon and the literature of
      China, Mr. Charles Gould, in his _Mythical Monsters_ (p. 212),
      writes: “Its mythologies, histories, religions, popular stories, and
      proverbs, all teem with references to a mysterious being _who has a
      physical nature and spiritual attributes_. Gifted with an accepted
      form, which he has the supernatural power of casting off for the
      assumption of others, he has the power of influencing the weather,
      producing droughts or fertilizing rains at pleasure, of raising
      tempests and allaying them. Volumes could be compiled from the
      scattered legends which everywhere abound relating to this subject.”

      This “mysterious being” is the _mythical_ Dragon, _i.e._, the symbol
      of the _historical_ and actual Adept, the Master and Professor of
      Occult Sciences of old. It has already been stated elsewhere, that
      the great “Magicians” of the Fourth and Fifth Races were generally
      called “Serpents” and “Dragons” after their Progenitors. All these
      belonged to the Hierarchy of the so‐called “Fiery Dragons of
      Wisdom,” the Dhyân Chohans, answering to the Agnishvâtta Pitris, the
      Maruts and Rudras generally, as the issue of Rudra their father, who
      is identified with the God of Fire. More is said in the text. Now
      Clement, an initiated Neo‐Platonist, knew, of course, the origin of
      the word “Dragon,” and why the initiated Adepts were so called, as
      he knew the secret of the Agathodæmon, the Christ, the seven‐
      vowelled Serpent of the Gnostics. He knew that the dogma of his new
      faith required the transformation of all the _rivals_ of Jehovah—the
      Angels supposed to have rebelled against that “Elohim,” as the Titan
      Prometheus rebelled against Zeus, the usurper of his father’s
      kingdom—and that “Dragon” was the mystic appellation of the “Sons of
      Wisdom”; from this knowledge came his definition, as cruel as it was
      arbitrary, “serpents and giants signify _demons_,” _i.e._, not
      “Spirits,” but _Devils_, in Church parlance.

  641 Part IV, Ch. xxvii, p. 291.

  642 “What would you say to our affirmation that the Chinese—I now speak
      of the inland, the true Chinamen, not of the hybrid mixture between
      the Fourth and Fifth Races now occupying the throne—the aborigines
      who belong in their unallied nationality wholly to the highest and
      last branch of the Fourth Race, reached their highest civilization
      when the Fifth had hardly appeared in Asia.” (_Esoteric Buddhism_,
      p. 67.) And this handful of the inland Chinese are all of a very
      high stature. Could the most ancient MSS. in the Lolo language (that
      of the aborigines of China) be got at and correctly translated, many
      a priceless piece of evidence would be found. But they are as rare
      as their language is unintelligible. So far, one or two European
      Archæologists only have been able to procure such priceless works.

  643 Quoted in De Mirville, _op. cit._, iii. 53. Remember the same
      statement in the _Book of Enoch_, as also the ladder seen by Jacob
      in his dream. The “two worlds” mean, of course, the two _planes_ of
      Consciousness and Being. A seer can commune with Beings of a higher
      plane than the Earth, without quitting his arm‐chair.

  644 See the Commentary on the Four Races—and on the “Sons of Will and
      Yoga,” the immaculate progeny of the Androgynous Third Race.

  645 In the _Kabalah_ the pronunciation of the four‐lettered _ineffable_
      Name is “a most secret arcanum”—“a secret of secrets.”

  646 _The Chaldean Account of Genesis_, p. 81.

  647 _Ibid._, p. 84, lines 12, 14 and 15.

  648 Returning once more to this most important subject in Archaic
      Cosmogony, even in the Norse legends, in the Sacred Scrolls of the
      Goddess Saga, we find Loki, the brother by blood of Odin—just as
      Typhon, Ahriman, and others are respectively brothers of Osiris and
      Ormazd—becoming evil only later, when he had mingled too long with
      humanity. Like all other Fire or Light Gods—Fire burning and
      destroying as well as warming and giving life—he ended by being
      regarded in the destructive sense of “Fire.” The name _Loki_, we
      learn from _Asgard and the Gods_ (p. 250), has been derived from the
      old word _liuhan_, to enlighten. It has, therefore, the same origin
      as the Latin _lux_, light. Hence Loki is identical with Lucifer or
      Light‐bringer. This title, being given to the Prince of Darkness, is
      very suggestive and is in itself a vindication against theological
      slander. But Loki is still more closely related to Prometheus, for
      he is shown chained to a sharp rock, while Lucifer, also identified
      with Satan, was chained down in Hell; a circumstance, however, which
      prevented neither of them from acting with all freedom on Earth, if
      we accept the theological paradox in its fulness. Loki is a
      beneficent, generous and powerful God in the beginnings of time, and
      the principle of good, and not of evil, in early Scandinavian
      Theogony.

  649 The Greek mythos alluded to a few pages back, namely the mutilation
      of Uranus by his son Cronus, is an allusion to this “theft” of the
      _divine creative Fire_ by the Son of the Earth and Heavens. If
      Uranus, the personification of the Celestial Powers, has to cease
      creating (he is made impotent by Cronus (Chronos), the God _in
      Time_), so, in the Egyptian Cosmogony, it is Thot, the God of
      Wisdom, who regulates this fight between Horus and Set, the latter
      being served by the former as Uranus is by Cronus. (See _Book of the
      Dead_, xvii, line 26.) In the Babylonian account it is the God Zu,
      who strips the “Father of the Gods” of “_umsimi_”—the ideal creative
      organ, not the “crown” (!) as G. Smith thought (_op. cit._, pp. 115,
      116). For, in the fragment K. 3454 (British Museum), it is said very
      clearly, that Zu having stripped the “venerable of heaven” of his
      _desire_, he carried away the “_umsimi_ of the gods,” and burnt
      thereby “the _tereti_ [the power] of all the gods,” thus “governing
      the whole of the _seed_ of all the angels.” As the _umsimi_ was “_on
      the seat_” of Bel, it could hardly be the “crown.” A fourth version
      is in the _Bible_. Ham is the Chaldæan Zu, and both are cursed for
      the same allegorically described crime.

  650 Quoted by Christian Ginsburg from the _Kabalah_.

  651 Schlagintweit, _Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 248. These are the Beings
      whose legendary existence has served as a ground‐work upon which to
      build the Rabbinical Lilith, and what the believers in the _Bible_
      would term the Antediluvian women, and the Kabalists the Pre‐Adamite
      races. They are no fiction—this is certain, however fantastic the
      exuberance of later growth.

  652 _Op. cit._, pp. 101, 102.

  653 For suggestiveness, we would recommend a short article by Visconde
      de Figanière, F.T.S., in _The Theosophist_, entitled “Esoteric
      Studies.” Its author expounds therein quite an Occult theory, though
      to the world a new idea—“the _progress_ of the Monad concurring with
      the _retrogression_ of Form, _i.e._, with decrease of the _vis
      formativa_.” (Vol. viii. p. 666.) He says, “Who knows what shape
      vehicled the Ego in remote rings [Rounds, or Races?]?... May not
      man’s type ... have been that of the Simiadæ in its variety? Might
      not the Monkey‐kingdom of Râmâyana fame rest on some far‐off
      tradition relating to a period when that was the common lot, or
      rather aspect, of man?” And the author winds up a very clever,
      though too short, exposition of his theory by saying that which
      every true Occultist will endorse: “With physico‐ethereal man there
      must be _involution_ of sex. As physico‐astral man depended on
      entities of the sub‐human class (evolved from animal prototypes) for
      rebirth, so will physico‐ethereal man find among the graceful,
      shapely orders issuing from the _air_‐plane, one or more which will
      be developed for his successive embodiments _when procreated forms
      are given_—a process which will include all mankind only very
      gradually. The [_Pre_‐?] Adamic and Post‐Adamic races were giants;
      their ethereal counterparts may possibly be liliputians—beauteous,
      luminous, diaphanous—but will assuredly be giants in mind” (p. 671).

  654 It may be objected that this is a contradiction. That, as the first
      Root‐Race appeared 300,000,000 years after the vegetation had
      evolved, the Seed of vegetable life could not be in the First Race.
      We say it could; for up to man’s appearance in _this_ Round, the
      vegetation was of quite another kind to what it is now, and quite
      ethereal; this, for the simple reason that no grass or plants could
      have been physical, before there were animal or other organisms to
      breathe out the carbonic acid which vegetation has to imbibe for its
      development, its nutrition and growth. They are interdependent in
      their _physical_ and achieved forms.

  655 _Zohar_, i. 21a.

  656 _Ibid._, iii. 48a.

  657 _Ibid._, ii. 76a.

  658 _Op. cit._, p. 666.

  659 It is stated in the _Zohar_ that the “primordial worlds” (sparks)
      could not continue because _man was not as yet_. “The _human_ form
      contains everything; and as it did not as yet exist, the worlds were
      destroyed.”

  660 “The Sacred Books of the East,” vol. iv; _The Vendîdâd_, J.
      Darmesteter; Fargard ii. vv. 27 (70) and 28 (74).

  661 This is the meaning when the allegory and symbol are opened and read
      by means of the _human_ key, or the key to Terrestrial
      Anthroposophy. This interpretation of the “Ark” symbolism does not
      in the least interfere with its astronomical, or even theogonic
      keys; nor with any of the other six meanings. Nor does it seem less
      scientific than the modern theories about the origin of man. As
      said, it has seven keys to it, like the rest.

  662 _Ibid._, v. 30 (87).

  663 _Ibid._, v. 31 (93).

  664 _Ibid._, v. 40 (131).

  665 See also _Bund._, xv.

  666 _Ibid._, 42 (137).

  667 _Bund._, xix and xxiv.

  668 S. L. MacGregor Mathers, _Kabbalah Unveiled_, p. 104.

  669 _Zohar_, ii. 8b.

  670 _Zohar_, iii. 278a; Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 217.

  671 Darwinian Evolutionists who are so wont to refer to the evidence of
      _reversion to type_—the full meaning of which, in the case of human
      monsters, is embraced in the Esoteric solution of the embryological
      problem—as proof of their arguments, would do well to enquire into
      those instances of _modern giants_ who are often 8, 9, and even 11
      feet high. Such _reversions_ are imperfect, yet undeniable
      reproductions of the original towering man of primeval times.

  672 See _Mythical Monsters_, by Ch. Gould, from whose interesting and
      scientific volume a few passages are quoted further on. See also, in
      A. P. Sinnett’s _Occult World_, the description of a cavern in the
      Himâlayas filled with relics of giant human and animal bones.

  673 _I.e._, the Third Eye was at the back of the head. The statement
      that the latest hermaphrodite humanity was “four‐armed,” unriddles
      probably the mystery of all the representations and idols of the
      exoteric Gods of India. On the Acropolis of Argos, there was a
      ξόανον, a rudely carved wooden statue, attributed to Dædalus,
      representing a three‐eyed colossus, which was consecrated to Zeus
      Triôpês, the “Three‐eyed.” The head of the “god” has two eyes in its
      face and one above on the top of the forehead. It is considered the
      most archaic of all the ancient statues. (_Schol. Vatic, ad Eurip.
      Troad._, 14.)

  674 The _inner vision_ could henceforth be acquired only through
      training and initiation, save in the cases of “natural and born
      magicians”—sensitives and mediums, as they are called now.

  675 This expression “petrified” instead of “ossified” is curious. The
      “back eye,” which is of course the Pineal Gland, so‐called, the
      small pea‐like mass of grey nervous matter attached to the back of
      the third ventricle of the brain, is said to almost invariably
      contain _mineral concretions_ and _sand_, and “nothing more.”

  676 “Deeply placed within the head, covered by thick skin and muscles,
      true eyes, that cannot see, are found in certain animals,” says
      Hæckel. “Among the Vertebrata there are blind moles and field‐mice,
      blind snakes and lizards.... They shun the daylight, dwelling ...
      under the ground.... [They] were _not originally blind_, but have
      evolved from ancestors that lived in the light and had well‐
      developed eyes. The atrophied eye beneath the opaque skin may be
      found in these blind beings in every stage of reversion.” (Hæckel,
      _Pedigree of Man_, “Sense Organs.” p. 343: Aveling’s Trans.) And if
      _two_ eyes could become so atrophied in lower animals, why not _one_
      eye—the Pineal Gland—in man, who is but a higher animal in his
      physical aspect?

  677 _Op. cit._, ii. 830, 831, ninth edition; “The Thalamencephalon or
      Inter‐brain.”

  678 The “nervous ether” of Dr. B. W. Richardson, F.R.S.; the nerve‐aura
      of Occultism. The “animal spirits” (?) are equivalent to the
      currents of nerve‐auric compound circulation.

  679 Let us remember that the _First_ Race is shown, in Occult Science,
      as spiritual within and ethereal without; the _Second_, psycho‐
      spiritual mentally, and ethereo‐physical bodily; the _Third_, still
      bereft of intellect in its beginning, is astro‐physical in its body,
      and lives an inner life, in which the psycho‐spiritual element is in
      no way as yet interfered with by the hardly nascent physiological
      senses. Its two front eyes look before them without seeing either
      past or future. But the Third Eye “_embraces Eternity_.”

  680 But in a very different manner to that pictured by Hæckel as an
      “_evolution by Natural Selection in the struggle for existence_”
      (_Pedigree of Man_, “Sense Organs,” p. 335; Aveling’s Trans.). The
      mere “thermal sensibility of the skin,” to hypothetical light‐waves,
      is absurdly incompetent to account for the beautiful combination of
      adaptations existing in the eye. We have shown that “natural
      selection” is a pure myth when credited with the _origination_ of
      variations, as the “survival of the fittest” can only take place
      after useful variations have sprung up, together with improved
      organisms. Whence came the “useful variations,” which developed the
      eye? Only from “blind forces ... without aim, without design”? The
      argument is puerile. The true solution of the mystery is to be found
      in the impersonal Divine Wisdom, in its Ideation—reflected through
      Matter.

  681 Palæontology has ascertained that in the animals of the Mesozoic
      age—the Saurians especially, such as the antediluvian Labyrinthodon,
      whose fossil skull exhibits a perforation otherwise inexplicable—the
      third, or odd eye must have been much developed. Several
      Naturalists, among others E. Korscheldt, feel convinced that
      whereas, notwithstanding the opaque skin covering it, such an eye in
      the reptiles of the present period can only distinguish light from
      darkness (as the human eyes do when bound with a handkerchief, or
      even tightly closed), in the now extinct animals that eye functioned
      and was a real organ of vision.

  682 Gould’s _Mythical Monsters_, p. 27.

  683 Karma is a word of many meanings, and has a special term for almost
      every one of its aspects. As a synonym of sin, it means the
      performance of some action for the attainment of an object of
      _worldly_, hence _selfish_, desire, which cannot fail to be hurtful
      to somebody else. Karma is action, the cause; and Karma again is the
      “Law of Ethical Causation”; the _effect_ of an act produced
      egotistically, in face of the great Law of Harmony which depends on
      altruism.

  684 Objectors to the doctrine of Karma should recall the fact that it is
      absolutely out of the question to attempt a reply to the Pessimists
      on other data. A firm grasp of the principles of Karmic Law knocks
      away the whole basis of the imposing fabric reared by the disciples
      of Schopenhauer and Von Hartmann.

  685 The doctrine and theology of the Calvinists. “The purpose of God
      _from eternity_ respecting all events”—which becomes _fatalism_ and
      kills free will, or any attempt of exerting it for good. “It is the
      preässignment or allotment of men to everlasting happiness or
      misery.” (_Catechism._) A noble and encouraging doctrine this!

  686 In order to make Karma more comprehensible to the Western mind,
      which is better acquainted with the Greek than with Âryan
      philosophy, some Theosophists have made an attempt to translate it
      by Nemesis. Had Nemesis been known to the Profane in antiquity, as
      it was understood by the Initiate, this translation of the term
      would be unobjectionable. As it is, Nemesis has been too much
      anthropomorphized by Greek fancy to permit our using it without an
      elaborate explanation. With the early Greeks, “from Homer to
      Herodotus, she was no goddess, but a _moral feeling_ rather,” says
      Decharme; the barrier to evil and immorality. He who transgresses
      it, commits a sacrilege in the eyes of the Gods, and is pursued by
      Nemesis. But, with time, that “feeling” was deified, and its
      personification became an ever‐fatal and punishing Goddess.
      Therefore, if we would connect Karma with Nemesis, we must do so in
      her triple character as Nemesis, Adrasteia and Themis. For, while
      the last is the Goddess of Universal Order and Harmony, who, like
      Nemesis, is commissioned to repress every excess, and keep man
      within the limits of Nature and righteousness under severe penalty,
      Adrasteia, the “inevitable,” represents Nemesis as the immutable
      effect of causes created by man himself. Nemesis, as the daughter of
      Dikê, is the equitable Goddess reserving her wrath for those alone
      who are maddened with pride, egoïsm, and impiety. (See Mesomed.,
      _Hymn. Nemes._, v. 2, from Brunck, _Analecta_ II. p. 292; quoted in
      _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_, p. 304.) In short, while Nemesis
      is a mythological, exoteric Goddess, or _Power_, personified and
      anthropomorphized in its various aspects, Karma is a highly
      philosophical truth, a most divine and noble expression of the
      primitive intuition of man concerning Deity. It is a doctrine which
      explains the origin of Evil, and ennobles our conceptions of what
      divine immutable Justice ought to be, instead of degrading the
      unknown and unknowable Deity by making it the whimsical, cruel
      tyrant, which we call “Providence.”

  687 Pralaya—a word already explained—is not a term that applies _only_
      to every “Night of Brahmâ,” or the World’s Dissolution following
      every Manvantara, equal to 71 Mahâyugas. It applies also to each
      “Obscuration” as well, and even to every Cataclysm that puts an end,
      by Fire or by Water in turn, to each Root‐Race. Pralaya is a general
      term like the word “Manu” the generic name for the Shishtas, who,
      under the appellation of “Kings,” are said in the _Purânas_ to be
      preserved “with the seed of all things, in an ark, from the waters
      of that inundation [or the fires of a general volcanic
      conflagration, the commencement of which we already see for our
      Fifth Race in the terrible earthquakes and eruptions of these late
      years, and especially in the present year (1888)], which, in the
      season of a Pralaya overspreads the world [the Earth].” (_Vishnu
      Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., I. lxxxi.) Time is only a form of
      Vishnu—truly, as Parâshara says in the _Vishnu Purâna_. In the Hindû
      Yugas and Kalpas, we have the regular descending series 4, 3, 2,
      with ciphers, multiplied, as occasion requires, for Esoteric
      purposes, but not, as Wilson and other Orientalists thought, for
      “sectarian embellishments.” A Kalpa may be an Age, or Day of Brahmâ,
      or a sidereal Kalpa, astronomical and earthly. These calculations
      are found in all the _Purânas_, but some differ—as for instance, the
      “Year of the seven Rishis,” 3,030 mortal years, and the “Year of
      Dhruva,” 9,090, in the _Linga Purâna_, which are again Esoteric, and
      _do_ represent actual (and secret) chronology. As said in the
      _Brahma Vaivarta_: “Chronologers compute a Kalpa by the life of
      Brahmâ. _Minor_ Kalpas, as Samvarta and the rest, are numerous.”
      “Minor Kalpas” denote here every period of Destruction, as was well
      understood by Wilson himself, who explains the latter as “those in
      which the Samvarta wind or other destructive agents operate.”
      (_Ibid._, p. 54.)

  688 An intuition and a presentiment of the Shishtas may be found in Mr.
      Sinnett’s _Esoteric Buddhism_. See the “Annotations”—the “Noah’s Ark
      Theory,” pp. 146, 147, fifth edition.

  689 The fact that Manu himself is made to declare that he was created by
      Virâj, and that he then produced the ten Prajápatis, who again
      produced seven Manus, who in their turn gave birth to seven other
      Manus (_Manu_, i. 33‐36) relates to other still earlier mysteries,
      and is at the same time a “blind” with regard to the doctrine of the
      Septenary Chain, and the simultaneous evolution of seven Humanities,
      or Men. However, the present work is written on the records of Cis‐
      Himâlayan Secret Teachings, and Brâhmanical Esoteric Philosophy may
      now differ in form as does the Kabalah. But they were identical in
      hoary antiquity.

  690 There is another Esoteric reason besides this for it. A Vaivasvata
      is the _seventh_ Manu, because this our Round, although the Fourth,
      is in the _preseptenary_ Manvantara, and the Round itself is in its
      _seventh_ stage of materiality or physicality. The close of its
      middle racial point occurred during the Fourth Root‐Race, when Man
      and all Nature reached their lowest state of gross Matter. From that
      time, _i.e._, from the end of the three and a half Races, Humanity
      and Nature entered on the ascending arc of their Racial Cycle.

  691 The interval that precedes each Yuga is called a Sandhyâ, composed
      of as many hundreds of years as there are thousands in the Yuga; and
      that which follows the latter is named Sandhyâmsha, and is of
      similar duration, as we are told in _Vishnu Purâna_. “The interval
      between the Sandhyâ and the Sandhyâmsha is the Yuga denominated
      Krita, Tretâ, etc. The [four] Krita, Tretâ, Dvâpara, and Kali
      constitute a great age, or aggregate of four ages: a thousand such
      aggregates are a Day of Brahmâ; and fourteen _Manus reign within
      that term_.” (_Op. cit._, _ibid._, p. 49.) Now had we to accept this
      literally then there would be only one Manu for every 4,320,000,000
      years. As we are taught that it took 300 million years for the two
      lower kingdoms to evolve, and that our Humanity is just 18 and some
      odd millions old—where were the other Manus spoken of, unless the
      allegory means what the Esoteric Doctrine teaches as to the 14 being
      each multiplied by 49.

  692 The words “Creation,” “Dissolution,” etc., do not correctly render
      the right meaning of either Manvantara or Pralaya. The _Vishnu
      Purâna_ enumerates several: “The dissolution of all things is of
      four kinds,” Parâshara is made to say: Naimittika (Occasional), when
      Brahmâ slumbers (his Night, when, “at the end of this Day occurs a
      re‐coalescence _of the Universe_, called Brahmâ’s contingent re‐
      coalescence,” because Brahmâ _is_ this Universe itself); Prâkritika
      (Elemental), when the return of this Universe to its original nature
      is partial and physical; Âtyantika (Absolute), identification of the
      _Embodied_ with the incorporeal Supreme Spirit—Mahâtmic state,
      whether temporary or until the following Mahâ Kalpa: also Absolute
      Obscuration—as of a whole Planetary Chain, etc.; and Nitya
      (Perpetual), Mahâ Pralaya for the Universe, _Death_—for man. Nitya
      is the extinction of life, like the “extinction of a lamp,” also “in
      sleep at night.” Nitya Sarga is “constant or perpetual creation,” as
      Nitya Pralaya is “constant or perpetual destruction of all that is
      born.” “That which ensues after a minor dissolution is called
      ephemeral creation.” (_Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., i. 113,
      114.) The subject is so difficult that we are obliged to repeat our
      statements.

  693 But see the superb definitions of Parabrahman and the Logos in T.
      Subba Row’s Lectures on the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_ in the early numbers of
      _The Theosophist_ of 1887.

  694 See preceding foot‐note.

  695 See _Manu_, i. 32, 33. Vaishvânara is, in another sense, the living
      magnetic fire that pervades the manifested Solar System. It is the
      most objective (though to us the reverse) and ever present aspect of
      the One Life, for it is the Vital Principle. (See _Theosophist_,
      July, 1883, p. 249.) It is also a name of Agni.

  696 _Op. cit._, pp. 134, 135.

  697 This—in the period of _Secondary_ Creation, so called. Of the
      _Primary_, when Earth is in possession of the three _Elemental_
      Kingdoms, we cannot speak for several reasons, one of which is,
      that, no one but a great seer, or one naturally intuitional, will be
      able to realize that which can never be expressed in any existing
      terms.

  698 Hippocrates said that number _seven_ “by its occult virtues tended
      to the accomplishment of all things, to be the dispenser of life and
      fountain of all its changes.” The life of man he divided into seven
      ages, as did Shakespeare, for “as the moon changes her phases every
      seven days, this number influences all sublunary beings,” and even
      the Earth, as we know. The teeth of a child appear in the seventh
      month, and he sheds them at seven years; at twice seven puberty
      begins, at three times seven his mental and vital powers are
      developed, at four times seven he is in his full strength, at five
      times seven his passions are most developed, etc. Thus also for the
      Earth; it is now in its middle age, yet very little wiser for it.
      The Tetragrammaton, the four‐lettered sacred name of the Deity, can
      be resolved on Earth only by becoming septenary through the manifest
      Triangle proceeding from the concealed Tetraktys. Therefore, the
      number seven has to be adopted on this plane. As written in the
      _Kabalah_ (“The Greater Holy Assembly,” v. 1161): “For assuredly
      there is no stability in those six, save (what they derive) from the
      _seventh_. For _all things depend_ from the _seventh_.” (S. L.
      MacGregor Mathers’ _Kabbalah_, p. 255.)

  699 Compare Stanzas III. _et seqq._

  700 St. Augustin says of Jesus: “He is a _fish_ that lives in the midst
      of waters.” Christians called themselves “Little
      Fishes”—_Pisciculi_—in their sacred Mysteries. “So many _fishes_
      bred in the _water_, and saved by _one great fish_,” says Tertullian
      of the Christians and Christ and the Church.

  701 _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 55.

  702 This event—viz., the destruction of the famous island of Ruta and
      the smaller island Daitya—which occurred 850,000 years ago in the
      later Pliocene times, must not be confounded with the submersion of
      the main Continent of Atlantis during the Miocene period. Geologists
      cannot bring the Miocene so near as 850,000 years, whatever they may
      do; it is, in reality, several million years ago that the main
      Atlantis perished.

  703 See _The Athenæum_, Aug. 25th, 1860.

  704 Mr. Huxley divides these races into the quintuple group of
      Australoids, Negroids, Mongoloids, Xanthochroics and
      Melanochroics—all issuing from imaginary Anthropoids. And yet, while
      protesting against those who say “that the structural differences
      between man and apes are small and insignificant,” and adding that
      “every bone of the gorilla bears a mark by which it can be
      distinguished from a corresponding human bone, and that in the
      present state of creation, at least, no intermediary being fills the
      gap which separates the man from the troglodyte”—the great Anatomist
      goes on speaking of the _simian_ characteristics in man! (See de
      Quatrefages, _The Human Species_, P. 113.)

  705 _Op. cit._, Isaac Myer, p. 422.

  706 _Zohar_, i. 119b, col. 475; _ibid._, p. 412.

  707 The Lemurians.

  708 Lava.

  709 Marble.

  710 Of the subterranean fires.

  711 This is the reason, perhaps, why even Easter Island, with its
      wondrous gigantic statues—a speaking witness to a submerged
      continent with a civilized mankind on it—is hardly mentioned
      anywhere in modern Encyclopædias. Its mention is carefully avoided
      except in some books of travels. Modern Science has an undeniable
      predilection for forcing hypotheses, built on personal hobbies, upon
      the cultured public, as well‐established evidence: for offering it
      _guesses_ instead of knowledge, and calling them “scientific
      conclusions.” Its specialists will evolve a thousand and one
      contradictory speculations rather than confess an _awkward self‐
      evident fact_—preëminent among such specialists being Hæckel and his
      English admirers and co‐thinkers. Yet “they are authorities”—we are
      sternly reminded. What of that? The Pope of Rome is also an
      authority and an infallible one—for _his_ followers; whereas the
      remarkable fallibility of scientific speculations is being proven
      periodically with every change of the moon.

  712 Our best modern novelists, although they are neither Theosophists
      nor Spiritualists, nevertheless begin to have very psychological and
      suggestively Occult dreams; witness Mr. Robert Louis Stevenson and
      his _Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde_, than which no grander
      psychological essay on Occult lines exists. Has the rising novelist
      Mr. Rider Haggard also had a prophetic, or rather a retrospective,
      clairvoyant dream before he wrote _She_? His imperial Kor, the great
      city of the dead, whose surviving inhabitants sailed northwards
      after the plague had killed almost a whole nation, seems, in its
      general outlines, to step out from the imperishable pages of the old
      archaic records. Ayesha suggests “that those men who sailed north
      may have been the fathers of the first Egyptians”; and then seems to
      attempt a synopsis of certain letters of a Master quoted in
      _Esoteric Buddhism_, for, she says: “Time after time have nations,
      ay, and rich and strong nations, learned in the arts, been, and
      passed away, and been forgotten, so that no memory of them remains.
      This [the nation of Kor] is but one of several; for time eats up the
      work of man unless, indeed, he digs in caves like the people of Kor,
      and _then mayhap the sea swallows them, or the earthquake shakes
      them in_.... Yet were not these people utterly destroyed, as I
      think. Some few remained in the other cities, for their cities were
      many. But the barbarians ... came down upon them, and took their
      women to wife, and the race of the Amahagger that is now is a
      bastard brood of the mighty sons of Kor, and behold it dwelleth in
      the tombs with its fathers’ bones” (pp. 180, 181).

      Here the clever novelist seems to repeat the history of all the now
      degraded and down‐fallen races of humanity. Geologists and
      Anthropologists would place at the head of humanity—as descendants
      of Homo Primigenius—the ape‐man, of which “_no fossil remains are as
      yet known to us_,” though they “were _probably_ akin to the
      _Gorilla_ and _Orang of the present day_” (Hæckel). In answer to
      whose “probably,” Occultists point to another and a greater
      probability—viz., the one given in our text.

  713 Robert Brown, _The Countries of the World_, vol. iv. p. 43.

  714 See Stanza II. This would account for the variation and great
      difference between the intellectual capacities of races, nations,
      and individual men. While incarnating into, and in other cases only
      informing, the human vehicles evolved by the first brainless
      (“manas‐less”) Race, the incarnating Powers and Principles had to
      take into account, and make their choice between, the past Karmas of
      the Monads, between which and their bodies they had to become the
      connecting link. Moreover, as correctly stated in _Esoteric
      Buddhism_ (p. 30), “the fifth principle, or human (intellectual)
      soul, in the majority of mankind is not even yet fully developed.”

  715 It is said by the incarnate Logos, Krishna, in the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_,
      “The seven great Rishis, the four preceding Manus, partaking of my
      nature, were born from my mind: from them sprang [emanated or were
      born] the human race and the world” (x. 6).

      Here, by the seven Great Rishis, the seven great Rûpa Hierarchies or
      Classes of Dhyân Chohans, are meant. Let us bear in mind that the
      seven Rishis, Saptarshi, are the Regents of the seven stars of the
      Great Bear, and therefore, of the same nature as the Angels of the
      Planets, or the seven Great Planetary Spirits. They were all reborn
      as men on Earth in various Kalpas and Races. Moreover, “the four
      preceding Manus” are the four Classes of the originally Arûpa
      Gods—the Kumâras, the Rudras, the Asuras, etc.; who are also said
      _to have incarnated_. They are not Prajâpatis, as are the first, but
      their informing “principles”—some of which have incarnated in men,
      while others have made other men simply the vehicles of their
      “reflections.” As Krishna truly says—the same words being repeated
      later by another _vehicle_ of the Logos—“I am the the same to all
      beings ... those who worship me [the sixth principle or the _divine_
      Intellectual Soul, Buddhi, made conscious by its union with the
      higher faculties of Manas] _are in me, and I am in them_.” (_Ibid._,
      x. 29.) The Logos, being no “personality” but the Universal
      Principle, is represented by all the divine Powers, _born of its
      Mind_—the pure Flames, or, as they are called in Occultism, the
      “Intellectual Breaths”—those Angels who are said to _have made
      themselves independent_, _i.e._, passed from the passive and
      quiescent, into the active state of Self‐Consciousness. When this is
      recognized, the true meaning of Krishna becomes comprehensible. But
      see Mr. Subba Row’s excellent Lecture on the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_
      (_Theosophist_, April, 1887, p. 444).

  716 _Op. cit._, p. 152.

  717 It was the northern parts of the Toyâmbudhi, or sea of fresh water,
      in Shveta‐dvîpa, which the seven Kumâras—Sanaka, Sananda, Sanâtana,
      Sanatkumâra, Jâta, Vodhu, and Panchashikha—visited agreeably with
      exoteric tradition. (See the Uttara Khanda of the _Padma Purâna,
      Asiatick Researches_, vol. xi. pp. 99, 100.)

  718 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., ii. 109.

  719 See _Bibliotheca Indica_, Trans. of the _Golâdhyâya of the
      Siddhânta‐shiromani_, iii. 21‐44.

  720 _Ibid._, pp. 106, 107.

  721 P. 321.

  722 Wilson, _ibid._, p. 137.

  723 In a lecture, Professor Pengelly, F.R.S., quotes Professor Oliver to
      the effect “that the present Atlantic islands’ flora affords no
      substantial evidence of a former direct communication with the
      mainland of the New World,” but adds himself that, at the same time,
      “at some period of the Tertiary epoch, N.‐E. Asia was united to
      N.‐W. America, perhaps by the line where the Aleutian chain of
      islands now extends.” Thus Occult Science alone can reconcile the
      contradictions and hesitations of Modern Science. But again, surely
      the argument for the existence of Atlantis does not rest on Botany
      alone.

  724 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson, v. 381, 382.

  725 As shown in the “Preliminary Notes” to this Volume, it stands to
      reason that neither the name of Lemuria nor even of Atlantis are the
      real _archaic_ names of the lost Continents. They have been adopted
      by us simply for the sake of clearness. Atlantis was the name given
      to those portions of the submerged Fourth Race Continent which were
      “beyond the Pillars of Hercules,” and which happened to keep above
      water after the general Cataclysm. The last remnant of these—Plato’s
      Atlantis, or “Poseidonis,” which is another _substitute_, or rather
      a translation of the real name—was the last of the Continent above
      water some 11,000 years ago. Most of the correct names of the
      countries and islands of both Continents are given in the _Purânas_;
      but to mention them specially, as found in other more ancient works,
      such as the _Sûrya Siddhânta_, would necessitate too lengthy
      explanations. If, in earlier writings, the two seem to have been too
      faintly distinguished, this must be due to careless reading and want
      of reflection. If ages hence, Europeans are referred to as Âryans,
      and a reader confuses them with the Hindûs and the latter with the
      Fourth Race, because some of them lived in ancient Lankâ—the blame
      will not fall on the writer.

  726 See Part III, Section VI, of this Volume.

  727 See Professor J. D. Dana’s article, _American Journal of Science_,
      III. v. 442, 443; Winchell’s _World‐Life_, p. 352.

  728 Speaking on periodical elevation and subsidence of the equatorial
      and polar regions, and ensuing changes of climate, Dr. Winchell,
      Professor of Geology in the University of Michigan, says: “As the
      movements here contemplated are cyclical, the same conditions would
      recur again and again; and accordingly the same fauna might return
      again and again to the same region, with intervals of occupation by
      another fauna. Progressive sedimentation would preserve the records
      of such faunal alterations; and there would be presented the
      phenomena of ‘colonies,’ ‘reäpparitions,’ and other faunal
      dislocations in the vertical and horizontal distributions of fossil
      remains. These phenomena are well known to the student of geology.”
      (_Op. cit._, p. 281.)

  729 See _American Naturalist_, xviii. 15‐26.

  730 _Five Years of Theosophy_, pp. 339, 340.

  731 _Pedigree of Man_, Aveling’s Trans., pp. 80, 81.

  732 _Ibid._, p. 82.

  733 _Op. cit._, p. 81.

  734 _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 65.

  735 “Half‐grown babes” in comparison with their giant brethren on other
      Zones. So would we now, should a like calamity overtake us.

  736 This relates to Lemuria.

  737 There are other cycles, of course, _cycles within cycles_—and it is
      just this which creates such a difficulty in the calculations of
      racial events. The circuit of the ecliptic is completed in 25,868
      years, and, with regard to our Earth, it is calculated that the
      equinoctial point falls back 50.1" annually. But there is another
      cycle within this one. It is said that: “As the apsis goes forward
      to meet it at the rate of 11.24”, annually, this would complete a
      revolution in one hundred and fifteen thousand three hundred and two
      years (115,302). The approximation of the equinox and the apsis is
      the sum of these motions, 61.34", and hence the equinox returns to
      the same position in relation to the apsis in 21,128 years. (See the
      article on “Astronomy” in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_.) We
      mentioned this cycle in _Isis Unveiled_ (vol. i), in relation to
      other cycles. Each has a marked influence on its contemporary race.

  738 The Atlanteans.

  739 Twenty‐seven feet.

  740 The Lemurians.

  741 Race.

  742 Compare the following Section, entitled “Cyclopean Ruins and
      Colossal Stones as Witnesses to Giants.”

  743 See Denon’s _Voyage en Egypte_, vol. ii.

  744 See _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 65.

  745 _Cf._ the chart adapted from the _Challenger_ and _Dolphin_
      soundings in Donnelly’s _Atlantis: the Antediluvian World_, p. 47.

  746 _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 58.

  747 _History of English Literature_, p. 23.

  748 Quoted in _Atlantis_, p. 132.

  749 _Numbers_, xiii. 33.

  750 _Deut._, iii. 11.

  751 Robert Brown, _The Countries of the World_, p. 43.

  752 Mentioned on pp. 44, _et seqq._

  753 _Ibid._, pp. 43, 44, _et seqq._, and pp. 310, 311.

  754 De la Vega, IX. ix, quoted in De Mirville’s _Pneumatologie_, iii.
      55.

  755 The first and second, in common with Bartholdi’s statue, have an
      entrance at the foot, leading by a winding staircase cut in the rock
      up into the heads. The eminent French Archæologist and
      Anthropologist, the Marquis de Nadeylac, in his work, justly remarks
      that there never was in ancient or in modern times a sculptured
      human figure more colossal than the first of the two.

  756 _Essays_, xxvi.

  757 _I Corinth._, x. 4.

  758 _Pneumatologie_, iii. p. 283.

  759 Saturn is Chronos—“Time.” His swallowing Jupiter‐lapis may turn out
      one day a prophecy. “Peter (_cephas_, _lapis_), is the _stone_ on
      which the Church of Rome is built”—we are assured. But Cronus
      (Chronos) is as sure to “swallow” _it_ one day, as he has swallowed
      Jupiter‐lapis and still greater characters.

  760 _Ibid._, p. 284.

  761 M. Falconnet, _op. cit._, t. vi, _Mém._, p. 513; quoted by De
      Mirville, _op. cit._, _ibid._, p. 285.

  762 The same, of course, as the “small voice” heard by Elijah after the
      earthquake at the mouth of the cave. (_I Kings_, xix. 12.)

  763 The rocking, or “logan,” stones bear various names; such as the
      _clacha‐brath_ of the Celt, the “destiny or judgment‐stone”; the
      divining‐stone, or “stone of the ordeal,” and the oracle‐stone; the
      moving or animated stone of the Phœnicians; the rumbling stone of
      the Irish. Brittany has its “_pierres branlantes_” at Huelgoat. They
      are found in the Old and the New Worlds; in the British Islands,
      France, Spain, Italy, Russia, Germany, etc., as also in North
      America. (See Hodson’s _Letters from North America_, vol. ii. p.
      440.) Pliny speaks of several in Asia (_Hist. Nat._, i. 96); and
      Apollonius Rhodius expatiates on the rocking stones, and says that
      they are “stones placed on the apex of a tumulus, and so sensitive
      _as to be movable by the mind_” (Ackerman’s _Arth. Index_, p. 34),
      referring no doubt to the ancient priests who moved such stones by
      will‐power from a distance.

  764 See _Dictionnaire des Religions_, l’Abbé Bertrand, Arts., “Heræscus”
      and “Bétyles”; De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 287, who has “Heraiclus”;
      but see Bunsen’s _Egypt_, i. 95.

  765 See among others, _History of Paganism in Caledonia_, by Dr. Th. A.
      Wise, F.R.A.S., etc.

  766 _Sépulture des Tartares_, arch. vii. p. 2227.

  767 _Voyageurs Anciens et Modernes_, i. 230.

  768 _Op. cit._, _ibid._, p. 290. If Ham was a Titan or Giant then were
      Shem and Japhet also Titans. They are either all Arkite Titans, as
      Faber shows—or myths.

  769 Diodorus Siculus asserts that in the days of Isis, some men were
      still of a vast stature, and were denominated by the Hellenes
      Giants. “Οἱ δὲν Αἰγύπτῳ μυθογοῦσι κατὰ τὴν Ἰσιδὸς ἡλικίαν γεγονέναι
      τίνας πολυσωμάτους.”

  770 _Antiquités Celtiques_, p. 88.

  771 Cambry, _ibid._, 90.

  772 _Op. cit._, p. 473. “It is difficult,” writes Creuzer, “not to
      suspect in the structures of Tiryns and Mycenæ planetary forces
      supposed to be moved by celestial powers, analogous to the famous
      Dactyli.” (_Pelasges et Cyclopes._) To this day Science is in
      ignorance on the subject of the Cyclopes. They are supposed to have
      built all the so‐called “Cyclopean” works whose erection would have
      necessitated several regiments of Giants, and yet they were only
      seventy‐seven in all, or about one hundred, as Creuzer thinks. They
      are called Builders, and Occultism calls them the _Initiators_, who
      by initiating some Pelasgians, thus laid the foundation stone of
      true _Masonry_. Herodotus associates the Cyclops with Perseus “the
      son of an Assyrian demon” (I. vi.). Raoul Rochette found that
      Palæmonius, the Cyclops, to whom a sanctuary was raised, was the
      “Tyrian Hercules.” In any case, he was the Builder of the sacred
      columns of Gadir, covered with mysterious characters—of which
      Apollonius of Tyana was the only one in his age who possessed the
      key—and with figures which may still be found on the walls of
      Ellora, the gigantic ruins of the temple of Vishvakarman, “the
      builder and artificer of the Gods.”

  773 _Hist. Nat._, t. xxxvi. p. 592; De Mirville, _op. cit._, _ibid._, p.
      289.

  774 _Dieu et les Dieux_, p. 567.

  775 De Mirville, _op. cit._, _ibid._, p. 291. Messrs. Richardson and
      Barth are said to have been amazed at finding in the Desert of
      Sahara the same trilithic and raised stones which they had seen in
      Asia, Circassia, Etruria, and in all the North of Europe. Mr.
      Rivett‐Carnac, B.C.S., of Allahabad, the distinguished Archæologist,
      shows the same amazement on finding the description, given by Sir J.
      Simpson, of the cuplike markings on stones and rocks in England,
      Scotland, and other Western countries; “offering an extraordinary
      resemblance” to “the marks on the trap boulders which encircle the
      barrows near Nagpur”—the City of Snakes. The eminent scholar saw in
      this “another and very extraordinary addition to the mass of
      evidence ... that a branch of the nomadic tribes, who swept at an
      early date over Europe, penetrated into India also.” We say Lemuria,
      Atlantis and her Giants, and the earliest races of the Fifth Root‐
      Race had all a hand in these betyli, lithoi, and “magic” stones in
      general. The cup‐marks noticed by Sir J. Simpson, and the “holes
      scooped out on the face” of rocks and monuments found by Mr. Rivett‐
      Carnac “of different sizes varying from six inches to an inch and a‐
      half in diameter, and in depth from one to one and a‐half inch ...
      generally arranged in perpendicular lines presenting many
      permutations in the number and size and arrangement of the cups”—are
      simply _written records_ of the oldest races. Whosoever examines
      with attention the drawings made of such marks in _Archæological
      Notes on Ancient Sculpturing on Rocks in Kumaon, India, etc._, will
      find therein the most primitive style of marking or recording.
      Something of the sort was adopted by the American inventors of the
      Morse code of telegraphic writing, which reminds us of the Ogham
      writing, a combination of long and short strokes, as Mr. Rivett‐
      Carnac describes it, “cut on sandstone.” Sweden, Norway, and
      Scandinavia are full of such _written_ records, for the Runic
      characters follow the cup‐marks and long and short strokes. In
      Johannes Magnus’ Infolio one may see the representation of the demi‐
      god, the giant Starchaterus (Starkad, the pupil of Hroszharsgrani,
      the Magician), holding under each arm a huge stone covered with
      Runic characters. This Starkad, according to Scandinavian legend,
      went to Ireland and performed marvellous deeds in the North and
      South, East and West. (See _Asgard and the Gods_, pp. 218‐221.)

  776 _Hist. Nat._, XXXVII. liv.

  777 _Ibid._, II. xxxviii.

  778 Charton, _Magasin Pittoresque_ (1853), p. 32. Quoted by De Mirville,
      _op. cit._, _ibid._, p. 293.

  779 T. A. Wise, _History of Paganism in Caledonia_, p. 36.

  780 _Op. cit._, _ibid._, p. 288.

  781 _Essays on Physiology_, p. 144.

  782 _Principles of Biology_, Appendix, p. 482.

  783 We shall treat of the Divine Instructors in Stanza XII.

  784 Men.

  785 Of the primitive Divine Stock.

  786 Race.

  787 Race.

  788 _The Great Pyramid._

  789 _Knowledge_, i. p. 243; quoted by Staniland Wake, _op. cit._, pp.
      81, 82.

  790 _Nineteenth Century_, 1882, p. 236; quoted by Staniland Wake,
      _ibid._, p. 82.

  791 _Op. cit._, XI. xvii.

  792 As shown by H. Lizeray in his _Trinité Chrétienne Devoilée_, the
      Dragon, being placed between the immutable Father (the Pole, a fixed
      point) and mutable Matter, transmits to the latter the influences he
      receives from the former, whence his name—the Verbum.

  793 Symbolized by the Egyptians under the form of a serpent with a
      hawk’s head.

  794 _Revue Archéologique_, 1885.

  795 Mackey’s _Sphinxiad: or, The Mythological Astronomy of the Ancients
      Demonstrated by Restoring to their Fables and Symbols their Original
      Meanings_, p. 42.

  796 _Ibid._, p. 47.

  797 Also translated as “Blissful Immortals” by Dr. W. Geiger; but the
      first is more correct.

  798 These “seven” became the eight, the Ogdoad, of the later
      _materialized_ religions, the seventh, or the highest “principle,”
      being no longer the pervading Spirit, the Synthesis, but becoming an
      anthropomorphic number, or additional unit.

  799 These elements are: the cosmic, the terrene, the mineral, the
      vegetable, the animal, the aqueous, and finally the human—in their
      physical, spiritual, and psychic aspects.

  800 P. 53.

  801 _Thalia_, lxxvii.

  802 Who adds that “the Egyptians had various ways of representing the
      angle of the poles. In Perry’s _View of the Levant_ there is a
      figure representing the _south pole_ of the Earth in the
      constellation of the _Harp_, in which the poles appear like two
      _straight rods_ surmounted with hawks’ wings, to distinguish the
      north from the south. But the symbols of the poles ... are,
      sometimes, in the form of serpents, with the heads of hawks to
      distinguish the north from the south end.” (_Op. cit._, p. 41.)

  803 Faber and Bishop Cumberland would make these all the later pagan
      personifications of “the Noëtic Ark, and ... no other than the
      patriarch [Noah] and his family”(!), as the former writer puts it in
      his _Cabiri_ (i. 136); because, we are told, that most probably
      after the Deluge in commemoration of the event, the pious Noachidæ
      established a religious festival, which was, later on, corrupted by
      their _impious_ descendants, who made of “Noah and his family”
      demons or hero‐gods; “and at length unblushing obscenity usurped the
      name and garb of religion” (_ibid._, i. p. 10). Now this is indeed
      putting an extinguisher upon the human reasoning powers, not only of
      antiquity, but even of our present generations. Reverse the
      statement, and after the words “Noah and his family” explain that
      what was meant is simply the Jewish version of a Samothracian
      mystery, of Saturn, or Cronus‐Cydyk and his Sons, and then we may
      say _Amen_.

  804 Who were later on, with the Greeks, limited to Castor and Pollux
      only. But in the days of Lemuria, the Dioscuri, the “Egg‐born,” were
      the Seven Dhyân Chohans (Agnishvâtta‐Kumâra) who incarnated in the
      Seven Elect of the Third Race.

  805 _Op. cit._, i. 133.

  806 Clement of Alexandria recognized the astronomical significance of
      Chapters xxv _et seqq._ of _Exodus_. He says that, according to the
      Mosaic doctrine, the seven Planets help in the generation of
      terrestrial things. The two Cherubs standing on the two sides of the
      sacred Tetragrammaton represent Ursa Major and Ursa Minor.

  807 Vyse, _Operations_, etc., ii. 258.

  808 Palgrave, ii. 264.

  809 Vyse, _ibid._, ii. 342.

  810 P. 57.

  811 The speculation of Mackey, the self‐made adept of Norwich, in his
      _Mythological Astronomy_, is a curious idea—yet one perhaps not so
      very far from the truth. He says that the Kabiri named Axieros and
      Axiokersa (_a_) derived their names from _kab_ or _cab_, a
      “measure,” and from _urim_, the “heavens”—the Kabirim being thus “a
      measure of the heavens”; and (_b_) that their distinctive names,
      implying the _principle of generation_, referred to the sexes. For
      “the word _sex_ was formerly understood by _ax_; which ... has, in
      our time, settled into sex. [And he refers to _Encyclopædia
      Londiniensis_, at the word ‘aspiration.’] Now if we give the
      aspirated sound to Axieros, it would become _Sax_ or _Sexieros_; and
      the other pole would be _Sexiokersa_. The two poles would thus
      become the generators of the other powers of nature—they would be
      the _Parents_ of the other powers; therefore, the most powerful
      Gods.” (_Op. cit._, p. 39.)

  812 ii. 51.

  813 i. 9‐17.

  814 Decharme, _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_, p. 270.

  815 The word _guebra_ comes from Kabiri (_Gabiri_), and means the
      Persian ancient fire‐worshippers, or Parsîs. Kabiri became Gabiri
      and then remained as an appellation of the Zoroastrians in Persia.
      (See Hyde’s _De Religione Persarum_, c. 29.)

  816 I. ix. 751.

  817 See Macrob., _Sat._, I. iii. c. 4, p. 376.

  818 Pausan., ix. 22; 5.

  819 Herodotus, iii. 37.

  820 Quoted in Gould’s _Mythical Monsters_, p. 399.

  821 Appendix, p. 13; quoted by Faber, _Cabiri_, ii. pp. 289‐291.

  822 The Amshaspands are six—if Ormazd, their chief and Logos, is
      excluded. But in the Secret Doctrine he is the seventh and highest,
      just as Phtah is the seventh Kabir among the Kabiri.

  823 In the _Purânas_ it is identified with Vishnu’s or Brahma’s Shveta‐
      dvîpa of Mount Meru.

  824 Ed. Fleisher, p. 16.

  825 MS., 47 in Nic. Cat.

  826 MS., 785, Uri’s Cat.; quoted by Col. Vyse, _Operations at the
      Pyramids of Gizeh_, ii. 364; see Staniland Wake, _The Great
      Pyramid_, p. 94.

  827 De Mirville, _Pneumatologie_, iii. 29.

  828 Staniland Wake, _ibid._, p. 96.

  829 _Ibid._, p. 97.

  830 _Égypte_, iv. 441; De Mirville, _op. cit._, iii. 41.

  831 _Annales de Philosophie Chrétienne_, xxxii. 442; see De Mirville,
      _Pneumatologie_, iii. 18.

  832 _Histoire de l’Astronomie Ancienne_; see De Mirville, _op. cit._,
      _ibid._, p. 15.

  833 De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 41.

  834 _Ibid._, pp. 16, 17.

  835 In the _Vishnu Purâna_, with careful reading, may be found many
      corroborations of the same (Book II, chaps, iii, iv, _et seqq._).
      The reigns of Gods, lower Gods, and Men are all enumerated in the
      descriptions of the seven islands, seven seas, seven mountains,
      etc., ruled by Kings. Each King is invariably said to have _seven_
      sons, an allusion to the seven sub‐races. One instance will do. The
      King of Kushā‐Dvîpa had seven sons ... “after whom the seven
      portions or Varsha of the island were called.... _There reside
      mankind, along with Daityas and Dânavas, as well as with spirits of
      heaven_ [_Gandharvas_, _Yakshas_, _Kimpurushas_, etc.] _and Gods._”
      (Wilson’s Trans., ii. 195.) There is but one exception in the case
      of King Priyavrata, the son of the first Manu, Svâyambhuva—who had
      _ten_ sons. But of these, three—Medha, Agnibâhu, and Putra (_ibid._,
      ii. 101)—became ascetics, and refused their portions. Thus
      Priyavrata divided the Earth again into _seven_ continents.

  836 _Égypte_, pp. 450‐455: De Mirville, _ibid._, pp. 41, 42.

  837 As a general rule, _now_ that the very nature of the _inner_ man has
      become as blind as his physical nature, man on this Globe is as the
      Amphioxus is in the ocean. Seen by millions of various other fishes
      and creatures that surround it, the Amphioxus species—having neither
      brain nor any of the senses possessed by the other classes—sees them
      not. Who knows whether, on the Darwinian theory, these Branchiostoma
      are not the direct ancestors of our Materialists?

  838 The Occultists have been accused of worshipping Gods or Devils! We
      deny this. Among the numberless hosts of Spirits—entities that have
      been or that will be men—there are some immeasurably superior to the
      human race, higher and holier than the highest saint on Earth, and
      wiser than any mortal without exception. And there are those again
      who are no better than we are, and some also who are far worse and
      inferior to the lowest savage. It is these last that command the
      readiest communication with our Earth, who perceive and sense us, as
      the clairvoyants perceive and sense them. The close proximity of our
      respective abodes and planes of perception are, unfortunately, in
      favour of such inter‐communication, as they are ever ready to
      interfere with our affairs for weal or woe. If we are asked how it
      is that none but sensitive hysterical natures, neuro‐ and psycho‐
      pathic persons, see—and occasionally talk with—“spirits,” we answer
      the question by several other queries. We ask: Do you know the
      nature of hallucination, and can you define its psychic process? How
      can you tell that all such visions are due merely to physical
      hallucinations? What makes you feel so sure that mental and nervous
      diseases, while drawing a veil over our _normal_ senses (so‐called),
      _do not_ reveal at the same time vistas unknown to the healthy man,
      by throwing open doors usually closed against your scientific (?)
      perceptions; or that a psycho‐spiritual faculty _does not_ forthwith
      replace the loss, or the temporary atrophy, of a purely physical
      sense? It is disease or the exuberance of nervous fluid which
      produces mediumship and visions—hallucinations, as you call them.
      But what _does_ Science know even of mediumship? Truly were the
      modern Charcots to pay attention to the delirium of their patients
      from a more psychic standpoint, Science—Physiology especially—might
      be more benefited than it is now, and truth have a wider field of
      fact in its knowledge.

  839 i. 70; De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 26.

  840 These were the early Âryans and the bulk of the Fourth Root‐Race—the
      former pious and meditative (given to yoga‐contemplation), the
      latter a fighting race of sorcerers, who were rapidly degenerating
      owing to their uncontrolled passions.

  841 The Northern and Southern Divisions of Lemuria‐Atlantis. The
      Hyperborean and the Equatorial lands of the two Continents.

  842 De Rougemont, _Peuple Primitif_, iii. 157; De Mirville, _ibid._, p.
      29. This is Occult and refers to the property of iron which is
      attracted by some magnetic elements, and repelled by others. Such
      elements, by an Occult process, can be made as impervious to it as
      water to a blow.

  843 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

  844 The First Continent, or Island, if so preferred, “the cap of the
      North Pole,” has never perished; nor will it to the end of the Seven
      Races.

  845 See De Rougemont, _ibid._

  846 Boulanger, _Règne des Dieux_, Introd.; see De Mirville, _op. cit._,
      _ibid._, pp. 32, 33.

  847 The Secret Doctrine explains and expounds what Plato says, for it
      teaches that those “Inventors” were Gods and Demi‐gods (Devas and
      Rishis) who had become—some deliberately, some compelled by
      Karma—incarnated in man.

  848 The preceding paragraphs are condensed from Plato, _Legg._, l.
      iv—_id., in Crit., et in Politic._; De Mirville, _ibid._, pp. 33,
      34.

  849 Argyle, _Unity of Nature_.

  850 _Book of the Dead_, xcix. 33; and clvi. 4. The reader is referred to
      Stanza VII, Shloka 1 (i. 240), wherein this verse is explained in
      another of its meanings, and also to the _Book of the Dead_, cix. 4
      and 5. This is a direct reference to the Esoteric division of man’s
      “principles” symbolized by the divine wheat. The legend which
      inscribes the third Register of the papyrus (_Book of the Dead_,
      cx.) states: “This is the region of the Manes [disembodied men]
      _seven_ cubits high—[to wit, those just translated and supposed to
      be still sevenfold with all their ‘principles,’ even the body being
      represented _astrally_ in the Kâma Loka or Hades, before their
      separation]; and there is wheat _three_ cubits high for Mummies in a
      _state of perfection_ [_i.e._, those already separated, whose
      _three_ higher principles are in Devachan] who are permitted to
      glean it.” This region (Devachan) is called “the land of the Re‐
      birth of Gods,” and is shown to be inhabited by Shoo, Tefnoot, and
      Seb. The “region for the Manes _seven_ cubits high”—for the yet
      imperfect Mummies—and the region for those “in a state of
      perfection” who “glean wheat _three_ cubits high,” is as clear as
      possible. The Egyptians had the same Esoteric Philosophy which is
      now taught by the Cis‐Himâlayan Adepts, and the latter, when,
      buried, have corn and wheat placed over them.

  851 I. xiv. There are Egyptologists who have quite erroneously tried to
      identify Osiris with Menes. Bunsen assigns to Menes an antiquity of
      5,867 years B.C., and is denounced for it by Christians. But “Isis‐
      Osiris” reigned in Egypt before the Zodiac was painted on the
      ceiling of the temple of Dendera, and that is over 75,000 years ago!

  852 In the text, “corked up” or “screwed up.”

  853 _Zohar_, part i, col. 177; De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 88.

  854 _Genesis_, vi. 4.

  855 _Prælectiones Theol._, ch. ii; De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 84.

  856 _Réflexions Critiques sur l’Origine des Anciens Peuples._

  857 Rabbi Parcha.

  858 i. 6.

  859 _Book of Ruth and Schadash_, fol. 63, col. 3, Amsterdam edition.

  860 _Zohar_, part ii, col. 73; De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 86.

  861 _Ibid._, p. 87.

  862 _More Nevochim_, xxvi. 8.

  863 _Sagra Scrittura._

  864 ii. pp. 14, 29.

  865 Chap. viii; Laurence’s Translation, pp. 7 and 8.

  866 _Job_, i. 6.

  867 The Chaldæan _Book of Numbers_.

  868 _Archæology_, xxv. 220, London.

  869 _Die Phoinizier_, 70.

  870 See Sanchuniathon in Eusebius, _Pr. Ev._, 36; _Genesis_, xvi.

  871 _Society of Antiquaries of London_, xxv. 220.

  872 _Cartas_, 51; see _Isis Unveiled_, i. 553, _et seqq._

  873 He is thus named and included in the list of the Dânavas in _Vâyu
      Purâna_; the Commentator of _Bhâgavata Purâna_ calls him a son of
      Danu, but the name means also “Spirit of Humanity.”

  874 Kashyapa is called the son of Brahmâ, and is the “Self‐born” to whom
      a great part of the work of creation is attributed. He is one of the
      seven Rishis; exoterically, the son of Marîchi, the son of Brahmâ;
      while the _Atharva Veda_ says, “The Self‐born Kashyapa sprang from
      Time,” and _Esoterically_ Time and Space are forms of the One
      _incognizable_ Deity. As an Âditya, Indra is son of Kashyapa, as
      also Vaivasvata Manu, our Progenitor. In the instance given in the
      text, he is Kashyapa‐Âditya, the Sun and the Sun‐god, from whom all
      the “Cosmic” Demons, Dragons (Nâgas), Serpent or Snake‐gods, and
      Dânavas or Giants, are born. The meaning of the allegories given
      above is purely astronomical and cosmical, but will serve to prove
      the identity of all.

  875 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., ii. 72.

  876 All such stories differ in the _exoteric_ texts. In the
      _Mahâbhârata_, Kârttikeya, “the six‐faced Mars,” is the son of Rudra
      or Shiva, Self‐born _without a mother_ from the seed of Shiva cast
      into the fire. But Kârttikeya is generally called Agnibhû, “Fire‐
      born.”

  877 Hiranyâksha is ruler or king of the _fifth_ region of Pâtâla, a
      Snake‐god.

  878 The Elohim also feared the Knowledge of Good and Evil for Adam, and
      therefore are shown as expelling him from Eden or killing him
      _spiritually_.

  879 The story told is, that Târaka (called also Kâlanâbha), owing to his
      extraordinary Yoga‐powers, had obtained all the divine knowledge of
      Yoga‐vidyâ and the Occult powers of the Gods, who conspired against
      him. Here we see the “obedient” Host of Archangels or minor Gods
      conspiring against the (future) Fallen Angels, whom Enoch accuses of
      the great crime of disclosing to the world all “the _secret things_
      done in heaven.” It is Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Suryal and Uriel
      who denounced to the Lord God those of their Brethren who were said
      _to have pried into the divine mysteries_ and taught them to men; by
      this means they themselves escaped a like punishment. Michael was
      commissioned to fight the Dragon, and so was Kârttikeya, and under
      the same circumstances. Both are “Leaders of the Celestial Host,”
      both Virgins, both “Leaders of Saints,” “Spear‐holders” (Shakti‐
      dharas), etc. Kârttikeya is the original of Michael and St. George,
      as surely as Indra is the prototype of Kârttikeya.

  880 The “life and the light” of the material _physical_ world, the
      delight of the senses—not of the soul. Apollo is preëminently the
      _human_ God, the God of emotional, pomp‐loving and theatrical Church
      ritualism, with lights and music.

  881 See _Revelation_ (xii) where we find Apollo’s mother persecuted by
      the Python, the Red Dragon, who is also Porphyrion, the scarlet or
      red Titan.

  882 _Book of God_, p. 88.

  883 No “God”—whether called Bel or Jehovah—who _curses_ his (supposed)
      own work, because he has made it imperfect, can be the One Infinite
      Absolute Wisdom.

  884 In the Indian allegory of Târakâmaya, the War between the Gods and
      the Asuras headed by Soma (the Moon, the King of Plants), it is
      Vishvakarmâ, the artificer of the Gods, who, like Vulcan (Tubal‐
      Cain), forges their weapons for them.

  885 _Chaldean Account of Genesis_, p. 304. We have said elsewhere that
      the “woman with child” of _Revelation_ was Aima, the Great Mother,
      or Binah, the third Sephira, “whose name is Jehovah”; and the
      “Dragon,” who seeks to devour her coming child (the Universe), is
      the Dragon of Absolute Wisdom—that Wisdom which, recognizing the
      non‐separateness of the Universe and everything in it from the
      Absolute ALL, sees in it no better than the great Illusion,
      Mahâmâyâ, hence the cause of misery and suffering.

  886 The “seven Karshvares of the Earth”—the seven Spheres of our
      Planetary Chain, the seven Worlds, also mentioned in the _Rig Veda_,
      are fully referred to elsewhere. There are six Râjamsi (Worlds)
      above Prithivî, the Earth, or “this” (Idâm), as opposed to that
      which is _yonder_ (the six Globes on the three other planes). (See
      _Rig Veda_, i. 34; iii. 56; vii. 10411, and v. 60, 6.)

  887 Darmesteter’s Trans., “Sacred Books of the East,” vol. iv. p. 207.

  888 _Ibid._, p. 217.

  889 _Ibid._, p. 208.

  890 _Book of the Dead_, xvii. 62; Anubis is Horus who melts “in him who
      is eyeless.”

  891 See Lenoir’s _Du Dragon de Metz_.

  892 See also _Egyptian Pantheon_, pp. 20, 23.

  893 _Book of the Dead_, xvii. 54 and 49.

  894 These “Evil Spirits” can by no means be identified with Satan or the
      Great Dragon. They are the Elementals generated or begotten by
      ignorance—cosmic and human passions—or Chaos.

  895 _Assyrian Discoveries_, p. 403.

  896 See _Numbers_, xxi. 8, 9. God orders Moses to build a brazen Serpent
      (Saraph), to _look upon_ which heals those bitten by the Fiery
      Serpents. The latter were the Seraphim, each one of which, as Isaiah
      shows (vi. 2), “had six wings”; they are the symbols of Jehovah, and
      of all the other Demiurgi who produce out of themselves six sons or
      likenesses—seven with their Creator. Thus, the Brazen Serpent _is_
      Jehovah, the chief of the “Fiery Serpents.” And yet, in _II Kings_
      (xviii. 4) it is shown that king Hezekiah, who, like as David his
      father, “did that which was right in the sight of the Lord”—“brake
      in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made ... and called it
      Nehushtan,” or piece of brass.

  897 “And Satan stood up against Israel and provoked David to number
      Israel” (_I Chronicles_, xxi. 1). “The anger of the Lord [Jehovah]
      was kindled against Israel, and he moved David ... to say, Go,
      number Israel” (_II Samuel_, xxiv. 1). The two are then identical.

  898 ii. 18, 22.

  899 Dozens of the most erudite writers have sifted thoroughly the
      various meanings of the name J’hovah (with, and without the
      Masoretic points), and shown their multifarious bearings. The best
      of such works is the _Source of Measures: the Hebrew Egyptian
      Mystery_, by J. Ralston Skinner, so often already referred to.

  900 In the above‐mentioned work (p. 233), verse 26 of chapter iv of
      _Genesis_ is correctly translated “then men began to call
      _themselves_ Jehovah,” but less correctly explained, perhaps, as the
      last word ought to be written Jah (male) Hovah (female), to show
      that from that time the race of distinctly separate man and woman
      began.

  901 See for explanation the excellent pages of Appendix vii of the same
      work.

  902 _Op. cit._, p. 293.

  903 _Rabba Battra_, 16a.

  904 In Demonology, Satan is the leader of the opposition in Hell, the
      monarch of which was Beelzebub. He belongs to the fifth kind or
      class of Demons (of which there are nine according to mediæval
      Demonology), and he is at the head of witches and sorcerers. But see
      elsewhere the true meaning of Baphomet, the goat‐headed Satan, one
      with Azazel, the scape‐goat of Israel. Nature is the God Pan.

  905 See _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 184.

  906 See _Codex Nazaræus_, iii. 73.

  907 He is also Vulcan or Vul‐cain, the greatest God with the later
      Egyptians, and the greatest Kabir. The God of Time was Chiun in
      Egypt, or Saturn, or Seth, and Chiun is the same as Cain. (_Source
      of Measures_, p. 278.)

  908 See Strabo, comparing them to the Cyclopes, xiv. p. 653 _sqq._
      Callim., _in Del._, 31. Stat., _Silv._, iv. 6, 47, etc.

  909 _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_, p. 271.

  910 Nothing could be more awkward and childish, we say, than this
      fruitless attempt to disconnect the genealogies of Cain and of Seth,
      or to conceal the identity of names under a different spelling.
      Thus, Cain has a Son Enoch, and Seth a Son Enoch (also Enos,
      Ch’anoch, Hanoch—one may do what one likes with unvowelled Hebrew
      names). In the Cainite line Enoch begets Irad, Irad Mehujael, the
      latter Methusael, and Methusael, Lamech. In the Sethite line, Enoch
      begets Cainan, and this one Mahalaleel (a variation on Mehujael),
      who gives birth to Jared (or Irad); Jared to Enoch (number 3), who
      produces Methuselah (from Methusael), and finally Lamech closes the
      list. (See _Genesis_, iv. v.) Now all these are symbols
      (kabalistically) of solar and lunar years, of astronomical periods
      and of physiological (phallic) functions, just as in any other Pagan
      symbolical creed. This has been proven by a number of writers.

  911 See _Analysis of Ancient Mythology_, ii. 760.

  912 vi. 9.

  913 See _New Encyclopædia_, by Abraham Rees, F.R.S.

  914 See _Hebrews_, v. 6; vii. 1, _et seqq._

  915 The Æolian name of Mars was Areus (Ἄρευς), and the Greek Ares (Ἄρης)
      is a name over the etymological significance of which, Philologists
      and Indianists, Greek and Sanskrit scholars, have vainly worked to
      this day. Very strangely, Max Müller connects both the names Mars
      and Ares with the Sanskrit root _mar_, whence he traces their
      derivation, and from which, he says, comes the name of the Maruts or
      Storm‐gods. Welcker, however, offers a more correct etymology. (See
      _Griech. Götterlehre_, i. 415.) However it may be, etymologies of
      roots and words alone will never yield the Esoteric meaning fully,
      though they may help to useful guesses.

  916 As the same author shows: “The very name Vulcain appears in the
      reading, for in the first words (_Gen._, iv. 5) is to be found
      V’elcain, or V’ulcain, agreeably to the deepened _u_ sound of the
      letter _vau_. Out of its immediate context, it may be read as, ‘_and
      the god Cain_,’ or Vulcain. If, however, anything is wanting to
      confirm the Cain‐Vulcain idea, Fuerst says: ‘קין _Cain, the iron
      point of a lance, a smith_ (blacksmith), inventor of sharp iron
      tools and smith work’ ” (p. 278).

  917 _Op. cit._, p. 186.

  918 _Append. de Cabiris ap. Orig. Gent._, pp. 364, 376; and the latter
      statement on p. 357. See Faber’s _Cabiri_, i. 8.

  919 Some derive the word from Paras which produced Pars, Pers, Persia;
      but it may be equally derived from Pitaras or Pitris, the Hindû
      progenitors of the Fifth Race—the Fathers of Wisdom or the Sons of
      “Will and Yoga”—who were called Pitaras, as were the divine Pitris
      of the First Race.

  920 See for these traditions the _Collection of Persian Legends_, in
      Russian, Georgian, Armenian, and Persian; Herbelot’s narrative
      _Légendes Persanes_, “Bibliothèque Orientale,” p. 298, 387, etc.,
      and Danville’s _Mémoires_. We give in a condensed narrative that
      which is scattered in hundreds of volumes in European and Asiatic
      languages, as well as in oral traditions.

  921 _Genesis_, iv. 16, _et seqq._

  922 The _main_ Continent perished in the Miocene times, as already
      stated.

  923 From Bede downwards all the chronologists of the Church have
      differed among themselves, and contradicted each other. “The
      chronology of the Hebrew text has been grossly altered, especially
      in the interval next after the Deluge”—says Whiston (_Old Test._, p.
      20).

  924 ii. 170, 171.

  925 Hence king Solomon, whose traces are nowhere to be found outside of
      the _Bible_. The description of his magnificent palace and city
      dovetail with those of the Persian tales, though they were unknown
      to all Pagan travellers, even to Herodotus.

  926 Herbelot, _op. cit._, p. 829.

  927 _Orient. Trad._, p. 454. See also Bailly’s _Lettres sur
      l’Atlantide_.

  928 See _Orient. Collect._, ii. 119.

  929 _Ibid._ Remember that the Rabbins teach that there are to be seven
      successive renewals of the Globe; that each will last 7,000 years,
      the total duration being thus 49,000 years. (See Rabbi Parcha’s
      _Wheel_; also Kenealy’s _Book of God_, p. 176.) This refers to seven
      Rounds, seven Root‐Races, and sub‐races, the truly Occult figures,
      though sorely confused.

  930 _Tales of Derbent._

  931 Mergain, or Morgana, the fairy sister of King Arthur, is thus shown
      of Oriental descent.

  932 Where we find her, indeed, in Great Britain, in the romance of the
      Knights of the Round Table. Whence the identity of name and fairy‐
      hood, if both heroines did not symbolize the same historical event
      which passed into a legend?

  933 Herbelot, p. 593; _Armenian Tales_, p. 35.

  934 To this day the aborigines of Caucasus speak of their mountains as
      Kap‐kaz, using the consonant _p_ instead of the usual _v_ (Kav‐kaz
      or Caucasus). But their bards say that it requires seven months for
      a swift horse to reach the “dry land” beyond Kaf, holding North
      without ever deviating from one’s way.

  935 Bailly thought he saw in this Horse a twelve‐oared ship. The Secret
      Doctrine teaches that the early Third Race built boats and flotillas
      before it built houses. But the “Horse,” though a much later animal,
      has, nevertheless, a more occult primitive meaning. The crocodile
      and the hippopotamus were considered sacred and represented divine
      symbols, both with the ancient Egyptians and with the Mexicans.
      Poseidon is, in Homer, the God of the Horse, and assumes that form
      himself to please Ceres. Arion, their progeny, is one of the aspects
      of that “Horse,” which is a Cycle.

  936 The severed parts must be Norway and other lands in the
      neighbourhood of the Arctic Circle.

  937 Cosmas Indicopleustes in _Collect. Novâ Patrum_, t. ii. p. 188; also
      see _Journ. des Savants_, Suppl. 1707, p. 20.

  938 The two Poles are called the “right” and “left ends” of our
      Globe—the Right being the North Pole—or the head and feet of the
      Earth. Every beneficent (astral and cosmic) action comes from the
      North; every lethal influence from the South Pole. They are much
      connected with and influence “right” and “left” hand magic.

  939 The more one approaches the Poles the less rotation is felt; at the
      Poles proper, the diurnal revolution is quite neutralized. Hence the
      expression that the Sphere is “motionless.”

  940 It is averred in Occultism that the land or island, which crowns the
      North Pole like a skull‐cap, is the only one which prevails during
      the whole Manvantara of our Round. All the central continents and
      lands will emerge from the sea bottom many times in turn, but this
      land will never change.

  941 Bear in mind that the Vedic and Avestaic name of Fohat is Apâm‐
      Napât. In the _Avesta_ he stands between the Fire‐yazatas and the
      Water‐yazatas. The literal meaning is “Son of the Waters,” but these
      “Waters” are not the liquid we know, but Æther—the Fiery Waters of
      Space. Fohat is the “Son of Æther” in its highest aspect, Âkâsha,
      the Mother‐Father of the primitive Seven, and of Sound or the Logos.
      Fohat is the Light of the Logos.

  942 This “Water” is the blood or fluid of Life which animates the Earth,
      compared here to a living body.

  943 Occult teaching corroborates the popular tradition which asserts the
      existence of a Fountain of Life in the bowels of the Earth and in
      the North Pole. It is the blood of the Earth, the electro‐magnetic
      current, which circulates through all the arteries, and which is
      said to be found stored in the “navel” of the Earth.

  944 Occultism points to the Himâlayan Chain as that “belt,” and
      maintains that whether under the water or above, it encircles the
      Globe. The “navel” is described as situated towards the setting Sun
      or to the West of the Himavat in which lie the roots of Meru, which
      mountain is North of the Himâlaya. Meru is _not_ “the fabulous
      mountain _in_ the navel or centre of the earth,” but its roots and
      foundations are in that “navel,” while it is in the far North
      itself. This connects it with the “Central” Land “that never
      perishes”; the land in which “the day of the mortal lasts six months
      and his night another six months.” As the _Vishnu Purâna_ has it:
      “For the North of Meru there is, therefore, always night during day
      in _other regions_; for Meru is North of all the Dvipas and Varshas”
      (islands and countries). (Book ii. chap. viii.) Meru is therefore
      neither on Atlas as Wilford suggests, nor, as Wilson tried to show,
      “absolutely in the centre of the globe,” only because “relatively
      with the inhabitants of the several portions, to all of whom the
      East is that quarter where the sun first appears.”

  945 Even the Commentaries do not refrain from Oriental metaphor. The
      Globe is likened to the body of a woman, “Mother‐Earth.” From her
      neck downward, means from the inland sea now beyond the impassable
      barrier of ice. The Earth, as Parâshara says, “is the mother and
      nurse, augmented with all creatures and their qualities, the
      _comprehender_ of all the worlds.”

  946 For the Stanzas call this locality by a term translated in the
      Commentary as _a place of no latitude_ (Niraksha), the Abode of the
      Gods. As a scholiast says in the _Sûrya Siddhânta_ (xii. 42‐44):

      “Above them goes the sun when situated at the equinoxes; they have
      neither equinoctial shadow nor elevation of the pole (_akshonnati_).

      “In both directions from Meru are two pole‐stars (_dhruvatârâ_),
      fixed in the midst of the sky, to those _who are situated in places
      of no latitude_ (_niraksha_), both these have their place in the
      horizon.

      “Hence there is, in those cities [in that land], no elevation of the
      poles, the two pole‐stars being situated in their horizon; but their
      degrees of co‐latitude (_lambaka_) are ninety: at Meru the degrees
      of latitude (_aksha_) are of the same number.” (See _Vishnu Purâna_,
      Wilson’s Trans., ii. 208.)

  947 Wilford makes many mistakes. He identifies, for instance, Shveta‐
      dvîpa, the White Island, the “island in the northern part of
      Toyambhudi,” with England, and then tries to identify it with Atala.
      (a nether region) and Atlantis. Now the Shveta‐dvîpa is the abode of
      Vishnu (exoterically), and Atala is a hell. He also places it in the
      Euxine or Ikshu (Black) Sea, and then seems to connect it, in
      another place, with Africa and Atlas.

  948 _Asiatick Researches_, viii. 280.

  949 _Op. cit._, _ibid._, p. 201.

  950 Every name in the _Purânas_ has to be examined at least under two
      aspects, geographically and metaphysically, in its allegorical
      application; _e.g._, Nîla, the (blue) mountain which is one of the
      boundaries to the north of Meru, is again to be sought
      geographically in a mountain range in Orissa, and yet again in a
      mountain quite different from the others, in Western Africa. Jambu‐
      dvîpa is Vishnu’s dominion—the World, limited in the _Purânas_ to
      our Globe, the region which contains Meru _only_, and again it is
      divided to contain Bharata‐varsha (India), its _best_ division, and
      the fairest, says Parâshara. Likewise with Pushkara and all others.

  951 _Ibid._, p. 202.

  952 _Sûrya Siddhânta_, Whitney’s Trans., v. 5.

  953 _Asiatick Researches_, iii. 300.

  954 Jambu, Plaksha, Shâlmali, Kusha, Krauncha, Shâka, and Pushkara.

  955 Such as Shâka and Pushkara, for instance, which do not yet exist,
      but into which will enter such lands as some portions of America, of
      Africa, and Central Asia, with the Gobi region. Let us bear in mind
      that Upadvîpas mean “root” islands, or the dry land in general.

  956 They were called Demons, Asuras, Giants, and monsters, because of
      their wickedness; and thus their country was likened to Atala—a
      Hell.

  957 Not on the river Nile, surely, but near the Nila mountains of the
      Atlas range.

  958 _Asiatick Researches_, iii. 225.

  959 See vols. viii, x, and xi, of _Asiatick Researches_.

  960 _Op. cit._, iii. 326.

  961 _Ibid._

  962 Says Wilford of the division of Atlantis and Bhârata or India,
      confusing the two accounts and Priyavrata with Medhâtithi: “This
      division was made by Priyavrata.... He had ten sons, and it was his
      intention to divide the whole world between them equally.... In the
      same manner Neptune divided the Atlantis between his ten sons: one
      of them had ... the extremity of the Atlantis”—which “is probably
      the old continent, at the extremity of which is Gades.... This
      Atlantis was overwhelmed with a flood; and it seems that _by the
      Atlantis, we should understand the antediluvian Earth_, over which
      ten princes were born to rule, according to the mythology of the
      West [and of the East, also] but _seven_ of them only sate upon the
      throne.” (_Op. cit._, viii. 286.) Some also are of opinion that of
      the seven Dvîpas _six_ were destroyed by a flood. Wilford takes it
      to be “Gades which included Spain,” but it was Plato’s
      island—rather.

  963 America, the “new” world, is thus, though not _much_, older—still it
      _is_ older—than Europe, the “old” world.

  964 If Div or Dev‐sefid’s (the Târadaitya’s) abode was on the _seventh
      stage_, it is because he came from Pushkara, the Pâtâla (antipodes)
      of India, or from America. The latter touched the walls, so to say,
      of Atlantis, before the latter finally sank. The word Pâtâla meaning
      both the antipodal countries and infernal regions, these became
      synonymous in ideas and attributes as well as in name.

  965 Neither Atlantis, nor yet Shankha‐dvîpa, was ever called “White
      Island.” When tradition says that “the White Island became black on
      account of the sins of the people,” it only means the denizens of
      the “White Island,” or Siddhapura, or Shveta‐dvîpa, who descended to
      the Atlantis of the Third and Fourth Races, to “inform the latter;
      and who, having incarnated, became black with sin” figure of speech.
      All the Avatâras of Vishnu are said to come originally from the
      White Island. According to Tibetan tradition the White Island is the
      only locality which escapes the general fate of other Dvipas; it can
      be destroyed by neither fire nor water, for—it is the “Eternal
      Land.”

  966 _Asiatick Researches_, xi. 27.

  967 _Genesis_, ix. 1.

  968 How wise and grand, how far‐seeing and morally beneficent are the
      laws of Manu on connubial life, when compared with the licence
      tacitly allowed to man in civilized countries. That those laws have
      been neglected for the last two millenniums does not prevent us from
      admiring their forethought. The Brâhman was a Grihasta, a family
      man, till a certain period of his life, when, after begetting a son,
      he broke with married life and became a chaste Yogi. His very
      connubial life was regulated by his Brâhman astrologer in accordance
      with his nature. Therefore, in such countries as the Punjâb, for
      instance, where the lethal influence of Mussulman, and later on of
      European, licentiousness, has hardly touched the orthodox Âryan
      castes, one still finds the finest men—so far as stature and
      physical strength go—on the whole Globe; whereas the mighty men of
      old have found themselves replaced in the Deccan, and especially in
      Bengal, by men whose generation becomes with every century—and
      almost with every year—dwarfed and weakened.

  969 Diseases and over‐population are facts that can never be denied.

  970 In Mrs. Anna Swanwick’s volume, _The Dramas of Æschylus_, it is said
      of “Prometheus Bound” (“Bohn’s Classical Library,” p. 334), that
      Prometheus truly appears in it “as the champion and benefactor of
      mankind, whose condition: ... is depicted as weak and miserable in
      the extreme.... Zeus, it is said, proposed to annihilate these puny
      ephemerals, and to plant upon the earth a new race in their stead.”
      We see the Lords of Being doing likewise, and exterminating the
      first product of Nature and the Sea, in the Stanzas. “Prometheus
      _represents_ himself as having frustrated this design, and as being
      consequently subjected, for the sake of mortals, to the most
      agonizing pain, inflicted by the remorseless cruelty of Zeus. We
      have, thus, the Titan, the symbol of finite reason and free will [of
      intellectual humanity, or the higher aspect of Manas], depicted _as
      the sublime philanthropist_, while Zeus, the Supreme Deity of
      Hellas, is portrayed as the cruel and obdurate despot, a character
      peculiarly revolting to Athenian sentiment.” The reason for it is
      explained further on. The “Supreme Deity” bears, in every ancient
      Pantheon—including that of the Jews—a _dual_ character, composed of
      light and shadow.

  971 The animal world, having simple instinct to guide it, has its
      _seasons of procreation_, and the sexes become neutralized during
      the rest of the year. Therefore, the free animal knows sickness but
      once in its life—before it dies.

  972 Introduction to “Prometheus Bound,” p. 340.

  973 From προ‐μῆτις, “forethought.” “Professor Kuhn,” we are told in the
      above‐named volumes, _The Dramas of Æschylus_, “considers the name
      of the Titan to be derived from the Sanskrit word Pramantha, the
      instrument used for kindling fire. The root _mand_ or _manth_,
      implies rotatory motion, and the word _manthâmi_, used to denote the
      process of fire kindling, acquired the secondary sense of snatching
      away; hence we find another word of the same stock, _pramatha_,
      signifying theft.” This is very ingenious, but perhaps not
      altogether correct; besides, there is a very prosaic element in it.
      No doubt in physical nature, the higher forms may develop from the
      lower ones, but it is hardly so in the world of thought. And as we
      are told that the word _manthâmi_ passed into the Greek language and
      became the word _manthanô_, to learn—that is to say, to appropriate
      knowledge, whence _prometheia_, fore‐knowledge, fore‐thought—we may
      find, in searching, a more poetical origin for the “fire‐bringer”
      than that displayed in its Sanskrit origin. The Svastica, the sacred
      sign and the instrument for kindling _sacred_ fire, may explain it
      better. “Prometheus, the fire‐bringer, is the Pramantha
      personified,” continues the author, “and finds his prototype in the
      Âryan Mâtarishvan, a divine ... personage, closely associated with
      Agni, the fire‐god of the Vedas.” Matih, in Sanskrit, is
      “understanding,” and a synonym of Mahat and Manas, and must be of
      some account in the origin of the name; Pramatih is the son of
      Fohat, and has his story also.

  974 Cronus is “Time,” and thus the allegory becomes very suggestive.

  975 It is complained by the author of the version and translator of
      “Prometheus Bound” that in this tracing of Io’s wanderings, “no
      consistency with our own known geography is attainable” (p. 379).
      There may be good reason for it. First of all it is the journey and
      wandering from place to place of the _Race_ from which the “tenth,”
      or Kalki Avatâra, so called, is to issue. This he calls the “kingly
      race born in _Argos_” (888). But Argos has no reference here to
      Argos in Greece. It comes from _arg_ or _arka_—the female generative
      power symbolized in the Moon—the navi‐formed Argha of the Mysteries,
      meaning the Queen of Heaven. Eustathius shows that, in the dialect
      of the Arg‐ians, Io signified the Moon; while Esotericism explains
      it as the divine Androgyne, or the mystic Ten (10); in Hebrew 10 is
      the perfect number, or Jehovah. Arghya in Sanskrit is the libation
      cup, the navi‐form or boat‐shaped vessel in which flowers and fruit
      are offered to the Deities. Arghyanâth is a title of the Mahâ
      Chohan, meaning the “Lord of Libations”; and Arghyavarsha, the “Land
      of Libations,” is the mystery name of that region which extends from
      Kailâsa mountain nearly to the Shamo Desert—from within which the
      Kalki Avatâra is expected. The Airyâna‐Varsedya of the Zoroastrians,
      as a locality, is identical with it. It is now said to have been
      situated between the Sea of Aral, Baltistan, and Little Tibet; but
      in olden times its area was far larger, as it was the birth‐place of
      _physical_ humanity, of which Io is the mother and symbol.

  976 _Op. cit._, p. 385, note.

  977 i. 569, 570.

  978 Alexander, who was better acquainted with Attock than with India—for
      he never entered India proper—could not have failed to hear the
      Indus, near its very sources, called Nîl and Nîlâ. The mistake—if
      mistake it is—is thus easily accounted for.

  979 That Io is identical, allegorically, with Isis and the Moon is shown
      by her being “cow‐horned.” The allegory undeniably reached Greece
      from India, where Vâch—the “melodious Cow” of the _Rig Veda_, “from
      whom mankind was produced” (_Bhâgavata Purâna_) is shown in the
      _Aitareya Brâhmana_ as pursued by her father Brahmâ, who was moved
      by an illicit passion, and changed her into a Deer. Hence Io,
      refusing to yield to Jupiter’s passion, becomes “horned.” The Cow
      was in every country the symbol of the passive generative power of
      nature, Isis, Vâch, Venus—the mother of the prolific God of Love,
      Cupid, but, at the same time, that of the Logos whose symbol, with
      the Egyptians and the Indians, became the Bull, as testified to by
      the Apis and the Hindû Bulls in the most ancient temples. In
      Esoteric Philosophy the Cow is the symbol of Creative Nature, and
      the Bull (her calf) the Spirit which vivifies her, or the “Holy
      Spirit,” as Dr. Kenealy shows. Hence the symbol of the horns. These
      were sacred also with the Jews, who placed on the altar horns of
      Shittim wood, by seizing which a criminal ensured his safety.

  980 _Tuscul. Quæst._, I. ii. 20.

  981 _Strom._, I. ii, _Oper._, i. 467, Ed. Potter’s.

  982 Herodotus and Pausanias supposed that the cause of the condemnation
      was that Æschylus, adopting the Theogony of the Egyptians, made
      Diana the daughter of Ceres, and not of Latona. (See Ælian, _Var.
      Hist._, I. v. xviii; i. 433, Edition Gronov.) But Æschylus _was_
      initiated.

  983 The Sabasia was a periodical festival with Mysteries enacted in
      honour of some Gods, a variant on the Mithraic Mysteries. The whole
      evolution of the Races was performed in these Mysteries.

  984 Mrs. A. Swanwick, _op. cit._

  985 See the foot‐note (p. 431) concerning the etymology of προ‐μῆτις or
      _forethought_. Prometheus confesses it in the drama when saying:

      O holy ether, swiftly‐wingèd gales....
      Behold what I, a god, from gods endure.

      And yet what say I? _Clearly I foreknow_
      All that must happen....
      ... The Destined it behoves,
      As best I may, to bear, for well I wot
      How incontestable the strength of Fate.... (105)

      “Fate” stands here for Karma, or Nemesis.

  986 Mankind is obviously divided into God‐informed men and lower human
      creatures. The intellectual difference between the Âryan and other
      civilized nations and such savages as the South Sea Islanders, is
      inexplicable on any other grounds. No amount of culture, no
      generations of training amid civilization, could raise such human
      specimens as the Bushmen, the Veddhas of Ceylon, and some African
      tribes, to the same intellectual level as the Âryans, the Semites,
      and the Turanians so‐called. The “Sacred Spark” is missing in them,
      and it is they who are the only _inferior_ races on the Globe, now
      happily—owing to the wise adjustment of Nature which ever works in
      that direction—fast dying out. Verily mankind is “of one blood,”
      _but not of the same essence_. We are the hot‐house, artificially
      quickened plants in Nature, having in us a spark, which in them is
      latent.

  987 The philosophical view of Indian metaphysics places the Root of Evil
      in the differentiation of the Homogeneous into the Heterogeneous, of
      the Unit into Plurality.

  988 _Sap._, i. 13.

  989 Gautama Buddha, named Shâkya Thüb‐pa, is the _twenty‐seventh_ of the
      last group, as most of these Buddhas belong to the Divine Dynasties
      which instructed mankind.

  990 Of these Buddhas, or the “Enlightened,” the far distant predecessors
      of Gautama, the Buddha, who represent, we are taught, once living?
      men, great Adepts and Saints, in whom the “Sons of Wisdom” had
      incarnated, and who were, therefore, so to speak, minor Avatâras of
      the Celestial Beings—eleven only belong to the Atlantean Race, and
      twenty‐four to the Fifth Race, from its beginnings. They are
      identical with the Tirthankaras of the Jainas.

  991 This may account for the similarity of the artificial mounds in the
      United States of America, and the tumuli in Norway. It is this
      identity that has led some American Archæologists to suggest that
      Norwegian mariners had _discovered_ America about one thousand years
      ago. (See Holmboe’s _Traces de Bouddhisme en Norvège_, p. 23.) There
      is no doubt that America is that “far distant land into which pious
      men and heavy storms had transferred the sacred doctrine,” as a
      Chinese writer suggested by his description to Neumann. But neither
      Professor Holmboe, of Stockholm, nor the American Archæologists,
      have guessed the right age of the mounds, or the tumuli. The fact
      that Norwegians may have re‐discovered the land that their long‐
      forgotten forefathers believed to have perished in the general
      submersion, does not conflict with the other fact that the Secret
      Doctrine of the land which was the cradle of physical man, and of
      the Fifth Race, had found its way into the so‐called New World ages
      and ages before the “Sacred Doctrine” of Buddhism.

  992 See _Physiological Selection_, by G. J. Romanes, F.R.S.

  993 _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 65.

  994 _Exodus_, xi.

  995 Wrote the late Brahmachârî Bawa, a Yogî of great renown and
      holiness: “Extensive works on ‘Ashtar Vidiâ’ and such other sciences
      were at different times compiled in the languages of the times from
      the Sanskrit originals. But they, together with the Sanskrit
      originals, were lost at the time of the partial deluge of our
      county.” (The _Theosophist_, June, 1880, “Some Things the Âryans
      Knew.”) For Agnyastra, see Wilson’s _Specimens of the Hindû
      Theatre_, i. 297.

  996 Some wonderful, artificially‐made beast, similar in some way to
      Frankenstein’s creation, which spoke and warned his master of every
      approaching danger. The master was a “Black Magician,” the
      mechanical animal was informed by a Djin, an Elemental, according to
      the accounts. The blood of a pure man alone could destroy him. See
      Part II, Section XXV, “Seven in Astronomy, Science, and Magic.”

  997 The four Karmic Gods, called the Four Mahârâjahs in the Stanzas.

  998 _Mythical Monsters_, p. 19.

  999 _Travels in Egypt_, vol. ii.

 1000 _The Mythological Astronomy of the Ancients Demonstrated_ (p. 3), by
      a strangely intuitional Symbologist and Astronomer, a kind of a
      self‐made Adept of Norwich, who lived in the first quartet of this
      century.

 1001 See Proctor, _Knowledge_, i. pp. 242, 400.

 1002 Rawlinson’s _Herodotus_, ii. 345.

 1003 _The Great Pyramid_, pp. 36, 37.

 1004 Staniland Wake, _op. cit._, pp. 6, 7.

 1005 _Ibid._

 1006 _The Mythological Astronomy of the Ancients Demonstrated_, pp. 4, 5.

 1007 The term “Atlantean” must not mislead the reader to regard these as
      one race only, or even a nation. It is as though one said
      “Asiatics.” Many, multityped, and various were the Atlanteans, who
      represented several “humanities,” and almost a countless number of
      races and nations, more varied indeed than would be the “Europeans,”
      were this name to be given indiscriminately to the five existing
      parts of the world, which, at the rate colonization is proceeding,
      will be the case, perhaps, in less than two or three hundred years.
      There were brown, red, yellow, white and black Atlanteans; giants
      and dwarfs, as some African tribes comparatively are, even now.

 1008 Says a teacher in _Esoteric Buddhism_ (p. 64): “In the Eocene age,
      even in its very first part, the great cycle of the Fourth Race men,
      the [Lemuro‐] Atlanteans, had already reached its highest point [of
      civilization], and the great Continent, the father of nearly all the
      present continents, showed the first symptoms of sinking.” And on
      page 70, it is shown that Atlantis as a whole perished during the
      Miocene period. To show how the continents, races, nations and
      cycles overlap each other, one has but to think of Lemuria, the last
      of whose lands perished about 700,000 years before the beginning of
      the Tertiary period (p. 65), and the last of “Atlantis” only 11,000
      years ago; thus both overlapping—one the Atlantean period, and the
      other the Âryan.

 1009 See _Traité de l’Astronomie Indienne et Orientale_, part iii.

 1010 Ceylon.

 1011 This is not so. The forefathers of the Âryan Brâhmans had their
      Zodiac and Zodiacal calculations from those born by Kriyâshakti
      power, the “Sons of Yoga”; the Egyptians from the Atlanteans of
      Ruta.

 1012 The former, therefore, may have registered time for seven or eight
      millions of years, but the Egyptians _could not_.

 1013 _Op. cit._, p. 6.

 1014 This question was amply challenged, and as amply discussed and
      answered. See _Five Years of Theosophy_, Art., “Mr. Sinnett’s
      _Esoteric Buddhism_,” pp. 325‐346.

 1015 _Ruins of Empires_, p. 360. Volney says that, as Aries was in its
      15th degree 1,447 B.C., it follows that the first degree of Libra
      could not have coincided with the Vernal Equinox more lately than
      15,194 years B.C., to which if you add 1,790 since Christ, when
      Volney wrote this, it appears that 16,984 years have elapsed since
      the (Greek or rather Hellenic) origin of the Zodiac.

 1016 The word “historical” is used, because, although historians have
      almost absurdly dwarfed the dates that separate certain events from
      our modern day, nevertheless, once that they are known and accepted,
      they belong to history. Thus, the Trojan War _is_ a historical
      event, which, though even less than 1,000 years B.C. are assigned to
      it, really took place more nearly 6,000 than 5,000 years B.C.

 1017 It is a historical fact that Sanchuniathon compiled the full record
      of the Phœnician religion from annals and state documents in the
      archives of the _older_ Phœnician cities, and wrote it in Phœnician
      characters in 1,250 B.C.

 1018 Prof. Virchow, in Appendix I, to Schliemann’s _Ilios_. Murray, 1880.

 1019 Gosse writes of the latter: “She is set down a thorough heretic, not
      at all to be believed, a manufacturer of unsound natural history, an
      inventor of false facts in science.” (_Romance of Natural History_,
      2nd Series, p. 227.)

 1020 Pp. 9, 10.

 1021 _Popular Science Monthly_, No. 60, April, 1877.

 1022 Dr. Cover writes: “That famous bird of Washington was a myth; either
      Audubon was mistaken, or else, as some do not hesitate to affirm, he
      _lied_ about it.”

 1023 _Ibid._, pp. 10, 11.

 1024 _Mythical Monsters_, p. 13, note.

 1025 So far back as July, 1888, at a time when the MS. of this work had
      not yet left my writing table, and _The Secret Doctrine_ was utterly
      unknown to the world, it was already being denounced as a product of
      my brain and no more. These are the flattering terms in which the
      _Evening Telegraph_ (of America) referred to this still unpublished
      work in its issue of June 30, 1888: “_Among the fascinating books
      for July reading_ is Mme. Blavatsky’s new book on Theosophy ... (!)
      _The Secret Doctrine_.... But because she can soar back into the
      Brahmin ignorance ... (!?) _is no proof that everything she says is
      true_.” And once the prejudiced verdict has been given on the
      mistaken notion that my book was out, and that the reviewer had read
      it—neither of which was or could be the case—now that it is really
      out, the critic will have to support his first statement, whether
      correct or otherwise, and will get out of it, probably by a more
      slashing criticism than ever.

 1026 _Science of Language_, p. 168.

 1027 _The Human Species_, p. 274.

 1028 See above, the diagram of the Genealogical Tree of the Fifth Race.

 1029 The Hegelian doctrine, which identifies Absolute Being or “Be‐ness”
      with “Non‐Being,” and represents the Universe as an Eternal
      Becoming, is identical with the Vedânta Philosophy.

 1030 _The Religions of India_, p. xiii.

 1031 Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 175.

 1032 See De Mirville, _Pneumatologie_, iii. pp. 218 _et seqq._

 1033 _Op. cit._, _ibid._

 1034 See _Genesis_ and the authorized chronology. In chapter viii, “Noah
      leaveth the ark”—2,348 B.C. In chapter x, “Nimrod the first
      monarch,” stands over 1,998 B.C.

 1035 _Annales de Philosophie Chrétienne_, June, 1860, p. 415.

 1036 April 30, 1860.

 1037 “I will mention to thee the writings ... respecting the belief and
      institutions of the Sabæans,” he says. “The most famous is the Book,
      _The Agriculture of the Nabatheans_, which has been translated by
      Ibn Wahohijah. This book is full of heathenish foolishness.... It
      speaks of preparations of Talismans, the drawing down of the powers
      of the Spirits, Magic, Demons, and Ghouls, which make their abode in
      the desert.” (Maimonides, quoted by Dr. D. Chwolsohn; _Die Ssabier
      und der Ssabismus_, ii. 458.) The Nabatheans of Mount Lebanon
      believed in the seven Archangels, as their forefathers had believed
      in the seven Great Stars, the abodes and bodies of these Archangels,
      which are believed in to this day by the Roman Catholics, as is
      shown elsewhere.

 1038 See _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 197.

 1039 i. 354.

 1040 Sayce; _cf._, p. 115, 2nd ed.

 1041 _Op. cit._, pp. 418, 419.

 1042 _Ibid._, p. 118.

 1043 Simply, the womb, the “Holy of Holies” with the Semites.

 1044 See the Valentinian Table in Epiphanius, _Adv. Hær._, I. xxxi. 2.

 1045 But it was not so in reality, as witness their prophets. It is the
      later Rabbis and the Talmudic scheme that killed out all
      spirituality from the body of their symbols; leaving only their
      Scriptures—a dead shell, from which the soul has departed.

 1046 See _II Samuel_, vi. 16‐22.

 1047 _Psalms_, xxiv. 3.

 1048 _II Kings_, xxiii. 7; see Dunlap, _Sôd; The Mysteries of Adoni_, p.
      41.

 1049 _Judges_, xxi. 21, 23 _et passim_.

 1050 _I Kings_, xviii. 26.

 1051 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 49.

 1052 _Ibid._, ii. 444.

 1053 The author of the _Qabbalah_ makes several attempts to prove
      conclusively the antiquity of the _Zohar_. Thus he shows that Moses
      de Leon could not be the author or the forger of the Zoharic works
      in the thirteenth century, as he is accused of being, since Ibn
      Gebirol gave out the same philosophical teaching 225 years before
      the day of Moses de Leon. No true Kabalist or scholar will ever deny
      the fact. It is certain that Ibn Gebirol based his doctrines upon
      the oldest Kabalistic sources, namely, the Chaldæan _Book of
      Numbers_, as well as some no longer extant Midrashim, the same, no
      doubt, as those used by Moses de Leon. But it is just the difference
      between the two ways of treating the same Esoteric subjects,
      which—while proving the enormous antiquity of the Esoteric
      System—points to a decided ring of Talmudistic and even Christian
      sectarianism in the compilation and glossaries of the Zoharic system
      by Rabbi Moses. Ibn Gebirol _never quoted_ from the Scriptures to
      enforce the teachings (Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 7). Whereas Moses de
      Leon has made of the _Zohar_ that which it has remained to this day,
      “a running commentary on the Five Books, or Pentateuch” (_ibid._),
      with a few later additions made by Christian hands. One follows the
      Archaic Esoteric Philosophy; the other, only that portion which was
      adapted to the _lost_ Books of Moses restored by Ezra. Thus, while
      the system, or the trunk on which the primitive original _Zohar_ was
      engrafted, is of an immense antiquity, many of the (later) Zoharic
      offshoots are strongly coloured by the peculiar views held by
      Christian Gnostics (Syrian and Chaldæan), the friends and co‐workers
      of Moses de Leon who, as shown by Munk, accepted their
      interpretations.

 1054 See Franck’s _Kabbala_, Preface.

 1055 i. 14.

 1056 See Schwartze, _op. cit._, _pagg._ 359, 361, _et seqq._

 1057 Sayce, _Hibbert Lectures_, 1887, p. 374.

 1058 Timæus, the Locrian, speaking of “Arka” [Arche], calls her “the
      principle of best things” (Ἀρχὰ τῶν ἁρίστων). The word _arcane_,
      “hidden,” or secret, is derived from this. “To no one is the
      _Arcane_ shown except to the ... Most High” (_Codex
      Nazaræus_)—alluding to Nature the female, and Spirit, the male
      Power. Æsculapius, as a Sun‐God was called _Archagetas_, “born from
      the Archa,” the divine Virgin‐Mother of the Heavens. (See Kenealy,
      _Book of God_, p. 10.)

 1059 Kenealy, _op. cit._, _ibid._

 1060 This is composed of ten dots arranged triangularly in four rows. It
      is the Tetragrammaton of the Western Kabalists.

 1061 From an MS.

 1062 See G. Maspéro, _Guide au Musée Boulaq_, 1884, p. 168, No. 1981.

 1063 _Ibid._, p. 169, No. 1998.

 1064 _Ibid._, p. 172, No. 2068.

 1065 The student must be aware that Jethro is not called the “father‐in‐
      law” of Moses because Moses was really married to one of his seven
      daughters. Moses was an Initiate, if he ever existed, and as such an
      Ascetic, a Nazar, and could never have been married. It is an
      allegory like everything else. Zipporah (the “shining”) is one of
      the personified Occult Sciences given by Reuel‐Jethro, the Midian
      priest Initiator, to Moses, his Egyptian pupil. The “well” by which
      Moses sat down in his flight from the Pharaoh symbolizes the “Well
      of Knowledge.”

 1066 i. pp. 106‐108 and elsewhere.

 1067 In Hebrew the phallic symbol Lingam and Yoni.

 1068 See Vol. I, Stanza IV, Shloka 3.

 1069 It is at that Step that one arrives on the plane of the level or
      floor and open entrance to the King’s Chamber, the Egyptian “Holy of
      Holies.”

 1070 The Candidate for Initiation always personified the God of the
      Temple he belonged to, as the High Priest personified the God at all
      times; just as the Pope now personates Peter and even Jesus Christ
      upon entering the inner sanctuary—the Christian “Holy of Holies.”

 1071 _Genesis_, i. 27.

 1072 Jehovah says to Moses: “the summation of my name is _sacr_, the
      carrier of the germ”—phallus. “It is ... the vehicle of enunciation,
      and truly enough, as the _sacr_, or carrier of the germ, its use
      passed down through ages to the _sacr‐factum_ of the Roman priest,
      and the _sacr‐fice_, and _sacr‐ment_ of the English speaking race.”
      (_Source of Measures_, p. 236.) Hence marriage is a _sacrament_ in
      the Greek and Roman Churches.

 1073 4to, London, 1684, vol. i. pp. 120, 121.

 1074 _Op. cit._, p. 67.

 1075 _Source of Measures_, 159.

 1076 _Op. cit._, p. 187.

 1077 _Op. cit._, p. 271.

 1078 From the same author. See also the Section on “The Symbolism of the
      Mystery Names Iao and Jehovah.”

 1079 In _Genesis_ (iv. 26), it is mis‐translated. “And he called his name
      Enos [man]: then began men to call upon the name of the Lord”—which
      has no sense in it, since Adam and the others must have done the
      same.

 1080 Strictly speaking, the Jews are an artificial Âryan race, born in
      India, and belonging to the Caucasian division. No one who is
      familiar with the Armenians and the Parsîs can fail to recognize in
      the three the same Âryan, Caucasian type. From the seven primitive
      types of the Fifth Race there now remain on Earth but three. As
      Prof. W. H. Flower aptly said in 1885: “I cannot resist the
      conclusion so often arrived at by various anthropologists—that the
      primitive man, whatever he may have been, has in the course of ages
      diverged into three extreme types, represented by the Caucasian of
      Europe, the Mongolian of Asia, and the Ethiopian of Africa, and that
      all existing individuals of the species can be ranged around these
      types.” (The President’s Address at the Anthropological Institute of
      Great Britain, etc.) Considering that our Race has reached its fifth
      sub‐race, how can it be otherwise?

 1081 Whenever such analogies between the Gentiles and the Jews, and later
      the Christians, have been pointed out, it has been the invariable
      custom of the latter to say that it was the work of the Devil who
      forced the Pagans to imitate the Jews for the purpose of throwing a
      slur on the religion of the _one, true living_ God. To this Faber
      says very justly: “Some have imagined that the Gentiles were servile
      copyists of the Israelites, and that each point of similitude was
      borrowed from the Mosaical Institutes. But this theory will by no
      means solve the problem. Both because we find the very same
      resemblance in the ceremonies of nations far distant from Palestine,
      as we do in the rites of those who are in its immediate vicinity,
      and because it seems incredible that all should have borrowed from
      one which was universally disliked and despised.” (_Pagan Idolatry_,
      i. 104.)

 1082 _Luke_, i. 28.

 1083 Their consecrated Pillars (unhewn stones) erected by Abraham and
      Jacob were _Lingams_.

 1084 _Op. cit._, p. 67.

 1085 See _Introduction to the Old Testament_, and also Bishop Colenso’s
      _Elohistic and Jehovistic Writers_.

 1086 King’s _Gnostics and their Remains_, p. 327, 2nd ed.

 1087 _Ibid._, p. 326.

 1088 Such a Pseudo‐Kabalist was the Marquis de Mirville in France, who
      studied the _Zohar_ and other old remnants of Jewish Wisdom under
      the “Chevalier” Drach, an ancient Rabbi Kabalist converted to the
      Romish Church, and with his help wrote half a dozen volumes full of
      slander and calumnies against every prominent Spiritualist and
      Kabalist. From 1848 up to 1860 he persecuted unrelentingly the old
      Count d’Ourches, one of the earliest Eastern Occultists in France, a
      man the scope of whose Occult knowledge will never be appreciated
      correctly by his survivors, because he screened his real beliefs and
      knowledge under the mask of Spiritism.

 1089 See _Hibbert Lectures_, 1887, pp. 101‐115.

 1090 _Exodus_, xxii. 28.

 1091 _Deut._, iv. 19.

 1092 _Jude_, 8, 9.

 1093 See _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 487, _et seqq._

 1094 Treat, _Kiddusheem_, 81. But see Myer’s _Qabbalah_, pp. 92, 94.

 1095 Marangone, in his _Delle Grandezze del Archangelo Sancti Mikaele_,
      exclaims: “O grandest Star, who followest the Sun who is Christ!...
      O living image of Divinity! O great thaumaturgist of the Old
      Testament! O invisible Vicar of Christ in his Church!...” The work
      is held in great honour in the Latin Church.

 1096 _Pneumatologie_, v. 516.

 1097 _Ibid._, p. 515.

 1098 _Ibid._, p. 514.

 1099 _Isaiah_, lxiii. 8, 9.

 1100 Metator and ἡγεμών.

 1101 _Pneumatologie_, p. 515. “La Face et le Représentant du Verbe.”

 1102 That which is called in the _Vendidâd_ Fravarshi, the immortal part
      of an individual; that which outlives man—the Higher Ego, say the
      Occultists, or the Divine Double.

 1103 Darmesteter’s Trans., p. 208.

 1104 _Orm. Ahr._, §§ 112, 113; quoted by Darmesteter, “Sacred Books of
      the East,” vol. iv. introd., p. lxxiv.

 1105 _De Idol._, ii. 373.

 1106 See De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 515.

 1107 _Ibid._ See also plates in King’s _Gnostics and their Remains_.

 1108 P. 518.

 1109 _The Book of Enoch the Prophet_, p. xlviii. Ed. 1883.

 1110 _Op. cit._, pp. xxxiv, xxxv.

 1111 Saith Uriel in the _Book of Enoch_ (xxvi. 3): “Those who have
      received mercy shall for ever bless God ... the _Everlasting
      King_”—who will reign over them.

 1112 _Vishnu Purâna_, III. ii; Wilson’s Trans., iii. 31.

 1113 _Matthew_, xxiv. 27.

 1114 _Luke_, x. 18.

 1115 The Protestant _Bible_ defines Behemoth _innocently_—“The _elephant_
      as some think”; see marginal note (_Job_, xl. 15) in the Authorized
      Version.

 1116 _Job_, xl. 19.

 1117 Astronomy, however, knows nothing of stars that have _disappeared_,
      unless it be simply from visibility; but never from existence since
      the science of Astronomy became known. Temporary stars are only
      _variable_ stars, and it is believed that even the _new_ stars of
      Kepler and Tycho Brahé may still be seen.

 1118 This refers to the “Kings of Edom.”

 1119 Another proof, if any were needed, that the ancient Initiates knew
      of more than _seven_ planets is to be found in the _Vishnu Purâna_
      (II. xii) where, describing the chariots attached to Dhruva (the
      Pole Star), Parâshara speaks of “the chariots of the _nine_
      planets,” which are attached by aërial cords.

 1120 Justin, _Cum Tryphone_, p. 284.

 1121 A division indicative of time.

 1122 Sanchuniathon calls Time the oldest Æon, Protogonos, the “First‐
      born.”

 1123 Philo Judæus, _Cain and his Birth_, p. xvii.

 1124 _Principles of Psychology_, 474.

 1125 It is suggestive of that spirit of paradoxical negation so
      conspicuous in our day, that while the evolution hypothesis has won
      its rights of citizenship in Science as taught by Darwin and Hæckel,
      yet both the Eternity of the Universe and the Preëxistence of a
      Universal Consciousness, are rejected by modern Psychologists.
      “Should the Idealist be right, the doctrine of evolution is a
      dream,” says Mr. Herbert Spencer.

 1126 _Zohar_, 9b.

 1127 Verse 6.

 1128 Mercure Trismegiste, _Pimandre_, chap. i, sec. 16: “Oh, ma pensée,
      que s’ensuit‐il? car je désire grandement ce propos. Pimandre diet,
      ceci est un mystère celé, jusques à ce jour d’hui. Car nature, soit
      mestant avec l’hôme, a produit le miracle très merveilleux, aîant
      celluy qui ie t’av diet, la nature de l’harmonie des sept du père,
      et de l’esprit. _Nature ne s’arresta pas là_, mais incontinent a
      produict _sept hômes, selon les natures des sept gouverneurs_ en
      puissance des deux sexes et esleuez.... La génération de ces _sept_
      s’est donnée en ceste manière....”

      And a gap is made in the translation, which can be filled partially
      by resorting to the Latin text of Apuleius. The commentator, the
      Bishop, says: “Nature produced in him [man] seven men” (seven
      principles).

 1129 xxviii. 2‐8.

 1130 _Ibid._

 1131 _Ibid._, 17.

 1132 _Ibid._, 13‐16.

 1133 _Ibid._, 18.

 1134 _Ibid._, 19.

 1135 xxxi. 16, 17. The only Pharaoh whom the _Bible_ shows going down
      into the Red Sea was the king who pursued the Israelites, and who
      remained unnamed, for very good reasons perhaps. The story was
      surely made up from the Atlantean legend.

 1136 xxviii. 13, 14.

 1137 xxxi. 3‐9.

 1138 _Vishnu Purâna._ I. xv.

 1139 This is pure allegory. The Waters are a symbol of Wisdom and of
      Occult Learning. Hermes represented the Sacred Science under the
      symbol of Fire; the Northern Initiates, under that of Water. The
      latter is the production of Nara, the “Spirit of God,” or rather
      Paramâtman, the “Supreme Soul,” says Kullûka Bhatta; Nârâyana,
      meaning “he who abides in the deep” or is plunged in the Waters of
      Wisdom—“water being the body of Nara” (_Vâyu Purâna_). Hence arises
      the statement that for 10,000 years they remained in austerity “in
      the vast ocean”; and are shown emerging from it. Ea, the God of
      Wisdom, is the “Sublime Fish,” and Dagon or Oannes is the Chaldæan
      Man‐Fish, who emerges from the Waters to teach Wisdom.

 1140 Chap. v; “Sacred Books of the East,” vol. viii. p. 257.

 1141 This is explained by the able translator of _Anugîtâ_ in a foot‐note
      (p. 258) in these words: “The sense appears to be this: The course
      of worldly life is due to the operations of the life‐winds which are
      attached to the Self, and lead to its manifestations as individual
      souls.”

 1142 Vaishvânara is a word often used to denote the Self—explains
      Nîlakantha.

 1143 _Ibid._, p. 259. Translated by Kâshinâth Trimbak Telang, M.A.,
      Bombay.

 1144 _Matthew_, iii. 10.

 1145 _Isaiah_, x. 19.

 1146 _Op. cit._, i. 133.

 1147 1845, p. 41.

 1148 See Dowson’s _Hindû Classical Dictionary_ for further information on
      above.

 1149 See _Five Years of Theosophy_, art., “The Elixir of Life.”

 1150 The partaker of Soma finds himself both linked to his external body,
      and yet away from it in his Spiritual Form. Freed from the former,
      he soars for the time being in the ethereal higher regions, becoming
      virtually “as one of the Gods,” and yet preserving in his physical
      brain the memory of what he sees and learns. Plainly speaking, Soma
      is the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge forbidden by the jealous
      Elohim to Adam and Eve or Yah‐ve, “lest man should become as one of
      us.”

 1151 We see the same in the modern exoteric religions.

 1152 _Historical View of the Hindû Astronomy._ Quoting from the work in
      reference to “Argabhatta” [? Âryabhatta] who is said to give a near
      approach to the true relation among the various values for the
      computations of the value of π, the author of _The Source of
      Measures_ reproduces a curious statement. “Mr. Bentley,” it is said,
      “was greatly familiar with the Hindû astronomical and mathematical
      knowledge.... This statement of his may then be taken as authentic.
      The same remarkable trait, among so many Eastern and ancient
      nations, of _sedulously concealing the arcana of this kind of
      knowledge, is a marked one_ among the Hindûs. That which was given
      out to be popularly taught, and to be exposed to public inspection,
      _was but the approximate of a more exact but hidden knowledge_. And
      this very formulation of Mr. Bentley will strangely exemplify the
      assertion; and, explained, will show that it [the Hindû _exoteric_
      astronomy and sciences] was derived _from a system exact beyond the
      European one_, in which Mr. Bentley himself, of course, trusted, as
      far in advance of the Hindû knowledge, at any time, in any
      generation” (pp. 86, 87).

      This is Mr. Bentley’s misfortune, and does not take away from the
      glory of the ancient Hindû Astronomers, who were all Initiates.

 1153 The Secret Doctrine teaches that every event of universal
      importance, such as geological cataclysms at the end of one Race and
      the beginning of a new one, involving a great change each time in
      mankind, spiritual, moral and physical—is precogitated and
      preconcerted, so to say, in the sidereal regions of our planetary
      system. Astrology is built wholly upon this mystic and intimate
      connection between the heavenly bodies and mankind; and it is one of
      the great secrets of Initiation and Occult Mysteries.

 1154 See Darmesteter’s _Vendidâd_, Introd., p. lviii.

 1155 See _Isaiah_, xiv. 12.

 1156 _Genesis_, vi.

 1157 The Nâgas are described by the Orientalists as a mysterious people
      whose landmarks are found abundantly in India to this day, and who
      lived in Nâga‐dvîpa, one of the _seven_ continents or divisions of
      Bhâratavarsha (old India); the town of Nagpur being one of the most
      ancient cities in the country.

 1158 xxviii. 3, 4.

 1159 Not less suggestive are the qualities attributed to Rudra Shiva, the
      great Yogî, the forefather of all the Adepts—in Esotericism one of
      the greatest Kings of the Divine Dynasties. Called the “earliest”
      and the “last,” he is the patron of the Third, Fourth, and the Fifth
      Root‐Races. For, in his earliest character, he is the ascetic Dig‐
      ambara, “clothed with the elements,” Tri‐lochana, the “three‐eyed,”
      Pancha‐ânana, the “five‐faced,” an allusion to the past Four and the
      present Fifth Race, for, though five‐faced, he is only “four‐armed,”
      as the Fifth Race is still alive. He is the “God of Time,” Saturn‐
      Cronus, as his “drum” Damaru, in the shape of an hour‐glass, shows;
      and if he is accused of having cut off Brahma’s fifth head, and left
      him with only four, it is again an allusion to a certain degree in
      Initiation, and also to the Races.

 1160 Gustav Seiffarth’s idea that the signs of the Zodiac were in ancient
      times only ten is erroneous. Ten only were known to the profane; the
      Initiates, however, knew them all, _from the time of the separation
      of mankind into sexes_, whence arose the separation of Virgo‐Scorpio
      into two. This separation, owing to the addition of a secret sign
      and the Libra invented by the Greeks, instead of the secret name
      which was not given, made twelve. (See _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 456.)

 1161 The above is, perhaps, a key to the Dalaï Lama’s symbolical name—the
      “Ocean” Lama, meaning the Wisdom‐Ocean. Abbé Huc speaks of this.

 1162 _Zohar_, iii. 9b, 10a, Brody Ed. Cremona Ed. iii. fol. 4a, col. 14.
      Myer’s _Qabbalah_, pp. 416, 417.

 1163 Such was the name given in ancient Judea to the Initiates, called
      also the “Innocents” and the “Infants,” _i.e._, once more “reborn.”
      This _key_ opens a vista into one of the _New Testament_ mysteries;
      the slaughter by Herod of the 40,000 “Innocents.” There is a legend
      to this effect, and the event, which took place almost a century
      B.C., shows the origin of the tradition blended at the same time
      with that of Krishna and his uncle Kansa. In the case of the _New
      Testament_, Herod stands for Alexander Jannæus (of Lyda), whose
      persecution and murder of hundreds and thousands of Initiates led to
      the adoption of the _Bible_ story.

 1164 _Zohar_, ii. 34.

 1165 i. § 16.

 1166 _Op. cit._, lxxiv. 13.

 1167 _Ibid._, § 33.

 1168 P. 16.

 1169 “Biographical and Critical Essay,” p. xxxviii.

 1170 _Histoire de la Magic_, pp. 16, 17.

 1171 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1172 What _devil_ could be possessed of more cunning, craft and cruelty
      than the Whitechapel murderer, “Jack the Ripper” of 1888, whose
      unparalleled, blood‐thirsty and cool wickedness led him to slaughter
      and mutilate in cold blood seven unfortunate and _otherwise_
      innocent women! One has but to read the daily papers to find in
      those wife‐ and child‐beating, drunken brutes (husbands and
      fathers!), a _small_ percentage of whom is daily brought before the
      courts, the complete personifications of the devils of the Christian
      Hell!

 1173 _Psalm_, lxxxii.

 1174 _Genesis_, xvii. 7.

 1175 _Op. cit._, p. 209.

 1176 _Ibid._, pp. 144, 145.

 1177 _Ibid._, p. 146.

 1178 _Op. cit._, p. 9. After the Polymorphic Pantheism of some Gnostics
      came the Exoteric Dualism of Manes, who was accused of personifying
      Evil and making of the Devil a God—the rival of God himself. We do
      not see that the Christian Church has so much improved on that
      exoteric idea of the Manicheans, for she calls God her King of
      Light, and Satan the King of Darkness, to this day.

 1179 To quote in this relation Mr. S. Laing, in his admirable work
      _Modern Science and Modern Thought_ (p. 222): “From this dilemma
      [the existence of evil in the world] there is no escape, unless we
      give up altogether the idea of an anthropomorphic deity, and adopt
      frankly the scientific idea of a First Cause, inscrutable and past
      finding out; and of a universe whose laws we can trace, but of whose
      real essence we know nothing, and can only suspect or faintly
      discern a fundamental law which may make the polarity of good and
      evil a necessary condition of existence.” Were Science to know “the
      real essence,” instead of knowing nothing of it, the faint suspicion
      would turn into the certitude of the existence of such a law, and
      the knowledge that this law is connected with Karma.

 1180 _Histoire de la Magie_, pp. 196, 197.

 1181 Âkâsha is _not_ the Ether of Science, as some Orientalists translate
      it.

 1182 Says Johannes Tritheim, the Abbot of Spanheim, the greatest
      Astrologer and Kabalist of his day: “The art of divine magic
      consists in the ability to perceive the essence of things in the
      Light of Nature [Astral Light], and by using the soul‐powers of the
      spirit to produce material things from the unseen universe, and in
      such operations the Above and the Below must be brought together and
      made to act harmoniously. The Spirit of Nature [Astral Light] is a
      unity, creating and forming everything, and by acting through the
      instrumentality of man it may produce wonderful things. Such
      processes take place according to law. You will learn the law by
      which these things are accomplished, if you learn to know yourself.
      You will know it by the power of the spirit that is in yourself, and
      accomplish it by mixing your spirit with the essence that comes out
      of yourself. If you wish to succeed in such a work you must know how
      to separate spirit and life in Nature, and, moreover, to separate
      the astral soul in yourself and to make it tangible, and then the
      substance of the soul will appear visibly and tangibly, rendered
      objective by the power of the spirit.” (Quoted in Dr. Franz
      Hartmann’s _Paracelsus_, pp. 164, 165.)

 1183 The real original text of _I Corinthians_, xv. 44, rendered
      kabalistically and Esoterically would read: “It is sown a _soul_
      body [not ‘natural’ body], it is raised a _spirit_ body.” St. Paul
      was an Initiate, and his words have quite a different meaning when
      read Esoterically. The body “is sown in _weakness_ [passivity]; it
      is raised in power” (v. 43)—or in spirituality and intellect.

 1184 “The War in Heaven” (_Theosophist_, iii. 24, 36, 67), by Godolphin
      Mitford, later in life Murad Ali Beg. Born in India, the son of a
      missionary, G. Mitford was converted to Islam, and died a Mahomedan
      in 1884. He was a most extraordinary Mystic, of great learning and
      remarkable intelligence. But he left the Right Path and forthwith
      fell under Karmic retribution. As well shown by the author of the
      article quoted, “The followers of the defeated ‘Elohim’ first
      massacred by the victorious Jews [the Jehovites], and then persuaded
      by the victorious Christians and Mohamedans, continued
      [nevertheless].... Some [of these scattered sects] ... have lost
      even the tradition of the true rationale of their belief—to worship
      in secrecy and mystery the Principle of Fire, Light, and Liberty.
      Why do the Sabean Bedouins (avowedly Monotheists when dwelling in
      the Mohamedan cities) in the solitude of the desert night yet invoke
      the starry ‘Host of Heaven’? Why do the Yezidis, the ‘Devil
      Worshippers,’ worship the ‘Muluk‐Taoos’—the ‘Lord Peacock’—the
      emblem of _Pride_ and of Hundred‐eyed Intelligence [and of
      Initiation also], which was expelled from Heaven with Satan,
      according to an old Oriental tradition? Why do the Gholaites and
      their kindred Mesopotamo‐Iranian Mohamedan Sects believe in the
      ‘Noor Illahee’—the ‘Light of the Elohim’—transmitted in _anastasis_
      through a hundred Prophet‐Leaders? It is because they have continued
      in ignorant superstition the traditional religion of the ‘Light
      Deities’ whom Jahveh overthrew!” (p. 69)—is _said_ to have
      overthrown rather; for by overthrowing _them_ he would have
      overthrown himself. The Muluk‐Taoos is Maluk, “Ruler,” as is shown
      in the foot‐note. It is only a new form of Moloch, Melek, Molech,
      Malayak, and Malachim—Messengers, Angels, etc.

 1185 So does every Yogi and even Christian, for one must take the Kingdom
      of Heaven _by violence_—we are taught. Why then should such a desire
      make of any one a Devil?

 1186 _Acad. des Inscrip._, xxxix. 690.

 1187 Fargard, xix. 47; Darmesteter’s Trans., p. 218.

 1188 _Vendidad_, Far. xx. 12; _op. cit._, p. 222.

 1189 _Ibid._, Far. xix. 43; _op. cit._, p. 218.

 1190 From the _Vendidad Sadah_, quoted by Darmesteter, _op. cit._, p.
      223.

 1191 See the Gâtha in Yasna xliv.

 1192 _Op. cit._, p. 441.

 1193 _Apollodorus_, I. 7, 1.

 1194 Ovid., _Metam._, I. 81. _Etym. M._, v. Προμηθεύς.

 1195 Pausanias, X. 4, 4.

 1196 _Op. cit._, p. 264.

 1197 Pausanias, II. 19, 5; _cf._ 20, 3.

 1198 _Timæus_, p. 22.

 1199 _Strom._, I. p. 380.

 1200 Decharme, _ibid._, p. 265.

 1201 _Opera et Dies_, 142‐145. According to the Occult Teaching, three
      Yugas passed away during the time of the Third Root‐Race, _i.e._,
      the Satya, the Tretà, and the Dvâpara Yuga—answering to the Golden
      Age in its early innocence; to the Silver, when it reached its
      maturity; and to the Bronze Age, when, separating into sexes, it
      became the mighty Demi‐gods of old.

 1202 _Asgard and the Gods_, pp. 11, 13.

 1203 _Op. cit._, p. 266.

 1204 _Ibid._, p. 258.

 1205 _Ibid._, p. 257.

 1206 _Ibid._, p. 258.

 1207 _Op. cit._, p. 145.

 1208 _Transactions of the Royal Society_, London, 1868.

 1209 _The Age and Origin of Man._

 1210 The modern attempt of some Greek scholars (poor and pseudo scholars,
      they would have appeared in the day of the old Greek writers!) to
      explain the real meaning of the ideas of Æschylus—which, as being an
      ignorant ancient Greek, he could not express so well himself—is
      absurdly ludicrous!

 1211 _Revue Germanique_, 1861, pp. 356, _et seqq._ See also _Mémoires de
      la Société de la Linguistique_, i. pp. 337. _et seqq._

 1212 Quoted by Decharme, _op. cit._, pp. 258, 259. There is the _upper_
      and _nether_ piece of timber used to produce this sacred fire by
      attrition at sacrifices, and it is the Aranì which contains the
      socket. This is proven by an allegory in the _Vâyu_ and other
      _Purânas_, which tell us that Nimi, the son of Ikshvàku, had left no
      successor, and that the Rishis, fearing to leave the Earth without a
      ruler, introduced the king’s body into the socket of an Arani—like
      an upper Aranì—and produced from it a prince named Janaka. “It was
      by reason of the peculiar way in which he was engendered that he was
      called Janaka.” See also Goldstücker’s _Sanskrit Dictionary_, _sub
      voce_. (_Vishnu Purána_, Wilson’s Trans., iii. 330.) Devaki,
      Krishna’s mother, in a prayer addressed to her, is called “the Aranî
      whose attrition engenders fire.”

 1213 The Monad of the animal is as immortal as that of man, yet the brute
      knows nothing of this; it lives an animal life of sensation just as
      the first human would have lived, on attaining physical development
      in the Third Race, had it not been for the Agnishvâtta and the
      Mânasa Pitris.

 1214 _Op. cit._, p. 259.

 1215 Ἰαπετιονίδης. _Theog._, p. 528.

 1216 _Theog._, 565.

 1217 The Fallen Angels, therefore; the Asuras of the Indian Pantheon.

 1218 Decharme, _op. cit._, pp. 259, 260.

 1219 _Ibid._, p. 263.

 1220 _Ibid._, p. 261.

 1221 _Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks_ (Berlin, 1859).

 1222 The italics are ours; they show how assumptions are raised to laws
      in our day.

 1223 Decharme, _op. cit._, p. 262.

 1224 _Philosoph. Placit._, iii. 3.

 1225 Baudry, _Revue Germanique_, 14 avril, 1861, p. 368.

 1226 _Op. cit._, pp. 264, 265.

 1227 See _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., v. 96, note.

 1228 xiii. 55, 56.

 1229 “Womb of Light,” “Holy Vessel,” are the epithets of the Virgin.

 1230 The Virgin is often addressed as the “Morning Star” and the “Star of
      Salvation.”

 1231 Wilson translates: “Thou art kingly policy, the parent of order.”

 1232 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., iv. pp. 264, 265.

 1233 iii. 290.

 1234 See _Joshua_, xv, 15.

 1235 Surât xix.

 1236 See Mackenzie’s _Royal Masonic Cyclopædia_, _sub voce_ “Enoch.”

 1237 Khanoch, or Hanoch, or Enoch Esoterically means the “Initiator” and
      “Teacher,” as well as Enos, the “Son of Man.” (See _Genesis_, iv.
      26.)

 1238 De Mirville, _Pneumatologie_, iii. 70.

 1239 Mackenzie, _op. cit._, _sub voc._

 1240 _Hebrews_, xi. 5.

 1241 De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 71.

 1242 Compare the “thieves and robbers” incident, p. 506, _supra_.

 1243 De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 73.

 1244 _Ibid._, p. 76.

 1245 _Antiquities_, ix. 2.

 1246 Cap. viii.

 1247 Says the _Zohar_, “Hanokh had a book which was one with the Book of
      the Generations of Adam; this is the Mystery of Wisdom.”

 1248 Noah is heir to the Wisdom of Enoch; in other words, the Fifth is
      heir to the Fourth Race.

 1249 See _Isis Unveiled_, i. 575, _et seqq._

 1250 See the illustration in _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 452.

 1251 See Danielo’s criticisms upon De Sacy, in the _Annales de
      Philosophie_, p. 393, deuxième article.

 1252 De Mirville, _ibid._, pp. 77, 78.

 1253 Ch. lxxix, Laurence’s Trans.

 1254 _Ibid._, ch. lxiv.

 1255 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._, v. 6.

 1256 Bailly, _Astronomie Ancienne_, i. 203, and ii. 216; De Mirville,
      _ibid._, p. 79.

 1257 De Mirville, _ibid._, p. 80.

 1258 _City of God_, XV. xxiii.

 1259 _Op. cit._, xxxii. 8, 9.

 1260 Of the Protestant Biblical Society of Paris, according to the
      version revised in 1824 by J. E. Ostervald.

 1261 With the Egyptian Gnostics it was Thoth (Hermes), who was chief of
      the Seven (see _Book of the Dead_). Their names are given by Origen,
      as Adonai (of the Sun), Iao (of the Moon), Eloi (Jupiter), Sabao
      (Mars), Orai (Venus), Astaphai (Mercury), and, finally, Ildabaoth
      (Saturn). See King’s _Gnostics and their Remains_, p. 344.

 1262 See Origen’s Copy of the Chart or Diagramma of the Ophites, in his
      _Contra Celsum_.

 1263 See Part III of this Volume, Section IV, B, “On Chains of Planets
      and their Plurality.”

 1264 _Exodus_, xxxiii. 18, 19; see Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 226.

 1265 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1266 _Supra_, p. 481.

 1267 See _Revelation_, xxii. 16.

 1268 _Op. cit._, ii. 301.

 1269 _Gnostics and their Remains._

 1270 _II Samuel._

 1271 By very few though, for the creators of the material universe were
      always considered as subordinate Gods to the Most High Deity.

 1272 _Op. cit._, ii. 296, 297. Fürst gives citations from Lydus and
      Cedrenus in support of his statements.

 1273 See plate 77 in vol. i of Montfaucon’s _Antiquities_. The disciples
      of Hermes, after their death, go to his planet, Mercury—their
      Kingdom of Heaven.

 1274 Cornutus.

 1275 Lydus, _De Mensibus_, iv.

 1276 _Preparat. Evang._, I. iii. 2.

 1277 But see p. 480, _supra_, concerning the Gnostic Priapus.

 1278 _Op. cit._, p. 52.

 1279 _Ibid._, pp. 3, 4.

 1280 Let the reader refer to the _Zohar_ and the two _Qabbalahs_ of Isaac
      Myer and S. L. MacGregor Mathers, with interpretations, if he would
      satisfy himself of this.

 1281 _Ibid._, p. 5.

 1282 _Ibid._, p. 12.

 1283 See _Book of the Dead_, xvii. 45‐47.

 1284 _Op. cit._, i. 421, 422.

 1285 _De la Croix Ansée_, _Mem. de l’Académie des Sciences_, pl. 2, Nos.
      8, 9, also 16, 2, p. 320; quoted in _Natural Genesis_, p. 423.

 1286 Vol. xviii. p. 393, pl. 4; Inman, fig. 38; Gerald Massey, _op.
      cit._, _ibid._, p. 422.

 1287 Certainly not; for very often there are symbols _made to symbolize
      other symbols_, and these are in turn used in ideographs.

 1288 The R of the Slavonian and Russian alphabets (the Kyriletza
      alphabet) is also the Latin P.

 1289 _Ibid._, p. 423.

 1290 See Moor’s _Hindû Pantheon_, plate xiii.

 1291 See Dowson’s _Hindû Classical Dictionary_, _sub voc._ “Rudra.”

 1292 Described in the _Mission des Juifs_, by the Marquis St. Yves
      d’Alveydre, the hierophant and leader of a large party of French
      Kabalists, as the Golden Age!

 1293 V. xxiii.

 1294 Translated from Burnouf’s French Translation, quoted by Fitzedward
      Hall, in Wilson’s _Vishnu Purâna_, ii. 307.

 1295 The more so since he is the reputed slayer of Tripurâsura and the
      Titan Târaka. Michael is the conqueror of the dragon, and Indra and
      Kârttikeya are often made identical.

 1296 _Ibid._, iv. 235.

 1297 _Op. cit._, XII. ii. 26‐32; quoted in _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s
      Trans., iv. 230. Nanda is the first Buddhist sovereign,
      Chandragupta, against whom all the Brâhmans were so arrayed, he of
      the Morya Dynasty, and the grandfather of Ashoka. This is one of
      those passages that do not exist in the earlier Paurânic MSS. They
      were added by the Vaishnavas, who, out of sectarian spite, were
      almost as great interpolators as the Christian Fathers.

 1298 _Historical View of the Hindû Astronomy_, p. 65, as quoted by
      Wilson, _op. cit._, p. 233.

 1299 See _Ezekiel_, i.

 1300 _In Quint. Lib. Euclid._

 1301 The Goddess Basht, or Pasht, was represented with the head of a cat.
      This animal was held sacred in Egypt for several reasons. It was a
      symbol of the Moon, the “Eye of Osiris” or the “Sun,” during night.
      The cat was also sacred to Sokhit. One of the mystic reasons was
      because of its body being rolled up in a circle when asleep. The
      posture is prescribed for occult and magnetic purposes, in order to
      regulate, in a certain way, the circulation of the vital fluid, with
      which the cat is preëminently endowed. “The nine lives of a cat” is
      a popular saying based on good physiological and occult reasons. Mr.
      Gerald Massey gives also an astronomical reason for it which may be
      found in vol. i. pp. 322, 323, of the present work. “The cat saw the
      sun, had it in its eye by night [was the eye of night], when it was
      otherwise unseen by men [for as the Moon reflects the light of the
      Sun, so the cat was supposed to reflect it on account of its
      phosphorescent eyes]. _We_ might say the moon _mirrored_ the solar
      light, because we have _looking glasses_. With them the cat’s eye
      _was_ the mirror.” (_Luniolatry Ancient and Modern_, p. 2.)

 1302 _Ezekiel_, i. 4, 15, 16, 20.

 1303 _Eccles._, i. 6.

 1304 Fol. 87, col. 346.

 1305 Vol. ii. pp. 299, 300.

 1306 _Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie_, i. 124. Also in _T’sang‐t‐ung‐
      ky_, by Wei‐Pa‐Yang.

 1307 Cocker’s _Christianity and Greek Philosophy_, xi. p. 377.

 1308 The cry of despair uttered by Count de Montlosier, in his _Mystères
      de la Vie Humaine_ (p. 117), is a warrant that the Cause of
      “excellence and goodness,” supposed by Plato to pervade the Universe
      is neither _his_ Deity, nor _our_ World. “Au spectacle de tant de
      grandeur opposé à celui de tant de misère, l’esprit qui se met à
      observer ce vaste ensemble, se represente je ne sais quelle grande
      divinité, _qu’ une divinité, plus grande et plus pressante_ encore,
      aurait comme brisée et mise en pièces en dispersant les débris dans
      tout l’Univers.” The “still greater and still more exacting
      divinity” than the God of this world, supposed to be so “good”—is
      Karma. And this true Divinity shows well that the lesser one, our
      _inner_ God (personal for the time being), has no power to arrest
      the mighty hand of this greater Deity—the Cause awakened by our
      actions generating smaller causes—which is called the Law of
      Retribution.

 1309 See _Isis Unveiled_, i. xii and xviii.

 1310 Stobæus, _Ecl._, i. 862.

 1311 The Svastika is certainty one of the oldest symbols of the Ancient
      Races. In our century, says Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie (_Royal Masonic
      Cyclopædia_), the Svastika “has survived in the form of the mallet”
      in the Masonic Fraternity. Among the many “meanings,” given by the
      author, we do not find the most important, Masons evidently being
      ignorant of it.

 1312 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 508.

 1313 _Ibid._, p. 506.

 1314 _Ibid._, p. 572.

 1315 _Ezekiel_, ix. 4.

 1316 _Exodus_, xii. 22.

 1317 viii. 29.

 1318 _Op. cit._, p. 204.

 1319 See Dowson’s _Hindû Classical Dictionary_.

 1320 _The Source of Measures_, p. 204.

 1321 _Ibid._, p. 205.

 1322 See Moor’s _Hindû Pantheon_, where Vittoba’s left foot, in the
      figure of his idol, bears the mark of the nails.

 1323 See Dr. Lundy’s _Monumental Christianity_, fig. 72.

 1324 _Source of Measures_, p. 52.

 1325 _Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie_, ii. 88.

 1326 The “Heavens” are identical with “Angels,” as already stated.

 1327 _Philosophumena_, vi. 48; quoted by King, _op. cit._, p. 200.

 1328 _Op. cit._, x. 3, 4.

 1329 _Pistis Sophia_, _pag._ 378; King, _ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1330 See the Section on “The Chronology of the Brâhmans,” p. 69, _supra_.

 1331 As confessed by C. W. King, the great authority on Gnostic
      antiquities, these “Gnostic” gems are not the work of the Gnostics,
      but belong to Pre‐Christian periods, and are the work of “magicians”
      (_op. cit._, p. 241).

 1332 King, _ibid._, p. 218.

 1333 The lack of intuition in Orientalists and Antiquarians past and
      present, is remarkable. Thus, Wilson, the translator of _Vishnu
      Purâna_, declares in his Preface that in the _Garuda Purâna_ he
      found “no account of the birth of Garuda.” Considering that an
      account of “Creation” in general is given therein, and that Garuda
      is coëternal with Vishnu, the Mahâ Kalpa, or Great Life‐Cycle,
      beginning with and ending with the _manifesting_ Vishnu, what other
      account of Garuda’s birth could be expected!

 1334 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1335 See _Revelation_, xvii. 2 and 10; and _Leviticus_, xxiii. 15 to 18;
      the first passage speaking of the “seven Kings,” of whom _five_ have
      gone; and the second about the “seven Sabbaths,” etc.

 1336 _Op. cit._, x. 5‐7.

 1337 _Pistis Sophia_ is an extremely important document, a genuine
      Evangel of the Gnostics, ascribed, at random to Valectinus, but much
      more probably a Pre‐Christian work as to its original. A Coptic MS.
      of this work was brought back by Bruce from Abyssinia and discovered
      by Schwartze, in the British Museum, quite accidentally, and
      translated by him into Latin. The text and Schwartze’s version were
      published by Petermann in the year 1853. In the text itself the
      authorship of this Book is ascribed to Philip the Apostle, whom
      Jesus bids sit down and write the revelation. It is genuine and
      ought to be as canonical as any other Gospel. Unfortunately it
      remains to this day untranslated into English.

 1338 King, _op. cit._, p. 200.

 1339 In the Cycle of Initiation, which was very long, Water represented
      the first and lower steps toward purification, while trials
      connected with Fire came last. Water could regenerate the Body of
      Matter; Fire alone, that of the Inner Spiritual Man.

 1340 Chap. ix.

 1341 See the Introduction by Káshináth Trimbak Telang, M.A.

 1342 “Sacred Books of the East,” vol. viii. p. 276.

 1343 _Ibid._

 1344 _Ibid._

 1345 Pp. 258, 259.

 1346 _Ibid._, p. 257.

 1347 _Ibid._, p. 259.

 1348 In the astronomical and cosmical key, Vaishvânara is Agni, son of
      the Sun, or Vishvânara, but in the psycho‐metaphysical symbolism it
      is the Self, in the sense of non‐separateness, _i.e._, both divine
      and human.

 1349 Here the speaker personifies the said divine Self.

 1350 _Ibid._

 1351 Compare with these “pairs of opposites,” in the _Anugîtâ_, the
      “pairs” of Æons, in the elaborate system of Valentinus, the most
      learned and profound Master of the Gnosis. As the “pairs of
      opposites,” male and female, are all derived from Âkâsha
      (undeveloped and developed, differentiated and undifferentiated, or
      Self or Prajâpati), so are the Valentinian “pairs” of male and
      female Æons shown to emanate from Bythos, the preëxisting eternal
      Depth, and in their secondary emanation from Ampsiu‐Ouraan, or
      sempiternal Depth and Silence, the second Logos. In the Esoteric
      emanation there are seven chief “pairs of opposites”; and so also in
      the Valentinian system there were fourteen, or twice seven.
      Epiphanius “copied one pair twice over,” Mr. C. W. King thinks, “and
      thus adds one pair to the proper fifteen.” (_The Gnostics and their
      Remains_, pp. 263, 264.) Here King falls into the opposite error;
      the pairs of Æons are not 15 (a “blind”) but 14, as the _first_ Æon
      is That from which others emanate, Depth and Silence being the first
      and only emanation from Bythos. As Hippolytus shows: “The Æons of
      Valentinus are confessedly the _six_ Radicals of Simon (Magus),”
      with the _seventh_, Fire, at their head. And these are: Mind,
      Intelligence, Voice, Name, Reason and Thought, subordinate to Fire,
      the Higher Self, or precisely the “Seven Winds” or the “Seven
      Priests” of _Anugîtâ_.

 1352 Not necessarily at death only, but during Samâdhi or mystic trance.

 1353 All the words and sentences between parenthetical marks are the
      writer’s. This is translated directly from the Latin translation.
      King’s translation conforms too much to Gnosticism as explained by
      the Church Fathers.

 1354 Barbelo is one of the three “Invisible Gods,” and, as C. W. King
      believes, includes the “Divine Mother of the Saviour,” or rather
      Sophia Achamoth (_cf._ _Pistis Sophia_, pag. 359).

 1355 _Pagg._ 378, 379.

 1356 In other _Purânas_ Jatâyu is the son of Aruna, Garuda’s brother,
      both the sons of Kashyapa. But all this is external allegory.

 1357 IX. viii. 12, 13.

 1358 From Burnouf’s Translation; see Wilson’s _Vishnu Purâna_, iii. 300.

 1359 Wilson, _ibid._, p. 302, note.

 1360 See _Vâyu Purâna_, which places him in the list of the forty
      renowned sons of Kashyapa.

 1361 _The Ordinances of Manu_, i. 16; Burnell’s Translation, p. 3, note.

 1362 _Ibid._, 27; p. 5.

 1363 Vol. i. pp. 355, _et seqq._

 1364 _Orthodoxie Maçonnique Suivie de la Maçonnerie Occulte et de
      l’Initiation Hermétique_, J. M. Ragon, p. 430; see also the whole of
      Chapter XXVII, “Puissance des Nombres d’après Pythagore” for what
      follows.

 1365 The reason for it is simple, and was given in _Isis Unveiled_. In
      geometry, one straight line fails to represent a perfect figure, nor
      can two straight lines constitute a perfect figure. The triangle is
      the first perfect figure.

 1366 Ragon, _ibid._, p. 428, note.

 1367 _Ibid._, p. 431.

 1368 _Op. cit._, p. 113.

 1369 Now what is the meaning and the reason of this figure? The reason is
      that Manas is the _fifth_ principle, and that the Pentagon is the
      symbol of Man—not only of the five‐limbed, but rather of the
      _thinking, conscious_ Man.

 1370 The reason for it becomes apparent when Egyptian symbology is
      studied. See further on.

 1371 _Ibid._, p. 114.

 1372 _Ibid._, pp. 114, 115.

 1373 _Book of the Dead_, lxxxviii. 2.

 1374 _Philosophumena_, v. 14.

 1375 See _Philosophumena_, v. 14.

 1376 So is Brahma’s _fifth_ head, said to be lost, burnt to ashes by
      Shiva’s “central eye”; Shiva being also Panchânana “five‐faced.”
      Thus the number is preserved and secrecy maintained on the true
      Esoteric meaning.

 1377 “When the Sun passes away behind the 30th degree of Makara and will
      reach no more the sign of the Mînam (Pisces) then the Night of
      Brahmâ has come.”

 1378 Death of every physical thing truly; but Mâra is also the
      unconscious quickener of the birth of the Spiritual.

 1379 Osiris is called in the _Book of the Dead_ (cxlii. B. 17) “Osiris,
      the double crocodile.” “He is the good and the bad Principle; the
      Day and the Night Sun, the God and the mortal man.” Thus far the
      Macrocosm and the Microcosm.

 1380 _Op. cit._, p. 117.

 1381 King’s _Gnostics and their Remains_, p. 297.

 1382 Reflecting on the cross, the author of _The Source of Measures_
      shows that this candlestick in the Temple “was so composed that,
      counting on either side, there were _four_ candle‐sockets; while, at
      the apex, there being _one in common_ to both sides, there were in
      fact 3 to be counted on the one side and 4 on the other, making in
      all the number 7, upon the self‐same idea of one in common with the
      cross display. Take a line of one unit in breadth by 3 units long,
      and place it on an incline; take another of 4 units long, and lean
      it upon this one, from an opposite incline, making the top unit of
      the 4 in length the corner or apex of a triangle. This is the
      display of the candlestick. Now, take away the line of 3 units in
      length, and _cross_ it on the one of 4 units in length, and the
      cross form results. The same idea is conveyed in the six days of the
      week in Genesis, crowned by the seventh, which was used by itself as
      a base of circular measure” (p. 51).

 1383 From a MS. supposed to be by “St. Germain,” embodied by Ragon, _op.
      cit._, p. 434.

 1384 It had no such meaning in the beginnings, nor during the earlier
      dynasties.

 1385 From an unpublished MS.

 1386 From St. Germain’s MS.

 1387 Yet this sense, if once mastered, will turn out to be the secure
      casket which holds the keys to the Secret Wisdom. True, a casket so
      profusely ornamented that its fancy‐work hides and conceals entirely
      any spring for opening it, and thus makes the unintuitional believe
      it has not, and cannot have, any opening at all. Still the keys are
      there, deeply buried, yet ever present to him who searches for them.

 1388 _Vishnu Purúna_, I. xv; Wilson’s Trans., ii. 29.

 1389 Quoted in Gerald Massey’s _The Natural Genesis_, i. 427.

 1390 With the Christians, most undeniably. With the Pre‐Christian
      Symbologists it was, as said, the Bed or Couch of Torture during the
      Initiation Mystery, the “Crucifix” being placed horizontally, on the
      ground, and not erect, as at the time when it became the Roman
      gallows.

 1391 So it was, and could not be otherwise. Julian, the Emperor, was an
      Initiate, and as such knew well the “mystery‐meaning” both
      metaphysical and physical.

 1392 _Op. cit._, _ibid._, p. 433.

 1393 _Book of the Dead._ xxxix. Apophis or Apap is the Serpent of Evil,
      the symbol of human passions. The Sun (Osiris‐Horus) destroys him,
      and Apap is thrown down, bound and chained. The God Aker, the “Chief
      of the Gate of the Abyss” of Aker, the Realm of the Sun (xv. 39),
      binds him. Apophis is the enemy of Ra (Light), but the “great Apap
      has fallen!” exclaims the Defunct. “The Scorpion has hurt thy
      mouth,” he says to the conquered enemy (xxxix. 7). The Scorpion is
      the “worm that never dies” of the Christians. Apophis is bound on
      the Tau or Tat, the “emblem of stability.” (See the erection of Tat
      in Tatoo, xviii.)

 1394 So have the crypts in Cis‐Himâlayan regions where Initiates live,
      and where their ashes are placed for seven lunar years.

 1395 _The Natural Genesis_, i. 432.

 1396 The Cross and the Tree are identical and synonymous in symbolism.

 1397 lvii. 3.

 1398 _Ibid._, 5.

 1399 Sermon clx.

 1400 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., iii. 174, note by Fitzedward Hall.

 1401 Hence the Initiates in Greece called the Tau Γαιήιος, “son of Gaia,”
      “sprung from Earth,” like Tityos in the _Odyssey_ (vii. 324).

 1402 Ragon, _Orthodoxie Maçonnique_, etc., pp. 432, 433.

 1403 _Ibid._, p. 433, note.

 1404 See the _Mahâbhârata_, _e.g._, III. 189, 3, where Vishnu says, “I
      called the name of water Nârâ in ancient times, and am hence called
      Nârâyana, for that was always the abode I moved in (Ayana).” It is
      into the Water, or Chaos, the “Moist Principle” of the Greeks and
      Hermes, that the first seed of the Universe is thrown. “The ‘Spirit
      of God’ moves on the dark waters of Space”; hence Thales makes of it
      the primordial element and prior to Fire, which was yet latent in
      that Spirit.

 1405 See the bronze statue of Tripurântaka Shiva, “Mahâdeva destroying
      Tripurâsura,” at the Museum of the India House.

 1406 Ragon, _ibid._, p. 433, note.

 1407 There are learned Brâhmans who have protested against our septenary
      division. They are right from their own standpoint, as we are right
      from ours. Leaving the three _aspects_, or _adjunct principles_ out
      of calculation, they accept only four Upâdhis, or Bases, including
      the Ego—the reflected image of the Logos in the Kârana Sharîra—and
      even “strictly speaking ... only three Upâdhis.” For purely
      theoretical metaphysical philosophy, or purposes of meditation,
      these three may be sufficient, as shown by the Târaka Yoga system;
      but for _practical occult teaching_ our septenary division is the
      best and easiest. It is, however, a matter of school and choice.

 1408 _Commentary_, Book ix. F. 19.

 1409 Protista are not animals. The reader is asked to bear in mind that
      when we speak of “animals,” the mammalians alone are meant.
      Crustacea, fishes, and reptiles are contemporary with, and most have
      preceded, _physical_ man in this Round. All were bisexual, however,
      before the age of mammalia in the closing portion of the Secondary
      or Mesozoic ages, _yet nearer to the Palæozoic than the Cænozoic
      ages_. Smaller marsupial mammalia are contemporary with the huge
      reptilian monsters of the Secondary.

 1410 _Æneid_, vi. 725‐729. “First [Divine] Spirit within sustains the
      heavens, the earth and watery plains, the moon’s orb and shining
      stars and the [Eternal] Mind diffused through all the parts [of
      Nature], actuates the whole stupendous frame and mingles with the
      vast body [of the Universe]. Thence proceed _the race of men and
      beasts_, the _vital principles_ of the flying kind and the monsters
      which the Ocean breeds under its smooth crystal plane.” “All
      proceeds from Ether and from its seven natures”—said the Alchemists.
      Science knows these only in their superficial effects.

 1411 Compare _Descent of Man_, p. 164.

 1412 Bartlett’s _Land and Water_.

 1413 _Source of Measures_, p. 65. The author explains: “_Note_ that in
      Hebrew, _Jared_, the father of Enoch, is construed to be ‘_the mount
      of descent_,’ and it is said to be the same with _Ararat_, on which
      the cubical structure of _Noah_, or _foundation measure_, rested.
      _Jared_, in Hebrew, is י־רד. The root derivations are the same with
      those of _Ararat_, of _acre_, of _earth_. The Hebrew י־רד is
      _literally, in British_, Y R D; hence, in _Jared_, is to be found
      _literally_, our English word _yard_ (and also י־רד, for _Jah_, or
      _Jehovah, is rod_). It is noteworthy that the son of _Jared_, viz.,
      _Enoch_, lived 365 years; and it is said of him, by rabbinical
      commentators, that the year period of 365 days was discovered by
      him, thus bringing, again, _time_ and _distance_ values together,
      _i.e._, _year time_ descended, by coördination, through the _yard_,
      or _Jared_, who _thus was its father_, in or through _Enoch_; and
      truly enough, 1296 = _yard_ (or _Jared_) × 4 = 5184, the
      characteristic value of the solar day, in _thirds_, which, as
      stated, may be styled the _parent, numerically_, of the solar year”
      (_ibid._). This, however, by the astronomical and numerical
      kabalistic methods. Esoterically, Jared is the Third Race and Enoch
      the Fourth—but as he is taken away alive he symbolizes also the
      Elect saved in the Fourth, while Noah is the Fifth from the
      beginning—the family saved from the Waters, eternally and
      _physically_.

 1414 vii. 2, 3.

 1415 _Five Years of Theosophy_, pp. 202, 203.

 1416 _Ibid._, p. 200.

 1417 Oliver’s _Pythagorean Triangle_, p. 104.

 1418 _De Anim. Procr._, 1027.

 1419 Oliver, _ibid._, p. 112.

 1420 Reuchlin è Cabala, l. ii; Oliver, _ibid._, p. 104.

 1421 In _The Source of Measures_, the author shows (pp. 50, 51) that the
      figure of the cube unfolded in connection with the circle “becomes
      ... a _cross proper_, or of the _tau_ form, and the attachment of
      the circle to this last gives the _ansated cross_ of the
      Egyptians.... While there are but 6 faces to a cube, the
      representation of the cross as the cube unfolded, as to the cross‐
      bars, displays one face of the cube _as common to two bars_, counted
      as belonging to either [_i.e._, once counted horizontally, and once
      vertically]; ... 4 for the upright, and 3 for the cross‐bar, making
      _seven_ in all. Here we have the famous 4 and 3 and 7.” Esoteric
      Philosophy explains that _four_ is the symbol of the Universe in its
      potential state, or Chaotic Matter, and that it requires Spirit to
      permeate it actively; _i.e._, the primordial _abstract_ Triangle has
      to quit its one‐dimensional quality and spread across that Matter,
      thus forming a _manifested_ basis on the three‐dimensional space, in
      order that the Universe should manifest intelligibly. This is
      achieved by the cube unfolded. Hence the _ansated_ cross as the
      symbol of man, generation and life. In Egypt Ank signified “soul,”
      “life” and “blood.” It is the _ensouled, living_ man, the septenary.

 1422 _Supra_, p. 626.

 1423 Oliver, _ibid._, p. 114.

 1424 _Pythag._, p. 61.

 1425 Oliver, _ibid._, p. 172.

 1426 _De Plac. Phil._, p. 878.

 1427 See Oliver, _ibid._, p. 106.

 1428 _Ibid._, p. 108.

 1429 Reuchlin, _ut supra_, p. 689; Oliver, _ibid._, pp. 112, 113.

 1430 Oliver, _ibid._, p. 118.

 1431 _Bucolica_, Ecl. viii. 75.

 1432 Philo, _De Mund. Opif._; Oliver, _ibid._, p. 172.

 1433 The seven Planets are not limited to this number because the
      Ancients knew of no others, but simply because they were the
      primitive or primordial “Houses” of the seven Logoi. There may be
      nine and ninety‐nine other planets discovered—this does not alter
      the fact of these seven alone being sacred.

 1434 Oliver, _ibid._, pp. 173, 174.

 1435 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1436 _The Natural Genesis_, i. 545.

 1437 _Ibid._

 1438 In _Timæus_, iii.; _ibid._

 1439 Oliver, _ibid._, p. 175.

 1440 See Section F., _infra_, “The Seven Souls of the Egyptologists.”

 1441 The Seven Centres of Energy evolved, or rendered objective by the
      action of Fohat upon the One Element; or, in fact, the “Seventh
      Principle” of the Seven Elements which exist throughout manifested
      Kosmos. We may here point out that they are in truth the Sephiroth
      of the Kabalists; the “Seven gifts of the Holy Ghost” in the
      Christian system; and in a mystical sense, the seven children or
      sons of Devakî killed before the birth of Krishna by Kansa. Our
      seven principles symbolize all of these. We have to part or separate
      from them before we reach the Krishna or Christ‐state, that of a
      Jîvanmukta, and centre ourselves entirely in the highest, the
      Seventh or the One.

 1442 Μοῖρα, is destiny, not “Fate,” in this case, as it is an
      appellation, not a proper noun. (See Wolf’s transl., _Odyssey_,
      xxii. 413.) But Moira, the Goddess of Fate, is a deity who, like
      Αἶσα, _gives to all their portion of good and evil_ (Liddell and
      Scott’s Lexicon), and is therefore Karma. By this abbreviation,
      however, _the subject_ to Destiny or Karma is meant, the Self or
      Ego, and that which is reborn. Nor is Ἀντιμῖμον Πνεύματος our
      conscience, but our Buddhî; nor is it again the “counterfeit” of
      Spirit but “modelled after,” or a “counterpart” (Aristoph.,
      _Thesmophor._, 27) of the Spirit—which Buddhî is, as the vehicle of
      Âtmâ.

 1443 _The Gnostics and their Remains_, pp. 37, 38.

 1444 _Rig Veda_, iii. 54. 16; ii. 29. 3, 4.

 1445 Prof. Roth (in Peter’s Lexicon) defines the Angirasas as an
      intermediate race of higher Beings between Gods and Men; while Prof.
      Weber, according to his invariable custom of modernizing and
      anthropomorphizing the divine, sees in them the original priests of
      the religion which was common to the Âryan Hindûs and Persians. Roth
      is right. “Angirasas” was one of the names of the Dhyânîs, or Deva‐
      Instructors (Guru‐Devas), of the late Third, the Fourth, and even of
      the Fifth Race Initiates.

 1446 _Ibid._, x. 62. 1, 4.

 1447 _Ibid._, x. 90. 1.

 1448 _Ibid._, x. 90. 5.

 1449 _Rig Veda_, x. 113. 5.

 1450 _Ibid._, i. 35. 8.

 1451 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1452 _Ibid._, ix. 86. 29.

 1453 Only three submerged, or otherwise destroyed, Continents—for the
      first Continent of the First Race exists to this day and will
      prevail to the last—are described in the Occult Doctrine, the
      Hyperborean, the Lemurian (adopting a name now known in Science),
      and the Atlantean. Most of Asia issued from under the waters after
      the destruction of Atlantis; Africa came still later, while Europe
      is the fifth and the latest continent—portions of the two Americas
      being far older. But of these, more anon. The Initiates who recorded
      the _Vedas_—or the Rishis of our Fifth Race—wrote at a time when
      Atlantis had already gone down. Atlantis is the _fourth_ Continent
      that _appeared_, but the _third_ that _disappeared_.

 1454 Compare Vishvakarman.

 1455 _Ibid._, x. 20. 1, 16.

 1456 Nor is this Archaic Teaching so very _unscientific_, since one of
      the greatest Naturalists of the age—the late Professor
      Agassiz—admitted the multiplicity of the geographical origins of
      man, and supported it to the end of his life. The unity of the human
      species was accepted by the illustrious Professor of Cambridge
      (U.S.A.) in the same way as it is by the Occultists—namely, in the
      sense of their essential and original homogeneity and their origin
      from one and the same source, _e.g._, Negroes, Âryans, Mongols,
      etc., have all originated in the same way and from the same
      ancestors. These latter were all of one essence, though
      differentiated, since they belonged to seven planes which differed
      in degree though not in kind. That original physical difference was
      only a little more accentuated by that of geographical and climatic
      conditions, later on. This is not the theory of Agassiz, of course,
      but the Esoteric version. It is fully discussed in the Addenda, Part
      III.

 1457 See the enumeration of the seven Spheres—not the “Karshvare of the
      earth,” as generally believed—in Fargard xix. 30, _et seqq._

 1458 The seven Worlds are, as has been said, the seven Spheres of the
      Chain, each presided over by one of the seven “Great Gods” of every
      religion. When the religions became degraded and anthropomorphized,
      and the metaphysical ideas nearly forgotten, the synthesis or the
      highest, the seventh, was separated from the rest, and that
      personification became the _eighth_ God, whom Monotheism tried to
      unify but—failed. In no exoteric religion is God really one, if
      analyzed metaphysically.

 1459 The six invisible Globes of our Chain are both “Worlds” and “Earths”
      as is our own, although invisible. But where could be the _six_
      invisible Earths on _this_ Globe?

 1460 _Vendîdâd_, S. B. E., vol. iv. pp. lix. lx., and note.

 1461 See _Rig Veda_, i. 34; iii. 56; vii. 10. 411, and v. 60. 6.

 1462 _Vendîdâd_, _op. cit._, p. 13.

 1463 Death came only after man had become a _physical_ creature. The men
      of the First Race, and also of the Second, dissolved and disappeared
      in their progeny.

 1464 _Op. cit._, p. 12.

 1465 I. xxiv. 1.

 1466 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., i. lxxx.

 1467 As Parâshara says: “These are the seven persons by whom in the
      several Manvantaras created beings have been protected. Because the
      whole world has been pervaded by the energy of the deity, he is
      entitled Vishnu, from the root Vish, ‘to enter,’ or ‘’pervade’; for
      all the gods, the Manus, the seven Rishis, the sons of the Manus,
      the Indras, the sovereigns of the gods, all are but the impersonated
      might [Vibhûtayah, potencies] of Vishnu.” (_Ibid._, iii. 18, 19.)
      Vishnu is the Universe; and the Universe itself is divided in the
      _Rig Veda_ into _seven_ regions—which ought to be sufficient
      authority, for the Brâhmans at all events.

 1468 _Ibid._, iii. 15.

 1469 Hymn xix. 53.

 1470 Vishnu is _all_—the worlds, the stars, the seas, etc. Vishnu “is all
      that is, all that is not.... [But] he is not a substance
      (Vastubhûta).” (_Vishnu Purâna_, Book II, Ch. xii; Wilson’s Trans.,
      ii. 309.) “That which people call the highest God is not a substance
      but the _cause_ of it; not one that is here, there, or elsewhere,
      _not what we see_, but that in which all is—Space.”

 1471 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., ii. 306.

 1472 Therefore it is said in the _Purânas_ that the sight at night of
      Dhruva, the polar star, and of the celestial Porpoise (Shishumâra, a
      constellation) “expiates whatever sin has been committed during the
      day.” (_Ibid._, p. 306.) The fact is that the rays of the four stars
      in the “circle of perpetual apparition”—the Agni, Mahendra,
      Kashyapa, and Dhruva, placed in the tail of Ursa Minor
      (Shishumâra)—focussed in a certain way and on a certain object,
      produce extraordinary results. The Astro‐magians of India will
      understand what is meant.

 1473 _Ibid._, iii. 15.

 1474 Dowson’s _Hindû Classical Dictionary_, _sub voc._ “Shiva,” p. 298.

 1475 _Vishnu Purâna_, _op. cit._, ii. 78.

 1476 In the _Râmâyana_ it is Bâla‐Râma, Krishna’s elder brother, who does
      this.

 1477 With regard to the origin of Rudra, it is stated in several
      _Purânas_ that his (spiritual) progeny, _created in him by Brahmâ_,
      is not confined to either the _seven_ Kumâras or the _eleven_
      Rudras, etc., but “comprehends infinite numbers of beings _in person
      and equipments like their_ (virgin) father. Alarmed at their
      fierceness, numbers, and _immortality_, Brahmâ desires his son Rudra
      to form creatures of a different and mortal nature.” Rudra _refusing
      to create_, desists, etc., hence Rudra is the first _rebel_.
      (_Linga_, _Vâyu_, _Matsya_, and other _Purânas_.)

 1478 Diti is shown to have been thus frustrated in the Dvâpara Yuga,
      during that period when the Fourth Race was flourishing.

 1479 Notwithstanding the terrible, and evidently _purposed_, confusion of
      Manus, Rishis, and their progeny in the _Purânas_, one thing is made
      clear: there have been and there will be seven Rishis in every Root‐
      Race, called also Manvantara in the sacred books, just as there are
      fourteen Manus in every Round, the presiding Gods, the Rishis and
      sons of the Manus, being identical. (See _Vishnu Purâna_, III. i;
      Wilson’s Trans., iii. 19.) Six Manvantaras are given, the seventh
      being our own, in the _Vishnu Purâna_. The _Vâyu Purâna_ furnishes
      the nomenclature of the sons of the fourteen Manus in every
      Manvantara, and the sons of the seven Sages or Rishis. The latter
      are the progeny of the Progenitors of mankind. All the _Purânas_
      speak of the seven Prajâpatis of this period or Round.

 1480 “Châkshusha was the Manu of the sixth period [Third Round and Third
      Race], in which Indra was Manojava”—Mantradruma in the _Bhâgavata
      Purâna_. (_Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., iii. 12.) As there is a
      perfect analogy between the Great Round (Mahâkalpa), each of the
      seven Rounds, and each of the seven great Races in every one of the
      Rounds—therefore, Indra of the sixth period, or Third Round,
      corresponds to the close of the Third Race, at the time of the Fall
      or the separation of sexes. Rudra, as the father of the Maruts, has
      many points of contact with Indra, the Marutvân, or “Lord of the
      Maruts.” Rudra is said to have received his name because of his
      weeping. Hence Brahmâ called him Rudra; but _he wept yet seven times
      more and so obtained seven other names_—of which he uses one during
      _each_ “period.”

 1481 _Ibid._, ii. 231.

 1482 In _Vishnu Puranâ_, Book II. Chap. iv. (Wilson, ii. 205), it is
      stated that the “Earth,” “with its continents, mountains, oceans,
      and exterior shell, is _fifty crores_ [five hundred millions] of
      Yojanas in extent”; to which the translator remarks: “_This
      comprises the planetary spheres_; for the diameter of the seven
      zones and oceans—each ocean being of the same diameter as the
      continent it encloses, and each successive continent being twice the
      diameter of that which precedes it—amounts to but two crores or
      fifty‐four lakhs.... ‘Whenever any contradictions in different
      Purânas are observed, they are to be ascribed ... to differences of
      Kalpas and _the like_.’ ” “The like” ought to read “occult meaning,”
      an explanation which is withheld by the commentator, who wrote for
      exoteric, _sectarian_ purposes, and was misunderstood by the
      translator for various other reasons, the least of which
      is—ignorance of the Esoteric Philosophy.

 1483 The Phœnix, although generally connected with the Solar Cycle of 600
      years—the Western cycle of the Greeks and other nations—is a generic
      symbol for several kinds of cycles, ciphers being taken out or more
      added according to which cycle is meant.

 1484 See _Book of Ali_, Russian transl.

 1485 The tense is past, because the book is allegorical, and has to veil
      the truths it contains.

 1486 _Oriental Collections_, ii. 119; quoted by Kenealy, _op. cit._, pp.
      175, 176.

 1487 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1488 _Op. cit._, xvii. 9, 10.

 1489 Section VI; _Leviticus_, xxiii. 15, _et seqq._

 1490 _Vie de Notre Seigneur Jésus‐Christ_, Introduction; quoted by De
      Mirville, _Pneumatologie_, iv. 50.

 1491 See Suidas, _sub voc._ Ἥλιος.

 1492 Pliny, _Hist. Nat._, vii. 56.

 1493 “Menses in quinos dies descripserunt dies” (lviii. 9).

 1494 Lib. i. c. 26.

 1495 _Hist. Nat._, vii. 48, and _Life of Numa_, 16.

 1496 _Mèm. Acad. Ins._, xvi. c. 48; iii. 183.

 1497 _Voyage en Sibérie_, iii. 19.

 1498 The spheres of action of the combined Forces of Evolution and Karma
      are (1) the Super‐spiritual or Noumenal; (2) the Spiritual; (3) the
      Psychic; (4) the Astro‐ethereal; (5) the Sub‐astral; (6) the Vital;
      and (7) the purely Physical Spheres.

 1499 Adbhutam, see _Atharva Veda_, x. 105.

 1500 In Hindûism, as understood by the Orientalists from the _Atharva
      Veda_, the three Rajamsi refer to the three “strides” of Vishnu; his
      ascending higher step being taken in the highest world (_A. V._,
      vii. 99, 1; _cf._ i. 155, 5). It is the Divo Rajah, or the “sky,” as
      they think it. But it is something besides this in Occultism. The
      sentence, _pâreshu gûhyeshu vrateshu_ (_cf._, i. 155, 3, and ix. 75,
      2, or again, x. 114), in _Atharva Veda_, has yet to be explained.

 1501 _Medical Review_, July, 1844.

 1502 H. Grattan Guinness, F.R.G.S., in his _Approaching End of the Age_,
      p. 258.

 1503 _Lancet_, 1842, 1843.

 1504 Having given a number of illustrations from natural history, the
      doctor adds: “The facts I have briefly glanced at are general facts,
      _and cannot happen day after day in so many millions of animals of
      every kind_. FROM THE LARVA OR OVUM OF A MINUTE INSECT UP TO MAN,
      _at definite periods_, from a mere _chance or coincidence_.... Upon
      the whole it is, I think, impossible to come to any less general
      conclusion than this, that, _in animals, changes occur every three
      and a half, seven, fourteen, twenty‐one, or twenty‐eight days, or at
      some definite number of weeks_”—or septenary cycles. Again, the same
      Dr. Laycock states that: “Whatever type the fever may exhibit,
      _there will be a paroxysm on the seventh day.... fourteenth will be
      remarkable as a day of amendment_ ... [either cure or death taking
      place]. If the fourth [paroxysm] be severe, and the fifth less so,
      the disease will end at the _seventh_ paroxysm, and ... the change
      for the better ... will be seen on the fourteenth day ... namely,
      about three or four o’clock a.m., when the system is most languid.”
      (_Approaching End of the Age_, by Grattan Guinness, pp. 258 to 269,
      wherein this is quoted).

      This is pure “soothsaying” by cyclic calculations, and it is
      connected with Chaldæan Astrolatry and Astrology. Thus Materialistic
      Science—in its medicine, _the most materialistic of all_—applies our
      Occult laws to diseases, studies natural history with its help,
      recognizes its presence as a fact in Nature, and yet must needs
      pooh‐pooh the same archaic knowledge when claimed by the Occultists.
      For if the mysterious Septenary Cycle is a law in Nature, _and it is
      one_, as proven; if it is found controlling both evolution and
      _involution_ (or death) in the realms of entomology, ichthyology and
      ornithology, as in the kingdom of the animal mammalia and man—why
      cannot it be present and acting in Kosmos, in general, in its
      natural (though occult) divisions of time, races, and _mental_
      development? And why, furthermore, should not the most ancient
      Adepts have studied and thoroughly mastered these cyclic laws under
      all their aspects? Indeed, Dr. Stratton states as a physiological
      and pathological fact, that “in health the human pulse is more
      frequent in the morning than in the evening for six days out of
      seven; and that on the _seventh_ day it is slower.” (_Edinburgh
      Medical and Surgical Journal_, Jan. 1843; _ibid., loc. cit._) Why,
      then, should not an Occultist show the same in cosmic and
      terrestrial life in the pulse of the Planet and Races? Dr. Laycock
      divides life by _three_ great _septenary_ periods; the first and
      last, each stretching over 21 years, and the central period or prime
      of life lasting 28 years, or four times seven. He subdivides the
      first into _seven_ distinct stages, and the other two into _three_
      minor periods, and says that: “The fundamental unit of the greater
      periods is _one week of seven days_, _each day being twelve hours_,
      and that single and compound _multiples_ of this unit, determine the
      length of these periods by the same ratio, as multiples of the unit
      of twelve hours determine the lesser periods. _This law binds all
      periodic vital phenomena together, and links the periods observed in
      the lowest annulose animals, with those of man himself, the highest
      of the vertebrata._” (_Ibid._, p. 267.) If Science does this, why
      should she scorn the Occult information, that—to use Dr. Laycock’s
      language—_one_ Week of the Manvantaric (Lunar) Fortnight, of
      fourteen Days (or seven Manus), that Fortnight of twelve Hours in a
      Day representing seven Periods or seven Races—is now passed? This
      language of Science fits our Doctrine admirably. Mankind _has_ lived
      over “_a week of seven days_, each day being _twelve hours_,” since
      three and a half Races are now gone for ever, the Fourth is
      submerged, and we are now in the Fifth Race.

 1505 _Op. cit._, p. 269.

 1506 See for the length of such cycles or Yugas in _Vriddha Garga_ and
      other ancient astronomical sections (Jyotisha). They vary from the
      cycle of five years—which Colebrooke calls “the cycle of the Vedas,”
      specified in the institutes of Parâshara, “and the basis of
      calculation for larger cycles” (_Miscell. Essays_, i. 106 and
      108)—up to the Mahâ Yuga or the famous cycle of 4,320,000 years.

 1507 The Hebrew word for “week” is _seven_; and any length of time
      divided by _seven_ would have been a “week” with them—even
      49,000,000 years, as it is seven times seven millions. But their
      calculation is throughout septiform.

 1508 Brahmâ creates in the first Kalpa, or on the first Day, various
      “sacrificial animals” (Pashavah), or the celestial bodies and the
      Zodiacal signs, and “plants,” _which_ he uses in _sacrifices_ at the
      opening of Tretâ Yuga. The Esoteric meaning shows him proceeding
      cyclically and creating astral Prototypes on the _descending_
      spiritual arc and then on the _ascending_ physical arc. The latter
      is the subdivision of a _two‐fold_ creation, sub‐divided again into
      seven descending and seven ascending degrees of Spirit falling, and
      of Matter ascending; the inverse of what takes place—as in a mirror
      which reflects the right on the left side—in this Manvantara of
      ours. It is the same Esoterically in the Elohistic _Genesis_ (chap.
      i), and in the Jehovistic copy, as in Hindû cosmogony.

 1509 _Op. cit._, vv. 70, 71, 80; _The Kabbalah Unveiled_, S. L. MacGregor
      Mathers, pp. 120, 121.

 1510 “The Greater Holy Assembly,” v. 1,160.

 1511 See _Vishnu Purâna_, I. v.

 1512 It is very surprising to see theologians and Oriental scholars
      expressing indignation at the “depraved taste” of the Hindû mystics,
      who, not content with having “invented” the Mind‐born Sons of
      Brahmâ, make the Rishis, Manus, and Prajâpatis of every kind spring
      from _various parts of the body_ of their primal Progenitor, Brahmâ.
      (See Wilson’s footnote in his _Vishnu Purâna_, i. 102.) Because the
      average public is unacquainted with the Kabalah, the key to, and
      glossary of, the much veiled Mosaic Books, therefore, the clergy
      imagines the truth will never out. Let any one turn to the English,
      Hebrew, or Latin texts of the _Kabalah_, now so ably translated by
      several scholars, and he will find that the Tetragrammaton, which is
      the Hebrew IHVH, is also both the “Sephirothal Tree”—_i.e._, it
      contains all the Sephiroth except Kether, the crown—and the united
      Body of the Heavenly Man (Adam Kadmon) from whose Limbs emanate the
      Universe and everything in it. Furthermore, he will find that the
      idea in the Kabalistic Books, the chief of which in the _Zohar_ are
      the “Book of Concealed Mystery,” and of the “Greater” and the
      “Lesser Holy Assembly,” is entirely phallic and far more crudely
      expressed than is the four‐fold Brahmâ in any of the _Purânas_. (See
      _The Kabbalah Unveiled_, by S. L. MacGregor Mathers, chapter xxii.
      of “The Lesser Holy Assembly,” concerning the remaining members of
      Microprosopus.) For, this “Tree of Life” is also the “Tree of
      Knowledge of Good and Evil,” whose chief mystery is that of human
      procreation. It is a mistake to regard the _Kabalah_ as _explaining_
      the mysteries of Kosmos or Nature; it explains and unveils only a
      few allegories in the _Bible_, and _is more esoteric_ than is the
      latter.

 1513 Simplified in the English _Bible_ to: “Is the Lord [!!] among us, or
      not?”

 1514 Verse 83; _op. cit._, p. 121.

 1515 Translators often render the word “Companion” (Angel, also Adept) by
      “Rabbi,” just as the Rishis are called Gurus. The _Zohar_ is, if
      possible, more occult than the _Book of Moses_; to read the “Book of
      Concealed Mystery” one requires the keys furnished by the genuine
      Chaldæan _Book of Numbers_, which is not extant.

 1516 Verses 1152, 1158, 1159; _op. cit._, p. 254.

 1517 _I Peter_, ii. 2‐5.

 1518 “The Greater Holy Assembly,” vv. 1160, 1161; _op. cit._, p. 255.

 1519 See pp. 445, 446, _supra_.

 1520 _Op. cit._, i. 297, 2nd ed.

 1521 It is. But Âgneyâstra are fiery “missile weapons,” not “edged”
      weapons, as there is some difference between Shastra and Astra in
      Sanskrit.

 1522 Yet there are some, who may know something of these, even outside
      the author’s lines, wide as they undeniably are.

 1523 This connecting link, like others, was pointed out by the present
      writer nine years before the appearance of the work from which the
      above is quoted, namely in _Isis Unveiled_, a work full of such
      guiding links between ancient, mediæval, and modern thought, but,
      unfortunately, too loosely edited.

 1524 Ay; but how can the learned writer prove that these “beginnings”
      were precisely in Egypt, and nowhere else; and only 50,000 years
      ago?

 1525 Precisely; and this is just what the Theosophists do. They have
      never claimed “original inspiration,” not even as mediums claim it,
      but have always pointed, and do now point, to the “primary
      signification” of the symbols, which they trace to other countries,
      older even than Egypt; significations, moreover, which emanate from
      a Hierarchy (or Hierarchies, if preferred) of _living_ Wise
      Men—mortals notwithstanding that Wisdom—who reject every approach to
      _supernaturalism_.

 1526 But where is the proof that the Ancients did not mean precisely that
      which the Theosophists claim? Records exist for what they say, just
      as other records exist for what Mr. Gerald Massey says. His
      interpretations are very correct, but are also very one‐sided.
      Surely Nature has more than one _physical aspect_; for Astronomy,
      Astrology, and so on, are all on the physical, not the spiritual,
      plane.

 1527 _The Natural Genesis_, i. 318. It is to be feared that Mr. Massey
      has not succeeded. We have our followers as he has his followers,
      and Materialistic Science steps in and takes little account of both
      his and our speculations!

 1528 The fact that this learned Egyptologist does not recognize in the
      doctrine of the “Seven Souls,” as he terms our “principles,” or
      “metaphysical ‘_concepts_,’ ” anything but “the primitive biology or
      physiology of the soul,” does not invalidate our argument. The
      lecturer touches on only two keys, those that unlock the
      astronomical and the physiological mysteries of Esotericism, and
      leaves out the other five. Otherwise he would have promptly
      understood that what he calls the physiological divisions of the
      living Soul of man, are regarded by Theosophists as also
      psychological and spiritual.

 1529 _Op. cit._, p. 2.

 1530 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1531 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1532 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._

 1533 _Ibid._, p. 4.

 1534 This is a great mistake made in the Esoteric enumeration. Manas is
      the fifth, not the fourth; and Manas corresponds precisely with Seb,
      the Egyptian fifth principle, for that portion of Manas which
      follows the two higher principles, is the ancestral soul, indeed,
      the bright, immortal thread of the higher Ego, to which clings the
      spiritual aroma of all the lives or births.

 1535 _Ibid._, p. 2.

 1536 _Ibid._, pp. 2, 3.

 1537 _Signatura Rerum_, xiv. pars. 10, 14, 15; _The Natural Genesis_, i.
      317.

 1538 _Aurora_, xxiv. 27.

 1539 This is indeed news! It makes us fear that the lecturer had never
      read _Esoteric Buddhism_ before criticizing it. There are too many
      such misconceptions in his notices of it.

 1540 “The Seven Souls of Man,” pp. 26, 27.

 1541 _Ibid._, p. 26.

 1542 _The Theosophist_, 1887 (Madras), pp. 705, 706.

 1543 According to _Shvetâshvatara‐Upanishad_ (357) the Siddhas are those
      who are possessed from birth of “superhuman” powers, as also of
      “knowledge and indifference to the world.” According to the Occult
      teachings, however, the Siddhas are Nirmânakâyas or the “spirits”—in
      the sense of an individual, or _conscious_ spirit—of great Sages
      from spheres on a higher plane than our own, who voluntarily
      incarnate in mortal bodies in order to help the human race in its
      upward progress. Hence their innate knowledge, wisdom and powers.

 1544 “The Sacred Books of the East,” viii. 284, _et seqq._

 1545 I propose to follow here the text and not the editor’s commentaries,
      who accepts Arjuna Mishra and Nilakantha’s _dead‐letter_
      explanations. Our Orientalists never trouble to think that if a
      native commentator is a non‐initiate, he could not explain
      correctly, and if an Initiate, would not.

 1546 See _Chhândogya_, p. 219, and Shankara’s commentary thereupon.

 1547 The editor explains here, saying, “I presume devoted to the
      Brahman.” We venture to assert that the “Fire” or Self is the real
      Higher SELF “connected with,” that is to say _one_ with Brahma, the
      One Deity. The “Self” separates itself no longer from the Universal
      Spirit.

 1548 The “Supreme Self,” says Krishna, in the _Bhagavad Gitâ_, pp. 102,
      _et seqq._

 1549 As Mahat, or Universal Intelligence, is first born, or manifests, as
      Vishnu, and then, when it falls into Matter and develops self‐
      consciousness, becomes egoism, selfishness, so Manas is of a dual
      nature. It is respectively under the Sun and Moon, for as
      Shankarâchârya says: “The moon is the mind, and the sun the
      understanding.” The Sun and Moon are the deities of our planetary
      Macrocosmos, and therefore Shankara adds that: “The mind and the
      understanding are the respective deities of the [human] organs.”
      (See _Brihadâranyaka_, pp. 521, _et seqq._) This is perhaps why
      Arjuna Mishra says that the Moon and the Fire (the Self, the Sun)
      constitute the universe.

 1550 “The body in the soul,” as Arjuna Mishra is credited with saying, or
      rather “the soul in the spirit”, and on a still higher plane of
      development, the Self or Âtman in the Universal Self.

 1551 _Op. cit._, p. 179.

 1552 _Prov._, ix. 1.

 1553 De Quatrefages, _The Human Species_, p. 111. The respective
      developments of the human and simian brains are referred to. “In the
      ape the temporo‐sphenoidal convolutions, which form the middle lobe,
      make their appearance and are completed before the anterior
      convolutions which form the frontal lobe. In man, on the contrary,
      the frontal convolutions are the first to appear, and those of the
      middle lobe are formed later.” (_Ibid._)

 1554 _Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, p. 290.

 1555 Series II, Vol. VI, p. 769 (Ed. 1886). To this an editorial remark
      adds that an “F.J.B.,” in the _Athenæum_ (No. 3069, Aug. 21, 1886,
      pp. 242‐3), points out that Naturalists have long recognized that
      there are “morphological” and “physiological” species. The former
      have their origin in men’s minds, the latter in a series of changes
      sufficient to affect the internal as well as the external organs of
      a group of allied individuals. The “physiological selection” of
      morphological species is a confusion of ideas; that of physiological
      species a redundancy of terms.

 1556 _Op. cit._, p. 79.

 1557 _Ibid._, p. 48.

 1558 Nägeli’s “principle of perfectibility”; von de Baer’s “striving
      towards the purpose”; Braun’s “divine breath as the inward impulse
      in the evolutionary history of Nature”; Professor Owen’s “tendency
      to perfectibility,” etc., are all expressive of the veiled
      manifestations of the universal guiding Fohat, rich with the Divine
      and Dhyân‐Chohanic thought.

 1559 Hæckel on “Cell‐Souls and Soul‐Cells,” _Pedigree of Man_, Aveling’s
      Trans., see pp. 136, 150.

 1560 See _infra_, M. de Quatrefages’ _exposé_ of Hæckel, in Section II,
      “The Ancestors Mankind is offered by Science.”

 1561 Strictly speaking, du Bois‐Reymond is an Agnostic, and not a
      Materialist. He has protested most vehemently against the
      materialistic doctrine, which affirms mental phenomena to be merely
      the product of molecular motion. The most accurate _physiological_
      knowledge of the structure of the brain leaves us “nothing but
      matter in motion,” he asserts; “_we must go further_, and admit the
      utterly incomprehensible nature of the psychical principle, which it
      is _impossible to regard_ as a mere outcome of material causes.”

 1562 See Hæckel’s “Present Position of Evolution,” _op. cit._, pp. 23,
      24, 296, 297, notes.

 1563 _Op. cit._, pp. 34, 35, 36.

 1564 _Measure for Measure_, Act ii, Scene 2.

 1565 _Knowledge_, January, 1882.

 1566 T. Huxley, _Man’s Place in Nature_, p. 57.

 1567 _Op. cit._, “The Proofs of Evolution,” p. 273.

 1568 Author of _Modern Science and Modern Thought_.

 1569 _Op. cit._, pp. 102, 103.

 1570 _Op. cit._, ii. 12, Wilson’s Transl.

 1571 _Op. cit._, p. 104. In this, as has been shown in Part I, Modern
      Science has again been anticipated, far beyond its own speculations,
      by Archaic Science.

 1572 _Ibid._, pp. 104‐106.

 1573 _Anthrop._, 3rd edition, p. 11.

 1574 Theosophists will remember that, according to Occult teaching,
      cyclic Pralayas so‐called are but “Obscurations,” during which
      periods Nature, _i.e._, everything visible and invisible on a
      resting Planet—remains _in statu quo_. Nature rests and slumbers, no
      work of destruction going on upon the Globe even if no active work
      be done. All forms, as well as their astral types, remain as they
      were at the last moment of its activity. The “Night” of a Planet has
      hardly any twilight preceding it. It is caught like a huge mammoth
      by an avalanche, and remains slumbering and frozen till the next
      dawn of its new Day—a very short one indeed in comparison to the Day
      of Brahmâ.

 1575 This will be pooh‐poohed, because it will not be understood by our
      modern men of Science; but every Occultist and Theosophist will
      easily realize the process. There _can be no objective_ form on
      Earth, nor in the Universe either, without its astral prototype
      being first formed in Space. From Phidias down to the humblest
      workman in the ceramic art, a sculptor has had to create first of
      all a model in his mind, then sketch it in dimensional lines, and
      then only can he reproduce it in a three dimensional or objective
      figure. And if the human mind is a living demonstration of such
      successive stages in the process of Evolution, how can it be
      otherwise when Nature’s Mind and creative powers are concerned?

 1576 See _A Modern Zoroastrian_, p. 103.

 1577 “Darwinian Theory” in _Pedigree of Man_, p. 22.

 1578 _The Age and Origin of Man._

 1579 _Man before Metals_, p. 320, “International Scientific Series.”

 1580 _Mr. Darwin’s Philosophy of Language_, 1873.

 1581 _Cf._ his _Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, p. 304.

 1582 _A Modern Zoroastrian_, p. 136.

 1583 It thus appears that in its anxiety to prove our noble descent from
      the catarrhine “baboon,” Hæckel’s school has pushed back the times
      of pre‐historic man millions of years. (See _Pedigree of Man_, p.
      273.) Occultists, render thanks to Science for such corroboration of
      our claims!

 1584 This seems a poor compliment to pay Geology, which is not a
      speculative but as exact a Science as Astronomy—save, perhaps, its
      too risky chronological speculations. It is mainly a “descriptive”
      as opposed to an “abstract” Science.

 1585 Such newly‐coined words as “perigenesis of plastids,” “plastidule
      souls” (!), and others less comely, invented by Hæckel, may be very
      learned and correct in so far as they may express very graphically
      the ideas in his own vivid fancy. As _facts_, however, they remain
      for his less imaginative colleagues painfully cænogenetic—to use his
      own terminology; _i.e._, for true Science they are spurious
      speculations, so long as they are derived from “empirical sources.”
      Therefore, when he seeks to prove that “the origin of man from other
      mammals, and most directly from the catarrhine apes, is a deductive
      law, that follows necessarily from the inductive law of the theory
      of descent” (_Anthropogeny_, p. 392, quoted in _Pedigree of Man_, p.
      295.)—his no less learned foes (du Bois‐Reymond—for one) have a
      right to see in this sentence a mere jugglery of words; a
      “_testimonium paupertatis_ of Natural Science”—as he himself
      complains, speaking, in return, of du Bois‐Reymond’s “astonishing
      ignorance.” (See _Pedigree of Man_, notes on pp. 295, 296.)

 1586 _Pedigree of Man_, p. 273.

 1587 _Anthropogeny_, p. 392. Quoted in _Pedigree of Man_, p. 295.

 1588 The _mental_ barrier between man and ape, characterized by Huxley as
      an “enormous gap, a distance practically immeasurable” (! !) is,
      indeed, in itself conclusive. Certainly it constitutes a standing
      puzzle to the Materialist, who relies on the frail reed of “natural
      selection.” The physiological differences between Man and the Apes
      are in reality—despite a curious community of certain
      features—equally striking. Says Dr. Schweinfurth, one of the most
      cautious and experienced of Naturalists:

      “In modern times there are no animals in creation that have
      attracted a larger amount of attention from the scientific student
      of nature than these great quadrumana [the anthropoids], which are
      stamped with such a singular resemblance to the human form as to
      have justified the epithet of anthropomorphic.... But all
      investigation at present only leads human intelligence to a
      confession of its insufficiency; and nowhere is caution more to be
      advocated, nowhere is premature judgment more to be deprecated than
      in the attempt to bridge over the mysterious chasm which separates
      man and beast.” (_Heart of Africa_, i., 520. Ed., 1873.)

 1589 _The Descent of Man_, p. 160. Ed. 1888. A ridiculous instance of
      evolutionist contradictions is afforded by Schmidt (_Doctrine of
      Descent and Darwinism_, p. 292). He says: “Man’s kinship with the
      apes is ... not impugned by the bestial strength of the teeth of a
      male orang or gorilla.” Mr. Darwin, on the contrary, endows this
      fabulous being with teeth used as weapons!

 1590 According even to a fellow‐thinker, Professor Schmidt, Darwin has
      evolved “a certainly not flattering, and perhaps in many points not
      correct, portrait of our presumptive ancestors in the phase of
      dawning humanity.” (_Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, p. 284.)

 1591 _The Human Species_, pp. 106‐108.

 1592 _Op. cit._, p. 77.

 1593 Pp. 109, 110.

 1594 _Op. cit._, p. 110.

 1595 Of course the Esoteric system of Fourth Round Evolution is much more
      complex than the paragraph and quotations referred to categorically
      assert. It is practically a _reversal_—both in embryological
      inference and succession in time of species—of the current Western
      conception.

 1596 According to Hæckel, there are also “cell‐souls” and “atom‐cells”;
      an “inorganic molecular soul” without, and a “plastidular soul”
      with, or possessing, memory. What are our Esoteric teachings to
      this? The _divine and human_ soul of the seven principles in man
      must, of course, pale and give way before such a stupendous
      revelation!

 1597 _The Pedigree of Man_, p. 296.

 1598 A valuable confession, this. Only it makes the attempt to trace the
      _descent_ of consciousness in man, as well as of his physical body,
      from Bathybius Hæckelii, still more humorous and _empirical_ in the
      sense of Webster’s second definition.

 1599 _Ibid._

 1600 Those who take the opposite view and look upon the existence of the
      human Soul—“as a supernatural, a spiritual phenomenon, conditioned
      by forces altogether different from ordinary physical forces,” mock,
      he thinks, “in consequence, all explanation that is simply
      scientific.” They have no right it seems, to assert that “psychology
      is, in part, or in whole, a spiritual science, not a physical one.”
      The new discovery by Hæckel—one taught for thousands of years in all
      the Eastern religions, however—that animals have souls, will, and
      sensation, hence, soul‐functions, leads him to make of Psychology
      the science of the Zoologists. The archaic teaching that the “soul”
      (the animal and human souls, or Kâma and Manas) “has its
      developmental history”—is claimed by Hæckel as his own discovery and
      innovation on an “untrodden [?] path”! He, Hæckel, will work out the
      comparative evolution of the soul in man and in other animals. The
      comparative morphology of the soul‐organs, and the comparative
      physiology of the soul‐functions, both founded on Evolution, thus
      become the psychological [really materialistic] problem of the
      scientific man. (“Cell‐souls and Soul‐cells,” pp. 135, 136, 137,
      _Pedigree of Man_.)

 1601 _The Pedigree of Man_, note 20, p. 296.

 1602 P. 119.

 1603 See “Transmigration of Life‐Atoms,” in _Five Years of Theosophy_,
      pp. 533‐539. The collective aggregation of these atoms forms thus
      the Anima Mundi of our Solar System, the Soul of our little
      Universe, each atom of which is of course a Soul, a Monad, a little
      universe endowed with consciousness, hence with memory. (Vol. I,
      Part III, “Gods, Monads, and Atoms.”)

 1604 _Op. cit._, p. 119.

 1605 In “The Transmigration of Life‐Atoms” (_Five Years of Theosophy_, p.
      535), we say of the Jîva, or Life‐Principle, in order to better
      explain a position which is but too often misunderstood: “It is
      omnipresent ... though [on this plane of manifestation often] ... in
      a dormant state [as in stone].... The definition which states that
      when this indestructible force is ‘disconnected with one set of
      atoms [_molecules_ ought to have been said] it becomes immediately
      attracted by others,’ does not imply that it abandons entirely the
      first set [because the atoms themselves would then disappear], but
      only that it transfers its _vis viva_, or living power—the energy of
      motion, to another set. But because it manifests itself in the next
      set as what is called kinetic energy, it does not follow that the
      first set is deprived of it altogether; for it is still in it, as
      potential energy or life latent.” Now what can Hæckel mean by his
      “not identical atoms, but their peculiar motion and mode of
      aggregation,” if it is not the same kinetic energy we have been
      explaining? Before evolving such theories, he must have read
      Paracelsus and studied _Five Years of Theosophy_ without properly
      digesting the teachings.

 1606 _Op. cit._, note 21, p. 296.

 1607 _Ibid._, note 19.

 1608 _Ibid._, note 23.

 1609 _Man’s Place in Nature_, p. 159.

 1610 _Op cit._, p. 157.

 1611 _Ibid._, p. 161.

 1612 This the way _primitive man_ must have acted? We are not aware of
      men, not even of savages, in our age, who are known to have imitated
      the apes which lived side by side with them in the forests of
      America and the islands. But we do know of large apes who, tamed and
      living in houses, will mimic men to the length of donning hats and
      coats. The writer once had a chimpanzee who, without being taught,
      opened a newspaper and pretended to read it. It is the descending
      generations, the children, who mimic their parents—not the reverse.

 1613 _Ibid._, p. 151.

 1614 It is asked, whether it would change one iota of the scientific
      truth and fact contained in the above sentence if it were to read:
      “the ape is simply an instance of the biped type specialized for
      going on all fours generally, and with a smaller brain.”
      Esoterically speaking, this is the real truth, and not the reverse.

 1615 _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, pp. 151, 152.

 1616 We cannot follow Mr. Laing here. When avowed Darwinists like Huxley
      point to “the great gulf which intervenes between the lowest ape and
      the highest man in intellectual power,” the “enormous gulf ...
      between them,” the “immeasurable and practically infinite divergence
      of the human from the simian stirps” (_Man’s Place in Nature_, p.
      102 and note); when even the physical basis of mind—the brain—so
      _vastly_ exceeds in size that of the highest existing apes; when men
      like Wallace are forced to invoke the agency of extra‐terrestrial
      intelligences in order to explain the rise of such a creature as the
      pithecanthropus alalus, or speechless savage of Hæckel, to the level
      of the large‐brained and _moral_ man of to‐day—when all this is the
      case, it is idle to dismiss evolutionist puzzles so lightly. If the
      _structural_ evidence is so unconvincing and, taken as a whole, so
      hostile to Darwinism, the difficulties as to the “how” of the
      evolution of the human _mind_ by natural selection are tenfold
      greater.

 1617 A race which MM. de Quatrefages and Hamy regard as a branch of the
      same stock whence the Canary Island Guanches sprung—offshoots of the
      Atlanteans, in short.

 1618 _Ibid._, pp. 180‐182.

 1619 _Pedigree of Man_, p. 73.

 1620 Professor Owen believes that these muscles—the attollens, retrahens,
      and attrahens aurem—were actively functioning in men of the Stone
      age. This may or may not be the case. The question falls under the
      ordinary “occult” explanation, and involves no postulate of an
      “animal progenitor” to solve it.

 1621 _Man’s Place in Nature_, p. 104. To cite another good authority: “We
      find one of the most man‐like apes (gibbon) in the Tertiary period,
      and this species is _still in the same low grade_, and _side by
      side_ with it at the end of the Ice period, man is found in the same
      high grade as to‐day, the ape not having approximated more nearly to
      the man, and modern man not having become further removed from the
      ape than the first (fossil) man ... these facts contradict a theory
      of constant progressive development.” (Pfaff.) When, according to
      Vogt, the average Australian brain = 99·35 cub. inches; that of the
      gorilla 30·51, and that of the chimpanzee only 25·45, the _giant
      gap_ to be bridged by the advocate of “Natural” Selection becomes
      apparent.

 1622 Geo. T. Curtis, _Creation or Evolution?_ p. 76.

 1623 “At this period,” writes Darwin, “the arteries run in arch‐like
      branches, as if to carry the blood to branchiæ which are not present
      in the higher vertebrata, though the slits on the side of the neck
      still remain, marking their former [?] position.”

      It is noteworthy that, though gill‐clefts are absolutely useless to
      all but amphibia and fishes, etc., their appearance is regularly
      noted in the fœtal development of vertebrates. Even children are
      occasionally born with an opening in the neck corresponding to one
      of the clefts.

 1624 Those who with Hæckel regard the gill‐clefts with their attendant
      phenomena as illustrative of an active function in our amphibian and
      piscine ancestors (see his twelfth and thirteenth stages), ought to
      explain why the “vegetable with leaflets” (Prof. André Lefèvre)
      represented in fœtal growth, does not appear in his twenty‐two
      stages through which the Monera have passed in their ascent to Man.
      Hæckel does _not_ postulate a _vegetable_ ancestor. The
      embryological argument is thus a two‐edged sword and here cuts its
      possessor.

 1625 Lefèvre, _Philosophy Historical and Critical_, pt. ii. p. 480,
      “Library of Contemporary Science.”

 1626 We confess to not being able to see any good reasons for Mr. E.
      Clodd’s positive statement in _Knowledge_. Speaking of the men of
      Neolithic times, “concerning whom Mr. Grant Allen has given ... a
      vivid and accurate sketch,” and who are “the direct ancestors of
      peoples of whom remnants yet lurk in out‐of‐the‐way corners of
      Europe, where they have been squeezed or stranded,” he adds, “but
      the men of Palæolithic times can be identified with no existing
      races; they were savages of a more degraded type than any extant;
      tall, yet barely erect, with short legs and twisted knees, with
      prognathous, that is, projecting ape‐like jaws, and small brains.
      Whence they come we cannot tell, and their ‘grave knoweth no man to
      this day.’ ”

      Besides the possibility that there may be men who _know_ whence they
      came and how they perished—it is not true to say that the
      Palæolithic men, or their fossils, are all found with “small
      brains.” The oldest skull of all those hitherto found, the
      “Neanderthal skull,” is of average capacity, and Mr. Huxley was
      compelled to confess that it was no real approximation whatever to
      that of the “missing link.” There are aboriginal tribes in India
      whose brains are far smaller and nearer to that of the ape than any
      hitherto found among the skulls of Palæolithic man.

 1627 _Antiquity of Man_, p. 246.

 1628 The actual time required for such a theoretical transformation is
      necessarily enormous. “If,” says Professor Pfaff, “in the hundreds
      of thousands of years which you [the Evolutionists] accept between
      the rise of palæolithic man and our own day, a greater distance of
      man from the brute is not demonstrable [_the most ancient man was
      just as far removed from the brute as the now living man_], what
      reasonable ground can be advanced for believing that man has been
      developed from the brute, and has receded further from it by
      infinitely small gradations.... _The longer the interval of time
      placed between our times and the so‐called palæolithic men, the more
      ominous and destructive for the theory of the gradual development of
      man from the animal kingdom is the result stated._” Huxley writes
      (_Man’s Place in Nature_, p. 159) that the _most liberal_ estimates
      for the antiquity of man _must be still further_ extended.

 1629 _Fortnightly Review_, 1882. The baselessness of this assertion, as
      well as that of many other exaggerations of the imaginative Mr.
      Grant Allen, was ably exposed by the eminent Anatomist, Professor R.
      Owen, in _Longman’s Magazine_, No. 1. Must it be repeated, moreover,
      that the Cro‐Magnon Palæolithic type is superior to that of a very
      large number of existing races?

 1630 It thus stands to reason that Science would never dream of a Pre‐
      Tertiary man, and that de Quatrefages’ Secondary man makes every
      Academician and F.R.S. faint with horror because, to preserve the
      ape‐theory, Science must make man Post‐Secondary. This is just what
      de Quatrefages has twitted the Darwinists with, adding, that on the
      whole there were more scientific reasons for tracing the ape from
      man than man from the anthropoid. With this exception Science has
      not one single valid argument to offer against the antiquity of man.
      But in this case modern Evolution demands far more than the fifteen
      million years of Croll for the Tertiary period, for two very simple
      but good reasons: (_a_) no anthropoid ape has been found before the
      Miocene period; (_b_) man’s flint relics have been traced to the
      Pliocene and their presence _suspected_, if not accepted by all, in
      the Miocene strata. Again, where is the “missing link” in such case?
      And how could even a Palæolithic savage, a “man of Canstadt,” evolve
      into a _thinking_ man from the brute dryopithecus of the Miocene _in
      so short a time_? One sees now the reason why Darwin rejected the
      theory that only 60,000,000 years had elapsed since the Cambrian
      period. “He judges from the small amount of organic change since the
      commencement of the glacial epoch, and adds that the previous 140
      million years can hardly be considered as sufficient for the
      development of the varied forms of life which certainly existed
      toward the close of the Cambrian period.” (Ch. Gould, _Mythical
      Monsters_, p. 84.)

 1631 It may here be remarked that those Darwinians who, with Mr. Grant
      Allen, place our “hairy arboreal” ancestors so far back as the
      Eocene age, are landed in rather an awkward dilemma. No fossil
      anthropoid ape—much less the fabulous common ancestor assigned to
      man and the pithecoid—appears in Eocene strata. The first
      presentment of an anthropoid ape is Miocene.

 1632 Ed. Lartet, “Nouvelles Recherches sur la Coëxistence de l’Homme et
      des Grands Mammifères Fossils de la Dernière Période Géologique.”
      _Annales des Soc. Nat._, xv. 256.

 1633 See the Hibbert Lectures for 1887, p. 33.

 1634 From a Report of the Hibbert Lectures, 1887. _Lectures on the Origin
      and Growth of Religion, as Illustrated by the Religion of the
      Ancient Babylonians._ By A. H. Sayce.

 1635 See _supra_ “Chronology of the Brâhmans.”

 1636 _Nat. Philos._, by Thomson and Tait, App. D. Trans. Royal Soc.,
      Edin., xxiii. pt. 1.

 1637 _Popular Astronomy_, p. 509.

 1638 _Climate and Time_, p. 335.

 1639 Address, Liverpool Geological Society, 1876.

 1640 _World‐Life_, pp. 179, 180.

 1641 _Ibid._, pp. 367, 368.

 1642 _Climate and Time._

 1643 Quoted in Mr. Ch. Gould’s _Mythical Monsters_, p. 84.

 1644 According to Bischof, 1,004,177 years, according to Chevandier’s
      calculations 672,788 years, were required for the so‐called Coal
      formation. “The time required for the development of the strata of
      the Tertiary period, ranging from 3,000 to 5,000 feet in thickness,
      must have been at least 350,000 years.” (See _Force and Matter_,
      Büchner, p. 159, Ed. 1884.)

 1645 _Op. cit._, p. 379.

 1646 But see “The Ice‐Age Climate and Time,” _Popular Science Review_,
      xiv. 242.

 1647 Review of Kölliker’s Criticisms.

 1648 _Fallacies of Darwinism_, p. 160.

 1649 _The Genesis of Species_, Chap. VI, pp. 160‐162, Ed. 1871.

 1650 _Man’s Place in Nature_, p. 102, note.

 1651 Vol. x. art. “Geology,” p. 227. “100,000,000 of years is probably
      amply sufficient for all the requirements of Geology,” says the
      text. In France, some _savants_ do not find it nearly “sufficient.”
      Le Couturier claims 350 million years; Buffon was satisfied with 34
      millions—but there are those in the more modern schools who will not
      be content with less than 500 million years.

 1652 We are taught that the highest Dhyân Chohans, or Planetary Spirits
      (beyond the cognizance of the law of analogy), are in ignorance of
      what lies beyond the visible Planetary Systems, since their essence
      cannot assimilate itself to that of worlds beyond our Solar System.
      When they reach a higher stage of evolution these other universes
      will be open to them; meanwhile they have complete knowledge of all
      the worlds within the limits of our Solar System.

 1653 Since no single atom in the entire Kosmos is without life and
      consciousness, how much more then must its mighty globes be filled
      with both—though they remain sealed books to us men who can hardly
      enter even into the consciousness of the forms of life nearest us?

      We do not know _ourselves_, then how can we, if we have never been
      trained and initiated, fancy that we can penetrate the consciousness
      of the smallest of the animals around us?

 1654 _Pluralité des Mondes_, p. 439.

 1655 _Op. cit._, i. 4, 9.

 1656 _Hebrews_, i. 2. This relates to the Logos of every Cosmogony. The
      _unknown_ Light—with which he is said to be coëternal and coëval—is
      reflected in the First‐Born, the Protogonos; and the Demiurgos or
      the Universal Mind directs his Divine Thought into the Chaos that
      under the fashioning of minor Gods will be divided into the Seven
      Oceans—Sapta Samudras. It is Purusha, Ahura Mazda, Osiris, etc., and
      finally the Gnostic Christos, who is in the _Kabalah_, Chokmah, or
      Wisdom, the “Word.”

 1657 The _form_ of Tikkun or the Protogonos, “First‐Born,” _i.e._, the
      Universal Form and Idea, had not yet been mirrored in Chaos.

 1658 _Zohar_, iii. 292c. The “Heavenly Man” is Adam Kadmon—the synthesis
      of the Sephiroth, as “Manu Svâyambhuva” is the synthesis of the
      Prajâpatis.

 1659 _Bereshith Rabba_, Parsha IX.

 1660 This refers to the three Rounds that preceded our Fourth Round.

 1661 “Idra Suta,” _Zohar_, iii. 136c. “A sinking down from their
      status”—is plain; from active Worlds they have fallen into a
      temporary obscuration—they rest, and hence are entirely changed.

 1662 _Gen._, xxxvi. 43.

 1663 In that learned and witty work, _God and his Book_, by the
      redoubtable “Saladin” of Agnostic repute, the amusing calculation
      that, if Christ had ascended with the rapidity of a cannon ball, he
      would not yet have reached even Sirius, reminds one vividly of the
      past. It raises, perhaps, a not ill‐founded suspicion that even our
      age of scientific enlightenment may be as grossly absurd in its
      materialistic negations as the men of the Middle Ages were absurd
      and materialistic in their religious affirmations.

 1664 _Philosophy Historical and Critical_, p. 481.

 1665 Probably in excess.

 1666 _Knowledge_, Art. “The Antiquity of Man in Western Europe,” March
      31st, 1882.

 1667 Who, in another work, _La Préhistorique Antiquité de l’Homme_, some
      twenty years ago, generously allowed only 230,000 years to our
      mankind! Since we learn now that he places man in the Mid‐Miocene
      period, we must say that the much respected Professor of Prehistoric
      Anthropology in Paris is somewhat contradictory and inconsistent, if
      not _naïf_ in his views.

 1668 The root and basic idea of the origin and transformation of
      species—the _heredity_ of acquired faculties—seems to have found
      lately very serious opponents in Germany. Du Bois‐Reymond and Dr.
      Pflüger, the Physiologists, besides other men of Science as eminent
      as any, find insuperable difficulties and even impossibilities in
      the doctrine.

 1669 _History of Creation_, p. 20.

 1670 The same names are retained as those given by Science, to make the
      parallels clearer. Our terms are quite different.

 1671 Let the student remember that the Doctrine teaches that there are
      seven degrees of Devas or “Progenitors,” or seven Classes, from the
      most perfect to the less exalted.

 1672 It may be said that we are inconsistent in not introducing into this
      table a Primary‐age Man. The parallelism of Races and geological
      periods here adopted, is, so far as the origin of the First and
      Second are concerned, purely tentative, no direct information being
      available. Having previously discussed the question of a possible
      race in the Carboniferous age, it is needless to renew the debate.

 1673 During the _interim_ between one Round and another, the Globe and
      everything on it remains _in statu quo_. Remember, vegetation began
      in its ethereal form before what is called the Primordial, running
      through the Primary, and condensing in it, and reaching its full
      physical life in the Secondary.

 1674 Geologists tell us that “in the Secondary epoch, the only mammals
      which have been [hitherto] discovered in Europe are the fossil
      remains of a small marsupial or pouch‐bearer.” (_Knowledge_, March
      31st, 1882, p. 464.) Surely the marsupial or didelphis (the only
      surviving animal of the family of those which were on Earth during
      the presence on it of androgyne man) cannot be the only animal that
      was then on Earth? Its presence speaks loudly for that of other
      (though unknown) mammals, besides the monotremes and marsupials, and
      thus shows the appellation of “mammalian age” given only to the
      Tertiary period to be misleading and erroneous, as it allows one to
      infer that there were no mammals, but reptiles, birds, amphibians,
      and fishes alone in the Mesozoic times—the Secondary.

 1675 Those who feel inclined to sneer at that doctrine of Esoteric
      Ethnology, which pre‐supposes the existence of Men in the Secondary
      age, will do well to note the fact that one of the most
      distinguished Anthropologists of the day, M. de Quatrefages,
      seriously argues in that direction. He writes: “There is then
      nothing impossible in the idea that he [man] ... should have
      appeared upon the globe with the first representatives of the type
      to which he belongs by his organization.” (_The Human Species_, p.
      153.) This statement approximates most closely to our fundamental
      assertion that man preceded the other mammalia.

      Professor Lefèvre admits that the “labours of Boucher de Perthes,
      Lartet, Christy, Bourgeois, Desnoyers, Broca, De Mortillet, Hamy,
      Gaudry, Capellini, and a hundred others, have overcome all doubts,
      and clearly established the progressive development of the human
      organism and industries from the miocene epoch of the tertiary age.”
      (_Philosophy Historical and Critical_, Pt. II, p. 499, Chapter II,
      On Organic Evolution. “Library of Contemporary Science.”) Why does
      he reject the possibility of a Secondary‐age man? Simply because he
      is involved in the meshes of the Darwinian Anthropology. “The origin
      of man is bound up with that of the higher mammals”; he appeared
      “only with the _last_ types of his class”! This is not argument, but
      dogmatism. Theory can never excommunicate fact. Must everything give
      place to the mere working hypotheses of Western Evolutionists?
      Surely not!

 1676 These placentalia of the third sub‐class are divided, it appears,
      into villiplacentalia (placenta composed of many separate scattered
      tufts), the zonoplacentalia (girdle‐shaped placenta), and the
      discoplacentalia (or discoid). Hæckel sees in the marsupialia
      didelphia, one of the connecting links _genealogically_ between man
      and the moneron!!

 1677 This inclusion of the First Race in the Secondary is necessarily
      only a provisional working hypothesis—the actual chronology of the
      First, Second, and early Third Races being closely veiled by the
      Initiates. For all that can be said on the subject, the First Root‐
      Race may have been Pre‐Secondary, as is, indeed, taught.

 1678 The above parallels stand good only if Professor Croll’s earlier
      calculations are adopted, namely, of 15,000,000 years since the
      beginning of the Eocene period (see Charles Gould’s _Mythical
      Monsters_, p. 84), not those in his _Climate and Time_, which allow
      only two‐and‐a‐half million years, or at the utmost three million
      years’ duration to the Tertiary age. This, however, would make the
      whole duration of the incrusted age of the world only 131,600,000
      years, according to Professor Winchell, whereas in the Esoteric
      Doctrine, sedimentation began in _this_ Round approximately over
      320,000,000 years ago. Yet his calculations do not clash much with
      ours with regard to the epochs of glacial periods in the Tertiary
      age, which is called in our Esoteric books the “Age of the Pigmies.”
      With regard to the 320,000,000 of years assigned to sedimentation,
      it must be noted that even a greater time elapsed during the
      preparation of this Globe for the Fourth Round _previous to
      stratification_.

 1679 Though we apply the term “truly human,” only to the Fourth Atlantean
      Root‐Race, yet the Third Race is almost human in its latest portion,
      since it is during its fifth sub‐race that mankind separated
      sexually, and that the _first man was born_ according to the now
      normal process. This “first man” answers, in the _Bible_, to Enos or
      Henoch, son of Seth (_Genesis_, iv.).

 1680 Geology records the former existence of a universal ocean, and
      sheets of marine sediment uniformly present everywhere testify to
      it; but it is not even the epoch referred to in the allegory of
      Vaivasvata Manu. The latter is a Deva‐Man (or Manu) saving in an Ark
      (the female principle) the germs of humanity, and also the seven
      Rishis—who stand here as the symbols for the seven human
      principles—of which allegory we have spoken elsewhere. The
      “Universal Deluge” is the Watery Abyss of the Primordial Principle
      of Berosus. (See Stanzas ii to viii, in Part I.) How, if 15 million
      years are allowed by Croll to have elapsed since the Eocene period
      (which we state on the authority of a Geologist, Mr. Ch. Gould),
      only 60 millions are assigned by him “since the beginning of the
      Cambrian period, in the Primordial age”—passes comprehension. The
      Secondary strata are twice the thickness of the Tertiary, and
      Geology thus shows the Secondary age alone to be of twice the length
      of the Tertiary. Shall we then accept only 15 million years for both
      the Primary and the Primordial? No wonder Darwin rejected the
      calculation.

 1681 See _Esoteric Buddhism_, pp. 53‐55, Fourth Ed.

 1682 We hope that we have furnished all the scientific data for it
      elsewhere.

 1683 It is conceded by Geology to be “beyond doubt that a considerable
      period must have supervened after the departure of Palæolithic man
      and before the arrival of his Neolithic successor.” (See James
      Geikie’s _Prehistoric Europe_, and Ch. Gould’s _Mythical Monsters_,
      p. 98.)

 1684 Resembling in a manner the pile‐villages of Northern Borneo.

 1685 “The most clever sculptor of modern times would probably not succeed
      very much better, if his graver were a splinter of flint, and stone
      and bone were the materials to be engraved”! (Prof. Boyd Dawkins’
      _Cave‐Hunting_, p. 344.) It is needless after such a concession to
      further insist on Huxley’s, Schmidt’s, Laing’s, and others’
      statements to the effect that Palæolithic man cannot be considered
      to lead us back in any way to a pithecoid human race; thus they
      demolish the fantasies of many superficial evolutionists. The relic
      of artistic merit here _reäppearing_ in the Chipped‐Stone‐age men,
      is traceable to their _Atlantean_ ancestry. Neolithic man was a
      fore‐runner of the great Âryan invasion, and immigrated from quite
      another quarter—Asia, and in a measure Northern Africa. The tribes
      peopling the latter towards the North‐West, were certainly of an
      Atlantean origin—dating back hundreds of thousands of years before
      the Neolithic Period in Europe—but they had so diverged from the
      parent type as to present no longer any marked characteristic
      peculiar to it. As to the contrast between Neolithic and Palæolithic
      man, it is a remarkable fact that, as Carl Vogt points out, _the
      former was a cannibal, the much earlier man of the Mammoth era was
      not_. Human manners and customs do not seem to improve with time,
      then? Not in this instance at any rate.

 1686 _Op. cit._, p. 97.

 1687 _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, p. 181.

 1688 _Ibid._, p. 112.

 1689 On the data furnished by Modern Science, Physiology, and Natural
      Selection, and without resorting to any miraculous creation, two
      human negro specimens of the lowest intelligence—say idiots born
      dumb—might by breeding produce a dumb Pastrana species, which would
      start a new modified race, and thus produce, in the course of
      geological time, the regular anthropoid ape.

 1690 _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 64.

 1691 _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, p. 98.

 1692 _Anfänge zu einer Physiologischen Schöpfungs‐geschichte der
      Pflanzen‐ und Thierwelt, 1885._

 1693 _Op. cit._, p. 212.

 1694 _Ibid._, p. 11.

 1695 _Man’s Place in Nature_, p. 159.

 1696 Sir W. Dawson, LL.D., F.R.S., _Origin of the World_, p. 39.

 1697 _Prehistoric Antiquity of Man_, 1883.

 1698 _Antiquity of Man_, p. 25.

 1699 _India, What can it Teach Us?_ A course of Lectures delivered before
      the University of Cambridge in 1882. Lecture III., p. 110, Ed. 1892.

 1700 _Antiquity of Man Historically Considered._ “Present Day Tracts,”
      Vol. II, Essay IX, p. 25.

 1701 _Op. cit._, pp. 10, 11.

 1702 _Op. cit._, i. 4.

 1703 Palæolithic man must have been endowed in his day with thrice
      Herculean force and magic invulnerability, or else the lion was as
      weak as a lamb at that period, for both to share the same dwelling.
      We may as well be asked to believe that it is that lion or hyæna
      which engraved the deer on the antler, as be told that this piece of
      workmanship was done by a savage of such a kind.

 1704 _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, p. 164.

 1705 _Ibid._, p. 199.

 1706 More than twenty specimens of fossil monkeys have been found in one
      locality alone, in Miocene strata (Pikermi, near Athens). If man was
      not then, the period is too short for him to have been
      _transformed_—stretch it as one may. And if he was, and if no monkey
      is found earlier, what follows?

 1707 Dr. C. Carter Blake, Art., “The Genesis of Man.”

 1708 _Antiquity of Man_, p. 530.

 1709 New Series, i. 115, Art., “Evidences of the Age of Ice.”

 1710 _Fallacies of Darwinism._

 1711 _Op. cit._, p. 501, Ed. 1863.

 1712 _Op. cit._, iv. 162.

 1713 See on this question Wilson’s _Prehistoric Man_, ii. 54; _Origin of
      the World_, pp. 393, 394.

 1714 And how much more “enormous” if we reverse the subjects, and say
      during the monkey’s development from the Third Race Man.

 1715 _Op. cit._, pp. 160, 161.

 1716 _Principles of Biology_, i. 345.

 1717 _Modern Science and Modern Thought_, p. 94.

 1718 _Ibid._

 1719 The Darwinian theory has been so strained, that even Huxley was
      forced at one time to deprecate its occasional degeneration into
      “fanaticism.” Oscar Schmidt presents a good instance of a thinker
      who unconsciously exaggerates the worth of a hypothesis. He admits
      (_The Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, p. 158), that “natural
      selection ... is in some cases ... inadequate, ... in others ... not
      requisite, as the solution of the formation of species is found in
      other natural conditions.” He also asserts the “intermediate grades
      are ... wanting, which would entitle us to infer with certainty the
      direct transition from implacental to placental mammals” (p. 271);
      that “we are referred entirely to conjecture and inference for the
      origin of the mammals” (p. 268); and he speaks of the repeated
      failures of the framers of “hypothetical pedigrees,” more especially
      of Hæckel, while regarding their attempts as valuable (p. 250).
      Nevertheless he asserts (p. 194) that “what we have gained by the
      doctrine of descent based on the theory of selection ... is the
      knowledge of the connection of organisms as consanguineous beings.”
      Knowledge, in the face of the above‐cited concessions, is, then, the
      synonym for conjecture and theory only?

 1720 _The Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, p. 268.

 1721 _Ibid._, pp. 273‐275.

 1722 Bear in mind, please, that though the animals—mammalians
      included—have all been evolved after and partially _from_ man’s
      cast‐off tissues, still, as a far lower being, the mammalian animal
      became placental and separated far earlier than man.

 1723 Scientists now admit that Europe enjoyed in the Miocene times a
      warm, in the Pliocene or later Tertiary, a temperate climate.
      Littré’s contention as to the balmy spring of the Quaternary—to
      which deposits M. de Perthes’ discoveries of flint implements are
      traceable (since when the Somme has worn down its valley many scores
      of feet)—must be accepted with much reservation. The Somme‐Valley
      relics are _post‐glacial_, and possibly point to the immigration of
      savages during one of the more temperate periods intervening between
      _minor_ ages of Ice.

 1724 “Whence they [the old cave‐men] came, we cannot tell” (Grant Allen).
      “The palæolithic hunters of the Somme Valley did not originate in
      that inhospitable climate, but moved into Europe from some more
      genial region” (Dr. Southall, _Epoch of the Mammoth_, p. 315).

 1725 The _pure_ Atlantean stocks—of which the tall Quaternary cave‐men
      were, in part, the direct descendants—immigrated into Europe long
      prior to the Glacial period; in fact as far back as the Pliocene and
      Miocene times in the Tertiary. The worked Miocene flints of Thenay,
      and the traces of Pliocene man discovered by Professor Capellini in
      Italy, are witnesses to the fact. These colonists were portions of
      the once glorious Race, whose cycle from the Eocene onwards had been
      running down the scale.

 1726 The artistic skill displayed by the old cave‐men renders the
      hypothesis which regards them as approximations to the
      pithecanthropus alalus—that very mythical Hæeckelian monster—an
      absurdity requiring no Huxley or Schmidt to expose it. We see in
      their skill in engraving a gleam of Atlantean culture atavistically
      reäppearing. It will be remembered that Donnelly regards modern
      European civilization as a _renaissance_ of the Atlantean.
      (_Atlantis_, pp. 237‐264.)

 1727 _Philosophy Historical and Critical_, Pt. II. p. 504, chap., “On
      Organic Evolution.”

 1728 _Lettres sur l’Atlantide_, p. 12.

 1729 _Histoire de l’Astronomie Ancienne_, pp. 25, _et seqq._

 1730 _Lettres sur l’Atlantide_, p. 15. This conjecture is but a half‐
      guess. There were such “deluges of barbarians” in the Fifth Race.
      With regard to the Fourth, it was a _bonâ fide_ deluge of water
      which swept it away. Neither Voltaire nor Bailly, however, knew
      anything of the Secret Doctrine of the East.

 1731 For a full discussion of the relations between the _old_ Greeks and
      Romans, and the Atlantean colonists, see _Five Years of Theosophy_,
      pp. 308‐346.

 1732 _Timæus_, translated by H. Davis, pp. 326‐328.

 1733 The story about Atlantis and all the traditions thereon were told,
      as all know, by Plato in his _Timæus and Critias_. Plato, when a
      child, had it from his grand‐sire Critias, aged ninety, who in his
      youth had been told of it by Solon, his father Dropides’
      friend—Solon, one of the Seven Sages of Greece. No more reliable
      source could be found, we should think.

 1734 See Dr. Carter Blake’s paper “On the Naulette Jaw,” _Anthropological
      Review_, Sept., 1867.

 1735 See de Quatrefages and Hamy, _Crânes des Races Humaines_.

 1736 Hæckel’s “man‐ape” of the Miocene period is the dream of a
      monomaniac, which de Quatrefages (_Human Species_, pp. 105‐113) has
      cleverly disposed of. It is not clear why the world should accept
      the lucubrations of a psychophobic Materialist—to accept whose
      theory necessitates the acceptance _on faith_ of various animals
      unknown to Science or Nature, like the Sozura, for instance, that
      amphibian which has never existed anywhere outside Hæckel’s
      imagination—rather than the traditions of antiquity.

 1737 But see the mass of evidence collected by Donnelly to prove the
      Peruvian colony an offshoot of the Atlanteans.

 1738 _Cavernes de Périgord_, p. 35.

 1739 The ingenious author of _Atlantis, the Ante‐diluvian World_, in
      discussing the origin of various Grecian and Roman institutions,
      expresses his conviction that “the roots of the institutions of to‐
      day reach back to the Miocene age.” Ay, and further yet, as already
      stated.

 1740 _The Human Species_, p. 152.

 1741 As we know them, however. For not only does Geology prove that the
      British Islands have been _four times submerged and reëlevated_, but
      that the straits between them and Europe were dry land at a former
      remote epoch.

 1742 See, in _Isis Unveiled_ (i. 627), what Kullûka Bhatta says.

 1743 _Les Origines de la Terre et de l’Homme_, p. 454. To this, Professor
      N. Joly, of Toulouse, who thus quotes the Abbé in his _Man before
      Metals_, expresses the hope that M. Fabre will permit him “to differ
      from him on this last point” (p. 186). So do the Occultists; for
      though they claim a vast difference in the physiology and outward
      appearance of the five Races so far evolved, still they maintain
      that the present human species has descended from one and the same
      primitive stock, evolved from the Divine Men—our common ancestors
      and progenitors.

 1744 _Loc. cit._, 15, 18.

 1745 _Ibid._, 16.

 1746 _Op. cit._, 8‐10.

 1747 “The flints of Thenay bear unmistakable trace of the work of human
      hands.” (G. de Mortillet, _Promenades au Musèe de St. Germain_, p.
      76.)

 1748 Albert Gaudry, _Les Enchainements du Monde Animal dans les Temps
      Géologiques_, p. 240.

 1749 Speaking of the reindeer hunters of Périgord, Joly says that they
      “were of great height, athletic, with a strongly built skeleton.”
      (_Man before Metals_, p. 353.)

 1750 “On the shores of the lake of Beauce,” says the Abbé Bourgeois, “man
      lived in the midst of a fauna which completely disappeared
      (aceratherium, tapir, mastodon). With the fluviatile sands of
      Orléannais came the anthropomorphous monkey (pliopitliecus
      antiquus); therefore, later than man.” See _Comptes Rendus_ of the
      “Prehistoric Congress” of 1867 at Paris.

 1751 De Quatrefages, _The Human Species_, p. 312.

 1752 “In making soundings in the slimy soil of the Nile Valley, two baked
      bricks were discovered, one at the depth of 20, the other at 24
      yards. If we estimate the thickness of the annual deposit formed by
      the river at 8 inches a century [more careful calculations have
      shown no more than from three to five per century], we must assign
      to the first of these bricks an age of 12,000 years, and to the
      second that of 14,000 years. By means of analogous calculations,
      Burmeister supposes 72,000 years to have elapsed since the first
      appearance of man upon the soil of Egypt, and Draper attributes to
      the European man who witnessed the last glacial epoch, an antiquity
      of more than 250,000 years.” (_Man before Metals_, p. 183.) Egyptian
      Zodiacs show more than 75,000 years of observation! Note well also
      that Burmeister speaks only of the Delta population.

 1753 See _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 66, Fifth Edition.

 1754 Or on what are now the British Isles, which were not yet detached
      from the main continent in those days. “The ancient inhabitant of
      Picardy could pass into Great Britain without crossing the Channel.
      The British Isles were united to Gaul by an isthmus which has since
      been submerged.” (_Man before Metals_, p. 184.)

 1755 He witnessed and remembered it too, as “the final disappearance of
      the largest continent [of Atlantis] was an event coïncident with the
      elevation of the Alps,” a Master writes (see _Esoteric Buddhism_ p.
      70). _Pari passu_, as one portion of the dry land of our hemisphere
      disappeared, some land of the new continent emerged from the seas.
      It is on this colossal cataclysm, which lasted during a period of
      150,000 years, that traditions of all the “deluges” are built, the
      Jews constructing their version on an event which took place later,
      on Poseidonis.

 1756 “The Antiquity of the Human Race,” in _Man before Metals_, by M.
      Joly, p. 184.

 1757 The scientific “jury” disagreed, as usual; while de Quatrefages, de
      Mortillet, Worsaæ, Engelhardt, Waldemar, Schmidt, Capellini, Hamy,
      and Cartailhac, saw upon the flints the traces of human handiwork,
      Steenstrup, Virchow and Desor refused to do so. Still the majority,
      if we except some English Scientists, are for Bourgeois.

 1758 We take the following description from a scientific work. “The first
      of these animals [the alligator] designed with considerable skill,
      is no less than 250 ft. long.... The interior is formed of a heap of
      stones, over which the form has been moulded in fine stiff clay. The
      great serpent is represented with open mouth, in the act of
      swallowing an egg of which the diameter is 100 ft. in the thickest
      part; the body of the animal is wound in graceful curves and the
      tail is rolled into a spiral. The entire length of the animal is
      1,100 ft. This work is unique ... and there is nothing on the old
      continent which offers any analogy to it.” Except, however, its
      symbolism of the Serpent (the Cycle of Time) swallowing the Egg
      (Kosmos).

 1759 It might be better, perhaps, for _fact_ had we more “specialists” in
      Science and fewer “authorities” on universal questions. We have
      never heard that Humboldt gave authoritative and final decisions in
      the matter of polypi, or on the nature of an excrescence.

 1760 57,000 years is the date assigned by Dr. Dowler to the remains of
      the human skeleton, found buried beneath four ancient forests at New
      Orleans on the banks of the Mississippi river.

 1761 Murray says of the Mediterranean barbarians that they marvelled at
      the prowess of the Atlanteans. “Their physical strength was
      extraordinary [witness indeed their cyclopean buildings], the earth
      shaking sometimes under their tread. Whatever they did, was done
      speedily.... They were wise and communicated their wisdom to men”
      (_Mythology_, p. 4).

 1762 Art. by Dr. C. Carter Blake, 1871.

 1763 But the Magi of Persia were never Persians—not even Chaldæans. They
      came from a far‐off land, the Orientalists being of opinion that the
      said land was Media. This may be so, but from what part of Media? To
      this we receive no answer.

 1764 _Op. cit._, p. 160.

 1765 _Op. cit._, pp. 3‐13.

 1766 _Civilization of the Eastern Iranians in Ancient Times_, pp. 130,
      131.

 1767 Bûmî haptâita, _Yasna_, xxxii. 3.

 1768 _Cf._, for instance, vol. i. p. 4, of the Pahlavi Translation;
      _Bdh._ xxi. 2, 3.

 1769 Footnote by Dârâb Dastur Peshotan Sanjânâ, B.A., the translator of
      Dr. Wilhelm Geiger’s work on the _Civilization of the Eastern
      Iranians_.

 1770 _Op. cit._, pp. 130, 131.

 1771 Dr. Kenealy, in his _Book of God_, quotes Vallancey, who says: “I
      had not been a week landed in Ireland from Gibraltar, ... where I
      had studied Hebrew and Chaldaic under Jews of various countries ...
      when I heard a peasant girl say to a boor standing by her, ‘Feach an
      Maddin Nag’ (Behold the morning star), pointing to the planet Venus,
      the Maddina Nag of the Chaldæan” (pp. 162, 163).

 1772 _Lib._ iv.

 1773 There was a time when the whole world, the totality of mankind, had
      one religion, and when they were of “one lip.” “All the religions of
      the earth were at first one and emanated from one centre,” says
      Faber very truly.

 1774 _Critias_, translated by Davis, p. 415.

 1775 Plato’s veracity has been so unwarrantably impeached by even such
      friendly critics as Professor Jowett, when the story of Atlantis has
      been discussed, that it seems well to cite the testimony of a
      specialist on the subject. It is sufficient to place mere literary
      cavillers in a very ridiculous position:

      “If our knowledge of Atlantis was more thorough, it would no doubt
      appear that in every instance wherein the people of Europe accord
      with the people of America, they were both in accord with the people
      of Atlantis.... It will be seen that in every case where Plato gives
      us any information in this respect as to Atlantis, we find this
      agreement to exist. It existed in architecture, sculpture,
      navigation, engraving, writing, an established priesthood, the mode
      of worship, agriculture, and the construction of roads and canals;
      and it is reasonable to suppose that the same correspondence
      extended down to all the minor details.” (Donnelly, _Atlantis_, p.
      164. Twenty‐fourth Ed.)

 1776 Christians ought not to object to this doctrine of the periodical
      destruction of continents by fire and water; for St. Peter speaks of
      the Earth “standing out of the water, and in the water, whereby the
      world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished, but [is
      now] reserved unto fire” (II. iii. 5‐7. See also the _Lives of
      Alchemystical Philosophers_, p. 4, London, 1815).

 1777 See Hesiod’s _Theogony_, 507‐509, and _Odyssey_, i. 51‐53.

 1778 _Mèmoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions_, p. 176.

 1779 Æschylus, _Prometheus Vinctus_, 351, 429, etc.

 1780 iv. 184.

 1781 _Pyth._, i. 20; Decharme, _op. cit._, p. 315.

 1782 This does not mean that Atlas is the locality where it fell, for
      this took place in Northern and Central Asia; but that Atlas formed
      part of the Continent.

 1783 Had not Diocletian burned the Esoteric works of the Egyptians in
      A.D. 296, together with their books on Alchemy, “περὶ χυμείας
      ἀργύρου καὶ χρυσοῦ”; Cæsar 700,000 rolls at Alexandria; Leo Isaurus
      300,000 at Constantinople (eighth cent.); and the Mahommedans all
      they could lay their sacrilegious hands on—the world might know to‐
      day more of Atlantis than it does. For Alchemy had its birthplace in
      Atlantis during the Fourth Race, and had only its _renaissance_ in
      Egypt.

 1784 Professor Max Müller’s Lectures—_On the Philosophy of Mythology_—are
      before us. We read his citations of Heracleitus (460 B.C.),
      declaring that Homer deserved “to be ejected from public assemblies
      and flogged”; and of Xenophanes “holding Homer and Hesiod
      responsible for the popular superstitions of Greece,” and for
      ascribing “to the gods whatever is disgraceful and scandalous among
      men ... unlawful acts, such as theft, adultery, and fraud.” Finally
      the Oxford Professor quotes from Professor Jowett’s translation of
      Plato, where the latter tells Adaimantus (_Republic_) that “the
      young man [in the state] should not be told that in committing the
      worst of crimes, he is far from doing anything outrageous, and that
      he may chastise his father [as Zeus did with Cronus] ... in any
      manner that he likes, and in this will only be following the example
      of the first and greatest of the gods.... In my opinion, these
      stories are _not fit to be repeated_.” To this Prof. Max Müller
      observes that: “the Greek religion was clearly a national and
      _traditional_ religion, and, as such, it shared both the advantages
      and disadvantages _of this form of religious belief_”; while the
      Christian religion is “an _historical_ and, to a great extent, an
      individual religion, and it possesses the advantage of an authorized
      codex and of a settled system of faith” (p. 349). So much the worse
      if it is “historical,” for surely Lot’s incident with his daughters
      would only gain, were it “allegorical.”

 1785 ἁοιδῶν οἶδε δυστῆνοι λόγοι, _Hercules Furens_, 1346, Dindorf’s
      Edition.

 1786 _Critias_, 421.

 1787 Neptune or Poseidon is the Hindû Idas‐pati, identical with Nârâyana
      (the Mover on the Waters) or Vishnu, and like this Hindû God he is
      shown crossing the whole horizon in _three steps_. Idas‐pati means
      also the “Master of the Waters.”

 1788 Bailly’s assertion that the 9,000 years mentioned by the Egyptian
      priests do not represent “solar years” is groundless. Bailly knew
      nothing of Geology and its calculations; otherwise he would have
      spoken differently.

 1789 See _Matsya Purâna_, which places him among the seven Prajâpatis of
      the period.

 1790 _Iliad_, xxiv. 79.

 1791 _Op. cit._, p. 126.

 1792 The equivalent of this name is given in the original.

 1793 Deucalion is said to have brought the worship of Adonis and Osiris
      into Phœnicia. Now this worship is that of the Sun, lost and found
      again in its astronomical significance. It is only at the Pole that
      the Sun dies out for such a length of time as six months, for in
      latitude 68° it remains _dead_ only for forty days, as in the
      festival of Osiris. The two worships were born in the north of
      Lemuria, or on that Continent of which Asia was a kind of broken
      prolongation, and which stretched up to the polar regions. This is
      well shown by de Gebelin’s _Allegories d’Orient_, p. 246, and by
      Bailly; though neither Hercules nor Osiris are _solar myths_, save
      in one of their seven aspects.

 1794 The Hyperboreans, now regarded as mythical, are described (Herod.,
      iv. 33‐35; Pausanius, i. 31, 32; v. 7, 8; x. 5, 7, 8) as the beloved
      priests and servants of the Gods, and of Apollo chiefly.

 1795 The Cyclopes are not the only “one‐eyed” representatives in
      tradition. The Arimaspes were a Scythian people, and were also
      credited with but one eye. (_Géographie Ancienne_, ii. 321.) It is
      they whom Apollo destroyed with his shafts.

 1796 Ulysses was wrecked on the isle of Ææa, where Circe changed all his
      companions into pigs _for their voluptuousness_; and after that he
      was thrown into Ogygia, the island of Calypso, where for some seven
      years he lived with the nymph in illicit connection. Now Calypso was
      a daughter of Atlas (_Odys._, xii.), and all the traditional ancient
      versions, when speaking of the Isle of Ogygia, say that it was very
      distant from Greece, and right in the middle of the Ocean; thus
      identifying it with Atlantis.

 1797 Hygin., _Astron. Poétique_, ii. 15.

 1798 _Nineteenth Century_, July, 1887.

 1799 Diod. Sic., ii. 307.

 1800 To make a difference between Lemuria and Atlantis, the ancient
      writers referred to the latter as the Northern or Hyperborean
      Atlantis, and to the former as the Southern. Thus Apollodorus says
      (_Mythology_, Book ii): “The golden apples carried away by Hercules
      are not, as some think, in Lybia; they are in the Hyperborean
      Atlantis.” The Greeks naturalized all the Gods they borrowed and
      made Hellenes of them, and the moderns helped them. Thus also the
      Mythologists have tried to make of Eridanus the river Po, in Italy.
      In the myth of Phaeton it is said that at his death his sisters
      dropped hot tears which fell into Eridanus and were changed into
      amber! Now amber is found only in the northern seas, in the Baltic.
      Phaeton, meeting with his death while carrying heat to the frozen
      stars of the boreal regions, awakening at the Pole the Dragon made
      rigid by cold, and being hurled down into the Eridanus, is an
      allegory referring directly to the changes of climate in those
      distant times when, from a frigid zone, the polar lands had become a
      country with a moderate and warm climate. The usurper of the
      functions of the Sun, Phaeton, being hurled into the Eridanus by
      Jupiter’s thunderbolt, is an allusion to the second change that took
      place in those regions when, once more, the land where “the magnolia
      blossomed” became the desolate forbidding land of the farthest north
      and eternal ice. This allegory covers then the events of two
      Pralayas; and if well understood, ought to be a demonstration of the
      enormous antiquity of the human races.

 1801 _Iliad_, xvii. 431‐453.

 1802 _Ibid._, 322‐336.

 1803 See Apollodorus for this number.

 1804 See “The Sons of God and the Sacred Island.”

 1805 So occult and mystic is one of the aspects of Latona that she is
      made to reappear even in _Revelation_ (xii), as the woman clothed
      with the Sun (Apollo) and the Moon (Diana) under her feet, who being
      with child “cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.”
      A great red Dragon stands before the woman ready to devour the
      child. She brings forth the man‐child who was to rule all nations
      with a rod of iron, and who was caught unto the throne of God—the
      Sun. The woman fled to the wilderness still pursued by the Dragon,
      who flees again, and casts out of his mouth water as a flood, when
      the Earth helped the woman and swallowed the flood; and the Dragon
      went to make war with the remnant of her seed who kept the
      commandments of God. (See xii. 1, 17.) Anyone who reads the allegory
      of Latona pursued by the revenge of jealous Juno, will recognize the
      identity of the two versions. Juno sends Python, the Dragon, to
      persecute and destroy Latona and devour her babe. The latter is
      Apollo, the Sun, for the man‐child of _Revelation_, “who was to rule
      all nations with a rod of iron” is surely not the meek “Son of God,”
      Jesus, but the physical Sun, “who rules all nations”; the Dragon
      being the North Pole, gradually chasing the early Lemurians from the
      lands which became more and more Hyperborean and unfit to be
      inhabited by those who were fast developing into physical men, for
      they now had to deal with the climatic variations. The Dragon will
      not allow Latona “to bring forth”—the Sun to appear. “She is driven
      from heaven, and finds no place where she can bring forth,” until
      Neptune, the Ocean, in pity, makes immovable the floating isle of
      Delos—the nymph Asteria, hitherto hiding from Jupiter under the
      waves of the Ocean—on which Latona finds refuge, and where the
      bright God Delius is born, the God, who no sooner appears than he
      kills Python, the cold and frost of the Arctic region, in whose
      deadly coils all life becomes extinct. In other words, Latona‐
      Lemuria is transformed into Niobe‐Atlantis, over which her son
      Apollo, or the Sun, reigns—with an iron rod, truly, since Herodotus
      makes the Atlantes _curse_ his too great heat. This allegory is
      reproduced in its other mystic meaning (another of the seven keys)
      in the just cited chapter of _Revelation_. Latona became a powerful
      Goddess indeed, and saw her son receive worship (solar worship) in
      almost every fane of antiquity. In his Occult aspect Apollo is
      patron of number Seven. He is born on the seventh of the month, and
      the swans of Myorica swim seven times round Delos singing that
      event; he is given seven chords to his Lyre—the seven rays of the
      Sun and the seven forces of Nature. But this is only in the
      astronomical meaning, whereas the above is purely geological.

 1806 See Ovid, _Metamorphoses_, vi.

 1807 _Lettres sur l’Atlantide_, p. 137.

 1808 Hesiod, _Opera et Dies_, 143.

 1809 _Hist. Nat._, iv. 12.

 1810 _Marius._

 1811 _Op. cit._, c. 16.

 1812 Isaac Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 139.

 1813 Diod., ii. 225.

 1814 _Op. cit._, xxxvii. 2.

 1815 Vol. i. pp. 462‐464.

 1816 These islands were “found strewn with fossils of horses, sheep,
      oxen, etc., among gigantic bones of elephants, mammoths,
      rhinoceroses,” etc. If there was no man on Earth at that period “how
      came horses and sheep to be found in company with the huge
      antediluvians?”—asks a Master in a letter. (_Esoteric Buddhism_, p.
      67.) The reply is given above in the text.

 1817 _Op. cit._, iv. 239‐262.

 1818 A good proof that all the Gods, and religious beliefs, and myths
      have come from the North, which was also the cradle of _physical_
      man, lies in several suggestive words which have originated and
      remain to this day among the northern tribes in their primeval
      significance; but, although there was a time when all the nations
      were of “one lip,” these words have received a different meaning
      with the Greeks and Latins. One such word is _mann_, _man_, a living
      being, and _manes_, dead men. The Laplanders call their corpses to
      this day _manee_ (_Voyage de Rénard en Laponie_, i. 184). _Mannus_
      is the ancestor of the German race; the Hindû _Manu_, the thinking
      being, from _man_; the Egyptian _Menes_; and _Minos_, the King of
      Crete, judge of the infernal regions after his death—all proceed
      from the same word or root.

 1819 Thus, for instance, Gyges is a hundred‐armed and fifty‐headed
      monster, a Demi‐god in one case, and a Lydian, the successor of
      Candaules, king of the country, in another version. The same is
      found in the Indian Pantheon, where Rishis and the Sons of Brahmâ
      are reborn as mortals.

 1820 _Op. cit._, viii. 13.

 1821 The continents perish in turn by fire and water; either through
      earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, or by sinking and the great
      displacement of waters. Our continents have to perish by the former
      cataclysmal process. The incessant earthquakes of the past years may
      be a warning.

 1822 See Decharme’s _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_.

 1823 Denis, the Geographer, tells us that the great sea north of Asia was
      called glacial, or Saturnine (v. 35). Orpheus (v. 1077) and Pliny
      (iv. 16) corroborate the statement by showing that it was its giant
      inhabitants who gave it the name. And the Secret Doctrine explains
      both assertions by telling us that all the continents were formed
      from North to South; and that as the sudden change of climate
      dwarfed the race that had been born on it, arresting its growth, so,
      several degrees southward, various conditions had always produced
      the tallest men in every new humanity, or race. We see it to this
      day. The tallest men now found are those in Northern countries,
      while the smallest are Southern Asiatics, Hindûs, Chinamen,
      Japanese, etc. Compare the tall Sikhs and Punjabees, the Afghans,
      Norwegians, Russians, Northern Germans, Scotchmen, and English, with
      the inhabitants of Central India and the average European on the
      continent. Thus also the Giants of Atlantis, and hence the Titans of
      Hesiod, are all Northerners.

 1824 Having already given several instances of the vagaries of Science,
      it is delightful to find such agreement in this particular case.
      Read in connection with the scientific admission (cited elsewhere)
      of the Geologists’ ignorance of even the approximate duration of
      periods, the following passage is highly instructive: “We are not
      yet able to assign an approximate date for the most recent epoch at
      which our northern hemisphere was covered with glaciers. According
      to Mr. Wallace, this epoch may have occurred no more than seventy
      thousand years ago, while others would assign to it an antiquity of
      at least two hundred thousand years, and there are yet others who
      urge strong arguments on behalf of the opinion that a million of
      years is barely enough to have produced the changes which have taken
      place since that event.” (Fiske, _Cosmic Philosophy_, i. 304, Ed.
      1874.) Prof. Lefèvre, again, gives us as _his_ estimate one hundred
      thousand years. Clearly, then, if Modern Science is unable to
      estimate the date of so comparatively recent an era as the Glacial
      Epoch, it can hardly impeach the Esoteric Chronology of Race‐Periods
      and Geological Ages.

 1825 Cited in Schmidt’s _Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, pp. 300,
      301.

 1826 _Philosophy Historical and Critical_, p. 508.

 1827 _Human Species_, pp. 428, _et seqq._

 1828 Art., “The First Volume of the Publications of the ’Challenger,’” p.
      2, Nov. 4th, 1880.

 1829 _Op. cit._, Art., “Australia and Europe formerly one Continent” (v.
      19, 25). Undoubtedly a fact, and a confirmation of the Esoteric
      conception of Lemuria, which originally not only embraced great
      areas in the Indian and Pacific Oceans, but projected round South
      Africa into the North Atlantic. Its Atlantic portion subsequently
      became the geological basis of the future home of the Fourth Race
      Atlanteans.

 1830 _Ibid._, i. 143.

 1831 _Cf._, the published reports of the “Challenger” expedition; also
      Donnelly’s _Atlantis_, p. 468 and pp. 46‐56, Chap., “The Testimony
      of the Sea.”

 1832 Even the cautious Lefèvre speaks of the existence of Tertiary men on
      “upheaved lands, islands and continents then flourishing, but since
      submerged beneath the waters,” and elsewhere introduces a “possible
      Atlantis” to explain ethnological facts. _Cf._, his _Philosophy
      Historical and Critical_, pp. 478 and 504. Mr. Donnelly remarks with
      rare intuition that “modern civilization is Atlantean ... the
      inventive faculty of the present age is taking up the great
      delegated work of creation where Atlantis left it thousands of years
      ago” (_Atlantis_, p. 177. Twenty‐fourth Ed.). He also refers the
      origin of culture to the Miocene times. It is, however, to be sought
      for in the teachings given to the Third Race men by their Divine
      Rulers—at a vastly earlier period.

 1833 An equally “curious” similarity may be traced between some of the
      West Indian and West African fauna.

 1834 The Pacific portion of the giant Lemurian Continent christened by
      Dr. Carter Blake, the Anthropologist, “Pacificus.”

 1835 “Subsidence and Elevation,” _Geological Magazine_, pp. 241, 245,
      June, 1881.

 1836 _Antiquity of Man_, p. 492.

 1837 When Howard read, before the Royal Society of London, a paper on the
      first serious researches that were made on the aerolites, the Geneva
      Naturalist Pictet, who was present, communicated, on his return to
      Paris, the facts reported to the French Academy of Sciences. But he
      was forthwith interrupted by Laplace, the great Astronomer, who
      cried: “Stop! we have had enough of such _fables_, and know all
      about them,” thus making Pictet feel very small. Globular‐shaped
      lightnings or thunder‐bolts have been admitted by Science only since
      Arago demonstrated their existence. Says de Rochat (_Forces Non‐
      definies_, p. 4): “Every one remembers Dr. Bouilland’s misadventure
      at the Academy of Medicine when he had declared Edison’s phonograph
      ‘_a trick of ventriloquism_’!”

 1838 _Principles of Geology_, i. 9, 10.

 1839 _Ibid._

 1840 The Cyclic Law of Race‐Evolution is most unwelcome to Scientists. It
      is sufficient to mention the fact of “primeval civilization” to
      excite the frenzy of Darwinians; it being obvious that the further
      culture and science is pushed back, the more precarious becomes the
      basis of the ape‐ancestor theory. But as Jacolliot says: “Whatever
      there may be in these traditions [submerged continents, etc.], and
      whatever may have been the place where a civilization more ancient
      than that of Rome, of Greece, of Egypt, and of India, was developed,
      it is certain that this civilization did exist, and it is highly
      important for science to recover its traces, however feeble and
      fugitive they be.” (_Histoire des Vièrges; les Peuples et les
      Continents Disparus_, p. 15.) Donnelly has proved the fact from the
      clearest premises, but the Evolutionists will not listen. A Miocene
      civilization upsets the “universal Stone age” theory, and that of a
      _continuous_ ascent of man from animalism. And yet Egypt, at least,
      runs counter to current hypotheses. There is no Stone age visible
      there, but a more glorious culture is apparent the further back we
      are enabled to carry our retrospect.

 1841 _Myths and Myth‐Makers_, p. 21.

 1842 Violent minor cataclysms and colossal earthquakes are recorded in
      the annals of most nations—if not of all. Elevation and subsidence
      of continents is always in progress. The whole coast of South
      America has been raised up 10 to 15 feet and settled down again in
      an hour. Huxley has shown that the British Islands have been four
      times depressed beneath the ocean and subsequently raised again and
      peopled. The Alps, Himâlayas and Cordilleras were all the result of
      depositions drifted on to sea‐bottoms and upheaved by Titanic forces
      to their present elevation. The Sahara was the basin of a Miocene
      sea. Within the last five or six thousand years the shores of
      Sweden, Denmark and Norway, have risen from 200 to 600 feet; in
      Scotland there are raised beaches with outlying stacks and skerries
      surmounting the shore now eroded by the hungry wave. The North of
      Europe is still rising from the sea, and South America presents the
      phenomenon of raised beaches of over 1,000 miles in length, now at a
      height varying from 100 to 1,300 feet above the sea‐level. On the
      other hand, the coast of Greenland is sinking fast, so much so that
      the Greenlander will not build by the shore. All these phenomena are
      certain. Why then may not a gradual change have given place to a
      violent cataclysm in remote epochs—such cataclysms occurring on a
      minor scale even now, _e.g._, the case of Sunda Island with the
      destruction of 80,000 Malays?

 1843 For the opinions of Jacolliot, after long travels through the
      Polynesian Islands, and his proofs of a former great geological
      cataclysm in the Pacific Ocean, see his _Histoire des Vièrges; les
      Peuples et les Continents Disparus_, p. 308.

 1844 August, 1880.

 1845 _Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, pp. 236, 237. _Cf._ also his
      lengthy arguments on the subject, pp. 231‐235.

 1846 _Op. cit._, i. 22, 23, Ed. 1869.

 1847 _Pedigree of Man_, p. 73.

 1848 Cited in Schmidt’s _Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, p. 238.

 1849 For further facts as to the isolation of the Basques in Europe and
      their ethnological relations, see Joly, _Man before Metals_, p. 316.
      B. Davis is disposed to concede, from an examination of the skulls
      of the Guanches of the Canary Islands and modern Basques, that both
      belong to a race proper to those _ancient_ islands, of which the
      Canaries are the _remains_! This is a step in advance indeed. De
      Quatrefages and Hamy also both assign the Cro‐Magnon men of South
      France and the Guanches to _one_ type—a proposition which involves a
      certain corollary which both these writers may not care to father.

 1850 _Families of Speech._

 1851 _Cf._, Benjamin, _The Atlantic Islands_, p. 130.

 1852 _Westminster Review_, Jan., 1872.

 1853 Schmidt, _Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism_, p. 223.

 1854 Professor Retzius, _Smithsonian Report_, 1859, p. 266.

 1855 See the investigations of United States ship “Dolphin” and others.

 1856 _Scientific American_, July 28th, 1877.

 1857 See his chart, _Atlantis_, p. 46, though he deals with only a
      fragment of the _real_ Continent.

 1858 Donnelly, _Atlantis_, p. 480.

 1859 _Maçonnerie Occulte_, p. 44.

 1860 _Vide_ Sir William Thompson and Mr. Huxley.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET DOCTRINE, VOL. 2 OF 4***



CREDITS


April 4, 2017

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>. (This
            file was produced from images generously made available by The
            Internet Archive.)



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 54488‐0.txt or 54488‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/4/4/8/54488/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law
means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the
Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States
without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect
the Project Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the ebooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use
this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away — you may do practically _anything_ in the United States with
ebooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to
the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works
based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are
removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™
mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing
Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement
for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
    and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
    restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re‐use
    it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with
    this ebook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org. If you are not
    located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the
    country where you are located before using this ebook.


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts
not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    – You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    – You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e‐mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    – You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    – You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The Project Gutenberg Trademark
LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation
as set forth in Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not
protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™
collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such
as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data,
transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer
virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS‐IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle‐aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64‐6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business
office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801)
596‐1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date
contact information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep
ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook’s ebook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our ebooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new ebooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new ebooks.






***FINIS***
