PART II. THE ARCHAIC SYMBOLISM OF THE WORLD‐RELIGIONS.


    The narratives of the Doctrine are its cloak. The simple look only
    at the garment—that is, upon the narrative of the Doctrine; more
    they know not. The instructed, however, see not merely the cloak,
    but what the cloak covers.—_Zohar_ (iii. 152; FRANCK, 119).

    The Mysteries of the Faith (are) not to be divulged to all.... It
    is requisite to hide in a mystery the wisdom spoken.—_Stromateis_
    (12; CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS).




Section I. Esoteric Tenets Corroborated in Every Scripture.


In view of the strangeness of the teachings, and of many a doctrine which
from the modern scientific standpoint must seem absurd, some necessary and
additional explanations have to be made. The theories contained in the
Stanzas of Volume II are even more difficult to assimilate than those
which are embodied in Volume I, on Cosmogony. Theology, therefore, has to
be questioned here, in Part II, as Science will be in Part III, for since
our doctrines differ so widely from the current ideas of both Materialism
and Theology, the Occultists must be ever prepared to repel the attacks of
either or of both.

The reader can never be too often reminded that, as the abundant
quotations from various old Scriptures prove, these teachings are as old
as the world; and that the present work is simply an attempt to render, in
modern language and in a phraseology with which the scientific and
educated student is familiar, archaic Genesis and History as taught in
certain Asiatic centres of Esoteric Learning. These must be accepted or
rejected on their own merits, fully or partially; but not before they have
been carefully compared with the corresponding theological dogmas and the
modern scientific theories and speculations.

One feels serious doubt whether, with all its intellectual acuteness, our
age is destined to discover in each Western nation even one solitary
_uninitiated_ Scholar or Philosopher capable of fully comprehending the
spirit of Archaic Philosophy. Nor can either be expected to do so, before
the real meaning of the Alpha and the Omega of Eastern Esotericism, the
terms Sat and Asat—so freely used in the _Rig Veda_ and elsewhere—is
thoroughly assimilated. Without this key to Âryan Wisdom, the Cosmogony of
the Rishis and the Arhats is in danger of remaining a dead letter to the
average Orientalist. Asat is not merely the negation of Sat, nor is it the
“not yet existing”; for Sat is in itself neither the “existent,” nor
“being.” Sat is the immutable, the ever‐present, changeless, and eternal
Root, from and through which all proceeds. But it is far more than the
potential force in the seed, which propels onward the process of
development, or what is now called evolution. It is the ever becoming,
though the never manifesting.(1029) Sat is born from Asat, and Asat is
begotten by Sat—perpetual motion in a circle, truly; yet a circle that can
be squared only at the Supreme Initiation, at the threshold of
Parinirvâna.

Barth started a reflection on the _Rig Veda_ which was meant for a stern
criticism, an unusual, therefore, as was thought, an original, view of
this archaic volume. It so happened, however, that, in his criticism, this
scholar revealed a truth, without being himself aware of its full
importance. He premises by saying that “neither in the language nor in the
thought of the _Rig Veda_” has he “been able to discover that quality _of
primitive natural simplicity_, which so many are fain to see in it.” Barth
had Max Müller in his mind’s eye when writing this. For the famous Oxford
professor has throughout characterized the hymns of the _Rig Veda_, as the
unsophisticated expression of the religious feeling of a pastoral innocent
people. “In the Vedic hymns the ideas and myths appear in their simplest
and freshest form”—the Sanskrit scholar thinks. Barth is of a different
opinion, however.

So divided and personal are the opinions of Sanskritists as to the
importance and intrinsic value of the _Rig Veda_, that these opinions
become entirely biassed whichever way they incline. Thus Prof. Max Müller
declares that:


    Nowhere is the wide distance which separates the ancient poems of
    India from the most ancient literature of Greece more clearly
    felt, than when we compare the growing myths of the Veda with the
    full grown and decayed myths on which the poetry of Homer is
    founded. The Veda is the real Theogony of the _Aryan races_, while
    that of Hesiod is a distorted caricature of the original image.


This is a sweeping assertion, and perhaps rather unjust in its general
application. But why not try to account for it? Orientalists cannot do so,
for they reject the chronology of the Secret Doctrine, and can hardly
admit the fact that between the Rig Vedic hymns and Hesiod’s Theogony tens
of thousands of years have elapsed. So they fail to see that the Greek
myths are no longer the primitive symbolical language of the Initiates,
the Disciples of the Gods‐Hierophants, the divine ancient “Sacrificers,”
and that disfigured by the distance, and encumbered by the exuberant
growth of human _profane_ fancy, they now stand like distorted images of
stars in running waves. But if Hesiod’s Cosmogony and Theogony are to be
viewed as caricatures of the original images, how much more so the myths
in the Hebrew _Genesis_, in the sight of those for whom they are no more
divine revelation or the word of God, than is Hesiod’s Theogony for Mr.
Gladstone.

As Barth says:


    The poetry it [the _Rig Veda_] contains appears to me, on the
    contrary, to be of a singularly refined character and artificially
    elaborated, full of allusions and reticences, of pretensions [?]
    to mysticism and theosophic insight; and the manner of its
    expression is such as reminds one more frequently of the
    phraseology in use among certain small groups of initiated than
    the poetic language of a large community.(1030)


We will not stop to enquire of the critic what he can know of the
phraseology in use among the “initiated,” or whether he belongs himself to
such a group; for, in the latter case, he would hardly have used such
language. But the above shows the remarkable disagreement between scholars
even with regard to the _external_ character of the _Rig Veda_. What,
then, can any of the modern Sanskritists know about its _internal_ or
_esoteric_ meaning, beyond the correct inference of Barth, that this
Scripture _has been compiled by Initiates_?

The whole of the present work is an endeavour to prove this truth. The
ancient Adepts have solved the great problems of Science, however
unwilling modern Materialism may be to admit the fact. The mysteries of
Life and Death _were_ fathomed by the great master‐minds of antiquity; and
if they have preserved them in secresy and silence, it is because these
problems formed part of the Sacred Mysteries, which must have remained
incomprehensible to the vast majority of men then, as they do now. If such
teachings are still regarded as chimeras by our opponents in Philosophy,
it may be a consolation to Theosophists to learn, on good proof, that the
speculations of modern Psychologists—whether serious Idealists, like Mr.
Herbert Spencer, or wool‐gathering Pseudo‐idealists—are far more
chimerical. Indeed, instead of resting on the firm foundation of facts in
Nature, they are the unhealthy will‐o’‐the‐wisps of materialistic
imagination, of the brains that evolved them—and no more. While they deny,
we affirm; and our affirmation is corroborated by almost all the Sages of
antiquity. Believing in Occultism and a host of invisible Potencies for
good reasons, we say, _Certus sum, scio quod credidi_; to which our
critics reply, _Credat Judæus Apella_. Neither is converted by the other,
nor does such result affect even our little planet. _E pur se muove!_

Nor is there any need of proselytizing. As remarked by the wise Cicero:


    Time destroys the speculations of man, but it confirms the
    judgment of nature.


Let us bide our time. Meanwhile, it is not in the human constitution to
witness in silence the destruction of one’s Gods, whether they be true or
false. And as Theology and Materialism have combined together to destroy
the old Gods of antiquity and seek to disfigure every old philosophical
conception, it is but just that the lovers of the Old Wisdom should defend
their position, by proving that the whole arsenal of the two is, at best,
formed of new weapons made out of very old material.




Section II. Adam=Adami.


Names such as Adam‐Adami, used by Dr. Chwolsohn in his _Nabathean
Agriculture_ and derided by M. Renan, may prove little to the profane. To
the Occultist, however, once that the term is found in a work of such
immense antiquity as that above cited, it proves a good deal. It proves,
for instance, that Adami was a manifold symbol, originating with the Âryan
people, as the root word shows, and having been taken from them by the
Semites and the Turanians—as many other things were.

Adam‐Adami is a generic compound name as old as language is. The Secret
Doctrine teaches that Ad‐i was the name given by the Âryans to the first
_speaking_ race of mankind, in this Round. Hence the terms Adonim and
Adonai (the ancient plural form of the word Adon), which the Jews applied
to their Jehovah and Angels, who were simply the first spiritual and
ethereal sons of the Earth, and the God Adonis, who in his many variations
stood for the “First Lord.” Adam is the Sanskrit Âdi‐Nâth, also meaning
First Lord, as Âd‐Îshvara, or any Ad (the First) prefixed to an adjective
or substantive. The reason for this is that such truths were a common
inheritance. It was a revelation received by the _first_ mankind before
that time which, in biblical phraseology, is called “the period of one
_lip_ and word,” or speech; knowledge expanded by man’s own intuition
later on, still later hidden from profanation under an adequate symbology.
The author of the _Qabbalah_, according to the philosophical writings of
Ibn Gebirol, shows the Israelites using Ad‐onaï (A Do Na Y), “Lord,”
instead of Eh’yeh, “I am,” and YHVH, and adds that, while Adonaï is
rendered “Lord” in the _Bible_,


    The lowest designation, or the Deity in Nature, the more general
    term Elohim, is translated God.(1031)


A curious work was translated in 1860 or thereabout, by the Orientalist
Chwolsohn, and presented to ever‐incredulous and flippant Europe under the
innocent title of _Nabathean Agriculture_. In the opinion of the
translator that archaic volume _is a complete initiation_ into the
mysteries of the Pre‐Adamite nations, on the authority of _undeniably
authentic documents_. It is an invaluable compendium, the full epitome of
the doctrines, arts and sciences, not only of the Chaldæans, but also of
the Assyrians and Canaanites of the pre‐historic ages.(1032) These
Nabatheans—as some critics thought—were simply the Sabæans, or Chaldæan
star‐worshippers. The work is a retranslation from the Arabic, into which
language it was at first translated from the Chaldæan.

Masoudi, the Arabian historian, speaks of these Nabatheans, and explains
their origin in this wise:


    After the Deluge [?] the nations established themselves in various
    countries. Among these were the Nabatheans, who founded the city
    of Babylon, and were those descendants of Ham who settled in the
    same province under the leadership of Nimrod, the son of Cush, who
    was the son of Ham and great‐grandson of Noah. This took place at
    the time when Nimrod received the governorship of Babylonia as the
    delegate of Dzahhak named Biourasp.(1033)


The translator, Chwolsohn, finds that the assertions of this historian are
in perfect accord with those of Moses in _Genesis_; while more irreverent
critics might express the opinion that for this very reason their truth
should be suspected. It is useless, however, to argue the point, which is
of no value in the present question. The weather‐beaten, long‐since‐buried
problem, and the difficulty of accounting, on any logical ground, for the
phenomenal derivation of millions of people of various races, of many
civilized nations and tribes, from _three_ couples—Noah’s sons and their
wives—in 346 years(1034) after the Deluge, may be left to the Karma of the
author of _Genesis_, whether he is called Moses or Ezra. That which is
interesting in the work under notice, however, are its contents, the
doctrines enunciated in it, which are again, if read Esoterically, almost
all of them identical with the Secret Teachings.

Quatremère suggested that this book might have been simply a copy made
under Nebuchadnezzar II from some Hamitic treatise, “infinitely more
ancient,” while the author maintains, on internal and external evidence,
that its Chaldæan original was written out from the oral discourses and
teachings of a wealthy Babylonian landowner, named Qû‐tâmy, who had used
for those lectures still more ancient materials. The first Arabic
translation is placed by Chwolsohn so far back as the thirteenth century
B.C. On the first page of this “revelation,” the author, or amanuensis,
Qû‐tâmy, declares that “the doctrines propounded therein, _were originally
told by Saturn ... to the Moon, who communicated them to her idol,_” _and
the idol revealed them to her devotee, the writer_—the Adept Scribe of
that work—Qû‐tâmy.

The details given by the God for the benefit and instruction of mortals,
show periods of incalculable duration and a series of numberless kingdoms
and Dynasties that preceded the appearance on Earth of Adami (the “red‐
earth”). These periods, as might have been expected, have roused the
defenders of the chronology of the biblical dead‐letter meaning almost to
fury. De Rougemont was the first to make a _levée_‐in‐arms against the
translator. He reproaches him with _sacrificing_ Moses to anonymous
authors.(1035) Berosus, he urges, however great were _his chronological
errors_, was at least in perfect accord with the prophet with regard to
the first men, since he speaks of Alorus‐Adam, of Xisuthrus‐Noah, and of
Belus‐Nimrod, etc. Therefore, he adds, the work must be an _apocryphon_ to
be ranged with its contemporaries—the _Fourth Book of Esdras_, the _Book
of Enoch_, the _Sibylline Oracles_, and the _Book of Hermes_—_every one of
these dating no further back than two or three centuries B.C._ Ewald came
down still harder on Chwolsohn, and finally M. Renan, who in the _Revue
Germanique_(1036) asks him to show reason why his _Nabathean Agriculture_
should not be the fraudulent work of some Jew of the third or fourth
century of our era? It can hardly be otherwise—argues the romancer of the
_Vie de Jésus_, since, in this _in‐folio_ on Astrology and Sorcery:


    We recognize in the personages introduced Qû‐tâmy, all the
    patriarchs of the biblical legends, such as Adam‐Adami, Anouka‐
    Noah, and his Ibrahim‐Abraham, etc.


But this is no reason, since Adam and others are generic names. Meanwhile
it is humbly submitted that, all things considered, an _apocryphon_—if
even of the third century A.D., instead of the thirteenth century B.C., is
old enough to appear _genuine_ as a document, and so satisfy the demands
of the most exacting archæologist and critic. For even admitting, for
argument’s sake, that this literary relic has been compiled by “some Jew
of the third century of our era”—what of that? Leaving the credibility of
its doctrines for a moment aside, why should it be less entitled to a
hearing, or less instructive as reflecting older opinions, than any other
religious work, also a “compilation from old texts” or oral tradition—of
the same or even a later age? In such case we should have to reject and
call “apocryphal” the _Kurân_—three centuries later, though we know it to
have sprung, Minerva‐like, direct from the brain of the Arabian prophet;
and we should have to pooh‐pooh all the information we can get from the
_Talmud_, which, in its present form, was also compiled from older
materials, and is not earlier than the ninth century of our era.

This curious “Bible” of the Chaldæan Adept and the various criticisms upon
it (as in Chwolsohn’s translation) are noticed, because it has an
important bearing upon a great portion of the present work. With the
exception of the contention of M. Renan, an iconoclast on principle—so
pointedly called by Jules Lemaître “_le Paganini du néant_”—the worst
fault found with the work is, it would seem, that the _apocryphon_
pretends to have been communicated _as a revelation_ to an Adept by, and
from, the “idol of the Moon,” who received it from “Saturn.” Hence, very
naturally, it is “a fairy tale all round.” To this there is but one
answer: It is no more a fairy tale than the _Bible_, and if one falls, the
other must follow it. Even the mode of divination through “the idol of the
Moon” is the same as that practised by David, Saul and the High Priests of
the Jewish Tabernacle by means of the Teraphim.

The _Nabathean Agriculture_ is a compilation indeed; it is no
_apocryphon_, but the repetition of the tenets of the Secret Doctrine
under the exoteric Chaldæan form of national symbols, for the purpose of
“cloaking” the tenets, just as the _Books of Hermes_ and the _Purânas_ are
like attempts by Egyptians and Hindûs. The work was as well known in
antiquity as it was during the Middle Ages. Maimonides speaks of it, and
refers more than once to this Chaldæo‐Arabic MS., calling the Nabatheans
by the name of their co‐religionists, the “star‐worshippers,” or Sabæans,
but yet failing to see in the disfigured word “Nabathean” the mystic name
of the caste devoted to Nebo, the God of _Secret_ Wisdom, which shows on
its face that the Nabatheans were an Occult Brotherhood.(1037) The
Nabatheans who, according to the Persian Yezidi, originally came to Syria
from Busrah, were the degenerate members of that fraternity; still their
religion, even at that late day, was purely kabalistic.(1038) Nebo is the
Deity of the Planet Mercury, and Mercury is the God of Wisdom, or Hermes,
or Budha, which the Jews called Kokab (ככב), “the Lord on high, the
aspiring,” and the Greeks Nabo (Ναβώ), hence Nabatheans. Notwithstanding
that Maimonides calls their doctrines “heathenish foolishness” and their
archaic literature “_Sabæorum fœtum_,” he places their “agriculture,” the
Bible of Qû‐tâmy, in the first rank of archaic literature; and Abarbanel
praises it in unmeasured terms. Spencer,(1039) quoting the latter, speaks
of it as that “most excellent oriental work,” adding that by Nabatheans,
the Sabæans, the Chaldæans, and the Egyptians, in short all those nations
_against whom the laws of Moses were most severely enacted_, have to be
understood.

Nebo, the oldest God of Wisdom of Babylonia and Mesopotamia, was identical
with the Hindû Budha and the Hermes‐Mercury of the Greeks. A slight change
in the sexes of the parents is the only alteration. As Budha was the Son
of Soma (the Moon) in India, and of the wife of Brihaspati (Jupiter), so
Nebo was the son of Zarpanitu (the Moon) and of Merodach, who became
Jupiter, after having been a Sun‐god. As Mercury the Planet, Nebo was the
“overseer” among the seven Gods of the Planets; and as the personification
of the Secret Wisdom he was Nabin, a seer and a prophet. Moses is made to
die and disappear on the mount sacred to Nebo. This shows him to have been
an Initiate, and a priest of that God under another name; for this God of
Wisdom was the great Creative Deity, and was worshipped as such. And this
not only at Borsippa in his gorgeous Temple, or Planet‐tower; he was
likewise adored by the Moabites, the Canaanites, the Assyrians, and
throughout the whole of Palestine. Then why not by the Israelites? “The
planetary temple of Babylon” had its “Holy of Holies” within the shrine of
Nebo, the Prophet‐God of Wisdom. We are told in the Hibbert Lectures:


    The ancient Babylonians had an intercessor between men and the
    gods ... and Nebo, was the “proclaimer” or “prophet,” as he made
    known the desire of his father Merodach.(1040)


Nebo is a Creator, like Budha, of the Fourth, and also of the Fifth, Race.
For the former starts a new race of Adepts, and the latter, the Solar‐
Lunar Dynasty, or the men of these Races and Round. Both are the Adams of
their respective creatures. Adam‐Adami is a personation of the _dual_
Adam: of the paradigmatic Adam‐Kadmon, the Creator, and of the lower Adam,
the terrestrial, who, as the Syrian Kabalists have it, had only Nephesh,
the “breath of life,” but _no Living Soul_, until after his Fall.

If, therefore, Renan persists in regarding the Chaldæan Scriptures—or what
remains of them—as apocryphal, it is quite immaterial to truth and fact.
There are other Orientalists who may be of a different opinion; and even
were they not, it would still really matter very little. These doctrines
contain the teachings of Esoteric Philosophy, and this must suffice. To
those who understand nothing of symbology it may appear astrolatry, pure
and simple, or to him who would conceal the Esoteric Truth, even
“heathenish foolishness.” Maimonides, however, while expressing scorn for
the Esotericism in the religion of other nations, confessed Esotericism
and Symbology in his own, preached silence and secrecy upon the true
meaning of Mosaic sayings, and thus came to grief. The Doctrines of
Qû‐tâmy, the Chaldæan, are, in short, the allegorical rendering of the
religion of the earliest nations of the Fifth Race.

Why then should M. Renan treat the name “Adam‐Adami” with such academical
contempt? The author of the _Origins of Christianity_ evidently knows
nothing of the origins of Pagan symbolism or of Esotericism either,
otherwise he would have known that the name Adam‐Adami was a form of a
universal symbol, referring, _even with the Jews_, not to one man, but to
four distinct humanities or mankinds. This is very easily proven.

The Kabalists teach the existence of four distinct Adams, or the
transformation of four consecutive Adams, the emanations from the
Dyooknah, or Divine Phantom, of the Heavenly Man, an ethereal combination
of Neshamah, the highest Soul or Spirit; this Adam having, of course,
neither a gross human body, nor a _body of desire_. This Adam is the
Prototype (Tzure) of the second Adam. That they represent our Five Races,
is certain, as everyone can see by their description in the _Kabalah_. The
first is the Perfect Holy Adam, “a shadow that disappeared” (the Kings of
Edom), produced from the divine Tzelem (Image); the second is called the
Protoplastic Androgyne Adam of the future terrestrial and separated Adam;
the third Adam is the man made of “dust” (the first, Innocent Adam); and
the fourth, is the supposed forefather of our own race—the Fallen Adam.
See, however, the admirably clear description of these in Isaac Myer’s
_Qabbalah_. He gives only four Adams, because of the Kings of Edom, no
doubt, and adds:


    The fourth Adam ... was clothed with skin, flesh, nerves, etc.
    This answers to the Lower _Nephesh_ and _Guff_, _i.e._, body,
    united. He has the animal power of reproduction and continuance of
    species.(1041)


This is the _human_ Root‐Race.

It is just at this point that the modern Kabalists—led into error by the
long generations of Christian Mystics who have tampered with the
kabalistic records wherever they could—diverge from the Occultists in
their interpretations, and take the later thought for the earlier idea.
The original _Kabalah_ was entirely metaphysical, and had no concern with
animal, or terrestrial, sexes; the later _Kabalah_ has suffocated the
divine ideal under the heavy phallic element. The Kabalists say: “God made
man male and female.” Says the author of the _Qabbalah_:


    Among the Qabbalists, the necessity to continued creation and
    existence is called the Balance.(1042)


And being without this “Balance,” connected with Maqom (the mysterious
“Place”),(1043) even the First Race is not, as we have seen, recognized by
the Sons of the Fifth Adam. From the highest Heavenly Man, the Upper Adam
who is “male‐female” or Androgyne, down to the Adam of dust, these
personified symbols are all connected with sex and procreation. With the
Eastern Occultists it is entirely the reverse. The sexual relation they
consider as a “Karma” pertaining only to the mundane relation of man, who
is dominated by Illusion, a thing to be put aside, the moment that the
person becomes “wise.” They considered it a most fortunate circumstance if
the Guru (teacher) found in his pupil an aptitude for the pure life of
Brahmâchârya. Their dual symbols were to them but the poetical imagery of
the sublime correlation of creative cosmic forces. And this ideal
conception is found beaming like a golden ray upon each idol, however
coarse and grotesque, in the crowded galleries of the sombre fanes of
India and other mother‐lands of cults.

This will be demonstrated in the following Section.

Meanwhile, it may be added that, with the Gnostics, the second Adam also
emanates from the Primeval Man, the Ophite Adamas, in “whose image he is
made”; the third, from this second—an Androgyne. The latter is symbolized
in the sixth and seventh pairs of the male‐female Æons, Amphain‐Essumen
(Ἀμφαὶν Ἐσσουμὲν), and Vananin‐Lamertade (Οὐανανίν Λαμερτάδε)—Father and
Mother(1044)—while the fourth Adam, or Race, is represented by a Priapean
monster. The latter—a Post‐Christian fancy—is the degraded copy of the
Ante‐Christian Gnostic symbol of the “Good One,” or “He, _who created
before anything existed_,” the Celestial Priapus—truly born from Venus and
Bacchus _when that God returned from his expedition into India_, for Venus
and Bacchus are the post‐types of Aditi and the Spirit. The later Priapus,
one, however, with Agathodæmon, the Gnostic Saviour, and even with
Abraxas, is no longer the glyph for _abstract creative_ Power, but
symbolizes the four Adams, or Races, the fifth being represented by the
_five_ branches cut off from the Tree of Life on which the old man stands
in the Gnostic gems. The number of the Root‐Races was recorded in the
ancient Greek temples by the seven vowels, of which _five_ were framed in
a panel in the Initiation Halls of the Adyta. The Egyptian glyph for it
was a hand with five fingers spread out, the fifth or little finger being
only half‐grown, and also _five_ “N’s”—hieroglyphs standing for that
letter. The Romans used the five vowels A E I O V in their fanes; and this
archaic symbol was adopted during the Middle Ages as a motto by the House
of the Hapsburgs. _Sic transit gloria!_




Section III. The “Holy of Holies.” Its Degradation.


The Sanctum Sanctorum of the Ancients, also called the Adytum—the recess
at the West end of the Temple which was enclosed on three sides by blank
walls and had its only aperture or door hung over with a curtain—was
common to all ancient nations.

A great difference is now found between the secret meaning of this
symbolical place as given in the Esotericism of the Pagans and in that of
the later Jews, though its symbology was originally identical throughout
the ancient races and nations. The _Gentiles_ placed in the Adytum a
_sarcophagus_, or a tomb (_taphos_), in which was the Solar God to whom
the temple was consecrated, holding it, as Pantheists, in the greatest
veneration. They regarded it, in its Esoteric meaning, as the symbol of
_resurrection_, cosmic, solar, or diurnal, and human. It embraced the wide
range of periodical, and (in time) punctual, Manvantaras, or the
reäwakenings of Kosmos, Earth, and Man to new existences; the Sun being
the most poetical and also the most grandiose symbol of such Cycles in
Heaven, and man—in his reïncarnations—on Earth. The _Jews_—whose realism,
if judged by the dead‐letter, was as practical and gross in the days of
Moses as it is now(1045)—in the course of their estrangement from the Gods
of their Pagan neighbours, consummated a national and levitical polity, by
the device of setting forth their Holy of Holies as the most solemn sign
of their Monotheism—exoterically, while seeing in it but a universal
phallic symbol—esoterically. While the Kabalists knew but Ain Suph and the
“Gods” of the Mysteries, the Levites had no tomb, no God in their Adytum
but the “Sacred” Ark of the Covenant—their “Holy of Holies.”

When the esoteric meaning of this recess is made clear, however, the
profane will be better able to understand why David danced “uncovered”
before the _Ark_ of the Covenant, and was so anxious to appear _vile_ for
the sake of his “Lord,” and _base_ in his own sight.(1046)

The Ark is the navi‐form Argha of the Mysteries. Parkhurst, who has a long
dissertation upon it in his Greek dictionary, and who never breathes a
word about it in his Hebrew lexicon, explains it thus:


    Archê (Ἀρχὴ) in this application answers to the Hebrew Rasit or
    wisdom, ... a word which had the meaning of the emblem of the
    female generative power, the Arg or Arca, in which the germ of all
    nature was supposed to float or brood on the great abyss during
    the interval which took place after every mundane cycle.


Quite so; and the Jewish Ark of the Covenant had _precisely the same
significance_; with the supplementary addition that, instead of a
beautiful and chaste sarcophagus (the symbol of the Matrix of Nature and
Resurrection), as in the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Pagans, they had the Ark
made still more _realistic_ in its construction by the two Cherubs set up
on the coffer or Ark of the Covenant, facing each other, with their wings
spread in such a manner as to form a perfect Yoni (as now seen in India).
Besides which, this generative symbol had its significance enforced by the
four mystic letters of Jehovah’s name, namely, IHVH (יהוה); Jod (י)
meaning the _membrum virile_; Hé (ה), the _womb_; Vau (ו), a crook or a
hook, a nail, and Hé (ה) again, meaning also “an opening”; the whole
forming the perfect _bisexual_ emblem or symbol or I(e)H(o)V(a)H, the male
and female symbol.

Perhaps also, when people realize the true meaning of the office and title
of the Kadesh Kadeshim, the “holy ones,” or “the consecrated to the
_Temple of the Lord_”—the “Holy of Holies” of these “holy ones” may assume
an aspect far from edifying.

Iacchus again is Iao or Jehovah; and Baal or Adon, like Bacchus, was a
phallic God.


    “Who shall ascend into the hill [the high place] of the Lord?”
    asks the holy king David, “Who shall stand in the place of his
    Kadushu (קדשו)?”(1047) Kadesh may mean in one sense to “devote,”
    “hallow,” “sanctify,” and even to “initiate” or to “set apart”;
    but it also means the ministry of lascivious rites—the Venus‐
    worship—and the true interpretation of the word Kadesh is bluntly
    rendered in _Deuteronomy_, xxiii. 17; _Hosea_, iv. 14; and
    _Genesis_, xxxviii. 15‐22. The “holy” Kadeshim of the _Bible_ were
    identical, as to the duties of their office, with the Nautch‐girls
    of the later Hindû pagodas. The Hebrew Kadeshim, or Galli, lived
    “by the house of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the
    grove,” or the bust of Venus‐Astarte.(1048)

    The dance performed by David round the Ark was the “circle‐dance,”
    said to have been prescribed by the Amazons for the Mysteries.
    Such was the dance of the daughters of Shiloh,(1049) and the
    leaping of the prophets of Baal.(1050) It was simply a
    characteristic of the Sabæan worship, for it denoted the motion of
    the Planets round the Sun. That the dance was a Bacchic frenzy is
    apparent. Sistra were used on the occasion, and the taunt of
    Michal and the King’s reply are very expressive.(1051)

    The Ark, in which are preserved the germs of all living things
    necessary to repeople the Earth, represents the survival of life,
    and the supremacy of Spirit over Matter, through the conflict of
    the opposing powers of Nature. In the Astro‐theosophic chart of
    the Western Rite, the Ark corresponds with the navel, and is
    placed at the sinister side, the side of the woman (the Moon), one
    of whose symbols is the left pillar of Solomon’s Temple—Boaz. The
    umbilicus is connected (through the placenta) with the receptacle
    in which are fructified the embryos of the race. The Ark is the
    sacred Argha of the Hindûs, and thus the relation in which it
    stands to Noah’s Ark may be easily inferred when we learn that the
    Argha was an oblong vessel, used by the high priests as a
    sacrificial chalice in the worship of Isis, Astarte, and Venus‐
    Aphrodite, all of whom were Goddesses of the generative powers of
    Nature, or of Matter—hence representing symbolically the Ark
    containing the germs of all living things.(1052)


Mistaken is he who accepts the kabalistic works of to‐day, and the
interpretations of the _Zohar_ by the Rabbis, for the genuine kabalistic
lore of old!(1053) For no more to‐day than in the day of Frederick von
Schelling does the _Kabalah_ accessible to Europe and America contain much
more than


    Ruins and fragments, much distorted, remnants still of that
    _primitive system which is the key to all religious
    systems_.(1054)


The oldest system and the Chaldæan _Kabalah_ were identical. The latest
renderings of the _Zohar_ are those of the Synagogue in the early
centuries—_i.e._, the Thorah (or Law), dogmatic and uncompromising.

The “King’s Chamber” in Cheops’ Pyramid is thus an Egyptian “Holy of
Holies.” On the days of the Mysteries of Initiation, the Candidate,
representing the Solar God, had to descend into the Sarcophagus, and
represent the energizing ray, entering into the fecund womb of Nature.
Emerging from it on the following morning, he typified the resurrection of
Life after the change called Death. In the Great Mysteries his figurative
“death” lasted two days, when with the Sun he arose on the third morning,
after a last night of the most cruel trials. While the Postulant
represented the Sun—the all‐vivifying orb that “resurrects” every morning
but to impart life to all—the Sarcophagus was symbolic of the female
principle. This, in Egypt; its form and shape changed with every country,
provided it remained a vessel, a symbolic “navis” or boat‐shaped vehicle,
and a “container,” symbolically, of germs or the germ of life. In India,
it is the “Golden” Cow through which the Candidate for Brâhmanism has to
pass if he desires to be a Brâhman, and to become _Dvi_‐ja, “born a
_second_ time.” The crescent‐form Argha of the Greeks was the type of the
Queen of Heaven—Diana, or the Moon. She was the Great Mother of all
Existences, as the Sun was the Father. The Jews, previous to, as well as
after, their metamorphosis of Jehovah into a _male_ God, worshipped
Astoreth, which made Isaiah declare: “_Your new moons and ... feasts_ my
soul hateth”;(1055) in saying which, he was evidently unjust. Astoreth and
the New Moon (the crescent Argha) Festivals, had no worse significance as
a form of public worship than had the hidden meaning of the Moon in
general, which was kabalistically connected directly with, and sacred to,
Jehovah, as is well known; with the sole difference, however, that one was
the female and the other the male aspect of the Moon, and of the star
Venus.

The Sun (the Father), the Moon (the Mother), and Mercury‐Thoth (the Son),
were the earliest Trinity of the Egyptians, who personified them in
Osiris, Isis, and Thoth (Hermes). In the Gnostic Gospel _Pistis Sophia_,
the seven Great Gods, divided into two Triads and the highest God (the
Sun), are the lower Triple Powers (Τριδυνάμεις), whose powers reside
respectively in Mars, Mercury and Venus; and the higher Triad—the three
“Unseen Gods,” who dwell in the Moon, Jupiter and Saturn.(1056)

This requires no proof. Astoreth was in one sense an impersonal symbol of
Nature, the Ship of Life carrying throughout the boundless Sidereal Ocean
the germs of all being. And when she was not identified with Venus, like
every other “Queen of Heaven” to whom cakes and buns were offered in
sacrifice, Astoreth became the reflection of the Chaldæan “Nuah, the
Universal Mother” (the female Noah, considered as one with the Ark), and
of the female Triad, Ana, Belita and Davkina; called, when blended into
one, “Sovereign Goddess, Lady of the Nether Abyss, Mother of Gods, Queen
of the Earth, and Queen of Fecundity.” Later, Belita or Tamtu(1057) (the
sea), the Mother of the City of Erech (the great Chaldæan Necropolis),
became Eve; and now she is Mary the Virgin, in the Latin Church,
represented as standing on the Crescent Moon, and, at times on the Globe,
to vary the programme. The Navis, or ship‐like form of the crescent, which
blends in itself all those common symbols of the Ship of Life, such as
Noah’s Ark, the Yoni of the Hindûs, and the Ark of the Covenant, is the
female symbol of the Universal “Mother of the Gods,” and is now found
under its Christian symbol in every Church, as the “nave” (from
_navis_).(1058) The Navis, the Sidereal Vessel, is fructified by the
Spirit of Life—the male God; or, as the learned Kenealy, in his
_Apocalypse_, very appropriately calls it—the Holy Spirit. In Western
religious symbology the crescent was the male, the full Moon the female,
aspect of that universal Spirit. The mystic word ALM, which the prophet
Mahomet prefixed to many chapters of the _Korân_, alludes to _her_ as the
Alm, the Immaculate Virgin of the Heavens.(1059) And—the sublime ever
falling into the ridiculous—it is from this root Alm that we have to
derive the word Almeh—the Egyptian dancing‐girls. The latter are “virgins”
of the same type as the Nautchees in India, and the (female) Kadeshim, the
“holy ones” of the Jewish temples—consecrated to Jehovah, who represented
both sexes—whose _holy_ functions in the Israelite fanes were _identical_
with those of the Nautchees.

Now Eustathius declares that IO (ΙΩ) means the Moon, in the dialect of the
Argians; it was also one of the names of the Moon in Egypt. Says
Jablonski:


    ΙΩ, _Ioh, Ægyptiis Lunam significat neque habent illi, in communi
    sermonis usu, aliud nomen quo Lunam designent præter IO_.


The Pillar and Circle (IO), which with Pythagoras was the perfect number
contained in the Tetraktys,(1060) became later a _preëminently phallic_
number—amongst the Jews, foremost of all, with whom it is the male and
female Jehovah.

This is how a scholar explains it:


    I find, on the Rosetta stone of Uhlemann, the word _mooth_ (also
    in Seiffarth), the name of the _moon_, used as a cycle of time,
    hence the lunar month, from the hieroglyph [Symbol: half circle],
    with [Symbol: five‐pointed star] and [Symbol: circle with middle
    dot] as determinatives, given as the Coptic I O H, or I O H. The
    Hebrew הוי may also be used as I O H, for the letter _vau_ (ו) was
    used for _o_ and for _u_, and for _v_ or _w_. This, before the
    Massora, of which the point (·) was used as וֹ = o, וּ = u, and ו
    = v or w. Now I had worked it out by original search that the
    great distinctive function of the god‐name Jehovah was designative
    of the influence of the moon as the _causative_ of _generation_,
    and as of its exact value as a lunar year in the natural _measure
    of days_, as you will fully see,... And here comes this linguistic
    same word from a source far more ancient; viz., the Coptic, or
    rather from the old Egyptian in time of the Coptic.(1061)


This is the more remarkable when Egyptology compares this with the little
which it knows about the Theban Triad—composed of Ammon, Mooth (or Moot),
and their son Khonsoo. This Triad was, when united, contained in the Moon
as their common symbol; and when separated, it was Khonsoo who was the God
Lunus, being thus confounded with Thoth and Phtah. His mother Moot—the
name signifying “Mother,” by the bye, and not the Moon, which was only her
symbol—is called the “Queen of Heaven,” the “Virgin,” etc., as she is an
aspect of Isis, Hathor, and other Mother Goddesses. She was less the wife
than the mother of Ammon, whose distinct title is the “husband of his
mother.” In a statuette at Boulaq, Cairo, this Triad is represented as a
mummy‐god holding in his hand three different sceptres, and bearing the
lunar disk on his head, the characteristic tress of hair showing the
design of representing it as that of an _infant_ God, or the “Sun,” in the
Triad. He was the God of Destinies in Thebes, and appears under two
aspects (1) as Khonsoo, the Lunar God, and Lord of Thebes, Nofir‐hotpoo,
“he who is in absolute repose,” and (2) as “Khonsoo p. iri‐sokhroo,” or
“Khonsoo, who executes Destiny”; the former preparing the events and
conceiving them for those born under his generative influence, the latter
putting them into action.(1062) Under theogonic permutations Ammon becomes
Horus, Hor‐Ammon, and Moot(h)‐Isis is seen suckling him in a statuette of
the Saïtic period.(1063) In his turn, in this transformed Triad, Khonsoo
becomes Thoth‐Lunus, “he who operates salvation.” His brow is crowned with
the head of an ibis decorated with the lunar disk and the diadem called
Io‐tef (IO‐tef).(1064)

Now all these symbols are certainly found reflected in (some believe them
identical with) the Yave, or Jehovah of the _Bible_. This will be made
plain to anyone who reads _The Source of Measures_, or “The Hebrew‐
Egyptian Mystery,” and understands its undeniable, clear, and mathematical
proofs that the _esoteric foundations_, or the system used in the building
of the Great Pyramid, and the architectural measurements in the Temple of
Solomon (whether the latter be mythical or real), Noah’s Ark, and the Ark
of the Covenant, are the same. If anything in the world can settle the
dispute that the old, as much as the later Post‐Babylonian, Jews, and
especially the former, built their Theogony and Religion on the very same
foundation as did all the Pagans, it is the work in question.

And now it may be as well to remind the reader of what we said of IAO in
_Isis Unveiled_:


    No other deity affords such a variety of etymologies as Iaho, nor
    is there any name which can be so variously pronounced. It is only
    by associating it with the Masoretic points that the later Rabbins
    succeeded in making Jehovah read “Adonaï”—or Lord. Philo Byblus
    spells it in Greek letters ΙΕΥΩ—IEVO. Theodoret says that the
    Samaritans pronounced it Iabé (Yahva), and the Jews Yaho; which
    would make it as we have shown, I—Ah—O. Diodorus states that
    “among the Jews they relate that Moses called the God IAO.” It is
    on the authority of the _Bible_ itself, that we maintain that,
    before his initiation by Jethro, his father‐in‐law, Moses had
    never known the word Iaho.(1065)


The above receives corroboration in a private letter from a very learned
Kabalist. In our first volume,(1066) it is stated that exoterically Brahma
(neuter), so flippantly and so often confused by the Orientalists with
Brahmâ (the male), is sometimes called Kâla‐hansa, the “Swan in Eternity,”
and the Esoteric meaning of Aham‐sa, is given as “I [am] he,” So‐ham being
equal to Sah “he,” and Aham “I”—a mystic anagram and permutation. It is
also the “four‐faced” Brahmâ, the Chatur‐mukham (the Perfect Cube) forming
itself _within_, and _from_, the Infinite Circle; and again the use of the
1, 3, 5, and 7/7 = 14, as the Esoteric Hierarchy of the Dhyân Chohans, is
explained. On this, the said correspondent comments in the following
manner:


    Of the 1, 3, 5, and twice 7, intending, and very especially,
    13514, which on a circle may be read as 31415 (or π value), I
    think there cannot be a possibility of doubting; and especially
    when considered with symbol marks on Sacr’,(1067) “Chakra,” or
    Circle of Vishnu.

    But let me carry your description a step further: You say, “The
    One from the Egg, the _Six_, and the _Five_,(1068) give the
    numbers 1065, the value of the First‐born.” If it be so, then in
    1065 we have the famous Jehovah’s name, the Jve or Jave, or
    Jupiter, and by change of ה to נ, or _h_ to _n_, then נוי or the
    Latin Jun or Juno, the base of the Chinese riddle, the key
    measuring numbers of Sni (Sinai) and Jehovah coming down on that
    Mount, which numbers (1065) are but the use of our ratio of 113 to
    355, because 1065 = 355 × 3 which is circumference to a diameter
    of 113 × 3 = 339. Thus the first born of Brahmâ‐Prajâpati (or any
    Demiurgus) indicates a measuring use of a circular relation taken
    from the Chakra (or Vishnu) and, as stated above, the Divine
    Manifestation takes the form of Life and the First‐born.

           [Illustration: Slope of entrance to King’s Chamber]

    It is a most singular thing: At the entrance passage to the King’s
    Chamber the measurement _from the surface_ of the Great Step(1069)
    and the Grand Gallery to the top of the said Gallery is, by the
    very careful measures of Piazzi Smyth, 339 inches. Take _a_ as a
    centre and with this radius describe a circle; the diameter of
    that circle will be 339 × 2 = 678, and these numbers are those of
    the expression _and the raven_, in the “dove and raven” scenes or
    pictures of the Flood of Noah; (the radius is taken to show
    division into two parts, which are 1065 each) for 113 (_man_) × 6
    = 678, and the diameter to a circumference of 1065 × 2—so we have
    here an indication of cosmic _man_ on this high grade or step, at
    the _entrance_ of the King’s Chamber (the Holy of Holies)—_which
    is the womb_. Now this passage is of such a height that a man to
    enter it _must stoop_. But a man _upright_ is 113, and broken, or
    stooping, he becomes 113/2 = 56·5 or 5·65 x 10 (יהוה), or Jehovah.
    That is, he personifies(1070) him as entering the Holy of Holies.
    But by Hebrew Esotericism the _chief function_ of Jehovah was
    _child giving_, etc., and that because, by the numbers of his
    name, he was the _measure of the lunar year_, which cycle of
    time—because by its factor of 7 (seven) it ran so coördinately
    with the periods of the quickening, viability, and gestation—was
    taken as the _causative of the generative action_ and therefore
    was worshipped and besought.


This discovery connects Jehovah still more with all the other Creative and
Generative Gods, Solar and Lunar, and especially with “King” Soma, the
Hindû Deus Lunus, the Moon, because of the Esoteric influence attributed
to this Planet in Occultism. There are other corroborations of this,
however, in Hebrew tradition itself. Adam is spoken of in the _More
Nevochim_ (or “Guide of the Perplexed”—truly!) of Maimonides in two
aspects; as a man, like all others born of a man and a woman, and—as the
_Prophet of the Moon_; the reason of which is now made apparent, and has
to be explained.

Adam, as the supposed great “Progenitor of the Human Race,” is, as Adam
Kadmon, made in the _image_ of God—a priapic image, therefore. The Hebrew
words Sacr’ and N’cabvah are, literally translated, Lingam (Phallus) and
Yoni (Cteïs), notwithstanding their translation in the _Bible_ “male and
female.”(1071) As said there, “God creates ‘_man in his own image_,’ in
the image of God created he him; _male and female_ created he them”—the
androgyne Adam Kadmon. Now this kabalistic name is not that of a living
man, nor even of a human or divine Being, but of the two sexes or organs
of procreation, called in Hebrew with that usual sincerity of language
preëminently biblical, Sacr’ and N’cabvah(1072); these two being,
therefore, the _image_ under which the “Lord God” appeared usually to his
chosen people. That this is so, is now undeniably proven by almost all the
symbologists and Hebrew scholars as well as by the _Kabalah_. Therefore
Adam is in one sense Jehovah. This makes plain another general tradition
in the East mentioned in Gregorie’s _Notes and Observations upon several
Passages in Scripture_,(1073) and quoted by Hargrave Jennings in his
_Phallicism_:


    That Adam was commanded by God that his dead body should be kept
    above ground till a fulness of time should come to commit it ...
    to the _middle of the earth_ by a priest of the Most High God....


Therefore,

Noah daily prayed in the Ark before the “Body of Adam”—(1074)

or before the Phallus in the Ark, or Holy of Holies, again. He who is a
Kabalist and accustomed to the incessant permutation of biblical names,
once they are interpreted numerically and symbolically, will understand
what is meant.


    The two words of which Jehovah is composed, make up the original
    idea of male‐female, as birth‐originator, for the י was the
    _membrum virile_ and _Hovah_ was _Eve_. So ... the _perfect one_,
    as originator of measures, takes also the form of _birth_ origin,
    as _hermaphrodite one_; hence, the phallic use of form.(1075)


Besides, the same author shows and demonstrates numerically and
geometrically that (_a_) Arets, “earth,” Adam, “man,” and H‐adam‐h, are
cognate with each other, and are _personified_ in the _Bible_ under one
form, as the Egyptian and Hebrew Mars, God of Generation;(1076) and (_b_)
that Jehovah, or Jah, is Noah, for _Jehovah is Noah_ in Hebrew would be
ינח or literally in English, _Inch_.

The above affords, then, a key to the said traditions. Noah, a divine
permutation, the supposed Saviour of Humanity, who carries in his Ark or
Argha (the Moon), the germs of all living things, worships before the
“Body of Adam,” which body is the image of the Creator, and a Creator
itself. Hence Adam is called the “Prophet of the Moon,” the Argha or “Holy
of Holies” of the Yod (י). This also shows the origin of the Jewish
popular belief that the face of Moses _is in the Moon_—_i.e._, the spots
in the Moon. For Moses and Jehovah are kabalistically once more
permutations, as has been shown. Says the author of _The Source of
Measures_:


    There is one fact in regard to Moses and his works too important
    to be omitted. When he is instructed by the Lord as to his
    mission, the _power_ name assumed by the Deity is, _I am that I
    am_, the Hebrew words being

    אהיה אשר אהיה ;

    a various reading of יהוה. Now, Moses is משה, and equals

    345.

    Add the values of the _new form_ of the name Jehovah, 21 + 501 +
    21 = 543, or, by a reverse reading, 345; thus showing Moses to be
    a form of Jehovah in this combination. 21 ÷ 2 = 105, or, reversed,
    501, so that the _asher_ or the _that_ in _I am‐that‐I am_ is
    simply a guide to a use of 21 or 7 × 3.501^2 = 251 +, a very
    valuable pyramid number, etc.(1077)


For a clearer explanation for the benefit of Non‐Kabalists we put it thus:
“I am that I am” is in Hebrew:

Âhiyé is ה י ה א, or 5 10 5 1.

Asher is ר ש א, or 200 300 1.

Âhiyé is ה י ה א, or 5 10 5 1.

Add the numbers of these separate words and you have:

אהיה (21) אשר (501) אהיה (21).

This relates to the process of descending in Fire on the Mount to make
Man, etc., and is explained to be but a _check_ and use of the numbers of
the mountains; for on one side we have 10 + 5 + 6 = 21, down the middle
501, and on the other side 6 + 5 + 10 = 21.(1078)

The “Holy of Holies,” both kabalistic and rabbinical, is thus shown as an
international symbol, and common property. Neither had originated with the
Hebrews; but owing to the too realistic handling of the half‐initiated
Levites, the symbol had acquired with them a significance which it
scarcely has with any other people to this day, and which it was
originally never meant to have by the true Kabalist. The Lingam and Yoni
of the modern average Hindû is, on the face of it, of course, no better
than the rabbinical “Holy of Holies”—but _it is no worse_; and this is a
point gained on the Christian traducers of the Asiatic religious
Philosophies. For, in such religious myths, in the hidden symbolism of a
creed and philosophy, the _spirit_ of the tenets propounded ought to
decide their relative value. And who will say, that, examined either way,
this so‐called “Wisdom,” applied solely to the uses and benefit of one
little nation, has ever developed in it anything like national ethics. The
Prophets are there, to show the walk in life of the chosen but “stiff‐
necked” people before, during, and after, the days of Moses. That they
have had at one time the Wisdom‐Religion and the use of its universal
language and symbols is proved by the same Esotericism existing to this
day in India with regard to the “Holy of Holies.” This, as said above, was
and still is the passage through the “Golden” Cow in the same _stooping
position_ as was necessitated by the Gallery of the Pyramid, which
identified man with Jehovah in Hebrew Esotericism. The whole difference
lies in the spirit of the interpretation. With the Hindûs as with the
ancient Egyptians that spirit was and is entirely metaphysical and
psychological; with the Hebrews it was _realistic_ and _physiological_. It
pointed to the first sexual separation of the human race—Eve giving birth
to Cain‐Jehovah, as shown in _The Source of Measures_; to the consummation
of terrestrial physiological union and conception—as in the allegory of
Cain shedding Abel’s blood, Habel being the feminine principle; and to
child‐bearing—a process shown to have begun in the Third Race, or with
Adam’s Third Son, Seth, with whose Son Henoch, men began to call
themselves Jehovah or Jah‐hovah, the male Jod and Havah or Eve, to wit,
male and female beings.(1079) Thus the difference lies in the religious
and ethical feeling, but the two symbols are identical. There is no doubt
that, with the fully initiated Judæan Tanaim, the inner sense of the
symbolism was as holy in its abstraction as with the ancient Âryan Dvijas.
The worship of the “God in the Ark” dates only from David; and for a
thousand years Israel knew of no phallic Jehovah. And now the old
_Kabalah_ edited and reëdited, has become tainted with it.

With the ancient Âryans the hidden meaning was grandiose, sublime and
poetical, however much the external appearance of their symbol may now
militate against the claim. The ceremony of passing through the Holy of
Holies—now symbolized by the Cow, but in the beginning through the temple
Hiranya‐garbha, the Radiant Egg, in itself a symbol of Universal, Abstract
Nature—meant spiritual conception and birth, or rather the _re‐birth_ of
the individual and his regeneration; the _stooping_ man at the entrance of
the Sanctum Sanctorum, ready to pass through the Matrix of Mother Nature,
or the physical creature ready to re‐become the original Spiritual Being,
_pre_‐natal MAN. With the Semite, that _stooping_ man meant the _fall_ of
Spirit into Matter, and that _fall_ and _degradation_ were apotheosized by
him with the result of dragging Deity down to the level of man. For the
Âryan, the symbol represented the divorce of Spirit from Matter, its
merging into and return to its primal Source; for the Semite, the wedlock
of Spiritual Man with Material Female Nature, the physiological taking
preëminence over the psychological and the purely immaterial. The Âryan
views of the symbolism were those of the whole Pagan world; the Semite
interpretations emanated from, and were preëminently those of a small
tribe, thus marking its national features and the idiosyncratic defects
that characterize many of the Jews to this day—gross realism, selfishness,
and sensuality. They had made a bargain, through their father Jacob, with
their tribal deity, self‐exalted above all others, and a _covenant_ that
his “seed shall be as the dust of the earth”; and that deity could have no
better image henceforth than that of the symbol of generation, and as
representation a _number_ and numbers.

Carlyle has wise words for both these nations. With the Hindû Âryan—the
most metaphysical and spiritual people on earth—religion has ever been, in
his words,


    An everlasting lode‐star, that beams the brighter in the heavens
    the darker here on earth grows the night around him.


The religion of the Hindû detaches him from this Earth; therefore, even
now, the cow‐symbol is one of the grandest and most philosophical among
all others in its inner meaning. To the “Masters” and “Lords” of European
potencies, the Israelites, certain words of Carlyle apply still more
admirably; for them


    Religion is a wise prudential feeling grounded on _mere
    calculation_—


and it was so from its beginnings. Having burdened themselves with it,
Christian nations feel bound to defend and _poetize_ it, at the expense of
all other religions.

But it was not so with the ancient nations. For them the passage‐entrance
and the sarcophagus in the King’s Chamber meant regeneration—not
generation. It was the most solemn symbol, a _Holy of Holies_, indeed,
wherein were created Immortal Hierophants and “Sons of God”—never mortal
men and sons of lust and flesh, as now in the hidden sense of the Semite
Kabalist. The reason for the difference in the views of the two races is
easy to account for. The Âryan Hindû belongs to the oldest races now on
Earth; the Semite Hebrew to the latest. The former is nearly one million
years old; the latter is a small sub‐race some 8,000 years of age and no
more.(1080)

But phallic worship has developed only with the gradual loss of the keys
to the inner meaning of religious symbols, and there was a day when the
Israelites had beliefs as pure as the Âryans have. But now Judaism, built
_solely_ on phallic worship, has become one of the latest creeds in Asia,
and theologically a religion of hate and malice toward everyone and
everything outside itself. Philo Judæus shows what was the genuine Hebrew
faith. The Sacred Writings, he says, prescribe what we ought to do,
_commanding us to hate the heathen and their laws and institutions_. True,
they did hate Baal or Bacchus worship publicly, but left its worst
features to be followed secretly. It is with the Talmudic Jews that the
grand symbols of Nature were the most profaned. With them, as now shown by
the discovery of the key to the correct _Bible_ reading, Geometry, the
_fifth_ Divine Science—“fifth” in the series of the Seven Keys to the
universal Esoteric Language and Symbology—was desecrated, and by them
applied to conceal the most terrestrial and grossly sexual mysteries,
wherein both Deity and Religion were degraded.

We are told that it is just the same with our Brahmâ‐Prajâpati, with
Osiris and all other _Creative_ Gods. Quite so, when their rites are
judged exoterically and externally; the reverse when their _inner_ meaning
is unveiled, as we see. The Hindû Lingam is identical with Jacob’s
“Pillar”—most undeniably. But the difference, as said, seems to consist in
the fact that the Esoteric significance of the Lingam was too truly sacred
and metaphysical to be revealed to the profane and the vulgar; hence its
superficial appearance was left to the speculations of the mob. Nor would
the Âryan Hierophant and Brâhman, in their proud exclusiveness and the
satisfaction of their knowledge, go to the trouble of concealing its
primeval _nakedness_ under cunningly devised fables; whereas the Rabbi,
having interpreted the symbol to suit his own tendencies, had to veil the
crude significance; and this served a double purpose—that of keeping his
secret to himself and of exalting himself in his supposed monotheism over
the Heathen, whom his Law commanded him to hate(1081)—a commandment now
gladly accepted by the Christian too, in spite of another and later
commandment, “Love one another.” Both India and Egypt had and have their
sacred lotuses, symbolic of the same “Holy of Holies”—the lotus growing in
the water, a double feminine symbol—the _bearer_ of its own seed and root
of all. Virâj and Horus are both male symbols, emanating from Androgyne
Nature, one from Brahmâ and his female counterpart Vâch, the other, from
Osiris and Isis—never from the One Infinite God. In the Judæo‐Christian
systems it is different. Whereas the lotus, containing Brahmâ, the
Universe, is shown growing out of Vishnu’s Navel, the Central Point in the
Waters of Infinite Space, and whereas Horus springs from the lotus of the
Celestial Nile—all these abstract pantheistic ideas are dwarfed and made
terrestrially concrete in the _Bible_. One is almost inclined to say that
in the _esoteric_ they are _grosser and still more anthropomorphic_, than
in their _exoteric_ rendering. Take as an example the same symbol, even in
its Christian application—the _lilies_ in the hand of the Archangel
Gabriel.(1082) In Hindûism—the “Holy of Holies” is a universal
abstraction, whose _dramatis personæ_ are Infinite Spirit and Nature; in
Christian Judaism, it is a _personal_ God, _outside_ of that Nature, and
the human womb—Eve, Sarah, etc.; hence, an anthropomorphic phallic God,
and his image—man.

Thus it is maintained, that with regard to the contents of the _Bible_,
one of two hypotheses has to be admitted. Either behind the symbolic
substitute Jehovah, there was the Unknown, Incognizable Deity, the
kabalistic Ain Suph; or, the Jews have been from the beginning no better
than the dead‐letter Lingam‐worshippers(1083) of the India of to‐day. We
say it was the former; and that, therefore, the secret or esoteric worship
of the Jews was the same Pantheism that the Vedântin Philosophers are
reproached with to‐day; Jehovah was a _substitute_ for purposes of an
exoteric national faith, and had no importance or reality in the eyes of
the erudite Priests and Philosophers—the Sadducees, the most refined and
the most learned of all the Israelite sects, who stand as a living proof
of it, with their contemptuous rejection of every belief, save the Law.
For how could those who invented the stupendous scheme now known as the
_Bible_, or their successors who knew, as all Kabalists do, that it was so
invented for a popular “blind”—how could they, we ask, feel reverence for
such a phallic symbol and a _number_, as Jehovah is shown most undeniably
to be in the kabalistic works? How could anyone worthy of the name of a
Philosopher, and knowing the real _secret_ meaning of their “Pillar of
Jacob,” their Bethels, oil‐anointed Phalli, and their “Brazen Serpent,”
worship such a gross symbol, and minister unto it, seeing in it their
“Covenant”—the Lord Himself! Let the reader turn to _Gemara Sanhedrim_ and
judge. As various writers have shown, and as brutally stated in Hargrave
Jennings’ _Phallicism_:


    _We know from the Jewish records_ that the Ark contained a _table
    of stone_; and if it can be demonstrated that that stone was
    phallic, and yet identical with the sacred name Jehovah or
    Yehovah, which, written in unpointed Hebrew with four letters, is
    J‐E‐V‐E or J‐H‐V‐H (the H being merely an aspirate and the same as
    E). This process leaves us the two letters I and V (or in another
    of its forms U); then if we place the I _in_ the U we have the
    “Holy of Holies”; we also have the Linga and Yoni and Argha of the
    Hindûs, the Iswarra [Îshvara] or “supreme Lord”; and here we have
    the whole secret of its mystic and arc‐celestial import, confirmed
    in itself by being identical with the Linyoni [?] of the Ark of
    the Covenant.(1084)


The biblical Jews of to‐day do not date from Moses but from David—even
admitting the identity of the old and genuine with the later and
remodelled Mosaic scrolls. Before that time their nationality is lost in
the mists of pre‐historic darkness, the veil from which is now withdrawn
as much as we have space to do. It is only to the days of the Babylonian
captivity that the _Old Testament_ may be referred by the most lenient
criticism as the approximately correct views that were current about the
days of Moses. Even such fanatical Christians and worshippers of Jehovah
as the Rev. Mr. Horne, have to admit the numerous changes and alterations
made by the later compilers of the “Book of God,” since it was _found_ by
Hilkiah,(1085) and since


    The Pentateuch arose out of the _primitive or older_ documents, by
    means of a _supplementary_ one.


The Elohistic texts were re‐written 500 years after the date of Moses; the
Jehovistic 800, on the authority of the biblical chronology itself. Hence,
it is maintained that the deity, represented as the organ of generation in
his pillar‐form, and as a symbol of the double‐sexed organ in the numeral
value of the letters of his name—the Yod, י or “phallus,” and Hé, ה, the
“opening,” or the “womb,” according to kabalistic authority—is of a far
later date than the Elohim‐symbols and is borrowed from the Pagan
_exoteric_ rites; and Jehovah is thus on a par with the Lingam and Yoni
found on every roadside in India.

Just as the Iao of the Mysteries was distinct from Jehovah, so was the
later Iao and Abraxas, or Abrasax, of some Gnostic sects identical with
the God of the Hebrews, who was the same as the Egyptian Horus. This is
undeniably proven on “Heathen” as on the Gnostic “Christian” gems. In
Matter’s collection of such gems there is a “Horus”—


    Seated on the lotus, inscribed ΑΒΡΑΣΑΞ ΙΑΩ (Abrasax Iao)—an
    address exactly parallel to the so frequent ΕΙΣ ΖΕΥΣ ΣΑΡΑΠΙ (Eis
    Zeus Sarapi) on the contemporary Heathen gems, and therefore only
    to be translated by “Abraxas is the One Jehovah.”(1086)


But who was Abraxas? As the same author shows:


    The numerical or Kabbalistic value of the name Abraxas directly
    refers to the Persian title of the god “Mithras,” Ruler of the
    year, worshipped from the earliest times under the appellation of
    Iao.(1087)


Thus, he was the Sun, in one aspect, the Moon or the Lunar Genius, in
another, that Generative Deity whom the Gnostics saluted as “Thou that
presidest over the Mysteries of the Father and the Son, who shinest in the
night‐time, holding _the second rank_, the first Lord of Death.”

It is only in his capacity of the Genius of the Moon—the latter being
credited in the old cosmogony with being the parent of our Earth—that
Jehovah could ever be regarded as the _Creator_ of our Globe and _its_
Heaven, namely, the Firmament.

The knowledge of all this will be no proof, however, to the average bigot.
Missionaries will go on with the most virulent attacks on the religions of
India, and Christians read with the same benighted smile of satisfaction
as ever these preposterously unjust words of Coleridge:


    It is highly worthy of observation that the inspired writings
    received by Christians are distinguishable from all other books
    _pretending to inspiration_, from the Scriptures of the Brahmins,
    and even from the Koran, in their strong and frequent
    _recommendation of truth_ [!!].




Section IV. On the Myth of the “Fallen Angels” in its Various Aspects.



A. The Evil Spirit: Who, And What?


Our present quarrel is exclusively with Theology. The Church enforces
belief in a Personal God and a Personal Devil, while Occultism shows the
fallacy of such a belief. For the Pantheists and Occultists, as much as
for the Pessimists, “Nature” is no better than “a comely mother, but stone
cold”; but this is true only so far as regards _external_ Physical Nature.
They both agree that, to the superficial observer, she is no better than
an immense slaughter‐house wherein butchers become victims, and victims
executioners in their turn. It is quite natural that the pessimistically
inclined profane, once convinced of Nature’s numerous shortcomings and
failures, and especially of her autophagous propensities, should imagine
this to be the best evidence that there is no Deity _in abscondito_ within
Nature, nor anything divine in her. Nor is it less natural that the
Materialist and the Physicist should imagine that everything is due to
blind force and chance, and to the survival of the _strongest_, even more
often than of the _fittest_. But the Occultists, who regard Physical
Nature as a bundle of most varied illusions on the plane of deceptive
perceptions; who recognize in every pain and suffering but the necessary
pangs of incessant procreation; a series of stages toward an ever‐growing
perfectibility, which is visible in the silent influence of never‐erring
Karma, or _Abstract_ Nature—the Occultists, we say, view the Great Mother
otherwise. Woe to those who live without suffering. Stagnation and death
is the future of all that vegetates without change. And how can there be
any change for the better without proportionate suffering during the
preceding stage? Is it not those only who have learnt the deceptive value
of earthly hopes and the illusive allurements of external nature who are
destined to solve the great problems of life, pain, and death?

If our modern Philosophers—preceded by the mediæval scholars—have helped
themselves to more than one fundamental idea of antiquity, Theologians
have built their God and his Archangels, their Satan and his Angels, along
with the Logos and his staff, entirely out of the _dramatis personæ_ of
the old heathen Pantheons. They would have been welcome to these, had they
not cunningly distorted the original characters, perverted the
philosophical meaning, and, taking advantage of the ignorance of
Christendom—the result of long ages of mental sleep, during which humanity
was permitted to think only by proxy—tossed every symbol into the most
inextricable confusion. One of their most sinful achievements in this
direction, was the transformation of the divine _Alter Ego_ into the
grotesque Satan of their Theology.

As the whole philosophy of the problem of evil hangs upon the correct
comprehension of the constitution of the _Inner_ Being of Nature and Man,
of the divine within the animal, and hence also the correctness of the
whole system as given in these pages, with regard to the crown piece of
evolution—Man—we cannot take sufficient precautions against theological
subterfuges. When the good St. Augustine and the fiery Tertullian call the
Devil the “monkey of God,” we can attribute it to the ignorance of the age
they lived in. It is more difficult to excuse our modern writers on the
same ground. The translation of Mazdean literature has afforded Roman
Catholic writers the pretext for proving their point in the same direction
once more. They have taken advantage of the dual nature of Ahura Mazda and
of his Amshaspands in the _Zend Avesta_ and the _Vendîdâd_, to emphasize
still further their wild theories. Satan is the _plagiarist and the
copyist by anticipation_ of the religion which came ages later. This was
one of the master strokes of the Latin Church, its best trump‐card after
the appearance of Spiritualism in Europe. Though only a _succès d’estime_,
in general, even among those who are not interested in either Theosophy or
Spiritualism, yet the weapon is often used by the Christian (Roman
Catholic) Kabalists against the Eastern Occultists.

Now even the Materialists are quite harmless, and may be regarded as the
friends of Theosophy, when compared to some fanatical “Christian”—as they
call themselves, “Sectarian” as we call them—Kabalists, on the Continent.
These read the _Zohar_, not to find in it ancient Wisdom, but, by mangling
the texts and meaning, to discover in its verses Christian dogmas, where
none could ever have been meant; and, having fished them out with the
collective help of Jesuitical casuistry and learning, the supposed
“Kabalists” proceed to write books and to mislead less far‐sighted
students of the Kabalah.(1088)

May we not then be permitted to drag the deep rivers of the Past, and thus
bring to the surface the root idea that led to the transformation of the
Wisdom‐God, who had first been regarded as the Creator of everything that
exists, into an Angel of Evil—a ridiculous horned biped, half goat and
half monkey, with hoofs and a tail? We need not go out of the way to
compare the Pagan Demons of either Egypt, India, or Chaldæa with the Devil
of Christianity, for no such comparison is possible. But we may stop to
glance at the biography of the Christian Devil, a piratical reprint from
the Chaldæo‐Judæan mythology.

The primitive origin of this personification rests upon the Akkadian
conception of the Cosmic Powers—the Heavens and the Earth—in eternal feud
and struggle with Chaos. Their Silik‐Muludag (? Murudug), “the God amongst
all the Gods,” the “merciful guardian of men on Earth,” was the son of Hea
(or Ea) the great God of Wisdom, called by the Babylonians Nebo. With both
peoples, as also in the case of the Hindû Gods, their deities were both
beneficent and maleficent. As evil and punishment are the agents of Karma,
in an absolutely just retributive sense, so Evil was the servant of the
Good.(1089) The reading of the Chaldæo‐Assyrian tiles has now demonstrated
this beyond a shadow of doubt. We find the same idea in the _Zohar_. Satan
was a Son and an Angel of God. With all the Semitic nations, the Spirit of
the Earth was as much the Creator in his own realm as the Spirit of the
Heavens. They were twin brothers and interchangeable in their functions,
when not two in one. Nothing of that which we find in _Genesis_ is absent
from the Chaldæo‐Assyrian religious beliefs, even in the little that has
hitherto been deciphered. The great “Face of the Deep” of _Genesis_ is
traced in the Tohu Bohu (“Deep” or “Primeval Space”), or Chaos, of the
Babylonians. Wisdom, the Great Unseen God—called in _Genesis_ the “Spirit
of God”—lived, for the older Babylonians as for the Akkadians, in the Sea
of Space. Toward the days described by Berosus, this Sea became the
Visible Waters on the face of the Earth—the crystalline abode of the Great
Mother, the Mother of Ea and all the Gods, which became, still later, the
great Dragon Tiamat, the Sea Serpent. Its last stage of development was
the great struggle of Bel with the Dragon—the Devil!

Whence the Christian idea that God cursed the Devil? The God of the Jews,
whosoever he was, forbids cursing Satan. Philo Judæus and Josephus both
state that the Law (the _Pentateuch_ and the _Talmud_) undeviatingly
forbid one to curse the Adversary, and also the Gods of the Gentiles.
“Thou shalt not revile the Gods,” quoth the God of Moses,(1090) for it is
God who “hath divided [them] unto all nations”;(1091) and those who speak
evil of “Dignities” (Gods) are called “filthy dreamers” by Jude.


    For even Michael the Archangel ... durst not bring against him
    [the Devil] a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke
    thee.(1092)


Finally the same is repeated in the _Talmud_:(1093)


    Satan appeared one day to a man who used to curse him daily, and
    said to him: “Why dost thou this?” Consider that _God himself_
    would not curse me, but merely said: “The Lord rebuke thee,
    Satan.”(1094)


This piece of Talmudic information shows plainly (_a_) that St. Michael is
called “God” in the _Talmud_, and somebody else the “Lord,” and (_b_) that
Satan is _a_ God, of whom even the “Lord” is in fear. All we read in the
_Zohar_ and other kabalistic works on Satan shows plainly that this
“personage” is simply the personification of the abstract Evil, which is
the weapon of Karmic Law and Karma. It is our human nature and man
himself, as it is said that “Satan is always near and inextricably
interwoven with man.” It is only a question of that Power being latent or
active in us.

It is a well‐known fact—to learned Symbologists at all events—that in
every great religion of antiquity, it is the Logos Demiurge—the Second
Logos, or the first emanation from the Mind, Mahat—who is made to strike,
so to say, the key‐note of that which may be called the correlation of
Individuality and Personality in the subsequent scheme of evolution. It is
the Logos who is shown, in the mystic symbolism of Cosmogony, Theogony,
and Anthropogony, playing two parts in the drama of Creation and
Being—that of the purely human Personality and the divine Impersonality of
the so‐called Avatâras, or divine Incarnations, and of the Universal
Spirit, called Christos by the Gnostics, and the Fravarshi (or Ferouer) of
Ahura Mazda in the Mazdean Philosophy. On the lower rungs of Theogony the
Celestial Beings of lower Hierarchies had each a Fravarshi, or a Celestial
“Double.” It is the same, only still more mystic, reässertion of the
kabalistic axiom, “_Deus est Demon inversus_”; the word “Demon,” however,
as in the case of Socrates, and in the spirit of the meaning given to it
by the whole of antiquity, standing for the Guardian Spirit, an “Angel,”
not a Devil of Satanic descent as Theology would have it. The Roman
Catholic Church shows its usual logic and consistency by accepting St.
Michael as the Ferouer of Christ. This Ferouer was his “Angel Guardian,”
as _proved_ by St. Thomas,(1095) who, however, calls the prototypes and
synonyms of Michael, such as Mercury for example, Devils!

The Church positively accepts the tenet that Christ has his Ferouer as any
other God or mortal has. Writes De Mirville:


    Here we have the two heroes of the Old Testament, the _Verbum_ [?]
    (or _second_ Jehovah), and his _Face_ [“Presence,” as the
    Protestants translate], both making but one, and yet being two, a
    mystery which seemed to us unsolvable before we had studied the
    doctrine of the Mazdean _Ferouers_, and learnt that the _Ferouer_
    was the spiritual potency, at once _image_, _face_, and _guardian_
    of the Soul which finally assimilates the _Ferouer_.(1096)


This is _almost_ correct.

Among other absurdities, the Kabalists maintain that the word Metatron,
being divided into _meta‐thronon_ (μετὰ, θρόνον), means “near the
throne.”(1097) It means quite the reverse, as _meta_ means “beyond” and
not “near.” This is of great importance in our argument. St. Michael,
then, the “_quis ut Deus_,” is the translator, so to speak, of the
invisible world into the visible and the objective.

They maintain, furthermore, along with the Roman Catholic Church, that in
the Biblical and Christian Theology there does not exist a “higher
celestial personality, after the Trinity, than that of the Archangel, or
the Seraphim, Michael.” According to them, the conqueror of the Dragon is
the Archisatrap of the Sacred Militia, the Guardian of the Planets, the
King of the Stars, the Slayer of Satan and the Powerful Rector. In the
mystic Astronomy of these gentlemen, he is the Conqueror of Ahriman, who
having upset the Sidereal Throne of the usurper, bathes in his stead in
the Solar Fires; and, Defender of the Christ‐Sun, he approaches so near
his Master, “that he seems to become one with him.”(1098) Owing to this
fusion with the Word (Verbum) the Protestants, and among them Calvin,
ended by losing sight entirely of the duality, and saw no Michael “but
only his Master,” writes the Abbé Caron. The Roman Catholics, and
especially their Kabalists, know better; and it is they who explain to the
world this duality, which affords them the means of glorifying the chosen
ones of the Church, and of rejecting and anathematizing all those Gods who
may be in the way of their dogmas.

Thus the same titles and the same names are given in turn to God and the
Archangel. Both are called Metatron, “both have the name of Jehovah
applied to them when they speak _one in the other_” (_sic_), for,
according to the _Zohar_, the term signifies equally the Master and the
Ambassador. Both are the Angel of the Face, because, as we are informed,
if on the one hand the “Word” is called “the Face [or the Presence] and
the Image of the Substance of God,” on the other, “when speaking of the
_Saviour_ to the Israelites, Isaiah [?] tells them” that “the Angel of his
Presence saved them in their affliction”—“so he was their Saviour.”(1099)
Elsewhere Michael is called very plainly the “Prince of the Faces of the
Lord,” the “Glory of the Lord.” Both Jehovah and Michael are the “Guides
of Israel(1100) ... Chiefs of the Armies of the Lord, Supreme Judges of
the Souls and even Seraphs.”(1101)

The whole of the above is given on the authority of various works by Roman
Catholics, and must, therefore, be orthodox. Some expressions are
translated to show what subtle Theologians and Casuists mean by the term
Ferouer,(1102) a word borrowed by some French writers from the _Zend
Avesta_, as said, and utilized in Roman Catholicism for a purpose
Zoroaster was very far from anticipating. In Fargard xix (verse 14), of
the _Vendîdâd_ it is said:


    Invoke, O Zarathushtra! my Fravarshi, who am Ahura Mazda, the
    greatest, the best, the fairest of all beings, the most solid, the
    most intelligent, ... and whose soul is the holy Word (Mâthra
    Spenta).(1103)


The French Orientalists translate _Fravarshi_ by _Ferouer_.

Now what is a Ferouer, or Fravarshi? In some Mazdean works it is plainly
implied that Fravarshi is the _inner_, immortal Man, or the Ego which
reïncarnates; that it existed before the physical body and survives all
such bodies it happens to be clothed in.


    Not only man was endowed with a Fravarshi, _but gods too_, and the
    sky, fire, waters, and plants.(1104)


This shows as plainly as can be shown that the Ferouer is the “spiritual
counterpart” of either God, animal, plant, or even element, _i.e._, the
refined and the _purer_ part of the grosser creation, the soul of the
body, whatever the body may happen to be. Therefore does Ahura Mazda
recommend Zarathushtra to invoke his Fravarshi and not himself (Ahura
Mazda); that is to say, the impersonal and _true_ Essence of Deity, one
with Zoroaster’s own Âtmâ (or Christos), not the _false_ and personal
appearance. This is quite clear.

Now it is on this divine and ethereal prototype that the Roman Catholics
have seized so as to build up the supposed difference between their God
and Angels and the Deity and its aspects, or the Gods of the old
religions. Thus, while calling Mercury, Venus, Jupiter (whether as Gods or
Planets) Devils, they at the same time make of the same Mercury the
Ferouer of their Christ. This fact is undeniable. Vossius(1105) proves
that Michael is the Mercury of the Pagans, and Maury and other French
writers corroborate him, and add that according to great Theologians
_Mercury and the Sun are one_, (?) and no wonder, they think, since
Mercury being so near the Wisdom and the Verbum (the Sun), must be
absorbed by and confounded with him.(1106)

This “Pagan” view was accepted from the first century of our era, as shown
in the original _Acts of the Apostles_ (the English translation being
worthless). So much is Michael the Mercury of the Greeks and other
nations, that when the inhabitants of Lystra mistook Paul and Barnabas for
Mercury and Jupiter, saying, “The Gods have come down to us in the
likeness of men”—the text adds: “And they called Barnabas Zeus, and Paul,
Hermes, because he was the _leader of the Word_ (Logos),” and not “the
chief speaker,” as erroneously translated in the Authorized, and repeated
even in the Revised, English _Bible_. Michael is the Angel of the vision
in _Daniel_, the Son of God, “who was like unto a Son of Man.” It is the
Hermes‐Christos of the Gnostics, the Anubis‐Syrius of the Egyptians, the
Counsellor of Osiris in Amenti, the Leontoid Michael‐Ophiomorphos
(ὀφιομόρφος) of the Ophites, who wears on certain Gnostic jewels a lion’s
_head_, like his father Ildabaoth.(1107)

Now to all this the Roman Catholic Church tacitly consents, many of her
writers even avowing it publicly. Unable to deny the flagrant “borrowing”
of their Church, who “spoiled” her seniors of their symbols, as the Jews
had “spoiled” the Egyptians of their jewels of silver and gold, they
explain the fact quite coolly and seriously. Thus the writers who have
hitherto been _timid_ enough to see, in this repetition by Christian
dogmas of old Pagan ideas, “a _legendary plagiarism_ perpetrated by man,”
are gravely assured that, far from such a simple solution of the almost
perfect resemblance, it has to be attributed to quite another cause—“to a
_pre‐historical_ plagiarism, of a _superhuman_ origin.”

If the reader would know how, he must again kindly turn to the same volume
of De Mirville’s work.(1108) Please note that this author was the
_official and recognized defender_ of the Roman Church, and was helped by
the learning of all the Jesuits. There we read:


    We have pointed out several demi‐gods, and also “very historical”
    heroes of the Pagans, who were predestined from the moment of
    their birth, _to ape_, while at the same time they dishonoured,
    the nativity of the hero, _who was quite God_, before whom the
    whole earth had to bow; we have traced them being born as _he_
    was, from an immaculate mother; we have seen them strangling
    serpents in their cradles, fighting against demons, performing
    miracles, dying as martyrs, descending to the nether world and
    rising again from the dead. And we have bitterly deplored that
    timid and shy Christians should feel compelled to explain all such
    identities on the ground of coincidence of myth and symbol. They
    forget apparently these words of the Saviour, _all that came
    before me are thieves and robbers_—a word which explains all
    without any absurd negation and which I have commented on in these
    words, “The Evangel is a sublime drama, _parodied and played
    before its appointed time by ruffians_.”


The “ruffians” (_les drôles_), are of course Demons whose manager is
Satan. Now this is the easiest and the most sublime and simple way of
getting out of the difficulty! The Rev. Dr. Lundy, a Protestant De
Mirville, followed the happy suggestion in his _Monumental Christianity_,
and so did Dr. Sepp of Munich in his works written to prove the divinity
of Jesus and the Satanic origin of all other Saviours. So much greater the
pity that a systematic and collective plagiarism which went on for several
centuries on the most gigantic scale, should be explained by another
plagiarism, this time in the fourth Gospel. For the sentence quoted from
it, “All that ever came before me,” etc., is a _verbatim_ repetition of
words written in the _Book of Enoch_. In the Introduction to Archbishop
Laurence’s translation from an Ethiopic MS. in the Bodleian Library, the
editor, author of the _Evolution of Christianity_, remarks:


    In revising the proof‐sheets of the Book of Enoch, we have been
    still further impressed by relationship with New Testament
    Scripture. Thus, the parable of the sheep, rescued by the good
    Shepherd from hireling guardians and ferocious wolves, is
    _obviously borrowed_ by the fourth Evangelist from Enoch lxxxix,
    in which the author depicts the shepherds as killing and
    destroying the sheep before the advent of their Lord, and thus
    discloses the true meaning of that hitherto mysterious passage in
    the Johannine parable—“All that ever came before me are thieves
    and robbers”—language in which we now detect an obvious reference
    to the allegorical shepherds of Enoch.(1109)


It is too late in the day to claim that it is Enoch who borrowed from the
_New Testament_, instead of _vice versâ_. Jude (14, 15) quotes _verbatim_
from Enoch a long passage about the coming of the Lord with his ten
thousand saints, and naming the prophet specifically _acknowledges_ the
source.


    In ... perfecting the parallelism between prophet and apostle,
    [we] have placed beyond controversy that, _in the eyes of the
    author of an Epistle accepted as Divine revelation_, the Book of
    Enoch _was the inspired production of an antediluvian
    patriarch_....

    The cumulative coincidence of language and ideas in Enoch and the
    authors of New Testament Scripture, ... clearly indicates that the
    work of the Semitic Milton was the inexhaustible source from which
    Evangelists and Apostles, or the men who wrote in their names,
    borrowed their conceptions of the resurrection, judgment,
    immortality, perdition, and of the universal reign of
    righteousness under the eternal dominion of the Son of Man. This
    _evangelical plagiarism_ culminates in the Revelation of John,
    which adapts the visions of Enoch to Christianity, with
    modifications in which we miss the sublime simplicity of the great
    master of apocalyptic prediction, who prophesied in the name of
    the antediluvian Patriarch.(1110)


“Antediluvian,” truly; but if the phraseology of the text dates hardly a
few centuries or even millenniums before the historical era, then it is no
longer the original _prediction_ of the events to come, but is, in its
turn, a copy of some scripture of a pre‐historic religion.


    In the Krita age, Vishnu, in the form of Kapila and other
    (inspired teachers) ... imparts ... true wisdom [as Enoch did]. In
    the Tretâ age he restrains the wicked, in the form of a universal
    monarch [Chakravartin, the “Everlasting King” of Enoch(1111)] and
    protects the three worlds [or Races]. In the Dvâpara age, in the
    person of Veda‐vyâsa, he divides the one Veda into four, and
    distributes it into hundreds (Shata) of branches.(1112)


Truly so; the Veda of the earliest Âryans, before it was written, went
forth into every nation of the Atlanto‐Lemurians, and sowed the first
seeds of all the now existing old religions. The off‐shoots of the never
dying Tree of Wisdom have scattered their dead leaves even on Judæo‐
Christianity. And at the end of the Kali, our present Age, Vishnu, or the
“Everlasting King,” will appear as Kalki, and reëstablish righteousness
upon earth. The minds of those who live at that time shall be awakened,
and become as pellucid as crystal.


    The men who are thus changed by virtue of that peculiar time [the
    Sixth Race] _shall be as the seeds_ of other human beings, and
    shall give birth to a race who shall follow the laws of the Krita
    age of purity;


_i.e._, it shall be the Seventh Race, the Race of “Buddhas,” the “Sons of
God,” born of _immaculate_ parents.



B. The Gods Of Light Proceed From The Gods Of Darkness.


Thus it is pretty well established that Christ, the Logos, or the God in
Space and the Saviour on Earth, is but one of the echoes of this same
antediluvian and sorely misunderstood Wisdom. Its history begins by the
descent on Earth of the “Gods” who incarnate in mankind, and this is the
“Fall.” Whether Brahmâ hurled down on Earth by Bhagavân in the allegory,
or Jupiter by Cronus, all are the symbols of the human races. Once having
touched this Planet of dense Matter, the snow‐white wings of even the
highest Angel can no longer remain immaculate, or the Avatâra (or
incarnation) be perfect, as every such Avatâra is the fall of a God into
generation. Nowhere is the metaphysical truth more clear, when explained
Esoterically, or more hidden from the average comprehension of those who
instead of appreciating the sublimity of the idea can only degrade it—than
in the _Upanishads_, the Esoteric glossaries of the _Vedas_. The _Rig
Veda_, as Guignault characterized it, “is the most sublime conception of
the great highways of humanity.” The _Vedas_ are, and will remain for
ever, in the Esotericism of the _Vedânta_ and the _Upanishads_, “the
mirror of the Eternal Wisdom.”

For upwards of sixteen centuries the new masks, forced over the faces of
the old Gods, have screened them from public curiosity, but they have
finally proved a misfit. Yet the metaphorical Fall, and the as
metaphorical Atonement and Crucifixion, have led Western Humanity through
roads knee‐deep in blood. Worse than all, they have led it to believe in
the dogma of the Evil Spirit distinct from the Spirit of all Good, whereas
the former lives in all Matter and preëminently in man. Finally it has
created the God‐slandering dogma of Hell and eternal perdition; it has
spread a thick film between the higher intuitions of man and divine
verities; and, most pernicious result of all, it has made people remain
ignorant of the fact that there were no fiends, no dark demons in the
Universe before man’s own appearance on this, and probably on other
Earths. Hence the people have been led to accept, as the problematical
consolation for this world’s sorrows, the thought of original sin.

The philosophy of that Law in Nature, which implants in man as well as in
every beast a passionate, inherent, and instinctive desire for freedom and
self‐guidance, pertains to Psychology and cannot be touched on now, for to
demonstrate this feeling in higher Intelligences, to analyze and give a
natural reason for it, would necessitate an endless philosophical
explanation for which there here is no room. Perhaps the best synthesis of
this feeling is found in three lines of Milton’s _Paradise Lost_. Says the
“Fallen One”:


    Here we may reign secure; and in my choice,
    To reign is worth ambition, though in hell!
    Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven!


Better be man, the crown of terrestrial production and king over its _opus
operatum_, than be lost among the will‐less Spiritual Hosts in Heaven.

We have said elsewhere that the dogma of the first Fall rested on a few
verses in _Revelation_, which are now shown to be a plagiarism from Enoch
by some scholars. These have given rise to endless theories and
speculations, which have gradually acquired the importance of dogma and
inspired tradition. Every one sought to explain the verse about the seven‐
headed dragon with his ten horns and seven crowns, whose tail “drew the
third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth,” and
whose place, with that of his Angels, “was found no more in heaven.” What
the seven heads of the Dragon (or Cycle) mean, and its _five_ wicked kings
also, may be learned in the Addenda which close Part III of this Volume.

From Newton to Bossuet speculations were incessantly evolved in Christian
brains with regard to these obscure verses. Says Bossuet:


    The star that falls is the heresiarch Theodosius.... The clouds of
    smoke are the heresies of the Montanists.... The third part of the
    stars are the martyrs, and especially the doctors of divinity.


Bossuet ought to have known, however, that the events described in
_Revelation_ were not original, and may, as shown, be found in other and
Pagan traditions. There were no scholastics nor Montanists during Vedic
times, nor yet far earlier in China. But Christian _Theology_ had to be
_protected and saved_.

This is only natural. But why should truth be sacrificed in order to
protect from destruction the lucubrations of Christian Theologians?

The “_princeps aeris hujus_,” the “Prince of the Air,” of St. Paul, is not
the Devil, but the effects of the Astral Light, as Éliphas Lévi correctly
explains. The Devil is not the “God _of this period_,” as he says, for it
is the Deity of every age and period since Man appeared on Earth, and
Matter in its countless forms and states had to fight for its evanescent
existence against other disintegrating Forces.

The “Dragon” is simply the symbol of the Cycle and of the “Sons of
Manvantaric Eternity,” who had descended on Earth during a certain epoch
of its formative period. The “clouds of smoke” are geological phenomena.
The “third part of the stars of heaven,” cast down to the Earth, refers to
the Divine Monads—the Spirits of the Stars in Astrology—that
circumambulate our Globe; _i.e._, the _human_ Egos destined to perform the
whole Cycle of Incarnations. The sentence, “_qui circumambulat terram_,”
however, is again referred to the Devil in Theology, the mythical Father
of Evil being said to “fall like lightning.” Unfortunately for this
interpretation, the “Son of Man,” or Christ, is expected, on the personal
testimony of Jesus, to descend on Earth likewise, “as the lightning cometh
out of the East,”(1113) just in the same shape and under the same symbol
as Satan, who is seen to fall “as lightning ... from heaven.”(1114) All
these metaphors and figures of speech, preëminently Oriental in their
character, must have their origin searched for in the East. In all the
ancient Cosmogonies _Light_ comes from _Darkness_. In Egypt, as elsewhere,
_Darkness_ was “the principle of all things.” Hence Pymander, the “Thought
Divine,” issues as Light from Darkness. Behemoth(1115) is the principle of
Darkness, or Satan, in Roman Catholic Theology, and yet Job says of him
that Behemoth is “the chief [principle] of the ways of God”—“_Principium
viarum Domini Behemoth!_”(1116)

Consistency does not seem to be a favourite virtue in any portion of
Divine Revelation, so‐called—not as interpreted by Theologians, at any
rate.

The Egyptians and the Chaldæans referred the birth of their Divine
Dynasties to that period when creative Earth was in her last final throes
in giving birth to her pre‐historic mountain ranges, which have since
disappeared, her seas and her continents. Her face was covered with “deep
Darkness and in that [Secondary] Chaos was the principle of all things”
that developed on the Globe later on. Our Geologists have now ascertained
that there was such a terrestrial conflagration in the early geological
periods, several hundred millions of years ago.(1117) As to the tradition
itself, every country and nation had it, each under its respective
national form.

It is not alone Egypt, Greece, Scandinavia or Mexico, that had its Typhon,
Python, Loki, and its “falling” Demon, but China also. The Celestials have
a whole literature upon the subject. It is said that in consequence of the
rebellion against Ti of a proud Spirit, who said he was Ti himself, seven
Choirs of Celestial Spirits were exiled upon Earth, which “_brought a
change in all Nature_, Heaven itself _bending_ down and uniting with
Earth.”

In the _Y‐King_, one reads:


    The flying Dragon, superb and rebellious, suffers now, and his
    pride is punished; he thought he would reign in Heaven, he reigns
    only on the Earth.


Again, the _Tchoon‐Tsieoo_ says allegorically:


    One night the stars ceased shining in darkness, and deserted it,
    falling down like rain upon the Earth, _where they are now
    hidden_.


These stars are the Monads.

Chinese Cosmogonies have their “Lord of the Flame” and their “Celestial
Virgin,” with little “Spirits to help and minister to her; and big Spirits
to fight those who are the enemies of other Gods.” But all this does not
prove that the said allegories are _presentments_ or _prophetic_ writings
which all refer to Christian Theology.

The best proof one can offer to Christian Theologians that the Esoteric
statements in the _Bible_—in both Testaments—are the assertion of the same
idea as in our Archaic Teachings, to wit, that the “Fall of the Angels”
referred simply to the Incarnation of Angels “who had broken through the
Seven Circles”—is found in the _Zohar_. Now the _Kabalah_ of Simeon Ben
Iochaï is the soul and essence of the allegorical narrative, as the later
_Christian Kabalah_ is the “dark cloaked” Mosaic Pentateuch. And it says
(in the Agrippa MSS.):


    The Wisdom of the Kabalah rests in the Science of the Equilibrium
    and Harmony.

    Forces that manifest without having been first equilibrized perish
    in Space [“equilibrized” meaning differentiated].

    Thus perished the first Kings [the Divine Dynasties] of the
    Ancient World, the _self‐produced_ Princes of Giants. They fell
    like rootless trees, and were seen no more; for _they were the
    Shadow of the Shadow_ [to wit, the Chhâyâ of the Shadowy
    Pitris].(1118)

    But those that came after them, who shooting down like falling
    stars were enshrined in the Shadows—prevailed to this day
    [Dhyânîs, who by incarnating in those “empty Shadows,” inaugurated
    the era of mankind].


Every sentence in the ancient Cosmogonies unfolds to him who can read
between the lines the identity of the ideas, though under different garbs.

The first lesson taught in Esoteric Philosophy is, that the Incognizable
Cause does not put forth evolution, whether consciously or unconsciously,
but only exhibits periodically _different aspects_ of Itself to the
perception of _finite_ minds. Now the Collective Mind—the
Universal—composed of various and numberless Hosts of Creative Powers,
however infinite in Manifested Time, is still finite when contrasted with
the Unborn and Undecaying Space in its supreme essential aspect. That
which is finite cannot be perfect. Therefore there are inferior Beings
among those Hosts, but there never have been any Devils or “disobedient
Angels,” for the simple reason that they are all governed by Law. The
Asuras (call them by any other name you will) who incarnated, followed in
this a law as implacable as any other. They had manifested prior to the
Pitris, and as Time (in Space) proceeds in Cycles, their turn had
come—hence the numerous allegories. The name “Asura” was first given by
the Brâhmans indiscriminately to those who opposed their mummeries and
sacrifices, as did the great Asura called Asurendra. It is to those ages,
probably, that the origin of the idea of the Demon, as opposer and
adversary, has to be traced.

The Hebrew Elohim, called “God” in the translations, who create “Light,”
are identical with the Âryan Asuras. They are also referred to as the
“Sons of Darkness,” as a philosophical and logical contrast to Light
Immutable and Eternal. The earliest Zoroastrians did not believe in Evil
or Darkness being _coëternal_ with Good or Light, and they give the same
interpretation. Ahriman is the manifested _Shadow_ of Ahura Mazda (Asura
Mazda), himself issued from Zeruâna Âkerne, the “Boundless [Circle of]
Time,” or the Unknown Cause. They say of the latter:


    Its glory is too exalted, its light too resplendent for either
    human intellect or mortal eye to grasp and see.


Its primal emanation _is Eternal Light, which, from having been previously
concealed in Darkness, was called to manifest itself and thus was formed
Ormazd, the __“__King of Life.__”_ He is the “First‐born” in Boundless
Time, but, like his own antetype (preëxisting spiritual idea), _has lived
within Darkness from all Eternity_. The six Amshaspands—seven with
himself, the Chief of all—the primitive _Spiritual Angels and Men_, are
_collectively_ his Logos. The Zoroastrian Amshaspands create the World in
six Days or periods also, and rest on the seventh; but in the Esoteric
Philosophy, that _seventh_ is the _first_ period or “Day,” the so‐called
_Primary Creation_ in Âryan Cosmogony. It is that intermediate Æon which
is the _Prologue_ to Creation, and which stands on the borderland between
the Uncreated Eternal Causation and the produced finite effects; a state
of _nascent_ activity and energy as the first aspect of the Eternal
Immutable Quiescence. In _Genesis_, on which no metaphysical energy has
been spent, but only an extraordinary acuteness and ingenuity to veil the
Esoteric Truth, Creation begins at the third stage of manifestation. “God”
or the Elohim are the “Seven Regents” of _Pymander_. They are identical
with all the other Creators. But even in _Genesis_ that period is hinted
at by the abruptness of the picture, and the “Darkness” that was on the
face of the Deep. The Elohim are shown to “create”—that is to say, to
build or to produce the two Heavens or “double” Heaven (_not_ Heaven and
Earth); which means, in so many words, that they separated the upper
manifested (Angelic) Heaven, or plane of consciousness, from the lower or
terrestrial plane; the (to us) Eternal and Immutable Æons from those
Periods that are in space, time and duration; Heaven from Earth, the
Unknown from the Known—to the profane. Such is the meaning of the sentence
in _Pymander_, which says that:


    Thought, the _divine_, which is Light and Life [Zeruâna Âkerne]
    produced through its Word, or first aspect, the other, _operating_
    Thought, which being the God of Spirit and Fire, constructed Seven
    Regents enclosing within their Circle the World of Senses named
    “Fatal Destiny.”


The latter refers to Karma; the “Seven Circles” are the seven planets and
planes, as also the seven Invisible Spirits, in the Angelic Spheres, whose
visible symbols are the seven planets,(1119) the seven Rishis of the Great
Bear and other glyphs. As said of the Âdityas by Roth:


    They are neither sun, nor moon, nor stars, nor dawn, but the
    eternal sustainers of this luminous life which exists as it were
    behind all these phenomena.


It is they—the “Seven Hosts”—who, having “considered in their Father
[Divine Thought] the plan of the operator,” as says _Pymander_, _desired_
to operate (or build the world with its creatures) likewise; for, having
been born “_within_ the Sphere of Operation”—the manifesting Universe—such
is the Manvantaric Law. And now comes the second portion of the passage,
or rather of two passages merged into one to conceal the full meaning.
Those who were born within the Sphere of Operation were “the brothers who
loved _him_ well.” The latter—the “him”—were the Primordial Angels; the
Asuras, the Ahriman, the Elohim, or “Sons of God,” of whom Satan was
one—all those Spiritual Beings who were called the “Angels of Darkness,”
because that Darkness is _absolute_ Light, a fact now neglected if not
entirely forgotten in Theology. Nevertheless, the spirituality of those
much abused “Sons of Light” which is Darkness, must be evidently as great,
in comparison with that of the Angels next in order, as the ethereality of
the latter would be when contrasted with the density of the human body.
The former are the “First‐born,” and therefore so near to the confines of
Pure Quiescent Spirit as to be merely the “privations”—in the Aristotelian
sense—the Ferouers or the ideal types of those who followed. They could
not create material, _corporeal_ things; and, therefore, were said in
process of time to have “refused” to create, as “commanded” by
“God”—otherwise, to have “_rebelled_.”

Perchance, this is justified on the principle of the _scientific_ theory
which teaches us as to the effect of two sound waves of equal length
meeting:


    If the two sounds be of the same intensity, their coincidence
    produces a sound four times the intensity of either, while their
    interference produces _absolute silence_.


While explaining some of the “heresies” of his day, Justin Martyr shows
the identity of all the world religions at their starting points. The
first _Beginning_ opens invariably with the _Unknown_ and _Passive_ Deity,
from which emanates a certain Active Power or Virtue, the Mystery that is
sometimes called Wisdom, sometimes the Son, very often God, Angel, Lord,
and Logos.(1120) The latter is sometimes applied to the very first
Emanation, but in several systems it proceeds from the first Androgyne or
Double Ray produced at the beginning by the Unseen. Philo depicts this
Wisdom as male and female. But though its first manifestation had a
beginning—for it proceeded from Oulom(1121) (Aiôn, Time), the highest of
the Æons when emitted from the Father—it had remained with the Father
_before all creations_, for it is part of him.(1122) Therefore Philo
Judæus calls Adam Kadmon by the name “Mind”—the Ennoia of Bythos in the
Gnostic System. “The Mind, let it be named Adam.”(1123)

As the old Magian books explain it, the whole event becomes clear. A thing
can only exist through its opposite—Hegel teaches us; and only a little
philosophy and spirituality are needed to comprehend the origin of the
later dogma, which is so truly satanic and infernal in its cold and cruel
wickedness. The Magians accounted for the Origin of Evil in their exoteric
teachings in this way. “Light can produce nothing but Light, and can never
be the origin of Evil”; how then was Evil produced, since there was
nothing coëqual or like the Light in its production? Light, say they,
produced several Beings, all of them spiritual, luminous, and powerful.
But a Great One (the “Great Asura,” Ahriman, Lucifer, etc.) had an _evil
thought_, contrary to the Light. He doubted, and by that doubt he became
dark.

This is a little nearer to the truth, but still wide of the mark. There
was _no_ “_evil_ thought” that originated the opposing Power, but simply
Thought _per se_; something which, being cogitative, and containing design
and purpose, is therefore finite, and must thus find itself naturally in
opposition to pure Quiescence, the as natural state of absolute
Spirituality and Perfection. It was simply the Law of Evolution that
asserted itself; the progress of Mental Unfolding, differentiated from
Spirit, involved and entangled already with Matter, into which it is
irresistibly drawn. Ideas, in their very nature and essence, as
conceptions bearing relation to objects, whether true or imaginary, are
opposed to Absolute Thought, that Unknowable All of whose mysterious
operations Mr. Spencer predicates that nothing can be said, but that “it
has no kinship of nature with Evolution”(1124)—which it certainly has
not.(1125)

The _Zohar_ gives it very suggestively. When the “Holy One” (the Logos)
desired to create man, he called the _highest_ Host of Angels and spake
unto them what he wanted, but they _doubted_ the wisdom of this desire and
answered: “Man will not continue one night in his glory”—for which they
were burnt (annihilated?), by the “Holy” Lord. Then he called another,
lower Host, and said the same. And they contradicted the “Holy One”: “What
is the good of Man?”—they argued. Still Elohim created Man, and when Man
_sinned_ there came the Hosts of Uzza and Azael, and twitted God: “Here is
the Son of Man that thou hast made”—they said. “Behold, he sinned!” Then
the Holy One replied: “If you had been among them [Men] you would have
been worse than they.” And he threw them from their exalted position in
Heaven even down on to the Earth; and “they were changed [into Men] and
sinned after the women of the earth.”(1126) This is quite plain. No
mention is made in _Genesis_ (vi) of these “Sons of God” receiving
_punishment_. The only reference to it in the _Bible_ is in _Jude_:


    And the angels which kept not their first estate but left their
    own habitation, he hath reserved in _everlasting chains_ under
    _darkness_ unto the _judgment of the great day_.(1127)


And this means simply that the “Angels,” doomed to incarnation, are in the
_chains_ of flesh and matter, under the _darkness_ of ignorance, till the
“_Great Day_,” which will come as always after the Seventh Round, after
the expiration of the “Week,” on the Seventh Sabbath, or in the Post‐
Manvantaric Nirvâna.

How truly Esoteric and consonant with the Secret Doctrine is Pymander, the
Thought Divine, of Hermes, may be inferred from its original and primitive
translations in Latin and Greek only. On the other hand how disfigured it
has been later on by Christians in Europe, is seen from the remarks and
unconscious _confessions_ made by De St. Marc, in his Preface and Letter
to the Bishop of Ayre, in 1578. Therein, the whole cycle of
transformations from a Pantheistic and Egyptian into a Mystic Roman
Catholic treatise is given, and we see how _Pymander_ has become what it
is now. Still, even in St. Marc’s translation, traces are found of the
real Pymander—the “Universal Thought” or “Mind.” This is the translation
from the old French translation, the original being given in the foot‐
note(1128) in its quaint old French:


    Seven men [principles] were generated in Man.... The nature of the
    harmony of the Seven of the Father and of the Spirit. Nature ...
    produced seven men in accordance with the natures of the Seven
    Spirits ... having in them, potentially, the two sexes.


Metaphysically, the Father and the Son are the “Universal Mind” and the
“Periodical Universe”; the “Angel” and the “Man.” It is the Son and the
Father at one and the same time; in Pymander, the _active_ Idea and the
_passive_ Thought that generates it; the radical keynote in Nature which
gives birth to the seven notes—the septenary scale of the Creative Forces,
and to the seven prismatic _aspects_ of colour, all born from the one
White Ray, or Light—itself generated in Darkness.



C. The Many Meanings Of The “War In Heaven.”


The Secret Doctrine points out, as a self‐evident fact, that Mankind,
collectively and individually, is with all manifested Nature the vehicle
(_a_) of the Breath of One Universal Principle, in its primal
differentiation; and (_b_) of the countless “breaths” proceeding from that
One Breath in its secondary and further differentiations, as Nature with
its many “mankinds” proceeds downwards toward the planes that are ever
increasing in materiality. The Primary Breath informs the higher
Hierarchies; the secondary—the lower, on the constantly descending planes.

Now there are many passages in the _Bible_ which prove on their face,
_exoterically_, that this belief was at one time _universal_; and the two
most convincing are _Ezekiel_, xxviii and _Isaiah_, xiv. Christian
Theologians are welcome to interpret both as referring to the great War
before Creation, the Epos of Satan’s Rebellion, etc., if they so choose,
but the absurdity of the idea is too apparent. Ezekiel addresses his
lamentations and reproofs to the King of Tyre; Isaiah—to King Ahaz, who
indulged in the worship of idols, as did the rest of the nation with the
exception of a few Initiates (the Prophets, so‐called), who tried to
arrest it on its way to exotericism—or idolatry, which is the same thing.
Let the student judge.

In _Ezekiel_, it is said:


    Son of Man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord God
    [as we understand it, the “God” Karma]; Because thine heart is
    lifted up, and thou hast said I am a God, ... yet thou art a
    man.... Behold, therefore, I will bring strangers upon thee: ...
    and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom,
    ... and they shall bring thee down to the pit [or Earth‐
    life].(1129)


The origin of the “prince of Tyrus” is to be traced to the “Divine
Dynasties” of the iniquitous Atlanteans, the Great Sorcerers. There is no
metaphor in the words of Ezekiel, but actual _history_ this time. For the
voice _in_ the prophet, the voice of the “Lord,” his own Spirit, which
spake unto him, says:


    Because ... thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of
    God(s) [Divine Dynasties], in the midst of the seas; yet thou art
    a man.... Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there is no secret
    that they can hide from thee: with thy wisdom ... thou hast
    increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy
    riches. Behold, therefore ... strangers ... shall draw their
    swords against the beauty of thy wisdom ... They shall bring thee
    down ... and thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain in
    the midst of the seas.(1130)


All such imprecations are not _prophecy_, but simply _reminders_ of the
fate of the Atlanteans, the “Giants on Earth.”

What can be the meaning of this last sentence if it is not a narrative of
the fate of the Atlanteans? Again, “Thine heart was lifted up because of
thy beauty,”(1131) may refer to the “Heavenly Man” in _Pymander_, or to
the Fallen Angels, who are accused of having fallen through pride on
account of the great beauty and wisdom which became their lot. There is no
metaphor here, except in the preconceived ideas of our Theologians,
perhaps. These verses relate to the Past and belong more to the Knowledge
acquired at the Mysteries of Initiation than to retrospective
clairvoyance! Says the voice, again:


    Thou hast been in Eden, the garden of God [in the Satya Yuga];
    every precious stone was thy covering: ... the workmanship of thy
    tabrets and thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day thou wast
    created. Thou art the anointed cherub; ... thou hast walked up and
    down in the midst of the stones of fire.... Thou wast perfect in
    thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was
    found in thee. Therefore I will cast thee ... out of the mountain
    of God, and ... destroy thee.(1132)


The “Mountain of God” means the “Mountain of the Gods” or Meru, whose
representative in the Fourth Race was Mount Atlas, the _last form of one
of the divine Titans_, so high in those days that the ancients believed
that the Heavens rested on its top. Did not Atlas assist the Giants in
their War against the Gods (Hyginus)? Another version shows the _fable_ as
arising from the fondness of Atlas, son of Iapetus and Clymene, for
Astronomy, and from his dwelling for that reason on the highest mountain
peaks. The truth is that Atlas, the “Mountain of the Gods,” and also the
hero of that name, are the Esoteric symbols of the Fourth Race, and his
seven daughters, the Atlantides, are the symbols of its seven sub‐races.
Mount Atlas, according to all the legends, was three times as high as it
is now; for it has sunk at two different times. It is of a volcanic
origin, and therefore the voice within Ezekiel says:


    Therefore will I _bring forth a fire from the midst of thee_, it
    shall devour thee.(1133)


Surely it does not mean, as seems to be the case from the translated
texts, that this fire was to be brought from the midst of the Prince of
Tyrus, or his people, but from Mount Atlas, symbolizing the proud Race,
learned in Magic and high in arts and civilization, whose last remnant was
destroyed almost at the foot of the range of those once gigantic
mountains.

Truly, “thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more”;(1134)
as the very name of the Race and its fate is now annihilated from man’s
memory. Bear in mind that almost every ancient king and priest was an
Initiate; that from toward the close of the Fourth Race there had been a
feud between the Initiates of the Right and those of the Left Path;
finally, that the Garden of Eden is referred to by other personages than
the Jews of the Adamic Race, since even Pharaoh is compared to the fairest
tree of Eden by this same Ezekiel, who shows:


    All the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, ...
    comforted in the nether parts of the earth. [For] they also went
    down into hell with him [Pharaoh](1135)


—unto the nether parts, which are in fact the bottom of the ocean, whose
floor gaped wide to devour the lands of the Atlanteans and themselves. If
one bears all this in mind and compares the various accounts, then one
will find out that chapters xxviii and xxxi of _Ezekiel_ do not relate to
Babylon, Assyria, nor yet to Egypt, since none of these have been so
destroyed, having simply fallen into ruins on the _surface_, not _beneath_
the earth—but indeed to Atlantis and most of its nations. And he will see
that the “Garden of Eden” of the Initiates was no myth, but a locality now
submerged. Light will dawn upon him, and he will appreciate such sentences
as these at their true Esoteric value: “Thou hast been in Eden; ... thou
wast upon the holy mountain of God”(1136)—for every nation had and many
still have _holy_ mountains; some Himâlayan Peaks, others Parnassus and
Sinai. They were all places of Initiation and the abodes of the Chiefs of
the communities of ancient and even modern Adepts. And again:


    Behold, the Assyrian [why not Atlantean, Initiate?] was a cedar in
    Lebanon; ... his height was exalted above all the trees.... The
    cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: ... so that all
    the trees of Eden ... envied him.(1137)


Throughout all Asia Minor, the Initiates were called the “Trees of
Righteousness,” and the Cedars of Lebanon, as also were some kings of
Israel. So were the great Adepts in India, but only the Adepts of the Left
Hand. When _Vishnu Purâna_ narrates that “the world was over‐run with
trees,” while the Prachetasas, who “passed 10,000 years of austerity in
the vast ocean,” were absorbed in their devotions, the allegory relates to
the Atlanteans and the Adepts of the early Fifth Race—the Âryans. Other
“_trees_ [Adept Sorcerers] spread, and over‐shadowed the unprotected
earth; and the people perished ... unable to labour for ten thousand
years.” Then the Sages, the Rishis of the Âryan Race, called Prachetasas,
are shown “coming forth _from the deep_,”(1138) and destroying by the wind
and flame issuing from their mouths the iniquitous “Trees” and the whole
vegetable kingdom; until Soma (the Moon), the sovereign of the vegetable
world, pacifies them by making alliance with the Adepts of the Right Path,
to whom he offers as bride Mârishâ, the “offspring of the trees.”(1139)
This hints at the great struggle between the “Sons of God” and the Sons of
the Dark Wisdom—our forefathers; or the Atlantean and the Âryan Adepts.

The whole history of that period is allegorized in the _Râmâyana_, which
is the mystic narrative in epic form of the struggle between Râma—the
first king of the Divine Dynasty of the early Âryans—and Râvana, the
symbolical personation of the Atlantean (Lankâ) Race. The former were the
incarnations of the Solar Gods; the latter, of the Lunar Devas. This was
the great battle between Good and Evil, between White and Black Magic, for
the supremacy of the divine forces over the lower terrestrial, or cosmic
powers.

If the student would understand better the last statement, let him turn to
the Anugîtâ episode of the _Mahâbhârata_, where the Brâhmana tells his
wife:


    I have perceived by means of the Self the seat abiding in the
    Self—(the seat) where dwells the Brahman free from the pairs of
    opposites, and the moon, together with the fire [or the sun],
    upholding (all) beings (as) the mover of the intellectual
    principle.(1140)


The Moon _is_ the deity of the mind (Manas) but only on the lower plane.
Says a Commentary:


    _Manas is dual—Lunar in the lower, Solar in its upper portion._


That is to say, it is attracted in its higher aspect towards Buddhi, and
in its lower descends into, and listens to the voice of, its _animal_ Soul
full of selfish and sensual desires; and herein is contained the mystery
of an Adept’s and of a profane man’s life, as also that of the _post
mortem_ separation of the divine from the animal Man. The
_Mahâbhârata_—every line of which has to be read Esoterically—discloses in
magnificent symbolism and allegory the tribulations of both Man and Soul.
Says the Brâhmana in the _Anugîtâ_:


    In the interior (within the body), in the midst of all these
    (life‐winds) [? principles], which move about in the body and
    swallow up one another,(1141) blazes the Vaishvânara fire(1142)
    sevenfold.(1143)


But the chief “Soul” is Manas or mind; hence, Soma, the Moon, is shown as
making an alliance with the solar portion in it, personified as the
Prachetasas. But of the seven keys that open the seven aspects of the
_Râmâyana_, as of every other Scripture, this is only one—the
metaphysical.

The symbol of the “Tree” standing for various Initiates was almost
universal. Jesus is called the “Tree of Life,” as are also all the Adepts
of the Good Law, while those of the Left Path are referred to as the
“withering trees.” John the Baptist speaks of the “axe” which “is laid to
the root of the trees”;(1144) and the king of Assyria’s armies are called
“trees.”(1145)

The true meaning of the Garden of Eden has been sufficiently given in
_Isis Unveiled_. Now the writer has more than once heard surprise
expressed that _Isis Unveiled_ should contain so few of the doctrines now
taught. This is quite erroneous. For the allusions to such teachings are
plentiful, even if the teachings themselves were withheld. The time had
not arrived then, as the hour has not struck even now, _to say all_. “No
Atlanteans, or the Fourth Race which preceded our Fifth Race, are
mentioned in _Isis Unveiled_,” wrote a critic on _Esoteric Buddhism_ one
day. I, who wrote _Isis Unveiled_, maintain that the Atlanteans _are_
mentioned as our predecessors. For what can be plainer than the following
statement, when speaking of the Book of Job:


    In the original text, instead of “dead things,” it is written dead
    _Rephaim_ (giants, or mighty primitive men), from whom “Evolution”
    _may one day trace our present race_.(1146)


It is invited to do so now, now that this hint is explained quite openly;
but Evolutionists are as sure to decline nowadays as they did ten years
ago. Science and Theology are against us: therefore we question both, and
have to do so in self‐defence. On the strength of hazy metaphors scattered
throughout the prophets, and in St. John’s _Revelation_, a grand but
reëdited version of the _Book of Enoch_, on these insecure grounds
Christian Theology has built its dogmatic Epos of the War in Heaven. It
has done more: it has used the symbolical visions, intelligible only to
the Initiates, as pillars upon which to support the whole bulky edifice of
its religion; and now the pillars have been found very weak reeds, and the
cunning structure is foundering. The entire Christian scheme rests upon
this Jakin and Boaz—the two contrary forces of Good and Evil, Christ and
Satan, αἱ ἀγαθαὶ καὶ αἱ κακαὶ δυνάμεις. Take away from Christianity its
main prop of the Fallen Angels, and the Eden Bower vanishes, with its Adam
and Eve, into thin air; and Christ, in the exclusive character of the One
God and Saviour, and the Victim of Atonement for the sin of animal‐man,
becomes forthwith a useless, meaningless myth.

In an old number of the _Revue Archéologique_, a French writer, M. Maury,
remarks:


    This universal strife between good and bad spirits seems to be
    only the reproduction of _another more ancient and more terrible
    strife_, which, according to an ancient myth, took place before
    the creation of the universe, between the faithful and the
    rebellious legions.(1147)


Once more, it is a simple question of priority. Had John’s _Revelation_
been written during the Vedic period, and were not one sure now of its
being simply another version of the _Book of Enoch_ and the Dragon legends
of Pagan antiquity—the grandeur and the beauty of the imagery might have
biassed the critics’ opinion in favour of the Christian interpretation of
that first War, whose battle‐field was starry Heaven, and the first
slaughterers—the Angels. As the matter now stands, however, one has to
trace _Revelation_, event by event, to other and far older visions. For
the better comprehension of the apocalyptic allegories and of the Esoteric
epos we ask the reader to turn to _Revelation_, and to read chapter xii,
from verse 1 to verse 7.

This has several meanings, and much has been found out with regard to the
astronomical and numerical keys of this universal myth. That which may be
now given, is a fragment, a few hints as to its secret meaning, as
embodying the record of a real war, the struggle between the Initiates of
the two Schools. Many and various are the still existing allegories built
on this same foundation stone. The true narrative—that which gives the
full Esoteric meaning—is in the Secret Books, but the writer has had no
access to these.

In the exoteric works, however, the episode of the Târaka War, and some
Esoteric Commentaries, may offer a clue perhaps. In every _Purâna_ the
event is described with more or less variations which show its allegorical
character.

In the Mythology of the earliest Vaidic Âryans as in the later Paurânic
narratives, mention is made of Budha, the “Wise,” one “learned in the
Secret Wisdom,” who is the planet Mercury in his euhemerization. The
_Hindû Classical Dictionary_ credits Budha with being the author of a hymn
in the _Rig Veda_. Therefore, he can by no means be “a later fiction of
the Brâhmans,” but is a very old personation indeed.

It is by enquiring into his genealogy, or theogony rather, that the
following facts are disclosed. As a myth, he is the son of Târâ, the wife
of Brihaspati, the “gold coloured,” and of Soma, the (male) Moon who,
Paris‐like, carries this new Helen of the Hindû Sidereal Kingdom away from
her husband. This causes a great strife and _war_ in Svarga (Heaven). The
episode brings on a battle between the Gods and the Asuras. King Soma
finds allies in Ushanas (Venus), the leader of the Dânavas; and the Gods
are led by Indra and Rudra, who side with Brihaspati. The latter is helped
by Shankara (Shiva), who, having had for his Guru Brihaspati’s father,
Angiras, befriends his son. Indra is here the Indian prototype of Michael,
the Archistrategus and the slayer of the “Dragon’s” Angels—since one of
his names is Jishnu, “leader of the celestial host.” Both fight, as some
Titans did against other Titans in defence of revengeful Gods, the one
party in defence of Jupiter Tonans (in India, Brihaspati is the planet
Jupiter, which is a curious coincidence); the other in support of the
ever‐thundering Rudra. During this war, Indra is deserted by his body‐
guard, the Storm‐Gods (Maruts). The story is very suggestive in some of
its details.

Let us examine some of them, and seek to discover their meaning.

The presiding Genius, or “Regent” of the planet Jupiter is Brihaspati, the
wronged husband. He is the Instructor or Spiritual Guru of the Gods, who
are the representatives of the Procreative Powers. In the _Rig Veda_, he
is called Brahmanaspati, the name “of a deity in whom _the action of the
worshipped_ upon the gods is personified.” Hence Brahmanaspati represents
the materialization of the “Divine Grace,” so to say, by means of ritual
and ceremonies, or the exoteric worship.

Târâ,(1148) his wife, is, on the other hand, the personification of the
powers of one initiated into Gupta Vidyâ (Secret Knowledge), as will be
shown.

Soma is the Moon astronomically; but in mystical phraseology it is also
the name of the sacred beverage drunk by the Brâhmans and the Initiates
during their mysteries and sacrificial rites. The Soma plant is the
_asclepias acida_, which yields a juice from which that mystic beverage,
the Soma drink, is made. Alone the descendants of the Rishis, the
Agnihotris, or Fire‐priests, of the great Mysteries knew all its powers.
But the real property of the _true_ Soma was (and _is_) to make a “new
man” of the Initiate, after he is “reborn,” namely once that he begins to
live in his _Astral_ Body;(1149) for, his spiritual nature overcoming the
physical, he would soon snap it off and part even from that etherealized
form.(1150)

Soma was never given in days of old to the non‐initiated Brâhman—the
simple Grihasta, or priest of the exoteric ritual. Thus Brihaspati, “Guru
of the Gods” though he was, still represented the dead‐letter form of
worship. It is Târâ, his _wife_, the symbol of one who, though wedded to
dogmatic worship, longs for true Wisdom, who is shown as initiated into
his mysteries by King Soma, the giver of that Wisdom. Soma is thus made
_to carry her away_ in the allegory. The result of this is the birth of
Budha, _Esoteric Wisdom_—Mercury, or Hermes, in Greece and Egypt. He is
represented as “so beautiful,” that even the husband, though well aware
that Budha is not the progeny of his dead‐letter worship—claims the “new‐
born” as his Son, the fruit of his ritualistic and meaningless
forms.(1151) Such is, in brief, _one_ of the meanings of the allegory.

The War in Heaven refers to several events of this kind on various and
different planes of being. The first is a purely astronomical and cosmical
fact pertaining to Cosmogony. Mr. John Bentley thought that with the
Hindûs the War in Heaven was only a figure referring to their calculations
of time periods.(1152)

This served as a prototype, he thinks, for the Western nations to build
their War of the Titans upon. The author is not quite wrong, but neither
is he quite right. If the sidereal prototype refers indeed to a pre‐
manvantaric period, and rests entirely on the knowledge which the Âryan
Initiates claim they have of the whole programme and progress of
cosmogony,(1153) the War of the Titans is but a legendary and deified copy
of the real war that took place in the Himâlayan Kailâsa (Heaven) instead
of in the depths of cosmic interplanetary Space. It is the record of the
terrible strife between the “Sons of God” and the “Sons of the Shadow” of
the Fourth and the Fifth Races. It is on these two events, blended
together by legends borrowed from the exoteric account of the War waged by
the Asuras against the Gods, that every subsequent national tradition on
the subject has been built.

Esoterically, the Asuras, transformed subsequently into evil Spirits and
lower Gods, who are eternally at war with the _Great_ Deities—are the Gods
of the Secret Wisdom. In the oldest portions of the _Rig Veda_, they are
the Spiritual and the Divine, the term Asura being used for the Supreme
Spirit and being the same as the great Ahura of the Zoroastrians.(1154)
There was a time when the Gods Indra, Agni, and Varuna themselves belonged
to the Asuras.

In the _Taittirîya Brâhmana_, the Breath (Asu) of Brahmâ‐Prajâpati became
alive, and from that Breath he created the Asuras. Later on, after the
War, the Asuras are called the enemies of the Gods, hence—“_A_‐suras,” the
initial _a_ being a negative prefix—or “_No_‐Gods”; the “Gods” being
referred to as Suras. This then connects the Asuras and their “Hosts,”
enumerated further on, with the “Fallen Angels” of the Christian Churches,
a Hierarchy of Spiritual Beings to be found in every Pantheon of ancient
and even modern nations—from the Zoroastrian down to that of the Chinaman.
They are the Sons of the primeval Creative Breath at the beginning of
every new Mahâ Kalpa, or Manvantara, in the same rank as the Angels who
had remained “faithful.” These were the _allies_ of Soma (the parent of
the Esoteric Wisdom) as against Brihaspati (representing ritualistic or
ceremonial worship). Evidently they have been degraded in Space and Time
into opposing Powers or Demons by the ceremonialists, on account of their
rebellion against hypocrisy, sham‐worship, and the dead‐letter form.

Now what is the real character of all those who fought along with them?
They are:

(1) Ushanas, or the “Host” of the Planet Venus, become now in Roman
Catholicism Lucifer, the Genius of the “day star,”(1155) the Tsaba, or
Army of “Satan.”

(2) The Daityas and Dânavas are the Titans, the Demons and Giants whom we
find in the _Bible_(1156)—the progeny of the “Sons of God” and the
“Daughters of Men.” Their generic name shows their alleged character, and
discloses at the same time the secret _animus_ of the Brâhmans; for they
are the Kratu‐dvishas—the “enemies of the sacrifices” or exoteric _shams_.
These are the “Hosts” that fought against Brihaspati, the representative
of _exoteric_ popular and national religions; and Indra—the God of the
_visible_ Heaven, the Firmament, who, in the early _Veda_, is the
_highest_ God of cosmic Heaven, the fit habitation for an _extra_‐cosmic
and personal God, higher than whom no exoteric worship can ever soar.

(3) Then come the Nâgas,(1157) the Sarpas, Serpents or Seraphs. These,
again, show their character by the hidden meaning of their glyph. In
mythology they are _semi‐divine_ beings with a human face and the tail of
a dragon. They are therefore, undeniably, the Jewish Seraphim (compare
Serapis, Sarpa, Serpent); the singular being Saraph, “burning, fiery.”
Christian and Jewish angelology distinguishes between the Seraphim and the
Cherubim or Cherubs, who come second in order: Esoterically, and
kabalistically, they are identical; the Cherubim being simply the name for
the images or likenesses of any of the divisions of the celestial Hosts.
Now, as said before, the Dragons and Nâgas were the names given to the
Initiate‐hermits, on account of their great Wisdom and Spirituality and
their living in caves. Thus, when Ezekiel(1158) applies the adjective
Cherub to the King of Tyre, and tells him that by his _wisdom_ and his
_understanding_ there is _no secret_ that can be hidden from him, he shows
the Occultist that it is a “Prophet,” perhaps still a follower of
_exoteric_ worship, who fulminates against an Initiate of another school
and not against an imaginary Lucifer, a fallen Cherub from the stars, and
then from the Garden of Eden. Thus the so‐called “War” is, in one of its
many meanings, also an allegorical record of the strife between the two
classes of Adepts—of the Right and of the Left Path. There were three
classes of Rishis in India, who were the earliest Adepts known; the Royal,
or Râjarshis, kings and princes, who adopted the ascetic life; the Divine,
or Devarshis, or the sons of Dharma or Yoga; and the Brahmarshis,
descendants of those Rishis who were the founders of Gotras of Brâhmans,
or caste‐races. Now, leaving the mythical and astronomical keys for one
moment aside, the secret teachings show many Atlanteans who belonged to
these divisions; and there were strifes and wars between them, _de facto_
and _de jure_. Nârada, one of the greatest Rishis, was a Devarshi; and he
is shown in constant and everlasting feud with Brahmâ, Daksha, and other
Gods and Sages. Therefore we may safely maintain that whatever the
_astronomical_ meaning of this universally accepted legend may be, its
human phase is based on real and historical events, disfigured into a
theological dogma only to suit ecclesiastical purposes. As above so below.
Sidereal phenomena, and the behaviour of the celestial bodies in the
Heavens, were taken as a model, and the plan was carried out below, on
Earth. Thus, Space, in its abstract sense, was called the “realm of divine
knowledge,” and by the Chaldees or Initiates Ab Soo, the habitat (or
father, _i.e._, the source) of knowledge, because it is in Space that
dwell the intelligent Powers which _invisibly_ rule the Universe.(1159)

In the same manner, and on the plan of the Zodiac in the _upper_ Ocean or
the Heavens, a certain realm on Earth, an inland sea, was consecrated and
called the “Abyss of Learning”; twelve centres on it, in the shape of
twelve small islands, representing the Zodiacal Signs—two of which
remained for ages the “mystery Signs”(1160)—were the abodes of twelve
Hierophants and Masters of Wisdom. This “Sea of Knowledge” or
learning(1161) remained for ages there, where now stretches the Shamo or
Gobi Desert. It existed until the last great glacial period, when a local
cataclysm, which swept the waters South and West and so formed the present
great desolate desert, left only a certain oasis, with a lake and one
island in the midst of it, as a relic of the Zodiacal Ring on Earth. For
ages the Watery Abyss—which, with the nations that preceded the later
Babylonians, was the abode of the “Great Mother,” the terrestrial post‐
type of the “Great Mother Chaos” in Heaven, the parent of Ea (Wisdom),
himself the early prototype of Oannes, the Man‐Fish of the Babylonians—for
ages, then, the “Abyss” or Chaos was the abode of Wisdom and not of Evil.
The struggle of Bel and then of Merodach, the Sun‐God, with Tiamat, the
Sea and its Dragon—a “War” which ended in the defeat of the latter—has a
purely cosmic and geological meaning, as well as a historical one. It is a
page torn out of the history of the Secret and Sacred Sciences, their
evolution, growth and _death—for the profane masses_. It relates (_a_) to
the systematic and gradual drying up of immense territories by the fierce
Sun at a certain pre‐historic period, one of the terrible droughts which
ended by a gradual transformation of once fertile lands abundantly watered
into the sandy deserts which they are now; and (_b_) to the as systematic
persecution of the Prophets of the Right Path by those of the Left. The
latter, having inaugurated the birth and evolution of the sacerdotal
castes, have finally led the world into all those exoteric religions,
which have been invented to satisfy the depraved taste of the “hoi polloi”
and the ignorant for ritualistic pomp and the materialization of the ever‐
immaterial and Unknowable Principle.

This was a certain improvement on the Atlantean sorcery, the memory of
which lingers in the remembrance of all the literary and Sanskrit‐reading
portion of India, as well as in the popular legends. Still it was a parody
on, and the desecration of, the Sacred Mysteries and their Science. The
rapid progress of anthropomorphism and idolatry led the early Fifth, as it
had already led the Fourth Race, into sorcery once more, though on a
smaller scale. Finally, even the four “Adams” (symbolizing, under other
names, the four preceding Races) were forgotten, and, passing from one
generation into another, each loaded with some additional myths, were at
last drowned in that ocean of popular symbolism called the Pantheons. Yet
they exist to this day in the oldest Jewish traditions: the first as the
Tzelem, the “Shadow‐Adam,” the Chhâyâs of our doctrine; the second, the
“Model” Adam, the copy of the first, and the “male and female” of the
exoteric _Genesis_; the third, the “Earthly Adam” before the Fall, an
androgyne; and the fourth, the Adam after his “fall,” _i.e._, separated
into sexes, or the pure Atlantean. The Adam of the Garden of Eden, or the
forefather of our Race—the fifth—is an ingenious compound of the above
four. As stated in the _Zohar_, Adam, the first Man, is not found now on
Earth, he “is not found in all Below.” For where does the lower Earth come
from? “From the _Chain of the Earth_, and from the _Heaven Above_,”
_i.e._, from the superior Globes, those which precede and are above our
Earth.


    And there came out from it [the Chain] creatures differing one
    from the other. Some of them in garments [solid] (skins), some in
    shells (_Q’lippoth_), ... some in red shells, some in black, some
    in white, and some from all the colours.(1162)


As in the Chaldæan Cosmogony of Berosus and the Stanzas just given, some
treatises on the _Kabalah_ speak of creatures with two faces, some with
four, and some with one face; for “the highest Adam did not come down in
all the countries, or produce progeny and have many wives,” but is a
mystery.

So is the Dragon a mystery. Truly says Rabbi Simeon Ben Iochaï, that to
understand the meaning of the Dragon is not given to the “companions”
(students, or Chelâs), but only to the “little ones,” _i.e._, the perfect
Initiates.(1163)


    The work of the beginning the companions understand; but it is
    only the little ones who understand the parable on the work in the
    Principium by the _Mystery of the Serpent of the Great Sea_.(1164)


And those Christians, who may happen to read this, will also understand by
the light of the above sentence who their “Christ” was. For Jesus states
repeatedly that he who “shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a _little
child_, he shall not enter therein”; and if some of his sayings have been
meant to apply to children without any metaphor, most of the references to
the “little ones” in the Gospels, relate to the Initiates, _of whom Jesus
was one_. Paul (Saul) is referred to in the _Talmud_ as the “little one.”

The “Mystery of the Serpent” was this: Our Earth, or rather _terrestrial
life_, is often referred to in the Secret Teachings as the Great Sea, the
“Sea of Life” having remained to this day a favourite metaphor. The
_Siphra Dtzenioutha_ speaks of Primeval Chaos and the Evolution of the
Universe after a Destruction (Pralaya), comparing it to an uncoiling
serpent:


    Extending hither and thither, its tail in its mouth, the head
    twisting on its neck, it is enraged and angry.... It watches and
    conceals itself. Every thousand _Days_ it is manifested.(1165)


A commentary on the _Purânas_ says:


    Ananta‐Shesha is a form of Vishnu, the Holy Spirit of
    Preservation, and a symbol of the Universe, on which it is
    supposed to sleep during the intervals of the _Days_ of Brahmâ.
    The seven heads of Shesha support the Universe.


So the Spirit of God “sleeps,” or is “breathing” over the Chaos of
Undifferentiated Matter, before each new “Creation,” says the _Siphra
Dtzenioutha_. Now one Day of Brahmâ is composed, as already explained, of
_one thousand_ Mahâ Yugas; and as each Night, or period of rest, is equal
in duration to this Day, it is easy to see what this sentence in the
_Siphra Dtzenioutha_ refers to—viz., that the Serpent manifests “once in a
thousand days.” Nor is it more difficult to see whither the initiated
writer of the _Siphra_ is leading us, when he says:


    Its head is broken in the waters of the Great Sea, as it is
    written: Thou dividest the sea by thy strength, thou brakest the
    _heads_ of the _dragons_ in the waters.(1166)


It refers to the trials of the Initiates in this physical life, the “Sea
of Sorrow,” if read with one key; it hints at the successive destruction
of the seven Spheres of a Chain of Worlds in the Great Sea of Space, when
read with another key; for every sidereal globe or sphere, every world,
star, or group of stars, is called in symbolism a “Dragon’s Head.” But
however it may read, the Dragon was never regarded as Evil, nor was the
Serpent either—in antiquity. In the metaphors, whether astronomical,
cosmical, theogonical or simply physiological (or phallic), the Serpent
was always regarded as a _divine_ symbol. When mention is made of “the
[Cosmic] Serpent which runs with 370 leaps,”(1167) it means the cyclic
periods of the great Tropical Year of 25,868 years, divided in the
Esoteric calculation into 370 periods or cycles, as one solar year is
divided into 365 days. And if Michael was regarded by the Christians as
the Conqueror of Satan, the Dragon, it is because in the _Talmud_ this
fighting personage is represented as the Prince of Waters, who had seven
subordinate Spirits under him—a good reason why the Latin Church made him
the patron saint of every promontory in Europe. In the _Siphra
Dtzenioutha_ the Creative Force “makes sketches and spiral lines of his
creation _in the shape of a Serpent_.” It “holds its tail in its mouth,”
because it is the symbol of endless eternity and of cyclic periods. Its
meanings, however, would require a volume, and we must end.

Thus the reader may now see for himself what are the several meanings of
the “War in Heaven,” and of the “Great Dragon.” Thus the most solemn and
dreaded of Church dogmas, the alpha and omega of the Christian faith, and
the pillar of its Fall and Atonement, dwindles down to a Pagan symbol, in
the many allegories of these pre‐historic struggles.




Section V. Is Plerôma Satan’s Lair?


The subject is not yet exhausted, and has to be examined from still other
aspects.

Whether Milton’s grandiose description of the three _days’_ Battle of the
Angels of Light against those of Darkness justifies the suspicion that he
must have heard of the corresponding Eastern tradition—it is impossible to
say. Nevertheless, if not himself in connection with some Mystic, then it
must have been through some one who had obtained access to the secret
works of the Vatican. Among these there is a tradition concerning the
“Beni Shamash”—the “Children of the Sun”—relating to the Eastern allegory,
with far more minute details _in its triple version_, than one can get
either from the _Book of Enoch_, or the far more recent _Revelation_ of
St. John concerning the “Old Dragon” and his various Slayers, as has been
just shown.

It seems inexplicable to find, to this day, authors belonging to mystical
societies who yet continue in their preconceived doubts as to the
“alleged” antiquity of the _Book of Enoch_. Thus, while the author of the
_Sacred Mysteries among the Mayas and Quiches_ is inclined to see in Enoch
an Initiate converted to Christianity (!!),(1168) the English compiler of
Éliphas Lévi’s works, _The Mysteries of Magic_, is also of a like opinion.
He remarks that:


    Outside the erudition of Dr. Kenealy, no modern scholarship
    attributes any more remote antiquity to the latter work [the _Book
    of Enoch_] than the fourth century B.C.(1169)


Modern scholarship has been guilty of worse errors than this one. It seems
but yesterday that the _greatest_ literary critics in Europe denied the
very authenticity of that work, together with the Orphic Hymns, and even
the Book of Hermes or Thoth, until whole verses from the latter were
discovered on Egyptian monuments and tombs of the earliest dynasties. The
opinion of Archbishop Laurence is quoted elsewhere.

The “Old Dragon” and Satan, which have now become singly and collectively
the symbol of, and the theological term for, the “Fallen Angel,” are not
so described either in the _original_ Kabalah (the Chaldæan _Book of
Numbers_) or in the modern. For the most learned, if not the greatest of
modern Kabalists, namely Éliphas Lévi, describes Satan in the following
glowing terms:


    It is that Angel who was proud enough to believe himself God;
    brave enough to buy his independence at the price of eternal
    suffering and torture; beautiful enough to have adored himself in
    full divine light; strong enough to still reign in darkness amidst
    agony, and to have made himself a throne out of his
    inextinguishable pyre. It is the Satan of the republican and
    heretical Milton ... the prince of anarchy, served by a hierarchy
    of pure spirits(!!).(1170)


This description—one which reconciles so cunningly Theological dogma and
Kabalistic allegory, and even contrives to include a political compliment
in its phraseology—is, when read in the right spirit, quite correct.

Yes, indeed; it is this grandest of ideals, this ever‐living symbol—nay
apotheosis—of self‐sacrifice for the intellectual independence of
humanity; this ever Active Energy protesting against Static Inertia—the
principle to which Self‐assertion is a crime, and Thought and the Light of
Knowledge odious. As Éliphas says with unparalleled justice and irony:


    It is this pretended hero of tenebrous eternities, who,
    slanderously charged with ugliness, is decorated with horns and
    claws, which would fit far better his implacable tormentor.(1171)


It is he who has been finally transformed into a Serpent—the Red Dragon.
But Éliphas Lévi was yet too subservient to his Roman Catholic
authorities—one may add, too jesuitical—to confess that this Devil was
mankind, and never had any existence on Earth outside of that
mankind.(1172)

In this, Christian Theology, although following slavishly in the steps of
Paganism, has only been true to its own time‐honoured policy. It had to
isolate itself, and to assert its authority. Hence it could not do better
than turn every Pagan Deity into a Devil. Every bright Sun‐God of
antiquity—a glorious Deity by day, and its own Opponent and Adversary by
night, named the Dragon of Wisdom, because it was supposed to contain the
germs of night and day—has now been turned into the antithetical Shadow of
God, and has become Satan on the sole and unsupported authority of
despotic human dogma. After which all these producers of light and shadow,
all the Sun‐ and the Moon‐Gods, have been cursed, and thus the one God
chosen out of the many and Satan have both been anthropomorphized. But
Theology seems to have lost sight of the human capacity for discriminating
and finally analyzing all that is artificially forced upon its reverence.
History shows in every race and even tribe, especially in the Semitic
nations, the natural impulse to exalt its own tribal deity above all
others to the hegemony of the Gods, and proves that the God of the
Israelites was such a _tribal_ God, and no more, even though the Christian
Church, following the lead of the “chosen” people, is pleased to enforce
the worship of that one particular deity, and to anathematize all the
others. Whether originally a conscious or an unconscious blunder,
nevertheless, it _was_ one. Jehovah has ever been in antiquity only a God
“among” other “Gods.”(1173) The _Lord_ appears to Abraham, and while
saying, “I am the _Almighty God_,” yet adds, “I will establish my covenant
... to be _a_ God unto thee” (Abraham); and unto _his seed_ after
him(1174)—but not unto Âryan Europeans.

But, then, there was the grandiose and ideal figure of Jesus of Nazareth
to be set off against a dark background, to gain in radiance by the
contrast; _and a darker one the Church could hardly invent_. Lacking the
_Old Testament_ symbology, ignorant of the real connotation of the name of
Jehovah—the Rabbinical secret substitute for the Ineffable and
Unpronounceable Name—the Church mistook the cunningly fabricated shadow
for the reality, the anthropomorphized _generative_ symbol for the one
Secondless Reality, the ever Unknowable Cause of All. As a logical
sequence the Church, for purposes of duality, had to invent an
anthropomorphic Devil—created, as taught by her, by God himself. Satan has
now turned out to be the monster fabricated by the Jehovah‐
Frankenstein—his father’s curse and a thorn in the divine side, a monster,
than whom no earthly Frankenstein could have fabricated a more ridiculous
bogey.

The author of _New Aspects of Life_ describes the Jewish God very
correctly from the kabalistic standpoint as:


    The Spirit of the Earth, which had revealed itself to the Jew as
    Jehovah.(1175)... It was that Spirit again who, after the death of
    Jesus, assumed his form and personated him as the risen Christ


—the doctrine of Cerinthus and several Gnostic sects with slight
variation, as one can see. But the author’s explanations and deductions
are remarkable:


    None knew ... better than Moses, ... [and] so well as he, how
    great was the power of those [Gods of Egypt] with whose priests he
    had contended, ... the gods of which Jehovah is claimed to be the
    God [by the Jews only].


Asks the author:


    What were these gods, these Achar of which Jehovah, the Achad, is
    claimed to be the God ... by overcoming them?


To which our Occultism answers: Those whom the Church now calls the Fallen
Angels and collectively Satan, the Dragon—overcome, if we have to accept
_her_ dictum, by Michael and his Host, that Michael being simply Jehovah
himself, one of the subordinate Spirits at best. Therefore, the author is
again right in saying:


    The Greeks believed in the existence of ... _daimons_. But ...
    they were anticipated by the Hebrews, who held _that there was a
    class of personating spirits_ which they designated _demons_,
    “personators.”... Admitting with Jehovah, who expressly asserts
    it, the existence of other gods, which ... were personators of the
    One God, were these other gods simply a higher class of
    personating spirits, ... which had acquired and exercised greater
    powers? And is not personation _the key to the mystery of the
    spirit state_? But once granting this position, _how are we to
    know that Jehovah was not a personating spirit_, a spirit which
    arrogated to itself that it was, and thus became, the personator
    of the one unknown and unknowable God? Nay, how do we know that
    the spirit calling itself Jehovah, in arrogating to itself his
    attributes did not thus cause its own designation to be imputed to
    the One who is in reality as nameless as incognizable?(1176)


Then the author shows that “the spirit Jehovah _is_ a personator” on its
own admission. It acknowledged to Moses “that it had appeared to the
patriarchs as the God Shaddai” and the “God Helion.”


    With the same breath it assumed the name of Jehovah; and it is on
    the faith of the assertion of this personator that the names El,
    Eloah, Elohim, and Shaddai, have been read and interpreted in
    juxtaposition with Jehovah as the “Lord God Almighty.” [Then when]
    the name Jehovah became ineffable, the designation Adonai, “Lord,”
    was substituted for it, and ... it was owing to this substitution
    that the “Lord” passed from the Jewish to the Christian “Word” and
    World as a designation of God.(1177)


And how are we to know, the author may add, that Jehovah was not many
spirits personating even that seemingly one—Jod or Jod‐He?

But if the Christian Church was the first to make the existence of Satan a
dogma, it was because, as shown in _Isis Unveiled_, the Devil—the powerful
Enemy of God (?!!) had to become the corner stone and pillar of the
Church. For, as a Theosophist, M. Jules Baissac, truly observes in his
_Satan ou le Diable_:


    Il fallait éviter de paraître autoriser le dogme du double
    principe en faisant de ce Satan créateur une puissance réelle, et
    pour expliquer le mal originel, on profère contre Manes
    l’hypothèse d’une permission de l’unique Tout‐Puissant.(1178)


The choice and policy were unfortunate, anyhow. Either the personator of
the lower God of Abraham and Jacob ought to have been made entirely
distinct from the mystic “Father” of Jesus, or—the “Fallen” Angels should
have been left unslandered by further fictions.

Every God of the Gentiles is connected with, and closely related to,
Jehovah—the Elohim; for they are all One Host, whose units differ only in
name in the Esoteric Teachings. Between the “Obedient” and the “Fallen”
Angels there is no difference whatever, except in their respective
functions, or rather in the inertia of some, and the activity of others,
among those Dhyân Chohans, or Elohim, who were “commissioned to create,”
_i.e._, to fabricate the manifested world out of the eternal material.

The Kabalists say that the true name of Satan is that of Jehovah turned
upside down, for “Satan is not a black God but the negation of the white
Deity,” or the Light of Truth. God is Light and Satan is the necessary
Darkness or _Shadow_ to set it off, without which pure Light would be
invisible and incomprehensible.(1179) “For the Initiates,” says Éliphas
Lévi, “the Devil is not a person but a creative Force, for Good as for
Evil.” The Initiates represented this Force, which presides at physical
generation, under the mysterious form of God Pan—or Nature; whence the
horns and hoofs of that mythical and symbolic figure, as also the
Christian “goat” of the “Witches’ Sabbath.” With regard to this too,
Christians have imprudently forgotten that the “goat” was also the victim
selected for the atonement of all the sins of Israel, that the scape‐goat
was indeed the sacrificial martyr, the symbol of the greatest mystery on
earth—the “fall into generation.” Only, the Jews have long forgotten the
real meaning of their (to the non‐initiated) ridiculous hero, selected
from the drama of life in the Great Mysteries enacted by them in the
desert; and the Christians have never known it.

Éliphas Lévi seeks to explain the dogma of his Church by paradoxes and
metaphors, but succeeds very poorly in the face of the many volumes
written by pious Roman Catholic Demonologists under the approbation and
auspices of Rome, in this nineteenth century of ours. For the true Roman
Catholic, the Devil or Satan is a _reality_; the drama enacted in the
Sidereal Light according to the seer of Patmos—who desired, perhaps, to
improve upon the narrative in the _Book of Enoch_—is as real, and as
historical a fact as any other allegory and symbolical event in the
_Bible_. But the Initiates give an explanation which differs from that
given by Éliphas Lévi, whose genius and crafty intellect had to submit to
a certain compromise dictated to him from Rome.

Thus, the true and “uncompromising” Kabalists admit that, for all purposes
of Science and Philosophy, it is enough that the profane should know that
the Great Magic Agent—called by the followers of the Marquis de St.
Martin, the Martinists, the Astral Light, by the mediæval Kabalists and
Alchemists the Sidereal Virgin and the Mysterium Magnum, and by the
Eastern Occultists Æther, the reflection of Âkâsha—is that which the
Church calls Lucifer. That the Latin scholastics have succeeded in
transforming the Universal Soul and Plerôma—the _Vehicle of Light_ and the
receptacle of all forms, a Force spread throughout the whole Universe,
with its direct and indirect effects—into Satan and his works, is no news
to any one. But now they are prepared to give out to the above‐mentioned
profane even the secrets hinted at by Éliphas Lévi, without _adequate
explanation_, for the latter’s policy of veiled revelations could only
lead to further superstition and misunderstanding. What, indeed, can a
student of Occultism, who is a beginner, gather from the following highly
poetical sentences of Éliphas Lévi, which are as apocalyptic as the
writings of any of the Alchemists?


    Lucifer [the Astral Light] ... is an intermediate force existing
    in all creation; it serves to create and to destroy, and the Fall
    of Adam was an erotic intoxication which has rendered his
    generation a slave to this fatal Light, ... every sexual passion
    that overpowers our senses is a whirlwind of that Light which
    seeks to drag us towards the abyss of death. Madness,
    hallucinations, visions, extasies, are all forms of a very
    dangerous excitation due to this _interior phosphorus_[?]. Thus
    light, finally, is of the nature of fire, the intelligent use of
    which warms and vivifies, and the excess of which, on the
    contrary, dissolves and annihilates.

    Thus man is called upon to assume a sovereign empire over this
    [Astral] Light and conquer thereby his immortality, and is
    threatened at the same time with being intoxicated, absorbed, and
    eternally destroyed by it.

    This Light, therefore, inasmuch as it is devouring, revengeful,
    and fatal, would thus really be hell‐fire, the serpent of the
    legend; the tormented errors of which it is full, the tears and
    the gnashing of teeth of the abortive beings it devours, the
    phantom of life that escapes them, and seems to mock and insult
    their agony, all this would be the Devil or Satan indeed.(1180)


There is no _false_ statement in all this; nothing save a superabundance
of ill‐applied metaphors, as, for instance, in the application of the myth
of Adam to the illustration of the astral effects. Âkâsha,(1181) the
Astral Light, can be defined in a few words; it is the Universal Soul, the
Matrix of the Universe, the Mysterium Magnum from which all that exists is
born by separation or _differentiation_. It is the cause of existence; it
fills all the infinite Space, _is_ Space itself, in one sense, or both its
_sixth_ and seventh principles.(1182) But as the finite in the Infinite,
as regards manifestation this Light must have its _shadowy_ side—as
already remarked. And as the Infinite can never be manifested, hence the
finite world has to be satisfied with the _shadow alone_, which its
actions draw upon humanity and which men attract and _force into __
activity_. Hence, while the Astral Light is the Universal Cause in its
unmanifested unity and infinity, it becomes, with regard to mankind,
simply the effects of the causes produced by men in their sinful lives. It
is not its bright denizens—whether they are called Spirits of Light or
Darkness—that produce Good or Evil, but mankind itself that determines the
unavoidable action and reaction in the Great Magic Agent. It is mankind
which has become the “Serpent of Genesis,” and thus causes daily and
hourly the Fall and Sin of the “Celestial Virgin”—which thus becomes the
Mother of Gods and Devils at one and the same time; for she is the ever‐
loving, beneficent Deity to all those who stir her _Soul_ and _Heart_,
instead of attracting to themselves her shadowy manifested essence, called
by Éliphas Lévi—the “fatal light” which kills and destroys. Humanity, in
its units, can overpower and master its effects; but only by the holiness
of their lives and by producing good causes. It has power only on the
manifested _lower_ principles—the shadow of the Unknown and Incognizable
Deity in Space. But in antiquity and _reality_, Lucifer, or Luciferus, is
the name of the Angelic Entity presiding over the Light of Truth as over
the light of the day. In the great Valentinian Gospel _Pistis Sophia_ it
is taught that of the three Powers emanating from the Holy Names of the
three Triple Powers (Τριδυνάμεις), that of Sophia (the Holy Ghost
according to these Gnostics—the most cultured of all), resides in the
planet Venus or Lucifer.

Thus to the profane, the Astral Light may be God and Devil at once—_Demon
est Deus inversus_—that is to say, through every point of Infinite Space
thrill the magnetic and electrical currents of _animate_ Nature, the life‐
giving and death‐giving waves, for death on earth becomes life on another
plane. Lucifer is divine and terrestrial Light, the “Holy Ghost” and
“Satan,” at one and the same time, _visible_ Space being truly filled with
the differentiated Breath invisibly; and the Astral Light, the manifested
effects of the two who are one, guided and attracted by ourselves, is the
_Karma_ of Humanity, both a personal and impersonal entity—personal,
because it is the mystic name given by St. Martin to the Host of Divine
Creators, Guides and Rulers of this Planet; _impersonal_, as the Cause and
Effect of Universal Life and Death.

The Fall was the _result of man’s knowledge_, for his “eyes were opened.”
Indeed, he was taught Wisdom and the Hidden Knowledge by the “Fallen
Angel,” for the latter had become from that day his Manas, Mind and Self‐
consciousness. In each of us that golden thread of continuous
Life—periodically broken into active and passive cycles of sensuous
existence on Earth, and super‐sensuous in Devachan—_is_ from the beginning
of our appearance upon this Earth. It is the Sûtrâtmâ, the luminous thread
of immortal _impersonal_ Monadship, on which our earthly “lives” or
evanescent Egos are strung as so many beads—according to the beautiful
expression of the Vedântic Philosophy.

And now it stands proven that Satan, or the Red Fiery Dragon, the “Lord of
Phôsphoros”—brimstone was a Theological improvement—and Lucifer, or
“Light‐Bearer,” is in us: it is our Mind, our Tempter and Redeemer, our
intelligent Liberator and Saviour from pure animalism. Without this
principle—the emanation of the very essence of the pure divine principle
Mahat (Intelligence), which radiates direct from the Divine Mind—we would
be surely no better than animals. The first _man_ Adam was made only a
_living soul_ (Nephesh), the last Adam was made a _quickening
spirit_(1183)—says Paul, his words referring to the building or _creation_
of man. Without this _quickening_ spirit, or _human mind_ or soul, there
would be no difference between man and beast; as there is none, in fact,
between animals with respect to their actions. The tiger and the donkey,
the hawk and the dove, are each one as pure and as innocent as the other,
because _irresponsible_. Each follows its instinct, the tiger and the hawk
killing with the same unconcern as the donkey eats a thistle, or the dove
pecks at a grain of corn. If the Fall had the significance given to it by
Theology; if that Fall occurred as a result of an act never intended by
Nature—a _sin_, how about the animals? If we are told that they procreate
their species in consequence of that same “original sin,” for which God
cursed the Earth—hence everything living on it—we will put another
question. We are told by Theology, as also by Science, that the animal was
on Earth far earlier than man. We ask the former: How did it _procreate
its species_, before the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil
had been plucked off? As said:


    The Christians—far less clear‐sighted than the great Mystic and
    Liberator whose name they have assumed, whose doctrines they have
    misunderstood and travestied, _and whose memory they have
    blackened by their deeds_—took the Jewish Jehovah as he was, and
    of course strove vainly to reconcile the _Gospel of Light and
    Liberty_ with the Deity of Darkness and Submission.(1184)


But it is sufficiently proven now that all the _soi‐disant_ evil Spirits
who are credited with having made war on the Gods, are identical as
personalities; that, moreover, all the ancient religions taught the same
tenet, save the final conclusion, which differs from the Christian. The
seven primeval Gods had all a dual state, one essential, the other
accidental. In their essential state they were all the Builders or
Fashioners, the Preservers and the Rulers of this World; and in the
accidental state, clothing themselves in visible corporeality, they
descended on the Earth and reigned on it as Kings and Instructors of the
lower Hosts, who had incarnated once more upon it as men.

Thus, Esoteric Philosophy shows that man is truly the manifested deity in
both its aspects—good and evil, but Theology cannot admit this
philosophical truth. Teaching as it does the dogma of the Fallen Angels in
its dead‐letter meaning, and having made of Satan the corner‐stone and
pillar of the dogma of redemption—to do so would be suicidal. Having once
shown the rebellious Angels _distinct_ from God and the Logos in their
personalities, to admit that the downfall of the _disobedient_ Spirits
means simply their fall into generation and matter, would be equivalent to
saying that God and Satan were identical. For since the Logos, or God, is
the aggregate of that once divine Host accused of having fallen, it would
naturally follow that the Logos and Satan are one.

Yet such was the real philosophical view in antiquity of the now
disfigured tenet. The Verbum, or the “Son,” was shown in a dual aspect by
the Pagan Gnostics—in fact, he was a _duality_ in full _unity_. Hence, the
endless and various national versions. The Greeks had Jupiter, the son of
Cronus, the Father, who hurls him down into the depths of Kosmos. The
Âryans had Brahmâ (in later theology) precipitated by Shiva into the Abyss
of Darkness, etc. But the Fall of all these Logoi and Demiourgoi from
their primitive exalted position, contained in all cases one and the same
Esoteric signification; the Curse, in its philosophical meaning, of being
incarnated on this Earth; an unavoidable rung in the Ladder of Cosmic
Evolution, a highly philosophical and fitting Karmic Law, without which
the presence of Evil on Earth would have to remain for ever a closed
mystery to the understanding of true Philosophy. To say, as the author of
_Esprits Tombés des Paiens_ does, that since—


    Christianity is made to rest on two pillars, that of evil
    (πουηροῦ), and of good (ἀγαθοῦ); on two forces, in short (ἀγαθαὶ
    καὶ κακαὶ δυνάμεις): hence, if we suppress the punishment of the
    _evil forces_, the protecting mission of the good powers will have
    neither value nor sense


—is to utter the most unphilosophical absurdity. If it fits in with, and
explains, Christian dogma, it obscures the facts and truths of the
primitive Wisdom of the ages. The cautious hints of Paul have all the true
Esoteric meaning, and it took centuries of scholastic casuistry to give
them the false colouring in their present interpretations. The Verbum and
Lucifer are one in their dual aspect; and the “Prince of the Air”
(_princeps aeris hujus_) is not the “God of _that_ period,” but an
everlasting principle. When the latter was said to be ever _circling_
around the world (_qui circumambulat terram_), the great Apostle referred
simply to the never‐ceasing cycles of human incarnations, in which evil
will ever predominate unto the day when Humanity is redeemed by the true
divine Enlightenment which gives the correct perception of things.

It is easy to disfigure vague expressions written in dead and long‐
forgotten languages, and palm them off on the ignorant masses as truths
and _revealed_ facts. The identity of thought and meaning is the one thing
that strikes the student in all the religions which mention the tradition
of the Fallen Spirits, and in those great religions there is not one that
fails to mention and describe it in one or another form. Thus, Hoang‐ty,
the Great Spirit, sees his Sons, who had acquired _active wisdom_, falling
into the Valley of Pain. Their leader, the Flying Dragon, having drunk of
the forbidden Ambrosia, _fell to the Earth_ with his Host (Kings). In the
_Zend Avesta_, Angra Mainyu (Ahriman), surrounding himself with Fire (the
“Flames” of the Stanzas), seeks to conquer the Heavens,(1185) when Ahura
Mazda, descending from the _solid_ Heaven he inhabits, to the help of the
Heavens _that revolve_ (in time and space, the manifested worlds of cycles
including those of incarnation), and the Amshaspands, the “seven bright
Sravah,” accompanied by their stars, fight Ahriman, and the vanquished
Devas fall to the Earth along with him.(1186) In the _Vendîdâd_ the Daêvas
are called “evil‐doing,” and are shown to rush away “into the depths of
the ... world of hell,” or Matter.(1187) This is an allegory which shows
the Devas _compelled to incarnate_, once that they have separated
themselves from their Parent Essence, or, in other words, after the Unit
had become multiple, after differentiation and manifestation.

Typhon the Egyptian Python, the Titans, the Suras and the Asuras, all
belong to the same legend of Spirits peopling the Earth. They are not
“_Demons_ commissioned to create and organize this visible universe,” but
the Fashioners or “Architects” of the Worlds, and the Progenitors of Man.
They are the _Fallen_ Angels, metaphorically—the “true mirrors” of the
“Eternal Wisdom.”

What is the complete truth as well as the Esoteric meaning about this
universal myth? The whole essence of truth _cannot be transmitted from
mouth to ear_. Nor can any pen describe it, not even that of the Recording
Angel, unless man finds the answer in the sanctuary of his own heart, in
the innermost depths of his divine intuition. It is the great _Seventh
Mystery_ of Creation, the first and the last; and those who read St.
John’s _Apocalypse_ may find its shadow lurking under the _seventh seal_.
It can be represented only in its apparent, objective form, like the
eternal riddle of the Sphinx. If the Sphinx threw herself into the sea and
perished, it is not because Œdipus _had_ unriddled the secret of the ages,
but because, by anthropomorphizing the ever‐spiritual and the subjective,
he had dishonoured the great truth for ever. Therefore, we can give it
only from its philosophical and intellectual planes, unlocked with three
keys respectively—for the last four keys of the seven that throw wide open
the portals to the Mysteries of Nature are in the hands of the highest
Initiates, and cannot be divulged to the masses at large—not in this
century, at any rate.

The dead‐letter is everywhere the same. The dualism in the Mazdean
religion was born from exoteric interpretation. The holy Airyaman, the
“bestower of weal,”(1188) invoked in the prayer called Airyama‐ishyô, is
the divine aspect of Ahriman, “the deadly, the Daêva of the Daêvas,”(1189)
and Angra Mainyu is the dark material aspect of the former. “Keep us from
our hater, O Mazda and Ârmaita Spenta,”(1190) has, as a prayer and
invocation, an identical meaning with “Lead us not into temptation,” and
is addressed by man to the terrible _spirit of duality_ in man himself.
For Ahura Mazda is the Spiritual, Divine, and Purified Man, and Ârmaita
Spenta, the Spirit of the Earth or materiality, is the same as Ahriman or
Angra Mainyu in one sense.

The whole of the Magian or Mazdean literature—or what remains of it—is
magical, occult, hence allegorical and symbolical, even its “mystery of
the law.”(1191) Now the Mobed and the Parsî keep their eye on the Baresma
during the sacrifice—the divine twig off Ormazd’s “Tree” having been
transformed into a bunch of metallic rods—and wonder why neither the
Amesha Spentas, nor “the high and beautiful golden Haômas, nor even their
Vohu‐Manô (good thoughts), nor their Râta (sacrificial offering),” help
them much. Let them meditate on the “Tree of Wisdom,” and by study
assimilate, one by one, the fruits thereof. The way to the Tree of Eternal
Life, the white Haôma, the Gaokerena, is through one end of the Earth to
the other; and Haôma is in Heaven as it is on Earth. But to become once
more a priest of it, and a “healer,” man must heal himself, for this must
be done before he can heal others.

This proves once more that, in order to be dealt with, with at least an
approximate degree of justice, the so‐called “myths” have to be closely
examined from all their aspects. In truth, every one of the seven keys has
to be used in its right place, and never mixed with the others—if we would
unveil the entire cycle of mysteries. In our day of dreary soul‐killing
Materialism, the ancient Priest‐Initiates have become, in the opinion of
our learned generations, the synonyms of clever impostors, kindling the
fires of superstition in order to obtain an easier sway over the minds of
men. This is an unfounded calumny, generated by scepticism and
uncharitable thoughts. No one believed more than they did in Gods—or, we
may call them, the spiritual and now invisible Powers, or Spirits, the
Noumena of the phenomena; and they believed simply because _they knew_.
And though after being initiated into the Mysteries of Nature, they were
forced to withhold their knowledge from the profane, who would have surely
abused it, such secrecy was undeniably less dangerous than the policy of
their usurpers and successors. The former taught only that which they well
knew. The latter, teaching what _they do not know_, have invented, as a
secure haven for their ignorance, a jealous and cruel Deity, who forbids
man to pry into his mysteries under the penalty of damnation; as well they
may, for _his_ mysteries can at best be only hinted at in polite ears,
never described. Turn to King’s _Gnostics and their Remains_, and see for
yourself what was the primitive Ark of the Covenant, according to the
author, who says:


    There is a Rabbinical tradition ... that the Cherubim placed over
    it were represented as male and female, in the act of copulation,
    in order to express the grand doctrine of the Essence of _Form_
    and _Matter_, the two principles of all things. When the Chaldeans
    broke into the Sanctuary and beheld this most astounding emblem,
    they naturally enough exclaimed, “Is this your God, of whom you
    boast, that He is such a lover of purity!”(1192)


King thinks that this tradition “savours too much of Alexandrian
philosophy to demand any credit,” to which we demur. The shape and form of
the wings of the two Cherubim standing on the right and left sides of the
Ark, these wings meeting over the “Holy of Holies,” are an _emblem_ quite
eloquent in itself, not to speak of the “holy” Jod within the Ark! The
Mystery of Agathodæmon, whose legend states, “I am Chnumis, Sun of the
Universe, 700,” can alone solve the mystery of Jesus, the number of whose
name is “888.” It is not the key of St. Peter, or the Church dogma, but
the Narthex—the Wand of the Candidate for Initiation—that has to be
wrenched from the grasp of the long‐silent Sphinx of the ages. Meanwhile:

The augurs, who, upon meeting each other, have to thrust their tongues
into their cheeks to suppress a fit of laughter, may be more numerous in
our own age than they ever were in the day of Sylla.




Section VI. Prometheus, the Titan.



His Origin In Ancient India.


In our modern day there is not the slightest doubt in the minds of the
best European symbologists that the name Prometheus possessed the greatest
and most mysterious significance in antiquity. While giving the history of
Deucalion, whom the Bœotians regarded as the ancestor of the human races,
and who was the son of Prometheus, according to the significant legend,
the author of the _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_ remarks:


    Thus Prometheus is something more than the archetype of humanity;
    he is its _generator_. In the same way that we saw Hephæstus
    moulding the first woman [Pandora] and endowing her with life, so
    Prometheus kneads the moist clay, of which he fashions the body of
    the first man whom he will endow with the soul‐spark.(1193) After
    the flood of Deucalion, Zeus, they said, had commanded Prometheus
    and Athena to call forth a new race of men from the mire left by
    the waters of the deluge,(1194) and, in the day of Pausanias, the
    slime which the hero had used for this purpose was still shown in
    Phocis.(1195) On several archaic monuments we still see Prometheus
    modelling a human body, either alone or with Athena’s help.(1196)


The same author reminds us of another equally mysterious personage, though
one less generally known than Prometheus, whose legend offers remarkable
analogies with that of the Titan. The name of this second ancestor and
generator is Phoroneus, the hero of an ancient poem, now unfortunately no
longer extant, the Phoroneidæ. His legend was localized in Argolis, where
a perpetual flame was preserved on his altar as a reminder that he was the
bringer of fire upon earth.(1197) A benefactor of men, like Prometheus, he
had made them participators of every bliss on earth. Plato(1198) and
Clemens Alexandrinus(1199) say that Phoroneus was the first man, or the
“father of mortals.” His genealogy, which assigns to him the river Inachos
as his father, reminds us of that of Prometheus, which makes that Titan
the son of the Oceanid Clymene. But the mother of Phoroneus was the nymph
Melia: a significant descent which distinguishes him from
Prometheus.(1200)

Melia, Decharme thinks, is the personification of the “Ash‐tree,” whence,
according to Hesiod, issued the race of the age of Bronze,(1201) and which
with the Greeks is the _celestial tree_ common to every Âryan mythology.
This Ash is the Yggdrasil of Norse antiquity, which the Norns sprinkle
daily with the waters from the fountain of Urd, that it may not wither. It
remains verdant till the last days of the Golden Age. Then the Norns—the
three sisters who gaze respectively into the Past, the Present, and the
Future—make known the decree of Orlog or Fate (Karma), but men are
conscious only of the Present.


    [But when] Gultweig (gold‐ore) comes, the bewitching enchantress
    ... who, thrice cast into the fire, arises each time more
    beautiful than before and fills the souls of gods and men with
    unappeasable longing, then the Norns ... enter into being, and the
    blessed peace of childhood’s dreams passes away, and sin comes
    into existence with all its evil consequences [and Karma].(1202)


The thrice‐purified Gold is—Manas, the Conscious Soul.

With the Greeks, the Ash‐tree represented the same idea. Its luxuriant
boughs are the Sidereal Heaven, golden by day and studded with stars by
night—the fruits of Melia and Yggdrasil, under whose protecting shadow
humanity lived during the Golden Age without desire as without fear. “That
tree had a fruit, or an inflamed bough, _which was lightning_”—Decharme
guesses.

And here steps in the killing Materialism of the age, that peculiar twist
in the modern mind, which, like a Northern blast, bends all on its way,
and freezes every intuition, allowing it no hand in the physical
speculations of the day. After having seen in Prometheus no more than
“fire by friction,” the learned author of the _Mythologie de la Grèce
Antique_ perceives in this “fruit” a trifle more than an allusion to
terrestrial fire and its discovery. It is no longer fire, owing to the
fall of lightning setting some dry fuel in a blaze, and thus revealing all
its priceless benefits to palæolithic men—but something more mysterious
this time, though still as earthly!


    A divine bird, nestled in the branches [of the celestial Ash‐
    tree], stole that bough [or the fruit] and carried it down on the
    earth in its bill. Now the Greek word Φορώνευς is the rigid
    equivalent of the Sanskrit word _bhuranyu_, “the rapid,” an
    epithet of Agni, considered as the carrier of the divine spark.
    Phoroneus, son of Melia or of the celestial ash, thus corresponds
    to a conception far more ancient, probably, than that one which
    transformed the _pramantha_ [of the old Âryan Hindûs] into the
    Greek Prometheus. Phoroneus is the [personified] bird, that brings
    the heavenly lightning to the earth. Traditions relating to the
    birth of the race of Bronze, and those which made of Phoroneus the
    father of the Argolians, are an evidence to us that this
    thunderbolt [or lightning], as in the legend of Hephæstus or
    Prometheus, was the origin of the human race.(1203)


This still affords us no more than the external meaning of the symbols and
the allegory. It is now supposed that the name of Prometheus has been
unriddled. But the modern Mythologists and Orientalists see in it no
longer what their fathers saw on the authority of the whole of classical
antiquity. They only find therein something far more appropriate to the
spirit of the age, namely, a phallic element. But the name of Phoroneus,
as well as that of Prometheus, bears not one, nor even two, but a series
of esoteric meanings. Both relate to the _seven_ Celestial Fires; to Agni
Abhimânin, his three sons, and their forty‐five sons, constituting the
Forty‐nine Fires. Do all these numbers relate only to the terrestrial mode
of fire and to the flame of sexual passion? Did the Hindû Âryan mind never
soar above such purely sensual conceptions; that mind which is declared by
Prof. Max Müller to be the most spiritual and mystically inclined on the
whole globe? The number of those fires alone ought to have suggested an
inkling of the truth.

We are told that one is no longer permitted, in this age of rational
thought, to explain the name of Pro‐metheus as the old Greeks did. The
latter, it seems:


    Basing themselves on the apparent analogy of προμηθεύς with the
    verb προμανθύνειν, saw in him the type of the “foreseeing” man, to
    whom, for the sake of symmetry, a brother was added—Epi‐metheus,
    or “he who takes counsel _after_ the event.”(1204)


But now the Orientalists have decided otherwise. They know the real
meaning of the two names better than those who invented them. The legend
is based upon an event of universal importance. It was built to
commemorate


    A great event which must have strongly impressed itself upon the
    imagination of the first witnesses, and its remembrance has never
    since faded out from popular memory.(1205)


What was this? Laying aside every poetical _fiction_, all those dreams of
the Golden Age, let us imagine—argue the modern scholars—in all its gross
realism, the first miserable state of humanity, the striking picture of
which was traced for us after Æschylus by Lucretius, and the exact truth
of which is now confirmed by Science; and then we may understand better
that a new life really began for man, on that day when he saw the first
spark produced by the friction of two pieces of wood, or from the veins of
a flint. How could men help feeling gratitude to that mysterious and
marvellous being which they were henceforth enabled to create at their
will, and which was no sooner born, than it grew and expanded, developing
with singular power.


    This terrestrial flame, was it not analogous in nature to that
    which sent them from above its light and heat, or which frightened
    them in the thunderbolt? Was it not derived from the same source?
    And if its origin was in heaven, must it not have been brought
    down some day on earth? If so, who was the powerful being, the
    beneficent being, God or man, who had conquered it? Such are the
    questions which the curiosity of the Âryans offered in the early
    days of their existence, and which found their answer in the myth
    of Prometheus.(1206)


The Philosophy of Occult Science finds two weak points in the above
reflections, and proceeds to point them out. The miserable state of
Humanity described by Æschylus and Lucretius was no more wretched then, in
the early days of the Âryans, than it is now. That “state” was limited to
the savage tribes; and the now‐existing savages are not a whit more happy
or unhappy than their forefathers were a million years ago.

It is an accepted fact in Science that “rude implements, exactly
resembling those in use _among existing savages_,” are found in river‐
gravels and caves, geologically “implying an enormous antiquity.” So great
is that resemblance that, as the author of _The Modern Zoroastrian_ tells
us:


    If the collection in the Colonial Exhibition of stone celts and
    arrow‐heads used by the Bushmen of South Africa were placed side
    by side with one from the British Museum of similar objects from
    Kent’s Cavern or the Caves of Dordogne, no one but an expert could
    distinguish between them.(1207)


And if there are Bushmen existing now, in our age of the highest
civilization, who are no higher intellectually than the race of men which
inhabited Devonshire and Southern France during the Palæolithic age, why
could not the latter have lived simultaneously with, and have been the
contemporary of, other races as highly civilized for their day as we are
for ours? That the sum of knowledge increases daily in mankind, “but that
intellectual capacity does not increase with it,” is shown when the
intellect, if not the physical knowledge, of the Euclids, Pythagorases,
Pâninis, Kapilas, Platos, and Socrates, is compared with that of the
Newtons, Kants, and the modern Huxleys and Hæckels. On comparing the
results obtained by Dr. J. Barnard Davis, the Craniologist,(1208) with
regard to the internal capacity of the skull—its volume being taken as the
standard and test for judging of the intellectual capacities—Dr. Pfaff
finds that this capacity among the French (certainly in the highest rank
of mankind) is 88.4 cubic inches, being thus “perceptibly smaller than
that of the Polynesians generally, which, even among many Papuans and
Alfuras of the lowest grade, amounts to 89 and 89.7 cubic inches”; which
shows that it is the _quality_ and not the _quantity_ of the brain that is
the cause of intellectual capacity. The average index of skulls among
various races having been now recognized to be “one of the most
characteristic marks of difference between different races,” the following
comparison is suggestive:


    The index of breadth among the Scandinavians [is] at 75; among the
    English at 76; among Holsteiners at 77; in Bresgau at 80;
    Schiller’s skull shows an index of breadth even of 82 ... the
    Madurese also 82!


Finally, the same comparison between the oldest skulls known and the
European, brings to light the startling fact that:


    _Most of these old skulls, belonging to the stone period, are
    above rather than below the average of the brain of the now living
    man in volume._


Calculating the measures for the height, breadth, and length in inches
from the average measurements of several skulls, the following sums are
obtained:

1. Old Northern skulls of the stone age:                    18.877 ins.
2. Average of 48 skulls of the same period from England:    18.858 ins.
3. Average of 7 skulls of the same period from Wales:       18.649 ins.
4. Average of 36 skulls of the stone age from France:       18.220 ins.

The average of the now living Europeans is 18.579 inches; of Hottentots,
17.795 inches!

These figures show plainly that:


    The size of the brain of the oldest populations known to us is not
    such as to place them on a lower level than that of the now living
    inhabitants of the Earth.(1209)


Besides which, they show the “missing link” vanishing into thin air. Of
these, however, more anon: we must return to our direct subject.

As the “Prometheus Vinctus” of Æschylus tells us, the race which Jupiter
so ardently desired “to quench, and plant a new one in its stead” (v.
241), suffered _mental_, not physical misery. The first boon Prometheus
gave to mortals, as he tells the Chorus, was to hinder them “from
_foreseeing_ death” (v. 256); he “saved the mortal race from sinking
blasted down to Hades’ gloom” (v. 244); and then only, “besides” that, he
gave them fire (v. 260). This shows plainly the dual character at any rate
of the Promethean myth, if Orientalists will not accept the existence of
the _seven keys_ taught in Occultism. This relates to the first opening of
man’s spiritual perceptions, not to his first seeing or “discovering”
fire. For fire was never _discovered_, but existed on Earth since its
beginning. It existed in the seismic activity of the early ages, volcanic
eruptions being as frequent and constant in those periods as fog is in
England now. And if we are told that men appeared so late on Earth that
all but a few volcanoes were already extinct, and that geological
disturbances had made room for a more settled state of things, we answer:
Let a new race of men—whether evolved from Angel or Gorilla—appear now on
any uninhabited spot of the Globe, with the exception perhaps of the
Sahara, and a thousand to one it would not be a year or two old before
“discovering fire,” through lightning setting the grass or something else
in flames. This assumption, that primitive man lived ages on Earth before
he was made acquainted with fire, is one of the most painfully illogical
of all. But old Æschylus was an Initiate, and knew well what he was giving
out.(1210)

No Occultist acquainted with symbology and the fact that Wisdom came to us
from the East, will for a moment deny that the myth of Prometheus has
reached Europe from Âryâvarta. Nor is he likely to deny that in one sense
Prometheus represents “fire by friction.” Therefore, he admires the
sagacity of M. F. Baudry, who shows in “Les Mythes du Feu et du Breuvage
Céleste”(1211) one of the aspects of Prometheus and his origin from India.
He shows the reader the _supposed_ primitive process to obtain fire, still
in use to‐day in India to light the sacrificial flame. This is what he
says:


    This process, such as it is minutely described in the Vedic
    Sûtras, consists in rapidly turning a stick in a socket made in
    the centre of a piece of wood. The friction develops intense heat
    and ends by setting on fire the particles of wood in contact. The
    motion of the stick is not a continuous rotation, but a series of
    motions in contrary senses, by means of a cord fixed to the stick
    in its middle; the operator holds one of the ends in each hand and
    pulls them alternately.... The full process is designated in
    Sanskrit by the verb _manthâmi, mathnáni_, which means “to rub,
    agitate, shake and obtain by rubbing,” and is especially applied
    to rotatory friction, as is proved by its derivative _mandala_,
    which signifies a circle.... The pieces of wood serving for the
    production of fire have each their name in Sanskrit. The stick
    which turns is called _pramantha_; the discus which receives it is
    called _arani_ and _aranî_: “the two aranis” designating the
    _ensemble_ of the instrument.(1212)


It remains to be seen what the Brâhmans will say to this. But even
supposing that Prometheus, in one of the aspects of his myth, was
conceived as the producer of fire by means of the Pramantha, or as an
animate and divine Pramantha, would this imply that the symbolism had no
other than the phallic meaning attributed to it by modern symbologists?
Decharme, at any rate, seems to have a correct glimmering of the truth;
for he unconsciously corroborates all that the Occult Sciences teach with
regard to the Mânasa Devas, who have endowed man with the consciousness of
his immortal soul—that consciousness which hinders man “from foreseeing
death,” and makes him _know_ he is immortal.(1213) “How did Prometheus
come into possession of the [divine] spark?” he asks.


    Fire having its abode in heaven, it is there he must have gone to
    find it before he could carry it down to men, and, to approach the
    gods, he must have been a god himself.(1214)


The Greeks held that he was of the _Divine_ Race, “the son of the Titan
Iapetos”;(1215) the Hindûs, that he was a Deva.


    But celestial fire belonged in the beginning to the gods alone; it
    was a treasure they reserved for themselves ... over which they
    jealously watched.... “The prudent son of Iapetus,” says Hesiod,
    “deceived Jupiter by stealing and concealing in the cavity of a
    narthex, the indefatigable fire of the resplendent glow.”(1216)
    ... Thus the gift made by Prometheus to men was a conquest made
    from heaven. Now according to Greek ideas [in this identical with
    those of the Occultists], this possession forced from Jupiter,
    this human trespassing upon the property of the gods, had to be
    followed by an expiation.... Prometheus, moreover, belongs to that
    race of Titans who had rebelled(1217) against the gods, and whom
    the master of Olympus had hurled down into Tartarus; like them, he
    is the genius of evil, doomed to cruel suffering.(1218)


What is most revolting in the explanations that follow, is the one‐sided
view taken of this grandest of all myths. The most intuitional among
modern writers cannot, or will not, rise in their conceptions above the
level of the Earth and cosmic phenomena. It is not denied that the moral
idea in the myth, as presented in the _Theogony_ of Hesiod, plays a
certain part in the primitive Greek conception. The Titan is more than a
thief of the celestial fire. He is the representation of humanity—active,
industrious, intelligent, but at the same time ambitious, which aims at
equalling divine powers. Therefore it is humanity punished in the person
of Prometheus, but it is only so with the Greeks. With them, Prometheus is
not a criminal, save in the eyes of the Gods. In his relation with the
Earth, he is, on the contrary, a God himself, a friend of mankind
(φιλάνθρωπος), which he has raised to civilization and initiated into the
knowledge of all the arts; a conception which found its most poetical
expounder in Æschylus. But with all other nations Prometheus is—what? The
Fallen Angel, Satan, as the Church would have it? Not at all. _He is
simply the image of the pernicious and dreaded effects of lightning._ He
is the “evil fire” (_mal feu_)(1219) _and the symbol of the divine
reproductive male organ_.


    Reduced to its simple expression, the myth we are trying to
    explain is then simply a [cosmic] genius of fire.(1220)


It is the former idea (the phallic) which was _preëminently_ Âryan, if we
believe Adalbert Kuhn(1221) and F. Baudry. For:


    The fire used by man being the result of the action of _pramantha_
    in the _arani_, the Âryas _must have_ ascribed [?] the same origin
    to celestial fire, and they _must have_(1222) imagined [?] that a
    god armed with the pramantha, or a divine pramantha, caused a
    violent friction in the bosom of the clouds, which gave birth to
    lightning and thunderbolts.(1223)

    This idea is supported by the fact that, according to Plutarch’s
    testimony,(1224) the Stoics thought that thunder was the result of
    the struggle of storm‐clouds, and lightning a conflagration due to
    friction; while Aristotle saw in the thunderbolt only the action
    of clouds which clashed with each other. What was this theory, if
    not the scientific translation of the production of fire by
    friction?... Everything leads us to think that, from the highest
    antiquity, and before the dispersion of the Âryas, it was believed
    that the pramantha lighted the fire in the storm‐cloud as well as
    in the aranis.(1225)


Thus, suppositions and idle hypotheses are made to stand for discovered
truths. Defenders of the biblical dead‐letter could not help the writers
of missionary tracts more effectually than do materialistic Symbologists
in thus taking for granted that the ancient Âryans based their religious
conceptions on no higher thought than the physiological.

But it is not so, and the very spirit of Vedic Philosophy is against such
an interpretation. For if, as Decharme himself confesses:


    This idea of the creative power of fire is explained ... by the
    ancient assimilation of the human soul to a celestial spark(1226)


—as shown by the imagery often made use of in the _Vedas_ when speaking of
Arani, it would mean something higher than simply a gross sexual
conception. A Hymn to Agni in the _Veda_ is cited as an example:


    Here is the pramantha; the generator is ready. Bring the mistress
    of the race (the female aranî). Let us produce Agni by attrition,
    according to ancient custom.


This means no worse than an abstract idea expressed in the tongue of
mortals. The female Aranî, the “mistress of the race,” is Aditi, the
Mother of the Gods, or Shekinah, Eternal Light—in the World of Spirit, the
“Great Deep” and Chaos; or Primordial Substance in its first remove from
the Unknown, in the Manifested Kosmos. If, ages later, the same epithet is
applied to Devakî, the Mother of Krishna, or the incarnated Logos; and if
the symbol, owing to the gradual and irrepressible spread of exoteric
religions, may now be regarded as having a sexual significance, this in no
way mars the original purity of the image. The subjective had been
transformed into the objective; Spirit had fallen into Matter. The
universal kosmic polarity of Spirit‐Substance had become, in human
thought, the mystic, but still sexual, union of Spirit and Matter, and had
thus acquired an anthropomorphic colouring which it had never had in the
beginning. Between the _Vedas_ and the _Purânas_ there is an abyss of
which they are the poles, like as are the seventh principle, the Âtmâ, and
the first or lowest principle, the Physical Body, in the septenary
constitution of Man. The primitive and purely spiritual language of the
_Vedas_, conceived many decades of millenniums earlier than the Paurânic
accounts, found a purely human expression for the purpose of describing
events which took place 5,000 years ago, the date of Krishna’s death, from
which day the Kali Yuga, or Black Age, began for mankind.

As Aditi is called Surârani, the Matrix or “Mother” of the Suras or Gods,
so Kuntî, the mother of the Pândavas, is called in the _Mahâbhârata_
Pândavârani(1227)—and the term is now _physiologized_. But Devakî, the
antetype of the Roman Catholic Madonna, is a later anthropomorphized form
of Aditi. The latter is the Goddess‐mother, or Deva‐mâtri, of seven Sons
(the six and the seven Âdityas of early Vedic times); the mother of
Krishna, Devakî, has six embryos conveyed into her womb by Jagad‐dhâtri,
the “Nurse of the World,” the seventh, Krishna, the Logos, being
transferred to that of Rohinî. Mary, the mother of Jesus, is the mother of
seven children, of five sons and two daughters (a later transformation of
sex), in Matthew’s Gospel.(1228) No one of the worshippers of the Roman
Catholic Virgin would object to reciting in her honour the prayer
addressed by the Gods to Devakî. Let the reader judge.


    Thou art that Prakriti [essence], infinite and subtile, which
    formerly bore Brahmâ in its womb.... Thou, eternal being,
    comprising, in thy substance, the essence of all created things,
    wast identical with creation; thou wast the parent of the tri‐form
    sacrifice, becoming the germ of all things. Thou art sacrifice,
    whence all fruit proceeds; thou art the Aranî, whose attrition
    engenders fire.(1229) As Aditi, thou art the parent of the
    gods.... Thou art light [Jyotsnâ, the morning twilight],(1230)
    whence day is begotten. Thou art humility [Samnati, a daughter of
    Daksha], the mother of wisdom; thou art Niti, the parent of
    harmony (Naya);(1231) thou art modesty, the progenitrix of
    affection [Prashraya, explained by Vinaya]; thou art desire, of
    whom love is born.... Thou art ... the mother of knowledge
    [Avabodha]; thou art patience [Dhriti], the parent of fortitude
    [Dhairya].(1232)


Thus Aranî is shown here to be the same as the Roman Catholic “Vase of
Election.” As to its primitive meaning, it was purely metaphysical. No
unclean thought traversed these conceptions in the ancient mind. Even in
the _Zohar_—far less metaphysical in its symbology than any other
symbolism—the idea is an abstraction and nothing more. Thus, when the
_Zohar_ says:


    All that which exists, all that which has been formed by the
    ancient, whose name is holy, can only exist through a male and
    female principle.(1233)


It means no more than that the divine Spirit of Life is ever coalescing
with Matter. It is the Will of the Deity that acts; and the idea is purely
Schopenhauerian.


    When Atteekah Kaddosha, the ancient and the concealed of the
    concealed, desired to form all things, it formed all things like
    male and female. This wisdom comprises _all_ when it goeth forth.


Hence Chokmah (male Wisdom) and Binah (female Consciousness or Intellect)
are said to create all between the two—the active and the passive
principles. As the eye of the expert jeweller discerns under the rough and
uncouth oyster shell the pure immaculate pearl, enshrined within its
bosom, his hand touching the shell but to get at its contents, so the eye
of the true Philosopher reads between the lines of the _Purânas_ the
sublime Vedic truths, and corrects the form with the help of the Vedântic
Wisdom. Our Orientalists, however, never perceive the pearl under the
thick coating of the shell and—act accordingly.

From all that has been said in this Section, one sees clearly that,
between the Serpent of Eden and the Devil of Christianity, there is an
abyss. Alone the sledge hammer of Ancient Philosophy can kill this dogma.




Section VII. Enoïchion‐Henoch.


The history of the evolution of the Satanic Myth would not be complete if
we omitted to notice the character of the mysterious and cosmopolitan
Enoch, variously called Enos, Hanoch, and finally Enoïchion by the Greeks.
It is from his book that the first notions of the Fallen Angels were taken
by the early Christian writers.

The _Book of Enoch_ is declared apocryphal. But what is an _apocryphon_?
The very etymology of the term shows that it is simply a _secret_ book,
_i.e._, one that belonged to the catalogue of temple‐libraries under the
guardianship of the Hierophants and Initiated Priests, and was never meant
for the profane. _Apocryphon_ comes from the verb _crypto_ (κρύπτω), “to
hide.” For ages the _Enoïchion_, the Book of the Seer, was preserved in
the “city of letters” and secret works—the ancient Kirjath‐sepher, later
on, Debir.(1234)

Some of the writers interested in the subject—especially Masons—have tried
to identify Enoch with Thoth of Memphis, the Greek Hermes, and even with
the Latin Mercury. As individuals, all of these are distinct one from the
other; professionally—if one may use this word, now so limited in its
sense—one and all belong to the same category of sacred writers, of
Initiators and Recorders of Occult and ancient Wisdom. Those who in the
_Korân_(1235) are generically termed the Edris, or the “Learned,” the
Initiated, bore in Egypt the name of “Thoth,” the inventor of Arts,
Sciences, of writing or letters, of Music and Astronomy. Among the Jews
Edris became “Enoch,” who, according to Bar‐Hebræus, “was the first
inventor of writing,” books, Arts, and Sciences, the first who reduced to
a system the progress of the planets.(1236) In Greece he was called
Orpheus, and thus changed his name with every nation. The number seven
being attached to, and connected with, each of those primitive
Initiators,(1237) as well as the number 365, of the days in the year,
astronomically, it identifies the mission, character, and the sacred
office of all these men, but certainly not their personalities. Enoch is
the _seventh_ Patriarch; Orpheus is the possessor of the Phorminx, the
seven‐stringed lyre, which is the seven‐fold mystery of Initiation. Thoth,
with the seven‐rayed Solar Discus on his head, travels in the Solar Boat
(the 365 degrees), jumping out every fourth (leap) year for one day.
Finally, Thoth‐Lunus is the septenary God of the seven days, or the week.
Esoterically and spiritually, Enoïchion means the “Seer of the Open Eye.”

The story about Enoch, told by Josephus, namely, that he had concealed his
precious Rolls or Books under the pillars of Mercury or Seth, is the same
as that told of Hermes, the “Father of Wisdom,” who concealed his Books of
Wisdom under a pillar, and then, discovering the two pillars of stone,
found the Science written thereon. Yet Josephus, notwithstanding his
constant efforts in the direction of Israel’s unmerited glorification, and
though he does attribute that Science (of Wisdom) to the _Jewish_
Enoch—writes _history_. He shows these pillars as still existing during
his own time.(1238) He tells us that they were built by Seth; and so they
may have been, only neither by the Patriarch of that name, the fabled son
of Adam, nor by the Egyptian God of Wisdom—Teth, Set, Thoth, Tat, Sat (the
later Sat‐an), or Hermes, who are all one—but by the “Sons of the Serpent‐
God,” or “Sons of the Dragon,” the name under which the Hierophants of
Egypt and Babylon were known before the Deluge, as were their forefathers,
the Atlanteans.

What Josephus tells us, therefore, with the exception of the application
made of it, must be true _allegorically_. According to his version the two
famous pillars were entirely covered with hieroglyphics, which, after
their discovery, were copied and reproduced in the most secret corners of
the inner temples of Egypt, and thus became the source of its Wisdom and
exceptional learning. These two “pillars,” however, are the prototypes of
the two “tables of stones” hewn by Moses at the command of the “Lord.”
Hence, in saying that all the great Adepts and Mystics of antiquity—such
as Orpheus, Hesiod, Pythagoras and Plato—got the elements of their
Theology from those hieroglyphics, he is right in one sense, and wrong in
another. The Secret Doctrine teaches us that the Arts, Sciences, Theology,
and especially the Philosophy of every nation which preceded the last
_universally known_, but not universal, Deluge, had been recorded
ideographically from the primitive oral records of the Fourth Race, and
that these were the inheritance of the latter from the early Third Root‐
Race before the allegorical Fall. Hence, also, the Egyptian pillars, the
tablets, and even the “white oriental porphyry stone” of the Masonic
legend—which Enoch, fearing that the real and precious secrets would be
lost, concealed before the Deluge in the bowels of the Earth—were simply
the more or less symbolical and allegorical copies from the primitive
Records. The _Book of Enoch_ is one of such copies, and is, moreover, a
Chaldæan, and now very incomplete, compendium. As already said, Enoïchion
means in Greek the “Inner Eye,” or the Seer; in Hebrew, _with the help of
Masoretic points_, it means the “Initiator” and “Instructor” (חֲנוֹךּ).
Enoch is a generic title; and, moreover, his legend is that of several
other prophets, Jewish and Heathen, with changes of made‐up details, the
root‐form being the same. Elijah is also taken up into Heaven “alive”; and
the Astrologer, at the court of Isdubar, the Chaldæan Hea‐bani, is
likewise raised to Heaven by the God Hea, who was _his_ patron, as Jehovah
was of Elijah, whose name means in Hebrew “God‐Jah,” Jehovah
(אֶלְיָה),(1239) and again of Elihu, which has the same meaning. This kind
of easy death, or _euthanasia_, has an Esoteric meaning. It symbolizes the
“death” of any Adept who has reached the power and degree, and also the
purification, which enable him to “die” in the Physical Body, and _still
live and lead a conscious life_ in his Astral Body. The variations on this
theme are endless, but the secret meaning is ever the same. The Pauline
expression,(1240) “that he should not see death” (_ut non videret
mortem_), has thus an Esoteric meaning, but nothing _supernatural_ in it.
The mangled interpretation given of some biblical hints to the effect that
Enoch, “whose years will equal those of the world” (of the _solar_ year,
365 days), will share with Christ and the prophet Elijah the honours and
bliss of the last Advent and of the destruction of
Antichrist(1241)—signify Esoterically, that some of the Great Adepts will
return in the Seventh Race, when all Error will be made away with, and the
advent of Truth will be heralded by those Shishta, the holy “Sons of
Light.”

The Latin Church is not always logical, nor prudent. She declares the
_Book of Enoch_ an _apocryphon_, and has gone so far as to claim, through
Cardinal Cajetan and other luminaries of the Church, the rejection from
the Canon of even the Book of Jude, who, otherwise, as an _inspired_
apostle, would quote from and thus sanctify the _Book of Enoch_, which is
alleged to be an apocryphal work. Fortunately, some of the dogmatics
perceived the peril in time. Had they accepted Cajetan’s resolution, they
would have been forced to reject likewise the Fourth Gospel; as St. John
borrows literally from Enoch, and places _a whole sentence_ from him, in
the mouth of Jesus!(1242)

Ludolph, the “father of Ethiopic literature,” commissioned to investigate
the various Enochian MSS. presented by Pereisc, the traveller, to the
Mazarine Library, declared that “no _Book of Enoch_ could exist among the
Abyssinians”! Further researches and discoveries worsted this too dogmatic
assertion, as all know. Bruce and Ruppel did find the _Book of Enoch_ in
Abyssinia, and what is more, brought it to Europe some years later, and
Bishop Laurence translated it. But Bruce despised it, and scoffed at its
contents; as did all the rest of the Scientists. He declared it a
_Gnostic_ work, concerning the Age of Giants who devour men—and bearing a
strong resemblance to the _Apocalypse_.(1243) Giants! another _fairy‐
tale_!

Such, however, has not been the opinion of all the best critics. Dr.
Hanneberg places the _Book of Enoch_ along with the _Third Book of the
Maccabees—at the head of the list of those whose authority stands the
nearest to that of the canonical works_.(1244)

Verily, “where doctors disagree...”!

As usual, however, they are all right and all wrong. To accept Enoch as a
biblical character, a single living person, is like accepting Adam as the
first man. Enoch was a generic title, applied to, and borne by, scores of
individuals, at all times and ages, and in every race and nation. This may
be easily inferred from the fact that the ancient Talmudists and the
teachers of Midrashim are not agreed generally in their views about
Hanokh, the Son of Yered. Some say Enoch was a great Saint, beloved by
God, and “taken alive to heaven,” _i.e._, one who reached Mukti or
Nirvâna, on Earth, as Buddha did and others still do; and others maintain
that he was a sorcerer, a wicked magician. This shows only that “Enoch,”
or its equivalent, was a term, even during the days of the later
Talmudists, which meant “Seer,” “Adept in the Secret Wisdom,” etc.,
without any specification as to the character of the title‐bearer.
Josephus, speaking of Elijah and Enoch,(1245) remarks that:


    It is written in the sacred books they [Elijah and Enoch]
    disappeared, but so that nobody knew that they died.


It means simply that _they had died in their personalities_, as Yogîs die
to this day in India, or even some Christian monks—to the world. They
disappear from the sight of men and die—on the terrestrial plane—even for
themselves. A seemingly figurative way of speaking, yet _literally true_.

“Hanokh transmitted the science of (astronomical) calculation and of
computing the seasons to Noah,” says the Midrash _Pirkah_;(1246) R.
Eliezar referring to Enoch that which others did to Hermes Trismegistus,
for the two are identical in their Esoteric meaning. “Hanokh” in this
case, and his “Wisdom,” belong to the cycle of the Fourth Atlantean
Race,(1247) and Noah to that of the Fifth.(1248) In this case both
represent the Root‐Races, the present one and the one that preceded it. In
another sense, Enoch disappeared, “he walked with God, and he was not, for
God took him”; the allegory referring to the disappearance of the Sacred
and Secret Knowledge from among men; for “God” (or Java Aleim—the high
Hierophants, the Heads of the Colleges of Initiated Priests(1249)) took
him; in other words, the Enochs or the Enoïchions, the Seers and their
Knowledge and Wisdom, became strictly confined to the Secret Colleges of
the Prophets with the Jews, and to the Temples with the Gentiles.

Interpreted with the help of merely the symbolical key, Enoch is the type
of the dual nature of man—spiritual and physical. Hence he occupies the
centre of the Astronomical Cross, as given by Éliphas Lévi from a secret
work, which is a Six‐pointed Star, the “Adonai.” In the upper angle of the
upper Triangle is the Eagle; in the left lower angle stands the Lion; in
the right, the Bull; while between the Bull and the Lion, over them and
under the Eagle, is the face of Enoch or Man.(1250) Now the figures on the
upper Triangle represent the Four Races, omitting the First, the Chhâyâs
or Shadows, and the “Son of Man,” Enos or Enoch, is in the centre, where
he stands between the Fourth and the Fifth Races, for he represents the
Secret Wisdom of both. These are the four Animals of _Ezekiel_ and of the
_Revelation_. This Double Triangle which, in _Isis Unveiled_, is faced by
the Hindû Ardhanârî, is by far the best. For in the latter, only the three
(for us) historical Races are symbolized; the Third, the Androgynous, by
Ardha‐nârî; the Fourth, symbolized by the strong, powerful Lion; and the
Fifth, the Âryan, by that which is its most sacred symbol to this day, the
Bull (and the Cow).

A man of great erudition, a French _savant_, M. de Sacy, finds several
most singular statements in the _Book of Enoch_, “worthy of the most
serious examination,” he says. For instance:


    The author [Enoch] makes the solar year consist of 364 days, and
    seems to know periods of three, of five, and of eight years,
    followed by _four_ supplementary days, which, in his system,
    appear to be those of the equinoxes and solstices.(1251)


To which he adds, later on:


    I see but one means to palliate them [these “absurdities”]; it is
    to suppose that the author expounds some fanciful system which may
    have existed _before the order of Nature had been altered at the
    period of the Universal Deluge_.(1252)


Precisely so; and the Secret Doctrine teaches that this “order of nature”
has been thus altered, and the series of the Earth’s humanities too. For,
as the angel Uriel tells Enoch:


    Behold, I have showed thee all things, O Enoch; and all things
    have I revealed to thee. Thou seest the sun, the moon, and _those
    which conduct the stars_ of heaven, which cause all their
    operations, seasons, and arrivals to return. In the days of
    sinners _the years shall be shortened_.... The moon shall change
    its laws....(1253)


In those days also, years before the Great Deluge that carried away the
Atlanteans and changed the face of the whole Earth (because “the _Earth_
[or its axis] _became inclined_”), Nature, geologically, astronomically,
and cosmically in general, could not have been the same, just because the
Earth _had inclined_. To quote from Enoch:


    And Noah cried with a bitter voice, Hear me; hear me; hear me;
    three times. And he said,... The earth labours and is violently
    shaken. Surely, I shall perish with it.(1254)


This, by the way, looks like one of those many “inconsistencies,” if the
_Bible_ is read literally. For, to say the least, this is a very strange
fear in one who had “found grace in the eyes of the Lord” and been told to
build an Ark! But here we find the venerable Patriarch expressing as much
fear as if, instead of a “friend” of God, he had been one of the Giants
doomed by the wrathful Deity. The Earth had already _inclined_, and the
deluge of waters had become simply a question of time, and yet Noah seems
to know nothing of his intended salvation.

A decree had come indeed; the decree of Nature and the Law of Evolution,
that the Earth should change its Race, and that the Fourth Race should be
destroyed to make room for a better one. The Manvantara had reached its
turning point of _three and a half_ Rounds, and gigantic physical Humanity
had reached the acme of gross materiality. Hence the apocalyptic verse
that speaks of a commandment gone forth that they may be destroyed, “that
_their end may be_”—the end of the Race:


    For they _knew_ [truly] every secret of the angels, every
    oppressive and secret power of the _Satans_, and every power of
    those who commit sorcery, as well as of those who make molten
    images in the whole earth.(1255)


And now a natural question. Who could have informed the apocryphal author
of this powerful vision—no matter to what age he may be assigned before
the day of Galileo—that the Earth could occasionally incline her axis?
Whence did he derive such astronomical and geological knowledge if the
Secret Wisdom, of which the ancient Rishis and Pythagoras had drunk, is
but a fancy, an invention of later ages? Has Enoch read prophetically
perchance in Fréderic Klée’s work on the Deluge the lines:


    The position of the terrestrial globe with reference to the sun
    has evidently been, in primitive times, different from what it is
    now; and this difference must have been caused by a displacement
    of the axis of rotation of the earth.


This reminds one of that _unscientific_ statement made by the Egyptian
priests to Herodotus, namely, that the Sun has not always risen where it
rises _now_, and that in former times the ecliptic had cut the equator at
right angles.(1256)

There are many such “dark sayings” scattered throughout the _Purânas_,
_Bible_ and other Mythologies, and to the Occultist they divulge two
facts; (_a_) that the Ancients knew as well as, and perhaps better than,
the moderns do, Astronomy, Geognosy and Cosmography in general; and (_b_)
that the behaviour of the Globe has altered more than once since the
primitive state of things. Thus, Xenophantes—on the _blind_ faith of _his_
“ignorant” religion, which taught that Phaeton, in his desire to learn the
_hidden_ truth, made the Sun deviate from its usual course—asserts
somewhere that, “the Sun turned toward another country”; which is a
parallel—slightly more scientific, however, if not as bold—of Joshua
stopping the course of the Sun altogether. Yet it may explain the teaching
of the Northern Mythology that before the _actual order_ of things the Sun
arose in the South, and its placing the Frigid Zone (Jeruskoven) in the
East, whereas now it is in the North.(1257)

The _Book of Enoch_, in short, is a _résumé_, a compound of the main
features of the history of the Third, Fourth and Fifth Races; a very few
prophecies from the present age of the world; a long retrospective,
introspective and prophetic summary of universal and quite _historical_
events—geological, ethnological, astronomical, and psychic—with a touch of
Theogony out of the antediluvian records. The Book of this mysterious
personage is referred to and quoted copiously in the _Pistis Sophia_, and
also in the _Zohar_ and its most ancient Midrashim. Origen and Clement of
Alexandria held it in the highest esteem. To say, therefore, that it is a
Post‐Christian forgery is to utter an absurdity and to become guilty of an
anachronism, for Origen, among others, who lived in the second century of
the Christian era, mentions it as an ancient and venerable work. The
secret and sacred Name and its potency are well and clearly though
allegorically described in the old volume. From the eighteenth to the
fiftieth chapter, the Visions of Enoch are all descriptive of the
Mysteries of Initiation, one of which is the Burning Valley of the “Fallen
Angels.”

Perhaps St. Augustine was quite right in saying that the Church rejected
the _Book of Enoch_ out of her canon owing to its too great antiquity (_ob
nimiam antiquitatem_).(1258) There was no room for the events noticed in
it within the limit of the 4004 years B.C. assigned to the world from its
“creation”!




Section VIII. The Symbolism of the Mystery‐Names Iao and Jehovah, with
their Relation to the Cross and Circle.


When the Abbé Louis Constant, better known as Éliphas Lévi, said in his
_Histoire de la Magie_ that the _Sepher Jetzirah_, the _Zohar_, and the
_Apocalypse_ of St. John, are the masterpieces of the Occult Sciences, he
ought, if he had wished to be correct and clear, to have added—in Europe.
It is quite true that these works contain “more _significance_ than
words”; and that their “expression is poetical,” while “in numbers” they
are “exact.” Unfortunately, however, before any one can appreciate the
_poetry_ of the expressions, or the _exactness_ of the numbers, he will
have to learn the real significance and meaning of the terms and symbols
employed. But man will never learn this so long as he remains ignorant of
the fundamental principle of the Secret Doctrine, whether in Oriental
Esotericism, or in the kabalistical Symbology—the _key, or value, in all
their aspects_, of the God‐names, Angel‐names, and Patriarch‐names in the
_Bible_, their mathematical or geometrical value, and their relations to
manifested Nature.

Therefore, if, on the one hand, the _Zohar_ “astonishes” the mystic, by
the profundity of its views and the great simplicity of its images, or the
other hand, that work misleads the student by such expressions as those
used with respect to Ain Suph and Jehovah, notwithstanding the assurance
that:


    The book is careful to explain that the human form with which it
    clothes God is but _an image of the Word_, and that God should not
    be expressed by any thought, or any form.


It is well known that Origen Clement, and the Rabbis confessed that the
_Kabalah_ and the _Bible_ were _veiled and secret_ books; but few know
that the Esotericism of the kabalistic books in their present _reëdited_
form is simply another and still more cunning veil thrown upon the
primitive symbolism of these secret volumes.

The idea of representing the _hidden_ Deity by the circumference of a
circle, and the Creative Power—male and female, or the Androgynous Word—by
the diameter across it, is one of the oldest symbols. It is upon this
conception that every great Cosmogony has been built. With the old Âryans,
the Egyptians, and the Chaldæans, the symbol was complete, as it embraced
the idea of the eternal and immovable Divine Thought in its absoluteness,
separated entirely from the incipient stage of the so‐called “creation,”
and comprised psychological and even spiritual evolution, and its
mechanical work, or cosmogonical construction. With the Hebrews, however,
though the former conception is to be distinctly found in the _Zohar_, and
the _Sepher Jetzirah_, or what remains of the latter—that which has been
subsequently embodied in the _Pentateuch_ proper, and especially in
_Genesis_, is simply this secondary stage, to wit, the mechanical law of
creation, or rather of construction; while Theogony is hardly, if at all,
outlined.

It is only in the first six chapters of _Genesis_, in the rejected _Book
of Enoch_, and the misunderstood and mistranslated poem of _Job_, that
true echoes of the Archaic Doctrine may now be found. The key to it is
lost now, even among the most learned Rabbis, whose predecessors in the
early period of the Middle Ages, in their national exclusiveness and
pride, and especially in their profound hatred of Christianity, preferred
to cast it into the deep sea of oblivion, rather than to share their
knowledge with their relentless and fierce persecutors. Jehovah was their
own tribal property, inseparable from, and unfit to play a part in, any
other but the Mosaic Law. Violently torn out of his original frame, which
he fitted and which fitted him, the “Lord God of Abraham and Jacob” could
hardly be crammed without damage and breakage into the new Christian
Canon. Being the weaker, the Judeans could not help the desecration. They
kept, however, the secret of the origin of their Adam Kadmon, or male‐
female Jehovah, and the new tabernacle proved a complete misfit for the
old God. They were, indeed, avenged!

The statement that Jehovah was the tribal God of the Jews and no higher,
will be denied like many other things. Yet the Theologians are not in a
position to tell us, in that case, the meaning of the verses in
_Deuteronomy_, which say quite plainly:


    When the Most High [not the “Lord,” or “Jehovah” either] divided
    to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of
    Adam, he set the bounds ... according to the number of the
    children of Israel.... _The Lord’s_ [Jehovah’s] _portion is his
    people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance_.(1259)


This settles the question. So impudent have been the modern translators of
Bibles and Scriptures, and so damaging are these verses, that, following
in the steps traced for them by their worthy Church Fathers, each
translator has rendered these lines in his own way. While the above‐cited
quotation is taken _verbatim_ from the English Authorized Version, in the
French Bible,(1260) we find the “Most High” translated by “Souverain”
(Sovereign!!), the “sons of Adam” rendered by “the children of men,” and
the “Lord” changed into the “Eternal.” For impudent sleight‐of‐hand, the
French Protestant Church seems thus to have surpassed even English
ecclesiasticism.

Nevertheless, one thing is patent: the “Lord’s [Jehovah’s] portion” is his
“chosen people” and none else, for, _Jacob alone is the lot of his
inheritance_. What, then, have other nations, who call themselves Âryans,
to do with this Semitic Deity, the tribal God of Israel? Astronomically,
the “Most High” is the Sun, and the “Lord” is one of his seven planets,
whether it be Iao, the Genius of the Moon, or Ildabaoth‐Jehovah, the
Genius of Saturn, according to Origen and the Egyptian Gnostics.(1261) Let
the “Angel Gabriel,” the “Lord” of Iran, watch over his people, and
Michael‐Jehovah, over his Hebrews. These are not the Gods of other
nations, nor were they ever those of Jesus. As each Persian Dev is chained
to his planet,(1262) so each Hindû Deva (a “Lord”) has its allotted
portion, a world, a planet, a nation or a race. Plurality of worlds
implies plurality of Gods. We believe in the former, and may recognize,
but will never worship the latter.(1263)

It has been repeatedly stated in this work that every religious and
philosophical symbol had seven meanings attached to it, each pertaining to
its legitimate plane of thought, _i.e._, either purely metaphysical or
astronomical; psychic or physiological, etc. These seven meanings and
their applications are difficult enough to learn when taken by themselves;
but the interpretation and the right comprehension of them become tenfold
more puzzling, when, instead of being correlated, or made to flow
consecutively out of, and to follow, each other, each, or any one of these
meanings, is accepted as the one and sole explanation of the whole
symbolical idea. An instance may be given, as it admirably illustrates the
statement. Here are two interpretations, given by two learned Kabalists
and scholars, of one and the same verse in _Exodus_. Moses beseeches the
Lord to show him his “glory.” Evidently it is not the crude dead‐letter
phraseology as found in the _Bible_ that is to be accepted. There are
_seven_ meanings in the _Kabalah_, of which we may give two as interpreted
by the said two scholars. One of them translates while explaining:


    “Thou canst not see My face;... I will put thee in a cleft of the
    rock and I will cover thee with My hand while I pass by. And then
    I will take away Mine hand, and thou shalt see My _a’hoor_,”
    _i.e._, My back.(1264)


And then the translator adds in a gloss:


    That is, I will show you “My back,” _i.e._, My visible universe,
    My lower manifestations, but, as a man still in the flesh, thou
    canst not see My invisible nature. So proceeds the Qabbalah.(1265)


This is correct, and is the cosmo‐metaphysical explanation. And now speaks
the other Kabalist, giving the numerical meaning. As it involves a good
many suggestive ideas, and is far more fully given, we may allow it more
space. This synopsis is from an unpublished MS., and explains more fully
what was given in Section III, on the “Holy of Holies.”(1266)

The numbers of the name “Moses” are those of “I am that I am,” so that the
names Moses and Jehovah are at one in numerical harmony. The word Moses is
משה (5 + 300 + 40), and the sum of the values of its letters is 345;
Jehovah—the Genius _par excellence_ of the Lunar Year—assumes the value of
543, or the reverse of 345.


    In the third chapter of Exodus, in the 13th and 14th verses, it is
    said: And Moses said, ... Behold I come unto the children of
    Israel, and shall say unto them. The God of your fathers hath sent
    me unto you; and they shall say unto me, What is his name? What
    shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses,

    I Am That I Am.


The Hebrew words for this expression are _âhiyé asher âhiyé_, and in the
value of the sums of their letters stand thus:

אהיה     אשר     אהיה
21      501      21


    ... This being his [God’s] name, the sum of the values composing
    it, 21, 501, 21 is 543, or simply a use of the simple digit
    numbers in the name of Moses, ... but now so ordered that the name
    of 345 is reversed, and reads 543.


So that when Moses asks, “Let me see Thy face or glory,” the other rightly
and truly replies, “Thou canst not see my face ... but thou _shalt see me
behind_”—the true sense, though not the precise words; for the corner and
the _behind_ of 543 is the _face_ of 345. This is


    For check and to keep a _strict use_ of a set of numbers to
    develop certain _grand_ results, for the object of which they are
    specifically employed.


As the learned Kabalist adds:


    In other uses of the numbers, they saw each other face to face. It
    is strange that if we add 345 to 543 we have 888, which was the
    Gnostic Cabbalistic value of the name Christ, who was Jehoshua or
    Joshua. And so also the division of the 24 hours of the day gives
    three eights as quotient.... The chief end of all this system of
    Number Checks was to preserve in perpetuity the exact value of the
    Lunar Year in the Natural measure of Days.


These are the astronomical and numerical meanings in the secret Theogony
of sidereo‐cosmical Gods invented by the Chaldæo‐Hebrews,—two meanings out
of seven. The other five would astonish the Christians still more.

The series of Œdipuses who have endeavoured to interpret the riddle of the
Sphinx, is long indeed. For many ages she has been devouring the brightest
and the noblest intellects of Christendom; but now the Sphinx is
conquered. In the great intellectual struggle which has ended in the
complete victory of the Œdipuses of Symbolism, it is, however, not the
Sphinx, who, burning with the shame of defeat, has had to bury herself in
the sea, but verily the many‐sided symbol, named Jehovah, whom
Christians—the _civilized_ nations—have accepted for their God. The
Jehovah symbol has collapsed under the too close analysis, and is—drowned.
Symbologists have discovered with dismay that their adopted Deity was only
a mask for many other Gods, a _euhemerized_ extinct planet, at best, the
Genius of the Moon and Saturn with the Jews, of the Sun and Jupiter with
early Christians; that the Trinity—unless they accepted the more abstract
and metaphysical meanings given to it by the Gentiles—was, in truth, only
an astronomical triad, composed of the Sun (the Father), and the two
planets Mercury (the Son) and Venus (the Holy Ghost), Sophia, the Spirit
of Wisdom, Love and Truth, and Lucifer, as Christ, the “bright and morning
star.”(1267) For, if the Father is the Sun (the “Elder Brother,” in the
Eastern Inner Philosophy), the nearest planet to it is Mercury (Hermes,
Budha, Thoth), the name of whose Mother on Earth was Maia. Now this planet
receives seven times more light than any other; a fact which led the
Gnostics to call their Christos, and the Kabalists their Hermes (in the
astronomical meaning), the “Seven‐fold Light.” Finally, _this_ God was
Bel—the Sun being Bel with the Gauls; Helios, with the Greeks; Baal, with
the Phœnicians; El, in Chaldæan, hence El‐ohim, Emanu‐el, and El, “God,”
in Hebrew. But even the kabalistic God has vanished in the rabbinical
workmanship, and one has now to turn to the innermost metaphysical sense
of the _Zohar_ to find in it anything like Ain Suph, the Nameless Deity
and the Absolute, so authoritatively and loudly claimed by the Christians.
But it is certainly not to be found in the Mosaic books, at any rate by
those who try to read without a key to them. Ever since this key was lost,
Jews and Christians have tried their best to blend these two conceptions,
but in vain. They have only succeeded in finally robbing even the
Universal Deity of Its majestic character and primitive meaning.

As was said in _Isis Unveiled_:


    It would seem, therefore, but natural to make a difference between
    the mystery‐god Ιαω, adopted from the highest antiquity by all who
    participated in the esoteric knowledge of the priests, and his
    phonetic counterparts, whom we find treated with so little
    reverence by the Ophites and other Gnostics.(1268)

    In the Ophite gems of King,(1269) we find the name of Iao
    repeated, and often confounded with that of Ievo, while the latter
    simply represents one of the Genii antagonistic to Abraxas.... But
    the name Iao neither originated with, nor was it the sole property
    of the Jews. Even if it had pleased Moses to bestow the name upon
    the tutelary “Spirit,” the alleged protector and national deity of
    the “chosen people of Israel,” there is yet no possible reason why
    other nationalities should receive Him as the Highest and One‐
    living God. But we deny the assumption altogether. Besides, there
    is the fact that Iaho or Iao was a “mystery name” from the
    beginning, for יהיה and יה never came into use before the time of
    king David. Anterior to his time, few or no proper names were
    compounded with Iah or Jah. It looks rather as though David, being
    a sojourner among the Tyrians and Philistines,(1270) brought
    thence the name of Jehovah. He made Zadok high priest, from whom
    came the Zadokites or Sadducees. He lived and ruled first at
    Hebron (חברון), Habir‐on or Kabeir‐town, where the rites of the
    four (mystery‐gods) were celebrated. Neither David nor Solomon
    recognized either Moses or the law of Moses. They aspired to build
    a temple to יהוה, like the structures erected by Hiram to Hercules
    and Venus, Adon and Astarte.

    Says Fürst: “The very ancient name of God, Yâho, written in the
    Greek Ιαω, appears, apart _from its derivation_, to have been an
    old mystic name of the Supreme Deity of the Shemites. Hence it was
    told to Moses when he was initiated at Hor‐eb—the _Cave_—under the
    direction of Jethro, the Kenite (or Cainite) priest of Midian. In
    an old religion of the Chaldæans, whose remains are to be found
    among the Neo‐Platonists, the highest Divinity, enthroned above
    the seven Heavens, representing the Spiritual Light‐Principle, ...
    and also conceived of as Demiurgus,(1271) was called Ιαω (יהו),
    who was, like the Hebrew Yâho, mysterious and unmentionable, and
    whose name was communicated to the Initiated. The Phœnicians had a
    Supreme God, whose name was triliteral and _secret_, and he was
    Ιαω.”(1272)


The cross, say the Kabalists, repeating the lesson of the Occultists, is
one of the most ancient—nay, perhaps, the _most_ ancient of symbols. This
has been demonstrated at the very beginning of the Proem in Volume I. The
Eastern Initiates show it coëval with the circle of Deific Infinitude and
the first differentiation of the Essence, the union of Spirit and Matter.
This interpretation has been rejected, and the astronomical allegory alone
has been accepted and made to fit into cunningly imagined terrestrial
events.

Let us demonstrate this statement. In Astronomy, as said, Mercury is the
son of Cœlus and Lux—of the Sky and Light, or the Sun; in Mythology he is
the progeny of Jupiter and Maia. He is the “Messenger” of his Father
Jupiter, the Messiah of the Sun; in Greek, his name Hermes means, among
other things, the “Interpreter”—the Word, the Logos, or Verbum. Now
Mercury is born on Mount Cyllene among shepherds, and is the patron of the
latter. As a psychopompic Genius, he conducted the Souls of the Dead to
Hades and brought them back again, an office attributed to Jesus after his
Death and Resurrection. The symbols of Hermes‐Mercury (Dii Termini) were
placed along, and at the turning points of, highways, as crosses are now
placed in Italy, and they were _cruciform_.(1273) Every seventh day the
priests anointed these Termini with oil, and once a year hung them with
garlands, hence they were the _anointed_. Mercury, when speaking through
his oracles, says:


    I am he whom you call the Son of the Father [Jupiter] and Maia.
    Leaving the King of Heaven [the Sun] I come to help you, mortals.


Mercury heals the blind and restores sight, mental and physical.(1274) He
was often represented as three‐headed and called Tricephalus, Triplex, as
one with the Sun and Venus. Finally, Mercury, as Cornutus(1275) shows, was
sometimes figured under a cubic form, without arms, because “the power of
speech and eloquence can prevail without the assistance of arms or feet.”
It is this cubic form which connects the Termini directly with the cross,
and it is the eloquence or the power of speech of Mercury which made the
crafty Eusebius say, “Hermes is the emblem of the Word which creates and
interprets all,” for it is the Creative Word; and he shows Porphyry
teaching that the Speech of Hermes—now interpreted “Word of God” (!) in
_Pymander_—a Creative Speech (Verbum), is the Seminal Principle scattered
throughout the Universe.(1276) In Alchemy “Mercury” is the radical “Moyst”
Principle, Primitive or Elementary Water, containing the Seed of the
Universe, fecundated by the Solar Fires. To express this fecundating
principle, a phallus was often added to the cross (the male and female, or
the vertical and the horizontal united) by the Egyptians. The cruciform
Termini also represented this dual idea, which was found in Egypt in the
_cubic_ Hermes. The author of _Source of Measures_ tells us why.(1277)

As shown by him, the cube unfolded becomes in display a cross of the Tau,
or the Egyptian, form; or again, “the circle attached to the Tau gives the
ansated cross” of the old Pharaohs. They had known this from their priests
and their “King‐Initiates” for ages, and also what was meant by “the
attachment of a man to the cross,” which idea “was made to coördinate with
that of the origin of human life, and hence the _phallic form_.” Only the
latter came into action æons and ages after the idea of the Carpenter and
Artificer of the Gods, Vishva‐karmâ, crucifying the “Sun‐Initiate” on the
cruciform lathe. As the same author writes:


    _The attachment of a man to the cross_ ... was made use of in this
    form of display by the Hindûs.(1278)


But, it was made “to coördinate” with the idea of the new rebirth of man
by _spiritual_, not physical regeneration. The Candidate for Initiation
was attached to the Tau or astronomical cross with a far grander and
nobler idea than that of the origin of mere _terrestrial_ life.

On the other hand, the Semites seem to have had no other or higher purpose
in life than that of procreating their species. Thus, geometrically, and
according to the reading of the _Bible_ by means of the numerical method,
the author of _The Source of Measures_ is quite correct.


    The entire [Jewish] system seems to have been anciently regarded
    as one resting in nature, and one which was adopted by nature, or
    God, as the _basis or law_ of the exertion practically of creative
    power—_i.e._, it was the _creative design_, of which creation was
    practically the application. This seems to be established by the
    fact that, under the system set forth, measures of _planetary
    times_ serve coördinately as measures of the _size_ of planets,
    and of the peculiarity of their shapes—_i.e._, in the extension of
    their equatorial and polar diameters.... This system [that of
    creative design] seems to underlie the whole Biblical structure,
    as a foundation for its _ritualism_ and for its display of the
    works of the Deity in the way of _architecture_, by use of the
    sacred unit of measure in the Garden of Eden, the Ark of Noah, the
    Tabernacle, and the Temple of Solomon.(1279)


Thus, on the very showing of the defenders of this system, the Jewish
Deity is proved to be, at best, only the manifested Duad, never the One
Absolute All. Geometrically demonstrated, he is a _number_; symbolically,
a _euhemerized_ Priapus; and this can hardly satisfy a mankind thirsting
after the demonstration of real spiritual truths, and the possession of a
God with a divine, not anthropomorphic, nature. It is strange that the
most learned of modern Kabalists can see in the cross and circle nothing
but a symbol of the manifested _creative_ and _androgyne_ Deity in its
relation to, and interference with, this phenomenal world.(1280) One
author believes that:


    However man [read, the Jew and Rabbi] obtained knowledge of the
    practical measure, ... by which nature was thought to adjust the
    planets in size to harmonize with the notation of their movements,
    it seems he did obtain it, and esteemed its possession as the
    means of his realization of the Deity—that is, he approached _so
    nearly to a conception of a Being having a mind like his own_,
    only infinitely more powerful, as to be able to realize _a law of
    creation_ established by that Being, which must have existed prior
    to any creation (kabalistically called the Word).(1281)


This may have satisfied the practical _Semite_ mind, but the Eastern
Occultist has to decline the offer of such a God; indeed, a Deity, a
Being, “having a mind like that of man, only infinitely more powerful,” is
_no_ God that has any room _beyond_ the cycle of creation. He has nought
to do with the _ideal_ conception of the Eternal Universe. He is, at best,
one of the _subordinate creative_ powers, the Totality of which is called
the Sephiroth, the Heavenly Man, and Adam Kadmon, the Second Logos of the
Platonists.

This very same idea is clearly found at the bottom of the ablest
definitions of the _Kabalah_ and its mysteries, _e.g._, by John A. Parker,
as quoted in the same work:


    The key of the Kabala is _thought to be the geometrical relation
    of the area of the circle inscribed in the square_, or of the cube
    to the sphere, giving rise to the relation of diameter to
    circumference of a circle, with the numerical value of this
    relation expressed in integrals. The relation of diameter to
    circumference, being a supreme one connected with the god‐names
    Elohim and Jehovah (which terms are expressions numerically of
    these relations, respectively—the first being of circumference,
    the latter of diameter), embraces all other subordinations under
    it. Two expressions of circumference to diameter in integrals are
    used in the Bible: (1) The perfect, and (2) The imperfect. One of
    the relations between these is such that (2) subtracted from (1)
    will leave a _unit_ of a diameter value in terms, or in the
    denomination of the circumference value of the perfect circle, or
    a unit straight line having a perfect circular value, or a factor
    of circular value.(1282)


Such calculations can lead one no further than to unriddle the mysteries
of the _third_ stage of Evolution, or the “Third Creation of Brahmâ.” The
initiated Hindûs know how to “square the circle” far better than any
European. But of this more anon. The fact is that the Western Mystics
commence their speculation only at that stage when the Universe “falls
into matter,” as the Occultists say. Throughout the whole series of
kabalistic books we have not met with one sentence that would hint in the
remotest way at the psychological and spiritual, as well as at the
mechanical and _physiological_ secrets of “creation.” Shall we, then,
regard the evolution of the Universe as simply a prototype, on a gigantic
scale, of the act of procreation; as “divine” _phallicism_, and rhapsodize
on it as the evilly‐inspired author of a late work of this name has done?
The writer does not think so. And she feels justified in saying so, since
the most careful reading of the _Old Testament_—esoterically, as well as
exoterically—seems to have carried the most enthusiastic enquirers no
further than a certainty on mathematical grounds that from the first to
the last chapter of the _Pentateuch_ every scene, every character or event
are shown connected, directly or indirectly, with the _origin of birth_ in
its crudest and most brutal form. Thus, however interesting and ingenious
the rabbinical methods, the writer, in common with other Eastern
Occultists, must prefer those of the Pagans.

It is not, then, in the _Bible_ that we have to search for the origin of
the cross and circle, but beyond the Flood. Therefore, returning to
Éliphas Lévi and the _Zohar_, we answer for the Eastern Occultists and say
that, applying practice to principle, they agree entirely with Pascal, who
says that:


    God is a circle, the centre of which is everywhere and the
    circumference nowhere.


Whereas the Kabalists say the reverse, and maintain it, solely out of
their desire to veil their doctrine. By the way, the definition of Deity
by the circle is not Pascal’s at all, as Éliphas Lévi thought. It was
_borrowed_ by the French Philosopher from either Mercury Trismegistus or
Cardinal Cusa’s Latin work, _De Doctâ Ignorantiâ_, in which he makes use
of it. It is, moreover, disfigured by Pascal, who replaces the words
“Cosmic Circle,” which stand symbolically in the original inscription, by
the word Theos. With the Ancients both words were synonymous.



A. Cross And Circle.


In the minds of the ancient Philosophers something of the divine and the
mysterious has ever been ascribed to the shape of the circle. The old
world, consistent in its symbolism and with its Pantheistic intuitions,
uniting the visible and the invisible Infinitudes into one, represented
Deity and its outward Veil alike—by a circle. This merging of the two into
a unity, and the name Theos being given indifferently to both, is
explained, and becomes thereby still more _scientific_ and philosophical.
Plato’s etymological definition of the word _theos_ (θεός) has, been given
elsewhere. In his _Cratylus_, he derives it from the verb _the‐ein_
(θέειν), “to move,” as suggested by the motion of the heavenly bodies
which he connects with Deity. According to the Esoteric Philosophy, this
Deity, during its “Nights” and its “Days,” or Cycles of Rest and Activity,
is the “Eternal Perpetual Motion,” the “Ever‐Becoming, as well as the ever
universally Present, and the Ever‐Existing.” The latter is the root‐
abstraction; the former is the only possible conception in the human mind,
if it disconnects this Deity from any shape or form. It is a perpetual,
never‐ceasing evolution, circling back in its incessant progress through
æons of duration into its original status—Absolute Unity.

It was only the minor Gods who were made to carry the symbolical
attributes of the higher ones. Thus, the God Shoo, the personification of
Ra, who appears as the “Great Cat of the Basin of Persæa in An”(1283) was
often represented in the Egyptian monuments seated and holding a cross,
symbol of the four Quarters, or the Elements, attached to a circle.

In that very learned work, _The Natural Genesis_, by Gerald Massey, under
the heading, “Typology of the Cross,” there is more information to be had
on the cross and circle than in any other work we know of. He who would
fain have proofs of the antiquity of the cross is referred to these two
volumes. The author says:


    The circle and cross are inseparable.... The Crux Ansata unites
    the circle and cross of the four corners. From this origin the
    circle and the cross came to be interchangeable at times. For
    example, the Chakra, or Disk of Vishnu, is a circle. The name
    denotes the circling, wheeling round, periodicity, the wheel of
    time. This the god uses as a weapon to hurl at the enemy. In like
    manner, Thor throws his weapon, the Fylfot, a form of the four‐
    footed cross [Svastika], and a type of the four quarters. Thus the
    cross is equivalent to the circle of the year. The wheel emblem
    unites the cross and circle in one, as does the hieroglyphic cake
    and the Ankh‐tie ☥.(1284)


Nor was the double glyph sacred with the profane, but only with the
Initiates. For Raoul Rochette shows that:(1285)


    The sign ♀ occurs as the _reverse_ of a Phœnician coin, with a Ram
    as the obverse.... The same sign, sometimes called Venus’ Looking‐
    Glass, because it typified reproduction, was employed to mark the
    hind‐quarters of valuable brood mares of Corinthian and other
    beautiful breeds of horses.


This proves that so far back as those early days the cross had already
become the symbol of human procreation, and that oblivion of the _divine_
origin of cross and circle had begun.

Another form of the cross is given from the _Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society_:(1286)


    At each of the four corners is placed a quarter arc of an oviform
    curve, and when the four are put together they form an oval; thus
    the figure combines the cross with the circle round it in four
    parts, corresponding to the four corners of the cross. The four
    segments answer to the four feet of the Swastica cross and the
    Fylfot of Thor. The four‐leaved lotus flower of Buddha, is
    likewise figured at the centre of this cross, the lotus being an
    Egyptian and Hindu type of the four quarters. The four quarter
    arcs, if joined together, would form an ellipse, and the ellipse
    is also figured on each arm of the cross. This ellipse therefore
    denotes the path of the earth.... Sir J. Y. Simpson copied the
    following specimen, [Symbol: Oval, with large letter “Z” inside,
    with horizontal crossbar] which is here presented, as the cross of
    the two equinoxes and the two solstices placed within the figure
    of the earth’s path. The same ovoid or boat‐shaped figure appears
    at times in the Hindu drawings with seven steps at each end as a
    form or a mode of Meru.


This is the astronomical aspect of the double glyph. There are six more
aspects, however, and an attempt may be made to interpret a few of these.
The subject is so vast that it would require in itself alone many volumes.

But the most curious of these Egyptian symbols of cross and circle, spoken
of in the above cited work, is one which receives its full explanation and
final colour from Âryan symbols of the same nature. Says the author:


    The four‐armed Cross is simply the cross of the four quarters, but
    the cross‐sign is not always simple.(1287) This is a type that was
    developed from an identifiable beginning, which was adapted to the
    expression of various ideas afterwards. The most sacred cross of
    Egypt that was carried in the hands of the Gods, the Pharaohs, and
    the mummied dead, is the Ankh ☥ the sign of life, the living, an
    oath, the covenant.... The top of this is the hieroglyphic Ru
    [Symbol: Horizontal oval] set upright on the Tau‐cross. The Ru is
    the door, gate, mouth, the place of outlet. This denotes the
    _birthplace_ in the northern quarter of the heavens, from which
    the Sun is reborn. Hence the _Ru of the Ankh‐sign is the feminine
    type of the birthplace, representing the north_. It was in the
    _northern quarter_ that the Goddess of the Seven Stars, called the
    “Mother of the Revolutions,” gave birth to time in the earliest
    cycle of the year. The first sign of this primordial circle and
    cycle made in heaven is the earliest shape of the Ankh‐cross
    [Symbol: Horizontal oval with tail to the right], a mere loop
    which contains both a circle and the cross in one image. This loop
    or noose is carried in front of the oldest genitrix, _Typhon of
    the Great Bear_; as her _Ark_, the ideograph of a _period_, _an
    ending_, _a time_, shown to mean one revolution. This, then,
    represents the circle made in the northern heaven by the Great
    Bear which constituted the earliest year of time, from which fact
    we infer that the loop or Ru of the North represents that quarter,
    the birthplace of time when figured as the Ru of the Ankh symbol.
    Indeed this can be proved. The noose is an _Ark_ or _Rek_ type of
    reckoning. The Ru of the Ankh‐cross was continued in the Cypriote
    R, [Symbol: Circle with horizontal line beneath], and the Coptic
    Ro, [Symbol: Figure like a Rho].(1288) The Ro was carried into the
    Greek cross [Symbol: Large Greek Rho with letter Chi beneath it],
    which is formed of the Ro and Chi or _R‐k_.... The Rek, or Ark,
    was the sign of all beginning (_Arche_) on this account, and the
    Ark‐tie is the cross of the North, the hind part of heaven.(1289)


Now this, again, is entirely astronomical and phallic. The Paurânic
version in India gives the whole matter another colour. Without destroying
the above interpretation, it is made to reveal a portion of its mysteries
with the help of the astronomical key, and thus offers a more metaphysical
rendering. The Ankh‐tie [Symbol: Horizontal oval with tail to the right]
does not belong to Egypt alone. It exists under the name of Pâsha, a cord
which the four‐armed Shiva holds in the hand of his right back arm.(1290)
The Mahâdeva is represented in the posture of an ascetic, as Mahâyogî,
with his third eye [Symbol: Vertical oval with dot in the middle], which
is “the Ru [Symbol: Horizontal oval with dot in the middle], set upright
on the Tau‐cross” in another form. The Pâsha is held in the hand in such a
way that the first finger and hand near the thumb make the cross, or loop
and crossing. Our Orientalists would have it to represent a cord to bind
refractory offenders with, because, forsooth, Kâlî, Shiva’s consort, has
the same as an attribute!

The Pâsha has here a double significance, as also has Shiva’s Trisûla and
every other divine attribute. This dual significance lies in Shiva, for
Rudra has certainly the same meaning as the Egyptian Ansated Cross in its
cosmic and mystic meaning. In the hand of Shiva, the Pâsha becomes
lingyonic. Shiva, as said before, is a name unknown to the _Vedas_. It is
in the _White Yajur Veda_ that Rudra appears for the first time as the
Great God, Mahâdeva, whose symbol is the Lingam. In the _Rig Veda_ he is
called Rudra, the “howler,” the beneficent and the maleficent Deity at the
same time, the Healer and the Destroyer. In the _Vishnu Purâna_, he is the
God who springs from the forehead of Brahmâ, who separates into male and
female, and he is the parent of the Rudras or Maruts, half of whom are
brilliant and gentle, others, black and ferocious. In the _Vedas_, he is
the Divine Ego aspiring to return to its pure, deific state, and at the
same time that Divine Ego imprisoned in earthly form, whose fierce
passions make of him the “roarer,” the “terrible.” This is well shown in
the _Brihadâranyaka Upanishad_, wherein the Rudras, the progeny of Rudra,
God of Fire, are called the “ten vital breaths (_prâna_, life), with the
heart (_manas_), as eleventh,”(1291) whereas as Shiva, he is the
_destroyer_ of that life. Brahmâ calls him Rudra, and gives him, besides,
seven other names, signifying seven forms of manifestation, and also the
seven powers of nature which destroy but to recreate or regenerate.

Hence the cruciform noose, or Pâsha, in the hand of Shiva, when he is
represented as an ascetic, the Mahâyogin, has no phallic signification,
and, indeed, it requires an imagination strongly bent in this direction to
find such a signification even in an astronomical symbol. As an emblem of
“door, gate, mouth, the place of outlet” it signifies the “strait gate”
that leads to the Kingdom of Heaven, far more than the “birthplace” in a
physiological sense.

It is a cross in a circle and Crux Ansata, truly; but it is a cross on
which all the human passions have to be crucified before the Yogî passes
through the “strait gate,” the narrow circle that widens into an infinite
one, as soon as the Inner Man has passed the threshold.

As to the mysterious seven Rishis in the constellation of the Great Bear;
if Egypt made them sacred to “the oldest genitrix, Typhon,” India has
connected these symbols ages ago with Time or Yuga‐revolutions, and the
Saptarshis are intimately connected with our present age‐the dark Kali
Yuga.(1292) The great Circle of Time, on the face of which, Indian fancy
has represented the Porpoise, or Shishumâra, has the cross placed on it by
nature in its division and localization of stars, planets and
constellations. In _Bhâgavata Purâna_,(1293) it is said:


    At the _extremity of the tail of that animal, whose head is
    directed toward the south_, and whose body is _in the shape of a
    ring_ [circle], Dhruva [the ex‐pole star] is placed; _along its
    tail_ are Prajâpati, Agni, Indra, Dharma, etc.; _across its loins_
    the seven Rishis.(1294)


This is then the first and earliest cross and circle, formed by the Deity,
symbolized by Vishnu, the Eternal Circle of Boundless Time, Kâla, on whose
plane lie crossways all the Gods, creatures, and creations born in Space
and Time‐who, as the Philosophy has it, all die at the Mahâpralaya.

Meanwhile it is the seven Rishis who mark the time and the duration of
events in our septenary Life‐cycle. They are as mysterious as their
supposed wives, the Pleiades, of whom only one‐she who hides‐has proven
virtuous. The Pleiades, or Krittikâs, are the nurses of Kârttikeya, the
God of War (the Mars of the Western Pagans), who is called the Commander
of the Celestial Armies, or rather of the Siddhas—Siddha‐sena (translated
Yogîs in Heaven, and holy Sages on the Earth)—which would make Kârttikeya
identical with Michael, the “Leader of the Celestial Hosts” and, like
himself, a virgin Kumâra.(1295) Verily he is the Guha, the “Mysterious
One,” as much so as are the Saptarshis and the Krittikâs, the seven Rishis
and the Pleiades, for the interpretation of all these combined reveal to
the Adept the greatest mysteries of Occult Nature. One point is worth
mention in this question of cross and circle, as it bears strongly upon
the elements of Fire and Water, which play such an important part in the
circle and cross symbolism. Like Mars, who is alleged by Ovid to have been
born of his mother Juno alone, without the participation of a father, or
like the Avatâras (Krishna, for instance)—in the West as in the
East—Kârttikeya is born, but in a still more miraculous manner, begotten
by neither father nor mother, but out of a seed of Rudra‐Shiva, which was
cast into the Fire (Agni) and then received by the Water (Ganges). Thus he
is born from Fire and Water—a “boy bright as the Sun and beautiful as the
Moon.” Hence he is called Agnibhû (son of Agni) and Gangâputra (son of
Ganges). Add to this the fact that the Krittikâ, his nurses, as the
_Matsya Purâna_ shows, are presided over by Agni, or, in the authentic
words, “the seven Rishis are on a line with the brilliant Agni,” and hence
“Krittika has Âgneya as a synonym”(1296)—and the connection is easy to
follow.

It is, then, the Rishis who mark the time and the periods of Kali Yuga,
the age of sin and sorrow. As the _Bhâgavata Purâna_ tells us:


    When the splendour of Vishnu, named Krishna, departed for heaven,
    then did the Kali age, during which men delight in sin, invade the
    world....

    When the seven Rishis were in Maghâ, the Kali age, comprising
    1,200 [divine] years [432,000 common years] began; and, when, from
    Maghâ, they shall reach Pûrvâshâdhâ, then will this Kali age
    attain its growth, under Nanda and his successors.(1297)


This is the revolution of the Rishis—


    When the two first stars of the seven Rishis (the Great Bear) rise
    in the heavens, and some lunar asterism is seen at night, at an
    equal distance between them, then the seven Rishis continue
    stationary in that conjunction for a hundred years,


—as a hater of Nanda makes Parâshara say. According to Bentley, it was in
order to show the quantity of the precession of the equinoxes that this
notion originated among the Astronomers.


    This was by assuming an imaginary line, or great circle, passing
    through the poles of the ecliptic and the beginning of the fixed
    Maghâ, which circle was supposed to cut some of the stars in the
    Great Bear.... The seven stars in the Great Bear being called the
    Rishis, the circle so assumed was called the line of the Rishis;
    and, being invariably fixed to the beginning of the lunar asterism
    Maghâ, the precession would be noted by stating the degree, etc.,
    of any movable lunar mansion cut by that line or circle, as an
    index.(1298)


There has been, and there still exists, a seemingly endless controversy
about the chronology of the Hindûs. Here is, however, a point that could
help to determine—approximately at least—the age when the symbolism of the
seven Rishis and their connection with the Pleiades began. When Kârttikeya
was delivered to the Krittikâ by the Gods to be nursed, they were only
six, whence Kârttikeya is represented with _six_ heads; but when the
poetical fancy of the early Âryan Symbologists made of them the consorts
of the seven Rishis, they were _seven_. Their names are given, and these
are Amba, Dulâ, Nitatui, Abrayanti, Maghâyanti, Varshayanti, and
Chupunika. There are other sets of names which differ, however. Anyhow,
the seven Rishis were made to marry the seven Krittikâ before the
disappearance of the seventh Pleiad. Otherwise, how could the Hindû
astronomers speak of a star which no one can see without the help of the
strongest telescopes? This is why, perhaps, in every such case the
majority of the events described in the Hindû allegories is fixed upon as
“a very recent invention, certainly _within_ the Christian era.”

The oldest Sanskrit MSS. on Astronomy begin their series of Nakshatras,
the twenty‐seven lunar asterisms, with the sign of Krittikâ, and this can
hardly make them earlier than 2,780 B.C. This is according to the “Vedic
Calendar,” which is accepted even by the Orientalists, though they get out
of the difficulty by saying that the said Calendar does not _prove_ that
the Hindûs knew anything of Astronomy at that date, and assure their
readers that, Calendars notwithstanding, the Indian Pandits may have
acquired their knowledge of the lunar mansions headed by Krittikâ from the
Phœnicians, etc. However that may be, the Pleiades are the central group
of the system of sidereal symbology. They are situated in the neck of the
constellation Taurus, regarded by Mädler and others, in Astronomy, as the
_central group_ of the system of the Milky Way, and in the _Kabalah_ and
Eastern Esotericism, as the _sidereal septenate_ born from the first
manifested side of the upper triangle, the concealed [triangle]. This
manifested side is Taurus, the symbol of One (the figure 1), or of the
first letter of the Hebrew alphabet, Aleph (א) “bull” or “ox,” whose
synthesis is Ten (10), or Yod (י), the perfect letter and number. The
Pleiades (Alcyone, especially), are thus considered, even in Astronomy, as
the central point around which _our universe of fixed stars revolves_, the
focus from which, and into which, the Divine Breath, Motion, works
incessantly during the Manvantara. Hence, in the sidereal symbols of the
Occult Philosophy, it is this circle with the starry cross on its face
which plays the most prominent part.

The Secret Doctrine teaches us that everything in the Universe, as well as
the Universe itself, is formed (“created”) during its periodical
manifestations—by accelerated Motion set into activity by the Breath of
the Ever‐to‐be‐unknown Power—unknown to present mankind, at any
rate—within the phenomenal world. The Spirit of Life and Immortality was
everywhere symbolized by a circle; hence the serpent biting its tail,
represents the Circle of Wisdom in Infinity; as does the astronomical
cross—the cross within a circle—and the globe, with two wings added to it,
which then became the sacred Scarabæus of the Egyptians, its very name
being suggestive of the secret idea attached to it. For the Scarabæus is
called in the Egyptian papyri, Khopirron and Khopri from the verb
_khopron_, “to become,” and has thus been made a symbol and an emblem of
human life and of the successive “becomings” of man, through the various
peregrinations and metempsychoses, or reïncarnations, of the liberated
soul. This mystical symbol shows plainly that the Egyptians believed in
reïncarnation and the successive lives and existences of the Immortal
Entity. As this, however, was an Esoteric Doctrine, revealed only during
the Mysteries, by the Priest‐hierophants and the King‐initiates to the
Candidates, it was kept secret. The Incorporeal Intelligences (the
Planetary Spirits, or Creative Powers) were always represented under the
form of circles. In the primitive Philosophy of the Hierophants these
_invisible_ circles were the prototypic causes and builders of all the
heavenly orbs, which were their _visible_ bodies or coverings, and of
which they were the souls. It was certainly a universal teaching in
antiquity.(1299) As Proclus says:


    Before the mathematical numbers, there are the _self‐moving_
    numbers; before the figures apparent—the vital figures, and before
    producing the material worlds _which move in a circle_, the
    Creative Power produced the _invisible_ circles.(1300)


“_Deus enim et circulus est_,” says Pherecydes, in his Hymn to Jupiter.
This was a Hermetic axiom, and Pythagoras prescribed such a circular
prostration and posture during the hours of contemplation. “The devotee
must approach as much as possible the form of a perfect circle,”
prescribes the Secret Book. Numa tried to spread the same custom among the
people, Pierius tells his readers; and Pliny says:


    During our worship, we roll up, so to say, our body in a
    ring—_totum corpus circumagimur_.(1301)


The Vision of the prophet Ezekiel reminds one forcibly of this mysticism
of the circle, when he beheld a “whirlwind” from which came out “one
_wheel_ upon the earth” whose work “_was_ as it were a wheel in the middle
of a wheel”—“for the spirit of the living creature _was_ in the
wheels.”(1302)

“[_Spirit_] whirleth about continually, and ... returneth again according
to his circuits”—says Solomon,(1303) who is made in the English
_translation_ to speak of the “wind,” and in the original text to refer
both to the _spirit_ and the _sun_. But the _Zohar_, the only true gloss
of the Kabalistic Preacher—in explanation of this verse, which is,
perhaps, rather hazy and difficult to comprehend—says:


    It seems to say that the sun moves in circuits, whereas it refers
    to the Spirit _under the sun_, called the Holy Spirit, that moves
    circularly, toward both sides, that they [It and the sun] _should
    be united in the same Essence_.(1304)


The Brâhmanical “Golden Egg,” from within which emerges Brahmâ, the
Creative Deity, is the “Circle with the Central Point” of Pythagoras, and
its fitting symbol. In the Secret Doctrine the concealed Unity—whether
representing Parabrahman, or the “Great Extreme” of Confucius, or the
Deity concealed by Phtah, the Eternal Light, or again the Jewish Ain Suph,
is always found to be symbolized by a circle or the “nought” (absolute No‐
Thing and Nothing, because it is Infinite and the All); while the God‐
manifested (by its works) is referred to as the Diameter of that Circle.
The symbolism of the underlying idea is thus made evident: the right line
passing through the centre of a circle has, in the geometrical sense,
length, but neither breadth nor thickness; it is an imaginary and feminine
symbol, crossing eternity, and made to rest on the plane of existence _of
the phenomenal world_. It is _dimensional_, whereas its circle is
dimensionless, or, to use an algebraical term, it is the dimension of an
equation. Another way of symbolizing the idea is found in the Pythagorean
sacred Decad which synthesizes, in the dual numeral Ten (the one and a
circle or cipher), the Absolute All manifesting itself in the Word or
Generative Power of Creation.



B. The Fall Of The Cross Into Matter.


Those who would feel inclined to argue upon this Pythagorean symbol by
objecting that it is not yet ascertained, so far, at what period of
antiquity the nought or cipher occurs for the first time—especially in
India—are referred to _Isis Unveiled_.(1305)

Admitting for argument’s sake that the ancient world was not acquainted
with our modes of calculation or Arabic figures—though in reality we know
it was—yet the circle and diameter idea is there to show that it was the
first symbol in Cosmogony. Before the Trigrams of Fo‐hi, Yang, the unity,
and Yin, the binary, explained cunningly enough by Éliphas Lévi,(1306)
China had her Confucius, and her Tao‐ists. The former circumscribes the
“Great Extreme” within a circle with a horizontal line across; the latter
place three concentric circles beneath the great circle, while the Sung
Sages showed the “Great Extreme” in an upper circle, and Heaven and Earth
in two lower and smaller circles. The Yangs and the Yins are a far later
invention. Plato and his school never understood the Deity otherwise,
notwithstanding the many epithets applied by him to the “God over all” (ὁ
ἐπὶ πᾶσι θεός). Plato, having been initiated, could not believe in a
personal God—a gigantic shadow of man. His epithets of “Monarch” and “Law‐
giver of the Universe” bear an abstract meaning well understood by every
Occultist, who, no less than any Christian, believes in the One Law that
governs the Universe, and recognizes it at the same time as immutable. As
Plato says:


    Beyond all _finite_ existences and _secondary_ causes, all laws,
    ideas and principles, there is an Intelligence or Mind (νοῦς), the
    first principle of all principles, the Supreme Idea on which all
    other ideas are grounded, ... the _ultimate_ substance _from which
    all things derive their being and essence_, the First and
    efficient Cause of all the order, and harmony, and beauty and
    excellency, and goodness, which pervade the Universe.


This Mind is called, by way of preëminence and excellence, the Supreme
Good,(1307) “The God” (ὁ θεός), and the “God over all.” These words apply,
as Plato himself shows, neither to the “Creator” nor to the “Father” of
our modern Monotheist, but to the _Ideal_ and Abstract Cause. For, as he
says: “This θεός, the God over all, _is not the truth or the
intelligence_, but the Father of it,” and its Primal Cause. Is it Plato,
the greatest pupil of the archaic Sages, a Sage himself, for whom there
was but a single object of attainment in this life—Real Knowledge—who
would have ever believed in a Deity that curses and damns men for ever, on
the slightest provocation?(1308) Surely not he who considered only those
to be genuine Philosophers and students of truth who possessed the
knowledge of the _really‐existing_ in opposition to mere seeming; of the
_always‐existing_ in opposition to the transitory: and of that which
exists _permanently_ in opposition to that which waxes, wanes, and is
developed and destroyed alternately.(1309) Speusippus and Xenocrates
followed in his footsteps. The One, the original, had no _existence_, in
the sense applied to it by mortal men. The τίμιον (the honoured) dwells in
the centre as in the circumference, but it is only _the reflection_ of the
Deity—the World Soul(1310)—the plane of the surface of the circle. The
cross and circle are a universal conception—as old as the human mind
itself. They stand foremost on the list of the long series of, so to say,
international symbols, which expressed very often great scientific truths,
besides their direct bearing upon psychological, and even physiological
mysteries.

It is no explanation to say, as does Éliphas Lévi, that God, the universal
Love, having caused the male Unit to dig an abyss in the female Binary, or
Chaos, thereby produced the world. In addition to the grossness of the
conception, it does not remove the difficulty of conceiving it without
losing one’s veneration for the rather too human‐like ways of the Deity.
It is to avoid such anthropomorphic conceptions that the Initiates never
used the epithet “God” to designate the One and Secondless Principle in
the Universe; and that—faithful in this to the oldest traditions of the
Secret Doctrine the world over—they deny that such imperfect and often not
very clean work could ever be produced by Absolute Perfection. There is no
need to mention here other still greater metaphysical difficulties.
Between speculative Atheism and idiotic Anthropomorphism there must be a
philosophical mean, and a reconciliation. The Presence of the Unseen
Principle throughout all Nature, and the highest manifestation of it on
Earth—Man, can alone help to solve the problem, which is that of the
mathematician whose _x_ must ever elude the grasp of our terrestrial
algebra. The Hindûs have tried to solve it by their Avatâras, the
Christians _think_ they have done so—by their one divine Incarnation.
Exoterically—both are wrong; Esoterically both of them are very near the
truth. Alone, among the Apostles of the Western religion, Paul seems to
have fathomed—if not actually revealed—the archaic mystery of the cross.
As for the rest of those who, by unifying and individualizing the
Universal Presence, have synthesized it into one symbol—the central point
in the crucifix—they show thereby that they have never seized the true
spirit of the teaching of Christ, but rather that they have degraded it in
more than one way by their erroneous interpretations. They have forgotten
the spirit of that universal symbol and have selfishly monopolized it—as
though the Boundless and the Infinite could ever be limited and
conditioned to one manifestation individualized in one man, or even in a
nation!

The four arms of the [Symbol: cross like the letter “X”], or decussated
cross, and of the Hermetic cross, pointing to the four cardinal
points—were well understood by the mystical minds of the Hindûs, Brâhmans
and Buddhists, hundreds of years before it was heard of in Europe, for
that symbol was and is found all over the world. They bent the ends of the
cross and made of it their Svastika, 卐 now the Wan of the Mongolian
Buddhist.(1311) It implies that the “central point” is not limited to one
individual, however perfect; that The Principle (God) is in Humanity, and
Humanity, as all the rest, is in It, like drops of water are in the ocean,
the four ends being toward the four cardinal points, hence losing
themselves in infinity.

Isarim, an Initiate, is said to have found at Hebron, on the _dead body_
of Hermes, the well known Smaragdine Tablet, which, it is said, contained
the essence of Hermetic Wisdom. Upon it were traced, among others, the
sentences:


    Separate the earth from the fire, the subtile from the gross....

    Ascend ... from the earth to heaven and then descend again to
    earth.


The _riddle_ of the cross is contained in these words, and its double
mystery is solved—to the Occultist.


    The philosophical cross, the two lines running in opposite
    directions, the horizontal and the perpendicular, the height and
    breadth, which the geometrizing Deity divides at the intersecting
    point, and which forms the magical as well as the scientific
    quaternary, when it is inscribed within the perfect square, is the
    basis of the Occultist. Within its mystical precinct lies the
    master‐key which opens the door of every science, physical as well
    as spiritual. It symbolizes our human existence, for the circle of
    life circumscribes the four points of the cross, which represent
    in succession, birth, life, death, and _immortality_.(1312)

    “Attach thyself,” says the Alchemist, “to the four letters of the
    tetragram disposed in the following manner. The letters of the
    ineffable name are there, although thou mayest not discern them at
    first. The incommunicable axiom is kabalistically contained
    therein, and this is what is called the magic arcanum by the
    masters.”(1313)


Again:


    The Tau, Τ, and the astronomical cross of Egypt, [Symbol: Circle
    with cross within] are conspicuous in several apertures of the
    remains of Palenque. In one of the _basso‐relievos_ of the Palace
    of Palenque, on the west side, sculptured as a hieroglyphic right
    under the seated figure, is a Tau. The standing figure, which
    leans over the first one, is in the act of covering its head with
    the left hand with the veil of initiation; while it extends its
    right with the index and middle finger pointing to heaven. The
    position is precisely that of a Christian bishop giving his
    blessing, or the one in which Jesus is often represented while at
    the Last Supper.(1314)


The Egyptian Hierophant had a square head‐dress which he had to wear
always during his functions. These square hats are worn unto this day by
the Armenian priests. The perfect Tau—formed of the perpendicular
(descending male ray) and the horizontal line (Matter, female
principle)—and the mundane circle were attributes of Isis, and it was only
at death that the Egyptian cross was laid on the breast of the mummy. The
claim that the cross is purely a Christian symbol introduced after our
era, is strange indeed, when we find Ezekiel stamping the foreheads of the
men of Judah who feared the Lord,(1315) with the _signum Thau_, as it is
translated in the Vulgate. In the ancient Hebrew this sign was formed thus
[Symbol: Cross, tilted towards the northeast], but in the original
Egyptian hieroglyphics as a perfect Christian cross ☦ (Tat, the emblem of
stability). In the _Revelation_, also, the “Alpha and Omega”—Spirit and
Matter—the first and the last, stamps the name of his Father on the
foreheads of the _elect_. Moses(1316) orders his people to mark their
_door‐posts_ and _lintels_ with blood, lest the “Lord God” should make a
mistake and smite some of his chosen people, instead of the doomed
Egyptians. And this mark is a Tau!—the identical Egyptian handled cross,
with the half of which talisman Horus raised the dead, as is shown on a
sculptured ruin at Philæ.

Enough has been said in the text about the Svastika and the Tau. Verily
may the cross be traced back into the very depths of the unfathomable
archaic ages! Its mystery deepens rather than clears, as we find it on the
statues of Easter Island, in old Egypt, in Central Asia, engraved on rocks
as the Tau and Svastika, in Pre‐Christian Scandinavia, everywhere! The
author of the _Source of Measures_ stands perplexed before the endless
shadow it throws back into antiquity, and is unable to trace it to any
particular nation or man. He shows the Targums handed down by the Hebrews,
obscured by translation. In _Joshua_(1317) read in Arabic, and in the
_Targum of Jonathan_, it is said: “The king of Ai he _crucified_ upon a
tree.”


    The Septuagint rendering is of suspension from a _double word_ or
    _cross_. (Wordsworth on Joshua.) ... The strangest expression of
    this kind is in _Numbers_ (xxv. 4) where, by Onkelos (?) it is
    read: “_Crucify them before the Lord (Jehovah) against the sun_.”
    The word here is יקע, _to nail to_, rendered properly (Fuerst) by
    the Vulgate, _to crucify_. The very construction of this sentence
    is mystic.(1318)


So it is, but the spirit of it has been ever misunderstood. “To crucify
before (not against) the Sun” is a phrase used of Initiation. It comes
from Egypt, and primarily from India. The enigma can be unriddled only by
searching for its key in the Mysteries of Initiation. The Initiated Adept,
who had successfully passed through all the trials, was _attached_, not
_nailed_, but simply tied on a couch in the form of a Tau, Τ, in Egypt, of
a Svastika without the four additional prolongations (☩ not 卐) in India,
plunged in a deep sleep—the “Sleep of Siloam,” as it is called to this day
among the Initiates in Asia Minor, in Syria, and even higher Egypt. He was
allowed to remain in this state for three days and three nights, during
which time his Spiritual Ego was said to “confabulate” with the “Gods,”
descend into Hades, Amenti, or Pâtâla—according to the country—and do
works of charity to the invisible Beings, whether Souls of men or
Elemental Spirits; his body remaining all the time in a temple crypt or
subterranean cave. In Egypt it was placed in the Sarcophagus in the King’s
Chamber of the Pyramid of Cheops, and carried during the night of the
approaching third day to the entrance of a gallery, where at a certain
hour the beams of the rising Sun struck full on the face of the entranced
Candidate, who awoke to be initiated by Osiris and Thoth, the God of
Wisdom.

Let the reader who doubts the statement consult the Hebrew originals
before he denies. Let him turn to some most suggestive Egyptian _bas
reliefs_. One especially from the temple of Philæ, represents a _scene of
initiation_. Two God‐Hierophants, one with the head of a hawk (the Sun),
the other ibis‐headed (Mercury, Thoth, the God of Wisdom and Secret
Learning, the assessor of Osiris‐Sun), are standing over the body of a
Candidate just initiated. They are in the act of pouring on his head a
double stream of “water” (the Water of Life and of New‐birth), the streams
being interlaced in the shape of a cross and full of small ansated
crosses. This is allegorical of the awakening of the Candidate who is now
an Initiate, when the beams of the morning Sun, Osiris, strike the crown
of his head; his entranced body being placed on its wooden Tau so as to
receive the rays. Then appeared the Hierophant‐Initiators, and the
sacramental words were pronounced, ostensibly to the Sun‐Osiris, in
reality to the Spirit‐Sun within, enlightening the newly‐born man.

Let the reader meditate on the connection of the Sun with the cross from
the highest antiquity, in both its generative and spiritually regenerative
capacities. Let him examine the tomb of Bait‐Oxly, in the reign of Ramses
II, where he will find the crosses in every shape and position; as also on
the throne of that sovereign, and finally on a fragment representing the
adoration of Bakhan‐Alearé, from the Hall of the ancestors of Totmes III,
now preserved in the National Library of Paris. In this extraordinary
sculpture and painting one sees the disk of the Sun beaming upon an
ansated cross placed upon a cross of which those of the Calvary are
perfect copies. The ancient MSS. mention these as the “hard couches of
those who were in [spiritual] travail, the _act of giving birth to
themselves_.” A quantity of such cruciform “couches,” on which the
Candidate, thrown into a dead trance at the end of his supreme Initiation,
was placed and secured, were found in the underground halls of the
Egyptian Temples after their destruction. The worthy and holy Fathers of
the Cyril and Theophilus types used them freely, believing they had been
brought and concealed there by some new converts. Alone Origen, and after
him Clemens Alexandrinus and other ex‐initiates, knew better. But they
preferred to keep silent.

Again, let the reader read the Hindû “fables,” as the Orientalists call
them, and remember the allegory of Vishvakarmâ, the Creative Power, the
Great Architect of the World, called in the _Rig Veda_ the “All‐seeing
God,” who “sacrifices himself to himself.” The Spiritual Egos of mortals
are his own essence, _one with him_, therefore. Remember that he is called
Deva‐vardhika, the “Builder of the Gods,” and that it is he who ties the
Sun, Sûrya, his son‐in‐law, on his lathe—in the exoteric allegory, but on
the Svastika, in Esoteric tradition, for on Earth he is the Hierophant‐
Initiator—and cuts away a portion of his brightness. Vishvakarmâ, remember
again, is the son of Yoga‐siddhâ, _i.e._, the holy power of Yoga, and the
fabricator of the “fiery weapon,” the magic Agneyastra.(1319) The
narrative is given more fully elsewhere.

The author of the kabalistic work so often quoted from, asks:


    The theoretical use of crucifixion then, must have been somehow
    connected with the personification of this symbol [the structure
    of the Garden of Paradise symbolized by a crucified man]. But how?
    And as showing what? The symbol was of the origin of measures,
    shadowing forth _creative law_ or _design_. What, practically, as
    regards humanity, could actual crucifixion betoken? Yet, that it
    was held as the effigy of some mysterious working of the same
    system, is shown from the very fact of the use. There seems to be
    deep below deep as to the mysterious workings of these number
    values—[the symbolization of the connection of 113: 355, with
    20612: 6561, by a _crucified man_]. Not only are they shown to
    work in the cosmos but, ... by sympathy, they seem to work out
    conditions relating to an unseen and spiritual world, and the
    prophets seem to have held knowledge of the connecting links.
    Reflection becomes more involved when it is considered that, the
    power of expression of the law, _exactly_, by numbers clearly
    defining a system, was not the _accident_ of the language, but was
    its very _essence_, and of its _primary organic construction_;
    therefore, neither the language, nor the mathematical system
    attaching to it, could be of man’s invention, unless both were
    _founded upon a prior language which afterwards became
    obsolete_.(1320)


The author proves these points by further elucidation, and reveals the
secret meaning of more than one dead‐letter narrative, by showing that
probably, איש, _man_, was the _primordial_ word:


    The very first word possessed by the Hebrews, whoever they were,
    to carry the idea, by sound, of _a man_. The _essential_ of this
    word was 113 [the numerical value of that word] from the
    beginning, and carried with it the elements of the cosmical system
    displayed.(1321)


This is demonstrated by the Hindû Vittoba, a form of Vishnu, as has
already been stated. The figure of Vittoba, even to the nail‐marks on the
feet,(1322) is that of _Jesus crucified_, in all its details save the
cross. That _man_ was meant is proved to us further by the fact of the
Initiate being _reborn_ after his _crucifixion_ on the _Tree of Life_.
This “Tree” has now become exoterically—through its use by the Romans as
an instrument of torture and the ignorance of the early Christian
schemers—the _tree of death_!

Thus, one of the seven Esoteric meanings intended by this mystery of
crucifixion by the mystic inventors of the system—the original elaboration
and adoption of which dates back to the very establishment of the
Mysteries—is discovered in the geometrical symbols containing the history
of the evolution of man. The Hebrews—whose prophet Moses was so learned in
the Esoteric Wisdom of Egypt, and who adopted their numerical system from
the Phœnicians, and later from the Gentiles, from whom also they borrowed
most of their Kabalistic Mysticism—most ingeniously adapted the cosmic and
anthropological symbols of the “Heathen” nations to their peculiar
_secret_ records. If Christian sacerdotalism has lost the key of this to‐
day, the early compilers of the Christian Mysteries were well versed in
Esoteric Philosophy and the Hebrew Occult Metrology, and used it
dexterously. Thus they took the word Aish, one of the Hebrew word‐forms
for _man_, and used it in conjunction with that of Shânâh or _lunar year_,
so mystically connected with the name of Jehovah, the supposed “Father” of
Jesus, and embosomed the mystic idea in an astronomical value and formula.

The original idea of the “man crucified” in space certainly belongs to the
ancient Hindûs. Moor shows this in his _Hindû Pantheon_ in the engraving
that represents Vittoba. Plato adopted it in his decussated cross in
space, the [Symbol: cross like the letter “X”], the “second God who
impressed himself on the universe in the form of the cross”; Krishna is
likewise shown “crucified.”(1323) Again it is repeated in the _Old
Testament_ in the queer injunction to crucify men before the Lord, the
Sun—which is no prophecy at all, but has a direct phallic significance. In
that same most suggestive work on the kabalistic meanings, we read again:


    In symbol, the nails of the cross have for the shape of the heads
    thereof a solid pyramid, and a tapering square obeliscal shaft, or
    phallic emblem, for the nail. Taking the position of the _three_
    nails in the man’s extremities and on the cross, they form or mark
    a _triangle_ in shape, one nail being at each corner of the
    triangle. The wounds, or _stigmata_, in the extremities are
    necessarily _four_, designative of the _square_.... The three
    nails with the three wounds are in number 6, which denotes the 6
    faces of the cube _unfolded_ [which make the cross or man‐form, or
    7, counting three horizontal and four vertical squares], on which
    the man is placed; and this in turn points to the circular measure
    transferred on to the edges of the cube. The _one_ wound of the
    feet separates into _two_ when the feet are separated, making
    _three_ together _for all_, and _four when separated_, or 7 in
    all—another and _most holy_ [_with the Jews_] feminine base
    number.(1324)


Thus, while the phallic or sexual meaning of the “crucifixion nails” is
proven by the geometrical and numerical reading, its mystical meaning is
indicated by the short remarks upon it, as given above, in its connection
with, and bearing upon, Prometheus. He is another victim, for he is
crucified on the Cross of Love, on the rock of human passions, a sacrifice
to his devotion to the cause of the spiritual element in Humanity.

Now, the primordial system, the double glyph that underlies the idea of
the cross, is not of “human invention,” for Cosmic Ideation and the
spiritual representation of the Divine Ego‐man are at its basis. Later, it
expanded into the beautiful idea adopted by, and represented in, the
Mysteries, that of regenerated man, the mortal, who, by crucifying the man
of flesh and his passions on the Procrustean bed of torture, became reborn
as an Immortal. Leaving the body, the animal‐man, behind him, tied on the
Cross of Initiation like an empty chrysalis, the Ego‐Soul became as free
as a butterfly. Still later, owing to the gradual loss of spirituality,
the cross became in Cosmogony and Anthropology no higher than a _phallic
symbol_.

With the Esotericists from the remotest times, the Universal Soul or Anima
Mundi, the material reflection of the Immaterial Ideal, was the Source of
Life of all beings and of the Life‐Principle of the three kingdoms. This
was _septenary_ with the Hermetic Philosophers, as with all Ancients. For
it is represented as a sevenfold cross, whose branches are respectively,
_light_, _heat_, _electricity_, _terrestrial magnetism_, _astral
radiation_, _motion_, and _intelligence_, or what some call self‐
consciousness.

As we have said elsewhere, long before the cross or its sign were adopted
as symbols of Christianity, the sign of the cross was used as a mark of
recognition among Adepts and Neophytes, the latter being called
Chrests—from Chrestos, the man of tribulation and sorrow. Says Éliphas
Lévi:


    The sign of the cross adopted by the Christians does not belong to
    them exclusively. It is also kabalistic, and represents the
    opposition and quaternary equilibrium of the elements. We see by
    the occult verse of the _Paternoster_ ... that there were
    originally two ways of doing it, or, at least _two_ very different
    formulas to express its meaning: one reserved for the priests and
    initiates; the other given to neophytes and the profane. Thus, for
    example, the initiate, carrying his hand to his forehead, said,
    _To thee_; then he added, _belong_; and continued, carrying his
    hand to the breast, _the kingdom_; then to the left shoulder,
    _justice_; to the right shoulder, _and mercy_. Then he joined the
    two hands, adding, _throughout the generating cycles—Tibi sunt
    Malchut et Geburah et Chesed per Æonas_—an absolutely and
    magnificently kabalistic sign of the cross, which the profanations
    of Gnosticism made the militant and official Church completely
    _lose_.(1325)


The “militant and official Church” did more: having helped herself to what
had never belonged to her, she took only that which the “Profane” had—the
kabalistic meaning of the _male_ and _female_ Sephiroth. She never lost
the _inner_ and higher meaning since she never had it—Éliphas Lévi’s
pandering to Rome notwithstanding. The sign of the cross adopted by the
Latin Church was _phallic_ from the beginning, while that of the Greeks
was the cross of the Neophytes, the Chrestoi.




Section IX. The Upanishads in Gnostic Literature.


We are reminded in King’s _Gnostics and their Remains_ that the Greek
language had but one word for _vowel_ and _voice_. This has led the
uninitiated to many erroneous interpretations. On the simple knowledge,
however, of this well‐known fact a comparison may be attempted, and a
flood of light thrown upon several mystic meanings. Thus the words, so
often used in the _Upanishads_ and the _Purânas_, “Sound” and “Speech,”
may be collated with the Gnostic “Vowels” and the “Voices” of the Thunders
and Angels in _Revelation_. The same will be found in _Pistis Sophia_, and
other ancient Fragments and MSS. This was remarked even by the matter‐of‐
fact author of the above mentioned work.

Through Hippolytus, an early Church Father, we learn what Marcus—a
Pythagorean rather than a Christian Gnostic, and a Kabalist most
certainly—had received in mystic revelation. It is said that Marcus had it
revealed unto him that:


    The _seven heavens_(1326) ... sounded each one vowel, which, all
    combined together, formed a single doxology, “the _sound_ whereof
    being carried down [from these seven heavens] to earth, becomes
    the creator and parent of all things that be on earth.”(1327)


Translated from the Occult phraseology into still plainer language this
would read: The Sevenfold Logos having differentiated into seven Logoi, or
Creative Potencies (Vowels), these (the Second Logos, or “Sound”) created
all on Earth.

Assuredly one who is acquainted with Gnostic literature can hardly help
seeing in St. John’s _Apocalypse_, a work of the same school of thought.
For we find John saying:


    Seven thunders uttered their voices ... [and] I was about to write
    ... [but] I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up
    those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them
    not.(1328)


The same injunction is given to Marcus, the same to all other _semi_ and
_full_ Initiates. The very sameness of the expressions used, and of the
underlying ideas, always betrays a portion of the Mysteries. We must
always seek for more than one meaning in every mystery allegorically
revealed, especially in those in which the number seven and its
multiplication seven by seven, or forty‐nine, appear. Now when, in _Pistis
Sophia_, the Rabbi Jesus is requested by his disciples to reveal to them
the “Mysteries of the Light of his Father”—_i.e._, of the Higher Self
enlightened by Initiation and Divine Knowledge—Jesus answers:


    Do ye seek after these mysteries? No mystery is more excellent
    than they; which shall bring your souls unto the Light of Lights,
    unto the place of Truth and Goodness, unto the place where there
    is neither male nor female, neither form in that place but Light,
    everlasting, not to be uttered. Nothing therefore is more
    excellent than the mysteries which ye seek after, _saving only the
    mystery of the seven Vowels and their forty and nine Powers_, and
    their numbers thereof. And no name is more excellent than all
    these (Vowels).(1329)


As says the Commentary, speaking of the “Fires”:

_The Seven Fathers and the Forty‐nine Sons blaze in Darkness, but they are
the Life and Light and the continuation thereof through the Great Age._

Now it becomes evident that, in every Esoteric interpretation of exoteric
beliefs expressed in allegorical forms, there is the same underlying
idea—the basic number _seven_, the compound of _three_ and _four_,
preceded by the divine _three_ ([triangle]) making the perfect number
_ten_.

Also, these numbers apply equally to divisions of time, to cosmography,
metaphysical and physical, as well as to man and everything else in
visible Nature. Thus these seven Vowels with their forty‐nine Powers are
identical with the three and the seven Fires of the Hindûs and their
forty‐nine Fires; identical with the numerical mysteries of the Persian
Simorgh; identical with those of the Jewish Kabalists. The latter,
dwarfing the numbers (their mode of “blinds”), made the duration of each
successive Renewal, or what we call in Esoteric parlance Round, 1,000
years only or of the seven Renewals of the Globe 7,000 years, instead of,
as is more likely, 7,000,000,000, and assigned to the total duration of
the Universe 49,000 years only.(1330)

Now, the Secret Doctrine furnishes a key which reveals to us on the
Indisputable grounds of comparative analogy that Garuda, the allegorical
and monstrous half‐man and half‐bird—the Vâhana or vehicle on which
Vishnu, as Kâla or “Time,” is shown to ride—is the origin of all such
allegories. He is the Indian Phœnix, the emblem of cyclic and periodical
time, the “Man‐lion” (Sinha), of whose representations the so‐called
Gnostic gems are so full.(1331)


    Over the seven rays of the lion’s crown, and corresponding to
    their points, stand often the seven vowels of the Greek alphabet,
    ΑΕΗΙΟΥΩ, testifying to the Seven Heavens.(1332)


This is the Solar Lion and the emblem of the Solar Cycle, as Garuda(1333)
is that of the Great Cycle, the Mahâ Kalpa, coëternal with Vishnu, and
also, of course, the emblem of the Sun and Solar Cycle. This is shown by
the details of the allegory. At his birth, Garuda, on account of his
“dazzling splendour,” is mistaken for Agni, the God of Fire, and was
thence called Gaganeshvara, “Lord of the Sky.” Its representation as
Osiris, on the Abraxas (Gnostic) gems, and by many heads of allegorical
monsters, with the head and beak of an eagle or a hawk—both solar
birds—denotes Garuda’s solar and cyclic character. His son is Jatâyu, the
cycle of 60,000 years. As well remarked by C. W. King:


    Whatever its primary meaning [of the gem with the solar lion and
    vowels] it was probably imported in its present shape from India
    (that true fountain head of Gnostic iconography).(1334)


The mysteries of the seven Gnostic Vowels, uttered by the Thunders of St.
John, can be unriddled only by the primeval and original Occultism of
Âryâvarta, brought into India by the primeval Brâhmans, who had been
_initiated in Central Asia_. And this is the Occultism we study and try to
explain, as much as is possible, in these pages. Our doctrine of seven
Races, and seven Rounds of life and evolution around our Terrestrial Chain
of Spheres, may be found even in _Revelation_.(1335) When the seven
“Thunders,” or “Sounds,” or “Vowels”—one meaning out of the seven for each
such vowel relates directly to our own Earth and its seven Root‐Races in
each Round—“had uttered their voices,” but had forbidden the Seer to write
them, and made him “seal up those things,” what did the Angel, “standing
upon the sea and upon the earth,” do?


    He lifted up his hand to heaven, and sware by him that liveth for
    ever and ever, ... that there _should be time no longer_: but in
    the days of the voice of the _seventh_ angel, when he shall begin
    to sound, the mystery of God [of the Cycle] should be
    finished.(1336)


This means, in Theosophic phraseology, that when the Seventh Round is
completed, then Time will cease. “There shall be time no longer”—very
naturally, since Pralaya shall set in and there will remain no one on
Earth to keep a division of time, during that periodical dissolution and
arrest of conscious life.

Dr. Kenealy and others believed that the calculations of the cyclic seven
and forty‐nine were brought by the Rabbins from Chaldæa. This is more than
likely. But the Babylonians, who had all those cycles and taught them only
at their great initiatory mysteries of astrological Magic, got their
wisdom and learning from India. It is not difficult, therefore, to
recognize in them our own Esoteric Doctrine. In their secret computations,
the Japanese have the same figures in their cycles. As to the Brâhmans,
their _Purânas_ and _Upanishads_ are good proof of it. The latter have
passed entirely into Gnostic literature; and a Brâhman needs only to read
_Pistis Sophia_(1337) to recognize his forefathers’ property, even to the
phraseology and similes used. Let us compare. In _Pistis Sophia_ the
disciples say to Jesus:


    Rabbi, reveal unto us the mysteries of the Light [_i.e._, the
    “Fire of Knowledge or Enlightenment”], ... forasmuch as we have
    heard thee saying that there is another baptism of _smoke_, and
    another baptism of the Spirit of Holy Light [_i.e._ the Spirit of
    Fire].(1338)


As John says of Jesus:


    I indeed baptize you with water; ... but he shall baptize you with
    the Holy Ghost and with fire.


The real significance of this statement is very profound. It means that
John, a non‐initiated ascetic, can impart to his disciples no greater
wisdom than the Mysteries connected with the plane of Matter, of which
Water is the symbol. His Gnosis was that of exoteric and ritualistic
dogma, of dead‐letter orthodoxy;(1339) while the wisdom which Jesus, an
Initiate of the Higher Mysteries, would reveal to them, was of a higher
character, for it was the “Fire” Wisdom of the true Gnosis or _real_
Spiritual Enlightenment. One was Fire, the other the Smoke. For Moses, the
Fire on Mount Sinai and the Spiritual Wisdom; for the multitudes of the
“people” below, for the profane, Mount Sinai in (through) Smoke, _i.e._,
the exoteric husks of orthodox or sectarian ritualism.

Now, having the above in view, read the dialogue between the sages Nârada
and Devamata in the _Anugîtâ_,(1340) an episode from the _Mahâbhârata_,
the antiquity and importance of which one can learn in the “Sacred Books
of the East,” edited by Prof. Max Müller.(1341) Nârada is discoursing upon
the “breaths” or the “life‐winds,” as they are called in the clumsy
translations of such words as Prâna, Apâna, etc., whose full Esoteric
meaning and application to individual functions can hardly be rendered in
English. He says of this science that:


    It is the teaching of the Veda, that the _fire_ verily is all the
    deities, and knowledge (of it) arises among Brâhmanas, being
    accompanied by intelligence.(1342)


By “fire,” says the Commentator, he means the Self. By “intelligence,” the
Occultist says, Nârada meant neither “discussion” nor “argumentation,” as
Arjuna Mishra believes, but “intelligence” truly, or the adaptation of the
_Fire of Wisdom_ to _exoteric ritualism_ for the profane. This is the
chief concern of the Brâhmans, who were the first to set the example to
other nations who thus anthropomorphized and carnalized the grandest
metaphysical truths. Nârada shows this plainly and is made to say:


    The _smoke_ of that (fire) which is of excellent glory (appears)
    in the shape of ... darkness [verily so!]; (its) ashes, ... [are]
    passion; and ... goodness is that in connection with it, in which
    the offering is thrown.(1343)


That is to say, that faculty in the disciple which apprehends the subtle
truth (the flame) which escapes heavenward, while the objective sacrifice
remains as a proof and _evidence of piety_ only to the profane. For what
else can Nârada mean by the following?


    Those who understand the sacrifice understand the Samâna and the
    Vyâna as the _principal_ (offering). The Prâna and Apâna are
    portions of the offering, ... and between them is the _fire_. That
    is the excellent seat of the Udâna as understood by Brâhmanas. As
    to that which is distinct from these pairs, hear me speak about
    that. Day and night are a pair, between them is the fire.... That
    _which exists_ and _that which does not exist_ are a pair, between
    them is the fire....(1344)


And after every such contrast Nârada adds:


    That is the excellent seat of the Udâna as understood by
    Brâhmanas.


Now many people do not know the full meaning of the statement that Samâna
and Vyâna, Prâna and Apâna—which are explained to be “life‐winds,” but
which we say are principles and their respective faculties and senses—are
offered up to Udâna, the _soi‐disant_ principal “life‐wind,” which is said
to act at all the joints. And so the reader who is ignorant that the word
“Fire” in these allegories means both the “Self” and the higher Divine
Knowledge, will understand nothing in this, and will entirely miss the
point of our argument, as the translator and even the editor, the great
Oxford Sanskritist, F. Max Müller, have missed the true meaning of
Nârada’s words. Exoterically, this enumeration of “life‐winds” has, of
course, the meaning, _approximately_, which is surmised in the foot‐notes,
namely:


    The sense _appears_ to be this: The course of worldly life is due
    to the operations of the life‐winds which are attached to the self
    and lead to its manifestations as individual souls [?]. Of these,
    the Samâna and Vyâna are controlled and held under check by the
    Prâna and Apâna.... The latter two are held in check and
    controlled by the Udâna, which thus controls all. And the control
    of this, which is the control of all five, ... leads to the
    supreme self.(1345)


The above is given as an explanation of the text, which records the words
of the Brâhmana, who narrates how he reached the ultimate Wisdom of
Yogism, and in this wise reached All‐knowledge. Saying that he had
“perceived by means of the self the seat abiding in the self,”(1346) where
dwells the Brahma free from all; and explaining that that indestructible
principle was entirely _beyond the perception of senses_—_i.e._, of the
five “life‐winds”—he adds that:


    In the midst of all these (life‐winds) which move about in the
    body and swallow up one another, blazes the Vaishvânara fire
    _sevenfold_.(1347)


This “Fire,” according to Nîlakantha’s commentary, is identical with the
“I,” the Self, which is the goal of the ascetic; Vaishvânara being a word
often used for the Self. Then the Brâhmana goes on to enumerate that which
is meant by the word “sevenfold,” and says:


    The nose [or smell], and the tongue [taste], and the eye, and the
    skin, and the ear as the fifth, the mind, and the understanding,
    these are the seven tongues of the blaze of Vaishvânara.(1348)...
    Those are the seven (kinds of) fuel for me.(1349)... These are the
    _seven great officiating priests_.(1350)


These seven priests are accepted by Arjuna Mishra in the sense of meaning
“the soul distinguished as so many [souls, or principles] with reference
to these several powers”; and, finally, the translator seems to accept the
explanation, and reluctantly admits that “they may mean” this; though he
himself takes the sense to mean:


    The powers of hearing etc. [the physical senses, in short], which
    are presided over by the several deities.


But whatever it may mean, whether in scientific or orthodox
interpretations, this passage on page 259 explains Nârada’s statements on
page 276, and shows them referring to exoteric and esoteric methods and
contrasting them. Thus the Samâna and the Vyâna, though subject to the
Prâna and the Apâna, and all the four to Udâna in the matter of acquiring
the Prânâyâma (of the Hatha Yogî, chiefly, or the lower form of Yoga), are
yet referred to as the principal offering, for, as rightly argued by K.
Trimbak Telang, their “operations are more practically important for
vitality”; _i.e._, they are the grossest, and are offered in the
sacrifice, in order that they may disappear, so to speak, in the quality
of darkness of that fire or its _smoke_—mere exoteric ritualistic form.
But Prâna and Apâna, though shown as subordinate (because less gross or
more purified), have the Fire between them; the Self and the Secret
Knowledge possessed by that Self. So for the good and evil, and for “that
which exists and that which does not exist”; all these “pairs”(1351) have
Fire between them, _i.e._, Esoteric Knowledge, the Wisdom of the Divine
Self. Let those who are satisfied with the _smoke_ of the Fire remain
wherein they are, that is to say within the Egyptian darkness of
theological fictions and dead‐letter interpretations.

The above is written only for the Western students of Occultism and
Theosophy. The writer presumes to explain these things neither to the
Hindûs, who have their own Gurus; nor to the Orientalists, who think they
know more than all the Gurus and Rishis, past and present, put together.
These rather lengthy quotations and examples are necessary, if only to
point out to the student the works he has to study so as to derive benefit
and learning from comparison. Let him read _Pistis Sophia_ in the light of
the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_, the _Anugîtâ_ and others; and then the statement made
by Jesus in the Gnostic Gospel will become clear, and the dead‐letter
“blinds” disappear at once. Read the following and compare it with the
explanation from the Hindû scriptures just given.


    And no Name is more excellent than all these, a Name wherein be
    contained all Names, and all Lights, and all the [forty‐nine]
    Powers. Knowing that Name, if a man quits this body of
    matter,(1352) no _smoke_ [_i.e._, no theological delusion],(1353)
    no darkness, nor Power, nor Ruler of the Sphere [no _Personal_
    Genius or Planetary Spirit called God] of Fate [Karma] ... shall
    be able to hold back the Soul that knoweth that Name.... If he
    shall utter that Name unto the fire, ... the darkness shall flee
    away.... And if he shall utter that name unto ... all their
    Powers, nay, even unto Barbelo,(1354) and the Invisible God, and
    the three triple‐powered Gods, so soon as he shall have uttered
    that name in those places, they shall all be thrown one upon the
    other, so that they shall be ready to melt and perish, and shall
    cry aloud, O Light of every light that is in the boundless lights,
    remember us also and purify us!(1355)


It is easy to see what this Light and Name are: the Light of Initiation
and the name of the “Fire‐Self,” which is no name, no action, but a
Spiritual, Ever‐living Power, higher even than the real “Invisible God,”
as this Power is Itself.

But if the able and learned author of the _Gnostics and their Remains_ has
not sufficiently allowed for the spirit of allegory and mysticism in the
fragments translated and quoted by him, in the above named work, from
_Pistis Sophia_—other Orientalists have done far worse. Having neither his
intuitional perception of the Indian origin of the Gnostic Wisdom still
less of the meaning of their “gems,” most of them, beginning with Wilson
and ending with the dogmatic Weber, have made most extraordinary blunders
with regard to almost every symbol. Sir M. Monier Williams and others show
a very decided contempt for the “Esoteric Buddhists” as Theosophists are
now called; yet no student of Occult Philosophy has ever mistaken a cycle
for a living personage and _vice versâ_, as is very often the case with
our learned Orientalists. An instance or two may illustrate the statement
more graphically. Let us choose the best known.

In the _Râmâyana_, Garuda is called “the maternal uncle of Sagara’s 60,000
sons”; and Amshumat, Sagara’s grandson, “the nephew of the 60,000 uncles”
who were reduced to ashes by the look of Kapila—the Purushottama, or
Infinite Spirit, who caused the horse which Sagara was keeping for the
Ashvamedha sacrifice to disappear. Again, Garuda’s son(1356);—Garuda being
himself the Mahâ Kalpa or Great Cycle—Jatâyu, the king of the feathered
tribe (when on the point of being slain by Râvana who carries off Sîtâ)
says, speaking of himself: “It is 60,000 years O king, that I am born”;
after which, _turning his back_ on the Sun—he dies.

Jatâyu is, of course, the cycle of 60,000 years within the Great Cycle of
Garuda; hence he is represented as his son, or nephew, _ad libitum_, since
the whole meaning rests on his being placed in the line of Garuda’s
descendants. Then, again, there is Diti, the mother of the Maruts, whose
descendants and progeny belonged to the posterity of Hiranyâksha, “whose
number was 77 crores (or 770 millions) of men,” according to the _Padma
Purâna_. All such narratives are pronounced “meaningless fictions” and
absurdities. But—truth is the daughter of time, verily; and time _will_
show.

Meanwhile, what could be easier than an attempt, at least, to verify
Paurânic chronology? There are many Kapilas; but the Kapila who slew king
Sagara’s progeny—60,000 men strong—was undeniably Kapila, the founder of
the Sânkhya philosophy, since it is so stated in the _Purânas_; although
one of them flatly denies the imputation without explaining its Esoteric
meaning. It is the _Bhâgavata Purâna_(1357) which says that:


    The report is not true that the sons of the king were scorched by
    the wrath of the sage. For how can the quality of darkness, the
    product of anger, exist in a Sage whose body was goodness and who
    purified the world—the earth’s dust, as it were, attributed to
    heavens! How should mental perturbation distract that sage,
    identified with the Supreme Spirit, who has steered here (on
    earth) that solid vessel of the Sânkhya (philosophy), with the
    help of which he who desires to obtain liberation crosses the
    dreaded ocean of existence, that path to death?(1358)


The _Purâna_ is in duty bound to speak as it does. It has a dogma to
promulgate and a policy to carry out—that of great secrecy with regard to
mystical _divine_ truths divulged for countless ages only at Initiation.
It is not in the _Purânas_, therefore, that we have to look for an
explanation of the mystery connected with various transcendental states of
being. That the story is an allegory is seen upon its very face: the
60,000 “sons,” brutal, vicious, and impious, are the personification of
the _human passions_ that a “mere glance of the Sage”—the Self who
represents the highest state of purity that can be reached on
Earth—reduces to ashes. But it has also other significations, cyclic and
chronological meanings, a method of marking the periods when certain Sages
flourished, found also in other _Purânas_.

Now it is as well ascertained as any tradition can be, that it was at
Hardwar, or Gangâdvâra, the “door or gate of the Ganges,” at the foot of
the Himâlayas, that Kapila sat in meditation for a number of years. Not
far from the Sewalik range, the pass of Hardwar is called to this day
“Kapila’s Pass,” and the place also is named “Kapilasthen” by the
ascetics. It is there that the Ganges, Gangâ, emerging from its
mountainous gorge, begins its course over the sultry plains of India. And
it is clearly ascertained by geological survey that the tradition which
claims that the ocean washed the base of the Himâlayas ages ago, is not
entirely without foundation, for distinct traces of this still remain.

The Sânkhya Philosophy may have been _brought down_ and taught by the
first, and written out by the _last_ Kapila.

Now Sâgara is the name of the ocean, and especially of the Bay of Bengal,
at the mouth of the Ganges, to this day in India.(1359) Have Geologists
ever calculated the number of millenniums it must have taken the sea to
recede the distance it is now from Hardwar, which is at present 1,024 feet
above its level? If they had, those Orientalists who show Kapila
flourishing from the first to the ninth century A.D., might change their
opinions, if only for one of two very good reasons. Firstly, the true
number of years which have elapsed since Kapila’s day is unmistakably in
the _Purânas_, though the translators may fail to see it; and secondly,
the Kapila of the Satya, and the Kapila of the Kali Yugas, may be one and
the same _individuality_, without being the same _personality_.

Kapila, besides being the name of a personage, of the once living Sage and
the author of the Sânkhya Philosophy, is also the generic name of the
Kumâras, the celestial Ascetics and Virgins; therefore the very fact of
the _Bhâgavata Purâna_ calling _that_ Kapila—whom it had showed just
before as a portion of Vishnu—the author of the Sânkhya Philosophy, ought
to have warned the reader of a “blind” containing an Esoteric meaning.
Whether he was the son of Vitatha, as the _Harivamsha_ shows him to be, or
of any one else, the author of the Sânkhya cannot be the same as the Sage
of the Satya Yuga—at the very beginning of the Manvantara, when Vishnu is
shown _in the form of Kapila_, “imparting to all creatures true Wisdom”;
for this relates to that primordial period when the “Sons of God” taught
to the newly created men those arts and sciences, which have since been
cultivated and preserved in the sanctuaries by the Initiates. There are
several well‐known Kapilas in the _Purânas_. First the primeval Sage, then
Kapila one of the three “secret” Kumâras, and Kapila son of Kashyapa and
Kadrû—the “many‐headed serpent”(1360)—besides Kapila the great Sage and
Philosopher of the Kali Yuga. The latter, being an Initiate, a “Serpent of
Wisdom,” a Nâga, was purposely blended with the Kapilas of the former
ages.




Section X. The Cross and the Pythagorean Decad.


The early Gnostics claimed that their Science, the Gnosis, rested on a
square, the angles of which represented respectively Sigê (Silence),
Bythos (Depth), Nous (Spiritual Soul or Mind), and Aletheia (Truth).

It is they who were the first to reveal to the world that which had
remained concealed for ages; namely, the Tau, in the shape of a
Procrustean bed, and Christos as incarnating in Chrestos, he who became
for certain purposes a willing candidate for a series of tortures, mental
and physical.

For them the whole of the Universe, metaphysical and material, was
contained within, and could be expressed and described by the digits
contained in the number 10, the Pythagorean Decad.

This Decad, representing the Universe and its evolution out of Silence and
the Unknown Depths of the Spiritual Soul, or Anima Mundi, presented two
sides or aspects to the student. It could be, and was at first, applied to
the Macrocosm, after which it descended to the Microcosm, or man. There
was, then, the purely intellectual and metaphysical, or the “Inner
Science,” and the as purely materialistic or “surface science,” both of
which could be expounded by and contained in the Decad. It could be
studied, in short, both by the deductive method of Plato, and the
inductive method of Aristotle. The former started from a divine
comprehension, when the plurality proceeded from unity, or the digits of
the Decad appeared, only to be finally reäbsorbed, lost in the infinite
Circle. The latter depended on sensuous perception alone, when the Decad
could be regarded either as the unity that multiplies, or matter which
differentiates; its study being limited to the plane surface, to the
cross, or the _seven_ which proceeds from the _ten_, or the perfect
number, on Earth as in Heaven.

This dual system was brought, together with the Decad, by Pythagoras from
India. That it was that of the Brachmans and Iranians, as they are called
by the ancient Greek Philosophers, is warranted to us by the whole range
of Sanskrit literature, such as the _Purânas_ and the _Laws of Manu_. In
these Laws or Ordinances of Manu, it is said that Brahmâ first creates the
“_ten_ Lords of Being,” the ten Prajâpati or Creative Forces; which ten
produce _seven_ other Manus, or, rather, as some MSS. have it, Munîn
(instead of Manûn) “devotees,” or holy beings, which are the seven Angels
of the Presence in the Western religion. This mysterious number seven,
born from the upper Triangle △, the latter itself born from the apex
thereof, or the Silent Depths of the Unknown Universal Soul (Sigê and
Bythos), is the sevenfold Saptaparna plant, born and manifested on the
surface of the soil of mystery, from the threefold root buried deep under
that impenetrable soil. This idea is fully elaborated in one of the
Sections of Volume I, Part II, Section III, “Primordial Substance and
Divine Thought,” which the reader should notice carefully, if he would
grasp the metaphysical idea involved in the above symbol. In man as in
nature, according to the Cis‐Himâlayan Esoteric Philosophy, which is that
of the Cosmogony of the _original_ Manu, it is the septenary division that
is intended by Nature herself. The seventh principle (Purusha) alone is
the Divine Self, strictly speaking; for, as said in Manu, “he [Brahmâ]
having pervaded the subtile parts of those six, of unmeasured
brightness,”(1361) created or called them forth to “Self”‐consciousness or
the consciousness of that One Self. Of these six, five elements (or
principles, or Tattvas, as Medhâtithi, the commentator thinks) “are called
the atomic destructible elements”;(1362) these are described in the above‐
named Section.(1363)

We have now to speak of the mystery language, that of the prehistoric
races. It is not a phonetic, but a purely pictorial and symbolical tongue.
It is known at present in its fulness to the very few, having become with
the masses for more than 5,000 years an absolutely dead language. Yet most
of the learned Gnostics, Greeks and Jews, knew it, and used it, though
very differently. A few instances may be given.

On the plane above, the number is no number but a _nought_—a _circle_. On
the plane below, it becomes _one_—which is an odd number. Each letter of
the ancient alphabets had its philosophical meaning and _raison d’être_.
The number _one_ (1) signified with the Alexandrian Initiates a _body
erect_, a living standing man, he being the only animal that has this
privilege. And, by adding to the “I” a head, it was transformed into a
“P,” a symbol of _paternity_, of the creative potency; while “R” signified
a “moving man,” one on his way. Hence Pater Zeus had nothing sexual or
phallic either in its sound or the form of its letters; nor had Πατὴρ Δεὺς
(according to Ragon).(1364) If we turn now to the Hebrew alphabet, we
shall find that while _one_ or Aleph (א) has a bull or an ox for its
symbol, _ten_, the perfect number, or _one_ of the _Kabalah_, is a Yod (י,
_y_, _i_, or _j_), and means, as the first letter of Jehovah, the
procreative organ, and the rest.

The _odd_ numbers are divine, the _even_ numbers are terrestrial,
devilish, and unlucky. The Pythagoreans hated the Binary. With them it was
the origin of differentiation, hence of contrasts, discord, or matter, the
beginning of evil. In the Valentinian Theogony, Bythos and Sigê (Depth,
Chaos, Matter born in Silence) are the primordial Binary. With the early
Pythagoreans, however, the Duad was that imperfect state into which the
first manifested being fell when it got detached from the Monad. It was
the point from which the two roads—the good and the evil—bifurcated. All
that which was double‐faced or false was called by them “binary.” One was
alone good and harmony, because no disharmony can proceed from One alone.
Hence the Latin word Solus in relation to the One and Only God, the
Unknown of Paul. Solus, however, very soon became Sol—the Sun.

The Ternary is the first of the odd numbers, as the triangle is the first
of the geometrical figures.(1365) This number is truly the number of
mystery _par excellence_. To study it on the exoteric lines one has to
read Ragon’s _Cours Philosophique et Interprétatif des Initiations_, on
the Esoteric—the Hindû symbolism of numerals; for the combinations which
were applied to it are numberless. It is on the Occult properties of the
three equal sides of the triangle that Ragon based his studies and founded
the famous Masonic Society of the Trinosophists—those who study _three_
sciences; an improvement upon the ordinary three Masonic degrees, given to
those who study nothing except eating and drinking at the meetings of
their Lodges. As the founder writes:


    The first line of the triangle offered to the apprentice for study
    is the _mineral kingdom_, symbolized by Tubalc [Symbol: Three dots
    in a triangle] [Tubal‐Cain].

    The second side on which the companion has to meditate, is the
    _vegetable kingdom_, symbolized by Schibb [Symbol: Three dots in a
    triangle] [Schibboleth]. In this kingdom begins the _generation of
    the bodies_. This is why the letter G is presented radiant before
    the eyes of the adept [?!].

    The third side is left to the master mason, who has to complete
    his education by the study of the _animal kingdom_. It is
    symbolized by Maoben [Symbol: Three dots in a triangle] (son of
    putrefaction).(1366)


The first solid figure is the Quaternary, the symbol of immortality. It is
the Pyramid, for the Pyramid stands on a triangular base, and terminates
with a point at the top, thus yielding the Triad and the Quaternary or the
3 and 4.

The Pythagoreans taught the connection and relation between the Gods and
the numbers, in a science called Arithmomancy. The Soul is a number, they
said, which moves of itself and contains the number 4; and spiritual and
physical man is number 3, as the Ternary represented for them not only the
surface but also the principle of the formation of the physical body. Thus
animals were Ternaries only, man alone being a Septenary, _when virtuous_;
a Quinary when bad, for:

Number Five was composed of a Binary and a Ternary, and of these the
Binary threw everything in the perfect form into disorder and confusion.
The _perfect man_, they said, was a Quaternary and a Ternary, or _four_
material and _three_ immaterial elements; and these three Spirits or
Elements we likewise find in Five when it represents the microcosm. The
latter is a compound of a Binary directly relating to gross Matter and of
three Spirits. Since, as Ragon says:


    This ingenious figure is the union of two Greek breathings placed
    over vowels which have or have not to be aspirated. The first sign
    (῾) is called the “strong” or superior “spiritus,” the Spirit of
    God aspired (_spiratus_) and breathed by man. The second sign (᾿)
    the lower, is the soft “spiritus” representing the secondary
    spirit; ... the whole embraces the whole man. It is the _universal
    quintessence_, the vital fluid or life.(1367)


The more mystic meaning of the number Five is given in an excellent
article by Mr. T. Subba Row, in _Five Years of Theosophy_, in an article
entitled “The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac,” in which he gives some rules
that may help the enquirer to ferret out “the deep significance of ancient
Sanskrit nomenclature in the old Âryan myths and allegories.” Meanwhile,
let us see what has been hitherto stated about the constellation
Capricornus in Theosophical publications, and what is known of it
generally. Every one knows that ♑ is the tenth sign of the Zodiac, into
which the Sun enters at the winter solstice, about December 21st. But very
few are those who know—even in India, unless they are initiated—the real
mystic connection which seems to exist, as we are told, between the names
Makara and Kumâra. The first means some amphibious animal, flippantly
called the “crocodile,” as some Orientalists think, and the second is the
title of the great patrons of Yogins, according to the Shaiva _Purânas_,
the sons of, and even one with, Rudra (Shiva), who is a Kumâra himself. It
is through their connection with Man that the Kumâras are likewise
connected with the Zodiac. Let us try to find out what the word Makara
means.

Says the author of “The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac”:


    Makara ... contains within itself the clue to its correct
    interpretation. The letter _ma_ is equivalent to number 5, and
    _kara_ means hand. Now in Sanskrit Tribhujam means a triangle,
    _bhujam_ or _karam_ (both synonymous) being understood to mean a
    side. So, Makaram or Panchakaram means a Pentagon.(1368)


Now the five‐pointed star or pentagon represents the five limbs of
man.(1369) Under the old system, we are told, Makara was the _eighth_
instead of the tenth sign.(1370)


    The sign in question is intended to represent the faces of the
    universe, and indicates that the figure of the universe is bounded
    by Pentagons.(1371)


The Sanskrit writers “speak also of Ashtadisha or eight faces bounding
Space,” referring thus to the Loka‐pâlas, the eight points of the compass,
the four cardinal and the four intermediate points.


    From an objective point of view the “microcosm” is represented by
    the human body. Makaram may be taken to represent simultaneously
    both the microcosm and the macrocosm, as external objects of
    perception.(1372)


But the true Esoteric sense of the word Makara is not, in truth,
“crocodile” at all, even when it is compared with the animal depicted on
the Hindû Zodiac. For it has the head and the fore‐legs of an antelope and
the body and tail of a fish. Hence the tenth sign of the Zodiac has been
taken variously to mean a shark, a dolphin, etc.; as it is the Vâhana of
Varuna, the Ocean God, and is often called, for this reason, Jala‐rûpa or
“water‐form.” The dolphin was the vehicle of Poseidon‐Neptune with the
Greeks, and one with him, Esoterically; and this “dolphin” is the “sea‐
dragon” as much as the crocodile of the Sacred Nile is the Vehicle of
Horus, and Horus himself. Says the mummy‐form God with the crocodile’s
head:


    I am the fish [and seat] of the great Horus of Kem‐oor.(1373)


With the Peratæ Gnostics it is Chozzar (Neptune) who converts the
dodecagonal pyramid into a sphere, “and paints its gate with many
colours.”(1374) He has _five androgyne_ ministers—he is Makara, the
Leviathan.

As the rising Sun was considered the Soul of the Gods sent to manifest
itself to men every day, and as the crocodile rose out of the water at the
first sunbeam, that animal came finally to personify a solar‐fire devotee
in India, as it personified that Fire, or the highest Soul with the
Egyptians.

In the _Purânas_, the number of the Kumâras changes according to the
exigencies of the allegory. For Occult purposes their number is given in
one place as seven, then as four, then as five. In the _Kûrma Purâna_ it
is said of them:


    These _five_ [Kumâras], O Brâhman, were Yogins who acquired entire
    exemption from passion.


Their very name shows their connection with the said constellation Makara,
and with some other Paurânic characters connected with the zodiacal signs.
This is done in order to veil what was one of the most suggestive glyphs
of the primitive Temples. The Kumâras are mixed up, astronomically,
physiologically, and mystically in general, with a number of Paurânic
personages and events. Hardly hinted at in the _Vishnu_, they figure in
various dramas and events throughout all the other _Purânas_ and sacred
literature; so that the Orientalists, having to pick up the threads of
connection hither and thither, have ended by proclaiming the Kumâras “due
chiefly to the fancy of the Purânic writers.” But—

_Ma_—we are told by the author of the “Twelve Signs of the Zodiac”—is
“five”; _kara_, a “hand” with its five fingers, as also a five‐sided sign
or a Pentagon. The Kumâra (in this case an anagram for Occult purposes),
as Yogîs, are _five_ in Esotericism, because the last two names have ever
been kept secret; they are the fifth order of Brahma‐devas, and the five‐
fold Chohans, having the Soul of the five Elements in them, Water and
Ether predominating, and therefore their symbols were both _aquatic_ and
_fiery_.


    Wisdom lies concealed under the couch of him who rests on the
    Golden Lotus (Padma) floating on the Water.


In India this is Vishnu, one of whose Avatâras was Buddha, as claimed in
days of old. The Prachetasas, the worshippers of Nârâyana—who, like
Poseidon, moved or dwelt _over_ not under the Waters—plunged into the
depths of the Ocean for their devotions and remained therein 10,000 years;
and the Prachetasas are _ten_ exoterically, but _five_, Esoterically.
Prachetâs is, in Sanskrit, the name of Varuna, the Water God, Nereus, an
aspect of Neptune, the Prachetasas being thus identical with the “five
ministers” of the male‐female Chozzar (Χωζζάρ or Χορζάρ), or Poseidon, of
the Peratæ Gnostics. These are respectively called Ou, Aoai, Ouô, Ouôab
and ... (Οὔ, Ἀοαὶ, Οὐώ, Οὐωάβ ...),(1375) the _fifth_, a _triple_ name
(making seven in all) being lost(1376)—_i.e._, kept secret. Thus much for
the “aquatic” symbol; the “fiery” connecting them with the fiery
symbol—spiritually. For purposes of identity, let us remember that as the
mother of the Prachetasas was Savarnâ, the daughter of the Ocean, so was
Amphitrite the mother of Neptune’s mystic “ministers.”

Now the reader is reminded that these “five ministers” are symbolized both
in the Dolphin, who had overcome the chaste Amphitrite’s unwillingness to
wed Poseidon, and in Triton their son. The latter, whose body above the
waist is that of a man and below a dolphin, a fish, is, again, most
mysteriously connected with Oannes, the Babylonian Dag, and further also
with the Matsya (Fish) Avatâra of Vishnu, both teaching mortals Wisdom.
The Dolphin, as every Mythologist knows, was placed, for his service, by
Poseidon, among the constellations, and became with the Greeks,
Capricornus, the Goat, whose hind part is that of a dolphin, and is thus
identical with Makara, whose head is also that of an antelope and the body
and tail those of a fish. This is why the sign of the Makara was borne on
the banner of Kâmadeva, the Hindû God of Love, identified, in the _Atharva
Veda_, with Agni, the Fire‐god, the son of Lakshmî, as correctly given by
the _Harivamsha_. For Lakshmî and Venus are one, and Amphitrite is the
early form of Venus. Now Kâma, the Makara‐ketu, is Aja, the “unborn,” and
Âtmâ‐bhû, the “self‐existent,” and Aja is the Logos in the _Rig Veda_, as
he is shown therein to be the first manifestation of the One; for “Desire
first arose in It, which was the primal germ of mind,” that “which
connects entity with non‐entity”—or Manas, the _fifth_, with Âtmâ, the
_seventh_, Esoterically—say the Sages. This is the _first_ stage. The
second, on the following plane of manifestation, shows Brahmâ—whom we
select as a representative for all the other First Gods of the
nations—causing to issue from his body his Mind‐born Sons, “Sanandana and
others,” who, in the _fifth_ “creation,” and again in the ninth (for
purposes of a “blind”) become the Kumâra. Let us close by reminding the
reader that goats were sacrificed to Amphitrite and the Nereids on the
sea‐shore—as goats are sacrificed to this day to Durgâ Kâlî, who is only
the _black_ side of Lakshmî (Venus), the _white_ side of Shakti—and by
suggesting what connection these animals may have with Capricornus, in
which appear twenty‐eight stars in the form of a goat, which goat was
transformed by the Greeks into Amalthæa, Jupiter’s foster‐mother. Pan, the
God of Nature, had goat’s feet, and changed himself into a goat at the
approach of Typhon. But this is a mystery which the writer dares not dwell
upon at length, not being sure of being understood. Thus the mystical side
of the interpretation must be left to the intuition of the student. Let us
note one more thing in relation to the mysterious number Five. It
symbolizes at one and the same time the Spirit of Life Eternal and the
spirit of life and love terrestrial—in the human compound; and, it
includes divine and infernal magic, and the universal and the individual
quintessence of being. Thus, the five mystic words or vowels uttered by
Brahmâ at “creation,” which forthwith became the Panchadasha (certain
Vedic Hymns, attributed to that God), are in their creative and magical
potentiality, the _white_ side of the _black_ Tântric _five_ Ma‐kâras, or
the five _m’s_. Makara, the constellation, is a seemingly meaningless and
absurd name; yet, even besides its anagrammatical significance in
conjunction with the term Kumâra, the numerical value of its first
syllable and its Esoteric resolution into _five_ has a very great and
Occult meaning in the mysteries of Nature.

Suffice it to say that, as the sign of Makara is connected with the birth
of the spiritual Microcosm, and the death or dissolution of the physical
Universe—its passage into the realm of the Spiritual,(1377) so the Dhyân
Chohans, called in India Kumâras, are connected with both. Moreover, in
the exoteric religions, they have become the synonyms of the Angels of
Darkness. Mâra is the God of Darkness, the Fallen One, and Death;(1378)
and yet it is one of the names of Kâma, the First God in the Vedas, the
Logos, from whom have sprung the Kumâras, and this connects them still
more with our “fabulous” Indian Makara, and the crocodile‐headed God in
Egypt.(1379) The Crocodiles in the Celestial Nile are _five_, and the God
Toom, the Primordial Deity, creating the heavenly bodies and living
beings, calls forth these Crocodiles in his _fifth_ “creation.” When
Osiris, the “Defunct Sun,” is buried and enters into Amenti, the sacred
Crocodiles plunge into the abyss of primordial Waters—the “Great Green
One.” When the Sun of Life rises, they reëmerge out of the sacred river.
All this is highly symbolical, and shows how primeval Esoteric truths
found their expression in identical symbols. But, as Mr. T. Subba Row
truly declares:


    The veil that was dexterously thrown over certain portions of the
    mystery connected with these [Zodiacal] signs by the ancient
    philosophers, _will never be lifted up for the amusement or
    edification of the uninitiated public_.(1380)


Nor was number Five less sacred with the Greeks. The “Five Words” of
Brahmâ have become with the Gnostics the “Five Words” written upon the
Âkâshic (Shining) Garment of Jesus at his glorification—the words “Zama
Zama Ôzza Rachama Ôzai” (ΖΑΜΑ ΖΑΜΑ ΩΖΖΑ ΡΑΧΑΜΑ ΩΖΑΙ), translated by the
Orientalists “the robe, the glorious robe of my strength.” These words
were, in their turn, the anagrammatic “blind” of the five mystic Powers
represented on the robe of the “resurrected” Initiate after his last trial
of three days’ trance; the five becoming _seven_ only after his “death,”
when the Adept became the full Christos, the full Krishna‐Vishnu, _i.e._,
merged in Nirvâna. The E Delphicum, a sacred symbol, was the numeral
_five_, again; and how sacred it was is shown by the fact that the
Corinthians, according to Plutarch, replaced the wooden numeral in the
Delphic Temple by a bronze one, and this one was transmuted by Livia
Augusta into a facsimile in gold.(1381)

It is easy to recognize in the two “Spiritus”—the Greek signs (!) spoken
of by Ragon—Âtmâ and Buddhi, or Divine Spirit and its Vehicle, the
Spiritual Soul.

The Six or the Senary is dealt with later in this Section, while the
Septenary will be fully treated in the course of this Volume in the
Section on “The Mysteries of the Hebdomad.”

The Ogdoad or Eight symbolizes the eternal and spiral motion of cycles,
the 8, ∞, and is symbolized in its turn by the Caduceus. It shows the
regular breathing of the Kosmos presided over by the Eight Great Gods—the
Seven from the primeval Mother, the One and the Triad.

Then comes the number Nine, or the triple Ternary. It is the number which
reproduces itself incessantly under all shapes and figures in every
multiplication. It is the sign of every circumference, since its value in
degrees is equal to 9, _i.e._, to 3 + 6 + 0. It is a _bad_ number under
certain conditions, and very unlucky. If number 6 was the symbol of our
Globe ready to be animated by a _divine_ Spirit, 9 symbolized our Earth
informed by a _bad_ or evil Spirit.

Ten, or the Decad, brings all these digits back to unity, and ends the
Pythagorean table. Hence this figure, [Symbol: Circle with line through
the middle]—_unity_ within _zero_—was the symbol of Deity, of the
Universe, and of Man. Such is the secret meaning of “the strong grip of
the lion’s paw, of the tribe of Judah” (the “master mason’s grip”) between
two hands, the joint number of whose fingers is _ten_.

If we now give our attention to the Egyptian cross, or the Tau, we may
discover this letter, which was so exalted by Egyptians, Greeks, and Jews,
to be mysteriously connected with the Decad. The Tau is the Alpha and the
Omega of Secret Divine Wisdom, which is symbolized by the initial and the
final letters of Thot (Hermes). Thot was the inventor of the Egyptian
alphabet, and the letter Tau closed the alphabets of the Jews and the
Samaritans, who called this character the “end” or “perfection,”
“culmination” and “security.” Hence, Ragon tells us, the words Terminus,
“end,” and Tectum, “roof,” are symbols of shelter and security—which is
rather a prosaic definition. But such is the usual destiny of ideas and
things in this world of spiritual decadence, though at the same time of
physical progress. Pan was at one time Absolute Nature, the One and Great
All; but when history catches a first glimpse of him, Pan has already
tumbled down into a _godling_ of the fields, a rural God; history will not
recognize him, while theology makes of him the Devil! Yet his seven‐piped
flute, the emblem of the seven forces of Nature, of the seven planets, the
seven musical notes, of all the septenary harmony in short, shows well his
primordial character. So with the cross. Far earlier than the Jews had
devised their golden candlestick of the Temple with _three_ sockets on one
side and _four_ on the other, and made of number _seven_ a feminine number
of generation(1382)—thus introducing the phallic element into religion—the
more spiritually‐minded nations had made of the cross (as 3 + 4 = 7) their
most sacred divine symbol. In fact, circle, cross, and seven—the latter
being made a base of _circular_ measurement—are the first primordial
symbols. Pythagoras, who brought his wisdom from India, left to posterity
a glimpse into this truth. His School regarded number 7 as a compound of
numbers 3 and 4, which they explained in a dual manner. On the plane of
the noumenal world, the Triangle was, as the first conception of the
manifested Deity, its image, “Father‐Mother‐Son”; and the Quaternary, the
perfect number, was the noumenal, ideal root of all numbers and things on
the physical plane. Some students, in view of the sacredness of the
Tetraktys and the Tetragrammaton, mistake the mystic meaning of the
Quaternary. The latter was with the Ancients only a _secondary_
“perfection,” so to speak, because it related only to the manifested
planes. Whereas it is the Triangle, the Greek Delta (Δ), which was the
“vehicle of the unknown Deity.” A good proof of it lies in the name of the
Deity beginning with Delta. Zeus was written Δεύς (Deus) by the Bœotians,
thence the Deus of the Latins. This, in relation to the metaphysical
conception, with regard to the meaning of the septenary _in the phenomenal
world_; but for purposes of profane or exoteric interpretation, the
symbolism changed. _Three_ became the ideograph of the three _material_
Elements—Air, Water, Earth; and _four_ became the principle of all that
which is neither corporeal nor perceptible. But this has never been
accepted by the real Pythagoreans. Viewed as a compound of 6 and 1, the
Senary and the Unity, number 7 was the invisible centre, the Spirit of
everything, as there exists no hexagonal body without a _seventh_ property
being found as the central point in it, as, for instance, crystals and
snow‐flakes in so‐called “inanimate” nature. Moreover, number _seven_,
they said, has all the perfection of the _unit_—the number of numbers. For
as absolute _unity_ is uncreated, and impartite, hence number‐less, and no
number can produce it, so is the _seven_; no digit contained within the
Decad can beget or produce it. And it is _four_ which affords an
arithmetical division between _unity_ and _seven_, for it surpasses the
former by the same number (_three_), as it is itself surpassed by the
_seven_, since _four_ is by as many numbers above _one_, as _seven_ is
above _four_.(1383)

“With the Egyptians number 7 was the symbol of _life_ eternal,” says
Ragon, and adds that this is why the Greek letter Z, which is but a double
7, is the initial letter of Zaô, “I live,” and of Zeus, the “father of all
living.”

Moreover, figure 6 was the symbol of the Earth during the autumn and
winter “sleeping” months, and figure 7 during spring and summer, as the
Spirit of Life animated her at that time—the seventh or central informing
Force. We find the same in the Egyptian mythos and symbol of Osiris and
Isis, personifying Fire and Water metaphysically, and the Sun and the Nile
physically. The number of the solar year, 365 in days, is the numerical
value of the word Neilos (Nile). This, together with the Bull, with the
crescent and the ansated cross between its horns, and the Earth under its
astronomical symbol (♁), are the most phallic symbols of later antiquity.


    The Nile was the river of time with the number of a year, or year
    and a day (364 + 1 = 365). It represented the parturient water of
    Isis, or Mother Earth, the moon, the woman, and the cow, also the
    _workshop_ of Osiris, representing the T’sod Olaum of the Hebrews.
    The ancient name of this river was Eridanus, or the Hebrew Iardan,
    with the Coptic or old Greek suffix. This was the door of the
    Hebrew word Jared, or _source_, or _descent_ ... of the river
    Jordan, which had the same mythical use with the Hebrews that the
    Nile had with the Egyptians,(1384) it was the source of descent,
    and held the waters of life.(1385)


It was, to put it plainly, the symbol of the personified Earth, or Isis
regarded as the womb of that Earth. This is shown clearly enough; and
Jordan—the river so sacred now to Christians—held no more sublime or
poetical meaning in it than the parturient waters of the Moon—Isis, or
Jehovah in his female aspect. Now, as shown by the same scholar, Osiris
was the Sun, and the river Nile, and the year of 365 days; while Isis was
the Moon, the bed of that river, or Mother Earth “for the parturient
energies of which water was a necessity,” as also the lunar year of 354
days, “the time‐maker of the periods of gestation.” All this then is
sexual and phallic, our modern scholars seeming to find in these symbols
nothing beyond a physiological or phallic meaning. Nevertheless, the three
figures 365, or the number of days in a solar year, have but to be read
with the Pythagorean key to find in them a highly philosophical and moral
meaning. One instance will be sufficient. It can read:


    The Earth (3)—animated by (6)—the Spirit of Life (5).


Simply because 3 is equivalent to the Greek Gamma (Γ) which is the symbol
of Gaia, the Earth, while the figure 6 is the symbol of the animating or
informing principle, and the 5 is the universal quintessence which spreads
in every direction and forms all matter.(1386)

The few instances and examples brought forward reveal only one small
portion of the methods used to read the symbolical ideographs and numerals
of antiquity. The system being of an extreme and complex difficulty, very
few, even among the Initiates, could master _all_ the seven keys. Is it to
be wondered, then, that the metaphysical gradually dwindled down into the
physical Nature; that the Sun, once upon a time the symbol of Deity,
became, as æons glided by, that of its creative ardour only; and that
thence it fell into a glyph of phallic significance? But surely, it is not
those whose method, like Plato’s, was to proceed from universals down to
particulars, who could ever have begun by symbolizing their religions by
sexual emblems! It is quite true, though uttered by that incarnated
paradox Éliphas Lévi, that “man is God on Earth, and God is man in
Heaven.” But this could not, and never did apply to the One Deity, only to
the Hosts of Its incarnated beams, called by us Dhyân Chohans, by the
Ancients Gods, and now transformed by the Church into Devils on the
_left_, and into the Saviour on the _right_ side!

But all such dogmas grew out of the one root, the root of Wisdom, which
grows and thrives on the Indian soil. There is not an Archangel that could
not be traced back to its prototype in the sacred land of Âryâvarta. These
prototypes are all connected with the Kumâras who appear on the scene of
action by “refusing”—as Sanatkumâra and Sananda—to “create progeny.” Yet
they are called the “creators” of (thinking) man. More than once they are
brought into connection with Nârada—another bundle of _apparent_
incongruities, yet a wealth of philosophical tenets. Nârada is the leader
of the Gandharvas, the celestial singers and musicians; Esoterically, the
reason for this is explained by the fact that the Gandharvas are “the
instructors of men in the Secret Sciences.” It is they, who “loving the
women of the Earth” disclosed to them the mysteries of creation; or, as in
the _Veda_, the “heavenly” Gandharva is a deity who knew and revealed the
secrets of heaven and divine truths, in general. If we remember what is
said of this class of Angels in _Enoch_ and in the _Bible_, then the
allegory is plain; their leader, Nârada, while refusing to procreate,
leads men to become Gods. Moreover, all of these, as stated in the
_Vedas_, are Chhandajas, “will‐born,” or incarnated, in different
Manvantaras, _of their own will_. They are shown in exoteric literature as
existing age after age; some being “cursed to be reborn,” others
incarnating as a duty. Finally, as the Sanakadikas, the seven Kumâras who
went to visit Vishnu on the “White Island” (Shveta‐dvîpa), the Island
inhabited by the Mahâ Yogins—they are connected with Shâka‐dvîpa and the
Lemurians and Atlanteans of the Third and Fourth Races.

In the Esoteric Philosophy, the Rudras (Kumâras, Âdityas, Gandharvas,
Asuras, etc.) are the highest Dhyân Chohans or Devas as regards
intellectuality. They are those who, owing to their having acquired by
self‐development the _five‐fold_ nature—hence the sacredness of number
_five_—became independent of the pure Arûpa Devas. This is a mystery very
difficult to realize and understand correctly. For we see that those who
were “obedient to law” are, equally with the “rebels,” _doomed to be
reborn in every age_. Nârada, the Rishi, is cursed by Brahmâ to incessant
peripateticism on Earth, _i.e._, to be constantly reborn. He is a rebel
against Brahmâ, and yet has no worse fate than the Jayas—the twelve great
Creative Gods produced by Brahmâ as his assistants in the functions of
creation. For the latter, lost in meditation, only _forgot to create_; and
for this, they were equally cursed by Brahmâ to be born in every
Manvantara. And still they are termed—together with the rebels—Chhandajas,
or those born of their own will in human form.

All this is very puzzling to one who is unable to read and understand the
_Purânas_ except in their dead‐letter sense.(1387) Hence we find the
Orientalists refusing to be puzzled, and cutting the Gordian knot of
perplexity by declaring the whole scheme “figments ... of Brâhmanical
fancy and love of exaggeration.” But to the student of Occultism, the
whole is pregnant with deep philosophical meaning. We willingly leave the
rind to the Western Sanskritist, but claim the essence of the fruit for
ourselves. We do more: we concede that in one sense much in these so‐
called “fables” refers to astronomical allegories about constellations,
asterisms, stars, and planets. Yet, while the Gandharva of the _Rig Veda_
may there be made to personify the fire of the Sun, the Gandharva Devas
are entities both of a physical and psychic character, while the Apsarasas
(with other Rudras) are both _qualities_ and _quantities_. In short, if
ever unravelled, the Theogony of the Vedic Gods will reveal fathomless
mysteries of Creation and Being. Truly says Parâshara:


    These classes of thirty‐three divinities ... exist age after age,
    and their appearance and disappearance is in the same manner as
    the sun sets and rises again.(1388)


There was a time, when the Eastern symbol of the cross and circle, the
Svastika, was universally adopted. With the Esoteric, and for the matter
of that exoteric, Buddhist, the Chinaman and the Mongolian, it means the
“ten thousand truths.” These truths, they say, belong to the mysteries of
the Unseen Universe and Primordial Cosmogony and Theogony.


    _Since Fohat crossed the Circle like two lines of flame
    [horizontally and vertically], the Hosts of the Blessed Ones have
    never failed to send their representatives upon the Planets they
    are made to watch over from the beginning._


This is why the Svastika is always placed—as the ansated cross was in
Egypt—on the breast of the defunct Mystics. It is found on the heart of
the images and statues of Buddha, in Tibet and Mongolia. It is the _seal_
placed also on the hearts of the living Initiates, burnt into the flesh
for ever with some. This, because they have to keep these truths inviolate
and intact, in eternal silence and secrecy to the day they are perceived
and read by their chosen successors—new Initiates—“worthy of being
entrusted with the ten thousand perfections.” So degraded, however, has it
now become, that it is often placed on the headgear of the “Gods,” the
hideous idols of the sacrilegious Bhons—the Dugpas or Sorcerers, of the
Tibetan borderlands—until found out by a Galukpa, and torn off together
with the head of the “God,” though it would be better were it that of the
worshipper which was severed from his sinful body. Still, it can never
lose its mysterious properties. Throw a retrospective glance, and see it
used alike by the Initiates and Seers, as by the Priests of Troy, for many
specimens of it have been found by Schliemann on the site of that old
city. One finds it with the old Peruvians, the Assyrians, Chaldæans, as
well as on the walls of the old‐world Cyclopean buildings; in the
catacombs of the _New_ World, and in those of the _Old_ (?), at Rome,
where—because the first Christians are supposed to have concealed
themselves and their religion—it is called Crux Dissimulata.


    According to De Rossi the Swastika from an early period was a
    favourite form of the cross _employed with an occult
    signification_ which shows the secret was not that of the
    Christian cross. One Swastika cross in the catacombs is the sign
    of an inscription which reads “ΖΩΤΙΚΩ ΖΟΤΙΚΗ [? ΖΩΤΙΚΗ], _Vitalis
    Vitalia_,” or life of life.(1389)


But the best evidence to the antiquity of the cross is that which is
brought forward by the author of _The Natural Genesis_ himself:


    The value of the cross as a Christian symbol is supposed to date
    from the time when Jesus Christ was crucified. And yet in the
    “Christian” _iconography of the catacombs no figure of a man
    appears upon the Cross during the first six or seven centuries_.
    There are all forms of the cross except that—the alleged starting‐
    point of the new religion. That was not the initial but the final
    form of the Crucifix.(1390) During some six centuries after the
    Christian era the foundation of the Christian religion in a
    crucified Redeemer is entirely absent from Christian art! The
    earliest known form of the human figure on the cross is the
    crucifix presented by Pope Gregory the Great to Queen Theodolinde
    of Lombardy, now in the Church of St. John at Monza, whilst no
    image of the Crucified is found in the catacombs at Rome earlier
    than that of San Giulio, belonging to the seventh or eighth
    century.... There is no Christ and no Crucified; the Cross is the
    Christ even as the Stauros (Cross) was a type and a name of Horus
    the Gnostic Christ. The Cross, not the Crucified, is the primary
    symbol of the Christian Church. The Cross, not the Crucified, is
    the essential object of representation in its art, and of
    adoration in its religion. The germ of the whole growth and
    development can be traced to the cross. And that cross is pre‐
    Christian, is pagan and heathen, in half a dozen different shapes.
    The Cult began with the cross, and Julian was right in saying he
    waged a “Warfare with the X”; which he obviously considered had
    been adopted by the A‐Gnostics and Mytholators to convey an
    impossible significance.(1391) During centuries the cross stood
    for the Christ, and was addressed as if it were a living being. It
    was divinized at first and humanized at last.(1392)


Few world‐symbols are more pregnant with real Occult meaning than the
Svastika. It is symbolized by the figure 6. Like that figure, it points,
in its concrete imagery, as does the ideograph of the number, to the
Zenith and the Nadir, to North, South, West, and East; one finds the unit
everywhere, and that unit reflected in all and every unit. It is the
emblem of the activity of Fohat, of the continual revolution of the
“Wheels,” and of the Four Elements, the “Sacred Four,” in their mystical,
and not alone in their cosmical meaning; further, its four arms, bent at
right angles, are intimately related, as shown elsewhere, to the
Pythagorean and Hermetic scales. One initiated into the mysteries of the
meaning of the Svastika, say the Commentaries, “can trace on it, with
mathematical precision, the evolution of Kosmos and the whole period of
Sandhyâ.” Also “the relation of the Seen to the Unseen,” and “the first
procreation of man and species.”

To the Eastern Occultist the Tree of Knowledge, in the Paradise of man’s
own heart, becomes the Tree of Life Eternal, and has nought to do with
man’s animal senses. It is an absolute mystery that reveals itself only
through the efforts of the imprisoned Manas, the Ego, to liberate itself
from the thraldom of sensuous perception, and see in the light of the one
eternal present Reality. To the Western Kabalist, and far more now to the
superficial Symbologist, nursed in the lethal atmosphere of Materialistic
Science, the chief explanation of the mysteries of the cross is—its sexual
element. Even the otherwise spiritualistic modern commentator discerns
this feature in the cross and Svastika before all others.


    The cross was used in Egypt as a protecting talisman and a symbol
    of saving power. Typhon, or Satan, is actually found chained to
    and bound by the cross. In the _Ritual_, the Osirian cries, “_The
    Apophis is overthrown, their cords bind the South, North, East,
    and West, their cords are on him. Har‐ru‐bah has knotted
    him._”(1393) These were the Cords of the four quarters, or the
    cross. Thor is said to smite the head of the serpent with his
    hammer, ... a form of Swastika or four‐footed cross.... In the
    primitive sepulchres of Egypt the model of the Chamber had the
    form of a cross.(1394) The pagoda of Mathura ... the birth‐place
    of Krishna, was built in the form of a cross.(1395)


This is perfect, and no one can discern in it that “sexual worship,” with
which the Orientalists love to break the head of Paganism. But how about
the Jews, and the exoteric religions of some Hindû sects, especially the
rites of the Vallabâchâryas? For, as said, Shiva‐worship, with its Lingam
and Yoni, stands too high philosophically, its modern degeneration
notwithstanding, to be called a simple phallic worship. But the Tree‐ or
Cross‐worship(1396) of the Jews, as denounced by their own Prophets, can
hardly escape the charge. The “sons of the sorcerers, the seed of the
adulterer,”(1397) as Isaiah calls them, never lost an opportunity of
“enflaming themselves with idols under every green tree”(1398)—which
denotes no metaphysical recreation. It is from these _monotheistic_ Jews
that the Christian nations have derived their religion, their “God of
Gods, the One living God,” while despising and deriding the worship of the
Deity of the ancient Philosophers. Let such believe in and worship the
physical form of the cross, by all means.

But to the follower of the true Eastern Archaic Wisdom, to him who
worships in spirit nought outside the Absolute Unity, that ever‐pulsating
great Heart that beats throughout, as in, every atom of Nature, each such
atom contains the germ from which he may raise the Tree of Knowledge,
whose fruits give Life Eternal and not physical life alone. For him, the
cross and circle, the Tree or the Tau—even after every symbol relating
thereto has been referred to and read, one after another—still remain a
profound mystery in their Past, and it is to that Past alone that he
directs his eager gaze. He cares little whether it be the Seed from which
grows the genealogical Tree of Being, called the Universe. Nor is it the
Three in One, the triple aspect of the Seed—its form, colour, and
substance—that interest him, but rather the Force which directs its
growth, the ever mysterious, as the ever unknown. For this vital Force,
that makes the Seed germinate, burst open and throw out shoots, then form
the trunk and branches, which, in their turn, bend down like the boughs of
the Ashvattha, the holy Tree of Bodhi, throw their seed out, take root and
procreate other trees—this is the only Force that has reality for him, as
it is the never‐dying Breath of Life. The Pagan philosopher sought for the
cause, the modern is content with only the effects and seeks the former in
the latter. What is beyond, he does not know, nor does the modern A‐
gnostic care; thus rejecting the only knowledge upon which he can with
full security base his Science. Yet this manifested Force has an answer
for him who seeks to fathom it. He who sees in the cross, the decussated
circle of Plato, the Pagan, not the antitype of circumcision, as Christian
(St.) Augustine did,(1399) is forthwith regarded by the Church as a
heathen; by Science, as a lunatic. This, because, while refusing to
worship the God of physical generation, he confesses that he can know
nothing of the Cause which underlies the so‐called _First_ Cause, the
Causeless Cause of this Vital Cause. Tacitly admitting the All‐Presence of
the Boundless Circle and making of it the Universal Postulate upon which
the whole of the Manifested Universe is based, the Sage keeps a
reverential silence concerning that upon which no mortal man should dare
to speculate. “The Logos of God is the revealer of man, and the Logos (the
Verb) of man is the revealer of God,” says Éliphas Lévi in one of his
paradoxes. To this, the Eastern Occultist would reply: On this condition,
however, that man should be dumb on the Cause that produced both God and
its Logos. Otherwise, he becomes invariably the _reviler_, not the
_revealer_, of the Incognizable Deity.

We have now to approach a mystery—the Hebdomad in Nature. Perchance, all
that we may say, will be attributed to coincidence. We may be told that
this number in Nature is quite _natural_—as indeed we say it is—and has no
more significance than the illusion of motion which forms the so‐called
“strobic circles.” No great importance was given to these “singular
illusions” when Professor Sylvanus Thompson exhibited them at the meeting
of the British Association in 1877. Nevertheless we should like to learn
the scientific explanation why seven should ever form itself as a
preeminent number—six concentric circles around a seventh, and seven rings
within one another round a central point, etc.—in this _illusion_,
produced by a swaying saucer, or any other vessel. We give the solution
refused by Science in the Section which follows.




Section XI. The Mysteries of the Hebdomad.


We must not close this Part on the Symbolism of Archaic History, without
an attempt to explain the perpetual recurrence of this truly mystic
number, the Hebdomad, in every scripture known to the Orientalists. As
every religion, from the oldest to the latest, reveals its presence, and
explains it on its own grounds agreeably with its own special dogmas, this
is no easy task. We can, therefore, do no better or more explanatory work
than to give a bird’s‐eye view of all. The numbers, 3, 4, 7, are the
sacred numbers of Light, Life, and Union—especially in this present
Manvantara, our Life‐Cycle; of which number _seven_ is the special
representative, or the _factor_ number. This has now to be demonstrated.

If one should ask a Brâhman learned in the _Upanishads_, which are so full
of the Secret Wisdom of old, why “he, of whom seven forefathers have drunk
the juice of the Moon‐plant,” is Trisuparna, as Bopaveda is credited with
saying;(1400) and why the Somapa Pitris should be worshipped by the
Brâhman Trisuparna—very few could answer the question; or, if they knew,
they would still less satisfy one’s curiosity. Let us, then, hold to what
the old Esoteric Doctrine teaches. As says the Commentary:

_When the first Seven appeared on Earth, they threw the seed of everything
that grows on the land into the soil. First came Three, and Four were
added to these as soon as stone was transformed into plant. Then came the
second Seven, who, guiding the Jîvas of the plants, produced the middle
[intermediate] natures between plant and moving living animal. The third
Seven evolved their Chhâyâs.... The fifth Seven imprisoned their
Essence.... Thus man became a Saptaparna._



A. Saptaparna.


Such is the name given in Occult phraseology to man. It means, as shown
elsewhere, a seven‐leaved plant, and the name has a great significance in
the Buddhist legends. So it had, also, under disguise, in the Greek myths.
The T, or τ (Tau), formed from the figure 7, and the Greek letter Γ
(Gamma), was, as stated in the last Section, the symbol of life, and of
Life Eternal: of earthly life, because Γ (Gamma) is the symbol of the
Earth (Gaia)(1401); and of Life Eternal, because the figure 7 is the
symbol of the same life _linked_ with Divine Life, the double glyph
expressed in geometrical figures being:

[Symbol: a triangle over a square]

—a Triangle and a Quaternary, the symbol of Septenary Man.

Now, the number _six_ has been regarded in the Ancient Mysteries as an
emblem of _physical_ Nature. For six is the representation of the six
dimensions of all bodies—the _six_ directions which compose their form,
namely, the four directions extending to the four cardinal points, North,
South, East, and West, and the two directions of height and thickness that
answer to the Zenith and the Nadir. Therefore, while the Senary was
applied by the Sages to _physical_ man, the Septenary was for them the
symbol of that man _plus_ his immortal Soul.(1402)

J. M. Ragon gives a very good illustration of the “hieroglyphical senary,”
as he calls our double equilateral triangle.


    The hieroglyphical senary is the symbol of the commingling of the
    _philosophical three_ fires and _three_ waters, whence results the
    procreation of the elements of all things.(1403)


The same idea is found in the Indian double equilateral triangle. For,
though it is called in that country the sign of Vishnu, yet in truth it is
the symbol of the Triad, or Tri‐mûrti. For, even in the exoteric
rendering, the lower triangle, [Symbol: triangle], with the apex downward,
is the symbol of Vishnu, the God of the Moist Principle and Water,
Nârâyana being the Moving Principle in the Nârâ, or Waters;(1404) while
the triangle, with its apex upward, [Symbol: triangle], is Shiva, the
Principle of Fire, symbolized by the triple flame in his hand.(1405) It is
these two interlaced triangles, wrongly called “Solomon’s Seal”—which also
form the emblem of our Society—that produce the Septenary and the Triad at
one and the same time, and are the Decad. Whatever way this [Symbol:
6‐point star] is examined, all the ten numbers are contained therein. For
with a point in the middle or centre, [Symbol: 6‐point star with middle
dot], it is a _sevenfold_ sign or Septenary; its triangles denote number
three, or the Triad; the two triangles show the presence of the Binary;
the triangles with the central point common to both yield the Quaternary;
the six points are the Senary; and the central point, the Unit; the
Quinary being traced by combination, as a compound of _two_ triangles, the
even number, and of _three_ sides in each triangle, the first odd number.
This is the reason why Pythagoras and the ancients made the number _six_
sacred to Venus, since:


    The union of the two sexes, and the spagyrization of matter by
    triads, are necessary to develop the generative force, that
    prolific virtue and tendency to reproduction which is inherent in
    all bodies.(1406)


Belief in “Creators,” or the personified Powers of Nature, is in truth no
polytheism, but a philosophical necessity. Like all the other Planets of
our system, the Earth has seven Logoi—the emanating Rays of the one
“Father‐Ray”—the Protogonos, or the Manifested Logos, he who sacrifices
his Esse (or “Flesh,” the Universe) that the World may live and every
creature therein have conscious being.

Numbers 3 and 4 are respectively male and female, Spirit and Matter, and
their union is the emblem of Life Eternal in Spirit on its ascending arc,
and in Matter as the ever resurrecting Element—by procreation and
reproduction. The spiritual male line is vertical [Symbol: bar]; the
differentiated matter‐line is horizontal; the two forming the cross or ☩.
The 3 is invisible; the 4 is on the plane of objective perception. This is
why all the Matter of the Universe, when analyzed to its ultimates by
Science, can be reduced to four Elements only—Carbon, Oxygen, Nitrogen,
and Hydrogen; and why the three primaries, the noumena of the four, or
graduated Spirit or Force, have remained a _terra incognita_, and mere
speculations, mere names, to exact Science. Her servants must believe in
and study first the primary causes, before they can hope to fathom the
nature, and acquaint themselves with the potentialities, of the effects.
Thus, while the men of Western learning had, and still have, the four, or
Matter, to toy with, the Eastern Occultists and their disciples, the great
Alchemists the world over, have the whole septenate to study from.(1407)
As those Alchemists have it:

_When the Three and the Four kiss each other, the Quaternary joins its
middle nature with that of the Triangle [or Triad, i.e., the face of one
of its plane surfaces becoming the middle face of the other], and becomes
a Cube; then only does it [the Cube unfolded] become the vehicle and the
number of Life, the Father‐Mother Seven._

Now we are taught that all these earliest forms of organic life also
appear in septenary groups of numbers. From minerals or “soft stones that
hardened,” to use the phraseology of the Stanzas, followed by the “hard
plants that softened,” which are the product of the mineral, for “it is
from the bosom of the stone that vegetation is born”;(1408) and then to
man—all the primitive models in every kingdom of Nature begin by being
ethereal, transparent, films. This, of course, takes place only in the
first beginning of life. With the next period they consolidate, and at the
_seventh_ begin to branch off into species, _all except men_, the first of
the mammalian animals(1409) in the Fourth Round.

Virgil, versed as every ancient poet was, more or less, in Esoteric
Philosophy, sang of evolution in the following strains:


    _Principio cælum ac terras camposque liquentes_
    Lucentemque globum Lunæ, Titaniaque astra
    _Spiritus_ intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
    _Mens_ agitat molem et magno se corpore miscet.
    Inde hominum pecudumque genus vitæque volantum
    Et quæ marmoreo fert monstra sub æquore pontus.(1410)


“First came three, or the Triangle.” This expression has a profound
meaning in Occultism, and the fact is corroborated, in Mineralogy, Botany,
and even in Geology—as has been demonstrated in the Section on “The
Chronology of the Brâhmans”—by the compound number seven, the three and
the four, being contained in it. Salt in solution proves this. For when
its molecules, clustering together, begin to deposit themselves as a
solid, the first shape they assume is that of triangles, of small pyramids
and cones. It is the figure of Fire, whence the word “Pyramis”; while the
second geometrical figure in _manifested_ Nature is a Square or a Cube, 4
and 6; for, as Enfield says, “the particles of earth being cubical, those
of fire are pyramidal”—truly. The pyramidal shape is that assumed by the
pines—the most primitive tree after the fern period. Thus the two
opposites in cosmic Nature—fire and water, heat and cold—begin their
metrographical manifestations, one by a trimetric, the other by a
hexagonal system. For the stellate crystals of snow, viewed under a
microscope, are all and each of them a double or a treble six‐pointed
star, with a central nucleus, like a miniature star within the larger one.
Says Mr. Darwin—showing that the inhabitants of the sea‐shore are greatly
affected by the tides:


    The most ancient progenitors in the kingdom of the Vertebrata ...
    apparently consisted of a group of marine animals.... Animals
    living either about the _mean_ high‐water mark, or about the
    _mean_ low‐water mark, pass through a complete cycle of tidal
    changes in a fortnight.... Now it is a mysterious fact that in the
    higher and now terrestrial Vertebrata ... many normal and abnormal
    processes have one or more weeks [septenates] as their periods ...
    such as gestation of mammals, the duration of fevers.(1411)

    The eggs of the pigeon are hatched in two weeks [or 14 days];
    those of the fowl in three; those of the duck in four; those of
    the goose in five; and those of the ostrich in seven.(1412)


This number is closely connected with the Moon, whose Occult influence is
ever manifesting itself in septenary periods. It is the Moon which is the
guide of the Occult side of terrestrial Nature, while the Sun is the
regulator and factor of manifested life. This truth has ever been evident
to the Seers and the Adepts. Jakob Böhme, by insisting on the fundamental
doctrine of the seven properties of everlasting Mother Nature, proved
himself thereby a great Occultist.

But to return to the consideration of the septenary in ancient religious
symbolism. To the metrological key of the symbolism of the Hebrews, which
reveals numerically the geometrical relations of the Circle (All‐Deity) to
the Square, Cube, Triangle, and all the integral emanations of the divine
area, may be added the theogonic key. This key explains that Noah, the
Deluge‐Patriarch, is in one aspect the permutation of the Deity (the
Universal Creative Law), for the purpose of the formation of our Earth,
its population, and the propagation of life on it, in general.

Now bearing in mind the septenary division in divine Hierarchies, as in
cosmic and human constitutions, the student will readily understand that
Jah‐Noah is at the head of, and is the synthesis of the lower cosmic
Quaternary. The upper Sephirothal Triad, △—of which Jehovah‐Binah
(Intelligence) is the left, female, angle—emanates the Quaternary, □. The
latter, symbolizing by itself the Heavenly Man, the sexless Adam Kadmon,
viewed as Nature in the abstract, becomes a septenate again by emanating
from itself the additional three principles, the lower terrestrial or
manifested physical Nature, Matter and our Earth—the seventh being
Malkuth, the “Bride of the Heavenly Man”—thus forming, with the higher
Triad, or Kether, the Crown, the full number of the Sephirothal Tree—the
10, the Total in Unity, or the Universe. Apart from the higher Triad, the
lower creative Sephiroth are seven.

The above is not directly to our point, though it is a necessary reminder
to facilitate the comprehension of what follows. The question at issue is
to show that Jah‐Noah, or the Jehovah of the Hebrew _Bible_, the alleged
Creator of our Earth, of man and all upon it, is:

(_a_) The lowest Septenary, the Creative Elohim—in his cosmic aspect.

(_b_) The Tetragrammaton or the Adam Kadmon, the “Heavenly Man” of the
four letters—in his theogonic and kabalistic aspects.

(_c_) The Noah—identical with the Hindû Shishta, the human Seed, left for
the peopling of the Earth from a previous creation, or Manvantara, as
expressed in the _Purânas_, or the pre‐diluvian period as rendered
allegorically in the _Bible_—in his cosmic character.

But whether a Quaternary (Tetragrammaton) or a Triad, the biblical
Creative God is not the Universal 10, unless blended with Ain Suph (as
Brahmâ with Parabrahman), but a septenary, one of the many septenaries of
the Universal Septenate. In the explanation of the question now in hand,
his position and status as Noah may best be shown by placing the 3, △, and
4, □, on parallel lines with the cosmic and human principles. For the
latter, the old familiar classification is made use of.

As an additional demonstration of the statement, let the reader turn to
kabalistic works.


    “_Ararat_ = _the mount of descent_ = הר‐י‐רד, _Hor‐Jared_. Hatho
    mentions it out of composition by _Arath_ = ארת. Editor of Moses
    Cherenensis says: ‘By this, they say, is signified _the first
    place of descent_ (of the ark).’ ” (Bryant’s _Anal._, vol. iv. pp.
    5, 6, 15.) Under “_Berge_,” _mountain_, Nork says of _Ararat_:
    “אררט, for ארת (_i.e._, _Ararat_ for _Arath_) _earth, Aramaic_
    reduplication.” Here it is seen that Nork and Hatho make use of
    the same equivalent, in Arath, ארש, with the meaning of
    _earth_.(1413)


Noah thus symbolizing both the Root‐Manu and the Seed‐Manu, or the Power
which developed the Planetary Chain, and our Earth, and the Seed‐Race, the
Fifth, which was saved while the last sub‐races of the Fourth, Vaivasvata
Manu, perished, the number _seven_ will be seen to recur at every step. It
is Noah who, as Jehovah’s permutation, represents the septenary Host of
the Elohim, and is thus the Father or Creator (the Preserver) of all
animal life. Hence the verses of _Genesis_: “Of every clean beast thou
shalt take to thee by sevens, the male [3], and the female [4]; of fowls
also of the air by sevens,”(1414) etc., followed by all the _sevening_ of
days and the rest.



B. The Tetraktys In Relation To The Heptagon.


Thus number _seven_, as a compound of 3 and 4, is the factor element in
every ancient religion, because it is _the factor element in Nature_. Its
adoption must be justified, and it must be shown to be _the_ number _par
excellence_, for, since the appearance of _Esoteric Buddhism_, frequent
objections have been made, and doubts expressed as to the correctness of
these assertions.

And here let the student be told at once, that in all such numerical
divisions the One universal Principle—although referred to as (the) one,
because the Only One—never enters into the calculations. It stands, in its
character of the Absolute, the Infinite, and the Universal Abstraction,
entirely by Itself and independent of every other Power whether noumenal
or phenomenal. Says the author of the article “Personal and Impersonal
God”:


    This entity is neither matter nor spirit; it is neither Ego nor
    non‐Ego; and it is neither object nor subject.

    In the language of Hindû philosophers it is the original and
    eternal combination of Purusha [Spirit] and Prakriti [Matter]. As
    the Advaitîs hold that an external object is merely the product of
    our mental states, Prakriti is nothing more than illusion, and
    Purusha is the only reality; it is the _one_ existence which
    remains in the universe of Ideas. This ... then, is the
    Parabrahman of the Advaitîs. Even if there were to be a personal
    God with anything like a material Upâdhi (physical basis of
    whatever form), from the standpoint of an Advaitî there will be as
    much reason to doubt his noumenal existence, as there would be in
    the case of any other object. In their opinion, a conscious God
    cannot be the origin of the universe, as his Ego would be the
    effect of a previous cause, if the word conscious conveys but its
    ordinary meaning. They cannot admit that _the grand total of all
    the states of consciousness in the universe_ is their deity, as
    these states are constantly changing, and as cosmic idealism
    ceases during Pralaya. There is only one permanent condition in
    the Universe, which is the state of perfect unconsciousness, bare
    Chidâkâsham (the field of consciousness) in fact.

    When my readers once realize the fact that this grand universe is
    in reality but a huge aggregation of various states of
    consciousness, they will not be surprised to find that the
    ultimate state of unconsciousness is considered as Parabrahman by
    the Advaitîs.(1415)


Although itself entirely out of human reckoning or calculation, yet this
“huge aggregation of various states of consciousness” is a septenate, in
_its_ totality entirely composed of septenary groups—simply because “the
capacity of perception _exists in seven different aspects corresponding to
the seven conditions of matter_,”(1416) or the seven properties, or states
of matter. And, therefore, the series from one to seven, begins in the
Esoteric calculations with the first manifested principle, which is number
one if we commence from above, and number seven when reckoning from below,
or from the lowest principle.

The Tetrad is esteemed in the _Kabalah_, as it was by Pythagoras, the most
perfect, or rather _sacred_ number, because it emanated from the One, the
first manifested Unit, or rather the Three in One. And the latter has ever
been impersonal, sexless, incomprehensible, though within the possibility
of the higher mental perceptions.

The first manifestation of the eternal Monad was never meant to stand as
the symbol of another symbol, the Unborn for the Element‐born, or the one
Logos for the Heavenly Man. Tetragrammaton, or the Tetraktys of the
Greeks, is the Second Logos, the Demiurgos.


    The Tetrad, as Thomas Taylor thinks, is, however, the _animal
    itself_ of Plato who, as Syrianus justly observes, was the best of
    the Pythagoreans; subsists at the extremity of the intelligible
    triad, as is most satisfactorily shown by Proclus in the third
    book of his treatise on the theology of Plato. And between these
    two triads [the double triangle], the one intelligible, and the
    other intellectual, another order of gods exists, which partakes
    of both extremes.(1417)...


The Pythagorean world, according to Plutarch,(1418) _consisted of a double
quaternary_.

This statement corroborates what is said about the choice, by the exoteric
theologies, of the _lower_ Tetraktys. For:


    The quaternary of the intellectual world [the world of Mahat] is
    T’Agathon, Nous, Psyche, Hyle; while that of the sensible world
    [of Matter], which is properly what Pythagoras meant by the word
    Kosmos, is Fire, Air, Water, and Earth. The four elements are
    called by the name of _rhizômata_, the roots or principles of all
    _mixed bodies_.(1419)


That is to say, the lower Tetraktys is the root of _illusion_, of the
World of Matter; and this is the Tetragrammaton of the Jews, and the
“mysterious deity,” over which the modern Kabalists make such a fuss!


    This number [_four_] forms the arithmetical mean between the monad
    and the heptad; and this comprehends all powers, both of the
    productive and produced numbers; for this, of all numbers under
    ten, is made of a certain number; the duad doubled makes a tetrad,
    and the tetrad doubled [or unfolded] makes the hebdomad [the
    septenary]. Two multiplied into itself produces four; and retorted
    into itself makes the first cube. This first cube is a _fertile
    number_, the ground of multitude and variety, constituted of two
    and four [depending on the monad, the _seventh_]. Thus the two
    principles of temporal things, the pyramis and cube, form and
    matter, flow from one fountain, the tetragon [on earth, the monad,
    in heaven].(1420)


Here Reuchlin, the great authority on the _Kabalah_, shows the cube to be
“matter,” whereas the pyramid or the triad is “form.” With the Hermesians
the number four becomes the symbol of truth only when _amplified into a
cube_, which, unfolded, makes seven, as symbolizing the male and female
elements and the element of Life.(1421)

Some students have been puzzled to account for the vertical line,(1422)
which is male, becoming, in the cross, a four‐partitioned line (_four_
being a female number), while the horizontal (the line of matter) becomes
three‐divisioned. But this is easy of explanation. Since the middle face
of the “cube unfolded” is _common_ to both the vertical and the horizontal
bar, or double‐line, it becomes _neutral_ ground so to say, and belongs to
neither. The spirit line remains triadic, and the matter line two‐fold—two
being an even and therefore a female number also. Moreover, according to
Theon in his _Mathematica_, the Pythagoreans, who gave the name of Harmony
to the Tetraktys, “because it is a diatessaron in sesquitertia,” were of
opinion that:


    The division of the canon of the monochord was made by the
    tetraktys in the duad, triad, and tetrad; for it comprehends a
    sesquitertia, a sesquialtera, a duple, a triple, and a quadruple
    proportion, the section of which is 27. In the ancient musical
    notation, the tetrachord consisted of _three_ degrees or
    intervals, and _four_ terms of sounds called by the Greeks
    diatessaron, and by us a fourth.(1423)


Moreover, the quaternary though an even, therefore a female (“infernal”)
number, varied according to its form. This is shown by Stanley.(1424) The
four was called by the Pythagoreans the Key‐Keeper of Nature; but in union
with the three, which made it seven, it became the most perfect and
harmonious number—_nature herself_. The four was “the masculine of
feminine form,” when forming the cross; and seven is the “Master of the
Moon,” for this Planet is forced to alter her appearance every seven days.
It is on number seven that Pythagoras composed his doctrine on the Harmony
and Music of the Spheres, calling a “tone” the distance of the Moon from
the Earth; from the Moon to Mercury half a tone, from thence to Venus the
same; from Venus to the Sun one and a half tones; from the Sun to Mars a
tone; from thence to Jupiter half a tone; from Jupiter to Saturn half a
tone; and thence to the Zodiac a tone; thus making seven tones—the
diapason harmony.(1425) All the melody of Nature is in those seven tones,
and therefore is called the “Voice of Nature.”

Plutarch explains(1426) that the most ancient Greeks regarded the Tetrad
as the root and principle of all things, since it was the number of the
elements which gave birth to all visible and invisible _created_
things.(1427) With the brothers of the Rosy Cross, the figure of the
cross, or _cube unfolded_, formed the subject of a disquisition in one of
the Theosophic degrees of Peuvret, and was treated according to the
fundamental principles of light and darkness, _or good and evil_.(1428)


    The intelligible world proceeds out of the divine mind [or unit]
    after this manner. The Tetraktys, reflecting upon its own essence,
    _the first unit, productrix of all things_, and on its own
    beginning, saith thus: Once one, twice two, immediately ariseth a
    tetrad, having on its top the highest unit, and _becomes a
    Pyramis_, whose base is a plain tetrad, answerable to a
    superficies, upon which the radiant light of the divine unity
    produceth the form of incorporeal fire, by reason of the descent
    of Juno (matter) to inferior things. Hence ariseth essential
    light, not burning but illuminating. This is _the creation of the
    middle world_, which the Hebrews call the _Supreme_, the world of
    the [_their_] deity. It is termed Olympus, entirely light, and
    replete with separate forms, where is the seat of the immortal
    gods, _deûm domus alta_, whose top is _unity_, its wall _trinity_,
    and its superficies _quaternity_.(1429)


The “superficies” has thus to remain a _meaningless surface_, if left by
itself. _Unity_ only “illuminating” _quaternity_, the famous lower four
has to build for itself also a wall from _trinity_, if it would be
manifested. Moreover, the Tetragrammaton, or Microprosopus, is “Jehovah”
arrogating to himself very improperly the “Was, Is, Will Be,” now
translated into the “I am that I am,” and interpreted as referring to the
highest abstract Deity; while Esoterically and in plain truth, it means
only periodically chaotic, turbulent, and eternal Matter, with all its
potentialities. For the Tetragrammaton is one with Nature, or Isis, and is
the exoteric series of androgyne Gods such as Osiris‐Isis, Jove‐Juno,
Brahmâ‐Vâch, or the Kabalistic Jah‐Hovah; all male‐females. Every
anthropomorphic God, in old nations, as Marcellus Ficin well observed, has
his name written with four letters. Thus with the Egyptians, he was Teut;
the Arabs, Alla; the Persians, Sire; the Magi, Orsi; the Mahometans, Abdi;
the Greeks, Teos; the ancient Turks, Esar; the Latins, Deus; to which John
Lorenzo Anania adds the German Gott; the Sarmatian Bouh; etc.(1430)

The Monad being one, and an _odd_ number, the Ancients therefore said that
the odd were the only perfect numbers; and—selfishly, perhaps, yet as a
fact—considered them all as masculine and perfect, being applicable to the
_celestial_ Gods, while even numbers, such as two, four, six, and
especially eight, as being female, were regarded as imperfect, and given
only to the _terrestrial and infernal_ Deities. Virgil records the fact by
saying, “_Numero deus impare gaudet_.” “The God is pleased with an odd
number.”(1431)

But number _seven_, or the Heptagon, the Pythagoreans considered to be a
_religious and perfect number_. It was called Telesphoros, because by it
all in the Universe and mankind is led _to its end_, _i.e._, its
culmination.(1432) The doctrine of the Spheres ruled by the seven Sacred
Planets(1433) shows, from Lemuria to Pythagoras, the seven Powers of
terrestrial and sublunary Nature, as well as the seven great Forces of the
Universe, proceeding and evolving in seven tones, which are the seven
notes of the musical scale.

The Heptad [our Septenary] was considered to be _the number of a virgin,
because it is unborn_ [like the Logos or the Aja of the Vedântins]:


    Without a father ... or a mother, ... _but proceeding directly
    from the monad_, which is the origin and crown of all
    things.(1434)


And if the Heptad is made to proceed from the Monad directly, then it is,
as taught in the Secret Doctrine of the oldest schools, the perfect and
sacred number of this Mahâmanvantara of ours.

The Septenary, or Heptad, was sacred indeed to several Gods and Goddesses;
to Mars, with his seven attendants, to Osiris, whose body was divided into
seven and twice seven parts; to Apollo, the Sun, amid his seven planets,
and playing the hymn to the seven‐rayed on his seven‐stringed harp; to
Minerva, the fatherless and the motherless, and others.(1435)

Cis‐Himâlayan Occultism with its sevening, and because of such sevening,
must be regarded as the most ancient, the original of all. It is opposed
by _some_ fragments left by Neo‐Platonists; and the admirers of the
latter, who hardly understand what they defend, say to us: See, your
forerunners believed only in _triple_ man, composed of Spirit, Soul, and
Body. Behold, the Târaka Râja Yoga of India limits that division to 3, we,
to 4, and the Vedântins to 5 (Koshas). To this, we of the Archaic school
ask:

Why then does the Greek poet say that it is not four but _seven_ who sing
the praise of the Spiritual Sun?


    Ἑπτά με κ.τ.λ.
    Seven sounding letters sing the praise of me,
    The immortal God, the almighty Deity.


Why again is the _triune_ Iao, the Mystery God, called the “fourfold,” and
yet the triadic and tetradic symbols come under one unified name with the
Christians—the Jehovah of the seven letters? Why again in the Hebrew Shebâ
is the Oath (the Pythagorean Tetraktys) identical with number 7? Or, as
Mr. Gerald Massey has it:


    Taking an oath was synonymous with “to seven,” and the 10
    expressed by the letter Jod, was the full number of Iao‐Sabaoth
    [—the ten‐lettered God].(1436)


In Lucian’s _Auction_:


    Pythagoras asks, “How do you reckon?” The reply is, “One, Two,
    Three, Four.” Then Pythagoras says, “Do you see? In _what you
    conceive_ Four there are Ten, _a perfect Triangle and our Oath_
    [Tetraktys, Four!—or Seven in all].”(1437)


Why again does Proclus say:


    The Father of the golden verses celebrates the Tetraktys as the
    fountain of perennial nature?(1438)


Simply because those Western Kabalists who quote the _exoteric_ proofs
against us have no idea of the real _Esoteric_ meaning. All the ancient
Cosmologies—the oldest Cosmographies of the two most ancient people of the
Fifth Root‐Race, the Hindû Âryans and the Egyptians, together with the
early Chinese races, the remnants of the Fourth or Atlantean Race—based
the whole of their Mysteries on number 10; the higher Triangle standing
for the invisible and metaphysical World, the lower three and four, or the
Septenate, for the physical Realm. It is not the Jewish _Bible_ that
brought number seven into prominence. Hesiod used the words, “the seventh
is the sacred day,” before the Sabbath of “Moses” was ever heard of. The
use of number seven was never confined to any one nation. This is well
testified by the seven vases in the Temple of the Sun, near the ruins of
Babian in Upper Egypt; the seven fires burning continually for ages before
the altars of Mithra; the seven holy fanes of the Arabians; the seven
peninsulas, the seven islands, seven seas, mountains, and rivers of India;
and of the _Zohar_; the Jewish Sephiroth of the seven splendours; the
seven Gothic deities; the seven worlds of the Chaldæans and their seven
Spirits; the seven constellations mentioned by Hesiod and Homer; and all
the interminable sevens which the Orientalists find in every MS. they
discover.(1439)

What we have to say finally is this: Enough has been brought forward to
show why the human principles were and are divided in the Esoteric Schools
into seven. Make it four and it will either leave man _minus_ his lower
terrestrial elements, or, if viewed from a physical standpoint, make of
him a soulless animal. The Quaternary must be the higher or the lower—the
celestial or terrestrial Tetraktys; to become comprehensible, according to
the teachings of the _ancient_ Esoteric School, man must be regarded as a
septenary. This was so well understood, that even the so‐called Christian
Gnostics adopted this time‐honoured system.(1440) This remained for a long
time a secret, for though it was suspected, no MSS. of that time spoke of
it clearly enough to satisfy the sceptic. But there comes to our rescue
the literary curiosity of our age—the oldest and best preserved Gospel of
the Gnostics, _Pistis Sophia_. To make the proof absolutely complete, we
shall quote from an authority, C. W. King, the only Archæologist who has
had a faint glimmer of this elaborate doctrine, and the best writer of the
day on the Gnostics and their gems.

According to this extraordinary piece of religious literature—a true
Gnostic fossil—the human Entity is the Septenary Ray from the One,(1441)
just as our School teaches. It is composed of seven elements, four of
which are borrowed from the four kabalistical manifested worlds. Thus:


    From Asiah it gets the Nephesh, or seat of the physical appetites
    [vital breath, also]; from Jezirah, the Ruach, or seat of the
    passions [? !]; from Briah, the Neshamah or reason; and from
    Aziluth it obtains the Chaiah, or principle of spiritual life.
    This looks like an adaptation of the Platonic theory of the Soul’s
    obtaining its respective faculties from the Planets in its
    downward progress through their spheres. But the Pistis‐Sophia,
    with its accustomed boldness, puts this theory into a much more
    poetical shape (§ 282). The _Inner Man_ is similarly made up of
    _four_ constituents, _but these are supplied by the rebellious
    Æons of the Spheres_, being the _Power_—a particle of the Divine
    light (“Divinæ particula auræ”) yet left in themselves; the _Soul_
    [the fifth] “formed out of the tears of their eyes, and the sweat
    of their torments”; the Ἀντιμῖμον Πνεύματος, _Counterfeit of the
    Spirit_ (seemingly answering to our _Conscience_) [_the sixth_];
    and lastly the Μοῖρα, _Fate_(1442) [Karmic Ego], whose business it
    is to lead the man to the end appointed for him: if he hath to die
    by the fire, to lead him into the fire; if he hath to die by a
    wild beast, to lead him unto the wild beast—[the _seventh_]!(1443)



C. The Septenary Element In The Vedas.


_It Corroborates the Occult Teaching Concerning the Seven Globes and the
Seven Races._

We have to go to the very source of historical information, if we would
bring our best evidence to testify to the facts enunciated. For, though
entirely allegorical, the Rig Vedic hymns are none the less suggestive.
The seven Rays of Sûrya, the Sun, are therein made parallel to the seven
Worlds, of every Planetary Chain, to the seven Rivers of Heaven and Earth,
the former being the seven creative Hosts, and the latter the seven Men,
or primitive human groups. The seven ancient Rishis—the progenitors of all
that lives and breathes on Earth—are the seven friends of Agni, his seven
“Horses,” or seven “Heads.” The human race has sprung from Fire and Water,
it is allegorically stated; fashioned by the Fathers, or the Ancestor‐
sacrificers, from Agni; for Agni, the Ashvins, the Âdityas,(1444) are all
synonymous with those “Sacrificers,” or the Fathers, variously called
Pitaras (or Pitris), Angirasas,(1445) and Sâdhyas, “Divine Sacrificers,”
the most Occult of all. They are all called Deva‐putra Rishayah or the
“Sons of God.”(1446) The “Sacrificers,” moreover, are collectively the One
Sacrificer, the Father of the Gods, Vishvakarman, who performed the great
Sarva‐medha ceremony, and ended by sacrificing himself.

In these Hymns the “Heavenly Man” is called Purusha, the “Man,”(1447) from
whom Virâj was born(1448); and from Virâj, the (mortal) man. It is
Varuna—lowered from his sublime position to be the chief of the
Lords—Dhyânîs or Devas—who regulates all natural phenomena, who “makes a
path for the Sun, for him to follow.” The seven Rivers of the Sky (the
descending Creative Gods), and the seven Rivers of the Earth (the seven
primitive Mankinds), are under his control, as will be seen. For he who
breaks Varuna’s laws (Vratâni, or “courses of natural action,” active
laws), is punished by Indra(1449) the Vedic powerful God, whose Vrata, or
law or power, is greater than the Vratâni of any other God.

Thus, the _Rig Veda_, the oldest of _all the known_ ancient records, may
be shown to corroborate the Occult Teachings in almost every respect. Its
Hymns, which are the records written by the earliest Initiates of the
Fifth (our) Race concerning the Primordial Teachings, speak of the Seven
Races (two still to come), allegorizing them by the seven “Streams”(1450)
and of the Five Races (Panchakrishtayah) which have already inhabited this
world(1451) on the five Regions (Panchapradishah)(1452) as also of the
three Continents that were.(1453)

It is only those scholars who will master the secret meaning of the
Purusha Sukta—in which the intuition of the modern Orientalists has chosen
to see “one of the very latest hymns of the _Rig Veda_”—who may hope to
understand how harmonious are its teachings and how corroborative of the
Esoteric Doctrines. He must study, in all the abstruseness of their
metaphysical meaning, the relations therein between the (Heavenly) Man
(Purusha), _sacrificed_ for the production of the Universe and all in
it,(1454) and the terrestrial mortal man(1455) before he realizes the
hidden philosophy of the verse:


    15. He [“Man,” Purusha, or Vishvakarman] had seven enclosing logs
    of fuel, and _thrice seven_ layers of fuel; when the Gods
    performed the sacrifice, they bound the Man as victim.


This relates to the three septenary primeval Races, and shows the
antiquity of the _Vedas_, which knew of no other sacrifice, probably, in
these earliest _oral_ teachings; and also to the seven primeval groups of
Mankind, as Vishvakarman represents divine Humanity collectively.(1456)

The same doctrine is found reflected in the other old religions. It may,
it must, have come down to us disfigured and misinterpreted, as in the
case of the Parsîs who read it in their _Vendîdâd_ and elsewhere, though
without understanding the allusions therein contained any better than do
the Orientalists; yet the doctrine is plainly mentioned in their old
works.(1457)

Comparing the Esoteric Teaching with the interpretations by Prof. James
Darmesteter, one may see at a glance where the mistake is made, and the
cause that produced it. The passage runs thus:


    The Indo‐Iranian Asura [Ahura] was often conceived as _sevenfold_;
    by the play of certain mythical [?] formulæ and the strength of
    certain mythical [?] numbers, the ancestors of the Indo‐Iranians
    had been led to speak of seven worlds,(1458) and the supreme god
    was often made sevenfold, as well as the worlds over which he
    ruled. The seven worlds became in Persia the seven Karshvare of
    the earth: the earth is divided into seven Karshvare, _only one of
    which is known and accessible to man_, the one on which we live,
    namely, Hvaniratha; which amounts to saying that there are _seven
    earths_.(1459) Parsi mythology knows also of seven heavens.
    Hvaniratha itself is divided into seven climes. (Orm. Ahr. §
    72.)(1460)


The same division and doctrine is to be found in the oldest and most
revered of the Hindû scriptures—the _Rig Veda_. Mention is made therein of
six Worlds, _besides_ our Earth: the six Rajamsi above Prithivî, the
Earth, or “this” (Idam) as opposed to “that which is _yonder_” (_i.e._,
the six Globes on the _three_ other planes or Worlds).(1461)

The italics are ours to point out the identity of the tenets with those of
the Esoteric Doctrine, and to accentuate the mistake that is made. The
Magi or Mazdeans only believed in what other people believed in: namely,
in seven “Worlds” or Globes of our Planetary Chain, of which _only one_ is
accessible to man, at the present time, our Earth; and in the successive
appearance and destruction of seven Continents or Earths on this our
Globe, each Continent being divided, in commemoration of the seven Globes
(one visible, six invisible), into seven islands or continents, seven
“climes,” etc. This was a common belief in those days when the now Secret
Doctrine was open to all. It is this multiplicity of localities in
septenary divisions, which has made the Orientalists—who have, moreover,
been further led astray by the oblivion of their primitive doctrines of
both the uninitiated Hindûs and Parsîs—feel so puzzled by this ever‐
recurring seven‐fold number as to regard it as “mythical.” It is this
oblivion of first principles which has led the Orientalists off the right
track and made them commit the greatest blunders. The same failure is
found in the definition of the Gods. Those who are ignorant of the
Esoteric Doctrine of the earliest Âryans, can never assimilate or even
understand correctly the metaphysical meaning contained in these Beings.

Ahura Mazda (Ormazd) was the head and synthesis of the seven Amesha
Spentas, or Amshaspands, and, therefore, an Amesha Spenta himself. Just as
Jehovah‐Binah‐Elohim was the head and synthesis of the Elohim, and no
more; so Agni‐Vishnu‐Sûrya was the synthesis and head, or the focus whence
emanated in physics and also in metaphysics, from the spiritual as well as
from the physical Sun, the seven Rays, the seven Fiery Tongues, the seven
Planets or Gods. All these became supreme Gods and _the_ One God, but only
after the loss of the primeval secrets; _i.e._, the sinking of Atlantis,
or the “Flood,” and the occupation of India by the Brâhmans, who sought
safety on the summits of the Himâlayas, for even the high table‐lands of
what is now Tibet became submerged for a time. Ahura Mazda is addressed
only as the “Most Blissful Spirit, Creator of the _Corporeal_ World” in
the _Vendîdâd_. Ahura Mazda in its literal translation means the “Wise
Lord” (Ahura “lord” and Mazda “wise”). Moreover, this name of Ahura, in
Sanskrit Asura, connects him with the Mânasaputras, the Sons of Wisdom who
informed the mindless man, and endowed him with his mind (Manas). Ahura
(Asura) may be derived from the root _ah_ “to be,” but in its primal
signification it is what the Secret Teaching shows it to be.

When Geology shall have found out how many thousands of years ago the
disturbed waters of the Indian Ocean reached the highest plateaux of
Central Asia, when the Caspian Sea and the Persian Gulf made one with it,
then only will they know the age of the existing Âryan Brâhmanical nation,
and also the time of its descent into the plains of Hindûstan, which did
not take place till millenniums later.

Yima, the so‐called “first man” in the _Vendîdâd_, as much as his twin‐
brother Yama, the son of Vaivasvata Manu, belongs to two epochs of
Universal History. He is the Progenitor of the Second human Race, hence
the personification of the Shadows of the Pitris, and the Father of the
Postdiluvian Humanity. The Magi said, “Yima,” as we say “man” when
speaking of mankind. The “fair Yima,” the first mortal who converses with
Ahura Mazda, is the _first _“man”_ who dies_ or disappears, not the first
who is born. The “son of Vîvanghat”(1462) was, like the son of Vaivasvata,
the symbolical man, who stood in Esotericism as the representative of the
_first three_ Races and the collective Progenitor thereof. Of these Races
the first two never died(1463) but only vanished, absorbed in their
progeny, and the Third knew death only towards its close, after the
separation of the sexes and its “Fall” into generation. This is plainly
alluded to in Fargard ii of the _Vendîdâd_. Yima refuses to become the
bearer of the law of Ahura Mazda, saying:


    “I was not born, I was not taught to be the preacher and the
    bearer of thy law.”(1464)


And then Ahura Mazda asks him to make his men increase and “watch over”
his world.

He refuses to become the priest of Ahura Mazda, because he is _his own
priest and sacrificer_, but he accepts the second proposal. He is made to
answer:


    “Yes!... Yes, I will nourish, and rule, and watch over thy world.
    There shall be, while I am king, neither cold wind nor hot wind,
    _neither disease nor death_.”


Then Ahura Mazda brings him a golden ring and a poniard, the emblems of
sovereignty.


    Thus, under the sway of Yima, three hundred _winters_ passed away,
    and the earth was _replenished_ with flocks and herds, with men
    and dogs and birds and with red blazing fires.


Three hundred winters mean three hundred periods or cycles. “Replenished,”
mark well; that is to say, all this had been on it before; and thus is
proven the knowledge of the doctrine about the successive Destructions of
the World and its Life‐Cycles. Once the “three hundred winters” were over,
Ahura Mazda warns Yima that the Earth is becoming too full, and men have
nowhere to live. Then Yima steps forward, and with the help of Spenta
Ârmaita, the female Genius, or Spirit of the Earth, makes that Earth
stretch out and become larger by one‐third, after which “new flocks and
herds and men” appear upon it. Ahura Mazda warns him again, and Yima makes
the Earth by the same magic power to become larger by two‐thirds. “Nine
hundred winters” _pass_ away, and Yima has to perform the ceremony for the
_third_ time. The whole of this is allegorical. The three processes of
stretching the Earth, refer to the three successive Continents and Races
issuing one after and from the other, as explained more fully elsewhere.
After the _third_ time, Ahura Mazda warns Yima in an assembly of
“celestial gods” and “excellent mortals” that upon the material world the
fatal winters are going to fall, and all _life_ will perish. This is the
old Mazdean symbolism for the “Flood,” and the coming cataclysm to
Atlantis, which sweeps away every Race in its turn. Like Vaivasvata Manu
and Noah, Yima makes a Vara—an Enclosure, an Ark—under the God’s
direction, and brings thither the seed of every living creature, animals
and “Fires.”

It is of this “Earth” or new Continent that Zarathushtra became the law‐
giver and ruler. This was the Fourth Race in its beginning, after the men
of the Third began to die out. Till then, as said above, there had been no
regular death, but only a transformation, for _men had no personality_ as
yet. They had Monads—“Breaths” of the One Breath, as impersonal as the
source from which they proceeded. They had bodies, or rather shadows of
bodies, which were sinless, hence Karma‐less. Therefore, as there was no
Kâma Loka—least of all Nirvâna or even Devachan—for the “Souls” of men who
had no personal Egos, there could be no intermediate periods between the
incarnations. Like the Phœnix, primordial man resurrected out of his old
into a new body. Each time, and with each new generation, he became more
solid, more physically perfect, agreeably with the evolutionary law, which
is the Law of Nature. Death came with the complete physical organism, and
with it—moral decay.

This explanation shows one more old religion agreeing in its symbology
with the Universal Doctrine.

Elsewhere the oldest Persian traditions, the relics of Mazdeism of the
still older Magians, are given, and some of them explained. Mankind did
not issue from one solitary couple. Nor was there ever a first man—whether
Adam or Yima—but a first mankind.

It may, or may not, be “mitigated polygenism.” Once that both Creation _ex
nihilo_ (an absurdity) and a superhuman Creator or Creators (a fact) are
made away with by Science, polygenism presents no more difficulties or
inconveniences—rather fewer from a scientific point of view—than
monogenism does.

In fact, it is as scientific as any other claim. For in his Introduction
to Nott and Gliddon’s _Types of Mankind_, Agassiz declares his belief in
an indefinite number of “primordial races of men created _separately_”;
and remarks that, “whilst in every zoological province animals are of
_different_ species, _man_, in spite of the diversity of his races, always
forms _one and the same_ human being.”

Occultism defines and limits the number of primordial races to seven,
because of the seven “Progenitors,” or Prajâpatis, the evolvers of beings.
These are neither Gods, nor supernatural Beings, but advanced Spirits from
another and lower Planet, reborn on this Planet, and giving birth in their
turn in the present Round to present Humanity. This doctrine is again
corroborated by one of its echoes—among the Gnostics. In their
anthropology and genesis of man they taught that “a certain company of
_seven_ Angels,” formed the first men, who were no better than senseless,
gigantic, shadowy forms—“a mere wriggling worm” (!) writes Irenæus,(1465)
who takes, as usual, the metaphor for reality.



D. The Septenary In The Exoteric Works.


We may now examine other ancient scriptures and see whether they contain
the septenary classification, and, if so, to what degree.

Scattered about in thousands of other Sanskrit texts, some still unopened,
others yet unknown, as well as in all the _Purânas_, as much as, if not
much more than, even in the Jewish _Bible_, the numbers seven and forty‐
nine (7 × 7) play a most prominent part. In the _Purânas_ they are found
from the seven Creations, in the first chapters, down to the seven Rays of
the Sun at the final Pralaya, which expand into seven Suns and absorb the
material of the whole Universe. Thus the _Matsya Purâna_ has:


    For the sake of promulgating the Vedas, Vishnu, in the beginning
    of a Kalpa, related to Manu the story of Narasimha and the events
    of _seven_ Kalpas.(1466)


Then again the same _Purâna_ shows that:


    In all the Manvantaras, classes of Rishis(1467) appear by seven
    and _seven_, and having established a code of law and morality
    depart to felicity.(1468)


The Rishis, however, represent many other things besides living sages.

In Dr. Muir’s translation of the _Atharva Veda_, we read:


    1. Time carries (us) forward, a steed, with _seven_ rays, a
    thousand eyes, undecaying, full of fecundity. On him intelligent
    sages mount; his wheels are all the worlds.

    2. Thus Time moves on _seven_ wheels; he has _seven_ naves;
    immortality is his axle. He is at present _all these worlds_. Time
    hastens onward the first God.

    3. A full jar is contained in Time. We behold him existing in many
    forms. He is all these worlds in the future. They call him “Time
    in the highest Heaven.”(1469)


Now add to this the following verse from the Esoteric Volumes:

_Space and Time are one. Space and Time are nameless, for they are the
incognizable That, which can be sensed only through its seven Rays—which
are the seven Creations, the seven Worlds, the seven Laws, etc._

Remembering that the _Purânas_ insist on the identity of Vishnu with Time
and Space,(1470) and that even the Rabbinical symbol for God is Maqom,
“Space,” it becomes clear why, for purposes of a manifesting Deity—Space,
Matter, and Spirit—the one central Point became the Triangle and
Quaternary—the perfect Cube—hence _seven_. Even the Pravaha Wind—the
mystic and occult force that gives the impulse to, and regulates the
course of the stars and planets—is septenary. The _Kûrma_ and _Linga
Purânas_ enumerate seven principal winds of that name, which winds are the
principles of Cosmic Space.(1471) They are intimately connected with
Dhruva(1472) (now Alpha), the Pole‐Star, which is connected in its turn
with the production of various phenomena through cosmic forces.

Thus, from the seven Creations, seven Rishis, Zones, Continents,
Principles, etc., in the Âryan Scriptures, the number has passed through
Indian, Egyptian, Chaldæan, Greek, Jewish, Roman, and finally Christian
mystic thought, until it landed in, and remained indelibly impressed on,
every exoteric theology. The seven old books stolen out of Noah’s Ark by
Ham, and given to Cush, his son, and the seven Brazen Columns of Ham and
Cheiron, are a reflection and a remembrance of the seven primordial
Mysteries instituted according to the “seven secret Emanations,” the seven
Sounds, and seven Rays—the spiritual and sidereal models of the seven
thousand times seven copies of them in later æons.

The mysterious number is once more prominent in the no less mysterious
Maruts. The _Vâyu Purâna_ shows, and the _Harivamsha_ corroborates,
concerning the Maruts—the oldest as the most incomprehensible of all the
secondary or lower Gods in the _Rig Veda_:


    That they are _born in every Manvantara [Round], seven times
    seven_ (or forty‐nine); that, in each Manvantara, _four times
    seven_ (or twenty‐eight) obtain emancipation, but their places are
    _filled up by persons reborn in that character_.(1473)


What are the Maruts in their Esoteric meaning, and who _those persons_
“reborn in that character”? In the _Rik_ and other _Vedas_, the Maruts are
represented as the Storm Gods and the _friends and allies_ of Indra; they
are the “Sons of Heaven and of Earth.” This led to an allegory that makes
them the children of Shiva, the great patron of the Yogîs:


    The Mahâ Yogî, the great _ascetic_, in whom is centred the highest
    perfection of austere penance and abstract meditation, _by which
    the most unlimited powers are attained, marvels and miracles are
    worked, the highest spiritual knowledge is acquired, and union
    with the great spirit of the universe is eventually gained_.(1474)


In the _Rig Veda_ the name Shiva is unknown, but the corresponding God is
called Rudra, a name used for Agni, the Fire‐God, the Maruts being called
therein his sons. In the _Râmâyana_ and the _Purânas_, their mother,
Diti—the sister, or complement, and a form of Aditi—anxious to obtain a
son who would destroy Indra, is told by Kashyapa, the Sage, that if, “with
thoughts wholly pious and person entirely pure,” she carries the babe in
her womb “for a hundred years,”(1475) she will have such a son. But Indra
foils her in the design. With his thunderbolt he _divides the embryo in
her womb into seven portions_, and then divides every such portion _into
seven pieces again_, which become the swift‐moving deities, the
Maruts.(1476) These Deities are only another _aspect_, or a development,
of the Kumâras, who are patronymically Rudras, like many others.(1477)

Diti, being Aditi—unless the contrary is proven to us—Aditi, we say, or
Âkâsha in her highest form, is the Egyptian _seven‐fold_ Heaven. Every
true Occultist will understand what this means. Diti, we repeat, is the
sixth principle of _metaphysical_ Nature, the Buddhi of Âkâsha. Diti, the
Mother of the Maruts, is one of her terrestrial forms, made to represent,
at one and the same time, the Divine Soul in the ascetic, and the divine
aspirations of mystic Humanity toward deliverance from the webs of Mâyâ,
and consequent final bliss. Indra is now degraded, because of the Kali
Yuga, when such aspirations are no more general but have become abnormal
through a general spread of Ahamkâra, the feeling of Egotism, or “I‐am‐
ness” and ignorance; but in the beginning Indra was one of the greatest
Gods of the Hindû Pantheon, as the _Rig Veda_ shows. Surâdhipa the “chief
of the gods,” has fallen down from Jishnu, the “Leader of the Celestial
Host”—the Hindû St. Michael—to an opponent of asceticism, the enemy of
every holy aspiration. He is shown married to Aindrî (Indrânî), the
personification of Aindriyaka, the evolution of the element of senses,
whom he married “because of her _voluptuous attractions_”; after which he
began sending celestial female demons to excite the passions of holy men,
Yogîs, and “to beguile them from the potent penances which he dreaded.”
Therefore, Indra, now characterized as “the god of the firmament, the
personified atmosphere”—is in reality the cosmic principle Mahat, and the
fifth human principle, Manas in its dual aspect—as connected with Buddhi,
and as allowing itself to be dragged down by the Kâma principle, the body
of passions and desires. This is demonstrated by Brahmâ telling the
conquered God that his frequent defeats were due to Karma, and were a
punishment for his licentiousness, and the seduction of various nymphs. It
is in this latter character that he seeks, to save himself from
destruction, to destroy the coming “babe,” destined to conquer him—the
babe, of course, allegorizing the divine and steady will of the Yogî,
determined to resist all such temptations, and thus destroy the passions
within his earthly personality. Indra succeeds again, because flesh
conquers spirit.(1478) He divides the “embryo” (of new _divine_ Adeptship,
begotten once more by the Ascetics of the Âryan Fifth Race) into _seven_
portions (a reference not alone to the seven sub‐races of the new Root‐
Race, in each of which there will be a Manu,(1479) but also to the seven
degrees of Adeptship), and then each portion into seven pieces—alluding to
the Manu‐Rishis of each Root‐Race, and even sub‐race.

It does not seem difficult to perceive what is meant by the Maruts
obtaining “four times seven” emancipations in every Manvantara, and by
those persons who are _re‐born_ in that character, viz., of the Maruts in
their Esoteric meaning, and who “fill up their places.” The Maruts
represent (_a_) the passions that storm and rage within every Candidate’s
breast, when preparing for an ascetic life—this mystically; (_b_) the
Occult potencies concealed in the manifold aspects of Âkâsha’s lower
principles—her body, or Sthûla Sharîra, representing the terrestrial,
lower atmosphere of every inhabited Globe—this mystically and sidereally;
(_c_) actual conscious existences, beings of a cosmic and psychic nature.

At the same time, Marut in Occult parlance is one of the names given to
those Egos of great Adepts who have passed away, and are known also as
Nirmânakâyas; of those Egos for whom—_since they are beyond
illusion_—there is no Devachan, who, having either voluntarily renounced
Nirvâna for the good of mankind, or who not yet having reached it, remain
invisible on Earth. Therefore are the Maruts(1480) shown, firstly, as the
sons of Shiva‐Rudra, the Patron Yogî, whose Third Eye (mystically) must be
acquired by the Ascetic before he becomes an Adept; then, in their cosmic
character, as the subordinates of Indra and his opponents, under various
characters. The “four times seven” emancipations have a reference to the
four Rounds, and the four Races that preceded ours, in each of which
Maruta‐Jîvas (Monads) have been re‐born, and would have obtained final
liberation, if only they had chosen to avail themselves of it. But instead
of this, out of love for the good of mankind, which would struggle still
more hopelessly in the meshes of ignorance and misery _were it not for
this extraneous help_, they are re‐born over and over again “in that
character,” and thus “fill up their own places.” _Who_ they are, “on
Earth”—every student of Occult Science knows. And he also knows that the
Maruts are Rudras, among whom also the family of Tvashtri, a synonym of
Vishvakarman, the great Patron of the Initiates, is included. This gives
us an ample knowledge of their true nature.

The same for the septenary division of cosmos and the human principles.
The _Purânas_, along with other sacred texts, teem with allusions to this.
First of all, the Mundane Egg which contained Brahmâ, or the Universe, was
externally invested with _seven_ natural elements, at first loosely
enumerated as Water, Air, Fire, Ether, and _three secret_ elements; then
the “World” is said to be “encompassed on every side” by seven elements,
also _within_ the Egg—as explained:


    The world is encompassed on every side, and above, and below, by
    the shell of the egg (of Brahmâ) [Andakatâha].(1481)


Around the shell flows Water, which is surrounded with Fire; Fire by Air;
Air by Ether; Ether by the Origin of the Elements (Ahamkâra); the latter
by Universal Mind, or “Intellect,” as Wilson translates. It relates to
Spheres of Being as much as to Principles. Prithivî is not our Earth but
the World, the Solar System, and means the “broad,” the “wide.” In the
_Vedas_—the greatest of all authorities, though needing a key to be read
correctly—three terrestrial and three celestial Earths are mentioned as
having been called into existence simultaneously with Bhûmi, our Earth. We
have often been told that six, not _seven_, appears to be the number of
spheres, principles, etc. We answer that there are, in fact, only six
principles in man; since his body is _no_ principle, but the covering, the
shell of a principle. So with the Planetary Chain; therein, speaking
Esoterically, the Earth—as well as the seventh, or rather fourth plane,
one that stands as the seventh, if we count from the first triple kingdom
of the Elementals that begin its formation—may be left out of
consideration, being (to us) the only distinct body of the seven. The
language of Occultism is varied. But supposing that _three_ Earths only,
instead of seven, are meant in the _Vedas_, what are those three, since we
still know of but one? Evidently there _must be_ an Occult meaning in the
statement under consideration. Let us see. The “Earth that floats” on the
Universal Ocean of Space, which Brahmâ divides in the _Purânas_ into seven
Zones, is Prithivî, the World divided into seven principles—a cosmic
division, looking metaphysical enough, but, in reality, _physical_ in its
Occult effects. Many Kalpas later, our Earth is mentioned, and again, in
its turn, is divided into seven Zones according to the law of analogy
which guided ancient Philosophers. After which we find on it seven
Continents, seven Isles, seven Oceans, seven Seas and Rivers, seven
Mountains, seven Climates, etc.(1482)

Furthermore, it is not only in the Hindû scriptures and philosophy that
one finds references to the seven Earths, but in the Persian, Phœnician,
Chaldæan, and Egyptian cosmogonies, and even in Rabbinical literature. The
Phœnix(1483)—called by the Hebrews Onech ענק, from Phenoch, Enoch, the
symbol of a secret cycle and initiation, and by the Turks, Kerkes—lives a
thousand years, after which, kindling a flame, it is self‐consumed; and
then, reborn from itself, it lives another thousand years, up to _seven
times seven_,(1484) when comes the Day of Judgment. The “seven times
seven,” or forty‐nine, are a transparent allegory, and an allusion to the
forty‐nine Manus, the seven Rounds, and the seven times seven human Cycles
in each Round on each Globe. The Kerkes and the Onech stand for a Race
Cycle, and the mystical Tree Ababel, the “Father Tree” in the _Kurân_,
shoots out new branches and vegetation at every resurrection of the Kerkes
or Phœnix; the “Day of Judgment” meaning a minor Pralaya. The author of
the _Book of God_ and the _Apocalypse_ believes that:


    The Phœnix is ... very plainly the same as the Simorgh of Persian
    romance; and the account which is given us of this last bird yet
    more decisively establishes the opinion that the death and revival
    of the Phœnix exhibit the successive destruction and reproduction
    of the world, which many believed to be effected by the agency of
    a fiery deluge [and also a watery one in its turn]. When the
    Simorgh was asked her age, she informed Caherman that this world
    is very ancient, for it has been already _seven times
    replenished_, with beings different from men, and _seven times
    depopulated_:(1485) that the age of the human race in which we now
    are, is to endure seven thousand years, and that she herself had
    seen _twelve_ of these revolutions, and knew not how many more she
    had to see.(1486)


The above, however, is no new statement. From Bailly, in the last century,
down to Dr. Kenealy, in the present, these facts have been noticed by a
number of writers; but now a connection can be established between the
Persian oracle and the Nazarene prophet. Says the author of the _Book of
God_:


    The Simorgh is in reality the same as the winged Singh of the
    Hindûs, and the Sphinx of the Egyptians. It is said that the
    former will appear at the end of the world ... [as a] monstrous
    lion‐bird.... From these the Rabbins have borrowed their mythos of
    an enormous Bird, sometimes standing on the earth, sometimes
    walking in the ocean ... while its head props the sky; and with
    the symbol, they have also adopted the doctrine to which it
    relates. They teach that there are to be _seven successive
    renewals_ of the globe; that each reproduced system will last
    _seven_ thousand years [?]; and that the _total duration of the
    Universe_ will be 49,000 years. This opinion, which involves the
    doctrine of the preëxistence of each renewed creature, they may
    either have learned during their Babylonian captivity, or _it may
    have been part of the primeval religion_ which their priests had
    preserved from remote times.(1487)


It shows rather that the initiated Jews _borrowed_, and their non‐
initiated successors, the Talmudists, lost, the sense, and applied the
seven Rounds, and the forty‐nine Races, etc., wrongly.

Not only _their_ priests, but those of every other country. The Gnostics,
whose various teachings are the many echoes of the one primitive and
universal doctrine, put the same numbers, under another form, in the mouth
of Jesus in the very occult _Pistis Sophia_. We say more: even the
Christian editor or author of _Revelation_ has preserved this tradition
and speaks of the _seven_ Races, four of which, with part of the fifth,
are gone, and two have to come. It is stated as plainly as can be. Thus
saith the angel:


    And here is the mind which hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven
    mountains, on which the woman sitteth. And there are _seven_
    kings; _five_ are fallen, and one _is_, and the other is not yet
    come.(1488)


Who, in the least acquainted with the symbolical language of old, will
fail to discern in the _five_ Kings that have fallen, the four Root‐Races
that were, and part of the Fifth, the one that _is_; and in the _other_,
that “is not yet come,” the Sixth and Seventh coming Root‐Races, as also
the sub‐races of this, our present Race? Another still more forcible
allusion to the seven Rounds and the forty‐nine Root‐Races in _Leviticus_,
will be found elsewhere, Part III.(1489)



E. Seven In Astronomy, Science, And Magic.


Again, number _seven_ is closely connected with the Occult significance of
the Pleiades, those seven daughters of Atlas, “the six present, the
seventh _hidden_.” In India they are connected with their nursling, the
war God, Kârttikeya. It was the Pleiades (in Sanskrit, Krittikâs) who gave
this name to the God, Kârttikeya being the planet Mars, _astronomically_.
As a God he is the son of Rudra, born without the intervention of a woman.
He is a Kumâra, a “virgin youth” again, generated in the fire from the
Seed of Shiva—the Holy Spirit—hence called Agni‐bhû. The late Dr. Kenealy
believed that, in India, Kârttikeya is the secret symbol of the Cycle of
the Naros, composed of 600, 666, and 777 years, according to whether solar
or lunar, divine or mortal, years are counted; and that the six visible,
or the seven actual sisters, the Pleiades, are needed for the completion
of this most secret and mysterious of all the astronomical and religious
symbols. Therefore, when intended to commemorate one particular event,
Kârttikeya was shown, of old, as a Kumâra, an Ascetic, with _six_
heads—one for each century of the Naros. When the symbolism was needed for
another event, then, in conjunction with the seven sidereal sisters,
Kârttikeya is seen accompanied by Kaumârî, or Senâ, his female aspect. He
is then riding on a peacock, the bird of Wisdom and Occult Knowledge, and
the Hindû Phœnix, whose Greek relation with the 600 years of the Naros is
well known. A six‐rayed star (double triangle), a Svastika, a six and
occasionally seven‐pointed crown, is on his brow; the peacock’s tail
represents the sidereal heavens; and the twelve signs of the Zodiac are
_hidden on his body_; for which he is also called Dvâdasha‐kara, the
“twelve‐handed,” and Dvâdashâksha, “twelve‐eyed.” It is as Shakti‐dhara,
however, the “spear‐holder,” and the conqueror of Târaka, Târaka‐jit, that
he is shown to be most famous.

As the years of the Naros are, in India, counted in two ways, either by
one hundred “years of the gods” (divine years), or one hundred “mortal
years,” we can see the tremendous difficulty the non‐initiated have in
arriving at a correct comprehension of this cycle, which plays such an
important part in St. John’s _Revelation_. It is the truly apocalyptic
cycle, because of its being of various lengths and relating to various
pre‐historic events, and in none of the numerous speculations about it
have we found any but a few _approximate_ truths.

Against the duration claimed by the Babylonians for their divine ages, it
has been urged that Suidas shows the Ancients counting days for years, in
their chronological computations. It is to Suidas and his authority that
Dr. Sepp appeals in his ingenious plagiarism—which we have already
exposed—of the Hindû figures 432. These they give in thousands and
millions of years, the duration of their Yugas, but Sepp dwarfed them to
4,320 _lunar_ years,(1490) “before the birth of Christ,” as “foreordained”
in the sidereal, in addition to the invisible, heavens, and proved “by the
apparition of the Star of Bethlehem.” But Suidas had no other warrant for
this assertion than his own speculations, and he was not an Initiate. He
cites, as a proof, Vulcan, and shows him reigning 4,477 years, or 4,477
_days_, as he thinks, or again rendered in years, 12 years, 3 months, and
7 days; he has, however, 5 days in his original—thus committing an error
even in such an easy calculation.(1491) True, there are other ancient
writers guilty of like fallacious speculations; Calisthenes, for instance,
who assigns to the astronomical observations of the Chaldæans only 1,903
years, whereas Epigenes recognizes 720,000 years.(1492) The whole of these
hypotheses made by profane writers are due to a misunderstanding. The
chronology of the Western peoples, ancient Greeks and Romans, was borrowed
from India. Now, it is said in the Tamil edition of _Bagavadam_ that 15
solar days make a Paccham; two Pacchams, or 30 days, make a month of
mortals, which is only one _day_ of the Pitara Devatâ or Pitris. Again, 2
of these months constitute a Rûdû, 3 Rûdûs make an Ayanam, and 2 Ayanams a
year of mortals, which is only a _day_ of the Gods. It is from such
misunderstood teachings that some Greeks have imagined that all the
initiated priests had transformed days into years!

This mistake of the ancient Greek and Latin writers became pregnant with
results in Europe. At the close of the past and the beginning of the
present century, Bailly, Dupuis, and others, relying upon the purposely
mutilated accounts of Hindû chronology, brought from India by certain
unscrupulous and too zealous missionaries, built quite a fantastic theory
on the subject. Because the Hindûs had made of half a revolution of the
moon a measure of time; and because a month composed of only fifteen days,
of which Quintus Curtius speaks,(1493) is found mentioned in Hindû
literature, therefore, it becomes a verified fact that their _year_ was
only half a year, when it was not called a _day_! The Chinese, also,
divided their Zodiac into twenty‐four parts, and hence their year into
twenty‐four fortnights, but such computation did not, nor does it, prevent
them having an astronomical year just the same as ours. They also have a
period of 60 days—the Southern Indian Rûdû—to this day in some provinces.
Moreover, Diodorus Siculus(1494) calls “_thirty days_ an Egyptian year,”
or that period during which the moon performs a complete revolution. Pliny
and Plutarch(1495) both speak of it; but does it stand to reason that the
Egyptians, who knew Astronomy as well as any other nation, made the
_lunar_ month consist of 30 days, when it is only 28 days with fractions?
This lunar period had an Occult meaning surely as well as had also the
Ayanam and the Rûdû of the Hindûs. The year of 2 months’ duration, and the
period of 60 days also, was a universal measure of time in antiquity, as
Bailly himself shows in his _Traité de l’ Astronomie Indienne et
Orientale_. The Chinamen, according to their own books, divided their year
into two parts, from one equinox to the other;(1496) the Arabs anciently
divided the year into six seasons, each composed of two months; in the
Chinese astronomical work called _Kioo‐tche_, it is said that two moons
make a measure of time, and six measures a year; and to this day the
aborigines of Kamschatka have their years of six months, as they had when
visited by Abbé Chappe.(1497) But is all this any reason for claiming that
when the Hindû _Purânas_ say a solar _year_, they mean one solar _day_!

It was the knowledge of the natural laws which make of seven the root
nature‐number, so to say, in the manifested world, or at any rate in our
present terrestrial life‐cycle, and the wonderful comprehension of its
workings, that unveiled to the Ancients so many of the mysteries of
Nature. It is these laws, again, and their processes on the sidereal,
terrestrial, and moral planes, which enabled the old Astronomers to
calculate correctly the duration of the cycles and their respective
effects on the march of events; to record beforehand—to prophesy, it is
called—the influence which they would have on the course and development
of the human races. The Sun, Moon, and Planets being the never‐erring
time‐measurers, whose potency and periodicity were well known, became thus
respectively the great ruler and rulers of our little system in all its
seven domains, or “spheres of action.”(1498)

This has been so evident and remarkable, that even many of the modern men
of Science, Materialists as well as Mystics, have had their attention
called to this law. Physicians and Theologians, Mathematicians and
Psychologists, have repeatedly drawn the attention of the world to this
fact of periodicity in the behaviour of “Nature.” These numbers are
explained in the Commentaries in the following words:

_The Circle is not the __“__One__”__ but the __“__All.__”_

_In the higher [Heaven], the impenetrable Rajah,_(_1499_)_ it [the Circle]
becomes One, because [it is] the indivisible, and there can be no Tau in
it._

_In the second [of the three Rajamsi, or the three __“__Worlds__”__], the
One becomes Two [male and female], and Three [with the Son or Logos], and
the Sacred Four [the Tetraktys, or Tetragrammaton]._

_In the third [the lower World or our Earth], the number becomes Four, and
Three, and Two. Take the first two, and thou wilt obtain Seven, the sacred
number of life; blend [the latter] with the middle Rajah, and thou wilt
have Nine, the sacred number of Being and Becoming._(1500)

When the Western Orientalists have mastered the real meaning of the Rig
Vedic divisions of the World—the two‐fold, three‐fold, six‐ and seven‐
fold, and especially the nine‐fold division—the mystery of the cyclic
divisions applied to Heaven and Earth, Gods and Men, will become clearer
to them than it is now. For:


    _There is a harmony of numbers in all nature; in the force of
    gravity, in the planetary movements, in the laws of heat, light,
    electricity, and chemical affinity, in the forms of animals and
    plants, in the perceptions of the mind._ The direction, indeed, of
    modern natural and physical science is towards a generalization
    which shall express the fundamental laws of all, by one simple
    numerical ratio. We would refer to Professor Whewell’s _Philosophy
    of the Inductive Sciences_, and to Mr. Hay’s researches into the
    laws of harmonious colouring and form. _From these it appears that
    the number seven is distinguished in the laws regulating the
    harmonious perception of forms, colours, and sounds_, and probably
    of taste also, if we could analyze our sensations of this kind
    with mathematical accuracy.(1501)


So much so, indeed, that more than one Physician has stood aghast at the
_septenary_ periodical return of the cycles in the rise and fall of
various complaints, and Naturalists have felt themselves at an utter loss
to explain this law.


    The birth, growth, maturity, vital functions, healthy revolutions
    of change, diseases, decay and death, of insects, reptiles,
    fishes, birds, mammals, and even of man, are more or less
    controlled by a law of _completion in weeks_ [or seven
    days].(1502)


Dr. Laycock, writing on the “Periodicity of  Vital Phenomena,”(1503)
records a “most remarkable illustration and confirmation of the law in
insects.”(1504)

To all of which Mr. Grattan Guinness remarks very pertinently, as he
defends biblical chronology:


    And man’s life ... is a _week_, a _week of decades_. “The days of
    our years are three‐score years and ten.” Combining the testimony
    of all these facts, we are bound to admit that _there prevails in
    organic nature a law of septiform periodicity, a law of completion
    in weeks_.(1505)


Without accepting the conclusions, and especially the premises of the
learned founder of “The East London Institute for Home and Foreign
Missions,” the writer accepts and welcomes his researches in the Occult
chronology of the _Bible_; just as, while rejecting the theories,
hypotheses, and generalizations of Modern Science, we bow before its great
achievements in the world of the Physical, or in all the minor details of
material Nature.

There is most assuredly an Occult “chronological system in Hebrew
scripture,” the _Kabalah_ being its warrant; moreover there is in it “a
system of weeks,” based on the archaic Indian system, which may still be
found in the old Jyotisha.(1506) And there are in it cycles of the “_week_
of days,” of the “_week_ of months,” of years, of centuries, and even of
millenniums, and more, of the “week of years of years.”(1507) But all this
can be found in the Archaic Doctrine. And if the common source of the
chronology in every scripture, however _veiled_, is denied in the case of
the _Bible_; then it will have to be shown how, in face of the six days
and the seventh (a Sabbath), we can escape connecting the Genetic with the
Paurânic Cosmogonies. For the first “week of creation” shows the
septiformity of its chronology and thus connects it with Brahmâ’s “seven
creations.” The able volume from the pen of Mr. Grattan Guinness, in which
he has collected in some 760 pages every proof of this septiform
calculation, is good evidence. For if the biblical chronology is, as he
says, “regulated by the law of weeks,” and if it is septenary, whatever
the measures of the creation week and the length of its days may be, and
if, finally, “the Bible system includes weeks on a great variety of
scales,” then this system is shown to be identical with all the Pagan
systems. Moreover, the attempt to show that 4,320 years, in lunar months,
elapsed between the “Creation” and the “Nativity,” is a clear and
unmistakable connection with the 4,320,000 years of the Hindû Yugas.
Otherwise, why make such efforts to prove that these figures, which are
preëminently Chaldæan and Indo‐Âryan, play such a part in the _New
Testament_? This we shall now prove still more forcibly.

Let the impartial critic compare the two accounts—the _Vishnu Purâna_ and
the _Bible_—and he will find that the “seven creations” of Brahmâ are at
the foundation of the “week of creation” in _Genesis_. The two allegories
are different, but the systems are both built on the same foundation‐
stone. The _Bible_ can be understood _only by the light of_ the _Kabalah_.
Take the _Zohar_, the “Book of Concealed Mystery,” however now disfigured,
and compare. The seven Rishis and the fourteen Manus, of the seven
Manvantaras, issue from Brahmâ’s head; they are his “Mind‐born Sons,” and
it is with them that begins the division of mankind into its Races from
the Heavenly Man, the manifested Logos, who is Brahmâ Prajâpati. Speaking
of the “Skull” (Head) of Macroprosopus, the Ancient One(1508) (in Sanskrit
Sanat is an appellation of Brahmâ), the _Ha Idra Rabba Qadisha_, or
“Greater Holy Assembly,” says that in every one of his hairs is a hidden
fountain issuing from the concealed brain.


    And it shineth and goeth forth through that hair unto the hair of
    Microprosopus, and from it [which is the manifest Quaternary, the
    Tetragrammaton] is his brain formed; and thence that brain goeth
    forth into _thirty_ and _two_ paths [or the Triad and the Duad, or
    again 432].


And again:


    Thirteen curls of hair exist on the one side and on the other of
    the skull [_i.e._, six on one and six on the other, the thirteenth
    being also the fourteenth, as it is male‐female]; ... and through
    them commenceth the division of the hair [the division of things,
    of mankind and the races].(1509)


“We _six_ are lights which shine forth from a _seventh_ (light),” saith
Rabbi Abba; “_thou art the seventh light_”—the synthesis of us all—he
adds, speaking of Tetragrammaton and his seven “companions,” whom he calls
the “eyes of Tetragrammaton.”(1510)

Tetragrammaton is Brahmâ Prajâpati, who assumed _four_ forms, in order to
create four kinds of _supernal_ creatures, _i.e._, made himself _four‐
fold_, or the manifest Quaternary;(1511) after that, he is re‐born in the
_seven_ Rishis, his Mânasaputras, “Mind‐born Sons,” who became later,
nine, twenty‐one, and so on, and who are all said to be born from various
parts of Brahmâ.(1512)

There are two Tetragrammatons: the Macroprosopus and the Microprosopus.
The first is the absolute perfect Square, or the Tetraktys within the
Circle, both abstract conceptions, and is therefore called Ain—Non‐being,
_i.e._, illimitable or absolute “Be‐ness.” But when viewed as
Microprosopus, or the Heavenly Man, the Manifested Logos, he is the
Triangle in the Square—the _sevenfold_ Cube, not the fourfold, or the
plane Square. For it is written in “The Greater Holy Assembly”:


    And concerning this, the children of Israel wished to inquire in
    their hearts [know in their minds], like as it is written, Exod.
    xvii. 7: “Is the Tetragrammaton in the midst of us, or the
    Negatively Existent One?”(1513)


—where they distinguished between Microprosopus, who is called
Tetragrammaton, and between Macroprosopus, who is called Ain, the
Negatively Existent.(1514)

Therefore, Tetragrammaton is the Three _made_ four and the Four made
three, and is represented on this Earth by his seven “Companions,” or
“Eyes”—the “seven eyes of the Lord.” Microprosopus is, at best, only a
_secondary_ manifested Deity. For “The Greater Holy Assembly” elsewhere
says:


    We have learned that there _were ten_ (_Rabbis_) [Companions]
    entered into (_the Assembly_) [the Sod, “mysterious assembly or
    mystery”] and that _seven_ came forth(1515) [_i.e._, _ten_ for the
    unmanifested, seven for the manifested Universe].

    1158. And when Rabbi Schimeon revealed the Arcana, there were
    found none present there save those [seven] (_companions_). And
    Rabbi Schimeon called them the seven eyes of Tetragrammaton, like
    as it is written, Zach. iii. 9: “These are the seven eyes [or
    principles] of Tetragrammaton” [—_i.e._, the four‐fold Heavenly
    Man, or pure Spirit, is resolved into septenary man, pure Matter
    and Spirit].(1516)


Thus the Tetrad is Microprosopus, and the latter is the male‐female
Chokmah‐Binah, the second and third Sephiroth. The Tetragrammaton is the
very essence of number _seven_, in its terrestrial significance. Seven
stands between four and nine—the basis and foundation, astrally, of our
physical world and man, in the kingdom of Malkuth.

For Christians and believers, this reference to _Zechariah_ and especially
to the _Epistle of Peter_,(1517) ought to be conclusive. In the old
symbolism, “man,” chiefly the Inner Spiritual Man is called a “stone.”
Christ is the corner‐stone, and Peter refers to all men as “lively”
(living) stones. Therefore a “stone with seven eyes” on it can only mean a
man whose constitution (_i.e._, his “principles”) is septenary.

To demonstrate more clearly the seven in Nature, it may be added that not
only does the number seven govern the periodicity of the phenomena of
life, but that it is also found dominating the series of chemical
elements, and equally paramount in the world of sound and in that of
colour as revealed to us by the spectroscope. This number is the factor,
_sine quâ non_, in the production of occult astral phenomena.

It is needless to refer in detail to the number of vibrations constituting
the notes of the musical scale; they are strictly analogous to the scale
of chemical elements, and also to the scale of colour as unfolded by the
spectroscope, although in the latter case we deal with only _one_ octave,
while both in music and chemistry we find a series of _seven_ octaves
represented theoretically, of which _six_ are fairly complete and in
ordinary use in both sciences. Thus, to quote Hellenbach:


    It has been established that, from the standpoint of phenomenal
    law, upon which all our knowledge rests, the vibrations of sound
    and light increase regularly, that they divide themselves into
    _seven_ columns, and that the successive numbers in each column
    are closely allied; _i.e._, that they exhibit a close relationship
    which not only is expressed in the figures themselves, but also is
    practically confirmed in chemistry as in music, in the latter of
    which the ear confirms the verdict of the figures.... The fact
    that this periodicity and variety is governed by the number
    _seven_ is undeniable, and it far surpasses the limits of mere
    chance, and must be assumed to have an adequate cause, which cause
    must be discovered.


Verily, then, as Rabbi Abba said:


    We are six lights which shine forth from a seventh (_light_); thou
    [Tetragrammaton] art the seventh light (_the origin of_) us all.

    For assuredly there is no stability in those six, save (_what they
    derive_) from the seventh. For all things depend from the
    seventh.(1518)


The ancient and modern Western American Zuñi Indians seem to have
entertained similar views. Their present‐day customs, their traditions and
records, all point to the fact that, from time immemorial, their
institutions, political, social and religious, were, and still are, shaped
according to the septenary principle. Thus all their ancient towns and
villages were built in clusters of six, around a seventh. It is always a
group of seven, or of thirteen, and always the six surround the seventh.
Again, their sacerdotal hierarchy is composed of six “Priests of the
House” seemingly synthesized in the seventh, who is a woman, the
“Priestess Mother.” Compare this with the “seven great officiating
priests” spoken of in the _Anugîtâ_, the name given to the “seven senses,”
exoterically, and to the seven human principles, Esoterically. Whence this
identity of symbolism? Shall we still doubt the fact of Arjuna going over
to Pâtâla, the Antipodes, America, and there marrying Ulûpî, the daughter
of the Nâga, or rather Nargal, king? But to the Zuñi priests.

These receive, to this day, an annual tribute of corn of seven colours.
Undistinguished from other Indians during the rest of the year, on a
certain day they come out—six priests and one priestess—arrayed in their
priestly robes, each of a colour sacred to the particular God whom the
priest serves and personifies; each of them representing one of the seven
regions, and each receiving corn of the colour corresponding to that
region. Thus, the white represents the East, because from the East comes
the first sun‐light; the yellow corresponds to the North, from the colour
of the flames produced by the Aurora Borealis; the red, the South, as from
that quarter comes the heat; the blue stands for the West, the colour of
the Pacific Ocean, which lies to the West; black is the colour of the
nether underground region—darkness; corn with grains of all colours on one
ear represents the colours of the upper region—of the firmament, with its
rosy and yellow clouds, shining stars, etc. The “speckled” corn, each
grain containing all the colours, is that of the “Priestess‐Mother”—woman
containing in herself the seeds of all races past, present and future; Eve
being the mother of all living.

Apart from these was the Sun—the Great Deity—whose priest was the
spiritual head of the nation. These facts were ascertained by Mr. F.
Hamilton Cushing, who, as many are aware, became a Zuñi, lived with them,
was initiated into their religious mysteries, and has learned more about
them than any other man now living.

Seven is also the great magic number. In the Occult Records the weapon
mentioned in the _Purânas_ and the _Mahâbhârata_—the Âgneyâstra or “fiery
weapon” bestowed by Aurva upon his Chelâ Sagara—is said to be constructed
of seven elements. This weapon—supposed by some ingenious Orientalists to
have been a “rocket” (!)—is one of the many thorns in the side of our
modern Sanskritists. Wilson exercises his penetration over it, on several
pages in his _Specimens of the Hindû Theatre_, and finally fails to
explain it. He can make nothing out of the Âgneyâstra, for he argues:


    These weapons are of a very unintelligible character. Some of them
    are occasionally wielded as missiles; but, in general, they
    _appear to be mystical powers exercised by the individual_—such as
    those of paralyzing an enemy, or _locking his senses fast in
    sleep_, or bringing down storm, and rain, and fire, from
    heaven.(1519)... They are supposed to assume celestial shapes,
    endowed with human faculties.... The _Râmâyana_ calls them the
    sons of Krishâshva.(1520)


The Shastra‐devatâs, “Gods of the divine weapons,” are no more
Âgneyâstras, the weapons, than the gunners of modern artillery are the
cannon they direct. But this simple solution did not seem to strike the
eminent Sanskritist. Nevertheless, as he himself says of the armiform
progeny of Krishâshva, “the allegorical origin of the Âgneyâstra weapons
is, undoubtedly, the more ancient.”(1521) It is the fiery javelin of
Brahmâ.

The seven‐fold Âgneyâstra, like the seven senses and the seven principles,
symbolized by the seven priests, are of untold antiquity. How old is the
doctrine believed in by Theosophists, the following Section will tell.



F. The Seven Souls Of The Egyptologists.


If one turns to those wells of information, _The Natural Genesis_ and the
_Lectures_ of Mr. Gerald Massey, the proofs of the antiquity of the
doctrine under analysis become positively overwhelming. That the belief of
the author differs from ours can hardly invalidate the facts. He views the
symbol from a purely natural standpoint, one perhaps a trifle too
materialistic, because too much that of an ardent Evolutionist and
follower of the modern Darwinian dogmas. Thus he shows that:


    The student of Böhme’s books finds much in them concerning these
    Seven “Fountain Spirits,” and primary powers, treated as seven
    properties of Nature in the alchemistic and astrological phase of
    the mediæval mysteries....

    The followers of Böhme look on such matter as the divine
    revelation of his inspired Seership. They know nothing of the
    natural genesis, the history and persistence of the “Wisdom”(1522)
    of the past (or of the broken links), and are unable to recognize
    the physical features of the ancient “Seven Spirits” beneath their
    modern metaphysical or alchemist mask. A second connecting link
    between the theosophy of Böhme and the physical origins of
    Egyptian thought, is extant in the fragments of _Hermes
    Trismegistus_.(1523) No matter whether these teachings are called
    Illuminatist, Buddhist, Kabalist, Gnostic, Masonic, or Christian,
    the elemental types can only be truly known in their
    beginnings.(1524) When the prophets or visionary showmen of
    cloudland come to us claiming original inspiration, and utter
    something new, we judge of its value by what it is in itself. But
    if we find they bring us the ancient matter which they cannot
    account for, and we can, it is natural that we should judge it by
    the primary significations rather than the latest
    pretensions.(1525) It is useless for us to read our later thought
    into the earliest types of expression, and then say the ancients
    meant that!(1526) Subtilized interpretations which have become
    doctrines and dogmas in theosophy have now to be tested by their
    genesis in physical phenomena, in order that we may explode their
    false pretensions to supernatural origin or supernatural
    knowledge.(1527)


But the able author of _The Book of the Beginnings_ and of _The Natural
Genesis_ does—very fortunately, for us—quite the reverse. He demonstrates
most triumphantly our Esoteric (Buddhist) teachings, by showing them
identical with those of Egypt. Let the reader judge from his learned
lecture on “The Seven Souls of Man.”(1528) Says the author:


    The first form of the mystical Seven was seen to be figured in
    heaven by the seven large stars of the _Great Bear_, the
    constellation assigned by the Egyptians to the Mother of Time, and
    of the seven Elemental Powers.(1529)


Just so, for the Hindûs place their seven primitive Rishis in the Great
Bear, and call this constellation the abode of the Saptarshi, Riksha and
Chitra‐shikhandinas. And their Adepts claim to know whether it is only an
astronomical myth, or a primordial mystery having a deeper meaning than it
bears on its surface. We are also told that:


    The Egyptians divided the face of the sky by night into seven
    parts. The primary Heaven was sevenfold.(1530)


So it was with the Âryans. One has but to read the _Purânas_ about the
beginnings of Brahmâ and his Egg, to see this. Have the Âryans then, taken
the idea from the Egyptians? But, as the lecturer proceeds:


    The earliest forces recognized in Nature were reckoned as seven in
    number. These became Seven Elementals, devils [?], or later
    divinities. Seven properties were assigned to Nature—as matter,
    cohesion, fluxion, coagulation, accumulation, station, and
    division—and _seven elements or souls to man_.(1531)


All this was taught in the Esoteric Doctrine, but it was interpreted and
its mysteries unlocked, as already stated, with _seven_, not two or, at
the utmost, three keys; hence the causes and their effects worked in
invisible or mystic as well as in psychic Nature, and were made referable
to Metaphysics and Psychology as much as to Physiology. As the author
says:


    A principle of _sevening_, so to say, was introduced, and the
    number seven supplied a sacred type _that could be used for
    manifold purposes_.(1532)


And it was so used. For:


    The seven souls of the Pharaoh are often mentioned in the Egyptian
    texts.... _Seven souls, or principles in man were identified by
    our British Druids_.... The Rabbins also ran the number of souls
    up to seven: so, likewise, do the Karens of India.(1533)


And then, the author, with several misspellings, tabulates the two
teachings—the Esoteric and the Egyptian—and shows that the latter had the
same series and in the same order.

[Esoteric] Indian.               Egyptian.
1. Rûpa, body or element of      1. Kha, body.
form.
2. Prâna, the breath of life.    2. Ba, the soul of breath.
3. Astral body.                  3. Khaba, the shade.
4. Manas, or                     4. Akhu, intelligence or
intelligence.(1534)              perception.
5. Kâma Rûpa, or animal soul.    5. Seb, ancestral soul.
6. Buddhi, or spiritual soul.    6. Putah, the first
                                 intellectual father.
7. Âtmâ, pure spirit.            7. Atmu, a divine, or eternal
                                 soul.(1535)

Further on, the lecturer formulates these seven (Egyptian) Souls, as (1)
The Soul of Blood—the _formative_; (2) The Soul of Breath—that _breathes_;
(3) The Shade or Covering Soul—that _envelopes_; (4) The Soul of
Perception—that _perceives_; (5) The Soul of Pubescence—that _procreates_;
(6) The Intellectual Soul—that _reproduces intellectually_; and (7) The
Spiritual Soul—that is _perpetuated permanently_.

From the exoteric and physiological standpoint this may be very correct;
it becomes less so from the Esoteric point of view. To maintain this, does
not at all mean that the “Esoteric Buddhists” _resolve men into a number
of elementary spirits_, as Mr. G. Massey, in the same lecture, accuses
them of maintaining. No “Esoteric Buddhist” has ever been guilty of any
such absurdity. Nor has it been ever imagined that these shadows “become
spiritual beings in another world,” or “seven potential spirits or
elementaries of another life.” What is maintained is simply that every
time the immortal Ego incarnates it becomes, as a total, a compound unit
of Matter and Spirit, which together act on seven different planes of
being and consciousness. Elsewhere, Mr. Gerald Massey adds:


    The seven souls [our “principles”] ... are often mentioned in the
    Egyptian texts. The moon‐god, Taht‐Esmun, or the later sun‐god,
    expressed the seven nature‐powers that were prior to himself, and
    were summed up in him as his seven souls [we say “principles”]....
    The seven stars in the hand of the Christ in Revelation, have the
    same significance.(1536)


And a still greater one, as these stars represent also the _seven keys_ of
the Seven Churches or the Sodalian Mysteries, kabalistically. However, we
will not stop to discuss, but add that other Egyptologists have also
discovered that the septenary constitution of man was a cardinal doctrine
with the old Egyptians. In a series of remarkable articles in the
_Sphinx_, of Munich, Herr Franz Lambert gives incontrovertible proof of
his conclusions from the _Book of the Dead_ and other Egyptian records.
For details the reader must be referred to the articles themselves.

Böhme, the prince of all the mediæval seers, says:


    We find seven especial properties in nature whereby this only
    Mother works all things [which he calls fire, light, sound (the
    upper three) and _desire_, _bitterness_, _anguish_, and
    _substantiality_, thus analyzing the lower in his own mystic way];
    whatever the six forms are spiritually, that the seventh [the body
    or substantiality], is essentially. These are the seven forms of
    the Mother of all Beings, from whence all that is in this world is
    generated.(1537)


And again:


    The Creator hath, in the body of this world, generated himself as
    it were _creaturely_ in his qualifying or Fountain Spirits, and
    all the stars are ... God’s powers, and the whole body of the
    world consisteth in the seven qualifying or fountain
    spirits.(1538)


This is rendering in mystical language our theosophical doctrine. But how
can we agree with Mr. Gerald Massey when he states that:


    The Seven Races of Men that have been sublimated and made
    Planetary [?] by Esoteric Buddhism,(1539) may be met with in the
    Bundahish as (1) the earth‐men; (2) water‐men; (3) breast‐eared
    men; (4) breast‐eyed men; (5) one‐legged men; (6) bat‐winged men;
    (7) men with tails.(1540)


Each of these descriptions, allegorical and even perverted in their later
form, is, nevertheless, an echo of the Secret Doctrine teaching. They all
refer to the pre‐human evolution of the “Water‐men terrible and bad” by
_unaided_ Nature through millions of years, as previously described. But
we deny point‐blank the assertion that “these were never real races,” and
point to the Archaic Stanzas for our answer. It is easy to infer and to
say that our “instructors have mistaken these shadows of the Past, for
things human and spiritual”; but that “they are neither, and never were
either,” it is less easy to prove. The assertion must ever remain on a par
with the Darwinian claim that man and the ape had a common pithecoid
ancestor. What the lecturer takes for a “mode of expression” and nothing
more, in the Egyptian _Ritual_, we take as having quite another and an
important meaning. Here is one instance. Says the _Ritual_, the _Book of
the Dead_:


    “I am the mouse.” “I am the hawk.” “I am the ape.”... “_I am the
    crocodile whose soul comes from_ MEN.”... “_I am the soul of the
    gods._”(1541)


The last sentence but one is explained by the lecturer, who says
parenthetically, “_that is, as a type of intelligence_,” and the last as
meaning, “the Horus, or Christ, as the outcome of all.”

The Occult Teaching answers: It means far more.

It gives first of all a corroboration of the teaching that, while the
human Monad has passed on Globe A and others, in the First Round, through
all the three kingdoms—the mineral, the vegetable, and the animal—in this
our Fourth Round, every mammal has sprung from Man, if the semi‐ethereal,
many‐shaped creature with the _human_ Monad in it, of the first two Races,
can be regarded as Man. But it must be so called; for, in the Esoteric
language, it is not the form of flesh, blood, and bones, now referred to
as man, which is in any way the Man, but the inner divine Monad with its
manifold principles or aspects.

The lecture referred to, however, much as it opposes _Esoteric Buddhism_
and its teachings, is an eloquent answer to those who have tried to
represent the whole as a new‐fangled doctrine. And there are many such, in
Europe, America, and even India. Yet, between the Esotericism of the old
Arhats, and that which has now survived in India among the few Brâhmans
who have seriously studied their Secret Philosophy, the difference does
not appear so very great. It seems centred in, and limited to, the
question of the order of the evolution of cosmic and other principles,
more than anything else. At all events it is no greater divergence than
the everlasting question of the _filioque_ dogma, which since the eighth
century has separated the Roman Catholic from the older Greek Eastern
Church. Yet, whatever the differences in the forms in which the septenary
dogma is presented, the substance is there, and its presence and
importance in the Brâhmanical system may be judged by what one of India’s
learned meta‐physicians and Vedântic scholars says of it:


    The real esoteric seven‐fold classification is one of the most
    important, if not the most important classification, which has
    received its arrangement from the mysterious constitution of this
    eternal type. I may also mention in this connection that the four‐
    fold classification claims the same origin. The light of life, as
    it were, seems to be refracted by the treble‐faced prism of
    Prakriti, having the three Gunams for its three faces, and divided
    into seven rays, which develop in course of time the seven
    principles of this classification. The progress of development
    presents some points of similarity to the gradual development of
    the rays of the spectrum. While the four‐fold classification is
    amply sufficient for all practical purposes, this real seven‐fold
    classification is of great theoretical and scientific importance.
    It will be necessary to adopt it to explain certain classes of
    phenomena noticed by occultists; and it is perhaps better fitted
    to be the basis of a perfect system of psychology. It is not the
    peculiar property of the “Trans‐Himâlayan Esoteric Doctrine.” In
    fact, it has a closer connection with the Brâhmanical Logos than
    with the Buddhist Logos. In order to make my meaning clear I may
    point out here that the Logos has seven forms. In other words,
    there are seven kinds of Logoi in the Cosmos. Each of these has
    became the central figure of one of the seven main branches of the
    ancient Wisdom‐Religion. This classification is not the seven‐fold
    classification we have adopted. I make this assertion without the
    slightest fear of contradiction. The real classification has all
    the requisites of a scientific classification. It has seven
    distinct principles, which correspond with seven distinct states
    of Prajñâ or consciousness. It bridges the gulf between the
    objective and subjective, and indicates the mysterious circuit
    through which ideation passes. The seven principles are allied to
    seven states of matter, and to seven forms of force. These
    principles are harmoniously arranged between two poles, which
    define the limits of _human_ consciousness.(1542)


The above is perfectly correct, save, perhaps, on one point. The “seven‐
fold classification” in the Esoteric System has never (to the writer’s
knowledge) been claimed by any one belonging to it, as “the peculiar
property of the ‘Trans‐Himâlayan Esoteric Doctrine’ ”; but only as having
survived in that old School alone. It is no more the property of the
Trans‐, than it is of the Cis‐Himâlayan Esoteric Doctrine, but is simply
the common inheritance of all such Schools, left to the Sages of the Fifth
Root‐Race by the great Siddhas(1543) of the Fourth. Let us remember that
the Atlanteans became the terrible sorcerers, now celebrated in so many of
the oldest MSS. of India, only toward their “Fall,” whereby the submersion
of their Continent was brought on. What is claimed is simply that the
Wisdom imparted by the “Divine Ones”—born through the Kriyâshaktic powers
of the Third Race before its Fall and separation into sexes—to the Adepts
of the early Fourth Race, has remained in all its pristine purity in a
certain Brotherhood. The said School or Fraternity being closely connected
with a certain island of an inland sea—believed in by both Hindûs and
Buddhists, but called “mythical” by Geographers and Orientalists—the less
one talks of it, the wiser he will be. Nor can one accept the said “seven‐
fold classification” as having “a closer connection with the Brâhmanical
Logos than with the Buddhist Logos,” since both are identical, whether the
one Logos is called Îshvara or Avalokiteshvara, Brahmâ or Padmapâni. These
are, however, very small differences, more fanciful than real, in fact.
Brâhmanism and Buddhism, both viewed from their orthodox aspects, are as
inimical and as irreconcilable as water and oil. Each of these great
bodies, however, has a vulnerable place in its constitution. While even in
their esoteric interpretation both can agree but to disagree, once that
their respective vulnerable points are confronted, every disagreement must
fall, for the two will find themselves on common ground. The “Achilles’
heel” of orthodox Brâhmanism is the Advaita philosophy, whose followers
are called by the pious “Buddhists in disguise”; as that of orthodox
Buddhism is Northern Mysticism, as represented by the disciples of the
philosophies of the Yogâchârya School of Âryâsangha and the Mahâyâna, who
are twitted in their turn by their co‐religionists as “Vedântins in
disguise.” The Esoteric Philosophy of both these can be but one if
carefully analyzed and compared, as Gautama Buddha and Shankarâchârya are
most closely connected, if one believes tradition and certain Esoteric
Teachings. Thus every difference between the two will be found one of form
rather than of substance.

A most mystic discourse, full of septenary symbology, may be found in the
_Anugita_(1544) There the Brâhmana narrates the bliss of having crossed
beyond the regions of illusion:


    In which fancies are the gadflies and mosquitoes, in which grief
    and joy are cold and heat, in which delusion is the blinding
    darkness, in which avarice is the beasts of prey and reptiles, in
    which desire and anger are the obstructors.


The sage describes the entrance into and exit from the forest—a symbol for
man’s life‐time—and also that forest itself:(1545)


    In that forest are seven large trees [the senses, mind and
    understanding, or Manas and Buddhi, included], seven fruits, and
    seven guests; seven hermitages, seven (forms of) concentration,
    and seven (forms of) initiation. This is the description of the
    forest. That forest is filled with trees producing splendid
    flowers and fruits of five colours.


The senses, says the commentator:


    Are called trees, as being producers of the fruits ... pleasures
    and pains ...; the guests are the powers of each sense
    personified—they receive the fruits above described; the
    hermitages are the trees ... in which the guests take shelter; the
    seven forms of concentration are the exclusion from the self of
    the seven functions of the seven senses, etc., already referred
    to; the seven forms of initiation refer to the initiation into the
    higher life, by repudiating as not one’s own the actions of each
    member out of the group of seven.(1546)


The explanation is harmless, if unsatisfactory. Says the Brâhmana,
continuing his description:


    That forest is filled with trees producing flowers and fruits of
    four colours. That forest is filled with trees producing flowers
    and fruits of three colours, and mixed. That forest is filled with
    trees producing flowers and fruits of two colours, and of
    beautiful colours. That forest is filled with trees producing
    flowers and fruits of one colour, and fragrant. That forest is
    filled [instead of with seven] with two large trees producing
    numerous flowers and fruits of undistinguished colours [mind and
    understanding—the two higher senses, or theosophically, Manas and
    Buddhi]. There is one fire [the Self] here, connected with the
    Brahman,(1547) and having a good mind [or _true knowledge_,
    according to Arjuna Mishra]. And there is fuel here, (namely) the
    five senses [or human passions]. The seven (forms of) emancipation
    from them are the seven (forms of) initiation. The qualities are
    the fruits.... There ... the great sages receive hospitality. And
    when they have been worshipped and have disappeared, another
    forest shines forth, in which _intelligence_ is the tree, and
    emancipation the fruit, and which possesses shade (in the form of)
    tranquillity, which depends on knowledge, which has contentment
    for its water, and which has the Kshetrajña(1548) within for the
    sun.


Now, all the above is very plain, and no Theosophist, even among the least
learned, can fail to understand the allegory. And yet, we see great
Orientalists making a perfect mess of it in their explanations. The “great
sages” who “receive hospitality” are explained as meaning the senses,
“which, having worked _as unconnected with the self_ are finally absorbed
into it.” But one fails to understand, if the senses are “unconnected”
with the “Higher Self,” in what manner they can be “absorbed into it.” One
would think, on the contrary, that it is just because the _personal_
senses gravitate and strive to be connected with the _impersonal_ Self,
that the latter, which is Fire, burns the lower five and purifies thereby
the higher two, “mind and understanding,” or the higher aspects of
Manas(1549) and Buddhi. This is quite apparent from the text. The “great
sages” _disappear_ after having “been worshipped.” Worshipped by whom if
they (the presumed senses) are “unconnected with the self”? By Mind, of
course; by Manas (in this case merged in the _sixth sense_) which is not,
and cannot be, the Brahman, the Self, or Kshetrajña—the Soul’s Spiritual
Sun. Into the latter, in time, Manas itself must be absorbed. It has
worshipped “great sages” and given hospitality to _terrestrial_ wisdom;
but once that “another forest shone forth” upon it, it is Intelligence
(Buddhi, the seventh sense, but sixth principle) which is transformed into
_the_ Tree—that Tree whose fruit is emancipation—which finally destroys
the very roots of the Ashvattha tree, the symbol of _life_ and of its
illusive joys and pleasures. And therefore, those who attain to that state
of emancipation have, in the words of the above‐cited Sage, “no fear
afterwards.” In this state “the end cannot be perceived because it extends
on all sides.”

“There always dwell seven females there,” he goes on to say, carrying out
the imagery. These females—who, according to Arjuna Mishra, are the Mahat,
Ahamkâra and five Tanmâtras—have always their faces turned downwards, as
they are obstacles in the way of spiritual ascension.


    In that same [Brahman, the Self] the seven perfect sages, together
    with their chiefs, ... abide, and again emerge from the same.
    Glory, brilliance and greatness, enlightenment, victory,
    perfection and power—these seven rays follow after this same sun
    [Kshetrajña, the Higher Self].... Those whose wishes are reduced
    [the unselfish]; ... whose sins [passions] are burnt up by
    penance, merging the self in the self,(1550) devote themselves to
    Brahman. Those people who understand the forest of knowledge
    [Brahman, or the Self], praise tranquillity. And aspiring to that
    forest, they are [re‐] born so as not to lose courage. Such,
    indeed, is this holy forest.... And understanding it, they [the
    sages] act (accordingly), being directed by the Kshetrajña.


No translator among the Western Orientalists has yet perceived in the
foregoing allegory anything higher than mysteries connected with
sacrificial ritualism, penance, or ascetic ceremonies, and Hatha Yoga. But
he who understands symbolical imagery, and hears the voice of _Self within
Self_, will see in this something far higher than mere ritualism, however
often he may err in minor details of the Philosophy.

And here we must be allowed a last remark. No true Theosophist, from the
most ignorant up to the most learned, ought to claim infallibility for
anything he may say or write upon Occult matters. The chief point is to
admit that, in many a way, in the classification of either cosmic or human
principles, in addition to mistakes in the order of evolution, and
especially on metaphysical questions, those of us who pretend to teach
others more ignorant than ourselves—are all liable to err. Thus mistakes
have been made in _Isis Unveiled_, in _Esoteric Buddhism_, in _Man_, in
_Magic: White and Black_, etc., and more than one mistake is likely to be
found in the present work. This cannot be helped. For a large or even a
small work on such abstruse subjects to be entirely exempt from error and
blunder, it would have to be written from its first to its last page by a
great Adept, if not by an Avatâra. Then only should we say, “This is
verily a work without sin or blemish in it!” But so long as the artist is
imperfect, how can his work be perfect? “Endless is the search for truth!”
Let us love it and aspire to it for its own sake, and not for the glory or
benefit a minute portion of its revelation may confer on us. For who of us
can presume to have the _whole_ truth at his fingers’ ends, even upon one
minor teaching of Occultism?

Our chief point in the present subject, however, has been to show that the
septenary doctrine, or division of the constitution of man, was a very
ancient one, and was not invented by us. This has been successfully done,
for we are supported in this, consciously and unconsciously, by a number
of ancient, mediæval, and modern writers. What the former said, was well
said; what the latter repeated, has generally been distorted. An instance:
Read the Pythagorean Fragments, and study the septenary man as given by
the Rev. G. Oliver, the learned Mason, in his _Pythagorean Triangle_, who
speaks as follows:


    The Theosophic Philosophy ... counted seven properties [or
    principles] in man—viz.:

    (1) The divine golden man.

    (2) The inward holy body from fire and light, like pure silver.

    (3) The elemental man.

    (4) The mercurial ... paradisiacal man.

    (5) The martial soul‐like man.

    (6) The venerine, ascending to the outward desire.

    (7) The solar man, [a witness to and] an inspector of the wonders
    of God [the Universe].

    They had also seven fountain spirits or powers of nature.(1551)


Compare this jumbled account and distribution of Western Theosophic
Philosophy with the latest Theosophic explanations by the Eastern School
of Theosophy, and then decide which is the more correct. Verily:


    Wisdom hath builded her house,
    She hath hewn out her _seven pillars_.(1552)


As to the charge that our School has not adopted the sevenfold
classification of the Brâhmans, but has confused it, this is quite unjust.
To begin with, the “School” is one thing, its exponents (to Europeans)
quite another. The latter have first to learn the A B C of practical
Eastern Occultism, before they can be made to understand correctly the
tremendously abstruse classification based on the seven distinct states of
Prajñâ or Consciousness; and, above all, to realize thoroughly what Prajñâ
_is_, in Eastern metaphysics. To give a Western student that
classification is to try to make him suppose that he can account for the
origin of consciousness, by accounting for the process by which a certain
knowledge, though _only one of the states_ of that consciousness, came to
him; in other words, it is to make him account for something he knows on
_this_ plane, by something he knows nothing about on the other planes;
_i.e._, to lead him from the spiritual and the psychological, direct to
the ontological. This is why the primary, old classification was adopted
by the Theosophists—of which classifications in truth there are many.

To busy oneself, after such a tremendous number of independent witnesses
and proofs have been brought before the public, with an additional
enumeration from theological sources, would be quite useless. The seven
capital sins and seven virtues of the Christian scheme are far less
philosophical than even the seven liberal and the seven accursed
sciences—or the seven arts of enchantment of the Gnostics. For one of the
latter is now before the public, pregnant with danger in the present as
for the future. The modern name for it is _Hypnotism_; used as it is by
scientific and ignorant Materialists, in the general ignorance of the
seven principles, it will soon become _Satanism_ in the full acceptation
of the term.





