PART III. ADDENDA. SCIENCE AND THE SECRET DOCTRINE CONTRASTED.


    The knowledge of this nether world—
      Say, friend, what is it, false or true?
    The false, what mortal cares to know?
      The true, what mortal ever knew?




Section I. Archaic, or Modern Anthropology?


Whenever the question of the Origin of Man is offered seriously to an
unbiassed, honest, and earnest man of Science, the answer comes
invariably: “We do not know.” De Quatrefages with his agnostic attitude is
one of such Anthropologists.

This does not imply that the rest of the men of Science are neither fair‐
minded nor honest, as such a remark would be questionably discreet. But it
is estimated that 75 per cent. of European Scientists are Evolutionists.
Are these representatives of Modern Thought all guilty of flagrant
misrepresentation of the facts? No one says this—but there are a few very
exceptional cases. However, the Scientists, in their anti‐clerical
enthusiasm and in despair of any alternative theory to Darwinism except
that of “special creation,” are unconsciously insincere in “forcing” a
hypothesis the elasticity of which is inadequate, and which resents the
severe strain to which it is now subjected. Insincerity on the same
subject is, however, patent in ecclesiastical circles. Bishop Temple has
come forward as a thorough‐going supporter of Darwinism in his _Religion
and Science_. This clerical writer goes so far as to regard Matter—after
it has received its “primal impress”—as the unaided evolver of all cosmic
phenomena. This view only differs from that of Hæckel, in postulating a
hypothetical Deity at “the back of beyont,” a Deity which stands entirely
aloof from the interplay of forces. Such a metaphysical entity is no more
the Theological God than is that of Kant. Bishop Temple’s truce with
materialistic Science is, in our opinion, impolitic—apart from the fact
that it involves a total rejection of the biblical cosmogony. In the
presence of this display of flunkeyism before the materialism of our
“learned” age, we Occultists can but smile. But how about loyalty to the
Master such theological truants profess to serve—Christ, and Christendom
at large?

However, we have no desire, for the present, to throw down the gauntlet to
the clergy, our business being now with materialistic Science alone. The
latter, in the person of its best representatives, answers to our
question, “We do not know;” yet the majority of them act as though
Omniscience were their heirloom, and they knew all things.

For, indeed, this negative reply has not prevented the majority of
Scientists from speculating on the question, each seeking to have his own
special theory accepted to the exclusion of all others. Thus, from Maillet
in 1748, down to Hæckel in 1870, theories on the origin of the human race
have differed as much as the personalities of their inventors themselves.
Buffon, Bory de St. Vincent, Lamarck, E. Geoffroy St. Hilaire, Gaudry,
Naudin, Wallace, Darwin, Owen, Hæckel, Filippi, Vogt, Huxley, Agassiz,
etc., each has evolved a more or less scientific hypothesis of genesis. De
Quatrefages arranges these theories in two principal groups—one based on a
rapid, and the other on a very gradual transmutation; the former favouring
a new type (man) produced by a being entirely different, the latter
teaching the evolution of man by progressive differentiations.

Strangely enough, it is from the most scientific of these authorities that
has emanated the most unscientific of all the theories upon the subject of
the Origin of Man. This is now so evident, that the hour is rapidly
approaching when the current teaching about the descent of man from an
ape‐like mammal will be regarded with less respect than the formation of
Adam out of clay, and of Eve out of Adam’s rib. For


    It is evident, especially after the most fundamental principles of
    Darwinism, that an organized being cannot be a descendant of
    another whose development is in an inverse order to its own.
    Consequently, in accordance with these principles, man cannot be
    considered as the descendant of any simian type whatever.(1553)


Lucae’s argument _versus_ the Ape‐theory, based on the different flexures
of the bones constituting the axis of the skull in the cases of man and
the anthropoids, is fairly discussed by Schmidt. He admits that:


    The ape as he grows becomes more bestial; man ... more human—


and seems, indeed, to hesitate a moment before he passes on:


    This flexure of the cranial axis may, therefore, still be
    emphasized as a human character, in contradistinction to the apes;
    the peculiar characteristic of an order can scarcely be elicited
    from it; and especially as to the doctrine of descent, this
    circumstance seems in no way decisive.(1554)


The writer is evidently not a little disquieted by his own argument. He
assures us that it upsets any possibility of the present apes having been
the progenitors of mankind. But does it not also negative the bare
possibility of the man and the anthropoid having had a common—though, so
far, an absolutely theoretical—ancestor?

Even “Natural Selection” itself is with every day more threatened. The
deserters from the Darwinian camp are many, and those who were at one time
its most ardent disciples are, owing to new discoveries, slowly but
steadily preparing to turn over a new leaf. In the _Journal of the Royal
Microscopical Society_ for October, 1886, we may read as follows:


    PHYSIOLOGICAL SELECTION.—Mr. G. J. Romanes finds certain
    difficulties in regarding natural selection as a theory for the
    origin of species, as it is rather a theory of the origin of
    adaptive structures. He proposes to replace it by what he calls
    physiological selection, or segregation of the fit. His view is
    based on the extreme sensitiveness of the reproductive system to
    small changes in the conditions of life, and he thinks that
    variations in the direction of greater or less sterility must
    frequently occur in wild species. If the variation be such that
    the reproductive system, while showing some degree of sterility
    with the parent form, continues to be fertile within the limits of
    the varietal form, the variation would neither be swamped by
    intercrossing nor die out on account of sterility. When a
    variation of this kind occurs, the physiological barrier must
    divide the species into two parts. The author, in fine, regards
    mutual sterility, not as one of the effects of specific
    differentiation, but as the cause of it.(1555)


An attempt is made to show the above to be a complement of, and sequence
to, the Darwinian theory. This is a clumsy attempt at best. The public
will soon be asked to believe that Mr. C. Dixon’s _Evolution without
Natural Selection_ is also Darwinism—expanded, as the author certainly
claims it to be!

But it is like splitting the body of a man into three pieces, and then
maintaining that each piece is the identical man he was before,
only—expanded. Yet the author states:


    Let it be clearly understood that not one single syllable in the
    foregoing pages has been written antagonistic to Darwin’s theory
    of Natural Selection. All I have done is to explain _certain_
    phenomena ... the more one studies Darwin’s works, the more one is
    convinced of the truth of his hypothesis [! !].(1556)


And before this, he alludes to:


    The overwhelming array of facts which Darwin gave in support of
    his hypothesis, and which triumphantly carried the theory of
    Natural Selection over all obstacles and objections.(1557)


This does not prevent the learned author, however, from upsetting this
theory as “triumphantly,” and from even openly calling his work
_Evolution_ without _Natural Selection_, or, in so many words, with
Darwin’s fundamental idea knocked to atoms in it.

As to Natural Selection itself, the utmost misconception prevails among
many present‐day thinkers, who tacitly accept the conclusions of
Darwinism. It is, for instance, a mere device of rhetoric to credit
Natural Selection with the power of _originating_ species. Natural
Selection is no entity; it is merely a convenient phrase for describing
the mode in which the survival of the fit and the elimination of the unfit
among organisms are brought about by the Struggle for Existence. Every
group of organisms tends to multiply beyond the means of subsistence; the
constant battle for life—the “struggle to obtain enough to eat and to
escape being eaten” added to the environmental conditions—necessitates a
perpetual weeding out of the unfit. The _élite_ of any stock, thus sorted
out, propagate the species and transmit their organic characteristics to
their descendants. All useful variations are thus perpetuated, and a
progressive improvement is effected. But Natural Selection—in the writer’s
humble opinion, “Selection, _as a Power_”—is in reality a pure myth;
especially when it is resorted to as an explanation of the Origin of
Species. It is merely a representative term expressive of the manner in
which “useful variations” are stereotyped when produced. Of itself, “it”
can _produce_—_nothing_, and only operates on the rough material presented
to “it.” The real question at issue is: What _cause_—combined with other
secondary causes—produces the “variations” in the organisms themselves?
Many of these secondary causes are purely physical—climatic, dietary, etc.
Very well. But beyond the secondary aspects of organic evolution, a deeper
principle has to be sought for. The Materialist’s “spontaneous
variations,” and “_accidental_ divergencies” are self‐contradictory terms
in a universe of “Matter, Force and _Necessity_.” Mere variability of
type, apart from the supervisory presence of a quasi‐intelligent impulse,
is powerless to account for the stupendous complexities and marvels of the
human body, for instance. The insufficiency of the Darwinists’ mechanical
theory has been exposed at length by Dr. Von Hartmann among other purely
negative thinkers. It is an abuse of the reader’s intelligence to write,
as does Hæckel, of _blind_ indifferent cells, “arranging themselves into
organs.” The Esoteric solution of the origin of animal species is given
elsewhere.

Those purely _secondary_ causes of differentiation, grouped under the head
of sexual selection, natural selection, climate, isolation, etc., mislead
the Western Evolutionist and offer no real explanation whatever of the
“whence” of the “ancestral types” which served as the _starting point_ for
physical development. The truth is that the differentiating “causes” known
to Modern Science only come into operation after the _physicalization of
the primeval animal root‐types out of the astral_. Darwinism only meets
Evolution at its midway point—that is to say, when astral evolution has
given place to the play of the ordinary physical forces with which our
present senses acquaint us. But even here the Darwinian Theory, even with
the “expansions” recently attempted, is inadequate to meet the facts of
the case. The cause underlying physiological variation in species—one to
which all other laws are subordinate and secondary—is a sub‐conscious
intelligence pervading matter, ultimately traceable to a _reflection_ of
the Divine and Dhyân‐Chohanic wisdom.(1558) A not altogether dissimilar
conclusion has been arrived at by so well known a thinker as Ed. von
Hartmann, who, despairing of the efficacy of _unaided_ Natural Selection,
regards Evolution as being intelligently guided by the Unconscious—the
Cosmic Logos of Occultism. But the latter acts only mediately through
Fohat, or Dhyân‐Chohanic energy, and not quite in the direct manner which
the great pessimist describes.

It is this divergence among men of Science, their mutual, and often their
_self_‐contradictions, that gives the writer of the present volumes the
courage to bring to light other and older teachings—if only as hypotheses
for _future_ scientific appreciation. So evident, even to the humble
recorder of this archaic teaching, though not in any way very learned in
Modern Sciences, are the scientific fallacies and gaps, that she has
determined to touch upon all these, in order to place the two teachings on
parallel lines. For Occultism, it is a question of self‐defence, and
nothing more.

So far, _The Secret Doctrine_ has concerned itself with metaphysics, pure
and simple. It has now landed on Earth, and finds itself within the domain
of physical Science and practical Anthropology, or those branches of study
which materialistic Naturalists claim as their rightful domain, coolly
asserting, furthermore, that the higher and more perfect the working of
the Soul, the more amenable it is to the analysis and explanations _of the
Zoologist and the Physiologist alone_.(1559) This stupendous pretension
comes from one, who, to prove his pithecoid descent, has not hesitated to
include the Lemuridæ among the ancestors of man; these have been promoted
by him to the rank of Prosimiæ, _indeciduate_ mammals, to which he very
incorrectly contributes a _decidua_ and a discoidal placenta.(1560) For
this Hæckel was taken severely to task by de Quatrefages, and criticised
by his own brother Materialists and Agnostics—Virchow and du Bois‐Reymond,
as great, if not greater authorities than himself.(1561)

Such opposition notwithstanding, Hæckel’s wild theories are, to this day,
still called by some scientific and logical. The mysterious nature of
Consciousness, of Soul, of Spirit in Man being now explained as a mere
advance on the functions of the protoplasmic molecules of the lively
Protista, and the gradual evolution and growth of human mind and “social
instincts” toward civilization having to be traced back to their origin in
the civilization of ants, bees, and other creatures—the chances left for
an impartial hearing of the doctrines of Archaic Wisdom are few indeed.
The _educated_ profane are told that:


    The social instincts of the lower animals have, of late, been
    regarded for various reasons _as clearly the origin of morals_,
    even of those of man [?], ...


—and that our divine consciousness, our soul, intellect, and aspirations
have worked their “way up from the lower stages of the simple cell‐soul”
of the gelatinous Bathybius—(1562) and they seem to believe it. For such
men, the Metaphysics of Occultism must produce the effect that our
grandest oratorios produce on the Chinaman—sounds that jar upon their
nerves.

Yet, are our Esoteric teachings about “Angels,” the first three pre‐animal
human Races, and the downfall of the Fourth, _on a lower level of fiction
and self‐delusion_ than the Hæckelian “plastidular,” or the inorganic
“molecular souls of the Protista”? Between the evolution of the spiritual
nature of man from the above amœbian souls, and the alleged development of
his physical frame from the protoplastic dweller in the ocean slime, there
is an abyss which will not easily be crossed by any man in the _full_
possession of his intellectual faculties. Physical Evolution, as Modern
Science teaches it, is a subject for open controversy; spiritual and moral
development on the same lines is the insane dream of a crass Materialism.

Furthermore, past as well as present daily experience teaches that no
truth has ever been accepted by learned bodies unless it has dovetailed
with the habitually preconceived ideas of their professors. “The crown of
the innovator is a crown of thorns”—said Geoffroy St. Hilaire. It is only
that which fits in with popular hobbies and accepted notions that as a
general rule gains ground. Hence the triumph of the Hæckelian ideas,
notwithstanding that they are proclaimed by Virchow, du Bois‐Reymond, and
others as the “_testimonium paupertatis_ of Natural Science.”

Diametrically opposed as may be the materialism of the German
Evolutionists to the spiritual conceptions of Esoteric Philosophy,
radically inconsistent as is their accepted anthropological system with
the real facts of Nature—the pseudo‐idealistic bias now colouring English
thought is almost more pernicious. The pure Materialistic Doctrine admits
of a direct refutation and an appeal to the logic of facts. The Idealism
of the present day, not only contrives to absorb, on the one hand, the
basic negations of Atheism, but lands its votaries in a tangle of
_unreality_, which culminates in a practical Nihilism. Argument with such
writers is almost out of the question. Idealists, therefore, will be still
more antagonistic than even the Materialists to the Occult teachings now
given. But as no worse fate can befall the exponents of Esoteric
Anthropogenesis at the hands of their foes than being openly called by
their old and time‐honoured names of “lunatics” and “ignoramuses,” the
present archaic theories may be safely added to the many modern
speculations, and bide their time for their full or even partial
recognition. Only, as the very existence of these archaic theories will
probably be denied, we have to give our best proofs and stand by them to
the bitter end.

In our race and generation the one “temple in the universe” is in rare
cases—_within_ us; but our body and mind have been too defiled by both
“sin” and “science” to be outwardly anything better _now_ than a fane of
iniquity and error. And here our mutual position—that of Occultism and
Modern Science—ought to be once for all defined.

We, Theosophists, are willing to bow before such men of learning as the
late Prof. Balfour Stewart, Messrs. Crookes, de Quatrefages, Wallace,
Agassiz, Butlerof, and others, though, from the stand‐point of the
Esoteric Philosophy, we may not agree with all they say. But nothing will
make us consent to even a show of respect for the opinions of such other
men of Science as Hæckel, Carl Vogt, or Ludwig Büchner, in Germany, or
even Mr. Huxley and his co‐thinkers in Materialism in England—the colossal
erudition of the first named, notwithstanding. Such men are simply the
intellectual and moral murderers of future generations; especially Hæckel,
whose crass Materialism often rises to the height of idiotic _naivetés_ in
his reasonings. One has but to read his _Pedigree of Man, and Other
Essays_ (Aveling’s Translation) to feel a desire that, in the words of
Job, his remembrance should perish from the Earth, and that he “shall have
no name in the streets.” Hear the creator of the mythical Sozura deriding
the idea of the origin of the human race “as a supernatural [?]
phenomenon,” as one—


    That could not result from simple mechanical causes, from physical
    and chemical forces, but requires the direct intervention of a
    creative personality.... Now the central point of Darwin’s
    teaching ... lies in this, that it demonstrates the simplest
    mechanical causes, purely physico‐chemical phenomena of nature, as
    wholly sufficient to explain the highest and most difficult
    problems. Darwin puts in the place of a conscious creative force,
    building and arranging the organic bodies of animals and plants on
    a designed plan, a series of natural forces working blindly (as we
    say) without aim, without design. In place of an arbitrary act of
    operation, we have a necessary law of Evolution.... [So had Manu
    and Kapila, and, at the same time, guiding, conscious and
    intelligent Powers]. Darwin very wisely ... had put on one side
    the question as to the first appearance of life. But very soon
    that consequence, so full of meaning, so wide‐reaching, was openly
    discussed by able and brave scientific men, such as Huxley, Carl
    Vogt, Ludwig Büchner. A mechanical origin of the earliest living
    form was held as the necessary sequence to Darwin’s teaching ...
    we are at present only concerned with a single consequence of the
    theory, the natural origin of the human race through almighty
    Evolution.(1563)


To this, unabashed by such a scientific farrago, Occultism replies: In the
course of Evolution, when the physical triumphed over the spiritual and
mental evolution, and nearly crushed it under its weight, the great gift
of Kriyâshakti remained the heirloom of only a few elect men in every age.
Spirit strove vainly to _manifest itself in its fulness in purely organic
forms_ (as has been explained in Part I of this Volume), and the faculty,
which had been a natural attribute in the early humanity of the Third
Race, became one of the class regarded as simply phenomenal by
Spiritualists and Occultists, and as _scientifically impossible_ by
Materialists.

In our modern day the mere assertion that there exists a power which can
create human forms—ready‐made Sheaths within which can incarnate the
_conscious_ Monads or Nirmânakâyas of past Manvantaras—is, of course,
absurd, ridiculous! That which is regarded as quite natural, on the other
hand, is the production of a Frankenstein’s monster, _plus_ moral
consciousness, religious aspirations, genius, and a feeling of his own
immortal nature within himself—by “physico‐chemical forces,” guided by
blind “Almighty Evolution.” As to the origin of that man, not _ex nihilo_,
cemented by a little red clay, but from a living divine Entity
consolidating the Astral Body with surrounding materials—such a conception
is too absurd even to be mentioned, in the opinion of the Materialists.
Nevertheless, Occultists and Theosophists are ready to have their claims
and theories compared as to their intrinsic value and probability with
those of the modern Evolutionists—however unscientific and superstitious
these theories may at the first glance appear. Hence the Esoteric teaching
is _absolutely_ opposed to the Darwinian evolution, as applied to man, and
_partially_ so with regard to other species.

It would be interesting to obtain a glimpse of the mental representation
of Evolution in the scientific brain of a Materialist. What _is_
Evolution? If asked to define the full and complete meaning of the term,
neither Huxley nor Hæckel will be able to do so any better than does
Webster:


    The act of unfolding; the process of growth, development; as the
    evolution of a flower from a bud, or an animal from the egg.


Yet the bud must be traced through its parent‐plant to the seed, and the
egg to the animal or bird that laid it; or at any rate to the speck of
protoplasm from which it expanded and grew. And both the seed and the
speck must have the latent potentialities in them for the reproduction and
gradual development, the unfolding of the thousand and one forms or phases
of evolution, through which they must pass before the flower or the animal
is fully developed? Hence, the future plan—if not a design—_must be
there_. Moreover, that seed _has to be traced_, and its nature
ascertained. Have the Darwinians been successful in this? Or will the
Moneron be cast in our teeth? But this atom of the Watery Abysses is _not_
homogeneous matter; and there must be something or somebody that had
moulded and cast it into being.

Here Science is once more silent. But since there is no self‐consciousness
as yet in speck, seed, or germ, according to both Materialists and
Psychologists of the modern school—Occultists agreeing in this for once
with their natural enemies—what is it that guides the force or forces so
unerringly in this process of Evolution? “Blind force”? As well call
“blind” the brain which evolved in Hæckel his _Pedigree of Man_ and other
lucubrations. We can easily conceive that the said brain lacks an
important centre or two; for whoever knows anything of the anatomy of the
human, or even of any animal, body, and is still an Atheist and a
Materialist, must be “hopelessly insane,” according to Lord Herbert, who
rightly sees in the frame of man’s body and the coherence of its parts,
something so strange and paradoxical that he holds it to be the “greatest
miracle of nature.” _Blind_ forces and “_no_ design” in anything under the
Sun! When no sane man of Science would hesitate to say that, even from the
little he knows and has hitherto discovered of the forces at work in
Kosmos, he sees very plainly that every part, every speck and atom, are in
harmony with their fellow atoms, and these with the whole, each having its
distinct mission throughout the life‐cycle. But, fortunately, the
greatest, the most eminent Thinkers and Scientists of the day are now
beginning to rise against this “Pedigree,” and even against Darwin’s
Natural Selection theory, though its author had never, probably,
contemplated such widely stretched conclusions. The Russian scientist N.
T. Danilevsky, in his remarkable work, _Darwinism, a Critical
Investigation of the Theory_, upsets such Darwinism completely and without
appeal, and so does de Quatrefages in his last work. Our readers are
recommended to examine the learned paper by Dr. Bourges, a member of the
Paris Anthropological Society, read by its author at a recent meeting of
that society and called “Evolutionary Psychology; the Evolution of Spirit,
etc.” In it he completely reconciles the two teachings—namely of physical
and spiritual evolution. He explains the origin of the variety of organic
forms—which are made to fit their environments with such evidently
intelligent design—by the existence and the mutual help and interaction of
two Principles in manifested Nature, the inner conscious Principle
adapting itself to physical Nature and the innate potentialities of the
latter. Thus the French scientist has to return to our old friend Archæus,
or the Life‐Principle—without naming it—as Dr. Richardson has done in
England in his Nerve‐Force. The same idea was recently developed in
Germany by Baron Hellenbach, in his remarkable work, _Individuality in the
Light of Biology and Modern Philosophy_.

We find the same conclusions arrived at in yet another excellent volume by
a deep thinking Russian, N. N. Strachof, who says in his _Fundamental
Conceptions of Psychology and Physiology_:


    The most clear, as the most familiar, type of development may be
    found in our own mental or physical evolution, which has served
    others as a model to follow.... If organisms are entities ... then
    it is only just to conclude and assert that the organic life
    strives to beget psychic life; but it would be still more correct
    and in accordance with the spirit of these two categories of
    evolution to say, that the true cause of organic life is the
    tendency of spirit to manifest in substantial forms, to clothe
    itself in substantial reality. It is the highest form which
    contains the complete explanation of the lowest, never the
    reverse.


This is admitting, as Bourges does in the Mémoire above mentioned, the
identity of this mysterious, integrally acting and organizing Principle
with the Self‐Conscious and Inner Subject, which we call the Ego and the
world at large the Soul. Thus all the best Scientists and Thinkers are
gradually approaching the Occultists in their general conclusions.

But such metaphysically inclined men of Science are out of court and will
hardly be listened to. Schiller, in his magnificent poem on the Veil of
Isis, makes the mortal youth who dared to lift the impenetrable covering
fall down dead, after beholding the naked Truth in the face of the stern
Goddess. Have some of our Darwinians, so tenderly united in natural
selection and affinity, also gazed at the Saïtic Mother bereft of her
veils? One might almost suspect it after reading their theories. Their
great intellects must have collapsed while gauging too closely the
uncovered face of Nature, leaving only the grey matter and ganglia in
their brains to respond to “blind” physico‐chemical forces. At any rate
Shakspere’s lines apply admirably to our modern Evolutionist, who
symbolizes that “proud man,” who—


    Drest in a little brief authority;
    Most ignorant of what he’s most assured,
    His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
    Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,
    As make the angels weep!(1564)


These have nought to do with the “Angels.” Their only concern is with the
human ancestor, the pithecoid Noah who gave birth to three sons—the tailed
Cynocephalus, the tailless Ape, and the “arboreal” Palæolithic man. On
this point, they will not be contradicted. Every doubt expressed is
immediately set down as an attempt to cripple scientific enquiry. The
insuperable difficulty at the very foundation of the Evolution theory,
namely, that no Darwinian is able to give even an approximate definition
of the period _at_ which, and the form _in_ which, the first man appeared,
is smoothed down to a trifling impediment, which is “really of no
account.” Every branch of knowledge is in the same predicament, we are
informed. The Chemist bases his most abstruse calculations simply


    Upon a hypothesis of atoms and molecules, of which not one has
    ever been seen, isolated, weighed, or defined. The electrician
    speaks of magnetic fluids which have never tangibly revealed
    themselves. No definite origin can be assigned either to molecules
    or magnetism. Science cannot and does not pretend to any knowledge
    of the beginnings of law, matter, or life.(1565)


And, withal, to reject a _scientific hypothesis_, however absurd, is to
commit the one unpardonable sin! We risk it.




Section II. The Ancestors Mankind is Offered by Science.


    The question of questions for mankind—the problem which underlies
    all others, and is more deeply interesting than any other—is the
    ascertainment of the place which man occupies in Nature, and of
    his relations to the universe of things.(1566)


The world stands divided this day and hesitates between _Divine
Progenitors_—be they Adam and Eve or the Lunar Pitris—and _Bathybius
Hæckelii_, the gelatinous hermit of the briny deep. Having explained the
Occult theory, it may now be compared with that of Modern Materialism. The
reader is invited to choose between the two after having judged them on
their respective merits.

We may derive some consolation for the rejection of our Divine Ancestors,
in finding that the Hæckelian speculations receive no better treatment at
the hands of strictly _exact_ Science than do our own. Hæckel’s
Phylogenesis is no less laughed at by the foes of his fantastic evolution,
by other and greater Scientists, than our primeval Races will be. As du
Bois‐Reymond puts it, we may believe him easily when he says that the


    Ancestral trees of our race sketched in the _Schöpfungsgeschichte_
    are of about as much value as are the pedigrees of the Homeric
    heroes in the eyes of the historical critic.


This settled, everyone will see that one hypothesis is as good as another.
And as we find Hæckel himself confessing that neither Geology in its
history of the past nor the ancestral history of organisms will ever “rise
to the position of a real ‘exact’ science,”(1567) a large margin is thus
left to Occult Science to make its annotations and lodge its protests. The
world is left to choose between the teachings of Paracelsus, the “father
of modern chemistry,” and those of Hæckel, the “father of the mythical
Sozura.” We demand no more.

Without presuming to take part in the quarrel of such very learned
Naturalists as du Bois‐Reymond and Hæckel _à propos_ of our blood
relationship to


    Those ancestors [of ours] which have led up from the unicellular
    classes, Vermes, Acrania, Pisces, Amphibia, Reptilia to the Aves


—we may put a brief question or two, for the information of our readers.
Availing ourselves of the opportunity, and bearing in mind Darwin’s
theories of Natural Selection, etc., we would ask Science—with regard to
the origin of the human and animal species—which theory of Evolution of
the two herewith described is the more scientific, or the more
unscientific, if so preferred.

(1) Is it that of an Evolution which starts from the beginning with sexual
propagation?

(2) Or that teaching which shows the gradual development of organs; their
solidification, and the procreation of each species, at first by simple
easy separation from one into two or even several individuals; then a
fresh development—the first step to a species of separate distinct
sexes—the hermaphrodite condition; then again, a kind of parthenogenesis,
“virginal reproduction,” when the egg‐cells are formed within the body,
issuing from it in atomic emanations and becoming matured outside of it;
until, finally, after a definite separation into sexes, the human beings
begin procreating through sexual connection?

Of these two, the first “theory”—or rather, a “revealed fact”—is
enunciated by all the exoteric Bibles, except the _Purânas_, preëminently
by the Jewish Cosmogony. The second is that which is taught by the Occult
Philosophy, as has been explained.

An answer is found to our question in a volume just published by Mr.
Samuel Laing—the best lay exponent of Modern Science.(1568) In Chapter
viii of his latest work, _A Modern Zoroastrian_, the author begins by
twitting “all ancient religions and philosophies” for “assuming a male and
female principle for their gods.” At first sight, he says:


    This distinction of sex appears as fundamental as that of plant
    and animal.... The Spirit of God brooding over Chaos and producing
    the world is only a later edition, revised according to
    monotheistic ideas, of the far older Chaldean legend which
    describes the creation of Cosmos out of Chaos by the coöperation
    of great gods, male and female.... Thus, in the orthodox Christian
    creed we are taught to repeat “begotten, not made,” a phrase which
    is absolute nonsense, or _non‐sense_—that is, an instance of using
    words like counterfeit notes, which have no solid value of an idea
    behind them. For “begotten” is a very definite term, which implies
    the conjunction of two opposite sexes to produce a new
    individual.(1569)


However we may agree with the learned author as to the inadvisability of
using wrong words, and the terrible anthropomorphic and phallic element in
the old Scriptures—especially in the orthodox Christian
_Bible_—nevertheless, there may be two extenuating circumstances in the
case. Firstly, all these “ancient philosophies” and “modern religions”
are—as has been sufficiently shown in these two Volumes—an exoteric veil
thrown over the face of Esoteric Truth; and—as the direct result of
this—they are allegorical, _i.e._, mythological in form; but still they
are immensely more philosophical in essence than any of the new scientific
theories, so‐called. Secondly, from the Orphic Theogony down to Ezra’s
last remodelling of the Pentateuch, every old Scripture, having in its
origin borrowed its facts from the East, has been subjected to constant
alterations by friend and foe, until of the original version there has
remained but the name, a dead shell from which the spirit had been
gradually eliminated.

This alone ought to show that no religious work now extant can be
understood without the help of the Archaic Wisdom, the primitive
foundation on which they were all built.

But to return to the direct answer expected from Science to our direct
question. It is given by the same author, when, following his train of
thought on the unscientific euhemerization of the powers of Nature in
ancient creeds, he pronounces a condemnatory verdict upon them in the
following terms:


    Science, however, makes sad havoc with this impression of sexual
    generation being the original and only mode of reproduction, and
    the microscope and dissecting knife of the naturalist introduce us
    to new and altogether unsuspected [?] worlds of life.


So little “unsuspected,” indeed, that the original a‐sexual “modes of
reproduction” must have been known to the ancient Hindûs, at any rate—Mr.
Laing’s assertion to the contrary notwithstanding. In view of the
statement in the _Vishnu Purâna_, quoted by us elsewhere, that Daksha
“established sexual intercourse as the means of multiplication,” only
after a series of other “modes,” which are all enumerated therein,(1570)
it becomes difficult to deny the fact. This assertion, moreover, is found,
note well, in an _exoteric_ work. Next, Mr. Laing goes on to tell us that:


    By far the larger proportion of living forms, in number at any
    rate if not in size, have come into existence, without the aid of
    sexual propagation.


He then instances Hæckel’s Moneron, “multiplying by self‐division.” The
next stage the author shows in the nucleated cell, “which does exactly the
same thing.” The following stage is that in


    Which the organism does not divide into two equal parts, but a
    small portion of it swells out ... and finally parts company and
    starts on a separate existence, which grows to the size of the
    parent by its inherent faculty of manufacturing fresh protoplasm
    from surrounding inorganic materials.(1571)


This is followed by a many‐celled organism which is formed by


    Germ‐buds reduced to spores, or single cells, which are emitted
    from the parent.... We are now at the threshold of that system of
    sexual propagation, which has [now] become the rule in all the
    higher families of animals.... This organism, having advantages in
    the struggle for life, established itself permanently ... and
    special organs developed to meet the altered conditions. Thus at
    length the distinction would be firmly established of a female
    organ or ovary containing the egg or primitive cell from which the
    new being was to be developed, and a male organ supplying the
    fertilizing spore or cell.... This is confirmed by a study of
    embryology, which shows that in the _human_ and higher animal
    species the distinction of sex is not developed until a
    considerable progress has been made in the growth of the
    embryo.... In the great majority of plants, and in some of the
    lower families of animals ... the male and female organs are
    developed within the same being, and they are what is called
    hermaphrodites. Another transition form is Parthenogenesis, or
    virginal reproduction, in which germ‐cells, apparently similar in
    all respects to egg‐cells, develop themselves into new
    individuals, without any fructifying element.(1572)


Of all this we are as perfectly well aware as we are aware that the above
was never applied by the very learned English popularizer of Huxley‐
Hæckelian theories to the _genus homo_. He limits this to specks of
protoplasm, plants, bees, snails, and so on. But if he would be true to
the theory of descent, he must be as true to ontogenesis, in which the
fundamental biogenetic law, we are told, runs as follows:


    The development of the embryo (ontogeny) is a condensed and
    abbreviated repetition of the evolution of the race (phylogeny).
    This repetition is the more complete, the more the true original
    order of evolution (palingenesis) has been retained by continual
    heredity. On the other hand, this repetition is the less complete,
    the more by varying adaptations the later spurious development
    (cænogenesis) has obtained.(1573)


This shows us that every living creature and thing on Earth, including
man, evolved from _one common primal form_. Physical man must have passed
through the same stages of the evolutionary process in the various modes
of procreation as other animals have done; he must have _divided_ himself;
then, hermaphrodite, have given birth _parthenogenetically_ (on the
immaculate principle) to his young ones; the next stage would be the
_oviparous_—at first “without any fructifying element,” then “with the
help of the fertilitary spore”; and only after the final and definite
evolution of both sexes, would he become a distinct “male and female,”
when reproduction through sexual union would grow into universal law. So
far, all this is scientifically proven. There remains but one thing to be
ascertained; viz., the plain and comprehensively described processes of
such ante‐sexual reproduction. This is done in the Occult books, a slight
outline of which has been attempted by the writer in Part I of this
Volume.

Either this, or—man is a distinct being. Occult Philosophy may call him
that, because of his distinctly _dual_ nature. Science cannot do so, once
that it rejects every interference save mechanical laws, and admits of no
principle outside Matter. The former—Archaic Science—allows the human
physical frame to have passed through every form, from the lowest to the
very highest, its present one, or from the simple to the complex—to use
the accepted terms. But it claims that in this Cycle, the Fourth, the
frame having already existed among the types and models of Nature from the
preceding Rounds—it was quite ready for man from the beginning of this
Round.(1574) The Monad had but to step into the Astral Body of the
Progenitors, in order that the work of physical consolidation should begin
around the shadowy prototype.(1575)

What would Science say to this? It would answer, of course, that as man
appeared on Earth as the latest of the mammalians, he had no need, any
more than these mammals, to pass through the primitive stages of
procreation as above described. His mode of procreation was already
established on Earth when he appeared. In this case, we may reply: Since
to this day not the remotest sign of a link between man and the animal has
yet been found, then (if the Occult Doctrine is to be repudiated) he must
have sprung _miraculously_ in Nature, like a fully armed Minerva from
Jupiter’s brain; and in such case the _Bible_ is right, along with other
national “revelations.” Hence the scientific scorn, so freely lavished by
the author of _A Modern Zoroastrian_ upon ancient philosophies and
exoteric creeds, becomes premature and uncalled for. Nor would the sudden
discovery of a “missing‐link”‐like fossil mend matters at all. For neither
one such solitary specimen nor the scientific inductions therefrom, could
insure its being the long‐sought‐for relic, _i.e._, that of an
undeveloped, still a once‐speaking, Man. Something more would be required
as a final proof. Besides this, even _Genesis_ takes up man, her Adam of
dust, only where the Secret Doctrine leaves her “Sons of God and Wisdom”
and picks up the physical man of the Third Race. Eve is _not_ “begotten,”
but is extracted out of Adam in the manner of “Amœba A,” contracting in
the middle and splitting into Amœba B—by division.(1576)

Nor has human speech developed from the various animal sounds. Hæckel’s
theory that “speech arose gradually from a few simple, crude animal
sounds,” as such “speech still remains amongst a few races of lowest
rank,”(1577) is altogether unsound, as argued by Professor Max Müller,
among others. He contends that no plausible explanation has yet been given
as to how the “roots” of language came into existence. A _human_ brain is
necessary for _human_ speech. And figures relating to the size of the
respective brains of man and ape show how deep is the gulf which separates
the two. Vogt says that the brain of the largest ape, the gorilla,
measures no more than 30·51 cubic inches; while the average brains of the
flat‐headed Australian natives—the lowest now of the human races—amount to
99·35 cubic inches! Figures are awkward witnesses and cannot lie.
Therefore, as truly observed by Dr. F. Pfaff, whose premises are as sound
and correct as his biblical conclusions are silly:


    The brain of the apes most like man does not amount to quite a
    third of the brain of the lowest races of men: it is not half the
    size of the brain of a new‐born child.(1578)


From the foregoing it is thus very easy to perceive that in order to prove
the Huxley‐Hæckelian theories of the descent of man, it is not one, but a
great number of “missing links”—a true ladder of progressive evolutionary
steps—that would have to be first found and then presented by Science to
thinking and reasoning humanity, before it would abandon belief in Gods
and the immortal Soul for the worship of quadrumanic ancestors. Mere myths
are now greeted as “axiomatic truths.” Even Alfred Russel Wallace
maintains with Hæckel that primitive man was a speechless ape‐creature. To
this Prof. Joly answers:


    Man never was, in my opinion, this pithecanthropus alalus whose
    portrait Hæckel has drawn as if he had seen and known him, whose
    singular and completely hypothetical genealogy he has even given,
    from the mere mass of living protoplasm to the man endowed with
    speech and a civilization analogous to that of the Australians and
    Papuans.(1579)


Hæckel, among other things, often comes into direct conflict with the
“science of languages.” In the course of his attack on Evolutionism(1580)
Prof. Max Müller stigmatized the Darwinian theory as “vulnerable at the
beginning and at the end.” The fact is, that only the partial truth of
many of the secondary “laws” of Darwinism is beyond question—M. de
Quatrefages evidently accepting natural selection, the struggle for
existence, and transformation within species, as proven not once and for
ever, but only _pro tempore_. But it may not be amiss, perhaps, to
condense the linguistic case against the “ape ancestor” theory:

Languages have their phases of growth, etc., like all else in Nature. It
is almost certain that the great linguistic families pass through three
stages.

(1) All words are roots and are merely placed in juxtaposition (Radical
languages).

(2) One root defines the other, and becomes merely a determinative element
(Agglutinative).

(3) The determinative element (the determinating meaning of which has long
lapsed) unites into a whole with the formative element (Inflected).

The problem then is: Whence these roots? Prof. Max Müller argues that the
existence of these _ready‐made materials of speech_ is a proof that man
cannot be the crown of a long organic series. This _potentiality of
forming roots_ is the great crux which Materialists almost invariably
avoid.

Von Hartmann explains it as a manifestation of the “Unconscious,” and
admits its cogency _versus_ mechanical Atheism. Hartmann is a fair
representative of the Metaphysician and Idealist of the present age.

The argument has never been met by the non‐pantheistic Evolutionists. To
say with Schmidt: “Forsooth we are to halt before the origin of
language!”—is an avowal of dogmatism and of speedy defeat.(1581)

We respect those men of Science who, wise in their generation, say: The
Prehistoric Past being utterly beyond our powers of direct observation, we
are too honest, too devoted to the truth—or what we regard as truth—to
speculate upon the unknown, giving out our unproven theories along with
facts absolutely established in Modern Science.


    The borderland of [metaphysical] knowledge is, therefore, best
    left to time, which is the best test as to truth.(1582)


This is a wise and an honest sentence in the mouth of a Materialist. But
when a Hæckel, after just saying that “historical events of past time,”
having “occurred many millions of years ago,(1583) ... are for ever
removed from direct observation,” and that neither Geology nor
Phylogeny(1584) can or will “rise to the position of a real ‘exact’
science,” then insists on the development of all organisms—“from the
lowest vertebrate to the highest, from amphioxus to man”—we ask for a
weightier proof than he can give. Mere “empirical sources of knowledge,”
so extolled by the author of _Anthropogeny_—when he has to be satisfied
with the qualification for his own views—are not competent to settle
problems lying beyond their domain; nor is it the province of exact
Science to place any reliance on them.(1585) If “empirical”—and Hæckel
himself declares so repeatedly—then they are no better, nor any more
reliable, in the sight of _exact_ research, when extended into the remote
past, than are our Occult teachings of the East, both having to be placed
on the same level. Nor are his phylogenetic and palingenetic speculations
treated any more favourably by the real Scientists, than are our cyclic
repetitions of the evolution of the great in the minor races, and the
original order of Evolution. For the province of exact, real Science,
materialistic though it be, is to carefully avoid anything like guess‐
work, speculation which _cannot_ be verified; in short, all _suppressio
veri_ and all _suggestio falsi_. The business of the men of exact Science
is to observe, each in his chosen department, the phenomena of Nature; to
record, tabulate, compare and classify the facts, down to the smallest
minutiæ which are presented to the observation of the senses _with the
help of all the exquisite mechanism that modern invention supplies_, not
by the aid of metaphysical flights of fancy. All that he has a legitimate
right to do, is to correct by the assistance of physical instruments the
defects or illusions of his own coarser vision, auditory powers, and other
senses. He has no right to trespass on the grounds of Metaphysics and
Psychology. His duty is to verify and to rectify all the facts that _fall
under his direct observation_; to profit by the experiences and mistakes
of the Past in endeavouring to trace the working of a certain
concatenation of cause and effect, which—but only by its constant and
unvarying repetition—may be called a Law. This it is which a man of
Science is expected to do, if he would become a teacher of men and remain
true to his original programme of natural or physical Sciences. Any side
path from this royal road becomes speculation.

Instead of keeping to this, what does many a so‐called man of Science do
in these days? He rushes into the domain of pure Metaphysics, while
deriding them. He delights in rash conclusions and calls them “a deductive
law from the inductive law” of a theory based upon and drawn out of the
depths of his own consciousness—that consciousness being perverted by, and
honeycombed with, one‐sided Materialism. He attempts to explain the
“origin” of things, which are yet embosomed only in his own conceptions.
He attacks spiritual beliefs and religious traditions millenniums old, and
denounces everything, save his own hobbies, as superstition. He suggests
theories of the Universe, a cosmogony developed by blind, mechanical
forces of Nature alone, far more _miraculous and impossible_ than even one
based upon the assumption of _fiat lux ex nihilo_—and tries to astonish
the world by his wild theory; and this theory, being known to emanate from
a scientific brain, is taken, on _blind faith_, as very scientific and as
the outcome of Science.

Are these the opponents Occultism should dread? Most decidedly not. For
such theories are treated no better by _real_ Science than are our own by
empirical Science. Hæckel, hurt in his vanity by du Bois‐Reymond, is never
tired of publicly complaining of the latter’s onslaught on his fantastic
theory of descent. Rhapsodizing on “the exceedingly rich storehouse of
empirical evidence,” he calls those “recognized Physiologists” who oppose
every speculation of his drawn from the said “storehouse”—ignorant men,
and declares:


    If many men, and among them even some Scientists of repute—hold
    that the whole of phylogeny is a castle in the air, and
    genealogical trees [from monkeys?] are empty plays of phantasy,
    they only in speaking thus demonstrate their ignorance of that
    wealth of _empirical sources of knowledge_ to which reference has
    already been made.(1586)


We open Webster’s Dictionary and read the definitions of the word
“empirical”:


    Depending upon experience or observation alone, _without due
    regard to modern science and theory_.


This applies to the Occultists, Spiritualists, Mystics, etc. Again:


    An empiric; one who confines himself to applying the results of
    his own observations only [which is Hæckel’s case]; one _wanting
    science_ ... an ignorant and unlicensed practitioner; a quack; a
    charlatan.


No Occultist or “Magician,” has ever been treated to any worse epithets.
Yet the Occultist remains on his own metaphysical grounds, and does not
endeavour to rank _his knowledge_, the fruits of _his_ personal
observation and experience, among the _exact_ Sciences of modern learning.
He keeps within his legitimate sphere, where he is master. But what is one
to think of a rank Materialist, whose duty is clearly traced before him,
who uses such an expression as this:


    The origin of man from other mammals, and most directly from the
    catarrhine ape, is a deductive law, that follows necessarily from
    the inductive law of the Theory of Descent.(1587)


A “theory” is simply a hypothesis, a speculation, and _not_ a law. To say
otherwise is one of the many liberties taken now‐a‐days by Scientists.
They enunciate an absurdity, and then hide it behind the shield of
Science. A deduction from theoretical speculation is nothing more than a
_speculation on a speculation_. Sir William Hamilton has already shown
that the word theory is now used


    In a very loose and improper sense ... that it is convertible into
    _hypothesis_, and _hypothesis_ is commonly used as another term
    for _conjecture_, whereas the terms “theory” and “theoretical” are
    properly used in opposition to the terms practice and practical.


But Modern Science puts an extinguisher on the latter statement, and mocks
at the idea. Materialistic Philosophers and Idealists of Europe and
America may be agreed with the Evolutionists as to the physical origin of
man, yet it will never become a general truth with the true Metaphysician;
and the latter defies the Materialists to make good their arbitrary
assumptions. That the ape‐theory theme(1588) of Vogt and Darwin, on which
the Huxley‐Hæckelians have of late composed such extraordinary variations,
is far less scientific—because clashing with the fundamental laws of that
theme itself—than ours can ever be shown to be, is very easy of
demonstration. Let the reader only turn to the excellent work on _Human
Species_ by the great French Naturalist de Quatrefages, and our statement
will at once be verified.

Moreover, between the Esoteric teaching concerning the Origin of Man and
Darwin’s speculations, no man, unless he is a rank Materialist, will
hesitate. This is the description given by Mr. Darwin of “the early
progenitors of man.”


    They must have been once covered with hair, both sexes having
    beards; their ears were probably pointed and capable of movement;
    and their bodies were provided with a tail, having the proper
    muscles. Their limbs and bodies were also acted on by many muscles
    which now only occasionally reäppear, but are normally present in
    the Quadrumana.... The foot was then prehensile, judging from the
    condition of the great toe in the fœtus; and our progenitors, no
    doubt, were arboreal in their habits, and frequented some warm
    forest‐clad land. The males had great canine teeth, which served
    them as formidable weapons.(1589)


Darwin connects man with the type of the tailed catarrhines:


    And consequently removes him a stage backward in the scale of
    evolution. The English naturalist is not satisfied to take his
    stand upon the ground of his own doctrines, and, like Hæckel, on
    this point places himself in direct variance with one of the
    fundamental laws which constitute the principal charm of
    Darwinism.


And then the learned French Naturalist proceeds to show how this
fundamental law is broken. He says:


    In fact, in the theory of Darwin, transmutations do not take
    place, either by chance or in every direction. They are ruled by
    certain laws which are due to the organization itself. If an
    organism is once modified in a given direction, it can undergo
    secondary or tertiary transmutations, but will still preserve the
    impress of the original. It is the law of _permanent
    characterization_, which _alone_ permits Darwin to explain the
    filiation of groups, their characteristics, and their numerous
    relations. It is by virtue of this law that _all_ the descendants
    of the first mollusc have been molluscs; _all_ the descendants of
    the first vertebrate have been vertebrates. It is clear that this
    constitutes one of the foundations of the doctrine. It follows
    that two beings belonging to two distinct types can be referred to
    _a common ancestor_, but the one cannot be the descendant of the
    other.

    Now man and apes present a very striking contrast in _respect to
    type_. Their organs ... correspond almost exactly term for term:
    but these organs are arranged after a very different plan. In man
    they are so arranged that he is essentially a _walker_, while in
    apes they necessitate his being a _climber_.... There is here an
    anatomical and mechanical distinction.... A glance at the page
    where Huxley has figured side by side a human skeleton and the
    skeletons of the most highly developed apes is a sufficiently
    convincing proof.

    The consequence of these facts, from the point of view of the
    logical application of the law of _permanent characterizations_,
    is that man cannot be descended from an ancestor who is already
    characterized as an ape, any more than a catarrhine tailless ape
    can be descended from a tailed catarrhine. A _walking animal_
    cannot be descended from a _climbing_ one. This was clearly
    understood by Vogt.

    In placing man among the primates, he declares without hesitation
    that the lowest class of apes have passed the landmark (the common
    ancestor), from which the different types of this family have
    originated and diverged. [This ancestor of the apes, Occult
    Science sees in the lowest human group during the Atlantean
    period, as shown before.] We must, then, place the origin of man
    beyond the last ape [corroborating our doctrine], if we wish to
    adhere to one of the laws most emphatically necessary to the
    Darwinian theory. We then come to the prosimiæ of Hæckel, the
    loris, indris, etc. But these animals also are climbers; we must
    go further, therefore, in search of our first direct ancestor. But
    the genealogy by Hæckel brings us from the latter to the
    _marsupials_. From men to the kangaroo the distance is certainly
    great. Now neither living nor extinct fauna show the intermediate
    types which ought to serve as landmarks. This difficulty causes
    but slight embarrassment to Darwin.(1590) We know that he
    considers the want of information upon similar questions as a
    proof in his favour. Hæckel doubtless is as little embarrassed. He
    admits the existence of an absolutely theoretical _pithecoid man_.

    Thus, since it has been proved that, according to Darwinism
    itself, the origin of man must be placed beyond the eighteenth
    stage, and since it becomes, in consequence, _necessary_ to fill
    up the gap between marsupials and man, will Hæckel admit the
    existence of _four unknown intermediate groups_ instead of one?
    Will he complete his genealogy in this manner? It is not for me to
    answer.(1591)


But see Hæckel’s famous genealogy, in _The Pedigree of Man_, called by him
the “Ancestral Series of Man.” In the “Second Division” (eighteenth stage)
he describes—


    Prosimiæ, allied to the Loris (Stenops) and Makis (Lemur), without
    marsupial bones and cloaca, _with placenta_.(1592)


And now turn to de Quatrefages’ _The Human Species_,(1593) and see his
proofs, based on the latest discoveries, to show that the Prosimiæ of
Hæckel have no decidua and a diffuse placenta. They cannot be the
ancestors of the apes even, let alone man, according to a fundamental law
of Darwin himself, as the great French Naturalist shows. But this does not
dismay the “animal theorists” in the least, for self‐contradiction and
paradoxes are the very soul of modern Darwinism. Witness—Mr. Huxley;
having himself shown, with regard to fossil man and the “missing link,”
that:


    Neither in Quaternary ages nor at the present time does any
    intermediary being fill the gap which separates man from the
    Troglodyte;


and that to “deny the existence of this gap _would be as reprehensible as
absurd_,” the great man of Science denies his own words _in actu_ by
supporting with all the weight of his scientific authority that _most_
“absurd” of all theories—the _descent of man from an ape_!

Says de Quatrefages:


    This genealogy is wrong throughout, and is founded on a material
    error.


Indeed, Hæckel bases his descent of man on the seventeenth and eighteenth
stages, the Marsupialia and Prosimiæ—(genus Hæckelii?). Applying the
latter term to the Lemuridæ—hence making of them animals with a
placenta—he commits a zoological blunder. For after having himself divided
mammals according to their anatomical differences into two groups—the
_indeciduata_, which have no decidua (or special membrane uniting the
placentæ), and the _deciduata_, those who possess it—he includes the
Prosimiæ in the latter group. Now we have shown elsewhere what other men
of Science had to say to this. As de Quatrefages says:


    The anatomical investigations of ... Milne Edwards and Grandidier
    upon the animals ... place it beyond all doubt that the Prosimiæ
    of Hæckel have no decidua and a diffuse placenta. They are
    _indeciduata_. Far from any possibility of their being the
    ancestors of the apes, according to the principles laid down by
    Hæckel himself, they cannot even be regarded as the ancestors of
    the zonoplacental mammals ... and ought to be connected with the
    Pachydermata, the Edentata, and the Cetacea.(1594)


And yet Hæckel’s inventions pass with some as _exact Science_!

The above mistake, if indeed it be one, is not even hinted at in Hæckel’s
_Pedigree of Man_, translated by Aveling. If the excuse may stand good
that at the time the famous “genealogies” were made, “the embryogenesis of
the Prosimiæ was not known,” it is familiar now. We shall see whether the
next edition of Aveling’s translation will have this important error
rectified, or if the seventeenth and eighteenth stages will remain as they
are to blind the profane, as one of the _real_ intermediate links. But, as
the French Naturalist observes:


    Their [Darwin’s and Hæckel’s] process is always the same,
    considering the unknown as a _proof_ in favour of their theory.


It comes to this. Grant to man an immortal Spirit and Soul; endow the
whole animate and inanimate creation with the monadic principle gradually
evolving from latent and passive into active and positive polarity—and
Hæckel will not have a leg to stand upon, whatever his admirers may say.

But there are important divergencies even between Darwin and Hæckel. While
the former makes us proceed from the _tailed_ catarrhine, Hæckel traces
our hypothetical ancestor to the _tailless_ ape, though, at the same time,
he places him in a hypothetical “stage” immediately preceding
this—Menocerca with tails (nineteenth stage).

Nevertheless, we have one thing in common with the Darwinian school, that
is the law of gradual and extremely slow Evolution, embracing many million
years. The chief quarrel, it appears, is with regard to the nature of the
primitive “ancestor.” We shall be told that the Dhyân Chohan, or the
“progenitor” of Manu, is a hypothetical being unknown on _the physical
plane_. We reply that it was believed in by the whole of Antiquity, and is
by nine‐tenths of the present humanity; whereas not only is the pithecoid
man, or ape‐man, a purely hypothetical creature of Hæckel’s creation,
unknown and untraceable on this Earth, but further its genealogy—as
invented by him—clashes with scientific facts and all the known data of
modern discovery in Zoology. It is simply absurd, even as a fiction. As de
Quatrefages demonstrates in a few words, Hæckel “admits the existence of
an absolutely theoretical pithecoid man”—a hundred times more difficult to
accept than any Deva ancestor. And it is not the only instance in which he
proceeds in a similar manner in order to complete his genealogical table.
In fact he very naïvely admits his inventions himself. Does he not confess
the non‐existence of his Sozura (fourteenth stage)—a creature entirely
unknown to Science—by confessing over his own signature, that:


    The proof of its existence arises from the necessity of an
    intermediate type between the thirteenth and the fourteenth
    stages[!].


If so, we might maintain with as much scientific right, that the proof of
the existence of our three ethereal Races, and of the three‐eyed men of
the Third and Fourth Root‐Races, “arises also from the necessity of an
intermediate type” between the animal and the Gods. What reason would the
Hæckelians have to protest in this special case?

Of course there is a ready answer: Because we do not grant the presence of
the Monadic Essence. The manifestation of the Logos as individual
consciousness in the animal and human creation is not accepted by exact
Science, nor does it cover the whole ground, of course. But the failures
of Science and its arbitrary assumptions are far greater on the whole than
any “extravagant” Esoteric doctrine can ever furnish.(1595) Even thinkers
of the school of Von Hartmann have become tainted with the general
epidemic. They accept the Darwinian Anthropology (more or less), though
they also postulate the individual Ego as a manifestation of the
Unconscious (the Western presentation of the Logos or Primeval Divine
Thought). They say the evolution of the physical man is from the animal,
but that mind in its various phases is altogether a thing apart from
material facts, though organism, as a Upâdhi, is necessary for its
manifestation.



Plastidular Souls, And Conscious Nerve‐Cells.


But one can never see the end of such wonders with Hæckel and his school,
whom the Occultists and Theosophists have every right to consider as
materialistic tramps trespassing on private metaphysical grounds. Not
satisfied with the paternity of Bathybius (Hæckelii), “plastidular souls”
and “atom‐souls”(1596) are now invented, on the basis of purely blind
mechanical forces of matter. We are informed that:


    The study of the evolution of soul‐life shows us that this has
    worked its way up from the lower stages of the simple cell‐soul,
    through an astonishing series of gradual stages in evolution, up
    to the soul of man.(1597)


“Astonishing,” truly—based as this wild speculation is on the
_consciousness_ of the “nerve cells.” For as he tells us:


    Little as we are in a position, at the present time, to explain
    fully the nature of consciousness,(1598) yet the comparative and
    genetic observation of it clearly shows, that it is only a higher
    and more complex function of the nerve cells.(1599)


Mr. Herbert Spencer’s song on consciousness—is sung, it seems, and may
henceforth be safely stored up in the lumber room of obsolete
speculations. Where, however, do Hæckel’s “complex functions” of _his_
scientific “nerve‐cells” land him? Once more right into the Occult and
mystic teachings of the _Kabalah_ about the descent of Souls as conscious
and unconscious Atoms; among the Pythagorean Monad and the Monads of
Leibnitz, and the “Gods, Monads, and Atoms” of our Esoteric
teaching;(1600) into the _dead letter_ of Occult teachings, left to the
_amateur_ Kabalists and professors of ceremonial Magic. For this is what
he says, in explaining his newly‐coined terminology:


    Plastidule‐Souls. The plastidules or protoplasmic molecules, the
    smallest, homogeneous parts of the protoplasm are, on our plastid
    theory, to be regarded as the active factors of all life‐
    functions. The plastidular soul differs from the inorganic
    molecular soul in that it possesses memory.(1601)


This he develops in his mirific lecture on the “Perigenesis of Plastidule,
or the Wave‐motions of Living Particles.” It is an improvement on Darwin’s
theory of “Pangenesis,” and a further approach, a cautious move, towards
“Magic.” The former is a conjecture that:


    Some of the actual identical atoms which formed part of ancestral
    bodies are thus transmitted through their descendants for
    generation after generation, so that we are literally “flesh of
    the flesh” of the primeval creature who has developed into man


—explains the author of _A Modern Zoroastrian_.(1602) The latter,
Occultism, teaches that—(_a_) the life‐atoms of our (Prâna) Life‐
Principle, are never entirely lost when a man dies. That the atoms best
impregnated with the Life‐Principle, an independent, eternal, conscious
factor, are partially transmitted from father to son by heredity, and are
partially drawn once more together and become the animating principle of
the new body in every new incarnation of the Monads. Because (_b_), as the
Individual Soul is ever the same, so are the atoms of the lower principles
(the body, its astral, or life‐double, etc.), drawn as they are by
affinity and Karmic law always to the same individuality in a series of
various bodies.(1603)

To be just and, to say the least, logical, our modern Hæckelians ought to
pass a resolution that henceforth the “Perigenesis of the Plastidule,” and
other similar lectures, should be bound up with those on “Esoteric
Buddhism” and “The Seven Principles in Man.” Thus the public will have a
chance, at any rate, of comparing the two teachings and then of judging
which is the more or the less absurd, even from the standpoint of
materialistic and exact Science.

Now the Occultists, who trace every atom in the Universe, whether an
aggregate or single, to One Unity, the Universal Life; who do not
recognize that anything in Nature can be inorganic; who know of no such
thing as dead Matter—the Occultists are consistent with their doctrine of
Spirit and Soul when speaking of memory in every atom, of will and
sensation. But what can a Materialist mean by the qualification? The law
of biogenesis, in the sense applied to it by the Hæckelians, is the result
of the ignorance on the part of the man of Science of _Occult_ Physics. We
know and speak of “life‐atoms,” and of “sleeping‐atoms,” because we regard
these two forms of energy—the kinetic and the potential—as produced by one
and the same force, or the One Life, and regard the latter as the source
and mover of all. But what is it that furnished with energy, and
especially with memory, the “plastidular souls” of Hæckel? The “wave
motion of living particles” becomes comprehensible on the theory of a
Spiritual One Life, of a universal Vital Principle independent of _our_
Matter, and manifesting as atomic energy only on _our_ plane of
consciousness. It is that which, individualized in the human cycle, is
transmitted from father to son.

Now Hæckel, modifying Darwin’s theory, suggests “more plausibly,” as the
author of _A Modern Zoroastrian_ thinks:


    That not the identical atoms, but their peculiar motions and mode
    of aggregation have been thus transmitted [by heredity].(1604)


If Hæckel, or any other Scientist, knew more than any of them does know of
the nature of the atom, he would not have improved the occasion in this
way. For he only states, in more metaphysical language than Darwin, one
and the same thing. The Life‐Principle, or Life Energy, which is
omnipresent, eternal, indestructible, is a Force and a Principle as
_noumenon_, while it is Atoms, as _phenomenon_. It is one and the same
thing, and cannot be considered as separate except in Materialism.(1605)

Further, Hæckel enunciates concerning the Atom‐Souls that which, at first
sight, appears as occult as the Monad of Leibnitz:


    The recent contest as to the nature of atoms, which we must regard
    as in some form or other the ultimate factors in all physical and
    chemical processes, seems to be capable of easiest settlement by
    the conception that these very minute masses possess, as centres
    of force, a persistent soul, that every atom has sensation and the
    power of movement.(1606)


He does not say a word concerning the fact that this is Leibnitz’ theory,
and one that is preëminently Occult. Nor does he understand the term
“soul” as we do; for, with Hæckel it is simply, along with consciousness,
the product of the grey matter of the brain, a thing which, as the cell‐
soul


    Is as indissolubly bound up with the protoplasmic body as is the
    human soul with the brain and spinal cord.(1607)


He rejects the conclusions of Kant, Herbert Spencer, of du Bois‐Reymond
and Tyndall. The latter expresses the opinion of all the great men of
Science, as of the greatest thinkers of this and past ages, in saying
that:


    The passage from the physics of the brain to the corresponding
    facts of consciousness is unthinkable. Were our minds and senses
    so ... illuminated as to enable us to see and feel the very
    molecules of the brain; were we capable of following all their
    motions, all their groupings ... electric discharges ... we should
    be as far as ever from the solution of the problem.... The chasm
    between the two classes of phenomena would still remain
    intellectually impassable.


But the complex function of the nerve‐cells of the great German Empiric,
or, in other words, his consciousness, will not permit him to follow the
conclusions of the greatest thinkers of our globe. _He is greater than
they._ He asserts this, and _protests_ against all:


    No one has the right to hold that in the future we shall not be
    able to pass beyond these limits of our knowledge that to‐day seem
    impassable.(1608)


And he quotes from Darwin’s introduction to _The Descent of Man_ the
following words, which he modestly applies to his scientific opponents and
himself:


    It is always those who know little, and not those who know much,
    that positively affirm that this or that problem will never be
    solved by Science.


The world may rest satisfied. The day is not far off when the “thrice
great” Hæckel will have shown, to his own satisfaction, that the
consciousness of Sir Isaac Newton was, physiologically speaking, but the
reflex action (or _minus_ consciousness) caused by the perigenesis of the
plastidules of our common ancestor and old friend, the Moneron Hæckelii.
Though, the said Bathybius has been found out and exposed as a pretender
simulating the organic substance _it is not_, and though among the
children of men, Lot’s wife alone—and even this, only after her
disagreeable metamorphosis—could claim as her forefather the pinch of salt
_it is_; all this will not dismay him in the least. He will go on
asserting, as coolly as he has always done, that it was only the peculiar
mode and motion of the ghost of the long‐vanished atoms of our Father
Bathybius, which—transmitted across æons of time into the cell‐tissue of
the grey matter of the brains of every great man—caused Sophocles and
Æschylus, and Shakspere as well, to write their tragedies, Newton, his
_Principia_, Humboldt, his _Cosmos_, etc. It also prompted Hæckel to
invent Græco‐Latin names three inches long, pretending to mean a good
deal, and meaning—nothing.

Of course we are quite aware that the true, honest Evolutionist agrees
with us; and that he is the first to say that not only is the geological
record imperfect, but that there are enormous gaps in the series of
hitherto discovered fossils, which can never be filled. He will tell us,
moreover, that “no Evolutionist assumes that man is descended from any
existing ape or any extinct ape either,” but that man and apes originated
_probably_ æons back, in some common root stock. Still, as de Quatrefages
points out, he will urge as an evidence corroborating his claim this
wealth of absent proofs as well, saying that:


    All living forms have not been preserved in the fossil series, the
    chances of preservation being few and far between ... [even
    primitive man] burying or burning his dead.


This is just what we ourselves claim. It is just as _possible_ that the
future may have in store for us the discovery of the giant skeleton of an
Atlantean, thirty feet high, as of the fossil of a pithecoid “missing
link”; only the former is more _probable_.




Section III. The Fossil Relics of Man and the Anthropoid Ape.



A. Geological Facts Bearing On The Question Of Their Relationship.


The data derived from scientific research as to “primeval man” and the ape
lend no countenance to theories deriving the former from the latter.
“Where, then, must we look for primeval man?”—still queries Mr. Huxley,
after having vainly searched for him in the very depths of the Quaternary
strata.


    Was the oldest Homo sapiens Pliocene or Miocene, or yet more
    ancient? In still older strata do the fossilized bones of an ape
    more anthropoid, or a man more pithecoid than any yet known, await
    the researches of some unborn palæontologist? Time will
    show.(1609)


It will—undeniably—and thus vindicate the Anthropology of the Occultists.
Meanwhile, in his eagerness to vindicate Mr. Darwin’s _Descent of Man_,
Mr. Boyd Dawkins believes that he has all but found the “missing link”—in
theory. It was due to Theologians more than to Geologists that, till
nearly 1860, man had been considered as a relic no older than the Adamic
orthodox 6,000 years. As Karma would have it, though, it was left to a
French Abbé—Bourgeois—to give this easy‐going theory even a worse blow
than had been given to it by the discoveries of Boucher de Perthes.
Everyone knows that the Abbé discovered and brought to light good evidence
that man was already in existence during the Miocene period, for flints of
undeniably human making were excavated from Miocene strata. In the words
of the author of _Modern Science and Modern Thought_:


    They must either have been chipped by man, or, as Mr. Boyd Dawkins
    supposes, by the dryopithecus or some other anthropoid ape which
    had a dose of intelligence so much superior to the gorilla or
    chimpanzee, as to be able to fabricate tools. But in this case the
    problem would be solved and the missing link discovered, for such
    an ape might well have been the ancestor of Palæolithic man.(1610)


Or—_the descendant of Eocene man_, which is a variant offered to the
theory. Meanwhile, the dryopithecus with such fine mental endowments is
yet to be discovered. On the other hand, Neolithic and even Palæolithic
man having become an absolute certainty, and as the same author justly
observes:


    If 100,000,000 years have elapsed since the earth became
    sufficiently solidified to support vegetable and animal life, the
    Tertiary period may have lasted for 5,000,000; or for 10,000,000
    years, if the life‐sustaining order of things has lasted, as Lyell
    supposes for at least 200,000,000 years—(1611)


why should not another theory be tried? Let us carry man, as a hypothesis,
to the close of Mesozoic times—admitting _argumenti causâ_ that the (much
more recent) higher apes then existed! This would allow ample time for man
and the modern apes to have diverged from the mythical “ape more
anthropoid,” and even for the latter to have degenerated into those that
are found _mimicking_ man in using “branches of trees as clubs, and
cracking cocoa‐nuts with hammer and stones.”(1612) Some savage tribes of
hillmen in India build their abodes on trees, just as the gorillas build
their dens. The question, which of the two, the beast or the man, has
become the imitator of the other, is scarcely an open one, even granting
Mr. Boyd Dawkins’ theory. The fanciful character of this hypothesis, is,
however, generally admitted. It is argued that while in the Pliocene and
Miocene periods there were true apes and baboons, and man was undeniably
contemporaneous with the former of these times—though, as we see, orthodox
Anthropology still hesitates, in the teeth of facts, to place him in the
era of the dryopithecus, which latter—


    Has been considered by some anatomists as in some respects
    superior to the chimpanzee or the gorilla ... (1613)


yet, in the Eocene there have been no other fossil _primates_ unearthed
and no pithecoid stocks found save a few extinct lemurian forms. And we
find it also hinted that the dryopithecus _may have been_ the “missing
link,” though the brain of the creature no more warrants the theory than
does the brain of the modern gorilla. (See also Gaudry’s speculations.)

Now we would ask who among the Scientists is ready to prove that _there
was no man_ in existence in the early Tertiary period? What is it that
prevented his presence? Hardly thirty years ago his existence any farther
back than six or seven thousand years was indignantly denied. Now he is
refused admission into the Eocene age. Next century it may become a
question whether man was not contemporary with the “flying dragon,” the
pterodactyl, the plesiosaurus and iguanodon, etc. Let us listen, however,
to the echo of Science.


    Now, wherever anthropoid apes lived it is clear that, whether as a
    question of anatomical structure, or of climate and surroundings,
    man, or some creature which was the ancestor of man, might have
    lived also. Anatomically speaking, apes and monkeys are as much
    special variations of the mammalian type as man, whom they
    resemble bone for bone, and muscle for muscle, and the physical
    animal man is simply an instance of the quadrumanous type
    specialized for erect posture and a larger brain(1614).... If he
    could survive, as we know he did, the adverse conditions and
    extreme vicissitudes of the Glacial period, there is no reason why
    he might not have lived in the semi‐tropical climate of the
    Miocene period, when a genial climate extended even to Greenland
    and Spitzbergen.(1615)


When most of the men of Science who are uncompromising in their belief in
the descent of man from an “extinct anthropoid mammal;” will not accept
even the bare tenability of any other theory than an ancestor common to
man and the dryopithecus, it is refreshing to find in a work of real
scientific value such a margin for compromise. Indeed, it is as wide as it
can be made under the circumstances, _i.e._, without immediate danger of
getting knocked off one’s feet by the tidal wave of science‐adulation.
Believing that the difficulty of accounting—


    For the development of intellect and morality by evolution is not
    so great as that presented by the difference as to physical
    structure(1616) between man and the highest animal—


the same author says:


    But it is not so easy to see how this difference of physical
    structure arose, and how a being came into existence which had
    such a brain and hand, and such undeveloped capabilities for an
    almost unlimited progress. The difficulty is this: the difference
    in structure between the lowest existing race of man and the
    highest existing ape is too great to admit of the possibility of
    one being the direct descendant of the other. The negro in some
    respects makes a slight approximation towards the Simian type. His
    skull is narrower, his brain less capacious, his muzzle more
    projecting, his arm longer than those of the average European man.
    Still he is essentially a man, and separated by a wide gulf from
    the chimpanzee or the gorilla. Even the idiot or crétin, whose
    brain is no larger and intelligence no greater than that of the
    chimpanzee, is an arrested man, not an ape.

    If, therefore, the Darwinian theory holds good in the case of man
    and ape, we must go back to some common ancestor from whom both
    may have originated.... But to establish this as a _fact_ and not
    a _theory_ we require to find that ancestral form, or, at any
    rate, some intermediate forms tending towards it ... in other
    words ... the “missing link.” Now it must be admitted that,
    hitherto, not only have no such missing links been discovered, but
    the oldest known human skulls and skeletons which date from the
    Glacial period, and are probably at least 100,000 years old, show
    no very decided approximation towards any such pre‐human type. On
    the contrary, one of the oldest types, that of the men of the
    sepulchral cave of Cro‐Magnon,(1617) is that of a fine race, tall
    in stature, large in brain, and on the whole superior to many of
    the existing races of mankind. The reply of course is that the
    time is insufficient, and if man and the ape had a common
    ancestor, that as a highly developed anthropoid ape, certainly,
    and man, probably, already existed in the Miocene period, such
    ancestor must be sought still further back at a distance compared
    with which the whole Quaternary period sinks into
    insignificance.... All this is true, and it may well make us
    hesitate before we admit that man ... is alone an exception to the
    general law of the universe, and is the creature of a special
    creation. This is the more difficult to believe, as the ape family
    which man so closely resembles [?] in physical structure contains
    numerous branches which graduate into one another, but the
    extremes of which differ more widely than man does from the
    highest of the ape series. If a special creation is required for
    man, must there not have been special creations for the
    chimpanzee, the gorilla, the orang, and for at least 100 different
    species of apes and monkeys which are all built on the same
    lines?(1618)


There _was_ a “special creation” for man, and a “special creation” for the
ape, _his_ progeny; only on other lines than ever bargained for by
Science. Albert Gaudry and others give some weighty reasons why man cannot
be regarded as the crown of an ape‐stock. When one finds that not only was
the “primeval savage” (?) a reality in the Miocene times, but that, as de
Mortillet shows, the flint relics he has left behind him were splintered
_by fire_ in that remote epoch; when we learn that the dryopithecus,
_alone of the anthropoids_, appears in those strata, what is the natural
inference? That the Darwinians are in a quandary. The very man‐like gibbon
is _still in the same low grade of development, as it was when it
coëxisted with man at the close of the Glacial period_. It has not
appreciably altered since the Pliocene times. Now there is little to
choose between the dryopithecus and the existing anthropoids—gibbon,
gorilla, etc. If, then, the Darwinian theory is all‐sufficient, how are we
to “explain” the evolution of this ape into man during the first half of
the Miocene? The time is far too short for such a theoretical
transformation. The extreme slowness with which variation in species
supervenes renders the thing inconceivable—more especially on the “natural
selection” hypothesis. The enormous mental and structural gulf between a
savage acquainted with fire and the mode of kindling it, and a brutal
anthropoid, is too great to bridge even in idea, during so contracted a
period. Let the Evolutionists push back the process into the preceding
Eocene, if they prefer to do so; let them even trace both man and
dryopithecus to a common ancestor; the unpleasant consideration has,
nevertheless, to be faced that in Eocene strata the anthropoid fossils are
as conspicuous by their absence, as is the fabulous pithecanthropus of
Hæckel. Is an exit out of this _cul de sac_ to be found by an appeal to
the “unknown,” and a reference, with Darwin, to the “imperfection of the
geological record”? So be it; but the same right of appeal must then be
equally accorded to the Occultists, instead of remaining the monopoly of
puzzled Materialism. Physical man, we say, existed before the first bed of
the Cretaceous rocks was deposited. In the early part of the Tertiary age,
the most brilliant civilization the world has ever known flourished at a
period when the Hæckelian man‐ape is conceived as roaming through primeval
forests, and Mr. Grant Allen’s putative ancestor as swinging himself from
bough to bough with his hairy mates, the degenerated Liliths of the Third
Race Adam. Yet there were no anthropoid apes in the brighter days of the
civilization of the Fourth Race; but Karma is a mysterious law, and no
respecter of persons. The monsters bred in sin and shame by the Atlantean
Giants, “blurred copies” of their bestial sires, and hence of modern man,
according to Huxley, now mislead and overwhelm with error the speculative
Anthropologist of European Science.

Where did the first men live? Some Darwinists say in Western Africa, some
in Southern Asia, others again believe in an independent origin of human
stocks in Asia and America from a simian ancestry. Hæckel, however,
advances gaily to the charge. Starting from his prosimia, “the ancestor
common to all other catarrhini including man”—a “link” now, however,
disposed of for good by recent anatomical discoveries—he endeavours to
find a habitat for the primeval pithecanthropus alalus.


    In all probability it [the transformation of animal into man]
    occurred in Southern Asia, in which region many evidences are
    forthcoming that here was the original home of the different
    species of man. Probably Southern Asia itself was not the earliest
    cradle of the human race, but Lemuria, a continent that lay to the
    south of Asia, and sank later on beneath the surface of the Indian
    Ocean. The period during which the evolution of the anthropoid
    apes into ape‐like men took place was probably the last part of
    the Tertiary period, the Pliocene age, and perhaps the Miocene
    age, its forerunner.(1619)


Of the above speculations, the only one of any worth is that referring to
Lemuria, which _was_ the cradle of mankind—of the physical sexual creature
who materialized through long æons out of the ethereal hermaphrodites.
Only, if it is proved that Easter Island is an actual relic of Lemuria, we
must believe that according to Hæckel the “dumb ape‐men,” just removed
from a brutal mammalian monster, built the gigantic portrait‐statues, two
of which are now in the British Museum. Critics are mistaken in terming
Hæckelian doctrines “abominable, revolutionary, immoral”—though
Materialism is the legitimate outcome of the ape‐ancestor myth—they are
simply too absurd to demand disproof.



B. Western Evolutionism: The Comparative Anatomy Of Man And The Anthropoid
In No Way A Confirmation Of Darwinism.


We are told that while every other heresy against Modern Science may be
disregarded, this, our denial of the Darwinian theory as applied to man,
will be the one “unpardonable” sin. The Evolutionists stand firm as rock
on the evidence of similarity of structure between the ape and man. The
anatomical evidence, it is urged, is quite overpowering in this case; it
is bone for bone, and muscle for muscle, even the brain conformation being
very much the same.

Well, what of that? All this was known before King Herod; and the writers
of the _Râmâyana_, the poets who sang the prowess and valour of Hanumân,
the Monkey‐God, “whose feats were great and wisdom never rivalled,” must
have known as much about his anatomy and brain as does any Hæckel or
Huxley in our modern day. Volumes upon volumes have been written upon this
similarity, in antiquity as in more modern times. Therefore, there is
nothing new given to the world or to philosophy in such volumes as
Mivart’s _Man and Apes_, or Messrs. Fiske and Huxley’s defence of
Darwinism. But what are those crucial proofs of man’s descent from a
pithecoid ancestor? If the Darwinian theory is not the true one, we are
told, if man and ape do not descend from a common ancestor, then we must
explain the reason of:

(i) The similarity of structure between the two; the fact that the higher
animal world—man and beast—is physically of one type or pattern.

(ii) The presence of rudimentary organs in man, _i.e._, traces of former
organs now atrophied by disuse. Some of these organs, it is asserted,
could not have had any scope for employment, except in a semi‐animal,
semi‐arboreal monster. Why, again, do we find in man those “rudimentary”
organs—as useless as its rudimentary wing is to the apteryx of
Australia—the vermiform appendix of the cæcum, the ear muscles,(1620) the
“rudimentary tail” with which children are still sometimes born, etc.?

Such is the war cry; and the cackle of the smaller fry among the
Darwinians is louder, if possible, than even that of the scientific
Evolutionists themselves!

Furthermore, the latter—with their great leader Mr. Huxley, and such
eminent Zoologists as Mr. Romanes and others—while defending the Darwinian
theory, are the first to confess the almost insuperable difficulties in
the way of its final demonstration. And there are as great men of Science
as the above‐named, who deny, most emphatically, the uncalled‐for
assumption, and loudly denounce the unwarrantable exaggerations on the
question of this supposed similarity. It is sufficient to glance at the
works of Broca, Gratiolet, Owen, Pruner‐Bey, and finally at the last great
work of de Quatrefages, _Introduction à __ l’Étude des Races Humaines,
Questions Générales_, to discover the fallacy of the Evolutionists. We may
say more: the exaggerations concerning this alleged similarity of
structure between man and the anthropomorphous ape have become so glaring
and absurd of late, that even Mr. Huxley has found himself forced to
protest against the too sanguine expectations. It was that great Anatomist
personally who called the “smaller fry” to order, by declaring in one of
his articles that the differences between the structure of the human body
and that of the highest anthropomorphous pithecoid, were not only _far
from being trifling and unimportant_, but were, on the contrary, very
great and suggestive:


    Every bone of a gorilla bears marks by which it might be
    distinguished from the corresponding bone of a man.(1621)


Among the existing creatures there is not one single intermediate form
that could fill the gap between man and the ape. To ignore that gap, he
added, “would be no less wrong than absurd.”

Finally, the absurdity of such an _unnatural_ descent of man is so
palpable in the face of all the proofs and evidence as to the skull of the
pithecoid compared to that of man, that de Quatrefages resorted
unconsciously to our Esoteric theory by saying that it is rather the apes
that can claim descent from man than _vice versâ_. As proven by Gratiolet,
with regard to the cavities of the brain of the anthropoids—in which
species that organ develops in an inverse ratio to what would be the case
were the corresponding organs in man really the product of the development
of the said organs in the apes—the size of the human skull and its brain,
as well as the cavities, increase with the individual development of man.
His intellect develops and increases with age, while his facial bones and
jaws diminish and straighten, thus becoming more and more spiritualized;
whereas with the ape it is the reverse. In its youth the anthropoid is far
more intelligent and good‐natured, while with age it becomes duller; and,
as its skull recedes and seems to diminish as it grows, its facial bones
and jaws develop, the brain being finally crushed, and thrown entirely
back, to make with every day more room for the animal type. The organ of
thought—the brain—recedes and diminishes, entirely conquered and replaced
by that of the wild beast—the jaw apparatus.

Thus, as wittily remarked in the French work, a gorilla could with perfect
justice address an Evolutionist, claiming its right of descent from him.
It would say to him: We, anthropoid apes, form a retrogressive departure
from the human type, and therefore our development and evolution are
expressed by a transition from a human‐like to an animal‐like structure of
organism; but in what way could _you_, men, descend from us—how can you
form a continuation of our genus? For, to make this possible, your
organization would have to differ still more than ours does from the human
structure, it would have to approach still closer to that of the beast
than ours does; and in such a case justice demands that you should give up
to us your place in nature. You are lower than we are, once that you
insist on tracing your genealogy from our kind; for the structure of our
organization and its development are such that we are unable to generate
forms of a higher organization than our own.

This is where the Occult Sciences agree entirely with de Quatrefages.
Owing to the very type of his development man cannot _descend_ from either
an ape or an ancestor common to both apes and men, but shows his origin to
be from a type far superior to himself. And this type is the “Heavenly
Man”—the Dhyân Chohans, or the Pitris so‐called, as shown in the first
Part of this Volume. On the other hand, the pithecoids, the orang‐outang,
the gorilla, and the chimpanzee _can_, and, as the Occult Sciences teach,
_do_, descend from the animalized Fourth human Root‐Race, being the
product of man and an extinct species of mammal—whose remote ancestors
were themselves the product of Lemurian bestiality—which lived in the
Miocene age. The ancestry of this semi‐human monster is explained in the
Stanzas as originating in the sin of the “mind‐less” races of the middle
Third Race period.

When it is borne in mind that all forms which now people the Earth are so
many variations on _basic types_ originally thrown off by the Man of the
Third and Fourth Round, such an evolutionist argument as that insisting on
the “unity of structural plan” characterizing all vertebrates, loses its
edge. The basic types referred to were very few in number in comparison
with the multitude of organisms to which they ultimately gave rise; but a
general unity of type has, nevertheless, been preserved throughout the
ages. The economy of Nature does not sanction the coëxistence of several
utterly opposed “ground plans” of organic evolution on one planet. Once,
however, that the general drift of the Occult explanation is formulated,
inference as to detail may well be left to the intuitive reader.

Similarly with the important question of the “rudimentary” organs
discovered by Anatomists in the human organism. Doubtless this line of
argument, when wielded by Darwin and Hæckel against their European
adversaries, proved of great weight. Anthropologists, who ventured to
dispute the derivation of man from an animal ancestry, were sorely puzzled
how to deal with the presence of gill‐clefts, with the “tail” problem, and
so on. Here again Occultism comes to our assistance with the necessary
data.

The fact is that, as previously stated, the human type is the repertory of
all potential organic forms, and the central point from which these latter
radiate. In this postulate we find a true “evolution” or “unfolding”—in a
sense which cannot be said to belong to the mechanical theory of Natural
Selection. Criticizing Darwin’s inference from “rudiments,” an able writer
remarks:


    Why is it not just as probably a true hypothesis to suppose that
    man was first created with these rudimentary sketches in his
    organization, and that they became useful appendages in the lower
    animals into which man degenerated, as it is to suppose that these
    parts existed in full development, activity and practical use, in
    the lower animals out of whom man was generated?(1622)


Read for “into which man degenerated,” “the prototypes which man _shed_ in
the course of his astral developments,” and an aspect of the true Esoteric
solution is before us. But a wider generalization is now to be formulated.

So far as our present Fourth Round terrestrial period is concerned, the
mammalian fauna are alone to be regarded as traceable to prototypes shed
by Man. The amphibia, birds, reptiles, fishes, etc., are the resultants of
the Third Round, astral fossil forms stored up in the auric envelope of
the Earth and projected into physical objectivity subsequent to the
deposition of the first Laurentian rocks. “Evolution” has to deal with the
progressive modifications, which Palæontology shows to have affected the
lower animal and vegetable kingdoms in the course of geological time. It
does not, and from the nature of things cannot, touch on the subject of
the pre‐physical types which served as the basis for future
differentiation. Tabulate the general laws controlling the development of
physical organisms it certainly may, and to a certain extent it has
acquitted itself ably of the task.

To return to the immediate subject of discussion. The mammalia, whose
first traces are discovered in the marsupials of the Triassic rocks of the
Secondary period, were evolved from _purely_ astral progenitors
contemporary with the Second Race. They are thus _post‐human_, and,
consequently, it is easy to account for the general resemblance between
their embryonic stages and those of Man, who necessarily embraces in
himself and epitomizes in his development the features of the group he
originated. This explanation disposes of a portion of the Darwinist brief.


    But how to account for the presence of the gill‐clefts in the
    human fœtus, which represent the stage through which the branchiæ
    of the fish are developed;(1623) for the pulsating vessel
    corresponding to the heart of the lower fishes, which constitutes
    the fœtal heart; for the entire analogy presented by the
    segmentation of the human ovum, the formation of the blastoderm,
    and the appearance of the “gastrula” stage, with corresponding
    stages in lower vertebrate life and even among the sponges; for
    the various types of lower animal life which the form of the
    future child shadows forth in the cycle of its growth?... How
    comes it to pass that stages in the life of fishes, whose
    ancestors swam [æons before the epoch of the First Root‐Race] in
    the seas of the Silurian period, as well as stages in that of the
    later amphibian, reptilian fauna, are mirrored in the “epitomized
    history” of human fœtal development?


This plausible objection is met by the reply that the Third Round
terrestrial animal forms were just as much referable to types thrown off
by Third Round Man, as that new importation into our planet’s area—the
mammalian stock—is to the Fourth Round Humanity of the Second Root‐Race.
The process of human fœtal growth epitomizes not only the general
characteristics of the Fourth, but of the Third Round terrestrial life.
The diapason of type is run through in brief. Occultists are thus at no
loss to “account for” the birth of children with an actual caudal
appendage, or for the fact that the tail in the human fœtus is, at one
period, double the length of the nascent legs. The potentiality of every
organ useful to animal life is locked up in Man—the Microcosm of the
Macrocosm—and abnormal conditions may not unfrequently result in the
strange phenomena which Darwinists regard as “reversion to ancestral
features.”(1624) Reversion, indeed, but scarcely in the sense contemplated
by our present‐day empiricists!



C. Darwinism And The Antiquity Of Man: The Anthropoids And Their Ancestry.


The public has been notified by more than one eminent modern Geologist and
man of Science, that:


    All estimate of geological duration is not merely imperfect, but
    necessarily impossible; for we are ignorant of the causes, though
    they must have existed, which quickened or retarded the progress
    of the sedimentary deposits.(1625)


And now another man of Science, as well known (Croll) calculating that the
Tertiary age began either fifteen or two‐and‐a‐half million years ago—the
former being a more correct calculation, according to Esoteric Doctrine,
than the latter—there seems in this case, at least, no very great
disagreement. Exact Science, refusing to see in man a “special creation”
(to a certain degree the Secret Sciences do the same), is at liberty to
ignore the first three, or rather two‐and‐a‐half Races—the spiritual, the
semi‐astral, and the semi‐human—of our teachings. But it can hardly do the
same in the case of the Third, at its closing period, the Fourth, and the
Fifth Races, since it already divides mankind into Palæolithic and
Neolithic man.(1626) The Geologists of France place man in the Mid‐Miocene
age (Gabriel de Mortillet), and some even in the Secondary period, as de
Quatrefages suggests; while the English _savants_ do not generally accept
such antiquity for their species. But they may know better some day. For,
as says Sir Charles Lyell:


    If we consider the absence or extreme scarcity of human bones and
    works of art in all strata, whether marine or fresh‐water, even in
    those formed in the immediate proximity of land inhabited by
    millions of human beings, we shall be prepared for the general
    dearth of human memorials in glacial formations, whether recent,
    pleistocene, or of more ancient date. If there were a few
    wanderers over lands covered with glaciers, or over seas infested
    with icebergs, and if a few of them left their bones or weapons in
    moraines or in marine drifts, the chances, after the lapse of
    thousands of years, of a geologist meeting with one of them must
    be infinitesimally small.(1627)


The men of Science avoid pinning themselves down to any definite statement
concerning the age of man, as indeed they are hardly able to make any, and
thus leave enormous latitude to bolder speculations. Nevertheless, while
the majority of the Anthropologists carry back the existence of man _only_
into the period of the post‐glacial drift, or what is called the
Quaternary period, those of them who, as Evolutionists, trace man to a
common origin with the monkey, do not show great consistency in their
speculations. The Darwinian hypothesis demands, in reality, a far greater
antiquity for man, than is even dimly suspected by superficial thinkers.
This is proven by the greatest authorities on the question—Mr. Huxley, for
instance. Those, therefore, who accept the Darwinian evolution, _ipso
facto_ hold very tenaciously to an antiquity of man so very great, indeed,
that it falls not so far short of the Occultist’s estimate.(1628) The
modest thousands of years of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ and the 100,000
years, to which Anthropology in general limits the age of Humanity, seem
quite microscopical when compared with the figures implied in Mr. Huxley’s
bold speculations. The former, indeed, makes of the original race of men
ape‐like cave‐dwellers. The great English Biologist, in his desire to
prove man’s pithecoid origin, insists that the transformation of the
primordial ape into a human being must have occurred _millions of years
back_. For in criticizing the excellent cranial capacity of the
Neanderthal skull, notwithstanding his assertion that it is overlaid with
“pithecoid bony walls,” coupled with Mr. Grant Allen’s assurances that
this skull—


    Possesses large bosses on the forehead, strikingly [?] suggestive
    of those which give the gorilla its peculiarly fierce
    appearance(1629)—


still Mr. Huxley is forced to admit that, in the said skull, his theory is
once more defeated by the—


    Completely human proportions of the accompanying limb‐bones,
    together with the fair development of the Engis skull.


In consequence of all this we are notified that these skulls—


    Clearly indicate that the first traces of the primordial stock
    whence man has proceeded, need no longer be sought by those who
    entertain any form of the doctrine of progressive development in
    the newest Tertiaries; but that they may be looked for in an epoch
    more distant from the age of the elephas primigenius than that is
    from us.(1630)


An _untold_ antiquity for man is thus, then, the scientific _sine quâ non_
in the question of Darwinian Evolution, since the oldest Palæolithic man
shows as yet no appreciable differentiation from his modern descendant. It
is only of late that Modern Science has with every year begun to widen the
abyss that now separates her from ancient Science, as that of Pliny and
Hippocrates; none of the old writers would have derided the Archaic
Teachings with respect to the evolution of the human races and animal
species, as the present day Scientist—Geologist or Anthropologist—is sure
to do.

The pendulum of thought oscillates between extremes. Having now finally
emancipated herself from the shackles of Theology, Science has embraced
the opposite fallacy; and in the attempt to interpret Nature on purely
materialistic lines, she has built up that most extravagant theory of the
ages—the derivation of man from a ferocious and brutal ape. So rooted has
this doctrine now become, in one form and another, that the most Herculean
efforts will be needed to bring about its final rejection. The Darwinian
Anthropology is the incubus of the Ethnologist, a sturdy child of modern
Materialism, which has grown up and acquired increasing vigour, as the
ineptitude of the theological legend of Man’s “creation” became more and
more apparent. It has thriven on account of the strange delusion that—as a
Scientist of repute puts it:


    All hypotheses and theories with respect to the rise of man can be
    reduced to two [the evolutionist and the biblical exoteric
    account].... There is no other hypothesis conceivable [!!].


The anthropology of the Secret Volumes is, however, the best possible
answer to such a worthless contention.

The anatomical resemblance between man and the higher ape, so frequently
cited by Darwinists as pointing to some former ancestor common to both,
presents an interesting problem, the proper solution of which is to be
sought for in the Esoteric explanation of the genesis of the pithecoid
stocks. We have given it as far as it was useful, by stating that the
bestiality of the primeval mindless races resulted in the production of
huge man‐like monsters—the offspring of human and animal parents. As time
rolled on, and the still semi‐astral forms consolidated into the physical,
the descendants of these creatures were modified by external conditions,
until the breed, dwindling in size, culminated in the lower apes of the
Miocene period. With these the later Atlanteans renewed the sin of the
“Mindless”—this time with full responsibility. The resultants of their
crime were the apes now known as anthropoid.

It may be useful to compare this very simple theory—and we are willing to
offer it merely as a hypothesis to the unbelievers—with the Darwinian
scheme, so full of insurmountable obstacles, that no sooner is one of them
overcome by a more or less ingenious hypothesis, than ten worse
difficulties are forthwith discovered behind the one disposed of.




Section IV. Duration of the Geological Periods, Race Cycles, and the
Antiquity of Man.


Millions of years have sunk into Lethe, leaving no more recollection in
the memory of the profane than the few millenniums of the orthodox Western
chronology as to the Origin of Man and the history of the primeval races.

All depends on the proofs found for the antiquity of the Human Race. If
the still‐debated man of the Pliocene or even the Miocene period was the
Homo primigenius, then Science _may_ be right (_argumenti causâ_) in
basing its present Anthropology—as to the date and mode of origin of Homo
sapiens—on the Darwinian theory.(1631) But if the skeletons of man should
at any time be discovered in the Eocene strata, while no fossil ape is
found there, and the existence of man is thus proved to be prior to that
of the anthropoid—then Darwinians will have to exercise their ingenuity in
another direction. Moreover, it is said in well‐informed quarters that the
twentieth century will be still in its earliest teens when such undeniable
proof of man’s priority will be forthcoming.

Even now much evidence is being brought forward to prove that the dates
hitherto assigned for the foundations of cities, civilizations and various
other historical events have been absurdly curtailed. This was done as a
peace‐offering to biblical chronology. The well‐known Palæontologist Ed.
Lartet writes:


    No date is to be found in Genesis, which assigns a time for the
    birth of primitive humanity.


But Chronologists have for fifteen centuries endeavoured to force the
_Bible_ facts into agreement with their systems. Thus, no less than one
hundred and forty different opinions have been formed about the single
date of “Creation.”


    And between the extreme variations there is a discrepancy of 3,194
    years, in the reckoning of the period between the beginning of the
    world and the birth of Christ. Within the last few years,
    archæologists have had also to throw back by nearly 3,000 years
    the beginnings of Babylonian civilization. On the foundation
    cylinder deposited by Nabonidus, the Babylonian king, conquered by
    Cyrus—are found the records of the former, in which he speaks of
    his discovery of the foundation stone that belonged to the
    original temple built by Naram‐Sin, son of Sargon, of Accadia, the
    conqueror of Babylonia, who, says Nabonidus, lived 3,200 years
    before his own time.(1632)


We have shown in _Isis Unveiled_ that those who based history on the
chronology of the Jews—a race which had none of its own and rejected the
Western till the twelfth century—would lose their way, for the Jewish
account could only be followed through kabalistic computation, and only
then with key in hand. We characterized the late George Smith’s chronology
of the Chaldæans and Assyrians, which he had made to fit in with that of
Moses, as quite fantastic. And now, in this respect at least, later
Assyriologists have corroborated our denial. For, whereas George Smith
makes Sargon I (the prototype of Moses) reign in the city of Akkad about
1600 B.C.—probably out of a latent respect for Moses, whom the _Bible_
makes to flourish 1571 B.C.—we now learn from the first of the six Hibbert
Lectures delivered by Professor A. H. Sayce, of Oxford, in 1887, that:


    Old views of the early annals of Babylonia and its religions have
    been much modified by recent discovery. The first Semitic Empire,
    it is now agreed, was that of Sargon of Accad, who established a
    great library, patronized literature, and extended his conquests
    across the sea into Cyprus. It is now known that he reigned as
    early as B.C. 3,750.... The Accadian monuments found by the French
    at Tel‐loh must be even older, reaching back to about B.C. 4,000.


In other words, to the fourth year of the World’s creation agreeably with
_Bible_ chronology, and when Adam was in his swaddling clothes. Perchance,
in a few years more, the 4,000 years may be further extended. The well‐
known Oxford lecturer remarked in his disquisitions upon “The Origin and
Growth of Religion as Illustrated by the Religion of the Ancient
Babylonians,” that:


    The difficulties of systematically tracing the origin and history
    of the Babylonian Religion were considerable. The sources of our
    knowledge of the subject were almost wholly monumental, very
    little help being obtainable from classical or Oriental writers.
    Indeed, it was an undeniable fact that the Babylonian priesthood
    intentionally swaddled up the study of the religious texts in
    coils of almost insuperable difficulty.


That they have confused the dates, and especially the order of events
“intentionally,” is undeniable, and for a very good reason: their writings
and records were all Esoteric. The Babylonian priests did no more than the
priests of other ancient nations. Their records were meant only for the
Initiates and their disciples, and it is only the latter who were
furnished with the keys to the true meaning. But Professor Sayce’s remarks
are promising. For he explains the difficulty by saying that as:


    The Nineveh library contained mostly copies of older Babylonian
    texts, and the copyists pitched upon such tablets only as were of
    special interest to the Assyrian conquerors, belonging to a
    comparatively late epoch, this added much to the greatest of all
    our difficulties—namely, our being so often left in the dark as to
    the age of our documentary evidence, and the precise worth of our
    materials for history.


Thus one has a right to infer that some still fresher discovery may lead
to a new necessity for pushing the Babylonian dates so far beyond the year
4,000 B.C., as to make them _pre‐cosmic_ in the judgment of every _Bible_
worshipper.

How much more would Palæontology have learned had not millions of works
been destroyed! We talk of the Alexandrian Library, which has been thrice
destroyed, namely, by Julius Cæsar 48 B.C., in A.D. 390, and lastly in the
year A.D. 640 by the general of Kaliph Omar. What is this in comparison
with the works and records destroyed in the primitive Atlantean Libraries,
wherein records are said to have been traced on the tanned skins of
gigantic antediluvian monsters? Or again in comparison with the
destruction of the countless Chinese books by command of the founder of
the Imperial Tsin dynasty, Tsin Shi Hwang‐ti, in 213 B.C.? Surely the
brick‐clay tablets of the Imperial Babylonian Library, and the priceless
treasures of the Chinese collections, could never have contained such
information as one of the aforesaid “Atlantean” skins would have furnished
to the ignorant world.

But even with the extremely meagre data at hand, Science has been able to
see the necessity of throwing back nearly every Babylonian date, and has
done so quite generously. We learn from Professor Sayce that even the
archaic statues at Tel‐loh, in Lower Babylonia, have suddenly been
assigned a date contemporary with the fourth dynasty in Egypt.(1633)
Unfortunately, dynasties and pyramids share the fate of geological
periods; their dates are arbitrary, and depend on the whims of the
respective men of Science. Archæologists know now, it is said, that the
afore‐mentioned statues are fashioned out of green diorite, that can only
be got in the Peninsula of Sinai; and


    They accord in the style of art, and in the standard of
    measurement employed, with the similar diorite statues of the
    pyramid builders of the third and fourth Egyptian dynasties....
    Moreover, the only possible period for a Babylonian occupation of
    the Sinaitic quarries must be placed shortly after the close of
    the epoch at which the pyramids were built; and thus only can we
    understand how the name of Sinai could have been derived from that
    of Sin, the primitive Babylonian moon‐god.


This is very logical, but what is the date fixed for these dynasties?
Sanchuniathon’s and Manetho’s synchronistic tables—or whatever remained of
these after holy Eusebius had the handling of them—have been rejected; and
still we have to remain satisfied with the four or five thousand years
B.C., so liberally allotted to Egypt. At all events one point is gained.
There is, at last, a city on the face of the Earth which is allowed, at
least, 6,000 years, and it is Eridu. Geology has discovered it. According
to Professor Sayce again:


    They are now also able to obtain time for the silting up of the
    head of the Persian Gulf, which demands a lapse of between 5,000
    and 6,000 years since the period when Eridu, now twenty‐five miles
    inland, was the seaport at the mouth of the Euphrates, and the
    seat of Babylonian commerce with Southern Arabia and India. More
    than all, the new chronology gives time for the long series of
    eclipses recorded in the great astronomical work called “The
    Observations of Bel”; and we are also enabled to understand the
    otherwise perplexing change in the position of the vernal equinox,
    which has occurred since our present zodiacal signs were named by
    the earliest Babylonian astronomers. When the Accadian calendar
    was arranged and the Accadian months were named, the sun at the
    vernal equinox was not, as now, in Pisces, or even in Aries, but
    in Taurus. The rate of the precession of the equinoxes being
    known, we learn that at the vernal equinox the sun was in Taurus
    from about 4,700 years B.C., and we thus obtain astronomical
    limits of date which cannot be impugned.(1634)


It may make our position plainer if we state at once that we use Sir C.
Lyell’s nomenclature for the ages and periods, and that when we talk of
the Secondary and Tertiary age, of the Eocene, Miocene and Pliocene
periods—this is simply to make our facts more comprehensible. Since these
ages and periods have not yet been allowed fixed and determined durations,
two‐and‐a‐half and fifteen million years being assigned at different times
to one and the same age (the Tertiary); and since no two Geologists or
Naturalists seem to agree on this point—Esoteric Teachings may remain
quite indifferent to the appearance of man in the Secondary or the
Tertiary age. If the latter age may be allowed even so much as fifteen
million years’ duration—well and good; for the Occult Doctrine, jealously
guarding its real and correct figures so far as concerns the First,
Second, and two‐thirds of the Third Root‐Race, gives clear information
upon one point only—the age of Vaivasvata Manu’s humanity.(1635)

Another definite statement is that during the so‐called Eocene period the
Continent to which the Fourth Race belonged, and on which it lived and
perished, showed the first symptoms of sinking, and that it was in the
Miocene age that it was finally destroyed—save the small island mentioned
by Plato. These points have now to be checked by scientific data.



A. Modern Scientific Speculations About The Ages Of The Globe, Animal
Evolution, And Man.


May we not be permitted to throw a glance at the works of specialists? The
work on _World‐Life: Comparative Geology_, by Prof. A. Winchell, furnishes
us with curious data. Here we find an opponent of the nebular theory
smiting with all the force of the hammer of his _odium theologicum_ on the
rather contradictory hypotheses of the great stars of Science, in the
matter of sidereal and cosmic phenomena based on their respective
relations to terrestrial durations. The “too imaginative physicists and
naturalists” do not fare very easily under this shower of their own
speculative computations placed side by side, and cut rather a sorry
figure. Thus he writes:


    Sir William Thompson, on the basis of the observed principles of
    cooling, concludes that no more than 10 million years [elsewhere
    he makes it 100,000,000] can have elapsed since the temperature of
    the earth was sufficiently reduced to sustain vegetable
    life.(1636) Helmholz calculates that 20 million years would
    suffice for the original nebula to condense to the present
    dimensions of the sun. Prof. S. Newcomb requires only 10 millions
    to attain a temperature of 212° Fahr.(1637) Croll estimates 70
    million years for the diffusion of the heat....(1638) Bischof
    calculates that 350 million years would be required for the earth
    to cool from a temperature of 2,000° to 200° Centigrade. Reade,
    basing his estimate on observed rates of denudation, demands 500
    million years since sedimentation began in Europe.(1639) Lyell
    ventured a rough guess of 240 million years; Darwin thought 300
    million years demanded by the organic transformations which his
    theory contemplates, and Huxley is disposed to demand 1,000
    millions [!!].... Some biologists ... seem to close their eyes
    tight and leap at one bound into the abyss of millions of years,
    of which they have no more adequate estimate than of
    infinity.(1640)


Then he proceeds to give what he takes to be more correct geological
figures: a few will suffice.

According to Sir William Thompson “the whole incrusted age of the world is
80,000,000 years”; and agreeably with Prof. Houghton’s calculations of a
minimum limit for the time since the elevation of Europe and Asia, three
hypothetical ages for three _possible_ and different modes of upheaval are
given, varying from the modest figure of 640,730 years, through 4,170,000
years to the tremendous figure of 27,491,000 years!!

This is enough, as one can see, to cover our claims for the four
Continents and even the figures of the Brâhmans.

Further calculations, the details of which the reader may find in Prof.
Winchell’s work,(1641) bring Houghton to an approximation of the
sedimentary age of the globe—11,700,000 years. These figures are found too
small by the author, who forthwith extends them to 37,000,000 years.

Again, according to Croll,(1642) 2,500,000 years “represents the time
since the beginning of the Tertiary age” in one work; and according to
another modification of his view, 15,000,000 only have elapsed since the
beginning of the Eocene period,(1643) this, being the first of the three
Tertiary periods, leaves the student suspended between two‐and‐a‐half and
fifteen millions. But if one has to hold to the former moderate figures,
then the whole incrusted age of the world would be 131,600,000
years.(1644)

As the last Glacial period extended from 240,000 to 80,000 years ago
(Prof. Croll’s view), therefore, man must have appeared on Earth from
100,000 to 120,000 years ago. But, as says Prof. Winchell with reference
to the antiquity of the Mediterranean race:


    It is generally believed to have made its appearance during the
    later decline of the continental glaciers. It does not concern,
    however, the antiquity of the Black and Brown races, since there
    are numerous evidences of their existence in more southern
    regions, in times remotely pre‐glacial.(1645)


As a specimen of geological _certainty_ and _agreement_, these figures
also may be added. Three authorities—Messrs. T. Belt, F.G.S., Robert Hunt,
F.R.S., and J. Croll, F.R.S.,—in estimating the time that has elapsed
since the Glacial epoch, give figures that vary to an almost incredible
extent:

Belt:         20,000 years.
Hunt:         80,000 years
Croll:       240,000 years(1646)

No wonder that Mr. Pengelly confesses that:


    It is at present and perhaps always will be impossible to reduce,
    even approximately, geological time into years or even into
    millenniums.


A wise word of advice from the Occultists to the gentlemen Geologists;
they ought to imitate the cautious example of Masons. As chronology, they
say, cannot measure the era of the creation, therefore, their “Antient and
Primitive Rite” uses 000,000,000 as the nearest approach to reality.

The same uncertainty, contradictions and disagreement reign on all other
subjects.

The scientific authorities on the Descent of Man are again, for all
practical purposes, a delusion and a snare. There are many Anti‐Darwinists
in the British Association, and Natural Selection begins to lose ground.
Though at one time the saviour, which seemed to rescue the learned
theorists from a final intellectual collapse into the abyss of fruitless
hypothesis, it begins to be distrusted. Even Mr. Huxley is showing signs
of truancy, and thinks “natural selection _not the sole_ factor”:

We greatly suspect that she [Nature] does make considerable jumps in the
way of variation now and then, and that these saltations give rise to some
of the gaps which appear to exist in the series of known forms.(1647)

Again, C. R. Bree, M.D., argues in this wise in considering the fatal gaps
in Mr. Darwin’s theory:


    It must be again called to mind that the intermediate forms must
    have been vast in numbers.... Mr. St. George Mivart believes that
    change in evolution may occur more quickly than is generally
    believed; but Mr. Darwin sticks manfully to his belief, and again
    tells us “_natura non facit saltum_.”(1648)


Herein the Occultists are at one with Mr. Darwin.

Esoteric teaching fully corroborates the idea of Nature’s slowness and
dignified progression. “Planetary impulses” are all periodical. Yet this
Darwinian theory, correct as it is in minor particulars, agrees no more
with Occultism than with Mr. Wallace, who, in his _Contributions to the
Theory of Natural Selection_, shows pretty conclusively that something
_more_ than Natural Selection is requisite to produce physical man.

Let us, meanwhile, examine the _scientific_ objections to this scientific
theory, and see what they are.

Mr. St. George Mivart is found arguing that:


    It will be a moderate computation to allow 25,000,000 for the
    deposit of the strata down to and including the Upper Silurian.
    If, then, the evolutionary work done during this deposition only
    represents a hundredth part of the sum total, we shall require
    2,500,000,000 (two thousand five hundred million) years for the
    complete development of the whole animal kingdom to its present
    state. Even one quarter of this, however, would far exceed the
    time which physics and astronomy seem able to allow for the
    completion of the process.

    Finally, a difficulty exists as to the reason of the absence of
    rich fossiliferous deposits in the oldest strata—if life was then
    as abundant and varied, as, on the Darwinian theory, it must have
    been. Mr. Darwin himself admits “the case at present must remain
    inexplicable; and this may be truly urged as a valid argument
    against the views” entertained in his book.

    Thus, then, we find a remarkable (and on Darwinian principles all
    but inexplicable) absence of minutely graduated transitional
    forms. All the most marked groups—bats, pterodactyles, chelonians,
    ichthyosaurians, amoura, etc.—appear at once upon the scene. Even
    the horse, the animal whose pedigree has been probably best
    preserved, affords no conclusive evidence of specific origin by
    significant fortuitous variations; while some forms, as the
    labyrinthodonts and trilobites, which seemed to exhibit gradual
    change, are shown by further investigation to do nothing of the
    sort.... All these difficulties are avoided if we admit that new
    forms of animal life of all degrees of complexity appear from time
    to time with comparative suddenness, being evolved according to
    laws in part depending on surrounding conditions, in part
    internal—similar to the way in which crystals (and, perhaps from
    recent researches, the lowest forms of life) build themselves up
    according to the internal laws of their component substance, and
    in harmony and correspondence with all environing influences and
    conditions.(1649)


“The internal laws of their component substance.” These are wise words,
and the admission of the possibility is prudent. But how can these
internal laws be ever recognized, if Occult teaching be discarded? As a
friend writes, while drawing our attention to the above speculations:


    In other words, the doctrine of Planetary Life‐Impulses must be
    admitted. Otherwise, why are species now _stereotyped_, and why do
    even domesticated breeds of pigeons and many animals relapse into
    their ancestral types when left to themselves?


But the teaching about Planetary Life‐Impulses has to be clearly defined
and as clearly understood, if present confusion is not to be made still
more perplexing. All these difficulties would vanish as the shadows of
night disappear before the light of the rising Sun, if the following
Esoteric Axioms were admitted:

(_a_) The existence and the enormous antiquity of our Planetary Chain;

(_b_) The actuality of the Seven Rounds

(_c_) The separation of human Races (outside the purely anthropological
division) into seven distinct Root‐Races, of which our present European
Humanity is the Fifth;

(_d_) The antiquity of man in this (Fourth) Round; and finally

(_e_) That as these Races evolve from ethereality to materiality, and from
the latter back again into relative physical tenuity of texture, so every
living (so‐called) _organic_ species of animals, with vegetation included,
changes with every new Root‐Race.

Were this admitted, if even only along with other, and surely, on maturer
consideration, no less absurd, suppositions—if Occult theories have to be
considered “absurd” at present—then every difficulty would be made away
with. Surely Science ought to try and be more logical than it now is, as
it can hardly maintain the theory of man’s descent from an anthropoidal
ancestor, and deny in the same breath any reasonable antiquity to such a
man! Once Mr. Huxley talks of “the vast intellectual chasm between the ape
and man,” and “the present enormous gulf between them,”(1650) and admits
the necessity of extending scientific allowances for the age of man on
Earth for such slow and progressive development, then all those men of
Science who are of his way of thinking, at any rate, ought to come to at
least some approximate figures, and agree upon the probable duration of
those Pliocene, Miocene, and Eocene periods of which so much is said, and
about which nothing definite is known—even if they dare not venture
_beyond_. But no two Scientists seem to agree. Every period seems to be a
mystery in its duration, and a thorn in the side of the Geologists; and,
as just shown, they are unable to harmonize their conclusions even with
regard to the comparatively recent geological formations. Thus, no
reliance can be placed on their figures when they do give any, for with
them it is all either millions or simply thousands of years!

That which is said may be strengthened by the confessions made by
themselves and the synopsis of these, to be found in that “Circle of
Sciences,” the _Encyclopædia Britannica_, which shows the mean accepted in
the geological and anthropological riddles. In that work the cream of the
most authoritative opinions is skimmed off and presented; nevertheless, we
find in it a refusal to assign any definite chronological date, even to
such comparatively speaking late epochs as the Neolithic era, though, for
a wonder, an age is established for the beginnings of certain geological
periods; at any rate for some few, the duration of which could hardly be
any more shortened, without an immediate conflict with facts.

Thus, it is surmised in the great Encyclopædia that:


    One hundred million years have passed ... since the solidification
    of our earth, when the earliest form of life appeared upon
    it.(1651)


But it seems quite as hopeless to try to convert the modern Geologists and
Ethnologists, as it is to make Darwinian Naturalists perceive their
mistakes. About the Âryan Root‐Race and its origins, Science knows as
little as of the men from other Planets. With the exception of Flammarion,
and of a few Mystics among Astronomers, even the habitableness of other
Planets is mostly denied. Yet such great Adept Astronomers were the
Scientists of the earliest races of the Âryan stock, that they seem to
have known far more about the races of Mars and Venus than the modern
Anthropologist knows of those of the early stages of the Earth.

Let us leave Modern Science aside for a moment and turn to Ancient
Knowledge. As we are assured by Archaic Scientists that all such
geological cataclysms—from the upheaval of oceans, deluges, and shifting
of continents, down to the present year’s cyclones, hurricanes,
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tidal waves, and even the extraordinary
weather and seeming shifting of seasons which are perplexing all European
and American Meteorologists—are due to, and depend on the Moon and
Planets; aye, that even modest and neglected constellations have the
greatest influence on the meteorological and cosmical changes, over, and
within our Earth—let us give one moment’s attention to our sidereal
despots, the rulers of our globe and men. Modern Science denies any such
influence; Archaic Science affirms it. We will see what both say with
regard to this question.



B. On Chains Of Planets And Their Plurality.


Did the Ancients know of Worlds besides their own? What are the data of
the Occultists in affirming that every Globe is a Septenary Chain of
Worlds—of which only one member is visible—and that these are, were, or
will be, “man‐bearing,” just as is every visible Star or Planet? What do
they mean by “a moral and physical influence” exerted on our Globe by the
Sidereal Worlds?

Such are the questions often put to us, and they have to be considered
from every aspect. To the first of the two queries the answer is: We
believe it because the first law in nature is uniformity in diversity, and
the second is analogy. “As above, so below.” The time is gone by for ever
when our pious ancestors believed that our Earth was in the centre of the
Universe, and the Church and her arrogant servants could insist that the
supposition that any other Planet could be inhabited should be regarded as
blasphemy. Adam and Eve, the Serpent and Original Sin, followed by
Atonement through Blood, have been too long in the way of progress, and
universal truth has thus been sacrificed to the insane conceit of us
little men.

Now what are the proofs thereof? Beyond inferential evidence and logical
reasoning, there are none for the profane. To the Occultists, who believe
in the knowledge acquired by countless generations of Seers and Initiates,
the data offered in the Secret Books are all‐sufficient. The general
public needs other proofs, however. There are some Kabalists, and even
some Eastern Occultists, who, failing to find uniform evidence upon this
point in all the mystic works of the nations, hesitate to accept the
teaching. Even such “uniform evidence” will be forthcoming presently.
Meanwhile, we may approach the subject from its general aspect, and see
whether belief in it is so very absurd, as some Scientists along with
other Nicodemuses would have it. Unconsciously, perhaps, in thinking of a
plurality of inhabited “Worlds,” we imagine them to be like the Globe we
inhabit, and to be peopled by beings more or less resembling ourselves.
And in so doing we are only following a natural instinct. Indeed, so long
as the enquiry is confined to the life‐history of this Globe, we can
speculate on the question with some profit, and ask ourselves, with some
hope of at least asking an intelligible question, what were the “Worlds”
spoken of in all the ancient scriptures of Humanity? But how do we know
(_a_) what kind of beings inhabit the Globes in general; and (_b_) whether
those who rule Planets superior to our own do not exercise the same
influence on our Earth _consciously_, that we may exercise
_unconsciously_, say on the small planets (planetoids or asteroids) in the
long run, by our cutting the Earth in pieces, opening canals, and thereby
entirely changing our climates. Of course, like Cæsar’s wife, the
planetoids, cannot be affected by our suspicion. They are too far, etc.
Believing in Esoteric Astronomy, however, we are not so sure of that.

But when, extending our speculations beyond our Planetary Chain, we try to
cross the limits of the Solar System, then indeed we act as do
presumptuous fools. For—while accepting the old Hermetic axiom, “as above,
so below”—as we may well believe that Nature on Earth displays the most
careful economy, utilizing every vile and waste thing in her marvellous
transformations, and withal _never_ repeating herself, so we may justly
conclude that there is no other Globe in all her infinite systems so
closely resembling this Earth, that the ordinary powers of man’s thought
should be able to imagine and reproduce its semblance and
containment.(1652)

And indeed we find in the romances as in all the so‐called scientific
fictions and spiritistic “revelations” from Moon, Stars, and Planets,
merely fresh combinations or modifications of the men and things, the
passions and forms of life, with which we are familiar, though even on the
other Planets of our own System nature and life are entirely different
from those prevailing on our own. Swedenborg was preeminent in inculcating
such an erroneous belief.

But even more. The ordinary man has no experience of any state of
consciousness other than that to which the physical senses link him. Men
dream; they sleep the profound sleep which is too deep for its dreams to
impress the physical brain; and in these states there must still be
consciousness. How, then, while these mysteries remain unexplored, can
_we_ hope to speculate with profit on the nature of Globes which, in the
economy of Nature, must needs belong to states of consciousness other and
quite different from _any_ which man experiences here?

And this is true to the letter. For even great Adepts (those initiated of
course), trained Seers though they be, can only claim thorough
acquaintance with the nature and appearance of Planets and their
inhabitants belonging to our Solar System. They _know_ that almost all the
Planetary Worlds are inhabited, but—even in spirit—they can have access
only to those of our System; and they are also aware how difficult it is,
_even for them_, to put themselves into full rapport even with the planes
of consciousness _within_ our System, differing as they do from the states
of consciousness possible on this Globe; such, for instance, as those
which exist on the Chain of Spheres on the three planes beyond that of our
Earth. Such knowledge and intercourse are possible to them because they
have learned how to penetrate to planes of consciousness which are closed
to the perceptions of ordinary men; but were they to communicate their
knowledge, the world would be no wiser, because men lack that experience
of other forms of perception which alone could enable them to grasp what
they might be told.

Still the fact remains that most of the Planets, like the Stars beyond our
System, are inhabited, a fact which has been admitted by the men of
Science themselves. Laplace and Herschel believed it, though they wisely
abstained from imprudent speculation; and the same conclusion has been
worked out and supported with an array of scientific considerations by C.
Flammarion, the well‐known French Astronomer. The arguments he brings
forward are strictly scientific, and are such as appeal even to a
materialistic mind, which would remain unmoved by such thoughts as those
of Sir David Brewster, the famous Physicist, who writes:


    Those “barren spirits” or “base souls,” as the poet calls them,
    who might be led to believe that the earth is the only inhabited
    body in the universe, would have no difficulty in conceiving the
    earth also to have been destitute of inhabitants. What is more, if
    such minds were acquainted with the deductions of geology, they
    would admit that it was uninhabited for myriads of years; and here
    we come to the impossible conclusion that during these myriads of
    years there was not a single intelligent creature in the vast
    domains of the Universal King, and that before the protozoic
    formations there existed neither plant nor animal in all the
    infinity of space.(1653)


Flammarion shows, in addition, that all the conditions of life—even as
_we_ know it—are present on some at least of the Planets, and points to
the fact that these conditions must be much more favourable on them than
they are on our Earth.

Thus scientific reasoning, as well as observed facts, concurs with the
statements of the Seer, and the innate voice in man’s own heart in
declaring that life—intelligent, conscious life—_must_ exist on other
worlds than ours.

But this is the limit beyond which the ordinary faculties of man cannot
carry him. Many are the romances and tales, some purely fanciful, others
bristling with scientific knowledge, which have attempted to imagine and
describe life on other Globes. But one and all they give but some
distorted copy of the drama of life around us. It is either, with
Voltaire, the men of our own race under a microscope, or, with de
Bergerac, a graceful play of fancy and satire; but we always find that at
bottom the new world is but the one we ourselves live in. So strong is
this tendency that even great natural, though non‐initiated, Seers, fall
victims to it when untrained; witness Swedenborg, who goes so far as to
dress the inhabitants of Mercury, whom he meets with in the spirit‐world,
in clothes such as are worn in Europe!

Commenting on this tendency, Flammarion says:


    It seems as if in the eyes of those authors who have written on
    this subject, the Earth were the type of the Universe, and the man
    of Earth, the type of the inhabitants of the Heavens. It is, on
    the contrary, much more probable, that, since the nature of other
    planets is essentially varied, and the surroundings and conditions
    of existence essentially different, while the forces which preside
    over the creation of beings and the substances which enter into
    their mutual constitution are essentially distinct, it would
    follow that our mode of existence cannot be regarded as in any way
    applicable to other globes. Those who have written on this subject
    have allowed themselves to be dominated by terrestrial ideas, and
    have therefore fallen into error.(1654)


But Flammarion himself falls into the very error which he here condemns,
for he tacitly takes the conditions of life on Earth as the standard by
which to determine the degree to which other Planets are adapted for
habitation by “other humanities.”

Let us, however, leave these profitless and empty speculations, which,
though they seem to fill our hearts with a glow of enthusiasm and to
enlarge our mental and spiritual grasp, do but in reality cause a
factitious stimulation, and blind us more and more to our ignorance not
only of the world we inhabit, but even of the infinitude contained within
ourselves.

When, therefore, we find “other worlds” spoken of in the Bibles of
Humanity, we may safely conclude that they not only refer to other states
of our Planetary Chain and Earth, but also to other inhabited Globes—Stars
and Planets; withal, that no speculations were ever made about the latter.
The whole of antiquity believed in the Universality of Life. But no really
initiated Seer of any civilized nation has ever taught that life on other
Stars could be judged by the standard of terrestrial life. What is
generally meant by “Earths” and “Worlds,” relates (_a_) to the “rebirths”
of our Globe after each Manvantara and a long period of Obscuration; and
(_b_) to the periodical and entire changes of the Earth’s surface, when
continents disappear to make room for oceans, and oceans and seas are
violently displaced and sent rolling to the poles, to cede their
emplacements to new continents.

We may begin with the _Bible_—the youngest of the World‐scriptures. In
_Ecclesiastes_, we read these words of the King‐Initiate:


    One generation passeth away and another generation cometh, but the
    earth abideth for ever.... The thing that hath been, it is that
    which shall be; and that which is done, is that which shall be
    done, and there is no new thing under the sun.(1655)


Under these words it is not easy to see the reference to the successive
cataclysms by which the Races of mankind are swept away, or, going further
back, to the various transitions of the Globe during the process of its
formation. But if we are told that this refers only to _our_ world _as we
now see it_, then we shall refer the reader to the _New Testament_, where
St. Paul speaks of the Son (the manifested Power) whom God hath appointed
heir of all things, “by whom also he made the worlds” (plural).(1656) This
“Power” is Chokmah, the Wisdom and the Word.

We shall probably be told that by the term “worlds,” the stars, heavenly
bodies, etc., were meant. But apart from the fact that “stars” were not
known as “worlds” to the ignorant editors of the Epistles, even if they
must have been thus known to Paul, who was an Initiate, a “Master‐
Builder,” we can quote on this point an eminent Theologian, Cardinal
Wiseman. In his work (i. 309) treating of the indefinite period of the six
days—or shall we say “too definite” period of the six days—of creation and
the 6,000 years, he confesses that we are in total darkness as to the
meaning of this statement of St. Paul, unless we are permitted to suppose
that allusion is made in it to the period which elapsed between the
_first_ and _second_ verses of chapter i of _Genesis_, and thus to those
primitive revolutions, _i.e._, the destructions and the reproductions of
the world, indicated in chapter i of _Ecclesiastes_; or, to accept, with
so many others, and in its _literal sense_, the passage in chapter i of
_Hebrews_, that speaks of the creation of “worlds”—in the plural. It is
very singular, he adds, that all the cosmogonies should agree to suggest
the same idea, and preserve the tradition of a first series of
revolutions, owing to which the world was destroyed and again renewed.

Had the Cardinal studied the _Zohar_ his doubts would have been changed
into certainties. Thus saith the “Idra Suta”:


    There were old worlds which perished as soon as they came into
    existence; worlds with and without form called Scintillas—for they
    were like the sparks under the smith’s hammer, flying in all
    directions. Some were the primordial worlds which could not
    continue long, because the “Aged”—his name be sanctified—had not
    as yet assumed his form,(1657) the workman was not yet the
    “Heavenly Man.”(1658)


Again in the _Midrash_, written long before the _Kabalah_ of Simeon Ben
Iochai, Rabbi Abahu explains:


    The Holy One, blessed be his name, has successively formed and
    destroyed sundry worlds before this one(1659).... Now this refers
    both to the first races [the “Kings of Edom”] and to the worlds
    destroyed.(1660)


“Destroyed” means here what we call “obscuration.” This becomes evident
when we read the explanation given further on:


    Still when it is said that they [the worlds] _perished_, it is
    only meant thereby that they [their humanities] lacked the true
    form, till the human [our] form came into being, in which all
    things are comprised and which contains all forms ...—it does not
    mean death, but only denotes a sinking down from their status
    [that of worlds in activity].(1661)


When, therefore, we read of the “destruction” of the Worlds, the word has
many meanings, which are very clear in several of the Commentaries on the
_Zohar_ and in Kabalistic treatises. As said elsewhere, it means not only
the destruction of many Worlds which have ended their life‐career, but
also that of the several Continents which have disappeared, as also their
decline and geographical change of place.

The mysterious “Kings of Edom” are sometimes referred to as the “Worlds”
that had been destroyed; but it is a “cloak.” The Kings who reigned in
Edom before there reigned a King in Israel, or the “Edomite Kings,” could
never symbolize the “prior worlds,” but only the “attempts at men” on this
Globe—the Pre‐Adamite Races, of which the _Zohar_ speaks, and which we
explain as the First Root‐Race. For as, speaking of the six Earths (the
six “Limbs” of Microprosopus), it is said that the seventh (our Earth)
came not into the computation when the six were created (the six Spheres
above our Globe in the Terrestrial Chain), so the first seven Kings of
Edom are left out of calculation in _Genesis_. By the law of analogy and
permutation, in the Chaldæan _Book of Numbers_, as also in the _Books of
Knowledge_ and of _Wisdom_, the “seven primordial worlds” mean also the
“seven primordial” races (sub‐races of the First Root‐Race of the
Shadows); and, again, the Kings of Edom are the sons of “Esau, the father
of the Edomites”;(1662) _i.e._, Esau represents in the _Bible_ the race
which stands between the Fourth and the Fifth, the Atlantean and the
Âryan. “Two _nations_ are in thy womb,” said the Lord to Rebekah; and Esau
was _red_ and _hairy_. From verse 24 to 34, chapter xxv of _Genesis_
contains the allegorical history of the birth of the Fifth Race.

Says the _Siphra Dtzenioutha_:


    And the Kings of ancient days died and their chiefs [crowns] were
    found no more.


And the _Zohar_ states:


    The Head of a nation that has not been formed at the beginning in
    the likeness of the White Head: its people is not from this
    Form.... Before it [the White Head, the Fifth Race or Ancient of
    the Ancients] arranged itself in its [own, or present] Form ...
    all Worlds have been destroyed; therefore it is written: and Bela,
    the Son of Beor, reigned in Edom [_Gen._, xxxvi. Here the “Worlds”
    stand for Races]. And he [such or another King of Edom] died, and
    another reigned in his stead.


No Kabalist who has hitherto treated of the symbolism and allegory hidden
under these “Kings of Edom” seems to have perceived more than one aspect
of them. They are neither the “worlds that were destroyed,” nor the “Kings
that died”—alone; but both, and much more, to treat of which there is no
space at present. Therefore, leaving the mystic parables of the _Zohar_,
we will return to the hard facts of materialistic Science; first, however,
citing a few from the long list of great thinkers who have believed in the
plurality of inhabited Worlds in general, and in Worlds that preceded our
own. These are, the great mathematicians Leibnitz and Bernouilli, Sir
Isaac Newton himself, as may be read in his _Optics_; Buffon, the
Naturalist; Condillac, the Sceptic; Bailly, Lavater, Bernardin de St.
Pierre, and, as a contrast to the two last named—suspected at least of
Mysticism—Diderot and most of the writers of the _Encyclopædia_. Following
these come Kant, the founder of modern Philosophy; the poet Philosophers,
Goethe, Krause, Schelling; and many Astronomers, from Bode, Fergusson and
Herschel, to Lalande and Laplace, with their many disciples in more recent
years.

A brilliant list of honoured names indeed; but the facts of physical
Astronomy speak even more strongly than these names in favour of the
presence of life, of even organized life, on other Planets. Thus in four
meteorites which fell respectively at Alais in France, in the Cape of Good
Hope, in Hungary, and again in France, on analysis, there was found
graphite, a form of carbon known to be invariably associated with organic
life on this Earth of ours. And that the presence of this carbon is not
due to any action occurring within our atmosphere is shown by the fact
that carbon has been found in the very centre of a meteorite; while in one
which fell at Argueil, in the south of France, in 1857, there was found
water and turf, the latter being always formed by the decomposition of
vegetable substances.

And further, examining the astronomical conditions of the other Planets,
it is easy to show that several are far better adapted for the development
of life and intelligence—even under the conditions with which men are
acquainted—than is our Earth. For instance, on the Planet Jupiter the
seasons, instead of varying between wide limits as do ours, change by
almost imperceptible degrees, and last twelve times as long as ours. Owing
to the inclination of its axis the seasons on Jupiter are due almost
entirely to the eccentricity of its orbit, and hence change slowly and
regularly. We shall be told, that no life is possible on Jupiter, as it is
in an incandescent state. But not all Astronomers agree with this. For
instance, what we state is declared by M. Flammarion; and _he_ ought to
know.

On the other hand Venus would be less adapted for human life such as
exists on Earth, since its seasons are more extreme and its changes of
temperature more sudden; though it is curious that the duration of the day
is nearly the same on the four inner planets, Mercury, Venus, the Earth
and Mars.

On Mercury, the Sun’s heat and light are seven times what they are on the
Earth, and Astronomy teaches that it is enveloped in a very dense
atmosphere. And as we see that life appears more active on Earth in
proportion to the light and heat of the Sun, it would seem more than
probable that its intensity is far, far greater on Mercury than here.

Venus, like Mercury, has a very dense atmosphere, as also has Mars, and
the snows which cover their poles, the clouds which hide their surface,
the geographical configuration of their seas and continents, the
variations of seasons and climates, are all closely analogous—at least to
the eye of the physical Astronomer. But such facts and the considerations
to which they give rise have reference only to the possibility of the
existence on these Planets of human life as known on Earth. That some
forms of life such as we know are _possible_ on these Planets, has been
long since abundantly demonstrated, and it seems perfectly useless to go
into detailed questions of the physiology, etc., of these hypothetical
inhabitants, since, after all, the reader can arrive only at an imaginary
extension of his familiar surroundings. It is better to rest content with
the three conclusions which M. Flammarion, whom we have so largely quoted,
formulates as rigorous and exact deductions from the known _facts_ and
laws of Science.

i. The various forces which were active in the beginning of evolution gave
birth to a great variety of beings on the several worlds; both in the
organic and inorganic kingdoms.

ii. The animated beings were constituted from the first according to forms
and organisms in correlation with the physiological state of each
inhabited globe.

iii. The humanities of other worlds differ from us, as much in their inner
organization as in their external physical type.

Finally the reader who may be disposed to question the validity of these
conclusions as being opposed to the _Bible_, may be referred to an
Appendix in M. Flammarion’s work dealing in detail with this question,
since in a work like the present it seems unnecessary to point out the
logical absurdity of those churchmen who deny the plurality of worlds on
the ground of biblical authority.

In this connection we may well recall those days when the burning zeal of
the Primitive Church opposed the doctrine of the Earth’s rotundity, on the
ground that the nations at the Antipodes would be outside the pale of
salvation; and again, we may remember how long it took for a nascent
Science to break down the idea of a solid firmament, in the grooves of
which the stars moved for the special edification of terrestrial humanity.

The theory of the Earth’s rotation was met by a like opposition—even to
the martyrdom of its discoverers—because, besides depriving our orb of its
dignified central position in space, the theory produced an appalling
confusion of ideas as to the Ascension—the terms “up” and “down” being
proved to be merely relative, thus complicating not a little the question
of the precise locality of Heaven!(1663)

According to the best modern calculations, there are no less than
500,000,000 Stars of various magnitudes, within the range of the best
telescopes. As to the distances between them, they are incalculable. Is,
then, our microscopical Earth—a “grain of sand on an infinite sea‐
shore”—the only centre of intelligent life? Our own Sun, itself 1,300,000
times larger than our Planet, sinks into insignificance beside the giant
Sun, Sirius, and the latter in its turn is dwarfed by other luminaries in
infinite Space. The self‐centred conception of Jehovah as the special
guardian of a small and obscure semi‐nomadic tribe, is tolerable beside
that which confines sentient existence to our microscopical Globe. The
primary reasons were without doubt: (_a_) astronomical ignorance on the
part of the early Christians, coupled with an exaggerated appreciation of
man’s own importance—a crude form of selfishness; and (_b_) the dread
that, if the hypothesis of millions of other inhabited Globes were
accepted, the crushing rejoinder would ensue: “Was there then a Revelation
to each World?”—involving the idea of the Son of God eternally “going the
rounds,” as it were. Happily it is now unnecessary to waste time and
energy in proving the possibility of the existence of such Worlds. All
intelligent persons admit it. That which now remains to be demonstrated
is, that if it is once proven that there are inhabited Worlds besides our
own, with humanities entirely different from each other as from our own—as
maintained in the Occult Sciences—then the evolution of the preceding
Races is half proved. For where is that Physicist or Geologist who is
prepared to maintain that the Earth has not changed scores of times, in
the millions of years which have elapsed in the course of its existence;
and that changing its “skin,” as it is called in Occultism, the Earth has
not had each time her special Humanities adapted to such atmospheric and
climatic conditions as were entailed by such change? And if so, why should
not our preceding four and entirely different Mankinds have existed and
thrived before our Adamic Fifth Root Race?

Before closing our debate, however, we have to examine the so‐called
organic evolution more closely. Let us search well and see whether it is
quite impossible to make our Occult data and chronology agree—up to a
certain point—with those of Science.



C. Supplementary Remarks On Esoteric Geological Chronology.


It seems possible to calculate the approximate duration at any rate of the
geological periods from the combined data of Science and Occultism now
before us. Geology is, of course, able to determine one thing with almost
certainty—the thickness of the several deposits. Now, it also stands to
reason that the time required for the deposition of any stratum on a sea‐
bottom must bear a strict proportion to the thickness of the mass thus
formed. Doubtless the _rate_ of the erosion of land, and of the sorting
out of matter on to ocean beds, has varied from age to age, and
cataclysmic changes of various kinds have broken the “uniformity” of
ordinary geological processes. Provided, then, that we have some definite
numerical basis on which to work, our task is rendered less difficult than
it might at first sight appear. Making due allowance for variations in the
rate of deposit, Professor Lefèvre gives us the relative figures which sum
up geological time. He does not attempt to calculate the lapse of years
since the first bed of the Laurentian rocks was deposited, but postulating
that time as _x_, he presents us with the relative proportions in which
the various periods stand to it. Let us premise our estimate by stating
that, roughly speaking, the Primordial rocks are 70,000 ft., the Primary
42,000 ft., the Secondary 15,000 ft., the Tertiary 5,000 ft., and the
Quaternary some 500 ft. in thickness:


    Dividing into a hundred parts the time, _whatever its actual
    length_, that has passed since the dawn of life on this earth
    [lower Laurentian strata], we shall be led to attribute to the
    Primordial age more than half of the whole duration, say 53.5; to
    the Primary 32.2; to the Secondary 11.5; to the Tertiary 2.3; to
    the Quaternary 0.5 or one‐half per cent.(1664)


Now, as it is certain, on Occult data, that the time which has elapsed
since the first sedimentary deposits is 320,000,000 years, we are able to
construct the following table:

ROUGH APPROXIMATIONS OF LENGTH OF GEOLOGICAL PERIODS IN YEARS.

Primordial (Laurentian, Cambrian, Silurian): 171,200,000.

Primary (Devonian, Coal, Permian): 103,040,000.

Secondary (Triassic, Jurassic, Cretaceous): 36,800,000.

Tertiary (Eocene, Miocene, Pliocene): 7,360,000.

Quaternary: 1,600,000.(1665)

Such estimates harmonize with the statements of Esoteric Ethnology in
almost every particular. The Tertiary Atlantean part‐cycle, from the “apex
of glory” of that Race in the early Eocene to the great Mid‐Miocene
cataclysm, would appear to have lasted some three‐and‐a‐half to four
million years. If the duration of the Quaternary is not, as seems likely,
rather over‐estimated, the sinking of Ruta and Daitya would be Post‐
Tertiary. It is probable that the results here given allow somewhat too
long a period to both the Tertiary and Quaternary, as the Third Race goes
very far back into the Secondary age. Nevertheless, the figures are most
suggestive.

But the argument from geological evidence being in favour of only
100,000,000 years, let us compare our claims and teachings with those of
exact Science.

Mr. Edward Clodd,(1666) in referring to M. de Mortillet’s work _Matériaux
pour l’Histoire de l’Homme_, which places man in the Mid‐Miocene
period,(1667) remarks that:


    It would be in defiance of all that the doctrine of evolution
    teaches, and moreover win no support from believers in special
    creation and the fixity of species, to seek for so highly
    specialized a mammalian as man at an early stage in the life‐
    history of the globe.


To this, one could answer: (_a_) the doctrine of evolution, as inaugurated
by Darwin and developed by later evolutionists, is not only the reverse of
infallible, but it is repudiated by several great men of Science, _e.g._,
de Quatrefages, in France, Dr. Weismann, an ex‐evolutionist in Germany,
and many others, the ranks of the Anti‐Darwinists growing stronger with
every year;(1668) and (_b_) truth to be worthy of its name, and remain
truth and fact, hardly needs to beg for support from any class or sect.
For were it to win support from believers in special creation, it would
never gain the favour of the evolutionists, and _vice versâ_. Truth must
rest upon its own firm foundation of facts, and take its chance of
recognition, when every prejudice in the way is disposed of. Though the
question has been already fully considered in its main aspect, it is,
nevertheless, advisable to combat every so‐called “scientific” objection
as we go along, when making what are regarded as heretical and anti‐
scientific statements.

Let us briefly glance at the divergencies between orthodox and Esoteric
Science, on the question of the age of the globe and of man. With the two
respective synchronistic tables before him, the reader will be enabled to
see at a glance the importance of these divergencies; and to perceive, at
the same time, that it is not impossible—nay, it is most likely—that
further discoveries in Geology and the finding of fossil remains of man
will force Science to confess that it is Esoteric Philosophy which is
right after all, or, at any rate, nearer to the truth.

PARALLELISM OF LIFE.

SCIENTIFIC HYPOTHESES: Science divides the period of the Globe’s history,
since the beginning of life on Earth (or the Azoic age), into five main
divisions or periods, according to Hæckel.(1669)

ESOTERIC THEORY: Leaving the classification of the geological periods to
Western Science, Esoteric Philosophy divides only the Life‐periods on the
Globe. In the present Manvantara the actual period is separated into seven
Kalpas and seven great human Races. Its first Kalpa, answering to the
Primordial Epoch is the age of the Primeval.

SCIENTIFIC: PRIMORDIAL EPOCH: Laurentian, Cambrian, Silurian. The
Primordial epoch, Science tells us, is by no means devoid of vegetable and
animal life. In the Laurentian deposits are found specimens of the Eozoon
canadense—a chambered shell. In the Silurian are discovered sea‐weeds
(algæ), molluscs, crustacea, and lower marine organisms, also the first
trace of fishes. The Primordial epoch shows algæ, molluscs, crustacea,
polyps, and marine organisms, etc. Science teaches, therefore, that marine
life was present from the very beginnings of time, leaving us, however, to
speculate for ourselves as to _how_ life appeared on Earth. If it rejects
the biblical “creation” (as we do), why does it not give us another,
approximately plausible hypothesis?

ESOTERIC: “PRIMEVAL”(1670): Devas or Divine Men, the “Creators” and
Progenitors.(1671) The Esoteric Philosophy agrees with the statement made
by Science (see preceding), demurring, however, to one particular. The
300,000,000 years of vegetable life (see “Brâhmanical Chronology”)
preceded the “Divine Men,” or Progenitors. Also, no teaching denies that
there were traces of life _within_ the Earth, besides the Eozoon
canadense, in the Primordial Epoch. Only, whereas the said vegetation
belonged to this Round, the zoological relics now found in the Laurentian,
Cambrian, and Silurian systems, so called, are the _relics_ of the Third
Round. At first astral like the rest, they consolidated and materialized
_pari passu_ with the new vegetation.

SCIENTIFIC: PRIMARY: Devonian,(1672) Coal, Permian. “Fern‐forests,
sigillaria, coniferæ, fishes, first trace of reptiles.” Thus saith Modern
Science.

ESOTERIC: “PRIMARY”: Divine Progenitors (Secondary Groups), and the two
and a half Races. The Esoteric Doctrine repeats that which was said above.
These are all relics of the preceding Round.(1673)

Once, however, the prototypes are projected out of the Astral Envelope of
the Earth, an indefinite amount of modification ensues.

SCIENTIFIC: SECONDARY: Triassic, Jurassic, Cretaceous. This is the age of
Reptiles, of the gigantic megalosauri, ichthyosauri, plesiosauri, etc.
Science denies the presence of man in this period. But it has still to
explain how men came to know of these monsters and describe them _before_
the age of Cuvier! The old annals of China, India, Egypt, and even of
Judea are full of them, as demonstrated elsewhere. In this period also
appear the first marsupial mammals(1674)—insectivorous, carnivorous,
phytophagous; and, as Prof. Owen thinks, a herbiferous hoofed mammal.

Science does not admit the appearance of man before _the close_ of the
Tertiary period.(1675) Why? Because man has to be shown younger than the
higher mammals. But Esoteric Philosophy teaches us the reverse. And as
Science is quite unable to come to anything like an approximate conclusion
as to the age of man, or even as to the geological periods, the Occult
teaching is, therefore, more logical and reasonable, even if accepted only
as a hypothesis.

ESOTERIC: “SECONDARY”: According to every calculation the Third Race had
already made its appearance, as during the Triassic there were already a
few mammals, and it must have separated before their appearance.

This, then, is the age of the Third Race, in which the origins of the
early Fourth may be perhaps also discoverable. We are, however, here left
entirely to conjecture, as no definite data are yet given out by the
Initiates.

The analogy is but a poor one, still it may be argued that, as the early
mammalia and pre‐mammalia are shown in their evolution merging from one
kind into a higher one, anatomically, so are the human races in their
procreative processes. A parallel might certainly be found between the
monotremata, didelphia (or marsupialia) and the placental mammals, divided
in their turn into three orders(1676) like the First, Second, and Third
Root‐Races of men.(1677) But this would require more space than can be now
allotted to the subject.

SCIENTIFIC: TERTIARY(1678): Eocene, Miocene, Pliocene. No man is yet
allowed to have lived during this period.

Says Mr. E. Clodd, in _Knowledge_: “Although the placental mammals and the
order of primates to which man is related, appear in Tertiary times, and
the climate, tropical in the Eocene age, warm in the Miocene, and
temperate in the Pliocene, was favourable to his presence, the proofs of
his existence in Europe before the close of the Tertiary epoch ... are not
generally accepted here.”

ESOTERIC: “TERTIARY”: The Third Race has now almost utterly disappeared,
carried away by the fearful geological cataclysms of the Secondary age,
leaving behind it but a few hybrid races.

The Fourth, born millions of years before(1679) the said cataclysm took
place, perished during the Miocene period,(1680) when the Fifth (our Âryan
Race) had had one million years of independent existence.(1681) How much
older it is from its origin—who knows? As the “historical” period began
with the Indian Âryans, with their _Vedas_ for their multitudes,(1682) and
far earlier in the Esoteric Records, it is useless to establish here any
parallels.

Geology has now divided the periods and placed man in the Quaternary.

SCIENTIFIC: QUATERNARY: Palæolithic Man, Neolithic Man, Historical Period.

ESOTERIC: “QUATERNARY”: If the Quaternary period is allowed 1,500,000
years, then only does our Fifth Race belong to it.

Yet—_mirabile dictu_—while the non‐cannibal Palæolithic man, who must have
certainly antedated cannibal Neolithic man by hundreds of thousands of
years,(1683) is shown to be a remarkable artist, Neolithic man is made out
to be almost an abject savage, his lake dwellings notwithstanding.(1684)
For see what a learned Geologist, Mr. Charles Gould, tells the reader in
his _Mythical Monsters_:


    Palæolithic men were unacquainted with pottery and the art of
    weaving, and apparently had no domesticated animals or system of
    cultivation; but the Neolithic lake‐dwellers of Switzerland had
    looms, pottery, cereals, sheep, horses, etc. Implements of horn,
    bone, and wood were in common use among both races, but those of
    the older are frequently distinguished by their being sculptured
    with great ability, or ornamented with life‐like engravings of the
    various animals living at the period; whereas there appears to
    have been a marked absence of any similar artistic ability(1685)
    on the part of Neolithic man.(1686)


Let us give the reasons for this.

(1) The oldest fossil man, the primitive cave‐men of the old Palæolithic
period, and of the Pre‐Glacial period (of whatever length, and however far
back), is always the same genus man, and there are no fossil remains
proving for him


    What the Hipparion and Anchitherium have proved for the genus
    horse—that is, gradual progressive specialization from a simple
    ancestral type to more complex existing forms.(1687)


(2) As to the so‐called Palæolithic hatchets:


    When placed side by side with the rudest forms of stone hatchets
    actually used by the Australian and other savages, it is difficult
    to detect any difference.(1688)


This goes to prove that there have been savages _at all times_; and the
inference would be that there might have been civilized people in those
days as well, cultured nations contemporary with those rude savages. We
see such a thing in Egypt 7,000 years ago.

(3) An obstacle which is the direct consequence of the two preceding: Man,
if no older than the Palæolithic period, could not possibly have had the
actual time necessary for his transformation from the “missing link” into
what he is known to have been even during that remote geological time,
_i.e._, even _a finer specimen of manhood than many of the now existing
races_.

The above lends itself naturally to the following syllogism: (1) The
_primitive_ man (known to Science) was, in some respects, even a finer man
of his genus than he is now. (2) The earliest monkey known, the lemur, was
_less_ anthropoid than the modern pithecoid species. (3) Conclusion: Even
though a _missing link_ were found, the balance of evidence would remain
more in favour of the ape _being a degenerated man_, made dumb by some
fortuitous circumstances,(1689) than in favour of the descent of man from
a pithecoid ancestor. The theory cuts both ways.

On the other hand, if the existence of Atlantis be accepted, and the
statement be believed that in the Eocene age—


    Even in its very first part, the great cycle of the Fourth Race
    men, the Atlanteans, had already reached its highest point,(1690)


then some of the present difficulties of Science might easily be made to
disappear. The rude workmanship of the Palæolithic tools proves nothing
against the idea that, side by side with their makers, there lived nations
highly civilized. We are told that:


    Only a very small portion of the earth’s surface has been
    explored, and of this a very small portion consists of ancient
    land surfaces or fresh water formations, where alone we can expect
    to meet with traces of the higher forms of animal life. And even
    these have been so imperfectly explored, that where we now meet
    with thousands and tens of thousands of undoubted human remains
    lying almost under our feet, it is only within the last thirty
    years that their existence has even been suspected.(1691)


It is very suggestive also that along with the rude hatchets of the lowest
savage, explorers meet with specimens of workmanship of such artistic
merit as could hardly be found, or expected, in a modern peasant belonging
to any European country—unless in exceptional cases. The “portrait” of the
“Reindeer Feeding,” from the Thayngin grotto in Switzerland, and those of
the man running, with two horses’ heads sketched close to him—a work of
the Reindeer period, _i.e._, at least 50,000 years ago—are pronounced by
Mr. Laing to be not only exceedingly well done, but the former, the
“Reindeer Feeding,” is described as one that “would do credit to any
modern animal painter”—by no means exaggerated praise, as anyone may see,
by glancing at the sketch given below from Mr. Gould’s work. Now, since we
have our greatest painters of Europe side by side with the modern
Esquimaux, who also have a tendency, like their Palæolithic ancestors of
the Reindeer period, the rude and savage human species, to be constantly
drawing with the point of their knives sketches of animals, scenes of the
chase, etc., why could not the same have happened in those days? Compared
with the specimens of Egyptian drawing and sketching—7,000 years ago—the
“earliest portraits” of men, horses’ heads, and reindeer, made 50,000
years ago, _are certainly superior_. Nevertheless, the Egyptians of those
periods are known to have been a highly civilized nation, whereas the
Palæolithic men are called _savages_ of the lower type. This is a small
matter seemingly, yet it is extremely suggestive as showing how every new
geological discovery is made to fit in with current theories, instead of
fitting the theories to include the discovery. Yes; Mr. Huxley is right in
saying, “Time will show.” It will, and it must vindicate Occultism.

Meanwhile, the most uncompromising Materialists are driven by necessity
into the most Occult‐like admissions. Strange to say, it is the most
materialistic—those of the German school—who, with regard to _physical_
development, come the nearest to the teachings of the Occultists. Thus,
Professor Baumgärtner believes that:


    The germs for the higher animals could only be the eggs of the
    lower animals; ... besides the advance of the vegetable and animal
    world in development, there occurred in that period the formation
    of _new original germs_ [which formed the basis of new
    metamorphoses, etc.] ... the first men who proceeded from the
    germs of animals beneath them, lived first in a larva state.


Just so; in a larva state, we say too, only from no “animal” germ; and
that larva was the soulless astral form of the pre‐physical Races. And we
believe, as the German professor does, with several other men of Science
in Europe now, that the human races—


    Have not descended from one pair, but appeared immediately in
    numerous races.(1692)


Therefore, when we read _Force and Matter_, and find that Emperor of
Materialists, Büchner, repeating after Manu and Hermes, that:


    Imperceptibly the plant glides into the animal, the animal into
    the man(1693)


—we need only add “and man into a spirit,” to complete the kabalistic
axiom. The more so, since we read the following admission:


    Evolved by spontaneous generation ... that whole rich and
    multiform organic world ... has developed itself progressively, in
    the course of endless periods of time, by the aid of natural
    phenomena.(1694)


The whole difference lies in this: Modern Science places her materialistic
theory of primordial germs on Earth, and the _last germ_ of life on this
Globe, of man, and everything else, between _two voids_. Whence the
_first_ germ, if both spontaneous generation and the interference of
external forces, are absolutely rejected now? Germs of organic life, we
are told, by Sir William Thompson, came to our Earth in some meteor. This
helps in no way, and only shifts the difficulty from this Earth to the
supposed meteor.

These are our agreements and disagreements with Science. About the
“endless periods” we are, of course, at one even with materialistic
speculation; for we believe in Evolution, though on different lines.
Professor Huxley very wisely says:


    If any form of the doctrine of progressive development is correct,
    we must extend by long epochs the most liberal estimate that has
    yet been made of the antiquity of man.(1695)


But when we are told that this man is a product of the natural forces
inherent _in_ Matter—Force, according to modern views, being but a quality
of Matter, a “mode of motion,” etc.—and when we find Sir William Thompson
repeating in 1885 what was asserted by Büchner and his school thirty years
ago, we fear all our reverence for real Science is vanishing into thin
air! One can hardly help thinking that Materialism is, in certain cases, a
_disease_. For when men of Science, in the face of magnetic phenomena and
the attraction of iron particles through insulating substances, like
glass, maintain that the said attraction is due to “molecular motion,” or
to the “rotation of the molecules of the magnet,” then, whether the
teaching comes from a “credulous” Theosophist innocent of any notion of
Physics, or from an eminent man of Science, it is equally ridiculous. The
individual who asserts such a theory in the teeth of _fact_, is only one
more proof that: “When people have not a niche in their minds into which
to shoot facts, so much the worse for the facts.”

At present the dispute between the spontaneous generationists and their
opponents is at rest, having ended in the provisional victory of the
latter. But even they are forced to admit, as Büchner did, and Messrs.
Tyndall and Huxley still do—that spontaneous generation _must have
occurred once_, under “special thermal conditions.” Virchow refuses even
to argue the question; it _must_ have taken place some time in the history
of our planet; and there’s an end of it. This seems to look more natural
than Sir William Thompson’s hypothesis just quoted, that the germs of
organic life fell on our Earth in some meteor; or the other “scientific”
hypothesis coupled with the recently adopted belief that there exists _no_
“vital principle” whatever, but only vital phenomena, which can all be
traced to the molecular forces of the original protoplasm. But this does
not help Science to solve the still greater problem—the origin and the
_descent_ of Man, for here is a still worse plaint and lamentation.


    While we can trace the skeletons of Eocene mammals through several
    directions of specialization in succeeding Tertiary times, man
    presents the phenomenon of an _unspecialized_ skeleton which
    cannot fairly be connected with any of these lines.(1696)


The secret could be soon told, not only from the Esoteric but even from
the standpoint of every religion the world over, without mentioning the
Occultists. The “specialized skeleton” is sought for in the wrong place,
where it can never be found. Scientists expect to discover it in the
physical remains of man, in some pithecoid “missing link,” with a skull
larger than that of the ape’s, and with a cranial capacity smaller than in
man, instead of looking for that specialization in _the super‐physical
essence of his inner astral constitution, which can hardly be excavated
from any geological strata_! Such a tenacious, hopeful clinging to a self‐
degrading theory is the most wonderful feature of the day.

Meanwhile, there are specimens of engravings made by Palæolithic
“savages”: Palæolithic meaning the “earlier Stone‐age” man, one supposed
to have been as savage and brutal as the brutes he lived with. Leaving the
modern South Sea islander, or even any Asiatic race, aside, we defy any
grown‐up schoolboy, or even a European youth, one who has never studied
drawing, to execute such an engraving or even a pencil sketch as good.
Here we have the true artistic _raccourci_, and correct lights and shadows
without any _plane_ model before the artist, who copied direct from
nature, thus exhibiting a knowledge of anatomy and proportion. The artist
who engraved this reindeer belonged, we are asked to believe, to the
primitive “semi‐animal” savages (contemporaneous with the mammoth and the
woolly rhinoceros), whom some over‐zealous Evolutionists once sought to
picture to us as distinct approximations to the type of their hypothetical
“pithecoid man”!

This engraved antler proves as eloquently as any fact can do, that the
evolution of the Races has ever proceeded in a series of rises and falls,
that man is, perhaps, as old as incrustated Earth, and—if we can call his
divine ancestor “man”—is far older still.

Even de Mortillet himself seems to experience a vague distrust of the
conclusions of modern Archæologists, when he writes:


    The pre‐historic is a new science, far, very far, from having said
    its last word.(1697)


According to Lyell, one of the highest authorities on the subject, and the
“father” of Geology:


    The expectation of always meeting with a lower type of human
    skull, the older the formation in which it occurs, _is based on
    the theory of progressive development_, and it _may_ prove to be
    sound; nevertheless we must remember that as yet _we have no
    distinct geological evidence that the appearance of what are
    called the inferior races of mankind has always preceded in
    chronological order that of the higher races_.(1698)


Nor has such evidence been found to this day. Science is thus offering for
sale the skin of a bear, which has hitherto never been seen by mortal eye!

This concession of Lyell’s reads most suggestively with the subjoined
utterance of Professor Max Müller, whose attack on Darwinian Anthropology
from the standpoint of language has, by the way, never been satisfactorily
answered:


    What do we know of savage tribes beyond the last chapter of their
    history? [Compare this with the Esoteric view of the Australians,
    Bushmen, as well as of Palæolithic European man, the Atlantean
    offshoots retaining a relic of a lost culture, which throve when
    the parent Root‐Race was in its prime.] Do we ever get an insight
    into their antecedents? Can we ever understand what after all is
    everywhere the most important and the most instructive lesson to
    learn—how they have come to be what they are?... Their language
    proves, indeed, that these so‐called heathens, with their
    complicated systems of mythology, their artificial customs, their
    unintelligible whims and savageries, are not the creatures of to‐
    day or yesterday. Unless we admit a special creation for these
    savages, they must be as old as the Hindûs, the Greeks and Romans
    [far older] ... They may have passed through ever so many
    vicissitudes, and what we consider as primitive, may be, for all
    we know, a relapse into savagery or a corruption of something that
    was more rational and intelligible in former stages.(1699)


Professor George Rawlinson, M.A., remarks:


    “The primeval savage” is a familiar term in modern literature, but
    there is no evidence that the primeval savage ever existed. Rather
    _all the evidence looks the other way_.(1700)


In his _Origin of Nations_, he rightly adds:


    _The mythical traditions of almost all nations place at the
    beginning of human history a time of happiness and perfection_, a
    “golden age” which has no features of savagery or barbarism, but
    many of civilization and refinement.(1701)


How is the modern Evolutionist to meet this consensus of evidence?

We repeat the question asked in _Isis Unveiled_:


    Does the finding of the remains in the cave of Devon prove that
    there were no contemporary races then who were highly civilized?
    When the present population of the Earth has disappeared, and some
    Archæologist belonging to the “coming race” of the distant future
    shall excavate the domestic implements of one of our Indian or
    Andaman Island tribes, will he be justified in concluding that
    mankind in the nineteenth century was “just emerging from the
    Stone age”?(1702)


Another strange inconsistency in scientific theories is that Neolithic man
is shown as being far more of a primitive savage than Palæolithic. Either
Lubbock’s _Pre‐historic Man_, or Evans’ _Ancient Stone Implements_ must be
at fault, or—both. For this is what we learn from these works and others:

(1) As we pass from Neolithic to Palæolithic man, the stone implements
become rude lumbering makeshifts, instead of gracefully shaped and
polished instruments. Pottery, and other useful arts disappear as we
descend the scale. And yet the latter could engrave such a reindeer!

(2) Palæolithic man lived in caves which he shared with hyænas and
lions,(1703) whereas Neolithic man dwelt in lake‐villages and buildings.

Every one who has followed even superficially the geological discoveries
of our day, knows that a gradual improvement in workmanship is found, from
the clumsy chipping and rude chopping of the early Palæolithic hatchets,
to the relatively graceful stone celts of that part of the Neolithic
period immediately preceding the use of metals. But this is _in Europe_,
only a few portions of which were barely rising from the waters in the
days of the highest Atlantean civilization. There were rude savages and
highly civilized people then, as there are now. If 50,000 years hence,
pigmy Bushmen are exhumed from some African cavern together with far
earlier pigmy elephants, such as were found in the cave deposits of Malta
by Milne Edwards, will that be a reason for maintaining that in our age
all men and all elephants were pigmies? Or if the weapons of the Veddhas
of Ceylon are found, will our descendants be justified in setting us all
down as Palæolithic savages? All the articles which Geologists now
excavate in Europe can certainly never date earlier than the close of the
Eocene age, since the lands of Europe were not even above water before
that period. Nor can what we have said be in the least invalidated by
theorists telling us that these quaint sketches of animals and men by
Palæolithic man, were executed only toward the close of the Reindeer
period—for this explanation would be a very lame one indeed, in view of
the Geologists’ ignorance of even the approximate duration of periods.

The Esoteric Doctrine teaches distinctly the dogma of the risings and
falls of civilization; and now we learn that:


    It is a remarkable fact that cannibalism seems to have become more
    frequent as man advanced in civilization, and that while its
    traces are frequent in Neolithic times they become very scarce or
    altogether disappear in the age of the mammoth and the
    reindeer....(1704)


—another evidence of the cyclic law and the truth of our teachings.
Esoteric history teaches that idols and their worship died out with the
Fourth Race, until the survivors of the hybrid races of the latter
(Chinamen, African negroes, etc.) gradually brought the worship back. The
_Vedas_ countenance no idols; all the modern Hindû writings do.


    In the early Egyptian tombs, and in the remains of the pre‐
    historic cities excavated by Dr. Schliemann, images of owl‐ and
    ox‐headed goddesses, and other symbolical figures or idols, are
    found in abundance. But when we ascend into Neolithic times, such
    idols are no longer found, or, if found, it is so rarely that
    archæologists still dispute as to their existence ... the only
    ones which may be said with some certainty to have been idols are
    one or two discovered by M. de Braye in some artificial caves of
    the Neolithic period ... which appear to be intended for female
    figures of life size.(1705)


And these may have been simply statues. Anyhow, all this is one among the
many proofs of the cyclic rise and fall of civilization and religion. The
fact that no traces of human relics or skeletons are so far found beyond
Post‐Tertiary or Quaternary times—though Abbé Bourgeois’ flints may serve
as a warning(1706)—seems to point to the truth of another Esoteric
statement, which runs thus:

_Seek for the remains of thy forefathers in the high places. The vales
have grown into mountains and the mountains have crumbled to the bottom of
the seas._

Fourth Race mankind, thinned after the last cataclysm by two‐thirds of its
population, instead of settling on the new continents and islands that
_reäppeared_—while their predecessors formed the floors of new
oceans—deserted that which is now Europe and parts of Asia and Africa for
the summits of gigantic mountains, the seas that surrounded some of the
latter having since “retreated” and made room for the table lands of
Central Asia.

The most interesting example of this progressive march is perhaps afforded
by the celebrated Kent’s Cavern at Torquay. In that strange recess,
excavated by water out of the Devonian limestone, we find a most curious
record preserved for us in the geological memoirs of the Earth. Under the
blocks of limestone, which heaped the floor of the cavern, were
discovered, embedded in a deposit of black earth, many implements of the
Neolithic period of _fairly excellent workmanship_, with a few fragments
of pottery—possibly traceable to the era of the Roman colonization. There
is no trace of Palæolithic man here. No flints or traces of the extinct
animals of the Quaternary period. When, however, we penetrate still deeper
through the dense layer of stalagmite beneath the black mould into the red
earth, which, of course, itself once formed the pavement of the retreat,
things assume a very different aspect. _Not one implement_ fit to bear
comparison with the _finely‐chipped weapons found in the overlying
stratum_ is to be seen; only a host of the rude and lumbering little
hatchets (with which the monstrous giants of the animal world were subdued
and killed by little man, we have to think?) and scrapers of the
Palæolithic age, mixed up confusedly with the bones of species now either
extinct or emigrated, driven away by change of climate. It is the
artificer of these ugly little hatchets, you see, who sculptured the
reindeer over the brook, on the antler as shown above! In all cases we
meet with the same evidence that, from historic to Neolithic and from
Neolithic to Palæolithic man, things slope downwards on an inclined plane
from the rudiments of civilization to the most abject barbarism—_in Europe
again_. We are made also to face the “Mammoth age”—the extreme or earliest
division of the Palæolithic age—in which the great rudeness of implements
reaches its maximum, and the brutal (?) appearance of contemporary skulls,
such as the Neanderthal, points to a very low type of humanity. But they
may sometimes point also to something else; to a race of men quite
distinct from our (Fifth Race) Humanity.

As said by an Anthropologist in _Modern Thought_:


    The theory, scientifically based or not, of Peyrère may be
    considered to be equivalent to that which divided man in two
    species. Broca, Virey, and a number of the French anthropologists
    have recognized that the lower race of man, comprising the
    Australian, Tasmanian, and Negro race, excluding the Kaffirs and
    the Northern Africans, _should be placed apart_. The fact that in
    this species, or rather sub‐species, the third lower molars are
    usually larger than the second, and the squamosal and frontal
    bones are generally united by suture, places the _Homo afer_ on
    the level of being as good a distinct species as many of the kinds
    of finches. I shall abstain on the present occasion from
    mentioning the facts of hybridity, whereon the late Professor
    Broca has so exhaustively commented. The history, in the past ages
    of the world, of this race is peculiar. It has _never originated a
    system of architecture or a religion of its own_.(1707)


It is peculiar, indeed, as we have shown in the case of the Tasmanians.
However it may be, _fossil_ man in Europe can neither prove nor disprove
the antiquity of man on this Earth, nor the age of his earliest
civilizations.

It is time that the Occultists should disregard any attempts to laugh at
them, scorning the heavy guns of the satire of the men of Science as much
as the pop‐guns of the profane, since it is impossible, so far, to obtain
either proof or disproof, while their theories can stand the test better
than can the hypotheses of the Scientists, at any rate. As to the proof of
the antiquity which they claim for man, they have Darwin himself and Lyell
with them. The latter confesses that they, the Naturalists—


    Have already obtained evidence of the existence of man at so
    remote a period that there has been time for many conspicuous
    mammalia, once his contemporaries, to die out, and _this even
    before the era of the earliest_ historical records.(1708)


This is a statement made by one of England’s great authorities upon the
question. The two sentences that follow are as suggestive, and may well be
remembered by students of Occultism, for with all others he says:


    In spite of the long lapse of prehistoric ages during which he
    [man] must have flourished on earth, _there is no proof of any
    perceptible change in his bodily structure_. If, therefore, he
    ever diverged from some unreasoning brute ancestor, we must
    suppose him to have existed at a far more distant epoch, _possibly
    on some continents or islands now submerged_ beneath the ocean.


Thus lost continents are officially suspected. That worlds, and also
races, are periodically destroyed by fire (volcanoes and earthquakes) and
water, in turn, and are periodically renewed, is a doctrine as old as man.
Manu, Hermes, the Chaldæans, all antiquity, believed in this. Twice
already has the face of the Globe been changed by fire, and twice by
water, since man appeared on it. As land needs rest and renovation, new
forces, and a change for its soil, so does water. Thence arises a
periodical redistribution of land and water, change of climates, etc., all
brought on by geological revolution, and ending in a final change in the
axis of the Earth. Astronomers may pooh‐pooh the idea of a periodical
change in the behaviour of the Globe’s axis, and smile at the conversation
given in the _Book of Enoch_ between Noah and his “grandfather” Enoch; the
allegory is, nevertheless, a geological and an astronomical fact. There is
a secular change in the inclination of the Earth’s axis, and its appointed
time is recorded in one of the great Secret Cycles. As in many other
questions, Science is gradually moving toward our way of thinking. Dr.
Henry Woodward, F.R.S., F.G.S., writes in the _Popular Science Review_:


    If it be necessary to call in extra‐mundane causes to explain the
    great increase of ice at this glacial period, I would prefer the
    theory propounded by Dr. Robert Hooke in 1688; since, by Sir
    Richard Phillips and others; and lastly by Mr. Thomas Belt, C.E.,
    F.G.S.; namely, a slight increase in the present obliquity of the
    ecliptic, a proposal in perfect accord with other known
    astronomical facts, and the introduction of which involves no
    disturbance of the harmony which is essential to our cosmical
    condition as a unit in the great solar system.(1709)


The following, quoted from a Lecture by W. Pengelly, F.R.S., F.G.S.,
delivered in March, 1885, on “The Extinct Lake of Bovey Tracey,” shows the
hesitation, in the face of every evidence in favour of Atlantis, to accept
the fact.


    Evergreen figs, laurels, palms, and ferns having gigantic rhizomes
    have their existing congeners _in a sub‐tropical climate, such, it
    cannot be doubted, as prevailed in __ Devonshire in Miocene
    times_, and are thus calculated to suggest caution when the
    _present climate_ of any district is regarded as normal.

    When, moreover, Miocene plants are found in Disco Island, on the
    west coast of Greenland, lying between 69° 20´ and 70° 30´ N.
    lat.; when we learn that among them were two species found also at
    Bovey (Sequoia couttsiæ, Quercus lyelli); when, to quote Professor
    Heer, we find that “the ‘splendid evergreen’ (Magnolia
    inglefieldi) ‘ripened its fruits so far north as on the parallel
    of 70°’ ” (_Phil. Trans._, clix. 457, 1869); when also the number,
    variety, and luxuriance of the Greenland Miocene plants are found
    to have been such that, had land continued so far, some of them
    would in all probability have flourished at the Pole itself, the
    problem of changes of climate is brought prominently into view,
    but only to be dismissed apparently with the feeling that the
    _time for its solution has not yet arrived_.

    It seems to be admitted on all hands that the Miocene plants of
    Europe have their nearest and most numerous existing analogues in
    North America, and hence arises the question: How was the
    migration from one area to the other effected? Was there, as some
    have believed, an Atlantis?—a continent, or an archipelago of
    large islands, occupying the area of the North Atlantic. There is
    perhaps nothing unphilosophical in this hypothesis; for since, as
    geologists state, “the Alps have acquired 4,000, and even in some
    places more than 10,000 feet of their present altitude since the
    commencement of the Eocene period” (Lyell’s _Principles_, 11th
    ed., p. 256, 1872), a Post‐Miocene[?] depression might have
    carried the hypothetical Atlantis into almost abysmal depths. But
    an Atlantis is apparently unnecessary and uncalled for. According
    to Professor Oliver, “A close and very peculiar analogy subsists
    between the Flora of Tertiary Central Europe and the recent Floras
    of the American States and of the Japanese region; an analogy much
    closer and more intimate than is to be traced between the Tertiary
    and recent Floras of Europe. We find the Tertiary element of the
    Old World to be intensified towards its extreme eastern margin, if
    not in numerical preponderance of genera, yet in features which
    especially give a character to the Fossil Flora.... This accession
    of the Tertiary element is rather gradual and not abruptly assumed
    in the Japan islands only. Although it there attains a maximum, we
    may trace it from the Mediterranean, Levant, Caucasus, and Persia
    ... then along the Himâlaya and through China.... We learn also
    that during the Tertiary epoch, counterparts of Central European
    Miocene genera certainly grew in North‐West America.... We note
    further that the present Atlantic Islands’ Flora affords no
    substantial evidence of a former direct communication with the
    mainland of the New World.... The consideration of these facts
    lead me to the opinion that botanical evidence does not favour the
    hypothesis of an Atlantis. On the other hand, it strongly favours
    the view that at some period of the Tertiary epoch North‐Eastern
    Asia was united to North‐Western America, perhaps by the line
    where the Aleutian chain of islands now extends.” (_Nat. Hist.
    Rev._, ii. 164, 1862, Art., “The Atlantis Hypothesis in its
    Botanical Aspect.”)


See, however, on these points, “Scientific and Geological Proofs of the
Reality of Several Submerged Continents.”

But nothing short of a pithecoid man will ever satisfy the luckless
searchers after the thrice hypothetical “missing link.” Yet, if beneath
the vast floors of the Atlantic, from the Teneriffe Pic to Gibraltar, the
ancient emplacement of the lost Atlantis, all the submarine strata were to
be broken up miles deep, no such skull as would satisfy the Darwinists
would be found. As Dr. C. R. Bree remarks, no missing links between man
and ape having been discovered in various gravels and formations above the
Tertiary strata, if these forms had gone down with the continents now
covered with the sea, they might still have been found—


    In those beds of contemporary geological strata which have _not_
    gone down to the bottom of the sea.(1710)


Yet they are as fatally absent from the latter as from the former. Did not
preconceptions fasten vampire‐like on man’s mind, the author of The
_Antiquity of Man_ would have found a clue to the difficulty in that same
work of his, by going ten pages back (to p. 530) and reading over a
quotation of his own from Professor G. Rolleston’s work. This
Physiologist, he says, suggests that as there is considerable plasticity
in the human frame, not only in youth and during growth, but even in the
adult, we ought not always to take for granted, as some advocates of the
development theory seem to do, that each advance in physical power depends
on an improvement in bodily structure, for why may not _the soul, or the
higher intellectual and moral faculties play the first instead of the
second part in a progressive scheme_?

This hypothesis is made in relation to evolution _not being entirely due_
to “natural selection”; but it applies as well to the case in hand. For
we, too, claim that it is the “Soul,” or the Inner Man, that descends on
Earth first, the psychic Astral, the mould on which physical man is
gradually built—his Spirit, intellectual and moral faculties awakening
later on as that physical stature grows and develops.

“Thus incorporeal spirits to smaller forms reduced their shapes immense,”
and became the men of the Third and the Fourth Races. Still later, ages
after, appeared the men of our Fifth Race, reduced from what we should
call the still gigantic stature of their primeval ancestors, to about half
that size at present.

Man is certainly _no_ special creation. He is the product of Nature’s
gradual perfective work, like any other living unit on this Earth. But
this is only with regard to the human tabernacle. That which lives and
thinks in man and survives that frame, the masterpiece of evolution—is the
“Eternal Pilgrim,” the Protean differentiation in Space and Time of the
One Absolute “Unknowable.”

In his _Antiquity of Man_(1711) Sir Charles Lyell quotes—perhaps in rather
a mocking spirit—what Hallam says in his _Introduction to the Literature
of Europe_:


    If man was made in the image of God, he was also made in the image
    of an ape. The framework of the body of him who has weighed the
    stars and made the lightning his slave, approaches to that of a
    speechless brute who wanders in the forests of Sumatra. Thus
    standing on the frontier land between animal and angelic natures,
    what wonder that he should partake of both!(1712)


An Occultist would have put it otherwise. He would say that man was indeed
made in the image of a type projected by his progenitor, the creating
Angel‐Force, or Dhyân Chohan; while the wanderer of the forest of Sumatra
was made _in the image of man_, since the framework of the ape, we say
again, is the revival, the resuscitation by abnormal means, of the actual
form of the Third Round and of the Fourth Round Man as well, later on.
Nothing is lost in Nature, _not an atom_: this is at least certain on
scientific data. Analogy would appear to demand that _form_ should be
equally endowed with permanency.

And yet what do we find? Says Sir William Dawson, F.R.S.:


    It is farther significant that Professor Huxley, in his lectures
    in New York, while resting his case as to the lower animals mainly
    on the supposed genealogy of the horse, which has often been shown
    to amount to no certain evidence, avoided altogether the
    discussion of the origin of men from the apes, now obviously
    complicated with so many difficulties that both Wallace and Mivart
    are staggered by them. Professor Thomas in his recent lectures
    (_Nature_, 1876), admits that there is no lower man known than the
    Australian, and that there is no known link of connection with the
    monkeys; and Hæckel has to admit that the penultimate link in his
    phylogeny, the ape‐like man, is absolutely unknown (_History of
    Creation_).... The so‐called “tallies” found with the bones of
    Palæocosmic men in European caves, and illustrated in the
    admirable works of Christy and Lartet, show that the rudiments
    even of writing were already in possession of the oldest race of
    men known to archæology or geology.(1713)


Again, in Dr. C. R. Bree’s _Fallacies of Darwinism_, we read:


    Mr. Darwin justly says that the difference physically and, more
    especially, mentally, between the lowest form of man and the
    highest anthropomorphous ape, is enormous. Therefore, _the
    time_—which in Darwinian evolution must be almost inconceivably
    slow—must have been _enormous_ also during man’s development from
    the monkey(1714). The chance, therefore, of some of these
    variations being found in the different gravels or fresh‐water
    formations above the tertiaries, must be very great. And yet not
    one single variation, not one single specimen of a being between a
    monkey and a man has ever been found! Neither in the gravel, not
    the drift‐clay, nor the fresh‐water beds and gravel and drift, nor
    in the tertiaries below them, has there ever been discovered the
    remains of any member of the missing families between the monkey
    and the man, as _assumed_ to have existed by Mr. Darwin. Have they
    gone down with the depression of the earth’s surface and are they
    now covered with the sea? If so, it is beyond all probability that
    they should not also be found in those beds of contemporary
    geological strata which have _not_ gone down to the bottom of the
    sea; still more improbable that some portions should not be
    dredged from the ocean‐bed like the remains of the mammoth and the
    rhinoceros, which are also found in fresh‐water beds and gravel
    and drift!... The celebrated Neanderthal skull, about which so
    much has been said, belongs confessedly to this remote period
    [bronze and stone ages], and yet presents, although it may have
    been the skull of an idiot, immense differences from the highest
    known anthropomorphous ape.(1715)


Our Globe being convulsed each time that it _reäwakens_ for a new period
of activity, like a field which has to be ploughed and furrowed before
fresh seed for its new crop is thrown into it—it does seem quite hopeless
that fossils belonging to its previous Rounds should be found in the beds
of either its oldest or its latest geological strata. Every new Manvantara
brings along with it the renovation of forms, types and species; every
type of the preceding organic forms—vegetable, animal and human—changes
and is perfected in the next, even to the mineral, which has received in
this Round its final opacity and hardness; its softer portions formed the
present vegetation; the astral relics of previous vegetation and fauna
were utilized in the formation of the lower animals, and in determining
the structure of the primeval Root‐Types of the highest mammalia. And,
finally, the form of the gigantic ape‐man of the former Round has been
reproduced in this one by human bestiality, and transfigured into the
_parent_ form in the modern anthropoid.

This doctrine, even imperfectly delineated as it is under our inefficient
pen, is assuredly more logical, more consistent with facts, and _far more_
probable, than many “scientific” theories; that, for instance, of the
first organic germ descending on a meteor to our Earth—like Ain Suph on
its Vehicle, Adam Kadmon. Only, the latter descent is allegorical, as
every one knows, and the Kabalists have never offered this figure of
speech for acceptance in its dead‐letter garb. But the germ‐in‐the‐meteor
theory, as coming from such high scientific quarters, is an eligible
candidate for axiomatic truth and law, a theory people are in honour bound
to accept, if they would be on a right level with Modern Science. What the
next theory necessitated by the materialistic premisses will be—no one can
tell. Meanwhile, the _present_ theories, as anyone can see, clash far more
discordantly among themselves than even with those of the Occultists
outside the sacred precincts of learning. For what is there, next in
order, now that exact Science has made even of the life‐principle an empty
word, a meaningless term, and insists that life is an effect _due to the
molecular action of the primordial protoplasm_? The new doctrine of the
Darwinists may be defined and summarized in the few words, from Mr.
Herbert Spencer:


    The hypothesis of special creations turns out to be
    worthless—worthless, by its derivation; worthless, in its
    intrinsic incoherence; worthless, as absolutely without evidence;
    worthless, as not supplying an intellectual need; worthless, as
    not satisfying a moral want. We must, therefore, consider it as
    counting for nothing in opposition to any other hypothesis
    respecting the origin of organic beings.(1716)




Section V. Organic Evolution and Creative Centres.


It is argued that Universal Evolution, otherwise the gradual development
of species in all the kingdoms of Nature, works by uniform laws. This is
admitted, and the law is enforced far more strictly in Esoteric than in
Modern Science. But we are also told, that it is equally a law that:


    Development works from the less to the more perfect, and from the
    simpler to the more complicated, by incessant changes, small in
    themselves, but constantly accumulating in the required
    direction(1717).


It is from the infinitesimally small that the comparatively gigantic
species are produced.

Esoteric Science agrees with this, but adds that this law applies only to
what is known to it as the Primary Creation—the evolution of Worlds from
Primordial Atoms, and the Pre‐primordial ATOM, at the first
differentiation of the former; and that during the period of cyclic
evolution in Space and Time, this law is limited and works only in the
lower kingdoms. It did so work during the first geological periods, from
simple to complex, on the rough material surviving from the relics of the
Third Round, which relics are projected into objectivity when terrestrial
activity recommences.

No more than Science, does the Esoteric Philosophy admit “design” or
“special creation.” It rejects every claim to the “miraculous,” and
accepts nothing outside the uniform and immutable laws of Nature. But it
teaches a cyclic law, a double stream of Force (or Spirit) and of Matter,
which, starting from the Neutral Centre of Being, develops by its cyclic
progress and incessant transformations. The primitive germ from which all
vertebrate life has developed throughout the ages, being distinct from the
primitive germ from which vegetable and animal life have evolved, there
are side laws whose work is determined by the conditions in which the
materials to be worked upon are found by them, and of which
Science—Physiology and Anthropology especially—seems to be little aware.
Its votaries speak of this “primitive germ,” and maintain that it is shown
beyond any doubt that:


    The design [and the “designer”], if there be any [in the case of
    man, with the wonderful structure of his limbs, and his hand
    especially], must be placed very much farther back, and is, in
    fact, involved in the primitive germ, from which all vertebrate
    life certainly, and probably all life, animal or vegetable, have
    been slowly developed.(1718)


This is as true of the “primitive germ” as it is false that that “germ” is
only “very much farther back” than man is; for it is at an immeasurable
and inconceivable distance, _in Time_, though not in Space, from the
origin even of our Solar System. As the Hindû philosophy very justly
teaches, the “Aniyâmsam Anîyasâm,” can be known only through false
notions. It is the “Many” that proceed from the “One”—the living spiritual
germs _or centres of forces_—each in a septenary form, which first
generate, and then give the primary impulse to the law of evolution and
gradual slow development.

Limiting the teaching strictly to this our Earth, it may be shown that, as
the ethereal forms of the first Men are first projected on seven zones by
seven Dhyân‐Chohanic Centres of Force, so there are centres of creative
power for every root or parent species of the host of forms of vegetable
and animal life. This is, again, no “special creation,” nor is there any
“design,” except in the general “ground‐plan” worked out by the Universal
Law. But there are certainly “designers,” though these are neither
omnipotent nor omniscient in the absolute sense of the term. They are
simply Builders, or Masons, working under the impulse given them by the
ever‐to‐be‐unknown (on our plane) Master Mason—the One Life and Law.
Belonging to this sphere, they have no hand in, nor possibility of working
on any other, during the present Manvantara, at any rate. That they work
in cycles and on a strictly geometrical and mathematical scale of
progression, is what the extinct animal species amply demonstrate; that
they act by design in the details of minor lives (of side animal issues,
etc.) is sufficiently proved by natural history. In the “creation” of new
species, departing sometimes very widely from the parent stock, as in the
great variety of the genus Felis—like the lynx, the tiger, the cat,
etc.—it is the “designers” who direct the new evolution by adding to, or
depriving the species of certain appendages, either needed or becoming
useless in the new environments. Thus, when we say that Nature provides
for every animal and plant, whether large or small, we speak correctly.
For it is these terrestrial Spirits of Nature, who form the aggregated
Nature—which, if it fails occasionally in its design, is neither to be
considered blind, nor to be taxed with the failure; since, belonging to a
_differentiated_ sum of qualities and attributes, it is in virtue of that
alone _conditioned and imperfect_.

Were there no such thing as evolutionary cycles, as an eternal spiral
progress into Matter with a proportionate _obscuration_ of Spirit (though
the two are one) followed by an inverse ascent into Spirit and the defeat
of Matter—active and passive by turn—how could we explain the discoveries
of Zoology and Geology? How is it that, on the dictum of authoritative
Science, one can trace the animal life from the mollusc up to the great
sea‐dragon, from the smallest land‐worm up again to the gigantic animals
of the Tertiary period; and that the latter were once crossed is shown by
the fact of all those species decreasing, dwindling down and becoming
dwarfed. If the seeming process of development working from the less to
the more perfect, and from the simpler to the more complex, were a
universal law indeed, instead of being a very imperfect generalization of
a mere secondary nature in the great cosmic process, and if there were no
such cycles as those claimed, then the Mesozoic fauna and flora ought to
change places with the latest Neolithic. It is the plesiosauri and the
ichthyosauri that we ought to find developing from the present sea‐ and
river‐reptiles, instead of these giving place to their dwarfed modern
analogies. It is, again, our old friend, the good‐tempered elephant, that
would be the fossil antediluvian ancestor, and the mammoth of the Pliocene
age who would be in the menagerie; the megalonyx and the gigantic
megatherium would be found instead of the lazy sloth in the forests of
South America, in which the colossal ferns of the carboniferous periods
would take the place of the mosses and the present trees—dwarfs, even the
giants of California, in comparison with the Titan‐trees of past
geological periods. Surely the organisms of the megasthenian world of the
Tertiary and the Mesozoic ages must have been _more complex and perfect_
than those of the microsthenian plants and animals of the present age? The
dryopithecus, for instance, is more perfect anatomically, is more fit for
a greater development of brain power, than the modern gorilla or gibbon.
How is all this, then? Are we to believe that the constitution of all
those colossal land‐ and sea‐dragons, of the gigantic flying reptiles, was
not far more developed and complex than the anatomy of the lizards,
turtles, crocodiles, and even of the whales—in short, of all those animals
with which we are acquainted?

Let us admit, however, for argument’s sake, that all those cycles, races,
septenary forms of evolution, and the _tutti quanti_ of Esoteric teaching,
are no better than a delusion and a snare. Let us agree with Science and
say that man—instead of being an imprisoned “spirit,” and his vehicle, the
shell or body, a gradually perfected and now complete mechanism for
material and terrestrial uses, as claimed by the Occultists—is simply a
more developed animal, whose primal form emerged from one and the same
primitive germ on this Earth as the flying dragon and the gnat, the whale
and the amoeba, the crocodile and the frog, etc. In this case, he must
have passed through the identical developments and through the same
process of growth as all the other mammals. If man is an animal, _and
nothing more_, a highly intellectual “ex‐brute,” he should at least be
allowed to have been a gigantic mammal of his kind, a “meganthropus” in
his day. This is exactly what Esoteric Science shows to have taken place
in the first three Rounds, and in this, as in most other things, it is
more logical and consistent than Modern Science. It classifies the human
body with the brute creation, and maintains it in the path of animal
evolution, from first to last, while Science leaves man a parentless
orphan born of sires unknown, an “unspecialized skeleton” truly! And this
mistake is due to a stubborn rejection of the doctrine of cycles.



A. The Origin And Evolution Of The Mammalia: Science And Esoteric
Phylogeny.


Having dealt almost exclusively with the question of the origin of man in
the foregoing criticism of Western Evolutionism, it may not be amiss to
define the position of the Occultists with regard to the differentiation
of species. The pre‐human fauna and flora have been already dealt with
generally in the Commentary on the Stanzas, and the truth of much of
modern biological speculation has been admitted, _e.g._, the derivation of
birds from reptiles, the _partial_ truth of “natural selection,” and the
transformation theory generally. It now remains to clear up the mystery of
the origin of those first mammalian faunæ which M. de Quatrefages so
brilliantly endeavours to prove contemporary with the Homo primigenius of
the Secondary Age.

The somewhat complicated problem relating to the “Origin of Species”—more
especially of the varied groups of fossil or existing mammalian faunæ—will
be rendered less obscure by the aid of a diagram. It will then be apparent
to what extent the “factors of organic evolution,” relied upon by Western
Biologists,(1719) are to be considered as adequate to meet the facts. The
line of demarcation between ethereo‐spiritual, astral and physical
evolution must be drawn. Perhaps, if Darwinians deigned to consider the
possibility of the second process, they would no longer have to lament the
fact that:


    We are referred entirely to conjecture and inference for the
    origin of the mammals!(1720)


At present the admitted chasm between the systems of reproduction of the
oviparous vertebrates and mammalia constitutes a hopeless crux to those
thinkers who, with the Evolutionists, seek to link all existing organic
forms in a continuous line of descent.

Let us take, for instance, the case of the ungulate mammals, since it is
said that in no other division do we possess such abundant fossil
material. So much progress has been made in this direction, that in some
instances the intermediate links between the modern and Eocene ungulates
have been unearthed; a notable example being that of the complete proof of
the derivation of the present one‐toed horse from the three‐toed
anchitherium of the old Tertiary. This standard of comparison between
Western Biology and the Eastern Doctrine could not, therefore, be improved
upon. The pedigree here utilized, as embodying the views of Scientists in
general, is that of Schmidt, based on the exhaustive researches of
Rütimeyer. Its _approximate_ accuracy—from the standpoint of
evolutionism—leaves little to be desired:

                     [Illustration: Ungulate Mammals]

                             Ungulate Mammals


At this, the midway point of evolution, Science comes to a standstill.


    The _root_ to which these two families lead back is unknown.(1721)


                         [Illustration: The Root]

                     The Root According to Occultism


Schmidt’s diagram represents the realm explored by Western Evolutionists,
the area in which climatic influences, “natural selection,” and all the
other _physical_ causes of organic differentiation are present. Biology
and Palæontology find their province here in investigating the many
physical agencies which so largely contribute, as has been shown by
Darwin, Spencer and others, to the “segregation of species.” But even in
this domain the sub‐conscious workings of the Dhyân‐Chohanic wisdom are at
the root of all the “ceaseless striving towards perfection,” though its
influence is vastly modified by those purely material causes which de
Quatrefages terms the “milieu” and Spencer the “environment.”

The “midway point of evolution” is that stage where the _astral_
prototypes definitely begin to pass into the physical, and thus become
subject to the differentiating agencies now operative around us. Physical
causation supervenes immediately on the assumption of the “coats of
skin”—_i.e._, the physiological equipment in general. The forms of men and
of other mammals previous to the separation of the sexes(1722) are woven
out of astral matter, and possess a structure utterly unlike that of the
physical organisms which eat, drink, digest, etc. The known physiological
contrivances requisite for these functions were almost entirely evolved
subsequently to the incipient physicalization of the seven Root‐Types out
of the astral—during the “midway halt” between the two planes of
existence. Hardly had the “ground‐plan” of evolution been limned out in
these ancestral types, than there supervened the influence of the
accessory terrestrial laws, familiar to us, resulting in the whole crop of
mammalian species. Æons of slow differentiation were, however, required to
effect this end.

The second diagram represents the domain of the purely astral prototypes
previous to their descent into gross matter. Astral matter, it must be
noted, is fourth‐state matter, having, like our gross matter, its own
“protyle.” There are several protyles in Nature, corresponding to the
various planes of matter. The two sub‐physical elemental kingdoms, the
plane of mind, Manas, or fifth‐state matter, as also that of Buddhi,
sixth‐state matter, are each and all evolved from one of the six protyles
which constitute the basis of the Object‐Universe. The three “states” so‐
called of our terrestrial matter, known as the “solid,” “liquid,” and
“gaseous,” are only, in strict accuracy, _sub_‐states. As to the former
reality of the descent into the physical, which culminated in
physiological man and animal, we have a palpable testimony in the fact of
the so‐called spiritualistic “materializations.”

In all these instances a complete temporary mergence of the astral into
the physical takes place. The evolution of _physiological_ man out of the
astral races of the _early_ Lemurian age—the Jurassic age of Geology—is
exactly paralleled by the “materialization” of “spirits” (?) in the séance
room. In the case of Professor Crookes’ “Katie King,” the presence of a
_physiological_ mechanism—heart, lungs, etc.—was indubitably demonstrated!

This, in a way, is the Archetype of Goethe. Listen to his words:


    Thus much we should have gained ... all the nine perfect organic
    beings ... [are] formed according to an archetype which merely
    fluctuates more or less in its very persistent parts and,
    moreover, day by day, completes and transforms itself by means of
    reproduction.


This is a seemingly imperfect foreshadowing of the Occult fact of the
differentiation of species from the primal astral Root‐Types. Whatever the
whole _posse comitatus_ of “natural selection,” etc., may effect, the
_fundamental unity of structural plan_ remains practically unaffected by
all subsequent modifications. The “unity of type” common, in a sense, to
all the animal and human kingdoms, is not, as Spencer and others appear to
hold, a proof of the consanguinity of _all_ organic forms, but a witness
to the essential unity of the “ground‐plan” Nature has followed in
fashioning her creatures.

To sum up the case we may again avail ourselves of a tabulation of the
actual factors concerned in the differentiation of species. The stages of
the process itself need no further comment here, for they follow the basic
principles underlying organic development, and we do not need to enter on
the domain of the biological specialist.

FACTORS CONCERNED IN THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES, ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE.

Basic astral prototypes pass into the physical, the Dhyân‐Chohanic
impulse, constituting Lamarck’s “inherent and necessary” law of
development. It lies behind all minor agencies: variation transmitted by
Heredity, Natural Selection, Sexual Selection Physiological Selection,
Isolation. Correlation of Growth, Adaptation to Environment. (Intelligent
as opposed to Mechanical Causation.)



B. The European Palæolithic Races: Whence, And How Distributed.


Is Science opposed to those who maintain that, down to the Quaternary
period, the distribution of the human races was widely different from what
it is now? Is Science against those who, further, maintain that the fossil
men found in Europe‐although they have almost reached a plane of sameness
and unity which continues till this day, regarded from the fundamental
physiological and anthropological aspects—still differ, sometimes greatly,
from the type of the now existing populations? The late M. Littré admits
this in an article published by him in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_ (March
1st, 1859) on the Mémoire called _Antiquités Celtiques et Antediluviennes_
by Boucher de Perthes (1849). Littré therein states that: (_a_) in these
periods when the mammoths, exhumed in Picardy in company with man‐made
hatchets, lived in the latter region, there must have been an eternal
spring reigning over all the terrestrial globe;(1723) nature was the
contrary of what it is now, and thus is left _an enormous margin for the
antiquity of those __“__periods__”_; he then adds (_b_):


    Spring, Professor of the Faculty of Medicine at Liège, found in a
    grotto near Namur, in the mountain of Chauvaux, numerous human
    bones “of a race quite distinct from ours.”


Skulls exhumed in Austria offer a great analogy with those of negro races
in Africa, according to Littré, while others, discovered on the shores of
the Danube and the Rhine, resemble the skulls of the Caribs and of the
ancient inhabitants of Peru and Chili. Still, the Deluge, whether Biblical
or Atlantean, is denied. But further geological discoveries made Gaudry
write conclusively:


    Our forefathers were positively contemporaneous with the
    rhinoceros tichorrhinus, the hippopotamus major.


And he added that the soil called _diluvial_ in geology—


    Was formed partially at least after man’s apparition on earth.


Upon this, Littré pronounced himself finally. He then showed the
necessity, in face of “the resurrection of so many old witnesses,” of
rehandling all the origins, all the durations, and added that there was an
age hitherto unknown to study—


    Either at the dawn of the actual epoch, or, as I believe, at the
    beginning of the epoch which preceded it.


The types of the skulls found in Europe are of two kinds, as is well
known: the orthognathous and the prognathous, or the Caucasian and the
Negroid types—such as are now found only among the African and the lower
savage tribes. Professor Heer—who argues that the facts of Botany
necessitate the hypothesis of an Atlantis—has shown that the plants of the
Neolithic lake‐villagers are mainly of African origin. How did these
plants appear in Europe if there were no former point of union between
Europe and Africa? How many thousand years ago did the seventeen men live
whose skeletons were exhumed in the department of the Haute Garonne, in a
squatting posture near the remains of a coal fire, with some amulets and
broken crockery around them, and in company with the ursus spelæus, the
elephas primigenius, the aurochs (regarded by Cuvier as a distinct
species), the megaceros hibernicus—all antediluvian mammals? Certainly
they must have lived in a most distant epoch, but not in one which carries
us further back than the Quaternary. A much greater antiquity for man has
yet to be proved. Dr. James Hunt, the late President of the
Anthropological Society, puts it at nine million years. This man of
Science, at any rate, makes some approach to our Esoteric computation, if
we leave out of the computation the first two semi‐human, ethereal Races,
and the early Third Race.

The question, however, arises—who were these Palæolithic men of the
European Quaternary epoch? Were they aboriginal, or were they the outcome
of some immigration dating back into the unknown past? The latter is the
only tenable hypothesis, as all Scientists agree in eliminating Europe
from the category of possible “cradles of mankind.” Whence, then, radiated
the various successive streams of “primitive” men?

The earliest Palæeolithic men in Europe—about whose origin Ethnology is
silent, and whose very characteristics are but imperfectly known, though
expatiated on as “ape‐like” by imaginative writers such as Mr. Grant
Allen—were of pure Atlantean and “Africo”‐Atlantean stocks.(1724) (It must
be borne in mind that by this time the Atlantean Continent itself was a
dream of the past.) Europe in the Quaternary epoch was very different from
the Europe of to‐day, being then only in process of formation. It was
united to Northern Africa—or rather to what is now Northern Africa—by a
neck of land running across the present Straits of Gibraltar—Northern
Africa thus constituting as it were an extension of the present Spain,
while a broad sea filled the great basin of the Sahara. Of the vast
Atlantis, the main bulk of which sank in the Miocene, there remained only
Ruta and Daitya and a stray island or so. The Atlantean connections of the
forefathers(1725) of the Palæolithic cave‐men are evidenced by the
upturning of fossil skulls in Europe, reverting closely to the type of the
West Indian Carib and ancient Peruvian—a mystery indeed for all those who
refuse to sanction the “hypothesis” of a former Atlantic continent to
bridge what is now an ocean. What are we also to make of the fact that
while de Quatrefages points to that “magnificent race,” the tall Cro‐
Magnon cave‐men, and to the Guanches of the Canary Islands, as
representatives of one type, Virchow also allies the Basques with the
latter in a similar way? Professor Retzius independently proves the
relationship of the aboriginal American dolichocephalous tribes and these
same Guanches. The several links in the chain of evidence are thus
securely joined together. Legions of similar facts could be adduced. As to
the African tribes—themselves diverging offshoots of Atlanteans modified
by climate and conditions—they crossed into Europe over the peninsula
which made the Mediterranean an inland sea. Fine races were many of these
European cave‐men, as the Cro‐Magnon, for instance. But, as was to be
expected, _progress is almost non‐existent_ through the whole of the vast
period allotted by Science to the Chipped‐Stone age.(1726) _The cyclic
impulse downwards_ weighs heavily on the stocks thus transplanted—the
incubus of the Atlantean Karma is upon them. Finally, Palæolithic man
makes room for his successor—and disappears almost entirely from the
scene. Professor André Lefèvre asks in this connection:


    Has the Polished succeeded the Chipped‐Stone Age by an
    imperceptible transition, or was it due to an invasion of
    brachycephalous Kelts? But whether the deterioration produced in
    the populations of La Vézère was the result of violent crossings,
    or of a general retreat northwards in the wake of the reindeer, is
    of little moment to us.


He continues:


    Meantime the bed of the ocean has been upheaved, Europe is now
    fully formed, her flora and fauna are fixed. With the taming of
    the dog begins the pastoral life. We enter on those polished stone
    and bronze periods, which succeed each other at irregular
    intervals, which even overlap one another in the midst of ethnical
    migrations and fusions, at once more confused and of shorter
    duration than less advanced and more rudimentary ages. The
    primitive European populations are interrupted in their special
    evolution, and without perishing, become absorbed in other races,
    engulfed, as it were, by the successive waves of migration
    overflowing from Africa, possibly from a lost Atlantis [? far too
    late by æons of years] and from prolific Asia. On the one hand
    came the Iberians, on the other Pelasgians, Ligurians, Sicanians,
    Etruscans—all forerunners of the great Âryan Invasion [Fifth
    Race].(1727)




Section VI. Giants, Civilizations, and Submerged Continents Traced in
History.


When statements such as are comprised in the above heading are brought
forward, the writer is, of course, expected to furnish _historical_
instead of _legendary_ evidence in support of such claims. Is this
possible? Yes; for evidence of such a nature is plentiful, and has simply
to be collected and brought together in order to become overwhelming in
the eyes of the unprejudiced.

Once the sagacious student gets hold of the guiding thread he may find out
such evidence for himself. We give _facts_ and show landmarks; let the
wayfarer follow them. What is adduced here is amply sufficient for _this_
century.

In a letter to Voltaire, Bailly finds it quite natural that the sympathies
of the “grand old invalid of Ferney” should be attracted to the
representatives of “knowledge and wisdom,” the ancient Brâhmans. He then
adds a curious statement. He says:


    But your Brâhmans are very young in comparison with their archaic
    instructors.(1728)


Bailly, who knew nought of the Esoteric teachings, nor of Lemuria,
believed, nevertheless, unreservedly in the lost Atlantis, and also in
several pre‐historic and civilized nations which had disappeared without
leaving any undeniable trace. He had studied the ancient classics and
_traditions_ extensively, and he saw that the Arts and Sciences known to
those we now call the “ancients,” were—


    Not the achievements of any of the now or even then existing
    nations, nor of any of the historical peoples of Asia....


and that, notwithstanding the learning of the Hindûs, their undeniable
priority in the early part of their race had to be referred to a people or
a race still more ancient and more learned than were even the Brâhmans
themselves.(1729)

Voltaire, the greatest sceptic of his day, the materialist _par
excellence_, shared Bailly’s belief. He thought it quite likely that:


    Long before the empires of China and India, there had been nations
    cultured, learned, and powerful, which a deluge of barbarians
    overpowered and thus replunged into their primitive state of
    ignorance and savagery, or what they call the state of pure
    nature.(1730)


That which with Voltaire was the shrewd conjecture of a great intellect,
was with Bailly a “question of historical facts.” For, he wrote:


    I make great case of ancient traditions preserved through a long
    series of generations.


It _was_ possible, he thought, that a _foreign_ nation should, after
instructing another nation, so disappear that it should leave no traces
behind. When asked how it could have happened that this ancient, or rather
archaic, nation should not have left at least some recollection in the
human mind, he answered that Time was a pitiless devourer of facts and
events. But the history of the Past was never entirely lost, for the Sages
of old Egypt had preserved it, and “it is so preserved to this day
elsewhere.” The priests of Saïs said to Solon, according to Plato:


    You are unacquainted with that most noble and excellent race of
    men, who once inhabited your country, from whom you and your whole
    present state are descended,(1731) though only a small remnant of
    this admirable people is now remaining.... These writings relate
    what a prodigious force your city once overcame, when a mighty
    warlike power, rushing from the Atlantic sea, spread itself with
    hostile fury over all Europe and Asia.(1732)


The Greeks were but the dwarfed and weak remnant of that once glorious
nation.(1733)

What was this nation? The Secret Doctrine teaches that it was the latest
seventh sub‐race of the Atlantean, already swallowed up in one of the
early sub‐races of the Âryan stock, one that had been gradually spreading
over the continent and islands of Europe, as soon as they had begun to
emerge from the seas. Descending from the high plateaux of Asia, where the
two races had sought refuge in the days of the agony of Atlantis, it had
been slowly settling and colonizing the freshly emerged lands. The
immigrant sub‐race had rapidly increased and multiplied on that virgin
soil; had divided into many family races, which in their turn divided into
nations. Egypt and Greece, the Phœnicians, and the Northern stocks, had
thus proceeded from that one sub‐race. Thousands of years later, other
races—the remnants of the Atlanteans—“yellow and red, brown and black,”
began to invade the new continent. There were wars in which the new comers
were defeated, and they fled, some to Africa, others to remote countries.
Some of these lands became islands in course of time, owing to new
geological convulsions. Being thus forcibly separated from the continents,
the result was that the undeveloped tribes and families of the Atlantean
stock fell gradually into a still more abject and savage condition.

Did not the Spaniards in the Cibola expeditions meet with _white_ savage
chiefs; and has not the presence of African negro types in Europe in the
pre‐historic ages been now ascertained? It is this presence of a foreign
type associated with that of the negro, and also with that of the
Mongolian, which is the stumbling‐block of Anthropology. The individual
who lived at an incalculably distant period at La Naulette, in Belgium, is
an example. Says an Anthropologist:


    The caves on the banks of the Lesse, in South‐Eastern Belgium,
    afford evidence of what is, perhaps, the lowest man, as shown by
    the Naulette jaw. Such man, however, had amulets of stone,
    perforated for the purpose of ornament; these are made of a
    psammite now found in the basin of the Gironde.(1734)


Thus Belgian man was extremely ancient. The man who was antecedent to the
great flood of waters—which covered the highlands of Belgium with a
deposit of lehm or upland gravel thirty metres above the level of the
present rivers—must have combined the characters of the Turanian and the
Negro. The Canstadt, or La Naulette, man may have been black, and he had
nothing to do with the Âryan type whose remains are contemporary with
those of the cave bear at Engis. The denizens of the Aquitaine bone‐caves
belong to a far later period of history, and may not be as ancient as the
former.

If the statement be objected to on the ground that Science does not deny
the presence of man on Earth from an enormous antiquity, though that
antiquity cannot be determined, since such presence is conditioned by the
duration of geological periods, the age of which is not ascertained; if it
is argued that the Scientists object most decidedly to the claim that man
preceded the animals, for instance; or that civilization dates from the
earliest Eocene period; or again, that there have ever existed giants,
three‐eyed and four‐armed and four‐legged men, androgynes, etc.—then the
objectors are asked in their turn, “How do you know? What proof have you
besides your personal hypotheses, each of which may be upset any day by
new discoveries?” And these future discoveries are sure to prove that,
whatever this earlier type of man known to Anthropologists may have been
in complexion, he was in no respect _apish_. The Canstadt man, the Engis
man, alike possessed essentially human attributes.(1735) People have
looked for the missing link at the wrong end of the chain; and the
Neanderthal man has long since been dismissed to the “limbo of all hasty
blunders.” Disraeli divided man into the associates of the apes and the
angels. Reasons are here given in favour of an “angelic theory”—as
Christians would call it, as applicable to at least some of the races of
men. At all events, if man be held to exist only since the Miocene period,
even then humanity as a whole could not be composed of the abject savages
of the Palæolithic age, as they are now represented by the Scientists. All
they say is mere arbitrary speculative guess‐work, invented by them to
answer to, and fit in with, their own fanciful theories.

We speak of events hundreds of thousands of years old, nay, even millions
of years old—if man date from the geological periods(1736)—not of any of
those events which happened during the few thousand years of the pre‐
historic margin allowed by timid and ever‐cautious history. Yet there are
men of Science who are almost of our way of thinking. From the brave
confession of the Abbé Brasseur de Bourbourg, who says that:


    Traditions, whose traces recur in Mexico, in Central America, in
    Peru, and in Bolivia, suggest the idea that man existed in these
    different countries at the time of the gigantic upheaval of the
    Andes, and that he has retained the memory of it—


down to the latest Palæontologists and Anthropologists, the majority of
scientific men is in favour of just such an antiquity. _Àpropos_ of Peru,
has any satisfactory attempt been made to determine the ethnological
affinities and characteristics of the race which reared those Cyclopean
erections, the ruins of which display the relics of a great civilization?
At Cuelap, for instance, such are found, consisting—


    Of a wall of wrought stones, 3,600 feet long, 560 broad, and 150
    feet high, constituting a solid mass with a level summit. On this
    mass was another, 600 feet long, 500 broad, and 150 feet high,
    making an aggregate height of 300 feet. In it were rooms and
    cells.(1737)


A most suggestive fact is the _startling resemblance between the
architecture of these colossal buildings and that of the archaic European
nations_. Mr. Fergusson regards the analogies between the ruins of “Inca”
civilization and the Cyclopean remains of the Pelasgians in Italy and
Greece, as a coincidence—


    The most remarkable in the history of architecture.... It is
    difficult to resist the conclusion that there may be some relation
    between them.


The “relation” is simply explained by the derivation of the stocks who
devised these erections, from a common centre in an Atlantic continent.
The acceptance of the latter can alone assist us to approach a solution of
this and similar problems in almost every branch of Modern Science.

Dr. Lartet, treating upon the subject, settles the question by declaring
that:


    The truth, so long contested, of the coëxistence of man with the
    great extinct species [elephas primigenius, rhinoceros
    tichorrhinus, hyæna spelæa, ursus spelæus, etc.], appears to me to
    be henceforth unassailable and definitely conquered by
    science.(1738)


It is shown elsewhere that such is also de Quatrefages’ opinion. He says:


    Man has in all probability seen Miocene times(1739) and
    consequently the entire Pliocene epoch. Are there any reasons for
    believing that his traces will be found further back still?... He
    may then have been contemporaneous with the earliest mammalia, and
    go back as far as the Secondary period.(1740)


Egypt is far older than Europe as now traced on the map. Atlanto‐Âryan
tribes began to settle on it when the British Islands(1741) and France
were not even in existence. It is well known that “the tongue of the
Ægyptian Sea,” or the Delta of lower Egypt, became firm land very
gradually, and followed the highlands of Abyssinia; unlike the latter,
which arose suddenly, comparatively speaking, it was very slowly formed,
through long ages, from successive layers of sea‐slime and mud, deposited
annually by the soil brought down by a large river, the present Nile. Yet
even the Delta, as a firm and fertile land, has been inhabited for more
than 100,000 years. Later tribes, with still more Âryan blood in them than
their predecessors, arrived from the East, and _conquered_ it from a
people whose very name is lost to posterity, except in the Secret Books.
It is this natural barrier of slime, which sucked in slowly and surely
every boat that approached those inhospitable shores, that was, till
within a few thousand years B.C., the best safeguard of the later
Egyptians, who had managed to reach it through Arabia, Abyssinia, and
Nubia, led on by Manu Vînâ in the day of Vishvâmitra.(1742)

So evident does the antiquity of man become with every day, that even the
Church is preparing for an _honourable_ surrender and retreat. The learned
Abbé Fabre, professor at the Sorbonne, has categorically declared that
pre‐historic Palæontology and Archæology may, without any harm to the
Scriptures, discover in the Tertiary beds as many traces as they please of
Pre‐Adamite man.


    Since it disregards all creations anterior to the last deluge but
    one [that which produced the diluvium, according to the Abbé],
    Bible revelation leaves us free to admit the existence of man in
    the grey diluvium, in Pliocene, and even Eocene strata. On the
    other hand, however, geologists are not all agreed on regarding
    the men who inhabited the globe in these primitive ages as our
    ancestors.(1743)


The day on which the Church shall find that its only salvation lies in the
Occult interpretation of the _Bible_ may not be so far off as some
imagine. Already many an Abbé and ecclesiastic has become an ardent
Kabalist, and as many appear publicly in the arena, breaking a lance with
Theosophists and Occultists in support of the metaphysical interpretation
of the _Bible_. But they commence, unfortunately for them, at the wrong
end. They are advised, before they begin to speculate upon the
_metaphysical_ in their Scriptures, to study and master that which relates
to the purely _physical_—_e.g._, its hints on Geology and Ethnology. For
such allusions to the septenary constitution of the Earth and Man, to the
seven Rounds and Races, abound in the _New_ as in the _Old Testament_, and
are as visible as the Sun in the heavens to him who reads both
symbolically. To what do the laws in chapter xxiii of _Leviticus_ apply?
What is the philosophy of reason for all such hebdomadal offerings and
symbolical calculations as:


    Ye shall count ... from the morrow after the Sabbath ... that ye
    brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven Sabbaths shall be
    complete.... And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without
    blemish, etc.(1744)


We shall be contradicted, no doubt, when we say that all these “wave” and
“peace” offerings were in commemoration of the _seven_ “Sabbaths” of the
Mysteries. These Sabbaths are seven Pralayas between seven Manvantaras, or
what we call Rounds; for “Sabbath” is an elastic word, meaning a period of
rest of whatever nature, as explained elsewhere. And if this is not
sufficiently conclusive, then we may turn to the verse which adds:


    Even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath shall ye number
    fifty days [forty‐nine, 7 × 7, stages of activity, and forty‐nine
    stages of rest, on the seven Globes of the Chain, and then comes
    the rest of Sabbath, the _fiftieth_]; and ye shall offer _a new
    meat offering_ unto the Lord.(1745)


That is, ye shall make an offering of your flesh or “coats of skin,” and,
divesting yourselves of your bodies, ye shall remain pure spirits. This
law of offering, degraded and materialized with ages, was an institution
that dated from the earliest Atlanteans; it came to the Hebrews _viâ_ the
“Chaldees,” who were the “wise men” of a _caste_, not of a nation, a
community of great Adepts come from their “Serpent‐holes,” who had settled
in Babylonia ages before. And if this interpretation from _Leviticus_
(full of the disfigured _Laws of Manu_) is found too far‐fetched, then
turn to _Revelation_. Whatever interpretation profane mystics may give to
the famous chapter xvii, with its riddle of the woman in purple and
scarlet; whether Protestants nod at the Roman Catholics, when reading
“Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the
Earth,” or Roman Catholics glare at the Protestants, the Occultists
pronounce, in their impartiality, that these words have applied from the
first _to all and every exoteric_ Churchianity—“ceremonial magic” of old,
with its terrible effects, and now the harmless, because distorted, farce
of ritualistic worship. The “mystery” of the woman and of the beast, are
the symbols of soul‐killing Churchianity and of Superstition.


    The beast that ... was, and is not, ... and yet is. And here is
    the mind which hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains
    [seven Continents and seven Races] on which the woman sitteth—


the symbol of all the exoteric, barbarous, idolatrous faiths which have
covered that symbol “with the blood of the saints and the blood of the
martyrs” who protested and do protest.


    And there are seven kings [seven Races]; five are fallen [our
    Fifth Race included], and one is [the Fifth continues], and the
    other [the Sixth and the Seventh Races] is not yet come; and when
    he [the Race “king”] cometh, he must continue a short space.(1746)


There are many such apocalyptic allusions, but the student has to find
them out for himself.

If the _Bible_ combines with Archæology and Geology to show that human
civilization has passed through three more or less distinct stages, in
Europe at least; and if man, both in America and Europe, as much as in
Asia, dates from geological epochs—why should not the statements of _The
Secret Doctrine_ be taken into consideration? Is it more philosophical or
logical and scientific to _disbelieve_, with Mr. Albert Gaudry, in Miocene
man, while believing that the famous Thenay flints(1747) “were carved by
the dryopithecus monkey”; or, with the Occultist, that the
anthropomorphous monkey came ages after man? For if it is once conceded,
and even scientifically demonstrated, that:


    There was not in the middle of the Miocene epoch a single species
    of mammal identical with species now extant(1748)


—and that man was then just as he is now; only taller, and more athletic
than we are(1749)—then where is the difficulty? That they could hardly be
the descendants of monkeys, which are themselves not traced before the
Miocene epoch,(1750) is, on the other hand, testified to by several
eminent Naturalists:


    Thus, in the savage of quaternary ages, who had to fight against
    the mammoth with stone weapons for arms, we find all those
    craniological characters generally considered as the sign of great
    intellectual development.(1751)


Unless man emerged spontaneously, endowed with all his intellect and
wisdom, from his brainless catarrhine ancestor, he could not have acquired
such brain within the limits of the Miocene period, if we are to believe
the learned Abbé Bourgeois.

As to the matter of giants, though the tallest man hitherto found in
Europe among fossils is the “Mentone man” (6ft. 8in.), others may yet be
excavated. Nilsson, quoted by Lubbock, states that:


    In a tomb of the Neolithic age ... a skeleton of extraordinary
    size was found in 1807.


It was attributed to a king of Scotland, Albus McGaldus.

And if in our own day we occasionally find men and women from 7ft. to even
9ft. and 11 ft. high, this only proves—on the law of atavism, or the
reäppearance of ancestral features of character—that there was a time when
9ft. and 10ft. was the average height of humanity, even in our latest
Indo‐European race.

But as the subject has been sufficiently treated elsewhere, we may pass on
to the Lemurians and the Atlanteans, and see what the old Greeks knew of
these early races and what the moderns now know.

The great nation mentioned by the Egyptian priests, from which descended
the forefathers of the Greeks of the age of Troy, and which, as averred,
had fought with the Atlantic race, was then, as we see, assuredly no race
of Palæolithic savages. Nevertheless, even in the days of Plato, with the
exception of priests and initiates, no one seems to have preserved any
distinct recollection of the preceding races. The earliest Egyptians had
been separated from the latest Atlanteans for ages upon ages; they were
themselves descended from an _alien_ race, and had settled in Egypt some
400,000 years before,(1752) but their Initiates had preserved all the
records. Even so late as the time of Herodotus, they had still in their
possession the statues of 341 kings who had reigned over their little
Atlanto‐Aryan sub‐race.(1753) If we allow only twenty years as an average
figure for the reign of each king, the duration of the Egyptian Empire has
to be pushed back, from the days of Herodotus, about 17,000 years.

Bunsen allowed the great Pyramid an antiquity of 20,000 years. More modern
Archæologists will not give it more than 5,000, or at the utmost 6,000
years, and generously concede to Thebes, with its hundred gates, 7,000
years from the date of its foundation. And yet there are records which
show Egyptian priests—Initiates—journeying in a north‐westerly direction,
_by land_, _viâ_ what became later the Straits of Gibraltar; turning North
and travelling through the future Phœnician settlements of Southern Gaul;
then still further North, until reaching Carnac (Morbihan) they turned to
the West again and arrived, _still travelling by land_, on the north‐
western promontory of the New Continent.(1754)

What was the object of their long journey? And how far back must we place
the date of such visits? The Archaic Records show the Initiates of the
second sub‐race of the Âryan family moving from one land to the other for
the purpose of supervising the building of menhirs and dolmens, of
colossal Zodiacs in stone, and places of sepulchre to serve as receptacles
for the ashes of generations to come. When did this occur? The fact of
their crossing from France to Great Britain _by land_ may give an idea of
the date when such a journey could have been performed on _terra firma_.

It was when:


    The level of the Baltic and of the North Sea was 400 feet higher
    than it is at the present day. The valley of the Somme was not
    hollowed to the depth it has now attained; Sicily was joined to
    Africa, Barbary to Spain. Carthage, the Pyramids of Egypt, the
    palaces of Uxmal and Palenque were not yet in existence, and the
    bold navigators of Tyre and Sidon, who at a later date were to
    undertake their perilous voyages along the coasts of Africa, were
    yet unborn. What we know with certainty is that European man was
    contemporaneous with the extinct species of the quaternary epoch
    ... that he witnessed the upheaval of the Alps(1755) and the
    extension of the glaciers, in a word that he lived for thousands
    of years before the dawn of the remotest historical traditions. It
    is even possible that man was the contemporary of extinct mammalia
    of species yet more ancient ... of the elephas meridionalis of the
    sands of St. Prest, or at the least of the elephas antiquus,
    assumed to be prior to the elephas primigenius, since their bones
    are found in company with carved flints in several English caves,
    associated with those of the rhinoceros hæemitechus and even of
    the machairodus latidens, which is of still earlier date. M. Ed.
    Lartet is also of opinion that there is nothing really impossible
    in the existence of man as early as the Tertiary period.(1756)


If “there is nothing impossible” scientifically, in the idea, and it may
be admitted that man was already in existence as early as the Tertiary
period, then it is just as well to remind the reader that Mr. Croll places
the beginning of that period 2,500,000 years back; but there was a time
when he assigned to it 15,000,000 years.

And if all this may be said of _European_ man, how great is the antiquity
of the Lemuro‐Atlantean and of the Atlanto‐Âryan man? Every educated
person who follows the progress of Science, knows how all vestiges of man
during the Tertiary period are received. The calumnies that were poured on
Desnoyers in 1863, when he announced to the Institute of France that he
had made a discovery


    In the undisturbed Pliocene sands of St. Prest near Chartres,
    proving the coëxistence of man and the elephas meridionalis—


were equal to the occasion. The later discovery, in 1867, by the Abbé
Bourgeois, that man lived in the Miocene epoch, and the reception it was
given at the Pre‐historic Congress held at Brussels in 1872, proves that
the average man of Science will see _only that which he wishes to
see_.(1757)

The modern Archæologist, though speculating _ad infinitum_ upon the
dolmens and their builders, knows, in fact, nothing either of them or of
their origin. Yet these weird and often colossal monuments of unhewn
stones—which consist generally of four or seven gigantic blocks placed
together—are strewn over Asia, Europe, America, and Africa, in groups or
rows. Stones of enormous size are found placed horizontally and variously
upon two, three, four, and as in Poitou, upon six and seven blocks. People
name them “devil’s altars,” druidic stones, and giant tombs. The stones of
Carnac in Morbihan, Brittany—nearly a mile in length and numbering 11,000
ranged in eleven rows—are twin sisters of those at Stonehenge. The conical
menhir of Loch‐maria‐ker, in Morbihan, measures twenty yards in length and
nearly two yards across. The menhir of Champ Dolent (near St. Malo) rises
thirty feet above the ground, and is fifteen feet in depth below. Such
dolmens and pre‐historic monuments are met with in almost every latitude.
They are found in the Mediterranean basin; in Denmark (among the local
tumuli from twenty‐seven to thirty‐five feet in height); in Shetland; in
Sweden, where they are called Ganggriften (or tombs with corridors); in
Germany, where they are known as the giant tombs (Hünengräben); in Spain,
where is the dolmen of Antiguera near Malaga; in Africa; in Palestine and
Algeria; in Sardinia, with the Nuraghi and Sepolture dei Giganti, or tombs
of giants; in Malabar; in India, where they are called the tombs of the
Daityas (Giants) and of the Râkshasas, the Men‐demons of Lankâ; in Russia
and Siberia, where they are known as the Koorgan; in Peru and Bolivia,
where they are termed the Chulpas or burial places, etc.

There is no country from which they are absent. Who built them? Why are
they all connected with serpents and dragons, with alligators and
crocodiles? Because remains of “Palæolithic man” were, it is thought,
found in some of them, and because, in the funeral mounds of America,
bodies of later races were discovered with the usual paraphernalia of bone
necklaces, weapons, stone and copper urns, etc., they are, therefore,
ancient _tombs_! But surely the two famous mounds—one in the Mississippi
valley and the other in Ohio—known respectively as the “Alligator Mound”
and the “Great Serpent Mound,” were never meant for tombs.(1758) Yet one
is told authoritatively that the mounds, and the mound or dolmen builders,
are all “Pelasgic” in Europe, antecedent to the Incas in America, yet not
of “extremely distant times.” They are built by “no race of dolmen
builders,” who _never existed_ save in the earlier archæological fancy
(opinion of De Mortillet, Bastian, and Westropp). Finally Virchow’s
opinion of the giant tombs of Germany is now accepted as an axiom. Says
that German Biologist:


    The tombs alone are gigantic, and not the bones they contain.


And Archæology has but to bow and submit to the decision.(1759)

That no gigantic skeletons have been hitherto found in the “tombs” is no
reason for saying that the remains of giants were never in them.
_Cremation was universal_ till a comparatively recent period—some 80,000
or 100,000 years ago. The real giants, moreover, were nearly all drowned
with Atlantis. Nevertheless, classical writers, as we have shown
elsewhere, often speak of giant skeletons being excavated in their day.
Moreover, human fossils may be counted on the fingers, as yet. No skeleton
ever yet found is older than between 50,000 or 60,000 years,(1760) and
man’s size was reduced from 15 to 10 or 12 feet, from the time of the
third sub‐race of the Âryan stock, which sub‐race—born and developed in
Europe and Asia Minor under new climates and conditions—had become
European. Since then, as we have said, it has been steadily decreasing. It
is truer, therefore, to say that the tombs alone are archaic, and not
necessarily the bodies of men occasionally found in them; and that those
tombs, since they are gigantic, must have contained giants,(1761) or
rather the ashes of generations of giants.

Nor were all such cyclopean structures intended for sepulchres. It is with
the so‐called Druidical remains, such as Carnac in Brittany and Stonehenge
in Great Britain, that the travelling Initiates above alluded to had to
do. And these gigantic monuments are all symbolic records of the World’s
history. They are not Druidical, but universal. Nor did the Druids build
them, for they were only the heirs of the cyclopean lore left to them by
generations of mighty builders and—“magicians,” both good and bad.

It will always be a subject of regret that History, rejecting _à priori_
the actual existence of giants, has preserved to us so little of the
records of antiquity concerning them. Yet in nearly every Mythology—which
after all _is_ Ancient History—the giants play an important part. In the
old Norse Mythology, the giants, Skrymir and his brethren, against whom
the sons of the Gods fought, were potent factors in the histories of
deities and men. The modern exegesis, that makes these giants the brethren
of the dwarfs, and reduces the combats of the Gods to the history of the
development of the Âryan Race, will only receive credence amongst the
believers in the Âryan theory as expounded by Max Müller. Granting that
the Turanian races were typified by the dwarfs (Dwergar), and that a dark,
round‐headed, and dwarfish race was driven northward by the fair‐faced
Scandinavians, or Æsir, the Gods being like unto men, there still exists
neither in history nor in any other scientific work any anthropological
proof whatever of the existence in Time or Space of a race of giants. Yet
that such exist, relatively and _de facto_ side by side with dwarfs,
Schweinfurth can testify. The Nyam‐Nyam of Africa are regular dwarfs,
while their next neighbours, several tribes of comparatively fair‐
complexioned Africans, are giants when confronted with the Nyam‐Nyams, and
very tall even among Europeans, for their women are all above six and a
half feet high.

In Cornwall and in ancient Britain the traditions of these giants are, on
the other hand, excessively common; they are said to have lived even down
to the time of King Arthur. All this shows that giants lived to a later
date amongst the Celtic than among the Teutonic peoples.

If we turn to the New World, we have traditions of a race of giants of
Tarija on the eastern slopes of the Andes and in Ecuador, who combated
Gods and men. These old beliefs, which term certain localities “Los Campos
de los Gigantes,” the “Fields of Giants,” are always concomitant with the
existence of Pliocene mammalia and the occurrence of Pliocene raised
beaches. “All the giants are not under Mount Ossa,” and it would be poor
Anthropology indeed that would restrict the traditions of giants to Greek
and Bible mythologies. Slavonian countries, Russia especially, teem with
legends about the Bogaterey (mighty giants) of old; and Slavonian
folklore, most of which has served for the foundation of national
histories, the oldest songs, and the most archaic traditions, speaks of
the giants of old. Thus we may safely reject the modern theory that would
make of the Titans mere symbols standing for cosmic forces. They were real
living men, whether twenty or only twelve feet high. Even the Homeric
heroes, who, of course, belonged to a far more recent period in the
history of the races, appear to have wielded weapons of a size and weight
beyond the strength of the strongest men of modern times.


    Not twice ten men the mighty bulk could raise,
    Such men as live in these degenerate days.


If the fossil footprints at Carson, Nevada, U.S.A., are human, they
indicate gigantic men, and of their genuineness there can remain no doubt.
It is to be deplored that the modern and scientific evidence for gigantic
men should rest on footprints alone. Over and over again, the skeletons of
hypothetical giants have been identified with those of elephants and
mastodons. But all such blunders before the days of Geology, and even the
traveller’s tales of Sir John Mandeville, who says that he saw giants
fifty‐six feet high, in India, only show that belief in the existence of
giants has never, at any time, died out of the thoughts of men.

That which is known and accepted is, that several races of gigantic men
have existed and left distinct traces. In the _Journal of the
Anthropological Institute_(1762) such a race is shown as having existed at
Palmyra and possibly in Midian, exhibiting cranial forms quite different
from those of the Jews. It is not improbable that another such race
existed in Samaria, and that the mysterious people who built the stone
circles in Galilee, hewed Neolithic flints in the Jordan valley, and
preserved an ancient Semitic language quite distinct from the square
Hebrew character, were of very large stature. The English translations of
the _Bible_ can never be relied upon, even in their modern revised forms.
They tell us of the Nephilim, translating the word by “giants,” and
further adding that they were “hairy” men, probably the large and powerful
prototypes of the later satyrs so eloquently described by patristic fancy;
some of the Church Fathers assuring their admirers and followers that they
had themselves seen these “satyrs”—some alive, others “pickled” and
“preserved.” The word “giants” being once adopted as a synonym of
Nephilim, the commentators have since identified them with the sons of
Anak. The filibusters who seized on the Promised Land found a preëxisting
population far exceeding their own in stature, and called it a race of
giants. But the races of really gigantic men had disappeared ages before
the birth of Moses. These tall people existed in Canaan, and even in
Bashan, and may have had representatives in the Nabatheans of Midian. They
were of far greater stature than the undersized Jews. Four thousand years
ago their cranial conformation and large stature separated them from the
children of Heber. Forty thousand years ago their ancestors may have been
of still more gigantic size, and four hundred thousand years earlier they
must have been in proportion to men in our days as the Brobdingnagians
were to the Lilliputians. The Atlanteans of the middle period were called
the “Great Dragons,” and the first symbol of their tribal deities, when
the “Gods” and the Divine Dynasties had forsaken them, was that of a giant
serpent.

The mystery veiling the origin and the religion of the Druids is as great
as that of their supposed fanes to the modern Symbologist, but not to the
initiated Occultists. Their priests were the descendants of the last
Atlanteans, and what is known of them is sufficient to allow the inference
that they were Eastern priests, akin to the Chaldæans and Indians, though
little more. It may be inferred that they symbolized their deity as the
Hindûs do their Vishnu, as the Egyptians did their Mystery God, and as the
builders of the Ohio great Serpent Mound worshipped theirs—namely under
the form of the “Mighty Serpent,” the emblem of the eternal deity Time—the
Hindû Kâla. Pliny called them the “Magi of the Gauls and Britons.” But
they were more than that. The author of _Indian Antiquities_ finds much
affinity between the Druids and the Brâhmans of India. Dr. Borlase points
to a close analogy between them and the Magi of Persia;(1763) others will
see an identity between them and the Orphic priesthood of Thrace—simply
because they were connected, in their Esoteric Teachings, with the
universal Wisdom Religion, and thus presented affinities with the exoteric
worship of all.

Like the Hindûs, the Greeks and Romans—we speak of the Initiates—the
Chaldees and the Egyptians, the Druids believed in the doctrine of a
succession of “worlds,” as also in that of seven “creations” (of new
continents) and transformations of the face of the Earth, and in a seven‐
fold night and day for each Earth or Globe. Wherever the serpent with the
egg is found, there this tenet was surely present. Their Dracontia are a
proof of it. This belief was so universal that, if we seek for it in the
Esotericism of various religions, we shall discover it in all. We shall
find it among the Âryan Hindûs and Mazdeans, the Greeks, the Latins, and
even among the old Jews and early Christians, whose modern stocks hardly
comprehend now what they read in their Scriptures. In the _Book of God_ we
read:


    The world, says Seneca, being melted and having reëntered into the
    bosom of Jupiter, this god continues for some time totally
    concentred in himself and remains concealed, as it were, wholly
    immersed in the contemplation of his own ideas. Afterwards we see
    a new world spring from him, perfect in all its parts. Animals are
    produced anew. An innocent race of men is formed.


And again, speaking of a mundane dissolution as involving the destruction
or death of all, he teaches us that:


    When the laws of nature shall be buried in ruin, and the last day
    of the world shall come, the Southern Pole shall crush, as it
    falls, all the regions of Africa, and the North Pole shall
    overwhelm all the countries beneath its axis. _The affrighted Sun
    shall be deprived of its light_; the palace of heaven falling to
    decay shall produce at once both life and death, and some kind of
    dissolution shall equally seize upon all the deities, who thus
    shall return into their original chaos.(1764)


One might imagine oneself reading the Paurânic account by Parâshara of the
great Pralaya. It is nearly the same thing, idea for idea. Has
Christianity nothing of the kind? It has, we say. Let the reader open any
English _Bible_ and read chapter iii of the Second _Epistle of Peter_, and
he will find there the same ideas:


    There shall come in the last days scoffers ... saying, Where is
    the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all
    things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.
    For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God
    the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water
    and in the water: whereby the world that then was, being
    overflowed with water, perished: but the heavens and the earth
    which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto
    fire ... the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
    elements shall melt with fervent heat. Nevertheless we ... look
    for new heavens and a new earth.(1765)


If the interpreters choose to see in this a reference to the creation, the
deluge, and the promised coming of Christ, when they shall live in a New
Jerusalem in Heaven, this is no fault of “Peter.” What the writer of the
Epistle meant was the destruction of this Fifth Race of ours by
subterranean fires and inundations, and the appearance of new continents
for the Sixth Root‐Race. For the writers of the Epistles were all learned
in symbology if not in science.

It has been mentioned elsewhere that the belief in the septenary
constitution of our Chain was the oldest tenet of the early Iranians, who
got it from the first Zarathushtra. It is time to prove it to those Parsîs
who have lost the key to the meaning of their Scriptures. In the _Avesta_
the Earth is considered septempartite and tripartite at one and the same
time. This is regarded by Dr. Geiger as an incongruity, for the following
reasons, which he calls discrepancies. The _Avesta_ speaks of the three
thirds of the Earth because the _Rig Veda_ mentions:


    Three earths.... Three strata or layers, one lying above the
    other, are said to be meant by this.(1766)


But he is quite mistaken, as are all exoteric profane translators. The
_Avesta_ has not borrowed the idea from the _Rig Veda_, but simply repeats
the Esoteric Teaching. The “three strata or layers” do not refer to our
Globe alone, but to three layers of the Globes of our Terrestrial
Chain—two by two, on each plane, one on the descending, the other on the
ascending arc. Thus, with reference to the six Spheres or Globes above our
Earth, the seventh and the fourth, the Earth is _septempartite_, while
with regard to the planes over our plane—it is _tripartite_. This meaning
is carried out and corroborated by the text of the _Avesta_, and even by
the speculations—most laborious and unsatisfactory guess‐work—of the
translators and commentators. It thus follows that the division of the
Earth, or rather the Earth’s Chain, into seven Karshvars is not in
contradiction with the three “zones,” if this word is read “planes.” As
Geiger remarks, this septenary division is very old—the oldest of
all—since the Gâthas already speak of the “septempartite earth.”(1767)
For:


    According to the statements of the later Parsî Scriptures, the
    _seven Kêrshvars are to be considered as completely disconnected
    parts of the earth_ [which they surely are. For] between them
    _there flows the ocean_, so that it is impossible, as stated in
    several passages, to pass from one Kêrshvar to another.(1768)


The “Ocean” is _Space_, of course, for the latter was called “Waters of
Space” before it was known as Ether. Moreover, the word Karshvar is
consistently rendered as Dvîpa, and Hvaniratha is rendered by Jambudvîpa
(Neryosangh, the translator of the _Yasna_).(1769) But this fact is not
taken into account by the Orientalists, and therefore we find even such a
learned Zoroastrian and Parsî by birth as the translator of Dr. Geiger’s
work, passing unnoticed and without a word of comment sundry remarks of
the former on the “incongruities” of this kind abounding in the Mazdean
Scriptures. One of such “incongruities” and “coïncidences” concerns the
similarity of the Zoroastrian with the Indian tenet with regard to the
seven Dvîpas—islands, or continents, rather—as met with in the _Purânas_,
namely:


    The Dvîpas form concentric rings, which, separated by the ocean,
    surround Jambudvîpa, which is situated in the centre, [and]
    according to the Iranian view, the Kêrshvar Qaniratha is likewise
    situated in the centre of the rest, they form no concentric
    circles, but each of them [the six other Karshvars] is a peculiar
    individual space, and so they group themselves round [above]
    Qaniratha.(1770)


Now Qaniratha—better Hvaniratha—is not, as believed by Geiger and his
translator, “the country inhabited by the Irânian tribes,” and “the other
names” do not mean “the adjacent territories of foreign nations in the
North, South, West, and East,” but signify our Globe or Earth. For that
which is meant by the sentence which follows the last quoted, namely,
that:


    Two, Vorubarshti and Voruzarshti, lie in the North; two,
    Vidadhafshu and Tradadhafshu, in the South; Savahi and Arzahi in
    the East and West


—is simply the very graphic and accurate description of the Chain of our
Planet, the Earth, represented in the _Book of Dzyan_ (11) thus:

                    [Illustration: The Chain of Earth]

The Mazdean names given above have only to be replaced by those used in
the Secret Doctrine to present us with the Esoteric tenet. The “Earth”
(our world) _is_ tripartite, because the Chain of the Worlds is situated
on three different planes above our Globe; and it is septempartite because
of the seven Globes or Spheres which compose the Chain. Hence the further
meaning given in _Vendidâd_ (xix. 39), showing that:


    Qaniratha alone is combined with _imat_, “this” (earth), while all
    other Karshvares are combined with the word “_avat_,” “that” or
    _those_—upper earths.


Nothing could be plainer. The same may be said of the modern comprehension
of all other ancient beliefs.

The Druids, then, understood the meaning of the Sun in Taurus, when, all
other fires being extinguished on the first of November, their sacred and
inextinguishable fires alone remained to illumine the horizon, like those
of the Magi and the modern Zoroastrians. And like the early Fifth Race and
later Chaldees, like the Greeks, and again like the Christians—who do the
same to this day, without suspecting the real meaning—they greeted the
Morning Star, the beautiful Venus‐Lucifer.(1771) Strabo speaks of an
island near to Britannia:


    Where Ceres and Persephone were worshipped with the same rites as
    in Samothrace and this island was Sacred Ierna(1772)—


where a perpetual fire was lit. The Druids believed in the rebirth of man,
not as Lucian explains:


    That the same spirit shall animate a new body, not here, but in a
    different world—


but in a series of reïncarnations in this same world; for as Diodorus
says, they declared that the souls of men, after determinate periods,
would pass into other bodies.(1773)

These tenets came to the Fifth Race Âryans from their predecessors of the
Fourth Race, the Atlanteans. They had piously preserved the teachings,
which told them how their parent Root‐Race, becoming with every generation
more arrogant, owing to the acquisition of superhuman powers, had been
gradually gliding toward its end. Those records reminded them of the giant
intellect of the preceding races as well as of their giant size. We find
the repetition of those records in every age of history, in almost every
old fragment which has descended to us from antiquity.

Ælian preserved an extract from Theophrastus written during the days of
Alexander the Great. It is a dialogue between Midas, the Phrygian, and
Silenus. The former is told of a continent that had existed in times of
old, so immense, that Asia, Europe and Africa seemed like poor islands
compared with it. _It was the last to produce_ animals and plants of
gigantic magnitudes. There, said Silenus, men grew to double the size of
the tallest man in his (the narrator’s) time, and they lived till they
were twice as old. They had wealthy cities with temples, and one of such
cities held more than a million of inhabitants in it, gold and silver
being found there in great abundance.

Grote’s suggestion that Atlantis was but a myth arisen from a
mirage—clouds on a dazzling sky taking the appearance of islands on a
golden sea—is too disingenuous to be further noticed.



A. Some Statements About The Sacred Islands And Continents In The
Classics, Explained Esoterically.


All that which precedes was known to Plato, and to many others. But as no
Initiate had the right to divulge and declare all he knew, posterity got
only hints. Aiming more to instruct as a Moralist than as a Geographer and
Ethnologist or Historian, the Greek Philosopher merged the history of
Atlantis, which covered several million years, into one event which he
located on one comparatively small island 3,000 stadia long by 2,000 wide
(or about 350 miles by 200, which is about the size of Ireland); whereas
the priests spoke of Atlantis as a continent vast as “all Asia and Lybia”
put together.(1774) But, however altered in its general aspect, Plato’s
narrative bears the impress of truth upon it.(1775) It was not he who
invented it, at any rate, since Homer, who preceded him by many centuries,
also speaks in his _Odyssey_ of the Atlantes—who are our Atlanteans—and of
their island. Therefore the tradition was older than the bard of Ulysses.
The Atlantes and the Atlantides of Mythology are based upon the Atlantes
and the Atlantides of History. Both Sanchuniathon and Diodorus have
preserved the histories of those heroes and heroines, however much their
accounts may have become mixed up with the mythical element.

In our own day we witness the extraordinary fact that such comparatively
recent personages as Shakspere and William Tell are all but denied, an
attempt being made to show one to be a _nom de plume_, and the other a
person who never existed. What wonder then, that the two powerful
Races—the Lemurians and the Atlanteans—have been merged into and
identified, in time, with a few half mythical peoples, who all bore the
same patronymic.

Herodotus speaks of the Atlantes—a people of Western Africa—who gave their
name to Mount Atlas: who were vegetarians, and “whose sleep was never
disturbed by dreams”; and who, moreover,


    Daily cursed the sun at his rising and at his setting because his
    excessive heat scorched and tormented them.


These statements are based upon moral and psychic facts and not on
physiological disturbance. The story of Atlas gives the key to this. If
the Atlanteans never had their sleep disturbed by dreams, it is because
that particular tradition is concerned with the earliest Atlanteans, whose
physical frame and brain were not yet sufficiently consolidated, in the
physiological sense, to permit the nervous centres to act during sleep.
With regard to the other statement—that they daily “cursed the sun”—this
again had nothing to do with the heat, but with the moral degeneration
that grew with the Race. It is explained in our Commentaries.

_They [the sixth sub‐race of the Atlanteans] used magic incantations even
against the Sun_—

failing in which they cursed it. The sorcerers of Thessaly were credited
with the power of calling down the Moon, as Greek history assures us. The
Atlanteans of the later period were renowned for their magic powers and
wickedness, their ambition and defiance of the Gods. Thence the same
traditions, taking form in the _Bible_, about the antediluvian giants and
the Tower of Babel, and found also in the _Book of Enoch_.

Diodorus records another fact or two: the Atlanteans boasted of possessing
the land in which all the Gods had received their birth; as also of having
had Uranus for their first King, he being also the first to teach them
Astronomy. Very little more than this has come down to us from antiquity.

The myth of Atlas is an allegory easily understood. Atlas is the old
Continents of Lemuria and Atlantis, combined and personified in one
symbol. The poets attribute to Atlas, as to Proteus, a superior wisdom and
a universal knowledge, and especially _a thorough acquaintance with the
depths of the ocean_; for both Continents bore Races instructed by
_divine_ Masters, and both were transferred to the bottom of the seas,
where they now slumber until their next reäppearance above the waters.
Atlas is the son of an ocean nymph, and his daughter is Calypso—the
“watery deep.” Atlantis has been submerged beneath the waters of the
ocean, and its progeny is now sleeping its eternal sleep on the ocean
floors. The _Odyssey_ makes of him the guardian and the “sustainer” of the
huge pillars that separate the Heavens from the Earth. He is their
“supporter.” And as both Lemuria, destroyed by submarine fires, and
Atlantis, submerged by the waves, perished in the ocean deeps,(1776) Atlas
is said to have been compelled to leave the surface of the Earth, and join
his brother Iapetus in the depths of Tartarus.(1777) Sir Theodore Martin
is right in interpreting this allegory as meaning:


    [Atlas] standing on the solid floor of the inferior hemisphere of
    the universe, and thus carrying at the same time the disc of the
    earth and the celestial vault—the solid envelope of the superior
    hemisphere.(1778)


For Atlas is Atlantis, which supports the new continents and their
horizons on its “shoulders.”

Decharme, in his _Mythologie de la Grèce Antique_, expresses a doubt as to
the correctness of Pierron’s translation of the Homeric word ἕχει by
_sustinet_, as it is not possible to see:


    How Atlas can support or bear at once several pillars situated in
    various localities.


If Atlas were an individual it would be an awkward translation. But, as he
personifies a Continent in the West said to support Heaven and Earth at
once,(1779) _i.e._, the feet of the giant tread the earth while his
shoulders support the celestial vault—an allusion to the gigantic peaks of
the Lemurian and Atlantean Continents—the epithet “supporter” becomes very
correct. The term _conservator_ for the Greek word ἕχει, which Decharme,
following Sir Theodore Martin, understands as meaning φυλάσσει and
ἐπιμελεῖταυ, does not render the same sense.

The conception was certainly due to the gigantic mountain chain running
along the terrestrial border or disc. These mountain peaks plunged their
roots into the very bottom of the seas, while they raised their heads
heavenward, their summits being lost in the clouds. The ancient continents
had more mountains than valleys on them. Atlas and the Teneriffe Peak, now
two of the dwarfed relics of the two lost Continents, were thrice as lofty
during the day of Lemuria and twice as high in that of Atlantis. Thus, the
Lybians called Mount Atlas the “Pillar of Heaven,” according to
Herodotus,(1780) and Pindar qualified the later Ætna as the “Celestial
Pillar.”(1781) Atlas was an inaccessible island peak in the days of
Lemuria, when the African continent had not yet been raised. It is the
sole Western relic which survives, _independent_, belonging to the
Continent on which the Third Race was born, developed and fell,(1782) for
Australia is now part of the Eastern Continent. Proud Atlas, according to
Esoteric tradition, having sunk one‐third of its size into the waters, its
two parts remained as an heirloom of Atlantis.

This again was known to the priests of Egypt and to Plato himself, the
solemn oath of secrecy, which extended even to the mysteries of Neo‐
Platonism, alone preventing the whole truth from being told.(1783) So
secret was the knowledge of the last island of Atlantis, indeed—on account
of the superhuman powers possessed by its inhabitants, the last direct
descendants of the Gods or Divine Kings, as it was thought—that to divulge
its whereabouts and existence was punished by death. Theopompus says as
much in his ever‐suspected _Meropis_, when he speaks of the Phœnicians as
being the only navigators in the seas which wash the Western coast of
Africa; who did it with such mystery that very often they sunk their own
vessels to make the too inquisitive foreigners lose all trace of them.

There are Orientalists and Historians—and they form the majority—who,
while feeling quite unmoved at the rather crude language of the _Bible_,
and some of the events narrated in it, show great disgust at the
“immorality” in the Pantheons of India and Greece.(1784) We may be told
that before them Euripides, Pindar, and even Plato, express the same
disgust; that they too felt irritated with the tales invented—“those
miserable stories of the poets,” as Euripides phrases it.(1785)

But there may have been another reason for this, perhaps. To those who
knew that there was more than one key to Theogonic Symbolism, it was a
mistake to have expressed it in a language so crude and misleading. For if
the educated and learned Philosopher could discern the kernel of wisdom
under the coarse rind of the fruit, and knew that the latter concealed the
greatest laws and truths of psychic and physical nature, as well as the
origin of all things—not so with the uninitiated profane. For him the
dead‐letter was religion; the interpretation—sacrilege. And this dead‐
