CHAPTER II.

INDUCTIVE PHILOSOPHY NOT UNDERSTOOD.

Ignorance of it the cause of many superstitions.--Lights seen in
marshy grounds, &c.--Supposed to be supernatural.--Causes of
these lights, and phenomena connected with them.--Shrinking and
swelling of pork in boiling.--Cause.--Supposed influence of the
moon in making soap, grafting trees, cutting timber, &c.--Lunar
influence in matters of wedlock.--Love not to be fed on
moonshine.                                                         22


CHAPTER III.

IGNORANCE OF THE CAUSES OF DREAMS.

Fruitful source of superstitions.--Opinions of ancient divines.
--Dreams related in the Scriptures.--Their object.--Principles
of mental philosophy applied to modern dreams.--Examples of
singular dreams.--Dreams occasioned by sickness.--Fulfilment
of certain dreams.--Causes of the same.--Remarkable case of
a German student.--Case of a member of Congress.--Amusing
case concerning a passage of Scripture.--Necessity of a pure
conscience, and a careful attention to our stomachs.               24


CHAPTER IV.

EFFECTS OF THE IMAGINATION ON THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.

Ignorance of it has given rise to many superstitions.--Experiments
of Mesmer and Deslon in Paris.--Singular developments.--Trials at
Dr. Franklin's house.--Children uninfluenced by mesmeric operations.
--Magnetizing a tree in Dr. Franklin's garden.--Experiments upon
two females.--Effect produced.--Experiment upon a female by Dr.
Sigault.--Practice among the Chinese.--Girl frightened to death by
a Gypsy.--Practice among the New Zealanders.--Killing others by
incantation.--Intercourse with departed spirits.--An account of
Perkins's metallic tractors.--Their supposed influence in various
diseases.--Suspicions concerning them.--Experiments with wooden
tractors.--Result of these experiments.--Statements of a modern
mesmerizer.                                                        29


CHAPTER V.

IGNORANCE OF MENTAL PHILOSOPHY.

This ignorance a cause of many superstitions.--Case of a person
who slept in a bed room supposed to be haunted.--Skeleton seen by
moonlight.--Apparition seen by Dr. Gregory.--Case related by Dr.
Conolly.--Ship's crew frightened by an apparition.--Young lady
supposed to have been murdered by pirates.--Cases of impressions
connected with bodily disease.--Phantasms in febrile diseases.--A
farmer frightened to death by a light in the road.--A figure like
Death striking a lady in her side with a dart.--Illusion of sight
and hearing.--Case of a lady who saw her absent husband standing
by her side.--Countenance of a friend seen in a mirror.--Tunes
heard.--Inverted objects.--Visions of the world of spirits.--Case
of Baron Swedenborg.--Case of a lady in Boston, who saw her
deceased grandmother.--The phantom ship seen in New Haven.--The
science of optics.--Of nauscopy.--Cases of mirage.                 38


CHAPTER VI.

IGNORANCE OF TRUE RELIGION.

God the Supreme Ruler of the Universe.--The natural world governed
by regular laws.--Sign of the howling of a dog under the window.--
Lucky and unlucky days.--Sir Matthew Hale's opinion.--Early laws of
Connecticut.--Superstition of sailors.--Timidity of Voltaire.--
Peace and happiness on all days.--How procured.                    50


CHAPTER VII.

BELIEF IN WITCHCRAFT.

A witch as regarded by our fathers.--Compact or agreement with the
devil.--Carried through the air on brooms and spits.--Anointing their
bodies with a magical ointment.--How to prepare the same.--Singular
ceremonies at the meetings of witches.--How they afflicted others.
--The bewitched pins shown to Grace Greenwood.--Mode of examining
and trying witches.--Witch catcher in England.--How he was arrested
and condemned.--Singular record on a church book in Scotland.--
Notice of the Salem witchcraft.--How such superstitions are to be
done away.--Witches and wizards of modern times.                   53


CHAPTER VIII.

NECROMANCY AND FORTUNE TELLING.

Moll Pitcher, the queen of the race.--Her place of abode.--Company
that visited her.--Member of a church sent to consult her.--Casting
out evil spirits in Syria.--Account of Lady Hester Stanhope.--The
astrologer of Hopkinton, Massachusetts.--Chief characteristic of
fortune seekers.--Effects produced upon them.                      58


