
Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 43237-h.htm or 43237-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/43237/43237-h/43237-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/43237/43237-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/spiritland00emmo


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





[Illustration: THE SPIRIT LAND.]


THE SPIRIT LAND.

by

S. B. EMMONS.







Philadelphia:
John E. Potter and Company.
Nos. 614 and 617 Sansom Street.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1857, by
L. P. Crown & Co.,
in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District
of Massachusetts




TO THE READER.


This volume is intended as an antidote to a species of errors that have
been rife in every age of the Christian church. Notwithstanding the
disclosures the Most High made of himself to his ancient people, they
were yet prone to turn aside from the worship of the true God, to
follow the lying spirits of the prophets of Baal, and other deceivers,
from the days of Moses till the destruction of Jerusalem. So, likewise,
under the Christian dispensation, there has been a succession of
Antichrists, until their name is _legion_, whose teachings have clouded
the understandings and blinded the moral perceptions of men, subverting
the faith of many whose mountains stood strong, and who had been
counted the chosen people of God.

The present is viewed as an age of _isms_. Men have run mad, and are
chasing phantoms. They are roaming round to find some fulcrum to
overturn the church and the Bible; they are imagining they are
receiving utterances from heaven, when nothing is uttered but the
vain fantasies of their own minds and hearts. It is the grossest
fanaticism--fanaticism in its most frightful form, leading its unhappy
victims, not unfrequently, to flagrant crimes, and to the most horrid
of all--that of self-destruction.

These pages are submitted to the public with the counsel of the wisest
and best of all ages, that, amid the wily arts of the adversary, we
should cling to the word of God, the Bible of our fathers, as the only
safe and infallible guide of faith and practice.




NOTE.


We would here give credit to the principal works from which valuable
and important matter has been selected for these pages: Whitman's
Popular Superstitions; Upham's Lectures upon Witchcraft; Christian
Freeman and Family Visitor; Abercrombie on the Intellectual Powers;
Influence of the Imagination upon the Nervous System, by Rev. Grant
Powers; Life of Adam Clarke; Hayward's Book of all Religions; Miller
on the Second Coming of Christ; Borrow's Gypsies of Spain; Stone on
False Prophets and Christs; Dickens's Household Words; Capron and
Barron on the Spirit Knockings; Dick on the Improvement of Society;
Revelations of A. J. Davis; The Great Harmonia; Rogers on Human and
Mundane Agents; Miss Crowe's Night Side of Nature; Spiritual
Telegraph, &c.

As the work embraces a mass of facts of an absorbing and intensely
interesting character, we trust that it will commend itself to an
enlightened and judicious public.

THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS.


PART FIRST.

INTRODUCTION.

THE OBJECT OF THIS WORK.

                                                                 PAGE

Nursery tales of giants, dwarfs, ghosts, fairies, and witches.--
Their effect upon juvenile minds.--A belief in ghosts still
prevalent.--The excitability of the public mind.--Ghost reported
as having been seen in Waltham, Massachusetts.                     17


CHAPTER I.

ORIGIN OF POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.

Ignorance of correct reasoning.--Conclusions from particular
facts.--Water boiled by heat.--Signs.--Breaking a mirror.--Gene
ral conclusions from a few facts.--A victim to superstition in
New Hampshire.--How signs may be multiplied.--The design of
the Creator in endowing us with reason.                            19


