letter is mentioned, a rap is heard. In this slow and tedious process,
long sentences are communicated. No wonder that the slowness of the
mode of communication should be considered as "perfectly appalling."
And then, too, the substance of these communications is too absurd and
ridiculous to be believed. We might here refer to the information given
by the prophet Swedenborg himself, in relation to the condition of the
pious Melancthon in the future state, that he was sometimes in an
excavated stone chamber, and at other times in hell; and when in the
chamber, he was covered with bear skins to protect him from the cold;
and that he refuses to see visitors from this world on account of the
filthiness of his apartment. This is about as probable and interesting
as the account given by a female clairvoyant in Cleveland, Ohio, who
says that she has (just) had an interview with Tom Paine, "who recants
his errors, and is at present stopping with General Washington and
Ethan Allen, at a hotel kept by John Bunyan."

We here introduce the following from one of the Boston papers:--

"_The 'Spiritual Rappings' exploded._--There is a good article under
this head, on the first page, to which we invite attention. The
writer is an accomplished scholar, an able physician, and one of the
first and best magnetizers in this country. He has investigated the
'rappings'--tested them theoretically and practically, and 'exploded'
them, if our readers have not already done so for themselves. His
communication is entitled to weight, and if circulated, as it should
be, among the credulous and unsuspecting, might save some from the
pitiful effects of a mischievous, absurd, and contemptible
superstitious delusion."

The article is as follows:--

"About the 16th of December last, I called on Mr. Sunderland, in good
faith, in order to hear and see manifestations from the spirit world.
He received me in a friendly manner, and, with a young lady who was
with me, seated me in the spirit room. We had to wait an hour or more,
and while seated we devoutly invoked the spirits. Finding them silent,
I put on them some of my most powerful mesmeric electric formula. They
persevered, however, in preserving profound silence.

"When, however, the medium, Mrs. Cooper, had arrived, and seven of us,
four gentlemen and three ladies, were seated round a square centre
table, the responses were made, and came freely. The young lady with
me, willing to believe, but wishing to know with absolute certainty,
before she assented to the truth of the proposition, that the rappings
were made by spirits, and not by the persons engaged in the business,
had seated herself about three feet from the table, so that she could
see under it. The following dialogue then ensued between Mrs. Cooper,
her adopted sister, and the young lady:--

"'Will you sit close to the table, miss?'

"'If they are spirits, they can rap just as well where I am. I am
willing to be convinced, and where I am I can hear perfectly well.'

"'The rule is, to sit close to the table.'

"'I will not disturb, but choose to sit where I am.'

"'If you will not comply with the regulation, you had better go into
the other room.'

"'I came to know, and I shall sit where I am.'

"She was inflexible, and the work proceeded. When my turn came, I could
put no test question, and was so told. I saw and felt that there was
collusion, and, ashamed of myself as being the dupe of supposed and
known imposition, after enduring the hour's sitting, I arose with the
full conviction that all was the effect of bones and muscles, and of
mesmeric action and reaction on the subjects themselves. While we were
examining a piano which was used on such occasions, and our backs were
turned towards the table, standing partly sidewise, I caught a glimpse
of Mrs. Cooper's foot in the very position and act of commencing a
spirit somerset on the table. She looked confused. I appeared not to
have fully recognized any thing wrong, thanked them for their father's
kindness and their attention, and left the domicil of the 'spiritual
philosopher' under a full, stern, and abiding conviction that _there_
was not the abiding place of invisible beings--that all was mechanical
which we heard, and all that any one had heard or seen was mechanical
or mesmeric.

"The second opportunity I had of testing the truth or falsity of these
spirit communications was in the city of Lowell. Every thing was
favorable as to place, time, and company. My eyes were every where, and
raps came seldom and solitary. The medium dropped from between his
fingers a small black pencil, about two inches long, with which I
believe he made the raps. After it fell, we heard no more. He looked
despairingly disappointed, soon went into a trance, arose, locked us
into the room, and when the hour had transpired, came out voluntarily.

"Invited by a friend who was anxious to convince me more fully, and
especially to convert the young lady who was with me at Mr.
Sunderland's, he called at my house with the medium, and was received
into my office. The young lady requested that we should stand around
the table, and no one touch it. We did so. On the first response, she
exclaimed, indignantly, addressing the medium, 'That, sir, was from
your foot; I heard it distinctly!' He looked guilty, and his eyes
flashed with anger. He asked the spirits if it was not 'nonsense,' and
received the response from the foot, 'yes,' and left, evidently highly
incensed.

"I determined to give one more trial to the spirits. In this latter
case, there were the three raps, clear and strong, and the answers
highly satisfactory, as far as they went. But the difficulty was, that
the spirits were capricious, and would respond only to just such as
they saw fit; and the medium was pretty well acquainted with me. The
perfect regularity of the knocks, and the sound, convinced me that, in
this instance, it was purely mechanical. I endeavored to get the secret
from the medium, and the answer was, 'If I should tell you, you would
be as wise as myself.' She evidently knew how it was done.

"I will now state a few facts, and conclude. 1. Wood is an excellent
conductor of sounds. A small worm, called at the south a sawyer, and
sought for angling, can be heard three yards, as it gnaws between the
wood and bark of a fallen pine; and the slightest scratch of a pin, on
the end of an isolated mast, sixty feet long, can be heard distinctly.

"2. In mesmeric operations, we well know that individuals _can be
made to hear and see things that never occurred or existed_, and yet
the subjects remain unconscious that they have been made the
_subjects of mesmeric hallucination_!

"3. Persons highly observant and susceptible can, by their eye and
feeling, when they put themselves into a semi-abnormal condition, tell,
in many instances nine times out of ten, who is and who is not a
believer, _and what is in the mind of the inquirer_.

"4. Mediums are invariably of this character.

"5. In matters of faith, friendship, love, or the spirit world, many
are willing to be deceived; and when they fall into the hands of the
shrewd and designing, who can appear the impersonation of truth,
virtue, honesty, and even piety itself, they are emphatically
_humbugged_, and give their money and their testimony to confirm
the fraud.

"Lastly. Many are so sincere and honest in their intentions, that it is
not in their hearts to believe that some of our most respectable men,
even clergymen, would lend their names to sustain any thing but what
they had believed and tested as a reality, and therefore themselves
believe.

"Now, Mr. Editor, from all that I have seen and know of these spiritual
communications, as 'rappings,' and from all these facts, I am free to
declare, that I believe them an arrant humbug, and one, too, of the
most pernicious tendency. They can all be traced to a human agency, as
either mechanical or mesmeric, alone or combined; and I will give my
right hand to any medium whose operation and device I cannot fully
discover, trace, and demonstrate, as deducible from either the one or
both of these sources, _and from no other_."

A correspondent of the Boston Traveller, in a communication dated New
York, January 22, 1852, says, "I look upon the delusion as I do upon a
contagious disease. It is a moral epidemic. Any man of peculiar
diathesis may be its victim. It spreads by sympathy and by moral
infection. Men of standing and intellect gravely and seriously affirm
that they have seen a man rise and float about the room like a feather,
till some unbelieving wretch approaches and breaks the spell, when the
aerial swimmer falls suddenly to the floor. Franklin, Washington, and
all the signers of the Declaration of Independence, have visited them,
and these departed worthies sanction any doctrine which the uninitiated
may happen to entertain before consulting them." A. J. Davis says,
"There is a class of spirits who dwell in divine love more than in
divine wisdom, and who are easily influenced to _feel_ precisely what
the majority of those who consult them _feel_ and think, and under
peculiar circumstances will say _precisely_ what the questioning minds
of the circle may _ardently_ and _positively_ desire. Affectionate
spirits--those dwelling in the _love circles_--are readily influenced
to approve the desires of the hearts of those with whom they commune on
earth; as in our homes, the infant, by virtue of its cries and positive
entreaties, captivates the affectionate, and perhaps intelligent,
mother, who, consequently, forthwith coincides with her child's
desires, submitting her judgment to its powerful appeals. Thus it is,
through the power of sympathy, spirits of the other world gratify all
our thoughts and desires." This is the _opinion_ of Mr. Davis, which
may pass for what it is worth. We never indorse his spiritual notions.

To give an idea of the conduct exhibited at the circles, or meetings,
of the "harmonials," we submit the following from the Springfield
Republican of January, 1852:--

"When we entered the hall, the meeting had not commenced, and all
parties were engaged in a lively chat. Soon there was a spontaneous
coming to order, and the ladies formed a circle around a table. The
gentlemen then formed a larger circle, entirely surrounding the ladies.
A good hymn was given out and sung. During the singing, we noticed one
lady growing excessively pale and cadaverous. Then her hands began to
twitch, and she commenced pounding upon the table. Directly opposite
her, a young woman was undergoing the process of being magnetized by
the spirits, while she, as we were informed, was resisting them. Her
hands were drawn under the table by sudden and powerful jerks, and
every muscle in her body seemed to be agitated with the most powerful
commotion, as if she were acted upon in every part by shocks of
electricity. This continued for ten or fifteen minutes, until she was,
at last, in a state apparently resembling the magnetic sleep.

"Another lady, with a fine eye and an intellectual cast of countenance,
was then moved to write, which she did, while her eyes stared and
rolled as if in a state of frenzy, and every muscle seemed strained to
its utmost tension. She wrote absolutely furiously, but no one but the
spirits could read it, and it was passed over to another medium, who
announced it a message of such utter unimportance that we have
forgotten it. A brawny blacksmith was among the mediums, but he did
nothing but pound on the table, and write the word 'sing.' The famous
medium Gordon was there, too, and he went through various
contortions--got down upon his knees, stood upon his seat, and
stretched up his arms and fingers, trembling all the while, as if in
the highest state of nervous excitement. Once he was twitched bodily
under the table, uttering a scream as he went. At times, the different
mediums would rise, spread their arms, slap the table, and throw their
hands into motions almost inconceivably rapid.

"One of the mediums, a young woman, arose by the dictation and powerful
urging of the spirits, and delivered a rambling sermon. It abounded in
quotations from the Bible and the doctrines of Universalism.

"But it was when the singing was in progress that the spirits and the
mediums were in the highest ecstasy. Then the latter would pound, and
throw their arms around, and point upwards, in the most fantastic
manner possible. And thus, with singing, and pounding, and reading the
Bible, and writing, and preaching, the evening passed away; and while
Old Hundred was being sung, the spirits gave their good night to the
circle.

"We can give but a faint idea of this scene. It is one we shall never
forget, and we only wish that the respectable men we saw there, the men
of age and experience, the young men and young women, could understand
the pity with which a man without the circle of their sympathy regarded
them. With the light of reason within them, with minds not untaught by
education, and with the full and perfect revelation of God's will in
their very hands, it was indeed most pitiable to see them swallowing
these fantastic mummeries, and mingling them, in all their wild,
furious, and unmeaning features, with the worship of Him who manifests
himself in the 'still small voice.'

"Of the sincerity of the majority of those present we have no doubt;
but that there are rank impostors in this town, who are leading astray
the credulous, we have as little doubt. The most that we saw on
Saturday night was mesmerism, and the rest a very transparent attempt
at deception. At any rate, if it was any thing else, we should
attribute it to any thing but good spirits. Were we a devil, and should
we wish to see how foolish we could make people appear, we should
choose this way. O men and women, do have done with such outrageous
nonsense."

Some have been most grossly deceived, and even made insane, by being
made to believe that they were magnetized by spirits. This was the case
with one of the celebrated Hutchinson singers--Judson J. Hutchinson.
Mr. Sunderland, in the fourth number of the Spiritual Philosopher,
observes as follows: "We shall hear of communications from 'prophets,'
'apostles,' 'kings,' and 'statesmen,' and of divers 'revelations,' said
to be made by them. We shall hear of human beings said to be magnetized
by spirits. But the _good_ and the _true_ will know and understand how
easy it is for some to become 'magnetized' by their own _ideas_, and to
take for 'revelations' _the fancies of their own brains_. The notion
about mortals being magnetized by spirits is a mistake, an _error_; and
it was this error which was the principal cause of all the real
difficulty in the case of Judson J. Hutchinson. Mr. H. was made to
believe that he was in company with his deceased brother, and that his
own deceased children came and sat upon his knees, and put their arms
about his neck. When he found himself sinking into an _abnormal state_,
he was told to believe that it was _the spirits_, and that there was
nothing _human_ about it. This, of course, Mr. H. was ready to believe.
He had heard of others being magnetized by spirits, and they were
happy, very happy. And as this seemed to promise him _approximation_ to
the spirit world, for which he was earnestly longing, he readily gave
himself entirely to that idea." The operator, Mr. Hazard, of Rochester,
New York, suggested that Mr. Hutchinson should ask the spirits to move
his (Mr. H.'s) hand to the top of his own head, that then he (Mr. H.)
might know it was they. "But the operator should have known," says Mr.
Sunderland, "that his _suggesting_ it to the mind of Mr. Hutchinson, in
the manner he did, or, if Mr. Hutchinson's own mind was _directed_ to
the movement of his own hand, _that_ was sufficient to cause his hand
to move, _even if there had been no spirits in existence_. And so, when
Mr. H. went to Cleveland, the difficulty was increased by a repetition
of the cause. He fell into the same state again, of course, when
similar _associations_ brought it up before his mind; and there he was
again told by a clairvoyant lady, that she 'saw the spirits' (his
brother Benjamin and Swedenborg) operating upon him. The effect was, to
render him _insane_." His brother Jesse says, that "the shock was too
great for Judson, on account of his bodily weakness, and that his
feeble nature was too fine strung to bear up against the severe
attacks, and it was with great difficulty he was brought back to
Milford, New Hampshire." While in this state, Mr. Sunderland was sent
for, and staid with him three days and three nights, to render him
assistance. Mr. S. says, "He was unfortunate in being told that he was
magnetized by spirits, and still more so, perhaps, in the treatment he
met with from some _uncongenial spirits_ in Syracuse and in Worcester."
From this, as well as from some other unfortunate cases, persons are
admonished to be careful to refrain from visiting such impostors.

Some have been told that St. Paul, St. Peter, St. Luke, and Timothy,
were present, and answered questions put to them; but Mr. Davis and
Mr. Sunderland declare it to be false. Mr. Davis says, "This point
I have been led to investigate carefully; and at no one of the
_circles_ referred to do I discover, upon the most critical interior
retrospection, a _single_ communication from the veritable St. Paul,
nor from any one of his glorious compeers."

So of Benjamin Franklin, who, it is said, has never condescended to
converse but a very few times with earthly beings, though his name is
often quoted in connection with clairvoyancy. The reason he is said to
assign to Mr. Davis is, that he cannot "prevent the almost exact human
imitations of his vibrations; and that they produce so much confusion
and contradiction, that, he thinks it best to wait until some further
improvement can be made in the mode of communication between the two
worlds." Yet how many are told that they have been put in communication
with Franklin!

Mr. Sunderland says, "We need the same conditions, or guaranties, for
believing _spirits_, that we do for believing _human_ testimony."
Speaking of those clairvoyants who are supposed to be exalted into
the spirit sphere, so as to see and converse with spirits, he says,
"Whether they do, really, see the spirits, whom they think they do,
must be determined by other things besides their own testimony. We are
not obliged to take their own mere _ipse dixit_ upon this, any more
than upon any other subject." And as yet, as has been remarked by Dr.
Phelps, _there is no proof that what purports to be a revelation from
spirits is the work of spirits at all_. Mr. Sunderland, for all we can
see, is liable to be in an error, as well as others; and all the
evidence he gives us that he has had interviews and holds conversations
with spirits is that of his own testimony alone. And so of Mr. Davis.

We have said that no dependence whatever can be placed upon the rapping
spirits. Dr. Phelps, of Stratford, Connecticut, once heard a very loud
rapping under the table while at his breakfast. "I asked if it was my
sister. The answer was, 'Yes.' 'Well,' said I, 'if you are the spirit
of my sister, you can tell me how many children you have in this
world.' So the spirit commenced counting, and counted up to
twenty-five, when I pronounced it a _lying_ spirit. I asked it,
'Are you unhappy?' It answered, 'Yes.' 'Can I do you any good?' 'Yes.'
'How?' The spirit then called for the alphabet, and spelled out, 'Give
me a glass of fresh gin.' 'What will you do with it,' said I. '_Put
it to my mouth._' I asked, 'Where is your mouth?' No answer."

Letters, and lines written upon scraps of paper, have, it is said, been
sent from the other world. The following was dropped from the ceiling
of Mrs. Phelps's parlor when she and others were present.

"Sir,--Sir Sambo's compliments, and begs the ladies to accept as a
token of his esteem." Other papers have been similarly written upon,
and signed "Sam Slick," "The Devil," "Beelzebub," "Lorenzo Dow," &c.

On the 15th of March, 1850, a large turnip was thrown against Dr.
Phelps's parlor window, having several characters carved out upon it,
somewhat resembling the Chinese characters. A _fac-simile_ of them
may be found in Davis's explanation of Modern Mysteries, page 55.

Some may receive such things as emanations from the spirit world; but
to us they seem too simple and puerile to be considered as having any
thing to do with the higher spheres.

Dr. Phelps, who has been witness to every species of manoeuvre of the
alleged spirit rappers, says that he has become fully satisfied that no
reliance whatever is to be placed on their communications, either as a
source of valuable information, or as a means of acquiring truth. "I am
satisfied," says he, "that their communications are _wholly worthless_.
They are often contradictory, often prove false, frequently trifling
and nonsensical, and more in character with what might be expected of a
company of loafers on a spree than from spirits returned from a world
of retribution to 'tell the secrets of their prison house.'"

With regard to moving tables, chairs, beds, &c., Mr. Davis says that,
"at a circle of friends in Bridgeport, Connecticut, there was a large
congregation of spirits, who, from a distance of eighty miles, or
thirty above the atmosphere of our earth, directed a mighty column of
vital electricity and magnetism, which column or current, penetrating
all intermediate substances, and by a process of infiltration, entered
the fine particles of matter which composed the table, and raised it,
several successive times, three or four feet from the floor!" This we
are to receive upon his authority, or upon the testimony of those who
may say they saw the table moved. But if the operator can _make things
appear_ that _never occurred or existed_, and can _imagine_ a thing,
and have that _imagination transferred to others_, then what evidence
have we that _spirits_ are concerned in the transaction? Just none
at all. A while ago, we heard of an Italian, at the Massachusetts
Hospital, who could raise tables from the floor without touching them;
and the art of so doing, he said, he learned in Italy. And how are we
to account for the Millerites and others being so raised, as they
believed? Are they not as much to be credited as those who profess a
belief in the miracles of the "harmonial philosophers"? For ourselves,
we are satisfied that such things, for the most part, are but a
delusion, whether they are alleged to take place among those supposed
to be bewitched, the Adventists, or the harmonials.

As to the _rapping noises_, we are inclined to think they may have
something to do with the knee and toe joints, and that the two
performers usually sit together, in order the better to alternate with,
and _spell_ or relieve each other. Upon a fair trial, it certainly has
been proved that the noises cannot be produced when the joints are
grasped firmly by another. But it may be doubted by some whether the
joints can be made to produce the distinct rappings that are sometimes
heard. We think they can. A few years ago, a boy in London gave
exhibitions of what was termed "_chin music_." It was done by striking
the fists upon the lower jaw. By this practice he was able to produce
quite loud and distinct sounds, and play a variety of tunes, to the
amusement of the public. The sounds were made by the finger joints, it
was supposed; and perhaps the jaw bone may have contributed its share
in the performance. The sounds given by the "rapping spirits" are by no
means so remarkable as many suppose. They are often quite indistinct,
and nearly inaudible. Unless a person was possessed of a large share of
credulity, he would never consider them as the responses of an
intelligent spirit. This is the decided conviction of hundreds who have
witnessed their performances in various parts of the country. Yet many
have been, and others will be, deceived. And, doubtless, many tender
and sensitive minds may be made insane by the wicked trifling of these
unprincipled impostors. Certainly we have not the least desire to set
at nought any thing of a _truly serious_ character. Yet we are
constrained to believe that the things of which we have spoken are too
ridiculous and nonsensical, if not actually _sinful_, to be entitled to
the least favor from the public. The learned Thomas Dick, in his Essay
on the Improvement of Society, gives an account of far more singular
and wonderful _phenomena_ produced by _mechanical_ agency, than any
that has as yet been attributed to the agency of _spirits_, as affirmed
by A. J. Davis, or La Roy Sunderland. And we here subjoin the facts of
the case, for the benefit of the public:--

"Soon after the murder of King Charles I., a commission was appointed
to survey the king's house at Woodstock, with the manor, park, and
other demesnes belonging to that manor. One _Collins_, under a feigned
name, hired himself as secretary to the commissioners, who, upon the
13th October, 1649, met, and took up their residence in the king's own
rooms. His majesty's bed chamber they made their kitchen, the council
hall their pantry, and the presence chamber was the place where they
met for the despatch of business. Things being thus prepared, they met
on the 16th for business; and in the midst of their first debate, there
entered a large _black dog_ (as they thought,) which made a dreadful
howling, overturned two or three of their chairs, and then crept under
a bed and vanished. This gave them the greater surprise, as the doors
were kept constantly locked, so that no real dog could get in or out.
The next day their surprise was increased, when, sitting at dinner in a
lower room, they heard plainly the noise of persons walking over their
heads, though they well knew the doors were all locked, and there could
be nobody there. Presently after, they heard, also, all the wood of the
King's Oak brought by parcels from the dining room, and thrown with
great violence into the presence chamber, as also all the chairs,
stools, tables, and other furniture forcibly hurled about the room;
their papers, containing the minutes of their transactions, were torn,
and the ink glass broken. When all this noise had ceased, Giles Sharp,
their secretary, proposed first to enter into these rooms; and in
presence of the commissioners, from whom he received the key, he opened
the doors, and found the wood spread about the room, the chairs tossed
about and broken, the papers torn, but not the least track of any human
creature, nor the least reason to suspect one, as the doors were all
fast, and the keys in the custody of the commissioners. It was
therefore unanimously agreed that the power that did this mischief must
have entered at the key-hole. The night following, Sharp, with two of
the commissioners' servants, as they were in bed in the same room,
which room was contiguous to that where the commissioners lay, had
their beds' feet lifted up so much higher than their heads, that they
expected to have their necks broken, and then they were let fall at
once with so much violence as shook the whole house, and more than ever
terrified the commissioners. On the night of the 19th, as they were all
in bed in the same room, for greater safety, and lights burning by
them, the candles in an instant went out, with a sulphurous smell; and
that moment many trenchers of wood were hurled about the room, which
next morning were found to be the same their honors had eaten out of
the day before, which were all removed from the pantry, though not a
lock was found opened in the whole house. The next night they fared
still worse; the candles went out, as before; the curtains of their
honors' beds were rattled to and fro with great violence; they received
many cruel blows and bruises by eight great pewter dishes and a number
of wooden trenchers being thrown on their beds, which, being heaved
off, were heard rolling about the room, though in the morning none of
these were to be seen.

"The next night the keeper of the king's house and his dog lay in the
commissioners' room, and then they had no disturbance. But on the night
of the 22d, though the dog lay in the room as before, yet the candles
went out, a number of brickbats fell from the chimney into the room,
the dog howled piteously, their bed clothes were all stripped off, and
their terror increased. On the 24th, they thought all the wood of the
King's Oak was violently thrown down by their bedsides; they counted
sixty-four billets that fell, and some hit and shook the beds in which
they lay; but in the morning none was found there, nor had the door
been opened where the billet wood was kept. The next night the candles
were put out, the curtains rattled, and a dreadful crack, like thunder,
was heard; and one of the servants, running in haste, thinking his
master was killed, found three dozen of trenchers laid smoothly under
the quilt by him. But all this was nothing to what succeeded
afterwards. The 29th, about midnight, the candles went out; something
walked majestically through the room, and opened and shut the windows;
great stones were thrown violently into the room, some of which fell on
the beds, others on the floor; and at about a quarter after one, a
noise was heard as of forty cannon discharged together, and again
repeated at about eight minutes' intervals. This alarmed and raised all
the neighborhood, who, coming into their honors' room, gathered up the
great stones, fourscore in number, and laid them by in the corner of a
field, where they were afterwards to be seen. This noise, like the
discharge of cannon, was heard for several miles round. During these
noises, the commissioners and their servants gave one another over for
lost, and cried out for help; and Giles Sharp, snatching up a sword,
had well nigh killed one of their honors, mistaking him for the spirit,
as he came in his shirt from his own room to theirs. While they were
together, the noise was continued, and part of the tiling of the house
was stripped off, and all the windows of an upper room were taken away
with it. On the 30th, at midnight, something walked into the chamber,
treading like a bear; it walked many times about, then threw the
warming pan violently on the floor; at the same time, a large quantity
of broken glass, accompanied with great stones and horse bones, came
pouring into the room with uncommon force. On the 1st of November, the
most dreadful scene of all ensued. Candles in every part of the room
were lighted up, and a great fire made; at midnight, the candles all
yet burning, a noise like the bursting of a cannon was heard in the
room, and the burning billets were tossed about by it even into their
honors' beds, who called Giles and his companions to their relief,
otherwise the house had been burned to the ground; about an hour after,
the candles went out as usual, the crack as of many cannon was heard,
and many pailfuls of green stinking water were thrown upon their
honors' beds; great stones were also thrown in as before, the bed
curtains and bedsteads torn and broken, the windows shattered, and the
whole neighborhood alarmed with the most dreadful noises; nay, the very
rabbit stealers, that were abroad that night in the warren, were so
terrified, that they fled for fear, and left their ferrets behind them.
One of their honors this night spoke, and, _in the name of God, asked
what it was, and why it disturbed them so_. No answer was given to
this; but the noise ceased for a while, when the spirit came again; and
as they all agreed, _brought with it seven devils worse than itself_.
One of the servants now lighted a large candle, and set it in the
doorway between the two chambers, to see what passed; and as he watched
it, he plainly saw a hoof striking the candle and candlestick into the
middle of the room, and afterwards, making three scrapes over the
snuff, scraped it out. Upon this the same person was so bold as to
draw a sword; but he had scarcely got it out, when he felt another
invisible hand holding it too, and pulling it from him, and at length,
prevailing, struck him so violently on the head with the pommel, that
he fell down for dead with the blow. At this instant was heard another
burst, like the discharge of the broadside of a ship of war, and at the
interval of a minute or two between each, no less than nineteen such
discharges. These shook the house so violently that they expected every
moment it would fall upon their heads. The neighbors, being all
alarmed, flocked to the house in great numbers, and all joined in
prayer and psalm singing; during which the noise continued in the other
rooms, and the discharge of cannons was heard as from without, though
no visible agent was seen to discharge them. But what was the most
alarming of all, and put an end to their proceedings effectually,
happened the next day, as they were all at dinner, when a paper, in
which they had signed a mutual agreement to reserve a part of the
premises out of the general survey, and afterwards to share it equally
among themselves, (which paper they had hid for the present under the
earth, in a pot in one corner of the room, and in which an orange tree
grew,) was consumed in a wonderful manner by the earth's taking fire,
with which the pot was filled, and burning violently with a blue flame
and an intolerable stench, so that they were all driven out of the
house, to which they could never be again prevailed upon to return."

This story has been somewhat abridged from the Encyclopædia Britannica,
where it is quoted from Dr. Plot's History of Oxfordshire, in which
these extraordinary occurrences are ascribed to satanic influence.
At the time they happened, they were viewed as the effects of
_supernatural powers_; and even Dr. Plot seems disposed to ascribe them
to this cause. "Though many tricks," says the doctor, "have often been
played in affairs of this kind, yet many of the things above related
are not reconcilable with juggling; such as the loud noises beyond the
powers of man to make without such instruments as were not there; the
tearing and breaking the beds; the throwing about the fire; the hoof
treading out the candle; and the striving for the sword; and the blow
the man received from the pommel of it." It was at length ascertained,
however, that this wonderful contrivance was all the invention of the
memorable Joseph Collins, of Oxford, otherwise called _Funny Joe_, who,
having hired himself as secretary under the name of _Giles Sharp_, by
knowing the private traps belonging to the house, and by the help of
_pulvis fulminans_, and other chemical preparations, and letting his
fellow-servants into the scheme, carried on the deceit without
discovery, to the very last.

The occurrences which are said to have taken place at the house of the
Rev. Dr. Phelps, in Stratford, Connecticut, are not to be compared in
their marvellousness to those we have quoted from Dr. Dick, and which
things were the results of the _ingenuity of Joe Collins_. Therefore,
when we hear of such like occurrences in our day, there will be no
necessity for us to attribute them to any supernatural influence,
either good or bad; for it is a well-received maxim, that "_what man
has done man can do_." To suppose that the merciful _Father_ of
_spirits_ would harass and frighten mankind by haunting their houses
with strange noises and rappings, ghosts and hobgoblins, and spirits of
the uneasy dead, would be derogatory to his paternal character. And
who, for a moment, could believe that he would torment little children
in this way, when our Savior took them in his arms, and blessed them,
and said, "Of such is the kingdom of heaven"? No, we must attribute
such things to any other source than as proceeding from the throne of
God.

Up to the present time it may be that many will profess to the world
that they have actually seen the spirits of the departed. Yet this is
no new profession, for the votaries of St. Vitus, and the
spiritually-minded Shakers of later times, have declared to us that
they have seen their departed friends and acquaintances. But even Mr.
Davis is led to consider a large majority of these cases to be the
results of cerebral agitation. "I can truthfully affirm," says he,
"that the objects, localities, scenery, and personages, seen by those
laboring under monomania, delirium tremens, &c., are of the same class
of mental delusion, and are absolutely nothing more than the
unconscious elaborations of the surcharged brain."




