CHAPTER I.

THE ORIGIN OF POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.


Ignorance of correct reasoning has undoubtedly given rise to many
superstitions. Inductive reasoning teaches us to infer general
conclusions from particular facts which have come under our
observation. This definition may be illustrated by an example. You know
that water boils on the application of a certain degree of heat. You
have seen this experiment tried many times without a single failure.
You therefore conclude that water will always boil on the application
of this degree of heat, although you have seen it applied but to a
small portion of the water in creation. Thus you draw this _general_
conclusion from the few _particular_ facts which you have witnessed.
But had you noticed several failures in the trial, your conclusions
would have been doubtful. And if the experiment had failed ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred, you would have adopted an opposite conclusion.
You would have said that the application of the specified degree of
heat would not boil water. In this way, logical reasoning leads to the
discovery of truth. Now, apply this principle of sound reasoning to the
whole mass of pretended _signs_. Let me select one to show you the
absurdity of believing in any. It is commonly reported that the
breaking of a looking glass betokens death to some member of the
family. This sign probably originated in the following manner: A death
happened to follow the breaking of a mirror. Some ignorant person
immediately concluded that the breaking of the glass was a sure sign of
death. The story soon spread among credulous people, and at length was
handed down from generation to generation as an established truth. But
you readily perceive the absurdity of forming this _general_ conclusion
from _one_ or a _few_ particular facts. We all know that death does not
follow the supposed sign oftener than once in a hundred times; and
therefore the breaking of the glass is almost a sure sign that no death
will immediately take place in the family. But as mirrors are always
breaking, and people are always dying, it is not strange that the
latter event should sometimes follow the former. It would be a miracle
if it did not. But the events have no connection whatever with each
other. The coincidence in any case is altogether accidental. We might
with the same reason affirm that the breaking of a teakettle is the
sign of death, or any thing else, as the breaking of a mirror. But the
truth is, there is no sign in the case. It first originated in
ignorance of correct reasoning, and has been perpetuated by the
credulous. It is but a short time ago that a girl in Exeter, N.H.,
broke a mirror. She believed that ill luck always followed such an
event and therefore became seriously affected in her mind. Finally, her
strength failed, and she died a victim to her superstition. Hence we
perceive the great importance of a just conception and well-informed
judgment upon such apparently trifling, yet oftentimes serious events,
in their effects upon social and individual happiness.

We have only to apply this principle of correct reasoning to every sign
in existence, to find them to be superstitious. We shall find, upon
investigation, that they are based upon no rational evidence, and
consequently are not entitled to our belief or confidence. If they
indicate any thing, it is something directly opposite to what is
generally supposed, for they do not come to pass more than once in a
hundred times, and therefore warrant a different conclusion. Not only
so. If you believe in the present pretended signs, you may make a
million more equally good. A man quarrels after drinking a glass of
wine; you may therefore say that taking a glass of wine is the sign of
a quarrel. A man draws a prize in a lottery; you may say therefore that
the purchase of a ticket is the sign of a fortune. A man dies after
supper; you may say therefore that eating supper is the sign of death.
In this you may multiply signs to infinity, and they will prove just as
true as any now in existence. But our Creator has endowed us with
understanding. He has given us reason to regulate our belief by
satisfactory evidence. And if we do this, we cannot believe in
_any_ of the pretended signs. We must conclude that they have all
originated in ignorance of correct reasoning, and are kept in
remembrance by those who will not use their intellectual powers as
their Maker designed.




CHAPTER II.

INDUCTIVE PHILOSOPHY NOT UNDERSTOOD.


Ignorance of inductive philosophy has given rise to many superstitions.
By the means of inductive philosophy, we are enabled to trace effects
to their true causes. For example: Lights have frequently been seen
dancing over marshy grounds, near tan-yards, and burying-places, and
along the sea shore. Credulous people have believed them to be the
spirits of the uneasy dead. This belief must be considered
superstitious, not having any foundation on rational evidence.
Philosophy teaches that these lights are occasioned by an inflammable
gas, which arises from decayed animal and vegetable substances, and
takes fire on coming in contact with atmospheric air. Thus we may trace
all effects to their true causes.

Many persons have supposed that pork killed in the increase of the moon
would swell in boiling, while that killed in her wane would shrink.
This opinion probably originated in the following manner: Some person
killed, at different periods of the moon, two hogs which had been born
and fattened together. That killed in her increase swelled in boiling;
while the other, killed in her wane, shrunk. He could conceive of no
way to account for the facts but on the supposition of lunar influence.
This conclusion was accordingly adopted, and at length became an
established truth. Yet there was no philosophy in forming this opinion
from a few such facts. More experiments should have been tried; and
they results would have shown that the real cause of the swelling and
shrinking existed in the constitution of the animals. It would have
been discovered that pork of fine and solid texture would commonly
swell, whenever killed; while that of loose and coarse grain would as
generally shrink. And the person would no more have thought of
attributing the difference in his pork to the moon than to the spirit
of Bonaparte.

Let this philosophic principle be applied to this whole class of
superstitions, and we shall arrive at similar results. There is the
supposed influence of the moon on making soap, grafting trees, cutting
timber, and also upon the fortunes of love-sick swains and maidens. The
latter are directed to go out in the evening and stand over the bars of
a gate, and, looking on the moon, repeat the following lines:--

    "All hail to the moon! all hail to thee!
    I pray thee, good moon, reveal to me,
    This night, who my husband shall be."

They must then go directly to bed, and will dream of their future
husband. Upon trial of the experiment, they will probably be inclined
to consider it a dreamy notion altogether; for love is of too serious a
nature to be fed upon mere _moonshine_.




