CHAPTER XVII.

BANISHMENT OF POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.


Seeing the evils of popular superstitions, what course shall we adopt
for their banishment? Or, in other words, how shall we best lend a
helping hand to hasten the downfall of ignorance, error, and sin?

1. We must deliver ourselves from their domination; for we are all more
or less under their influence. When any of the common signs of good or
evil fortune appear before us, our thoughts involuntarily recur to the
thing supposed to be signified. Sometimes a momentary shudder is
communicated to the whole system; unpleasant sensations are often
excited; and frequently a depression of spirits is produced. And how
can we free ourselves from this thraldom? By the exercise of our
reason. A proper use of our reasoning faculties will enable us to
accomplish this undertaking. We must endeavor to convince ourselves
that all these things are the offspring of ignorance; that they have no
foundation in reason, philosophy, or religion; and that they are
exceedingly pernicious in their consequences. When fully persuaded of
these truths, we must strive to make our feelings coincide with the
dictates of our understandings. And this we can effect by persevering
self-discipline. Such exertions, with the blessing of Heaven, will
eventually deliver us from the inconvenience, vexation, and slavery of
popular superstitions. And as such a consummation is most ardently to
be desired, we must enter upon the duty with a zeal and earnestness
commensurate with its importance.

2. We must also assist our fellow-men in the performance of this great
and good work. When we meet with those who believe in ghosts, in signs,
enchantments, and divination, we must try to persuade them that no
dependence whatever can be placed on any of these vanities--that they
are all fictions, absurdities, and abominations. And perhaps, in some
cases, if we cannot produce conviction by sober sense and sound
argument, we may be justified in resorting to ridicule.

It is a lamentable consideration that so much time should be criminally
wasted in many families in explaining tricks, relating and expounding
dreams, telling fortunes, and in detailing stories of haunted houses,
hobgoblins, and spirits of the supposed uneasy dead. In this way, the
evil is cherished, and transmitted from generation to generation. But
if we can succeed in giving an opposite direction to conversation; if
we can induce people to reason upon these things, and inquire into
their origin, causes, and effects, and investigate the evidence on
which they are imagined to rest, and adopt rational conclusions, we
shall be usefully employed. A course like this would eventually lead to
the banishment of popular superstitions, with their baneful effects
upon our peace and happiness; especially if we labor to impress upon
the minds of others the existence of an all-wise Providence, that
controls and governs all things for the highest good of all, calling
upon us to place our trust in Him, without whose notice not even a
sparrow falleth to the ground.

3. We must likewise attend to the early education of our children. It
is during infancy and childhood that our heads are filled with "nursery
tales" and marvellous stories. They are told us by those to whose care
we are early intrusted, either to frighten us into obedience, to
gratify our thirst for the new and wonderful, or to while away a
tedious evening. They sink into our confiding hearts, and leave
impressions the most pernicious and the most lasting. Could a child be
educated without any knowledge of such things, he would never be
troubled with their baneful influence. Our duty is therefore plain. In
taking the principal care of our children at home, we should not permit
them to learn any such things from our own lips; and we should evince,
too, by our daily conduct, that they exert no influence on our own
feelings, character, or happiness. In intrusting our offspring in early
life to the care of other persons, we must charge them, as faithful
guardians of the young, to conceal every thing of the kind from their
knowledge. And after our children become of sufficient age to associate
with others, we must caution them to avoid believing or relating any
superstitious tales as they would shun known falsehoods. By persevering
in this course, we shall save them from the degrading influence of
popular superstitions.

4. We must, moreover, endeavor to increase the means of public
education. We generally find that the most enlightened are the most
free from superstition; and it therefore follows that a high degree of
mental cultivation will effect a general deliverance. And how shall
this great object be accomplished? We must reason with them upon the
immense value and importance of knowledge. We must show them, by an
appeal to facts, that all our civil, social, domestic, and religious
blessings depend on the intelligence and virtue of the people. But
perhaps many will complain of the scarcity of money and the want of
means. If so, we must also show them, by an appeal to incontrovertible
facts, that more money is annually wasted, in all our towns, in
extravagant living, dress, furniture, and equipage; squandered in
shows, amusements, balls, and parties; in gaming, dissipation, public
parades, and intoxicating liquors, than is expended for the
instruction of the rising generation. No, there is not a lack of
funds. Where there is a will there is also a way. The value and
importance of the subject is not generally understood; or, if
understood, is not properly appreciated. Almost every thing else seems
of more consequence than learning and wisdom. Yet this will never
answer. The world is growing wiser. Those who will not employ the
requisite means must rest contented with comparative ignorance. Let
_us_ not be of this unworthy number. If we feel the importance of the
change in these respects, let us persevere in our laudable exertions,
leaving no objections unanswered, no measures untried, until we
succeed in giving our children a high degree of education. And if the
Father of spirits shall see fit to prolong our lives to witness the
results, we shall look upon the almost universal banishment of popular
superstitions.

5. Finally, we must labor for the diffusion of pure and undefiled
religion, adhering alone to the teachings of Jesus. We shall then
believe in one perfect, all-pervading Spirit, who regulates all the
events of this world which are above our control, and that all his
various dispensations originate in perfect wisdom and goodness. We
shall believe that we have no worse enemies than our own sinful lusts
and passions, and that power is given us through faith to conquer
these, even in this state of existence. We shall believe that it is as
much our duty to be always happy as it is to be always honest and
virtuous. We shall have the assurance that our heavenly Father has
commissioned no fate nor chance, spectres nor devils, to torment us.
And if we live up to this belief, we shall secure a large share of
temporal enjoyment, and be prepared for the increased and increasing
felicity of the spiritual world. If we produce this state of faith and
practice in ourselves and in those around us, we shall have done much
for the banishment of popular superstitions and the downfall of
ignorance, error, and sin.




PART SECOND.




MIRACLE IN SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS.


Four gentlemen in Springfield, not long since, publicly attested to a
"miracle," performed, as they believed, by spirits, at a "circle" where
they were present. It consisted in moving a table, and a number of
chairs in the room, and in shocks, resembling distant thunder, or
cannon at a distance, causing the persons and the chairs and tables to
tremble in such a manner that the effects were both seen and felt, the
room being well lighted at the time, and an opportunity afforded for
the closest inspection, so that the company unitedly declare that
_they know they were not imposed upon nor deceived_.

Now, there is nothing very remarkable in this affair, for all might
have been done by the medium himself, by first pathetizing the persons
present, as it might be done without their knowledge, and while in
that state could be made to see and hear any thing imagined by the
operator. We are assured, by one who knows, that it is impossible for
those who are fit subjects to be present at a circle without being
more or less under the mesmeric influence. And, in such cases, they
can be _willed_ to remember or forget what they have seen or heard. We
do not consider such persons as competent witnesses in such a case as
they have testified to. It may all have been induced, or it may all
have been real. And if real, there was no need to refer it to the
agency of spirits, since such things have been done without spirits,
as in the case of Joe Collins, or others which we shall refer to, in
this part of our volume. But here we may be told, that a thousand
dollars has been offered to any one who will prove that such things
are produced by any other power than that of _spirits_. But the same
sum has been offered to any one who will prove that _spirits_ move
tables, chairs, and the like, or that _spirits_ produce the noises and
other manifestations ascribed to them.

We have heard the case of a person who went to a medium and wished to
know if he could be put in communication with his father, who had died
several years before. He was answered in the affirmative. But the
inquirer desired, as proof that it would actually be the spirit of his
father that would be introduced to him, that a pencil and paper should
be laid upon a table, and that the spirit of the father should come and
write his own name upon the paper, the son feeling assured that, if
this were done, he should at once recognize both the name and the
writing. Accordingly, the spirit in question came, and did as was
desired, and the son declared it to be the real name and handwriting of
his father. Now, the philosophy of the case is this: The inquirer was
first pathetized, although ignorant of the fact at the time--a thing
very common, though not generally understood. Thus the medium became
acquainted with the name of the father as it existed in the mind of the
son; but did the pencil actually write the name upon the paper? No. It
was only made to _appear_ so to the mind of the inquirer. As to the
handwriting, the inquirer's mind was directed to a piece of paper, and
to look at the writing. Of course, he saw his father's name, and the
handwriting, for he could see nothing else for the time being, his
mind being impressed with that one idea or object, and closed to every
thing else. It was in fact, to him, his father's name and chirography,
and no one's else. It could not be otherwise while his mind was under
the control of the operator.

We have been told of a lady, who, in a magnetized state, sits at a
table and writes down information that is imparted to her, as is said,
from the world of spirits. Her hand and pen glide over the paper with
astonishing speed and velocity, far more rapid than the most expert
penman in a normal state. And what astonishes many is, that she cannot
stop writing when she wishes to, and sometimes becomes so exceedingly
fatigued as to beg of the spirit or spirits to grant her a little
repose from the wearisome task. But the whole matter is easily
accounted for, without referring it to the supposed agency of spirits.
The lady's arm is first paralyzed--deprived of motion by the will of
the medium or operator, so that her own mind or will has not the least
control over it. She thus becomes a mere machine, under the will and
control of another, whose will directs the movements of the arm and
pen, and dictates what is written in answer to inquiries made of things
appertaining to the spirit world, just as Miss Martineau declares, in
her letters on magnetism, that "the volitions of the mesmerist may
actuate the movements of the patient's limbs, and suggest the material
of his ideas." Many singular effects are produced upon the minds and
feelings of subjects in a sleep-waking state, by Professor Williams,
Dr. Cutter, and others, such as being made drunk with water, eating
cayenne as sugar, exercising complete control over their mental as well
as physical condition.

We have been assured by a pathetist, who is a thorough adept in the
profession, that he _can_ and often _has_ put persons in communication
_apparently_ with a deceased father, mother, brother, sister, or
friend. The individual is first _pathetized_ (another name for
mesmerism) by him in a wakeful state, though unconscious, it may be,
that he is under such an influence. His mind being in the possession
and under the control of the operator, a person is now either actually
or mentally (for it makes no difference) presented before him, and he
is told of the fact, and asked, _Do you not see your father?_ The idea
of _father_ is so presented to the mind, through the organ of _form_,
that the organ can take cognizance of none other than the father. The
_person_, if an actual person is employed for the occasion, is then
shifted or changed for another person; yet the subject perceives no
difference, even if changed successively for a dozen others; it is all
the same; it is _father_, and no one else, through the whole
exhibition. The father speaks, the son recognizes his voice, and they
converse together. The subject can be willed to hear any sound, as
that of music, artillery, thunder, and the like, though no sounds
whatever are in reality made. A niece of ours was operated on in this
way, and she was told to look abroad and behold the majestic waves of
the ocean, the pageantry of a military procession; and she saw and was
delighted with the scenes that were _willed_ to pass before her.
Apples were oranges to her, and she sucked their juice with a
delightful zest. An apple paring held before her was a beautiful bird,
then a squirrel, a rabbit, or whatever the operator _willed_ it to
become. The mind of the operator and the subject, in such cases,
become as one, and they then hear, see, taste, and feel the same thing
at the same moment. Miss Martineau says that, while in a mesmeric
state, she saw "things out of other worlds--not the things themselves,
but _impressions_ of them." "They come," says she, "from my brain. The
influence does not separate soul and body, but it sets the body at
rest, while it exalts and elevates the thinking powers."

"A striking incident," says Miss M., "occurred in one of my earliest
walks after recovery from a protracted illness. My mesmerist and I had
reached a headland nearly half a mile from home, and were resting
there, when she proposed to mesmerize me a little--partly to refresh me
for our return, and partly to see if any effect would be produced in a
new place, and while a fresh breeze was blowing. She merely laid her
hand upon my forehead, and in a minute or two the usual appearances
came, assuming a strange air of novelty from the scene in which I was.
After the blurring of the outlines, which made all objects more dim
than the dull gray day had already made them, the phosphoric lights
appeared, glorifying every rock and headland, the horizon, and all the
vessels in sight. One of the dirtiest and meanest of the steam tugs in
the port was passing at the time, and it was all dressed in heavenly
radiance--the last object that my imagination would select as an
element of a vision. Then, and often before and since, did it occur to
me, that if I had been a pious and very ignorant Catholic, I could not
have escaped the persuasion that I had seen heavenly visions. Every
glorified object before my eyes would have been a revelation; and my
mesmerist, with the white halo around her head, and the illumined
profile, would have been a saint or an angel."

We know not whether, in this instance, the mesmerist _willed_ her
subject to behold things as she did, yet as to the general truth _that
the will of the operator can produce in the subject mesmerized those
states of mind and body which he wills him or her to experience_,
there is abundant evidence. O. S. Fowler, editor of the Phrenological
Journal, says he "can bear ample testimony to the fact, as he has
seen, experienced, and _induced_ similar states by the thousand." And
many others testify to the same effect.

Persons can be made to travel to other countries, and even to other
spheres, and come back and tell what they have seen. And as persons
vary in the talent of description and observation, in the normal
state, so do they vary in a semi-abnormal condition. Some are found
to be _better travellers_, and will see more than others, and in
spiritual things will differ in their descriptions as they differ in
religious creeds and sentiments. Thus a Swedenborg, or a Fishbough,
sees a hell in the future state, where sinners suffer the penalty of
their earthly sins; while an Ambler, or a Davis, discovers that all
men are alike joyful and happy. Mr. Davis has seen fit to caution
the public not to believe too quickly or too fully the things
excitable persons relate; "because some minds are naturally inclined
to exaggerate or enlarge upon every thing which they may feel, see,
or hear." The _state_ alluded to is merely _induced_. It is not
real.

Persons are frequently made to do what they believe is done by others,
as in the case of a son of Dr. Phelps, of Stratford, Connecticut. The
boy, on one occasion, was found (with a rope passed under his arms)
suspended to the limb of a tree, having been taken, as was supposed,
from his bed in the evening by spirits, and thus treated by them. The
boy declared that when it was done, he "screamed at the top of his
voice;" but it was ascertained that he made no noise at all, for if he
had, the domestics, who were in the kitchen when he passed through it,
must have heard him, which they did not. We have the testimony of A. J.
Davis, himself, that the boy "really supposed that he had called aloud;
and so far from having been tied to the tree _by spirits, he had been
made unconsciously instrumental in tying himself to the tree_!" "I
have heard," says Mr. Davis, "instances of mischief cited, as occurring
in Dr. Phelps's house, in evidence of _satanic agency_, which I now
discover to have been caused or accomplished by one of the children in
sport, sometimes by electrical discharges and magnetic attractions,
and sometimes by the almost unpardonable mischievousness of persons
unknown to the family. The wanton destruction of property alleged to
have taken place on this gentleman's premises is referable, in most
cases, to emanations of vital electricity, seeking its equilibrium in
the atmosphere. In this manner window panes were broken and furniture
injured. In Woodbridge, New York, some few years ago, a young lady
was affected with a disease which gave rise to similar phenomena.
Mysterious sounds were heard in her presence; window panes were
frequently broken in her vicinity; and, in like manner, door panels
were burst out, sometimes falling _towards_ her, sometimes _from_ her,
and quick, concussive, and very loud sounds were heard under her feet
as she ascended a flight of stairs. Ultimately, the mysterious
phenomena frightened her into an illness which cured the malady."

"People cannot be too cautious how they receive the doings of those who
profess to be in connection with spirits of the other spheres; and to
those who wish to inquire into the matter, we would say, Go and hear,
but try to keep your wits about you, and not swallow bodily either the
preachers or their strange affirmations."--_Horace Greely._

"Under an impression that whatever is communicated by a spirit must, of
course, be true, many persons are receiving these communications as the
truth of God--as a new revelation from the spirit world. But if these
communications are from spirits, we have no proof that they are good
spirits. The presumption is, that they are bad spirits--lying spirits.
At my house they often accused each other of lying--contradicted at one
time what they affirmed at another; inflicted injury upon property in
the most wanton manner; and have given conclusive evidence throughout
that the discipline of hell, which they profess to have experienced
for several years, has not been wholly effectual in improving their
characters, and qualifying them for the 'higher spheres' for which
many suppose that the discipline after death is a preparation."--_Dr.
Phelps._

"Many of the doings of the rapping spirits are too nonsensical and
absurd to be believed. They spoil all our notions of the dignity, the
_spirituality_, of the spiritual world. That a messenger should come
from the spirit land to tell an old woman that her black cat did eat
another old woman's white rabbit, is not in accordance with the ideas
most people have of the doings and missions of beings in the enjoyment
of an immortal state."--_Puritan Recorder._




PERSONS TRAINED BY A LECTURER.


We have been informed, by a certain mesmerizer, that a distinguished
lecturer upon magnetism frequently trains persons to enact certain
parts in his public exhibitions. He first puts them under mesmeric
influence, and while in that state they are instructed to say certain
things, or to perform certain acts, which he wishes to exhibit at some
subsequent lecture. To this they severally agree, and thus a regular
programme, or series of performances, is made out. They are then
brought out of the mesmeric state, having been previously willed by the
operator to forget all that has passed while in that state. At the next
meeting appointed, these persons are present, and are again put into
the same state as before, when they immediately perceive, and are ready
to perform, the several parts assigned to them. In fact, they are so
completely under the will and control of the lecturer, that they
_must_ do or say _what he wills them to do or say_, and they cannot
help it, neither can they have the least recollection of what has
transpired, after being restored to the normal state.




SCENE AT EAST BOSTON.


We were present at a "circle," at the house of a _medium_ in East
Boston, on the 30th of April, 1852. Instead of that decorum and
seriousness that might be expected while holding intercourse with
departed spirits, we were surprised at the levity and sport indulged
on the occasion. The spirits were laughed at, and scolded, because
they made so many blunders in spelling out names, and were urged and
coaxed to do better. A lady, who had buried a friend, was told that
the name of the deceased was _Hannah_. But she informed the medium
that it was a _brother_ she had buried, and that she had never lost a
_sister_. But the medium said it made no difference, as the spirits
often gave the name of a sister for a brother, and sometimes a cousin
for either, as they were all in the family connection, and all such
dwelt together in the Love Circles.

In spelling out the name of any deceased friend, you are presented with
a card containing the alphabet, and are required to commence with the
letter A, and go through the alphabet some one, two, or three times,
touching each letter with a pencil as you pass over it. On touching
some particular letter, a rap is given, indicating that it is the first
letter of the name of your departed friend. And so of the other letters
comprising the name. The spirits often made mistakes in rapping at the
wrong letter, and were required to try again till they got the spelling
right. We were very particular to observe that the spirit was sure to
rap whenever the inquirer stopped or hesitated in passing over any
letter. Five or six would be eagerly watching the movement of your
hand, and the least possible hesitation upon any one letter was sure to
be accompanied with simultaneous raps. And as the inquirer was
frequently cautioned to proceed slow, it was natural enough to hesitate
on those letters comprising the name as it was spelled in their own
mind. In this way the alphabet became an interpreter to the supposed
spirits.

We requested that some demonstrations should be given in the art of
table lifting, but were told that the gentleman through whose agency
the feat is performed was not present this evening. We inquired if it
was necessary that any particular gentleman should be present that
tables or chairs might be raised, and were told it was, and that the
gentleman in question seemed to carry a large amount of electricity in
a circle about his person.

We have been informed by another person, who says he has, and often
does, raise tables and other articles, by request of others, that he
does it by controlling the vital electricity of individuals present
at the time. He says he "_steals_" their vital electricity, and
appropriates it to his own use, although those from whom he thus takes
it are not conscious of the fact. The more persons there are in the
room, the larger the amount of electricity obtained, and the greater
the effects produced by it. There is nothing as yet performed by those
alleged to be in connection with spirits but what he can successfully
imitate, such as producing effects upon persons at a distance,
imitating the handwriting of absent or deceased persons unknown to him
causing persons to write music, poetry, &c., who, in a normal state,
are incapable of doing either, as well as many other exploits, at the
option or desire of those who are present; inquirers, oftentimes,
in such cases, becoming the operators, transferring their own
impressions, ideas, sentiments, and knowledge to the acting medium,
and yet entirely ignorant of the fact, and astonished at the results
produced. The gentleman referred to discards the agency of spirits in
these transactions, and declares that the whole is done by the power
of his own will in using and controlling the amount of electricity
present at the time; thus proving that the mind or spirit in the body
has as much power and control over electricity as the mind or spirit
has _out_ of, or separate from, the body. And he is of the opinion
that if scientific men would investigate the powers of electricity,
and the laws by which it is controlled, they would no more think of
attributing the phenomena of the times to the agency of _spirits_,
than to the Pope of Rome. Many engaged in producing these phenomena
are themselves ignorant of the power or means by which they are
produced, and therefore attribute them to _spiritual_ agency, which
is, in fact, transferring the whole matter to a point beyond human
investigation, where no mortal being can possibly explore.

Some seem to think that these modern developments must be the work of
spirits, because, amid all the opposition arraigned against them, they
still continue to progress, and are becoming more and more wonderful
every day. Yet the same argument is as conclusive and convincing in
favor of Mormonism, and other foolish and wicked extravagances, as it
is in favor of the alleged spiritual manifestations. But while
hundreds, and perhaps thousands, are marvelling at the strangeness of
these developments, we find that several who have been engaged in them
for months or years, and believed them to be emanations from the spirit
world, now declare their convictions to the contrary, as will be seen
by the following account from the pen of a distinguished writer,
Professor Pond, of Maine.




EXTRACT FROM THE PURITAN RECORDER.


"The feats of the ancient jugglers were many of them mere acts of
deception. They were known to be such by those who performed them. And
the same is true of many who practise the like things now. Their
rappings and writings, and other strange performances, are secretly,
artfully got up by themselves. I do not say that this is true in all
cases; but in some cases we _know_ it is true; because the matter
has been fully investigated, and public confession has been made. For
example: A young woman, who had been instructed by the Rochester
rappers, and practised the art with them for a time, afterwards
renounced it, and exposed the delusion to the world. 'All who saw her
and heard her,' says my informant, 'were entirely satisfied of the
truth of her statements, and that she had revealed the actual method in
which the deception was effected and the deluded were blinded. Another
young woman in Providence, Almira Beazely, who was noted for her
rappings and revelations, and who murdered her brother to accomplish
one of her own predictions, confessed, on her trial, that she made the
noises herself, and explained the manner in which they were produced.
She also confessed to the removal of certain articles in the house
which had strangely disappeared, and which she pretended had been
_taken away by spirits_. Drs. Lee and Flint, of Buffalo, assisted
by two gentlemen by the name of Burr, have very thoroughly investigated
the matter, and explained the manner in which the mysterious noises are
made. Mr. Burr has himself made the rappings, and made them so loud as
to be heard by a congregation of fifteen hundred people.

"These instances are sufficient to prove that the spiritual
manifestations of our times, like those of ancient times, are in many
instances a sheer deception--a vile trick, palmed off upon a wondering
and credulous community, for the sake of money, or for other sinister
and selfish ends. If there is any thing more than trick in these
spiritual manifestations,--and I am inclined to think that, in some
instances, there may be,--I should refer it, as in case of the ancient
wizards, to the influence of _occult natural causes_--perhaps
electricity, or animal magnetism, or something else, operating upon a
nervous system of peculiar sensibility. I incline to this opinion for
several reasons.

"In the first place, if the noises and other manifestations were really
the work of spirits, why should they not be made through one person, as
well as another? Why should not all mediums be alike? Whereas it is
confessed that only persons of a peculiar nervous temperament are
capable of becoming mediums.

"Again: if the disclosures which are made are really from the spirit
world, it might be expected that they would, at least, be _consistent
with themselves_. Whereas it is well known that they vary endlessly.
In numerous instances, they are directly self-contradictory. 'Some of
the communications,' says one who had been a medium, 'were orthodox;
others were infidel. Some would acknowledge the truth of the Bible;
others would condemn it. Some would be in favor of virtue; others would
encourage the grossest crimes.'

"Another man, who had been a noted medium, but who was beginning to get
his eyes opened as to the character of the proceedings, told his
audience one night, 'Now, any one present ask a series of questions,
and I pledge myself that the answer shall be, every time, yes.' Some
one in the company asked, 'Is John Thompson alive?' The answer was,
'Yes.' 'Is John Thompson dead?' 'Yes.' 'Does John Thompson live in
Vermont?' 'Yes.' 'Does he live in Massachusetts?' 'Yes.' And so the
spirits went on contradicting themselves times without number. After
this, a like series of questions were answered in the negative,
exhibiting the most glaring contradictions, just as the operator
pleased.

"But this brings me to another reason for supposing that the answers
are not from departed spirits, but rather from the _mind of the
operator_, or from _some other mind in communication with his_, under
the influence of an electric or magnetic cause. It is an admitted fact
that these answers coincide very generally with the opinions or wishes
of the medium, or of some one present in consultation with him. I knew
a very respectable man, who discovered that he was a medium, and who
practised various experiments upon himself. Upon being asked what he
thought of it, he replied, 'If the answers are from the spirits, they
must be _very silly spirits_; for they always answer just as I wish to
have them.' Another medium informs us that he can obtain any answer he
pleases, by fixing his mind strongly upon it at the time. Now, does
this look as though the answer came from spirits? If the spirits of
the dead spoke, they would be likely to speak out independently; to
speak just what _they_ thought, and not what those thought with whom
they were consulting.

"There is another circumstance to be noted in this connection. When the
requisite preparation is made, there is no need of consulting the
spirits at all, in order to secure answers. You may consult with the
chairs or the table just as well. This experiment was tried, not long
since, at Wilmington, Vermont. A Mr. Kellogg was the medium, and he had
succeeded in consulting the spirits to the satisfaction of all
concerned. At length he remarked that he was about to let the company
into an important secret. 'We will interrogate the _table_,' said
he, 'and have nothing more to do with spirits.' He did so; and the
_table talked and answered, just as the spirits had done before_.
At the same time the table was made to stand on one leg, and to move
about, as is usual in such cases. This experiment demonstrated, to the
satisfaction of all present, that the strange appearances could be
produced just as well without the spirits as with them. 'The calling
for spirits,' to use the language of my informant, 'is mere garnish and
fog, by which the real agency in the case is concealed.'

"On the point now under consideration, viz., the possibly _electric_
character of these manifestations, I am happy to introduce the
testimony of Dr. Samuel Taylor, a respectable physician of Petersham,
Massachusetts, whose article on the subject may be found in a late
number of the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal. Dr. Taylor
discovered accidentally that he was a medium, and he proceeded to make
experiments upon himself. The manifestation, in his case, was not by
rapping, but by writing--a much more convenient mode of communicating
with the spirit world. On taking his pen, and holding himself in a
peculiar attitude, and proposing mentally some question to the
spirits, his pen would begin to oscillate in his fingers, and very
soon would write out an answer; and this without any voluntary effort
of his own. And what is particularly to be noticed is, the pen would
always write an answer which accorded with his own opinion or wishes,
that is, if he had any wish on the subject. For example: Dr. Taylor
inquired of one of the spirits about the different forms of religion.
'I asked which was the best religion, at the same time fixing my mind
sternly on the word _Protestant_. My hand immediately wrote
_Protestant_. In the same manner, and _by direction of the same
spirit_, my hand wrote successively, _Methodist_, _Unitarian_, and I
believe one or two others. While in this state,' Dr. Taylor says, '_I
felt a sensation like that of a light galvanic current passing through
me_. Sometimes it appeared to be a steady thrill, and sometimes it was
intermittent, resembling light shocks of electricity.'

"After numerous experiments, Dr. Taylor comes to the conclusion, that
the strange phenomena of which he was the subject were not tricks of
his own, neither did they come from the spirit world, but were the
result of what he calls _detached vitalized electricity_. When this
conclusion had been formed in his own mind, it occurred to him that he
would put it to the test of the spirits themselves. 'Accordingly I
asked them,' says he, 'if this was the work of departed spirits. The
answer was, "No." I asked if it was the work of the devil. Again the
answer was, "No." I asked if it was the effect of _detached vitalized
electricity_. The answer was, "Yes."' So the spirits _confirmed_ the
conclusion to which the doctor had come, as they did, in fact, all his
conclusions.

"We have the testimony of another medium, of the same import with that
of Dr. Taylor. Mr. Benjamin F. Cooley, who had long been a believer and
operator in the spiritual rappings, states that his mind is now
entirely changed. This change was brought about in consequence of 'a
deep and earnest study of the nature, power, and application of
electricity, and of the susceptibility of the mind to electrical or
psychological changes.' These things, he says, will produce the same
mysterious and startling phenomena which have been produced throughout
the country, and attributed to the operations of departed spirits. (Mr.
Cooley has recently published a work entitled An Exposition of
Spiritual Manifestations, to which we would refer the reader.)

"A part of what is done by those who claim to have familiar spirits,
may be the result of unknown _natural causes_. This is the most
plausible and excusable view which can possibly be taken of these
practices; and yet, even in this view, they are frightfully evil. The
persons who alone are susceptible to the influence of these natural
causes are generally those of a diseased or delicate nervous
temperament; and the effect of experimenting upon their nervous system
is usually to shatter it the more. They become excitable, fantastic,
and often insane. Diseases are engendered, both of body and mind, which
lead on to the most fearful consequences. But a short time ago, the
papers gave an account of a man in Barre, Massachusetts, who had been
much given to the rappings and other spiritual manifestations, who
became, in consequence, a raving maniac, threatening the life of his
family, and was committed to the Lunatic Asylum at Worcester. Other
like instances are occurring frequently, from the same cause. Almira
Beazely, the Providence rapper, who murdered her brother in fulfilment
of one of her own predictions, was cleared on the ground of her
insanity.

"But this is not the only evil of the practices in question, when
viewed as the result of natural causes. For the truth is, that, in
most cases, they are _not so viewed_ by those who engage in them.
_They_ regard them as the work of spirits. They are, therefore,
deceived; and those who follow them are deceived. Both suppose they
are receiving utterances from the other world, when nothing is uttered
but vain fantasies from their own minds and hearts. Such a deception
is, manifestly, a hurtful one. It is full of danger to all concerned.
To mistake one's own fancies for divine revelation, and feel
conscience-bound to obey them as such, is the very essence of
_fanaticism_. It is fanaticism in its most frightful form. Under the
influence of such an impression, persons may be led to perpetrate the
greatest cruelties, and the most horrid crimes, and vainly think that
they are doing God service. The wretched man in Barre was led to
attempt the life of his family, in obedience to a supposed revelation
from the spirit world.

"The practices which have been considered are of heathen origin. They
originated with the ancient heathen; they were spread over a greater
part of the heathen world; and they continue to pervade and curse it to
the present time. Among numerous heathen tribes at the present day,
scarcely a calamity occurs--a death, a flood, a fit of sickness, or an
instance of death--but some poor creature (and often more than one) is
accused and put to death, as being the cause of it. 'The sick man is
bewitched: who has bewitched him? His death (if he chance to die) has
been brought about by evil spirits: who has sent the spirits upon him?'
To get an answer to these questions, some old hag or conjurer is
consulted; the cause of the mischief is quickly discovered, and an
innocent person is put to death. Probably hundreds die every year after
this manner, among the heathen, _even in this nineteenth century_!
And the case would soon be no better among ourselves, if we were to go,
extensively and _confidently_, into the practice of consulting with
familiar spirits. The spirits would unravel all mysteries for us; they
would reveal all secrets; and not a man, woman, or child would long be
safe from their malicious accusations.

"Something more than a year ago, the Lunatic Asylum in Maine took fire,
and a portion of its inmates were smothered and consumed. And there are
hundreds of persons now in the state, who affirm that the building was
set on fire by the keepers, with a view to cover up and conceal their
own wickedness. These persons _know_ it was so; they have not the
shadow of a doubt on the subject. Why? Not that they have a particle of
evidence to this effect from our world, but because the spirits have so
informed them. Now, let these utterances become common, and be commonly
received, and in three months' time those keepers might every one of
them be dragged to the gallows, or the stake, while they were as
innocent of the charge laid against them as a child unborn.

"I refer to this instance just to show the sin, the evil, the exceeding
peril, of indulging in those practices which have been exposed. Let all
those who read these things, then, beware of them and shun them. If any
of us are capable of becoming _mediums_, as they are called, we had
better not know it; or, if we know it, we had better refrain from all
experiments. To tamper with such a power is to tamper with an already
shattered nervous system, the only effect of which will be to shatter
it the more.

"There is nothing more striking than the difference between those
representations of the future world which are made known in the Bible,
and which we know are true, and those which are put forth by the
revealers of our own times. The former are solemn, exciting,
impressive, some of them awfully so, others gloriously. While the
latter, as Professor Stowe says, are 'so uniformly and monotonously
silly, that we are compelled to think, if these are really the spirits
of the dead, in dying they must have lost what little of common sense
they ever possessed. If these are actual specimens of the spiritual
world, then this world, hard and imperfect as it is, is altogether the
most respectable part of God's creation.'

"In the Bible, we have frequent accounts of persons who were raised
from the dead--who actually returned from the spirit world to this. But
they returned uniformly with sealed lips. In not a single instance did
they make any disclosures. But our modern revealers pursue a very
different course. They practise no reserve. They go into the minutest
particulars,--sometimes into the most disgusting details,--and publish,
as one expresses it, 'a penny magazine of the spiritual world.'"

In the language of the Puritan Recorder, "The worst of the evil is the
soul-hardening familiarity they produce with the most awful subjects
ever offered for human contemplation. We know of nothing in human
experience so fatally destructive of all that reverence for the
spiritual, that awe of the unseen, that tender emotion, as well as
solemn interest, which connect themselves with the idea of the other
life. Who, that has a Christian heart, would not prefer the silence of
the grave to the thought of the dear departed one in the midst of such
imaginings, and such scenic associations as are usually connected with
the performances of the spirit rappers? 'They are not dead, but
_sleep_.' 'They enter into _peace_,' says the prophet. And then the
precious and consoling addition--'They sleep in Jesus;' meaning,
beyond all doubt, a state of rest, of calmness, of security, of
undisturbed and beatific vision--far removed from all resemblance to
this bustling life--a state in all respects the opposite of that
which fancy pictures as belonging to the scenes presented in the
manifestations of spiritual rappings, and spiritual table liftings and
all those spiritual pantomimes, which seem to be becoming more and
more extravagant and grotesque in proportion to the infidel credulity
with which they are received."

Should any think, by reading what we have offered upon this subject in
the preceding pages, that we have imputed guilt and deception to
mediums, who are believed to be, many of them, above such trickery, we
would merely refer such to page 29 of the Reply of Veriphilos Credens
to the communications supposed to have been written by Dr. Enoch Pond,
professor in the Bangor Seminary, as published in the columns of the
Puritan Recorder. The reviewer says, "To suppose that mediums could
practise deception on men of shrewdness and caution implies a greater
credulity than does a faith in the most startling of their
performances." "There is not the slightest degree of evidence," says
this writer, "that such a case has ever occurred;" and yet on the
selfsame page he says, "_There is no doubt that some mediums, when
the sounds and motions have failed to come in the usual mysterious way,
have counterfeited them by some sly motions of their feet and hands. I
have seen such things done, in some instances!_"

The same author says, page 63, "I have not attempted to justify any
reliance on disclosures made to us in the way of rappings. I think it
_altogether_ unsafe to do so, for the declaration has already come
to us, from what purports to be the spirits themselves, that _all
these manifestations are of a low order_, and are produced by the
_lowest grade of spirits_."

As to the plea that "spirits _must_ make the sounds," to account for
the _intelligence_ communicated, it being impossible for mere
"_electricity_ to originate facts," we reply by affirming that there is
no intelligence given beyond a certain limit; i.e., the mind of some
one or ones in connection, either present or absent, for it makes no
difference. For available purposes, a person a thousand or ten thousand
miles distant may yield all the amount of intelligence required in a
given case. Distance is no obstacle whatever. Electricity counts
neither time nor space. For instance, the transmission of electricity
through a conducting substance is instantaneous. A wire, or other
conductor, may have motion communicated to its whole length at the
same moment, whatever that length may be; and it is stated that an
electro-magnetic impulse may be transmitted at the rate of one hundred
and eighty thousand miles in a second, thus outstripping the sun in its
march!

A large number of intelligent individuals, who, for a year or two
past, have instituted a series of experiments upon this matter of
"intelligence," have found that in no case has information been
imparted beyond what existed in their own minds or that of some kindred
or friend. Finding this to be the case, they have wisely come to the
conclusion that spirits have never originated a solitary idea; that is,
_disembodied spirits_; and as to the spirit within a man, in his
corporeal state, why cannot it command as much influence over vital
electricity as in its disembodied existence? Since both parties claim
to perform by the same agent, and both claim this agent to be that of
_vital electricity_, we have also come to the same conclusion, with
a host of others, that the "calling for spirits is mere garnish and
fog, by which the real agency in the case is concealed."




EXTRACT FROM THE HOME JOURNAL.


"A considerable heap of books, pamphlets, and periodicals, some
against, but most of them for, the 'spiritual phenomena,' has been
accumulating upon our table, and now looms up large before us,
demanding notice. That departed spirits have any thing to do with them
is an explanation that we have never been able to accept for one
moment. We should as soon think of asserting that an apple, rolling
suddenly at our feet, must necessarily have fallen out of heaven,
because we could not see the tree it had blown from. To bring such an
astounding theory to explain such trivial phenomena is like sending a
frigate to pick up a champagne bottle that might be floating down the
bay.

"By some of the works before us we are informed, among many other
things, that in the other world every man has his name upon his front
door; that Swedenborg is a great man, delivers lectures, and _has a
street named after him_; that in heaven parties, concerts, and
_converzationes_ are frequent; that at some of the concerts, star
singers of great celebrity perform, attracting inconceivable multitudes
of spirits to hear them; that children take lessons in French and
Italian every morning; that the space allotted to some of the spirits
is as large as New York; that the 'seventh sphere' (the highest heaven)
is about five thousand miles from the earth; that the beds are of
roses, and when the spirits recline upon them, the birds sing joyfully
around, and mingle their music with the perfume of the flowers; that
the celestials (not the Chinese) wear white robes, edged with pink;
that a man generally attends his own funeral; that spirits, on their
arrival in heaven, are set to studying geology, chemistry, and other
dull subjects, which they soon begin to like, and say their daily
lessons with an excellent grace; that parchment is in extensive use;
that spirits are allowed to visit 'earth' once a day only, and have the
privilege of staying one hour; that they have books, rings, newspapers,
robin redbreasts, fruit, lakes, streams, diamonds, and drawing masters
in the next world. 'Dora's dress,' says one of the revelations, 'was of
blue satin, with a white sash; half sleeves, full; a pink velvet ribbon
round her throat, fastened by a cameo. Her hair was in curls each side
of her face, and fastened in a knot behind.' Dora, be it observed, is a
departed _spirit_.

"If it could be shown that all these things were really revealed, as
they are said to be, we should still think them unworthy of notice. The
greater part of the 'supernal theology' is utterly frivolous; and
whether frivolous or not, it bears very plainly the impress of the
medium's own mind, or of the unknown desires of those by whom he is
surrounded. If we were called upon to minister to a mind diseased, or
to find pabulum for a soul hungering after moral excellence, we should
as soon think of offering a copy of the Arabian Nights' Entertainments
as a book of the 'supernal theology.' For the practical guidance of
life, there is more help in any two maxims of the Sermon on the Mount,
than in the whole literature of supernaturalism.

"The manifestation mania would have died away long since but for one
unfortunate circumstance. We have in our land a large number of men who
may be termed semi-clergymen, or, as they are frequently called,
'outsiders,' or 'come-outers.' These are they who, either because they
know too much or because they know too little, or from superfluity of
naughtiness or redundancy of virtue, find it difficult to obtain a
'settlement.' These are the men who foster delusions; who, because they
cannot find a way to _serve_ the public, are reduced to _prey_ upon it.
They embrace the new light--whatever it may be--with a degree of
sincerity, and commit themselves to it; then they push it, stimulate
it, make a business of it, and live by it. O the multitude of spiritual
delusions that in every age of the world have originated and derived
their strength solely from the fact that the bodily necessities of
certain individuals depended upon their perpetuity! That, at this
moment, there are men most diligently engaged in the new spiritual
line, for the purpose of securing by it a reprieve from starvation, (or
work,) is a fact which we do not merely believe, but _know_."




FORETELLING FUTURE EVENTS.


Many devices have been resorted to in order to foretell the events of
the future. Some pretend to do it by cards; some by the settlings of a
tea or coffee cup; some by astrology; some by tables of letters and
figures; some by the lines of the hand; and some by spirits of the
dead. Strenuous advocates of these various modes are found, who recount
the wonderful predictions that have taken place. Some spirit hunter
recently prognosticated that the ship Staffordshire (reported to be
lost) would arrive safe at San Francisco on a certain day, as she did.
Professor Anderson had a glass bell at the Melodeon, in Boston, in
September, 1852, that answered questions pertaining to future events.
In deciding upon who would be the next president, it gave six distinct
taps for Pierce--the number agreed upon if he was to be the successful
competitor. This was done without any aid from spirits. We very much
doubt whether Robach or Lester would refuse a challenge from A. J.
Davis himself, to test their respective claims to correct predictions.
Yet we do not believe that any reliance can be placed upon the
prophecies of either party. Events may sometimes transpire in
accordance with their predictions; and it would be strange if they did
not, as they are always predicting, and events are ever occurring. But
they never think of naming the multiplicity of failures that take
place. Not long since, the spirits said that a distant friend would
never live to reach home; but he soon after arrived, safe and well. Mr.
Lester told a young man of Woburn that in two years he would marry a
certain young lady; but in two months he was a corpse. Hundreds of such
failures are constantly occurring, but are kept out of sight. If
generally known, they would spoil the trade. We are surprised that men
professing to high attainments, as A. J. Davis and some of his
coadjutors, should fall back and plant themselves upon such stale
trash. Some two years since, while lying apparently near our end, a
lady suggested to us that, if we desired, she would consult Mr. Lester
upon the probability of our recovery. We declined the offer, choosing
to leave all with the Sovereign Disposer of events, believing that he
would permit nothing to take place but what would be for our best good,
and that of all concerned.

    "Heaven from all creatures hides the book of fate,
    All but the page prescribed--their _present state_;
    From brutes what men, from men what angels know;
    Or who could suffer being here below?
    The lamb thy riot dooms to bleed to-day,
    Had he thy reason, would he skip and play?
    Pleased to the last, he crops the flowery food,
    And licks the hand just raised to shed his blood.
    O, blindness to the future! kindly given,
    That each may fill the circle marked by Heaven.
    _Hope humbly then_; with trembling pinions soar;
    Wait the great teacher death, and God adore!
    What future bliss he gives not thee to know,
    But gives _that hope_ to be thy _blessing now_."--POPE.




VISIONS, MIRACLES, AND WONDERS.


The writings of the spirit rappers abound with accounts of sights,
sounds, visions, and wonders. We are forcibly reminded of a similar
display in the writings of the Adventists, previous to the predicted
end of the world in 1843--an overwhelming array of facts, calculations,
signs, visions, wonders, miracles, maps, pictures, drawings, and
hieroglyphics, all going to show, in the most positive manner, that in
that year the world would be annihilated. And still it remains; and the
works containing the omens and facts to substantiate the prediction are
called to share the fate of a Farmer's Almanac quite out of date. Some
few still hold on to a semblance of the theory, like him who, in the
spring of 1851, declared that a talking cow, somewhere in Maine, had
prophesied that the world would be burned up the following June. How
lamentable to view the numbers of men and women who have given heed to
such things, when assured that the day and the hour is not known even
by the Son himself. (Matt. xxiv. 36.) Many of these persons were once
active in the church, and exerted an influence for good; but by
remaining in their present position, their influence in the cause of
Christ is palsied, and their, talents buried in the earth. And yet we
have propounded to us another "NEW CHURCH," which, according to the
predictions of its adherents, is destined to destroy all other
churches, as it _was to be_, according to the predictions of Miller,
Fitch, Himes, and others.

In conclusion upon these things, we would add, that it has been our
belief from the first, that there is nothing supernatural in the
so-called _spiritual manifestations_. They all bear the marks of
_earthly_ origin. The public not knowing how to explain them, the
first rappings were attributed to the "spirits;" and the idea having
been set afloat, it has been adopted without investigation, being the
easiest way of accounting for it.

To the common mind, three hundred years ago, it was plain and easy,
that the world was _flat_, and rested on something--on the _back
of Atlas_, and he stood on a _tortoise_, and the tortoise again
on _something_; and the fact that nobody could tell what, was not
allowed to stumble any one; it rested on a _foundation_, and that
was enough for any one to know or believe. Motion, space, attraction,
and repulsion were not understood, and Galileo came near losing his
life, and did lose his personal liberty and character, for
intelligence. When the world is as fully instructed in certain
principles connected with our existence as it is in the laws of the
physical universe, the "rappings," we think, will cease to be a wonder.




CLAIRVOYANT PHYSICIANS.


Persons in a clairvoyant state, by being put in connection with a
diseased person, feel, by sympathy, the pain and disease of the
patient. But to be qualified to describe the locality of the disease,
or be able to tell what organ or part is affected, the practitioner
must first have studied anatomy and physiology. The more perfect they
are in these branches, the more accurately can they describe the seat
of the disease. Their remedies are mostly botanical, and are generally
safe in their operation. The _regular_ "clairvoyant physician," so to
speak, does not pretend to be in league with "spirits;" but there _are_
those who profess that their prescriptions come from the other
world--from those who, though dead, rest _not_ from their labors.
Notwithstanding the extreme simplicity of their remedies, such as any
common nurse would advise, yet such is the profound sanctity and
mystery thrown around them by an _unseen spirit_, that some profess to
have received "wonderful healing mercies." To _believe_ that a medicine
(however simple) is prescribed by a _spirit_ from above, is enough to
perform a cure in any case. Imagination alone is equal to the task. A
very eminent allopathic physician informs us that he often rolls up
brown bread pills, which, in certain cases, perform unmistakable cures.
In fact, history is full of recoveries wrought out by aid of the
imagination. We will subjoin a case by way of illustration.

"Sir Humphrey Davy, on one occasion in early life, was assisting Dr.
Beddoes in his experiments on the inhalation of nitrous oxide. Dr.
Beddoes having inferred that this agent must be a specific for palsy, a
patient was selected for trial, and placed under the care of Davy.
Previously to administering the gas, Davy inserted a small thermometer
under the tongue of the patient, to ascertain the temperature. The
paralytic man, wholly ignorant of the process to which he was to
submit, but deeply impressed by Dr. Beddoes with the certainty of its
success, no sooner felt the thermometer between his teeth, than he
concluded the talisman was in operation, and in a burst of enthusiasm
declared that he had already experienced the effects of its benign
influence throughout his whole body. The opportunity was too tempting
to be lost. Davy did nothing more, but desired his patient to return on
the following day. The same ceremony was repeated, the same result
followed; and at _the end of a fortnight he was dismissed wholly
cured_; no remedy of any kind, except the thermometer, having ever
been used."




STYLE OF "SUPERNAL" COMPOSITIONS.


In the "supernal" productions we are presented with a pedantic
display of high-sounding words and phrases. To use the language
of inspiration, "they speak great swelling words of vanity." A
work has recently been announced with this imposing title:
"MACROCOSM and MICROCOSM," containing, among other things, "_The
Potential Media_," "_The Diastole and Systole of Nature_." A writer
in the Spiritual Telegraph, of October 9, says, "There are very many
fancy-captivating, and depravity-flattering publications--some of
them filled with indications, the most specious and subtle, of a
refined _atheism_. And I have seen a copy or two of a certain 'Journal,'
ostensibly advocating the great truths (?) of spiritual manifestations,
but containing some articles in which there was a congregation of words
_superlatively unmeaning and transcendentally ridiculous_." The same
writer says, "I do not believe one half the communications which are
said to come from George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, Henry Clay,
John C. Calhoun, John Wesley, and a host of other great names. What
affinity can these spirits have with many of the thoughtless, light,
and trifling circles, formed to pass off an hour, and perhaps ending
with foolish mountebank scenes of psychology, falsely so called?"

Davis, in his Great Harmonia, page 206, exposes a class of "mercenary
practitioners, who claim extraordinary or supernatural powers for their
subjects, _who give public and vulgar exhibitions, who employ chicanery
and ignorant plans, who trifle with and play fantastic tricks with
their subjects_." He speaks of a class of "doctrinal practitioners, who
prevert and misinterpret principles and results; who labor to make the
phenomena subservient to, and illustrative of, the theological dogmas;
who receive, modify, or reject, as a sectarian education and prejudice
may sanction; who conceal, misstate, and magnify disclosures." Enough,
in all conscience, to condemn the whole farce.




MYSTERIOUS PHENOMENA, WITH THEIR AGENTS OR CAUSES.


A work has recently been issued in Boston, by E. C. Rogers, containing
an exposition of mysterious agents, and dynamic laws, or science of
moving powers. It is a very valuable work, and, with his consent, we
shall take the liberty of introducing some of the principal facts
adduced; and at the same time would advise every inquirer to purchase
the work for himself, which he will never have cause to regret.

On page 22, the author says, "Light and heat have always been known as
agents by the common sensation of their more palpable phenomena. But
electricity and magnetism were not known until their phenomena were
specially observed. Many of the facts of these agents, before the
latter had become known, were referred to spiritual agencies. It is the
tendency of ignorance, in every age, to do the same thing. Reason
demands an agent adequate to the production of every phenomenon. If she
has not been furnished with sufficient data by which to arrive at a
correct conclusion, imagination, influenced by a blind marvellousness,
will refer the phenomena to some supernatural cause. Hence the early
superstitions about chemical operations, the appearance of comets,
eclipses, meteors, the 'bog lights,' and a thousand other phenomena.
But as the agencies of nature have become known, and their laws and
conditions of action discovered, the domination of superstition has
given place to the triumph of reason and the reign of truth."

"Reason determines that, for every phenomenon, there is an agent; but
never, without sufficient data, does she determine what that agent is.
The imagination often assumes this prerogative, and gives conclusions
without _facts_, or furnishes the false data from which the logical
faculty draws false principles. We mention these things to show how
easy it is to be deceived, by our imaginations, with regard to the
causes of outward phenomena, and that the only legitimate and
trustworthy process in arriving at a solution of the mysteries of
nature is, to furnish the reason with _facts_, and exclude the
influence of imagination. A blind precipitation of faith is also a
fatal influence to all correct reasoning; for it rouses the action of
the imagination, and long before the reason can possibly give a correct
deduction, credulity and imagination have conjured one up; and this
will be the more insisted upon as the only correct conclusion, as it is
the least possessed of the real truth and the action of reason. Hence
it is that those persons who are most ignorant of the principles of
nature are the more positive and precipitate in their decisions upon
any question of mystery. They _know_ that there is no natural
explanation, and the man is a fool who _attempts_ to find one." (Page
34.)

The first case we shall quote from the above work occurred in
Woodbridge, New Jersey, and was published at the time in the Newark
Daily Advertiser. The phenomena made their appearance in the family of
Mr. J. Barron, consisting, for the most part, of unusual sounds
accompanying a servant girl.

"The first sounds were those of a _loud thumping_, apparently
against the side of the house, which commenced one evening, when the
family had retired, and continued at short intervals until daylight,
when it ceased.

"The next evening it commenced at nightfall, when it was ascertained to
be mysteriously connected with the movements of a servant girl in the
family--a white girl, about fourteen years of age. While passing a
window, on the stairs, for example, a _sudden jar_, accompanied with an
_explosive sound, broke a pane of glass_, the girl at the same time
being seized with a violent spasm. This, of course, very much alarmed
her; and the physician, Dr. Drake, was sent for, who came and bled her.
The bleeding, however, produced no apparent effect. The noise still
continued, as before, at intervals, wherever the girl went, each sound
producing more or less of a spasm; and the physician, with all the
family, remained up during the night. At daylight the _thumping_ ceased
again. In the evening the same thing was repeated, commencing a little
earlier than before; and so every evening since, continuing each night
until morning, and commencing each night a little earlier than before,
until yesterday, when the thumping began about twelve o'clock at noon.
The circumstances were soon generally spread through the neighborhood,
and produced so much excitement that the house was filled, and
surrounded from sunrise to sunset, for nearly a week. Every imaginable
means were resorted to, in order to unravel the phenomenon. At one time
the girl would be removed from one apartment to another, but without
effect. Wherever she was placed, at certain intervals, the thumping
would be heard in the room. She was taken to a neighboring house. The
same result followed. When carried out of doors, however, no noise was
heard. Dr. Drake, who was constant in his attendance during the whole
period, occasionally aided by other scientific observers, was with us
last evening for two hours, when we were politely allowed a variety of
experiments with the girl, in addition to those heretofore tried, to
satisfy ourselves that there is no imposition in the case, and, if
possible, to discover the secret agent of the mystery. The girl was in
an upper room, with a part of the family, when we reached the house.
The noise then resembled that which would be produced by a person
violently thumping the upper floor with the head of an axe, five or six
times in succession, jarring the house, ceasing a few minutes, and then
resuming as before. We were soon introduced into the apartment, and
permitted to observe for ourselves. The girl appeared to be in perfect
health, cheerful, and free from the spasms felt at first, and entirely
relieved from every thing like the fear or apprehension which she
manifested for some days. The invisible noise, however, continued to
occur as before, though somewhat diminished in frequency, while we were
in the room. In order to ascertain more satisfactorily that she did not
produce it voluntarily, among other experiments we placed her on a
chair on a blanket in the centre of the room, bandaged the chair with a
cloth, fastening her feet on the front round, and confining her hands
together on her lap. No change, however, was produced. The thumping
continued as before, excepting that it was not quite so loud. The noise
resembled that which would be produced by stamping on the floor with a
heavy heel; yet she did not move a limb or muscle, that we could
discover. She remained in this position long enough to satisfy all in
the room that the girl exercised, voluntarily, no sort of agency in
producing the noise. It was observed that the noise became greater the
farther she was removed from any other person. We placed her in the
doorway of a closet in the room, the door being ajar, to allow her to
stand in the passage. In less than one minute the door flew open, as if
violently struck with a mallet, accompanied with precisely such a noise
as such a thump would produce. This was repeated several times, with
the same effect. In short, in whatever position she was placed, whether
in or out of the room, similar results, varied a little perhaps by
circumstances, were produced. There is certainly no deception in the
case. The noise was heard at least one hundred yards from the house."

"In this case, no suspicions were entertained by the investigators that
there was any supernatural or spiritual power manifested, as there was
no manifestations of intelligence. They were purely physical
phenomena."

The next case we shall notice we copy from the Spiritual Telegraph of
July 3, 1852, taken from an old New York paper, dated March 10, 1789.
The extract is as follows:--

"Sir: Were I to relate the many extraordinary, though not less true
accounts I have heard concerning that unfortunate girl at New
Hackensack, your belief might perhaps be staggered and patience tired.
I shall therefore only inform you of what I have been an eye-witness
to. Last Sunday afternoon my wife and myself went to Dr. Thorn's, and
after sitting for some time, we heard a knocking under the feet of a
young woman that lives in the family; I asked the doctor what
occasioned the noise: he could not tell, but replied, that he, together
with several others, had examined the house, but were unable to
discover the cause. I then took a candle and went with the girl into
the cellar: there the knocking also continued; but as we were ascending
the stairs to return, I heard a _prodigious rapping_ on each side,
which alarmed me very much. I stood still some time, looking around
with amazement, when I beheld some lumber, which lay at the head of the
stairs, shake considerably. About eight or ten days after, we visited
the girl again: the knocking was again heard, but much louder than
before. Our curiosity induced us to pay the third visit, when the
phenomena were still more alarming. _I then saw the chairs move; a
large dining table was thrown against me, and a small stand, on which
stood a candle, was tossed up and thrown into my wife's lap_; after
which we left the house, much surprised at what we had seen."

"Catharine Crowe, in her Night Side of Nature, mentions several
well-authenticated cases of this character, and other writers have
noticed the same phenomena. A case is given on the 410th page of Miss
Crowe's work--that of a young officer in the English army, who,
wherever he went, whether in camp or at home, or among strangers, was
liable to be tormented with these _noises at night_. Although they
gave no particular marks of intelligence, yet they were regarded by his
relatives with an abundance of superstition. They considered him
"haunted."

"When these sounds commenced, he would sit up in bed, and express his
anger in strong execrations. If a cage bird was in his room, it was
certain to be found dead in the morning; or if he kept a dog in the
apartment, it would make away from him as soon as released, and never
come near him again."

"The phenomena in Dr. Phelps's case, already mentioned in this volume,
consisted in the moving of articles of furniture in a manner that could
not be accounted for. Knives, forks, spoons, nails, blocks of wood,
&c., were thrown in different directions about the house, when there
appeared no visible power by which the motion could have been produced.
A writer in the New Haven Journal and Courier testifies, that while he
was present, "the contents of the pantry were emptied into the kitchen,
and bags of salt, tin ware, and heavy cooking utensils were thrown in a
promiscuous heap upon the floor, with a loud and startling noise.
Loaves of delicious cake were scattered about the house. The large
knocker of the outside door would thunder its fearful tones through the
loud-resounding hall, chairs would deliberately move across the room,
heavy marble-top tables would poise themselves upon two legs, and then
fall with their contents to the floor--no person being within six feet
of them."

"On the 1st of October, 1850, Mrs. Phelps and her two children left
home for Pennsylvania: with this the phenomena ceased. The doctor
remained at his house five weeks after, without disturbance. It was
ascertained that these and other manifestations were less frequent and
feebler when but one of the children was in the house; and that they
were more frequent in connection with the lad, (one of the above
children,) eleven years of age.

These children had frequently been mesmerized into the trance state by
their father; and one of them was subject to spontaneous trance, and at
one time was found in the barn in a cataleptic state. Since the return
of the doctor's family, in the spring of 1851, he has kept the two
children separate, the boy being away, lest his presence would occasion
a recurrence of the same phenomena. Simultaneous with the phenomena,
the boy would frequently start while asleep in bed.

Analogous to the above are the wonderful occurrences which took place
at Stockwell, England, in January, 1772, as related in the work
entitled Night Side of Nature, page 370. We shall only give the most
important particulars of the case, leaving the reader to consult the
work itself."

"On Monday, January 6, 1772, about ten o'clock in the forenoon, as Mrs.
Golding (the hostess) was in the parlor, she heard the china and
glasses in the kitchen tumble down and break; her maid came to her, and
told her the stone plates were falling from the shelf; Mrs. Golding
went into the kitchen, and saw them broken. Presently after, a row of
plates from the next shelf fell down likewise, while she was there, and
nobody near them: this astonished her much, and while she was thinking
about it, other things in different places began to tumble about, some
of them breaking, attended with violent noises all over the house; a
clock tumbled down, and the case broke." The destruction increased with
the wonder and terror of Mrs. Golding. Wherever she went, accompanied
by the servant girl, this dreadful waste of property followed.

Mrs. Golding, in her terror, fled to a neighbor's, where she
immediately fainted. A surgeon was called, and she was bled. The blood,
which had hardly congested, was seen all at once to spring out of the
basin upon the floor, and presently after, the basin burst to pieces,
and a bottle of rum, that stood by it, broke at the same time.

Mrs. Golding went to a second neighbor's, as the articles she had
conveyed to the first were being destroyed. And while the maid remained
at the first neighbor's, Mrs. Golding was not disturbed; but when
putting up what few things remained unbroken of her mistress's in a
back apartment, a jar of pickles, that stood upon a table, turned
upside down, and other things were broken to pieces.

Meantime the disturbances had ceased at Mrs. Golding's house, and but
little occurred at the neighbors', while Mrs. Golding and her servant
remained apart. But as soon as they came into each other's company, the
disturbance would begin again.

About five o'clock on Tuesday morning, Mrs. Golding went to the chamber
of her niece, and desired her to get up, as the noises and destruction
were so great she could continue in the house no longer: at this time,
all the tables, chairs, drawers, &c., were tumbling about. In
consequence of this resolution, Mrs. Golding and her maid went over the
way to Richard Fowler's. The maid returned to Mrs. Pain's, to help this
lady dress her children. At this time all was quiet. They then repaired
to Fowler's, and then began the same scenes as had happened at the
other places. It must be remarked that all was quiet here as well as
elsewhere, till the maid returned.

When they reached Mr. Fowler's, he began to light a fire in his back
room. When done, he put the candlestick upon the table in the fore
room. This apartment Mrs. Golding and her maid had just passed through.
This candlestick, and another with a tin lamp in it, that stood by it,
were dashed together, and fell to the ground. A lantern, with which
Mrs. Golding had been lighted across the road, sprang from a hook to
the ground. A basket of coals tumbled over, and the coals rolled about
the room.

Mrs. Golding and her servant now returned home, when similar scenes
were repeated. Mr. Pain then desired Mrs. Golding to send her maid for
his wife to come to them. When she was gone all was quiet. When she
returned she was immediately discharged, and no disturbances happened
afterwards."

"The account gives us the following particulars, namely: that the
phenomena always depended upon the presence of the servant maid, and
that they always occurred with the greatest energy when the mistress
was in the company of the maid; also that, when the maid passed through
a room alone, there would be little or no disturbance of its contents,
but if she was soon after followed by Mrs. Golding, various articles
would begin to play the most singular pranks. Very often one article
would be attracted by another, or they would fly towards each other,
and striking together, fall upon the floor as if both had been charged
with some physical agent which made them act like opposite poles. Then,
also, they would fly _from_ one another, as by _repulsive_ forces.
Every thing which Mrs. Golding had touched seems to have been in some
way affected, so that afterwards, on the approach of the maid, it would
be broken to atoms, sometimes, even, without her touch. The blood of
Mrs. Golding was highly susceptible under the same circumstances, and
the bowl in which it was contained and the glass ware standing by it
burst to pieces."

"In the year 1835, a suit was brought before the sheriff of Edinburgh,
Scotland, for the recovery of damages suffered in a certain house owned
by a Mr. Webster. Captain Molesworth was the defendant at the trial."
(See Night Side of Nature, page 400.) The following facts were
developed: Mr. Molesworth had seriously damaged the house both as to
substance and reputation.

_First._ By sundry holes which he cut in the walls, tearing up the
floors, &c., to discover the cause of certain noises which tormented
himself and family.

_Second._ By the bad name he had given the house, stating that it
was haunted. Witnesses for the defendant were sheriff's officers,
justices of the peace, and officers of the regiment quartered near; all
of whom had been at the said house sundry times to aid Captain
Molesworth detect the invisible cause of so much disturbance.

The disturbance consisted in certain noises, such as knockings,
pounding, scratching sounds, rustlings in different parts of a
particular room; sometimes, however, in other parts of the house.
Certain boards of the floor would seem to be at times infected with the
noises; then certain points in the walls, at which Mr. Molesworth would
point his gun, or cut into with an axe, all to no purpose.

The bed on which a young girl, aged thirteen years, had been confined
by disease, would very often be raised above the floor, as if a sudden
force was applied beneath it, which would greatly alarm her and the
whole family, and cause the greatest perplexity. The concussions which
were often produced on the walls would cause them visibly to tremble.
The force that produced these results was soon discovered to be in some
strange way connected with this invalid, and wherever the young invalid
was moved this force accompanied her."

"It is plainly exhibited, in the cases just given, that no
characteristics of spiritual agency are exhibited, but those, on the
contrary, of a mere physical power, associated with the organism of
certain persons. "We have not," says Mr. Rogers, "the least possible
evidence that any spirit, demoniacal or angelic, had any hand in
performing the wild antics among crockery and furniture which we have
seen performed in the accounts given. For it is admitted that a
spiritual agent is an intelligent agent. Its characteristics are those
of intelligence, as every one admits. Wherever, therefore, these
characteristics are wanting in a class of phenomena, it is blindly
absurd, greatly superstitious, even to draw the inference that they are
spiritual phenomena. But what shall be said when it is asserted as a
veritable certainty, and the crowd is made to stretch their throats and
swallow the absurdity without a moment's examination?" "Is it possible
we are to be driven to the conclusion that the ground of faith in
spirituality is identical with that of ignorance, superstition,
fanaticism, bigotry?"

We shall now proceed to give the case of Angelique Cottin, as reported
in the Night Side of Nature, and in the _Courrier des Etats Unis_,
and the investigations of the case as reported by M. Arago, before the
Paris Academy of Sciences, 16th of February, 1846.

"Angelique Cottin was a native of La Perriere, aged fourteen, when, on
the 15th of January, 1846, at eight o'clock in the evening, while
weaving silk gloves at an oaken frame, in company with other girls, the
frame began to jerk, and they could not by any efforts keep it steady.
It seemed as if it were alive; and becoming alarmed, they called in the
neighbors, who would not believe them, but desired them to sit down and
go on with their work. Being timid, they went one by one, and the frame
remained still till Angelique approached, when it recommenced its
movements, while she was also attracted by the frame. Thinking she was
bewitched or possessed, her parents took her to the presbytery, that
the spirit might be exorcised, or cast out. The curate, being a
sensible man, objected, but set himself to work to observe the
phenomenon, and being satisfied of the facts of the case, he bade them
take her to a physician.

"Meanwhile, the intensity of the influence, whatever it was, augmented;
not only articles made of oak, but all sorts of things, were acted upon
by it, and reacted upon her, while persons who were near her, even
without contact, frequently felt _electric_ shocks. The effects, which
were diminished when she was on a carpet or a waxed cloth, were most
remarkable when she _was on the bare earth_. They sometimes entirely
ceased for three days, and then recommenced. Metals were not affected.
Any thing touching her apron or dress would fly off, although a person
held it; and Monsieur Herbert, while seated on a heavy tub or trough,
was raised up with it. In short, the only place she could repose on was
a stone covered with cork. They also kept her still by isolating her.
When she was fatigued the effects diminished. A needle, suspended
horizontally, oscillated rapidly with the motion of her arm, without
contact; or remained fixed while deviating from the magnetic direction.
Great numbers of enlightened medical and scientific men witnessed these
phenomena, and investigated them with every precaution to prevent
imposition. She was often hurt by the violent involuntary movements she
was thrown into, and was evidently afflicted by chorea, or St. Vitus's
dance."--_Night Side of Nature_, page 382.

"The French paper mentions the circumstance that while Angelique was at
work in the factory, "the cylinder she was turning was suddenly thrown
a considerable distance without any visible cause; that this was
repeated several times; that all the young girls in the factory fled,
and ran to the curate to have him exorcise the young girl, believing
she had a devil." After the priest had consigned her to the physician's
care, the physician, with the father and mother, brought Angelique to
Paris. M. Arago received her, and took her to the observatory, and in
the presence of MM. Laugier and Goujon made the following observations,
which were reported to the Paris Academy of Sciences:--

"_First._ It is the left side of the body which appears to acquire
this sometimes attractive, but more frequently repulsive, property. A
sheet of paper, a pen, or any other light body, being placed upon a
table, if the young girl approaches her left hand, even before she
touches it, the object is driven to a distance as by a gust of wind.
The table itself is overthrown the moment it is touched by her hand, or
even by a thread which she may hold in it.

"_Second._ This causes instantaneously a strong commotion in her side,
which draws her towards the table; but it is in the region of the
pelvis that this singular repulsive force appears to concentrate
itself.

"_Third._ As had been observed the first day, if she attempted to sit,
the seat was thrown far from her, with such force that any other person
occupying it was carried away with it.

"_Fourth._ One day a chest upon which three men were seated was moved
in the same manner. Another day, although the chair was held by two
very strong men, it was broken between their hands.

"_Fifth._ These phenomena are not produced in a continued manner. They
manifest themselves in a greater or less degree, and from time to time
during the day; but they show themselves in their intensity in the
evening, from seven to nine o'clock.

"_Sixth._ Then the girl is obliged to continue standing, and is in
great agitation.

"_Seventh._ She can touch no object without breaking it or throwing it
upon the ground.

"_Eighth._ All the articles of furniture which her garments touch are
displaced and overthrown.

"_Ninth._ At that moment many persons have felt, by coming in contact
with her, a true electrical shock.

"_Tenth._ During the entire duration of the paroxysms, the left side of
the body is warmer than the right side.

"_Eleventh._ It is affected by jerks, unusual movements, and a kind of
trembling which seems to communicate itself to the hand which touches
it.

"_Twelfth._ This young person presents, moreover, a peculiar
sensibility to the action of the magnet. When she approaches the north
pole of the magnet she feels a violent shock, while the south pole
produces no effect; so that if the experimenter changes the poles, but
without her knowledge, she always discovers it by the difference of
sensations which she experiences.

"_Thirteenth._ The general health of Angelique is very good. The
extraordinary movements, however, and the paroxysms observed every
evening, resemble what one observes in some nervous maladies."

"The great fact demonstrated in this case," says E. C. Rogers, "is,
that, under _peculiar conditions_, the human organism gives forth
a physical power which, _without visible instruments_, lifts heavy
bodies, attracts or repels them according to a law of polarity,
overturns them, and produces the phenomena of sound. So far as the mere
movement of objects, even of great weight, in connection with certain
persons, is concerned, whether in the phenomena of the so called
'spiritual manifestations,' or out of them, the immediate agent is a
physical one, and is identical throughout. None but the most ignorant
can deny this." For a further delineation of the facts in this case,
and deductions therefrom, we refer the reader to the work of Mr.
Rogers, on the Dynamic Laws and Relations of Man.

"The next case we shall refer to is that of Frederica Hauffe, of the
town of Prevorst, in the mountainous parts of Germany. It was found
that in her hands, at a very early age, the hazel wand pointed out
metals and water. It was also found that, in certain localities, the
influences from the earth had a very powerful effect upon her
susceptible nerves. It was frequently observed by the one she often
accompanied in his walks through solitary places, that though she was
skipping ever so gayly by his side, at certain spots a kind of
seriousness and shuddering came over her, which for a long time he
could not comprehend. He also observed that she experienced the same
sensations in churchyards, and in churches where there were graves; and
that, in such churches, she never could remain below, but was obliged
to repair to the galleries. Superstition, it is true, has always
claimed such facts as parts of her ghostly superstructure; but they are
too material for this.

Frederica was almost constantly in a magnetic state, and in this
condition frequently communicated what was taking place at a distance,
and was aware of producing sounds in space, and some ways off; but this
being found to materially injure her, the habit was abandoned. She had
a very high degree of susceptibility to mundane influences, and the
effect was, that mineral loads and subterranean currents acted through
her upon a simple stick held in her hand.

At one time she was attacked with nervous fever, which continued
fourteen days with great violence. This was followed by _seven years
of_ MAGNETIC LIFE, interrupted only by very short and merely apparent
intervals. After the fever, she was attacked with spasms in the breast,
which continued three days. On the second day, a peasant's wife came
from the village, and seating herself beside her, said, "She needs no
physicians; they cannot help her;" and laid her hands on her forehead.
Immediately she was seized with the most direful spasms, and her
forehead was as cold as if she was dead. During the whole night she
cried deliriously that the woman had exercised a demoniacal influence
upon her; and whenever the woman returned she was always attacked with
spasms. On the third day they sent for a physician; and being then in a
magnetic condition, she cried to him when he entered, although she had
never seen him, "If you are a physician, you must help me!" He, well
understanding her malady, laid his hands on her head; and it was
remarked that, as long as he remained in the room, she saw and heard
him alone, and was insensible to the presence of all other persons. The
same kind of exclusive attachment has been seen in cases of persons who
have fallen under the peculiar influence of the magnet or a crystal,
thus showing the relation of mundane agencies to the psychological
nerve centres, as well as to the nerve centres in the spine, and among
the viscera.

After her physician had laid his hands on her she became calm, and
slept for some hours. Some internal remedies and a bath were prescribed
for her; but the spasms returned in the night, and for eighteen weeks
she was attacked by them from twice to five or six times a day. All the
remedies prescribed proving inefficacious, recourse was had to
"magnetic passes," which, for a time, relieved the spasms. It was amid
such sufferings and such influences that, in the month of February,
1823, after extreme tortures, she gave birth to her first child. This
event was followed, for some time, by additional ills. The following is
a somewhat curious circumstance, and goes to show the influence which
one organization will have upon another, when a certain relation is
established between them. It is this: The woman who, on a former
occasion, had exerted so unhappy an influence upon the mother, produced
precisely the same effects upon the child. Her contact with it threw it
into spasms, and the convulsions became periodical until its death.

About a year after the birth of her child, being laughed at for her
superstition, she was thrown into a state of rigid spasm, and became as
cold and stiff as a corpse. For a long time no respiration was visible.
She lay as in a dream. In this peculiar condition she spoke for three
days entirely in verse and at another, she saw, for the same period,
nothing but a ball of fire, that ran through her whole body as if on
thin bright threads. And then, for three days, she felt as if water was
falling upon her head, drop by drop; and it was at this time that she
saw her own image. She saw it clad in white, seated on a stool, whilst
she was lying in bed. She contemplated the vision for some time, and
would have cried out, but could not; at length she made herself heard,
and her husband entering, it disappeared. Her susceptibility was now so
great that she _heard and felt what happened at a distance_, and
was so sensible to external agencies, _that the nails in the walls
affected her_, which obliged her friends to remove them. The least
light had a powerful influence upon her nervous system, and could not
be endured.

She was now induced to take a medicine which made her more calm, but
threw her into a deeper trance. Still she could not endure the
sunlight. She was taken in a darkened carriage to her home on the
mountains. "Here she existed," says her physician, "only through the
nervous emanation of others, and it became necessary that some one
should always hold her hand; and if the person was weak, it increased
her debility. The physician prescribed magnetic passes and medicines,
but she fell into a magnetic sleep, _and then prescribed for herself_.
Her greatest suffering arose from the sensation of having a stone in
her head. It seemed as if her brain was compressed, and at every breath
she drew, the motion pained her. At this time a large magnet was
applied to her forehead; immediately her head and face were turned
round, and her mouth distorted as by a stroke of palsy. On the 28th of
December she gave birth to her second child, which was followed, as
before, by a long and severe illness. She continued constantly in a
magnetic state. Persons of various tempers now became her magnetizers.
The effects of these different nervous temperaments upon hers were very
serious. It brought her into special relation to so many persons, that,
even _at a distance, they affected her, visions of whom would appear to
her like visions of spirits_. This, moveover, brought her into a deeper
magnetic condition, and rendered her more _dependent on the nervous
energy of others_. Another physician was employed from a distance. He
gave her an amulet to wear, composed of certain substances, and a small
magnet, all arranged together. Occasionally this amulet, untouched by
any one, would run about her head, breast, and bed covering, like a
live thing."

"It has already been remarked, that, in the earlier stage of her
magnetic state, she was aware of _making sounds at a distance_.
This she repeatedly performed, so that her friends at a distance, as
they lay in bed, _heard distinctly the sounds_. This fact being
communicated to her physician, Dr. Kerner, he, by actual experiment and
observation, confirmed it. This was not performed by her will, which
was inactive in her somnambulic or cataleptic state, as well as her
consciousness. Every nerve centre was in a most intimate _rapport_
or relation with the mundane agencies, especially that which acts in
conjunction with the nervous force, and holds every animal in a certain
connection with every thing out of the organism.

The father of this unfortunate woman inhabited a house which formed a
part of an old cathedral, where, it had been reported by former
tenants, _strange sights had been seen, and strange sounds heard_. It
was in this house, at the time of her somnambulic state, already spoken
of, that there were heard _unusual knockings on the walls, noises in
the air_, and other sounds, which, as Dr. Kerner remarks, "can be
testified to by more than twenty credible witnesses." _There was a
trampling up and down stairs by day and by night to be heard, but no
one to be seen, as well as knockings on the walls and in the cellars;
but, however suddenly a person flew to the place to try to detect
whence the noise proceeded, they could see nothing. If they went
outside, the knocking was immediately heard inside, and vice versa._
The noises at length became so perplexing, that her father declared
that he could live in the house no longer. They were not only audible
to every body in the house, but to the passengers in the street, who
stopped to listen to them as they passed. Whenever there was playing on
the piano, and singing, sounds would commence on the walls."

We have not room to mention all the facts in her case; but will add a
few of the most remarkable. "She was very susceptible to _electrical
influences_, and, what is almost incredible, _she had a preternatural
feeling_ or _consciousness of human writing_. Various minerals seemed
to have a specific effect, when brought in contact with her. _Glass and
rock crystal_ had a powerful effect in waking her from the somnambulic
state, or in exciting the force within her organism. This fact, and
others of this character in abundance, point to the peculiar tendency
of this force, in some cases of disease, to act outwardly from the
nerve centres upon glass ware, window glass, &c. "We have known a
child, eight years old," says Mr. Rogers, "who seldom, at one period,
took hold of a glass dish without its soon bursting to pieces." In the
case of Frederica, a rock crystal, placed on the pit of her stomach,
and allowed to remain there for some time, would produce a deep state
of catalepsy. She was affected in the same manner by silicious sand and
gravel, or even by standing some time near a glass window. If she
chanced to seat herself on a sandstone beach, she was apt to become
cataleptic; and once, having been for some time missed, she was at
length found at the top of the house, seated on a heap of sand, so
rigid, that she was unable to move away from it. Whenever she was
placed in a bath by her medical attendants, it was with a great deal of
labor they could immerse her body beneath the surface. Her specific
gravity seemed to be more like cork, or a bladder of air, than that of
muscle, nerve, and bone. Something seemed to pervade her body, or to
act upon it, so entirely opposite to the centripetal action of the
earth, as to counteract this law of force in the most marked manner.
This fact suggested to Dr. Kerner a curious experiment, which resulted
in the development of another important phenomenon. He had concluded,
that as all these phenomena had taken place more or less in conjunction
with those usually termed _magnetic_ or _mesmeric_, there might be some
relation of the forces in both, or indeed they might be identical. To
test this matter, he at one time placed his fingers against hers, when
he found at once there existed a mutual attraction, as between two
magnets; and now, by extending his hand upward, _he raised her clear
from the ground; thus she was suspended, as a magnet suspends a piece
of iron_, or _another magnet, simply by a polar force_. This was
repeated several times, and afterwards his wife did quite the same
thing."

"We have already spoken of the action which the sun's light had upon
her in producing physical effects. Among others it was observed that
the different colored rays produced each a specific effect. The light
of the moon, also, when she looked at it, produced coldness and
shivering, with melancholy." The effects of these agents on the human
organism are clearly explained, in the numbers of an astronomical
paper, by Mr. Chapman, of Philadelphia.

"On touching Frederica with a finger, during an electrical state of the
atmosphere, she saw small flashes, which ascended to the ceiling; from
men these were colorless, from women blue; and she perceived emanations
of the same kind, and of the same variation of color, from people's
eyes."

Concerning the power possessed in the nerve centres of this woman, to
produce sounds at a distance, Dr. Kerner remarks as follows: "As I had
been told by her parents, before her father's death, that, at the
period of her early magnetic state, she was able to make herself heard
by her friends, as they lay in bed at night, in the same village, in
other houses, by a knocking,--as is said of the dead,--I asked her, in
her sleep, whether she was able to do so now, and at what distance. She
answered that she could sometimes do it. Soon after this, as we were
going to bed, (my children and servants being already asleep,) we heard
a knocking, as if in the air over our heads; There were six knocks, at
intervals of half a minute. It was a hollow, yet clear sound, soft, but
distinct. We were certain there was no one near us, nor over us, from
whom it could proceed; and our house stands by itself. On the following
evening, when she was asleep, (we had mentioned the knocking to nobody
whatever,) she asked me whether she should soon knock to us again;
which, as she said it was hurtful to her, I declined." And yet, not
long after this, Kerner relates the following, as having taken place at
his house: "On the morning of the 23d of March, 1837, at one o'clock, I
suddenly awoke, and heard seven knocks, one after another, at short
intervals, seeming to proceed from the middle of my chamber: my wife
was awakened also; and we could not compare this knocking to any
ordinary sound. Mrs. Hauffe lived several houses distant from us."

"On the 30th of the same month, Rev. Mr. Hermann came into _rapport_ or
special relation with Mrs. H., through the medium of psychological
sympathy, as well as through the physical influence. Previous to this
he had not been troubled with strange sounds at his house, but after
that period he was awakened every night, at a particular hour, by a
knocking in his room,--sometimes on the floor, and sometimes on the
walls,--which his wife heard as well as himself. In a great part of her
magnetic state, Mrs. H. was under a strong state of religious feeling,
and was often engaged in prayer. Rev. Mr. Hermann sympathized with her
in this, and with the commencement of the rapping in his room, he
experienced an involuntary disposition to pray." (See Mr. Rogers's
work, where many such cases are given.)

In elucidation of the effect of glass, sand, gravel, &c., upon her
organism, we will state an additional fact, as related by her
physician: "On the 21st of April, Dr. K. was at the house of Mrs. H.
The window being open, he saw a quantity of gravel come in the window,
which he not only saw, as he says, 'but picked it up!' To be certain
that no one threw it in, he immediately looked out. On comparing it, he
found it to be such gravel as lay in the front of the house."

"Now, let the phenomena we have related be put side by side with those
which occurred at the house of Rufus Elmer, in Springfield,
Massachusetts, on the 5th of April, 1852, as witnessed by Professor
Wells, of Cambridge, and others, and alleged to be the work of spirits.

_First._ The table was moved in every possible direction, and with
great force, when no cause of motion could be perceived.

_Second._ The table was forced against each one present so powerfully
as to move them from their positions, together with the chairs they
occupied, in all several feet.

_Third._ Mr. Wells and Mr. Edwards took hold of the table in such a
manner as to exert their strength to the best advantage, but found the
invisible power, exercised in the opposite direction, to be quite equal
to their utmost efforts.

_Fourth_. In two instances, at least, while the hands of all the
members of the circle were placed on the top of the table, and while no
visible power was employed to raise the table, or otherwise to move it
from its position, it was seen to rise clear of the floor, and to float
in the atmosphere for several seconds, as if sustained by a denser
medium than the air.

_Fifth._ Mr. Wells was rocked to and fro with great violence, and
at length it poised itself on two legs, and remained in this position
for some thirty seconds, when no other person was in contact with the
table.

_Sixth._ Three persons, Messrs. Wells, Bliss, and Edwards, assumed
positions on the table at the same time, and while thus seated, the
table was moved in various directions.

_Seventh._ Occasionally we were made conscious of the occurrence
of a powerful shock, which produced a vibratory motion of the floor of
the apartment. It seemed like the motion occasioned by distant thunder,
or the firing of ordnance far away, causing the tables, chairs, and
other inanimate objects, and all of us, to tremble in such a manner
that the effect was both seen and felt.

In conclusion, it was observed that D. D. Hume, the medium, frequently
urged the company to hold his feet and hands. The room was well
lighted, and a lamp was placed on and under the table, and every
possible opportunity afforded for the closest inspection. They were
therefore positive that there was no deception in the case. The
conclusion was, _that it must be the work of spirits_--a singular
conclusion, indeed, for men of such standing and acquirements. It might
all have been accomplished, _biologically_; but admitting the whole
to be literally and substantially true, they fall far short of
well-attested phenomena, where it was not so much as _conjectured_ even
to be _at all supernatural_."

The fact is incontrovertibly evident, that physical agents, subtile and
unseen, are every where at work. "Force shows itself," as the elegant
Somerville remarks, in his Connection of the Physical Sciences, "in
every thing that exists in the heavens or on the earth." There is a
physical power which not only binds satellites to their planet, and
planets with suns, and sun with sun throughout the wide extent of
creation, which is the cause of the disturbances, as well as the order
of nature, but it physically binds man to man, and man to nature. And
as every tremor it excites in one planet is immediately transmitted to
the farthest limits of the system, in oscillations, which correspond in
their periods with the cause producing them, like sympathetic notes in
music, or vibrations from the deep tones of an organ, so every
vibration, thus excited, is transmissible to the delicate centres of
every organic being, provided the repulsive agent of those beings is
changed in its relative condition so as to admit its influx. (See
Geometry and Faith, by Rev. T. Hill, of Waltham.)

"It is well known to every chemist, that wherever there is chemical
action going on, there is a constant evolution of some force. Now, that
there is a constant chemical action taking place is certain, and the
sources of this action are very numerous. Among others, we have that of
water, (often holding in solution saline ingredients, thus increasing
its action upon metallic substances,) which, percolating through the
surface, acts upon all those surfaces whose materials have a strong
chemical affinity for the oxygen or hydrogen of the water.

Wherever there is a mineral load the development of force is in some
instances very great. For instance, Mr. R. W. Fox was able, by
connecting two lodes with copper wires, and conducting the latter to
the surface of the earth, and immersing them in a cell which contained
a solution of sulphate of copper, to obtain an electrotype copy of an
engraved copperplate.

Thus "the earth itself may be made a _battery_," as Robert Hunt says.
"We know," he repeats, "that, through the superficial strata of the
earth, electric currents circulate freely, whether they are composed of
clay, sand, or any mixture of these with decomposed organic matter;
indeed, that with any substance in a moist state, electric currents
suffer no interruption." The electricity of mineral veins has attracted
the attention of some of the first philosophers of Europe, and has led
to some highly-interesting experiments with regard to the action of
this important agent in the formation, disposition, and direction of
rocks and mineral veins. M. Becqueral and others have made use of these
currents successfully in imitating Nature in her processes of making
crystals and other mineral formations."

"It is not, however, necessary to suppose that the agent of which we
are treating particularly requires a chemical action to develop it, or
the action of the electric force. Experiments have proved that it is
developed in every form of material action--that even the substances of
the earth, without sensible alteration, exert this force. To this agent
the sensitive nerve centres are extremely susceptible. The celebrated
Ritter, of Germany, devoted much time to an investigation of this
subject, and, in 1809, published Supplementary Treatises upon it,
together with Amoretti's celebrated work on the same subject--Physical
and Historical Inquiries into Rhabdomancy, &c., in Germany. (See Dr.
Ashburner's Translation of Rheinbach, first American edition;
Redfield.) Schubert, in his work on Natural History, says, "It seems
clear, from many observations, that the whole mineral (and much of the
vegetable) kingdom _has a profound and mysterious relation with the
organism of man_." "_This_ relation," says Rogers, "is that of
matter with matter connected by an imponderable agent." "The phenomena
which betray this, as a fact of nature, have been observable from the
earliest ages. It is certain, however, that local causes often give
developments to such strange phenomena, _that it requires all the
science that can be mustered to keep back the tide of superstition
which will be thus aroused in the breasts of those unacquainted with
the action of these agents_."

Some will ask the question, "If these things be true, why have we not
heard of them before?" We confess that we know of no other possible
reason than that such inquiries are not "_posted up_," as they should
be, in matters of history and science. But, before closing this part of
our subject, we propose to relate a few more incidents, by way of
illustration.

"In the year 1849-50, certain highly-respectable houses in the city of
New York seem to have been all at once unaccountably beset with a
strange power, which seized upon particular parts, and would not allow
any one, not even the members of the families, to touch those seemingly
consecrated things. Whenever this was attempted, a loud, sharp sound
would be instantly given, accompanied with a sharp and spiteful flash
of light, as if the agent was determined to protect that which it had
seized upon. But this was not all; it would smartly shock the intruder
with a blow, as if with an unseen fist, or the like. It even seized
upon the members of these families at times, and would--so to
speak--make them apparently strike one another, in an unseen manner,
simultaneously. It was often the case that a stranger could not call at
the door without being instantly struck on the wrist or elbow, on
touching the knob of the door bell; and he would see, at the same
instant, an angry flash of light, as if from some demon's eye. The
ladies were not allowed to kiss each other without each receiving, on
the approach of their lips, a fiery smack, as from a spirit's lips. The
dear little ones of these families were prevented from giving their
mothers the parting salutation on retiring for the night."

"There _seemed_ to be a great deal of cunning shown by this agency. If
the lady of the house did not think to pay all due deference to its
rules, when she wished to give orders to the servants below through the
metallic speaking tube, she was sure to receive an unseen blow in the
mouth, almost sufficient to stagger her: at the same instant she would
see the flash of what might have been taken for a 'fiery,' if not for
an 'evil eye.'"

"Professor Loomis visited these dwellings, (see Annual of Scientific
Discovery, 1851, page 129,) and observed these phenomena. He perceived
the flash whenever the hand was brought near to the knob of the door,
also to the gilded frame of a mirror, the gas pipes, or any metallic
body, especially when this body communicated freely with the earth. "In
one house," says this scientific gentleman, in his description before
the American Scientific Association, at New Haven, "in one house, which
I have had the opportunity to examine, a child, in taking hold of the
knob of a door, received so severe a shock that it ran off in great
fright. In passing from one parlor to the other, if the lady of the
house chanced to step upon the brass plate which served as a slide for
the folding doors, she received an unpleasant shock in the foot. When
she touched her finger to the chandelier, there appeared a brilliant
spark, and a snap." After a careful examination of several cases of
this kind, Professor Loomis came to the conclusion "that the
electricity is created (excited) by the friction of the shoes of the
inmates upon the carpets of the house." "If the professor is correct in
his conjecture, it would follow that every house," says Mr. Rogers,
"with similar carpets, should become electrized, and exhibit similar
phenomena, in which case we should have observed their appearance at a
much earlier period, and the occurrence would have been presented much
more frequently and extensively. Yet the phenomena is every whit
electrical; hence we are led by them to see, that when local
circumstances are favorable, an agent may be developed in our midst,
which may play the most singular pranks, which, it is more than
probable, may be attributed to _supernatural_, and even to SPIRITUAL
_powers_, if the witnesses should be ignorant of those characteristics
which identify them with a well-known agent. Had the characteristics in
the above been contrary to those of any known agent, although the
phenomena had been entirely physical, how many would have leaped to the
conclusion, without a moment's thought or investigation, that the force
was a power of the invisible spirit world? With regard to the phenomena
of the present day, reason has been entirely set aside; hence the
precipitate conclusion concerning them, even by many who lay great
claim to its use and application to all other subjects. We have been
truly astonished at the course of such persons."

"We shall now present a few cases that bear a closer analogy to
electricity, perhaps, than those we have been considering. The first we
shall speak of is that of the two Smyrna girls, who visited France in
1839, and exhibited what was called _their electrical powers, in
moving tables without contact_. The account was published in the
Boston Weekly Magazine, of December 28, 1839. The two girls landed at
Marseilles, about the first of November, 1839. In hopes of realizing a
splendid fortune, they intended to exhibit themselves in France, and
other parts of the continent. Immediately on their arrival, several
persons, including several men of science and professors, visited them,
and ascertained the following phenomena:--

_First._ "The girls stationed themselves, facing each other, at the
ends of a large _table_, keeping at a distance from it of one or two
feet, according to their electrical dispositions.

_Second._ "When a few minutes had elapsed, a _crackling_, like that of
electric fluid spreading over gilt paper, was heard, when,--

_Third._ "The table received a strong shake, which always made it
_advance from_ the ELDER to the younger sister.

_Fourth._ "A _key_, _nails_, or any piece of _iron_ placed on the table
_instantaneously stopped_ the phenomena.

_Fifth._ "When the iron was adapted to the _under part_ of the table,
it produced no effect upon the experiment.

_Sixth._ "Saving this singularity, the facts observed constantly
followed the known laws of electricity, whether glass insulators were
used, or whether one of the girls wore silk garments. In the latter
case, the electric properties of both were neutralized." Such was the
state of matters for some days after the arrival of the young Greeks;
but,--

_Seventh._ "The temperature having become cooled, and the atmosphere
having loaded itself with _humidity_, all perceptible electric
virtue seemed to have deserted them. One may conceive the melancholy of
these girls," the writer continues, "and the disappointment of the two
Greeks, their relations, who came with them to share their anticipated
wealth."

"In this case we have the "manifestation" of a force greatly analogous
to that often witnessed at the present day. In one important respect it
acted differently from electricity, in that it was broken by simply
laying a _key_ or a small piece of _iron_ on the object the agent had
acted upon, &c. "It must be admitted, however," says Mr. Rogers, "that
the fact of the influence of glass insulators and the silk dress,
causing a cessation of the phenomena, shows that the agent that acted
upon the table was, in some way, a form of electricity, though greatly
varying, in its laws of action, from that usually known to science. We
have," says Mr. R., "some curious facts relating to this _modified
agent_, to present from Matucci and others," (in the second number of
our work.)

"From the effects of the humidity of the atmosphere, some may conclude
that the agent must have been _electricity_, inasmuch as the same state
of the atmosphere produces a like effect upon the action of friction
electricity. Let us allow this, and turn to precisely the same
phenomenon, as it has been manifested in the cases of numerous
'mediums' for the so-called '_spiritual manifestations_.'"

"We will not state it upon our authority alone, but also upon that of a
large number of intelligent believers in the spiritual origin of these
phenomena, that the electrical condition of the atmosphere enters into
the circumstances of their evolution; that in a humid state of the
weather it is not only difficult, in many instances, but sometimes it
is absolutely impossible, to obtain them under such a condition." We
know that many of the less informed "mediums" attribute these failures
to the _capriciousness of the spirits_, and frequently scold them
soundly for their misdemeanors, though at other times they seem to pity
them because they get so weary and fatigued in answering so many
inquiries, and being so long "_on duty_."

"It was thought by some who witnessed the case of Angelique Cottin,
that the agent which acted so powerfully from her organism,
overthrowing tables, twisting chairs out of stout men's hands, raising
a man in a heavy tub, was electricity. C. Crowe says it did cause the
deviation of the magnetic needle; but M. Arago, who knows more about
this abused agent than a nation of theorizers, could not detect the
least signs of it by the nicest tests. And yet it would give the person
who touched her or her dress a powerful shock, as if it _were_
electricity. Still, it may be the same agent that is ground out of
plate glass, that propagates news from city to city on iron wires, and
that thunders in the material heavens."

"It has been supposed that because, in many instances, 'mediums' have
given shocks like those given by electrized bodies, the two agents must
be identical. Not long since, a young lady, about sixteen years of age,
Miss Harriett Bebee, was placed in a magnetic state, in company with
Mrs. Tamlin, both being of a clairvoyant character. The sounds were
heard while they were in that state. Every time these occurred a very
sensible jar, like an electric shock, was experienced by Miss Bebee. In
answer to a question, she stated that at each sound she felt as if
there was electricity passing over her. Several of the persons, in
whose presence these sounds are heard, always receive a slight shock,
so that there is a slight jar, which has sometimes been so plain as to
lead persons, ignorant of the facts and the phenomenon, to accuse them
of making it themselves." Says a writer upon this subject, "This
feeling of electricity seems to pervade nearly every thing connected
with these phenomena. When the rapping is heard, the peculiar jar is
felt, differing from the jar produced by a blow; and in various other
ways we are reminded of the use of this subtile agent. We often see, in
a dark room, bright electric flashes on the wall and other places."

The same writer observes, "Persons sometimes feel a sensation of
electricity passing over their limbs when they stand in the vicinity of
those who get the sounds most freely, although the particular persons
who seem to be the mediums feel no sensation at all. In one or two
instances we have seen a perceptible shock, as if caused by a galvanic
battery, especially when the persons were under the influence of
magnetism."

"In a work published in Cincinnati, by "William T. Coggshall, the
author says, "We have felt positive electrical influences from
clairvoyants. At the present time," he continues, "what is termed
'electrical circles' are being formed every week in Cincinnati, for the
benefit of persons whose systems require additional electrical power.
We have seen several women so powerfully electrized in these circles,
that the same effects were produced upon them which would have been had
they been isolated in connection with a galvanic battery." So it has
been seen that, on touching Angelique Cottin, a person would receive a
"true electric shock." This kind of shock was experienced by Campeti
and Bleton, in passing over mineral veins and subterraneous streams, as
mentioned by Dr. Ashburner. "Many somnambulic persons," says C. Crowe,
"are capable of giving an electric shock; and I have met with one
person, not somnambulic, who informed me that he has frequently been
able to do it by an effort of the will."

"When an iron plate was brought near to one of Reichenbach's patients,
and a crystal brought in contact with it, the effect upon it was like
an electric shock, which even ascended from the elbow to the shoulder."
Many other cases might be cited to the same purpose. The magnet and
iron have a specific action upon the nervous system; and the same agent
acts also from crystals, vegetable substances, and the human hand, nay,
from the earth itself." The second number of Mr. Rogers's work contains
some interesting facts of this character.

"Vitality," says Dr. W. E. Channing, in his Notes on Electricity, "is
dependent on physical conditions, and performs its functions by the
agency of physical forces." The Rev. Thomas Hill, in his Fragmentary
Supplement to the Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, observes that "all bodies
are moved through the agency of other bodies, and we see nowhere a
motion which is not dependent upon _physical causes_, that is, which is
not produced by _physical agents_. Our will employs, unconsciously, the
aid of nerve and muscle; the supreme will employs, with wise designs,
the intervention of the laws of _impulse_, _attraction_, and
_repulsion_." "When, in the course of ages, the comparative easy
problems of astronomy were solved, problems of more difficulty were
brought to view. Phenomena which were not _obvious_, not _pictured
alphabet_, but the _fine print of creation_, _electrical_, _optical_,
and _chemical phenomena_, led men into more _hidden_ knowledge."

"The agents employed by the animal organization," says Dr. Channing,
"are principles found UNIVERSALLY IN NATURE, and, in addition to these,
a force which is peculiar to living structures--the special agent of
vitality." "Now, it might reasonably be expected, that if electricity,
among other agents found "universally in nature," is also associated
with the agent of the animal economy, it might, under favorable
conditions, exhibit its characteristic phenomena. These conditions
would, of course, be owing to a variation of the organism from its
normal standard. The following case, given by Dr. Ennemoser, of
Germany, exhibits some of these characteristics:--

The case was that of a young woman, sister of a professor at Strasburg.
Immediately on a sudden fright, she was seized with a nervous malady,
which continued for a long period, and finally terminated in her death.
Among the remarkable symptoms in her case were the following:--

_First._ Those of _somnambulism_, with more or less lucidity.

_Second._ Her body became so highly charged with electricity that
it was necessary to conduct it away by a regular process of conduction.

_Third._ Her body would impart powerful shocks to those who came
in contact, and even when they did not touch her.

_Fourth._ She controlled its action so as to give her brother (the
professor) a "smart shock when he was several rooms off." (The account
states, that when the professor received the shock, "he started up and
rushed into her chamber, where she was in bed; and as soon as she saw
him, she said, laughing, 'Ah, you felt it, did you?'")

_Fifth._ She was subject, also, to spasms and paroxysms of rigor
and trembling.

Some of the phenomena, in this case, resemble those we see exhibited by
the electric fish. The case is an important one in considering the
command which the nerve centres possess over the general agents
associated with them."

We shall now present another singular case, which occurred in this
country, in the month of January, 1839, an account of which was given
in Silliman's Journal, by a correspondent:--

_First._ That "on the evening of January 28, 1839, during a somewhat
extraordinary display of the northern lights, a respectable lady became
so highly charged with electricity, as to give out vivid electrical
sparks from the end of each finger, to the face of each of the company
present."

_Second._ That this did not cease with the heavenly phenomena, but
continued several months, during which time she was constantly charged
and giving off electrical sparks to every conductor she approached.
This was extremely vexatious, as she could not touch the stove, or any
metallic utensil, without giving off an electrical spark, with the
consequent twinge.

_Third._ That "the state most favorable to _this phenomena_ was an
atmosphere of about eighty degrees Fahrenheit, moderate exercise, and
social enjoyment. It disappeared in an atmosphere approaching zero, and
under the debilitating effects of fear."

_Fourth._ That, "when seated by the stove, reading, with her feet upon
the fender, she gave sparks at the rate of three or four a minute; and
under the most favorable circumstances, a spark that could be seen,
heard, or felt, passed every moment."

_Fifth._ That "she could charge others in the same way, when insulated,
who could then give sparks to others."

_Sixth._ "To make it satisfactory that her dress did not produce it, it
was changed to cotton, and woollen, without altering the phenomenon.
The lady is about thirty, of sedentary pursuits, and delicate state of
health, having, for two years previously, suffered from acute
rheumatism and neuralgic affections."

For further investigation into the cause of singular phenomena evolved
from secret agents, and the true philosophy of biology, magnetism,
trance, &c., we would again refer to the numbers of a work by Mr.
Rogers, now in process of publication. His principles and deductions
challenge successful contradiction.




EXPERIMENTS IN BIOLOGY.


Biology, so called, is one peculiar feature, or form, of mesmerism.
"These experiments," says Dr. Richmond, "attracted much attention some
three years since, in Ohio, and other places, and such was the intense
excitement of the public mind that, in some places, parents and the
public were obliged to interfere and stop children from biologizing
each other." It was found that not only muscular motion, but the
exercise of the senses, could be destroyed by the will of the operator.
Taste was obliterated, or changed, memory destroyed, and any picture
presented to the mind of the subject would be seen. Tell him he saw
snakes, and he would become frightened, and rush with violence over the
seats and benches. Tell him he was sleigh riding, and he would
instantly seize the reins, and drive the horses with great glee. Tell
him he was a witch--an old woman in rags--and he would own the
character, and confess all the crimes with which you had charged him.
Tell him he was a gay young lady, and another subject was about to
court him, and a love scene would commence. Tell him he was cold, and
he would shiver, his teeth chatter; he would stamp, and thresh his
hands to keep them warm. Tell him it was summer--very hot, and he would
begin fanning himself, fling off his coat, and, unless prevented, would
divest himself of all garments tell him that a tree of fruit was before
him, and he would begin to fill his pockets. Sweep the room before him,
and open the sky, and say that the river of life and a white throne
were before him, that the judgment was set, and instantly he would
assume the attitude of devotion; he would gaze with burning eye and
rapt delight into the scene of glory. Take him to a lake side, tell him
a child was drowning in the water, and he would wade in, take it in his
arms, and lay it carefully down, and weep over it in deep pity. Bring
before him the lightning's flash, the thunder's roll, or proclaim a God
in grandeur, and a world on fire, and, as once actually took place in
Covington, Kentucky, a dozen subjects fell in intense fright: some on
to the floor, some on benches, others sought to fly, and all declared
to the audience that a shower of fire seemed to be around them. Any
image the operator sees fit to plant in the subject's mind is readily
done; any passion readily assumed; reverence, revenge, vanity, love,
hate, fear, mirth, joy, grief, or ecstasy, are all _imitated_ at his
bidding, and safely dispersed and reproduced with the rapidity of
thought, changing in an instant both the actions and motions of the
subject. Tell the person he is suffocating in water, and he _will_
suffocate, unless you prevent him. Tell him he is struck on the head,
and he falls, as if stricken down with a hammer. No doubt a subject
might be killed by a mental impression--by saying to him he was shot
through the heart, or was struggling in water. This is the opinion
of all operators in the art. The subject at the time is, to all
appearance, in a perfectly _normal state_; his mental, moral, and
physical powers seem unchanged, and he thinks at the time he can resist
your power over him; he but gives you his eye, and you lead him captive
by mental impressions. The only perceptible variation from the normal
state is, that the _eye_, in most subjects, is clear and glassy, the
same eye that is observed in some maniacs, and in consumptive
patients--clear, sharp, and fearful to look at. The hidden fires of the
soul seem to burn through it, with intense force. I have watched it for
months, and years, in consumptives, under the wasting of vitality; and
the eye kindles and sparkles with more intensity as they near their
end. All impressible subjects have this eye, to a greater or less
extent; all consumptives have it, as well as those who in early life
are inclined to consumption.

The facts and incidents under the effects of biology are truly singular
and wonderful; and yet the advocates of the "spirit mania" admit there
is nothing supernatural in them. For aught we can see, the phenomena
put forth by the "rappers" differ not materially from the biologic
developments. They seem to be identical with each other.

I know it is affirmed that the developments of electro-biology do not
cover the whole ground in dispute, inasmuch as _men and women only_ are
found to yield to its impressions, while _chairs, tables_, and other
inanimate objects remain unimpressed. But if chairs and tables are not
moved by one form of magnetism, they are by another, as we have
abundantly shown. And any one with half an eye cannot but see that it
would require less effort to move a table, or other inanimate object,
than living, intelligent beings, capable of exerting their will in
opposition to the effort. Dr. Richmond says he has "seen an operator
draw a dozen persons from their seats, by the magnetic force of his
hand, at the distance of many feet. The first move of the hand would
bring the head forward, then the body, and by adding his voice, 'You
will stand up,' they would, _while resisting with the will, in spite of
themselves_, stand up, and follow his hand around the room." If
biologists have not usually exerted their power upon inanimate things,
it has probably been because they did not deem it of sufficient
importance. We have seen, however, a biologist raise a table to the
ceiling of a room, kindly permitting it to stick there a while, to the
no small amusement of the spectators! And it can be done again. By the
way, we would inquire what biologist is it that has sometimes lent his
aid in the raising of tables, at a "circle" in East Boston, himself an
unbeliever in "_spirit table-liftings_?"

The editor of the Spiritual Telegraph says, that "in the biological
experiments there is a _visible human operator_," but, "in the
spiritual manifestations, no human operator can be found, or
demonstrated to exist." But, pray, what is the "medium," in these
manifestations, but _a visible human operator_? Sometimes it takes
three or four persons to produce a single demonstration. And sometimes
they cannot muster _force_ enough to do this, especially if the weather
be rainy. And this is probably the reason why the rappers at
Poughkeepsie have resolved not to admit unbelievers, nor at any time
more than two or three new-comers, at a "circle," making, with the
believers, ten or twelve in all--successful results never being
guarantied to those invited to attend.

Mr. Brittan himself asserts that it is "the same power that moves the
_human medium_ that also moves the _wooden table_," &c. Here we have a
_human medium_ that is _moved to do something_, and _wooden tables_,
also; and if we can discover the secret agent in the one case, we shall
likewise in the other, for there is a perfect sameness or coincidence
in their operations. It is the same _unseen_ power, in both cases,
moving chairs, tables, tubs, troughs, bedsteads, and piles of lumber,
besides other gross, ponderable bodies--cutting up an infinite variety
of pranks to the _consternation_ of some, and the _amusement_ of
others, as A. J. Davis says of the dancing plates, knives and forks,
shovel, tongs, and poker, moved by "electrical discharges and magnetic
attractions," or emanations of vital electricity seeking its
equilibrium in the atmosphere.




FACULTY OF IMITATION.


The faculty of imitating signatures, of writing music, poetry,
specimens of foreign tongues, &c., is no more strange than imitating
the voice and gestures of those we never heard nor saw. Persons of
scarcely any education or talents, while under biological influence,
have been made to imitate the voice of Webster, Everett, Fillmore, and
others, delivering off-hand speeches of most impassioned diction and
eloquence; while, in their _normal_ state, they could scarcely frame a
paragraph in the king's English, much more deliver a formal address,
embellished with a profusion of metaphors, tropes, and figures,
accompanied with the finished attitudes and movements of a Choate, a
Sumner, or a Banks! These mesmeric imitations refer also to mechanical
and artistic power, and every talent that characterizes us as
intelligent beings. Some assert that mediums are in a _perfectly normal
state_ during the exhibitions of the "spirit" phenomena; and yet, to
the practical mesmerizer, nothing is plainer than that they are most
absolutely mesmeric persons.

The power of _imitation_ among mediums is various, but distinct. Some
draw _maps_, purporting to come from a deceased schoolmate. Others draw
_likenesses_; others speak in voices imitating the dead--but they can
imitate the living just as well; others hear sounds--the voice of a
wife, or child, or friend. Walter Scott relates the case of an English
gentleman who was ill, and was told by his physician that he had lived
in London too long, and _lived too fast_; and advised him to retire to
the country and ruralize. One of his troubles was, that a set of
_green_ dressed dancers would enter his drawing room, go through their
evolutions, and retire. He knew it was an illusion, but could not
resist the annoyance, or the impressions made on him. He returned to
his country seat, and, in a few weeks, got rid of his visitors. He
concluded to remain out of town, and sent to London for the furniture
of his old parlor, to be placed in his country house; but when it came,
and was arranged in the room, the _corps de ballet_, dressed in
_green_, all rushed into the room, _exclaiming_, "Here we are all
again!" He had associated in his mind the furniture and the dancing
apparitions, and when it returned, they came with it, and, as he
thought, _spoke with voices_. We recollect of reading in a medical
paper, published in Boston, an account of a man who believed his house
to be haunted by the devil, in consequence of which he resolved to
vacate it and remove into the country. His goods were packed into a
wagon, and he was just upon the point of starting with his load, when
to his surprise he heard a voice, seemingly among the goods, crying
out, "We are all going together." "If that is the case," said the man,
"I will unload again; for if I am _to have_ the devil's company, it may
as well be in one place as another."

The excessive use of wine will induce a state of the brain, in which
the person thinks he hears voices and sees spirits; but on close
examination it will be found that it is the work of the abnormal
powers, developed in the brain by stimulating agents or intense
thinking. It will be recollected that Swedenborg, after eating a late,
heavy supper, heard a voice crying out to him in terrible accents, "Eat
not so much." (See chap. 5.) Such phenomena may unravel the voice Judge
Edwards heard. His long-continued meditation on death, with night,
solitude, loneliness, and grief, had so impressed him that he thought
he heard a sound in exact imitation of the voice of his wife. In the
case related by Scott, hearing was not only affected, but the organ of
color was involved in the hallucination, and the _green figures_
were as plain before him as real persons. This is always one of the
phenomena of ghost-seeing that the seer associates with the spectre,
namely, _form_ and _color_, _voice_ and _action_.

The cases of imitation referred to, and others of the same class, are
the results of the _imitative mechanic power_ of the individual,
brought out by the abnormal magnetic state existing at the time. For
instance, if the individual has time and tune--the faculty of music
within lying undeveloped--it may be brought out, and made to act, by
the effects of magnetism. Last winter we listened to a lecture
delivered in Newark, New Jersey, by the Rev. Mr. Harris, from New York
city. He stated that there was a lady in Providence, who, by the agency
of spirits, produced musical compositions equal to the productions of
the best masters, as Haydn, Beethoven, and others, and that a volume of
these pieces were soon to be issued from the press. And although the
said work has not been heard of as yet, still we doubt not that a
person in a magnetic state might write very good music, even if totally
ignorant of its rules, as this young lady was said to be.

Phrenologists often tell persons that they would make excellent
tailors, dressmakers, poets, painters, musicians, &c.--persons who
never attempted to operate in these callings. "All they need," it is
said, "is an opportunity for the development of their powers." Now,
magnetism tends to develop or rouse these _dormant_ faculties into
action. It also gives a far-reaching, a far-seeing grasp and perception
of things, as in the case of Miss Martineau, who, be it remembered, was
too intelligent to attribute such effects to the agency of spirits.

A marked case of the increase of the _imitative power_ of persons
in the magnetic condition, is found in the case of Frederica Hauffe. In
one of her magnetic moods she informed Dr. Kerner that she would make a
diagram of the spheres. "The sun sphere," as she called it, is very
complex; but "she spun out the complicated web with unerring
precision," and a pair of compasses given her to facilitate her labor
only embarrassed her. It is made up of circles within circles, and
sections and points, amounting to thousands, related and connected; and
yet the "whole was executed," says Dr. K., "in an incredible short
space of time." An engraving was made of this sphere, and a year after
she was shown the engraving, and said it was not correct; a point on
one of the lines was wanting. On referring to the original, they found
she was right. This diagram contained many curious things, and in some
parts related to the highest departments of mathematics. This
_faculty_ she only possessed in the magnetic state, being wholly
incompetent to the task when not clairvoyant. No living artist can
execute that diagram with a pen, with a fac-simile before him, with the
rapidity with which that ignorant, unlettered child of nature did it.
"I have, in many cases," says Dr. Richmond, "witnessed this imitative
power of mediums with the pen, dashing off figures and images with a
rashness and rapidity almost inconceivable." As far as we can see,
there is no more proof of the agency of spirits in one case than in the
other; and we are sure no such claim was ever set up in the case of
Mrs. Hauffe, though living in a less enlightened region, perhaps, than
these United States. We might multiply cases of this kind, but space
will not permit.




UNSEEN LETTERS AND SIGNATURES.


The operator in biology or magnetism often lays hold of the inquiring
spectator, and uses him or her to imitate unseen letters, signatures,
and sentences, in foreign languages. And no doubt but what Professor
Bush has been made unconsciously instrumental in executing a few
specimens of languages, his eyes wide open, it may be, all the while.
It can be no more strange than that the son of Dr. Phelps should have
been made unconsciously instrumental in tying himself to the limb of a
tree in his father's yard, _supposing_ it to have been done by
_spirits_. (See the version of the affair by A. J. Davis.)

A biological mesmerist assures us that he finds no difficulty in
raising beds, chairs, and tables; and in the case of Mr. Kellogg it is
shown that such things are easily done without any aid from
_spirits_. In the case of Dr. Taylor, the writing medium, it is
shown, by the testimony of the spirits themselves, if their word is to
be relied on, that the phenomena in his case were not done by spirits,
but were the results of vital electricity. Such things are getting to
be so common that we may expect soon to see the time when little ragged
boys even (like those in Egypt, who went through the streets offering
to show the spirit of any deceased friend for a penny or a piece of
cake) will offer to lift tables, or imitate handwritings, at a penny a
sight. We know of several "mediums," now engaged in these things, who
confess they do not understand by what power it is they raise tables,
or write sentences, &c., yet they do not believe it to be done by the
agency of disembodied spirits. In many schools, the children have been
forbidden by their teachers to indulge in these foolish practices. This
power may be electricity, in some of its forms, or some other agent
that has some relation or affinity to it, as in the cases related by
Mr. Rogers.




A DANCING LIGHT.


A few years since the inhabitants of Southboro', Massachusetts, were
excited and alarmed at the appearance of a _light_, about the size of a
star, which for several successive nights was seen moving over a spot
of land in the westerly part of the town. Upon examining the premises
by daylight, it was found that a quantity of bones that had been buried
in the earth had been thrown upon the surface by the roots of a tree,
the trunk of which had recently been prostrated by a gale of wind. By
many, these bones were supposed to belong to some human being, who, it
was conjectured, had been murdered, and buried beneath the spot. And
the light seen hovering near was considered indicative of such an
event. But if the reader will turn to the second chapter of this work,
he will learn that these _dancing lights_, so called, arise from an
inflammable gas, evolved from decayed animal and vegetable substances,
which take fire on coming in contact with atmospheric air. This _ignis
fatuus_, _Jack-with-a-lantern_, or _Will-with-a-wisp_ appearance is
generally seen in dark nights, over boggy and marshy ground, and
generally in motion, at the height of five or six feet, skipping from
place to place, and frequently changing in magnitude and form. On some
occasions, it is observed to be suddenly extinguished, and then to
reappear at a distance from its former position. Those persons who have
endeavored to examine it closely have found that it moves away from
them with a velocity proportioned to that of their advance--a
circumstance which has had no small influence on the fears of the
ignorant and superstitious. Dr. Denham once saw an _ignis fatuus_ in a
boggy place, between two rocky hills, in a dark and calm night. He
approached by degrees within two or three yards of it, and thereby had
an opportunity of viewing it to the best advantage. It kept skipping
about a dead thistle, till a slight motion of the air--occasioned, as
he supposed, by his near approach--caused it to jump to another place;
and as he advanced it kept flying before him. He observed it to be a
uniform body of light, and concluded it must consist of _ignited
vapor_. These appearances are common on the plains of Boulogne, in
Italy, where they sometimes flit before the traveller on the road,
saving him the expense of a torch on dark nights. Sometimes they spread
very wide, and then contract themselves; and sometimes they float like
waves, and appear to drop sparks of fire. They shine more strongly in
rainy than in dry weather.

An appearance of the same kind is sometimes met with at sea, during
gales of wind, and, of course, has become connected with many
superstitious notions of sailors, who call it a _corpusant_. There
are sometimes two together, and these are named Castor and Pollux. The
following is a description of one, given by the voyager Dampier: "After
four o'clock the thunder and the rain abated, and then we saw a
corpusant, at our maintopmast head. This sight rejoiced our men
exceedingly, for the height of the storm is commonly over when the
corpusant is seen aloft; but when they are seen lying on the deck, it
is generally accounted a bad sign. A corpusant is a certain small,
glittering light; when it appears, as this did, on the very top of a
mainmast, or at a yardarm, it is like a star; but when it appears on
the deck, it resembles a great glowworm. I have been told that when the
Spanish or Portuguese see them they go to prayers, and bless themselves
for the happy sight. I have heard some ignorant seamen discoursing how
they have seen them creep, or, as they say, travel about, in the
scuppers, telling many dismal stories that happened at such times; but
I did never see any one stir out of the place where it was first fixed,
except on deck, where every sea washeth it about. Neither did I ever
see any but when we had rain as well as wind, and, therefore, do
believe it is some jelly."

The origin and nature of the lights above described have not yet been
satisfactorily explained. More accurate observations than have been
made are required to furnish the basis of a correct theory respecting
them.




SAILORS' OMENS.


Sailors, usually the boldest men alive, are yet not unfrequently the
very abject slaves of superstitious fear. Nothing is more common than
to hear them talk of noises, flashes, shadows, echoes, and other
visible appearances, nightly seen and heard upon the waters. Andrews,
in his Anecdotes, says, "Superstition and profaneness, those extremes
of human conduct, are too often found united in the sailor; and the man
who dreads the stormy effects of drowning a cat, of whistling a contra
dance while he leans over the gunwale, will, too often, wantonly defy
his Creator by the most daring execrations and licentious behavior."
Dr. Pegge says that "sailors have a strange opinion of the devil's
power and agency in stirring up winds, which notion seems to have been
handed down from Zoroaster, who imagined that there was an evil spirit,
called _Vato_, that could excite violent storms of wind." To lose a cat
overboard, or to drown one, or to lose a bucket or a mop, is, at the
present day, a very unlucky omen with common sailors.




LOVE CHARMS.


Theocritus and Virgil both introduce women into their pastorals, using
charms and incantations to recover the affections of their sweethearts.
Shakspeare represents Othello as accused of winning Desdemona "by
conjuration and mighty magic."

    "Thou hast practised on her with foul charms;
    Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
    That waken motion.
    She is abused, stolen from me, and corrupted,
    By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks."

In Gay's Shepherd's Week, these are represented as country practices:--

    "Straight to the 'pothecary's shop I went,
    And in love powders all my money spent.
    Behap what will, next Sunday after prayers,
    When to the alehouse Lubberkin repairs,
    These golden flies into his mug I'll throw,
    And soon the swain with fervent love shall glow."

In Love Melancholy, by Dr. Ferrand, it is said, "We have sometimes
among us our silly wenches, some that, out of a foolish curiosity they
have, must needs be putting in practice some of those feats that they
have received by tradition from their mother perhaps, or nurse; and so,
not thinking forsooth to do any harm, as they hope to paganize it to
their own damnation. For it is most certain that _botanomancy_, which
is done by the noise, or crackling, that box or bay leaves make when
they are crushed between one's hands, or cast into the fire, was of old
in use among the pagans, who were wont to bruise poppy flowers betwixt
their hands, by this means thinking to know their loves." Speaking of
the ancient love charms, characters, amulets, or such like periapses,
Dr. F. says, "They are such as no Christian physician ought to use,
notwithstanding that the common people do to this day too
superstitiously believe and put in practice many of these paganish
devices."

Miss Blandy, who was executed many years ago for poisoning her father,
persisted in affirming that she thought the powder given her by her
villanous lover, Cranston, to administer to him, was a "love powder,"
which was to conciliate her father's affection to her lover. She met
her death with this asseveration; and her dying request, to be buried
close to her father, seems a corroborating proof, that though she was
certainly the cause of his premature death, yet she was not, in the
blackest sense of the word, his wilful murderer.

We quote the following lines from Herrick's Hesperides:--


    A CHARM OR AN ALLAY FOR LOVE.

    "If so be a toad be laid
    In a sheepskin newly flayed,
    And that tied to a man, 'twill sever
    Him and his affections ever"




EFFECTS OF A BELIEF IN A GHOST.


Whenever a real ghost appears,--by which we mean some man or woman
dressed up to frighten another,--if the supernatural character of the
apparition has been for a moment believed, the effects on the spectator
have always been injurious--sometimes producing convulsions, idiocy,
madness, or even instantaneous death. The celebrated Allston, the
painter, when in England, related the following incident to his friend
Coleridge, the poet: "It was, I think," said he, "in the University of
Cambridge, near Boston, that a certain youth took it into his wise head
to convert a Tom Paine-ish companion of his by appearing as a ghost
before him. He accordingly dressed himself up in the usual way, having
previously extracted the ball from the pistol which always lay near the
head of his friend's bed. Upon first awakening, and seeing the
apparition, the youth that was to be frightened very coolly looked his
companion, the ghost, in the face, and said, 'I know you; this is a
good joke; but you see I am not frightened. Now you may vanish.' The
ghost stood still. 'Come,' said the youth, 'that is enough. I shall get
angry; away!' Still the ghost moved not. 'By heavens!' ejaculated the
young man, 'if you do not, in three minutes, go away, I'll shoot you.'
He waited the time, deliberately levelled his pistol, fired, and with a
scream at the immovability of the figure, became convulsed, and soon
afterwards died. The very instant he believed it to be a ghost, his
human nature fell before it."




THE INVISIBLE LADY.


In the year 1804, an invisible lady and acoustic temple were exhibited
in Boston, as an "Extraordinary Aerial Phenomenon." Its body was made
of glass It gave answers to questions asked by visitors. In London, a
few years ago, there was shown an apparatus consisting of a four-footed
stand, and several trumpet-mouthed tubes, from any one of which
spectators received ready answers to questions. The answers were said
to come from the "invisible girl;" but the true explanation of the
puzzle was, that a secret tube, in the legs of the apparatus,
communicated the sounds to a girl in a neighboring apartment. Probably
something similar was arranged in the glass body exhibited in Boston;
and if we mistake not, during the sojourn of Joice Heth, of more recent
notoriety, at the Albany Museum, a shrewd Albanian, after a minute and
diligent examination, made the wonderful discovery that the old lady,
or _nurse of Washington_, was composed of _India rubber_, and was made
to breathe, speak, cry, sing, &c., by the aid of _ventriloquism_!

In a case of spirit rappings, Professor Grimes discovered that the
party had contrived to have some levers concealed beneath the floor,
and by means of certain little pegs coming through where the rappers
sat, connecting with the levers, all nicely poised on a balance, they
placed their feet upon them, and produced the raps at pleasure. And in
the case of the Rochester rappers, when their ankles were firmly held
by the committee of investigation, it is said a servant girl rapped
with her knuckles under the floor. Mrs. Culver, who had been instructed
by the Fox family, and had practised with them a while, afterwards
renounced the craft, and exposed this among other deceptions to the
world. "The girl," she says, "was instructed to rap whenever she heard
their voices calling for spirits."




SORCERERS IN THE EAST.


The operations of the men sorcerers in India are quite scientific. They
set about their work in a business-like manner, and in sight of the
house of their intended victim the mystic caldron begins to boil and
bubble. The victim, however, is not to be terrified out of his senses.
What are his enemy's fires and incantations to him? He takes no notice,
and continues to live on as though there was not a sorcerer in the
world. But that _smoke_: it meets his eye the first object every
morning. That ruddy glare: it is the last thing he sees at night. That
measured but inarticulate sound: it is never out of his ear. His
thoughts dwell on the mystical business. He is preoccupied, even in
company. He wonders what they are putting into the pot, and if it has
any connection with the spasm that has just shot through him. He
becomes nervous; he feels sick; he cannot sleep from thinking; he
cannot eat for that horrid broth that bubbles forever in his mind. He
gets worse and worse, and dies! But this empire of the imagination is
beaten in Java, where it is supposed that a housebreaker, by throwing a
handful of earth upon the beds of the inmates, completely incapacitates
them from moving to save their property. The man who is to be robbed,
on feeling the earth fall upon him, lies as motionless as if bound hand
and foot. He is under a spell, which he feels unable to break.




SINGULAR METAMORPHOSES.


In the East, men are believed to be frequently metamorphosed--sometimes
voluntarily, sometimes involuntarily--into tigers. The voluntary
transformation is effected merely by eating a certain root, whereupon
the person is instantly changed into a tiger; and when tired of this
character, he has only to eat another, when, as quick as thought, he
subsides from a tiger into a man. But sometimes mistakes happen. An
individual of an inquiring disposition once felt a strong curiosity to
know the sensations attendant on transformation; but, being a prudent
man, he set about the transformation with all necessary precaution.
Having provided himself with

          "the insane root
    That takes the reason prisoner,"

he gave one also to his wife, desiring her to stand by and watch the
event, and as soon as she saw him fairly turned into a tiger, to thrust
it into his mouth. She promised, but her nerves were not equal to the
performance. As soon as she saw her husband fixed in his new form, she
took to flight, carrying in her hand, in the confusion of her mind, the
root that would have restored him to her faithful arms. And so it
befell that the poor tiger-man was obliged to take to the woods, and
for many a day he dined on his old neighbors of the village, but was at
last shot, and _recognized_!

In this superstition will be seen the prototype of the wolf mania of
mediæval Europe. In Brittany, men betook themselves to the forests in
the shape of wolves, out of a morbid passion for the amusement of
howling and ravening; but if they left in some secure place the clothes
they had thrown off to prepare for the metamorphosis, they had but to
reassume them to regain their natural forms. But sometimes a
catastrophe, like that above related, took place: the wife discovered
the hidden clothes, and carrying them home, in the innocent carefulness
of her heart, the poor husband lived and died a _wolf_!




PERNICIOUS ERRORS RELATING TO HEALTH.


In a former part of this volume, we have spoken of several impositions
upon the credulity of the public, in matters appertaining to health.
The astrologists have told us that "some plants are only to be plucked
at the rising of the _dogstar_, when neither sun nor moon shine, while
others are to be cut with a golden knife, when the moon is just six
days old." To some particular plants "a string must be fastened, a
hungry dog tied thereto, who, being allured by the smell of roasted
flesh set before him, may pluck it up by the roots." At one time, the
vegetable oil of swallows was considered a potent remedy. It was
prepared "by compounding twenty different herbs with _twenty live
swallows_, well beaten together in a mortar." Another medicine was
prepared from _the raspings of a human skull_; another from the _moss,
growing on the head of a thief_, who had been gibbeted and left to hang
in the air. In addition to these, we have had "_the powder of a mummy;
the liver of frogs; the blood of weasels; an ointment made of sucking
whelps; the marrow of a stag; and the thigh bone of an ox_." And we
have numerous modern nostrums scarcely better than these, by which the
gullible public are often sorely victimized.

There are many opinions among the people, which prove highly
deleterious in being carried into practice. For instance, that we must
"stuff a cold to cure it," when the reverse of the case is the only
safe mode of procedure. In a cold, the lungs are already loaded and
congested with accumulations of muco-purulent matter, which is
increased by taking large quantities of food.

Erroneous views, in regard to cleanliness, often lead to great
mischief. There is a notion with some that dirt is really healthy,
especially for children. This idea probably originated from the fact,
that those children who are allowed to play in the dirt are often more
healthy than those who are confined in the nursery or parlor. But it
should be remembered that it is not _dirt_ which promotes their
health, but active exercise in the open air. This more than compensates
for the injury sustained by the dirt. There is, however, something
deceitful, after all, in the ruddy appearance of these children, who,
like some four-footed animals, are allowed to wallow in mire and dirt;
for they actually suffer more, not only from chronic, but from acute
diseases, than children whose parents are in better circumstances. The
pores of the skin, as we have shown in the Family Physician, published
by us a few years since, cannot be closed with filth for any length of
time, and the subject remain uninjured. It is true, some years may pass
away before the bad effects appear; but in after life, scrofula,
rheumatism, jaundice, and even consumption, often arise after the cause
which first gave rise to them is forgotten, if indeed it were ever
suspected. It is our candid opinion, that a larger part of the deaths
that occur among children by typhoid, scarlet fever, and other baleful
diseases, is owing to some defect in management, as to diet, air,
dress, or exercise, which we will briefly show in this connection.

There are some, in adult life, who abstain wholly from external
ablutions, and never think of washing their bodies from one year to
another. Now, such persons must be considered, to say the least, to be
of an uncleanly habit; and such a habit is not only unfavorable to
health, but to morality. Mr. Wesley reckons cleanliness to be second
only to godliness. We venture to affirm that he who is most guilty of
personal neglect will generally be found the most ignorant and vicious.
I am well acquainted with a whole family who neglect their persons
_from principle_. They are a sort of _new lights_ in religious things,
and hold that the true Christian should "slight the hovel, as beneath
his care." But there is a want of intelligence, and even of common
refinement, in the family, that certainly does not, and _cannot_, add
much to their own happiness or comfort, aside from the fact that it
greatly annoys their neighbors.

We do not pretend to say but that there are some great and good persons
who are slovenly in their general appearance; but these are only
exceptions to a general rule. On the contrary, common observation
teaches us that it is a distinguishing mark of low-bred rowdyism, and
of vicious and intemperate habits, to see young men dressed in the most
loose and careless manner. A person of refinement and cultivation would
feel ashamed to appear in such a manner before the public gaze.

Neglect of proper ventilation leads to incomparable mischief. There are
many persons who live through the day in closely confined and
excessively heated apartments, and also sleep in small contracted bed
rooms, without the least opportunity for a current of fresh air. Who
can wonder that they rise in the morning with wearied limbs, languid
and listless, with a furred tongue, parched mouth, and headache? They
are continually subjected to inhaling, over and over, the poison, the
miasma, of their own bodies, which cannot but result, in the end, to
the great detriment of health. We are perfectly astonished, oftentimes,
to see to what an extent such a thing is carried. Take this, in
connection with eating improper and badly-cooked food, fat meats,
gravies, and pastries, the want of suitable protection against
atmospheric changes, and active exercise in the open air, and who can
marvel at the prevalence of deadly fevers, consumption, or cholera
even? It is only a matter of surprise that there are not ten deaths
where there is now one.

Look at the quality of the meats purchased for use. It is now a common
practice with farmers (in order to save the milk) to sell their calves
for market as soon as born; and people eagerly purchase this immatured
meat because afforded at a low price. Then look at the enormous
quantities of _pork_ consumed. Go past the sausage factories, in
the cities of Jersey, and you behold it heaped in piles, ready for the
work of the hundreds of "choppers," driven by steam. Then look into the
groceries, see the array of pound sausage meat, and cheese heads, so
called. A grocer in Newark city informed us, last winter, that sausage
meat and buckwheat cakes formed three quarters of the aliment of the
citizens. And in Paterson, New Jersey, in the hottest of the season,
calves were lying upon the pavements, ready to be slaughtered, and
almost as momentarily devoured, as occasion demanded. Even the poor
fowls, their legs swollen with inflammation from the cords with which
they were bound, and half famished for water and food, and fevered by
fright and exposure, were readily purchased by men and women, to
satisfy the cravings of a perverted appetite. When we behold such
practices, we cannot think it strange that mortality should be so rife
as it is at times, especially when the atmosphere is in a condition to
affect the body in a predisposed state, favorable to the development of
diseases, such as that of small-pox, cholera, fever and ague, scarlet
and typhoid, (i.e., decomposing fever,) which is the concentration of
all others. The food we eat may convey the disease within, and unless
the state of our system is healthy and harmonious, the resisting power
will not be equal to the force and action of the external elements, and
consequently we shall become a prey to the contagion, whatever type or
form it assumes. We are somewhat inclined to think that A. J. Davis
(who is a physician by profession) is correct, when he says, "The
atmosphere has had the cholera, more or less, for thirty years, and
will continue to have it until there occurs a geological change in many
portions of the earth; and from the atmosphere the disease has been,
and is, communicated epidemically to the predisposed potato plant, and
also to the human system." A late English writer remarks, that "certain
diseases prevail at the approach of the equinoxes."




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.

Irregularities and inconsistencies in the text have been retained as
printed. Unmatched double quotation marks occur in numerous places,
particularly near the end of the text. No attempt was made to open
or close these quotations unless the location of the missing
double quotation mark was apparent.

