CHAPTER X.

OMENS, CHARMS, AND DIVINATION.


Many books have been published, having a tendency to deceive the
credulous, who suffer themselves to be guided by any thing but reason
and experience. Hence the encouragement bestowed on works of
enchantment, dreams, omens, and fate. Mankind have always discovered a
propensity to peep behind the veil of futurity, and have been lavish of
money in consulting persons and books that make a pretension of
unravelling the decrees of Fate, which lie hidden in the labyrinths of
darkness. From these sources have arisen the following superstitions,
as a sample of the many that have disturbed the peace of individuals,
families, and sometimes of whole communities.

"A coal in the shape of a coffin, flying out of the fire to any
particular person, denotes his death is not far off. A collection of
tallow rising up against the wick of a candle is called a
winding-sheet, and deemed an omen of mortality. If, in eating, you miss
your mouth, and the food falls, it is very unlucky, and denotes
sickness. To dream you are dressed in black is an unlucky omen. Some
quarrel is about to happen between you and a friend or relative.
Sickness is about to attend your family. Death will deprive you of some
friend or relation. Lawsuits will perplex and harass you. If you
undertake a journey, it will be unsuccessful. If you are in love, it
denotes that your sweetheart is very unhappy, and that sickness will
attend her. If you are a farmer, your crops will fail, the murrain will
attack your cattle, and some dreadful accident will happen by the
overturning of one of your wagons. If you are in business, some one
will arrest you, and you will have great difficulty in settling the
matter. To dream of hen and chickens is the forerunner of ill luck.
Your sweetheart will betray you and marry another. If you go to law,
the case will be decided against you. If you go to sea, you will lose
your goods, and narrowly escape shipwreck. To dream of coals denotes
much affliction and trouble. If you are in love, your sweetheart will
prove false, and do every thing to injure you. To dream you see the
coals extinguished, and reduced to cinders, denotes the death of
yourself, or some near friend or relation. It also indicates great
losses, and forewarns you of beggary and a prison. To dream you are
married is ominous of death. It also denotes poverty, a prison, and
misfortunes. To dream of lying with your newly-married husband or wife
denotes danger and sudden misfortunes."

_Popular charms_ are equally absurd and nonsensical. For example, a
ring made of the hinge of a coffin is good for the cramp. A halter with
which a man has been hanged, if tied about the head, will cure the
headache. A drop of blood of a black cat cures convulsions in children.
If a tree of any kind be split, and weak, rickety, or ruptured children
are drawn through it, and afterwards the tree is bound together, so as
to make it unite--as the tree heals and grows together, so will the
child acquire strength. If in a family the youngest daughter be married
before her older sisters, they must all dance at her wedding without
shoes, to counteract their ill luck, and procure themselves husbands.
And to procure luck when a person goes out to transact business, you
must throw an old shoe after him. To spit on the first money received
for the price of goods sold on any day will procure luck. And that
boxers must spit in their hands before they set to, for luck's sake.

Seamen have a superstition that if they whistle in a storm, the storm
will be increased. And in time of a calm, they practise whistling to
_call the wind_, as they term it. Among farmers, in setting a hen, it
is deemed lucky to use an odd number of eggs. Among soldiers, salutes
with cannon must be of an odd number. A royal salute is thrice seven,
or twenty-one guns. Healths are drank odd. Yet the number _thirteen_ is
sometimes deemed ominous; it being supposed that when thirteen persons
meet in a room, one of them will die within the year. To know whether a
woman shall have the man she desires, it is directed to get two lemon
peels, and wear them all day, one in each pocket, and at night rub the
four posts of the bedstead with them. If she is to succeed, the person
will appear to her in her sleep, and present her with a couple of
lemons. If not, there is no room for hope. And again the fair ones are
directed to take a piece of wedding cake, draw it thrice through the
wedding ring, lay it under their pillow, and they will certainly dream
of their future husbands. A thousand other equally successful methods
have been proposed to solve the mysteries of future fortune; and yet
the magical stone, that will turn all our schemes into wished-for
realities, remains to be discovered. As time advances, and knowledge
pervades the abodes of darkness and ignorance, all this trumpery of
ghosts, witches, fairies, tricks, and omens will go down to the "tomb
of the Capulets." People will be able to pass through the churchyard,
sleep in an old house, though the wind whistle ever so shrill, without
encountering any supernatural visitations. They will become wise enough
to trace private and public calamities to other causes than the
crossing of knives, the click of an insect, or even the portentous
advent of a comet. Thanks to the illustrious names recorded in the
annals of science and letters, who have contributed towards so happy a
consummation.




CHAPTER XI.

MODERN MIRACLES.


There are some who profess to believe in modern miracles. But such
belief necessarily partakes of superstition. The Savior gave no
intimation that miracles should continue after the establishment of
Christianity. He promised to be with his apostles even unto the end of
that age. He declared that all who believed their instructions should
also have power to cast out devils, heal diseases, speak with new
tongues, and withstand any deadly thing. But his promise did not extend
beyond the immediate converts of the apostles. And we have no
satisfactory evidence that miracles were wrought by any but these;
while we have abundant testimony that our Savior's promise was
literally fulfilled. In fact, there was no necessity for miracles after
the establishment of Christianity. They were first wrought as so many
testimonies that Jesus was the sent of God; and at the same time, were
so many significant emblems of his designs, so many types and figures,
aptly representing the benefits to be conferred upon the human race.
But they were not designed to be perpetuated; for a history of divine
revelation was committed to writing, and translated into the prevailing
languages of the civilized world. If any could be so obstinate as not
to be convinced of its divine origin by the mass of evidence with which
it was accompanied, neither would they believe, though one should rise
from the dead.

Pretended modern miracles admit of an easy explanation on natural
principles. Diseases have been suddenly healed; but imagination
effected the cure. Visions, ghosts, and apparitions have been seen; but
they existed only in the minds of the observers, and were caused by
some mental or bodily operation. But nothing of this kind can be said
of the miracles of Christ. His cannot be accounted for on any natural
principles, but must have been caused by divine miraculous agency.

Modern miracles are not supported by satisfactory evidence. They have
been mostly wrought in secret. No witnesses can be produced but the
most interested. This was not the case with those of our Savior. They
were performed openly, and in the presence of friends and enemies. They
could not be deceptions; for the resurrection of a dead person could be
tested by the evidence of the senses. The remark of Judge Howe may be
appropriately introduced in this connection. He had thoroughly and
impartially studied the evidences of Christianity, and a firm belief in
its divine origin was the result. He observed that no jury could be
found that would give a verdict against Christianity, if the evidences
on both sides could be fairly presented before them, and they were
governed in forming their opinion by the common rules of belief. The
truth of this observation is confirmed by the fact, that candid
inquirers after truth have uniformly risen from an examination of the
evidences of Christianity believers in its divine origin. The same
cannot be said of modern miracles. No jury could be obtained of
disinterested persons, who would give a verdict in their favor.
Therefore we have no satisfactory evidence of their reality. Our safest
course is to admit the conclusion of eminent writers of all
denominations, namely, that miracles ceased with the first converts of
Christianity.




