CHAPTER XVI.

EVIL EFFECTS OF POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.

Great waste of time.--Ceremonies among the ancients.--Practices
in Catholic countries.--Injurious practices in Protestant
lands.--Dreams, visions, signs, tricks, omens, &c.--Great waste
of human life.--Account of the trial by _ordeal_.--Murder of
innocent persons.--Belief in dreams and forewarnings.--Modern
miracles, appearances of the dead, &c.--Unfavorable influence of
a belief in dreams.--The death watch, new moon, &c.--Predictions
of Nanny Scott.--Of the good Mrs. Taylor.--Marriages on a stormy
day.--Practice of wedded couples.--Moles on the wrong side of the
body.--Opening books, tricks, fortune telling.--Practice of a
lady in a clergyman's family.--Disadvantageous matrimonial
alliances.--Anticipation of dreadful calamities.--Practice of
Rev. John Wesley.--Temperaments of Melancthon and Luther.--Luck,
chance, fatality, &c.--Saul and the witch of Endor.--Conjurers
and impostors.--Injury done to the cause of medicine.--King's
touch in scrofula.--The _ninth_ son of a _ninth_ son.--The
_seventh_ son of a _seventh_ son.--Cure by the cold hands of
a malefactor.--Plaster on a pitchfork; polishing rusty nails.
--A female heart made into pills for consumption.--Heart taken
out of a female in Maine, and in Waltham, Massachusetts, and
made into pills.--Influence of the imagination.--Account of a
Mr. Austin, in Vermont.--His singular mode of healing the sick.
--Account of the celebrated _rain-water_ doctor.--Sketch of an
_astrological_ physician in New York.--Of Valentine Greataks
and Francisco Bagnone.--Momentary relief obtained, and why.--
Injury done to the cause of religion.--Account of the Pharisees,
compared to vipers and toads, and their numerous progeny.--How
we may know a Pharisee.--A young man catechized by our Savior.
--St. Paul once a Pharisee.--Proof.--Customs among the Catholics.
--Practices of many Protestants.--Mistaken views upon religion.
--Views concerning Satan.--Satan _versus_ Cotton Mather.--Professor
Stuart's views concerning the devil.--_Periodical_ revivals
of religion; the cause.--How to have a constant revival.          165


CHAPTER XVII.

BANISHMENT OF POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.

How shall it be effected?--The proper use of our _reasoning
faculties_.--The exercise of our understandings.--Persevering
self-discipline.--Conduct towards believers in ghosts, signs,
&c.--Misconduct in families; trying tricks, &c.--How we should
employ our time.--Belief in an all-wise Providence, as Governor
and Controller of all events.--Importance of a correct education
of youth.--Nursery tales and marvellous stories.--Their baneful
influence.--Correct examples before children.--Superstitious
tales to be avoided.--Attention to the means of education.--
Immense value and importance of knowledge.--No lack of means
to educate the young.--Money foolishly wasted in various ways.
--Perseverance in laudable exertions.--The blessing of Heaven
to crown our labors.                                              185


PART SECOND.

MIRACLE IN SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS.

Miracle performed by spirits in Springfield, Massachusetts.--Case
of biological deception.--Case of a "writing medium."--Effects
produced by pathetism.--Incident related by Miss Martineau.--
Travelling to other countries, and to other spheres.--Singular
feat by a boy of Dr. Phelps.--Wonderful case of a lady in New
Jersey.--Advice of Hon. Horace Greely.--Testimony of Rev. Dr.
Phelps.                                                           191


PERSONS TRAINED BY A LECTURER ON MAGNETISM.                       199


SCENE AT EAST BOSTON.

"Circle" at the house of Mr. Hoyt, at East Boston.--Effects of
vital electricity.--Imitating handwritings, writing poetry, music,
&c.                                                               200


EXTRACT FROM THE PURITAN RECORDER.

Facts related by a gentleman of Maine.--Renunciation of a spirit
rapper.--Murder committed at the instigation of "spirits."--
Conflicting testimony concerning John Thompson.--Experiments
of Mr. Kellogg, the table lifter.--Discovery by Dr. Taylor,
the writing medium.--Renunciation of Mr. Cooley, of Springfield,
Massachusetts.--Attempt to murder a family in Barre, Massachusetts.
--Sacrifice of the innocent in heathen countries.--Great danger
in civilized communities.--Reports concerning the burning of
the Lunatic Asylum in Maine.--Testimony of Professor Stowe.--
Reply of Bingham to Professor Pond.--Singular confessions of the
reviewer.--Intelligence said to be communicated by "spirits."--
Vital electricity of embodied and disembodied spirits.            203


EXTRACT FROM THE HOME JOURNAL.

Star singers, concerts, parties, and lectures in the other
spheres.--Studies of French, Italian, geology, chemistry, drawing,
&c.--Semi-clergymen, outsiders, or come-outers.                   215


FORETELLING FUTURE EVENTS.

Prediction concerning the ship Staffordshire.--General Pierce's
election foretold by Professor Anderson's glass bell.--False
predictions of the "spirits."--Error committed by Professor
Lester.--Suggestion of a lady to a sick friend.--Sentiments of
Alexander Pope.                                                   218


VISIONS, MIRACLES, AND WONDERS.

Sights, sounds, signs, miracles, maps, drawings, hieroglyphics.
--Talking cow in Maine.--Her prophecy.--Proposition for _another_
"NEW CHURCH."--Predictions concerning all other churches.--
Opinions three hundred years ago.--Fate of Galileo.               220


CLAIRVOYANT PHYSICIANS.

Prescriptions from the dead.--Power of the imagination.--Wonderful
efficacy of brown bread pills.--Singular cure of palsy, by Sir
Humphrey Davy.                                                    221


STYLE OF "SUPERNAL" COMPOSITIONS.

Fishbough's new work.--Fancy-captivating publications.--Refined
atheism.--Transcendental nonsense.--False communications relating
to patriots, statesmen, orators, and divines.--Mountebank scenes
of "psychology."--Testimony of A. J. Davis, upon the tricks of
the spirit demonstrators.--Concealments, misstatements, and
exaggerations.                                                    223


MYSTERIOUS PHENOMENA, WITH THEIR AGENTS OR CAUSES.

Thumping noises in New Jersey.--Door opened as if struck by a
mallet.--Great excitement.--Glass broken, &c.--Knockings heard in
New Hackensack.--Pile of lumber shaken; tables, chairs, stand,
and candlestick thrown about.--Bags of salt, tin ware, and
cooking utensils thrown in a heap.--An English officer haunted by
noises in the night.--Heavy marble top tables poising themselves
on two legs.--Brass door knockers bewitched.--Commotion among
crockery, tin ware, &c.--Firing a gun at noises in the walls.
--Tearing up floor to get at the noises.--Suit brought for
damages.--Bed of a sick girl raised.--Trembling of the house
walls.--Singular pranks in a factory.--Jerking of the frames,
and cylinder thrown at a distance.--Alarm and flight of the
operatives.--A chest with three men, and a man on a tub, taken
up by an invisible power.--A chair broken between two men's
hands.--An image seated on a stool, clad in white.--Visions of
beings like spirits.--Knockings on the walls, and noises in the
air.--A lady suspended by the tips of the fingers, as a magnet
suspends a piece of iron.--Electrical flashes from a lady's
body.--Knockings made to be heard at a distance.--Quotation from
a work by Rev. T. Hill, of Waltham.--Singular developments in New
York.--Freaks of a knob of a door bell.--Fiery flashes, and fiery
smacks, on kissing.--Blows in the mouth from a speaking tube.--
Account of two girls that could move tables without touching them.
--Effects of storms on raising tables.--Electrical circles in
Cincinnati.--Case of a lady in Strasburg.--Power of giving
electrical shocks to persons at a distance.--Singular effects
of the northern lights on a lady.                                 224


EXPERIMENTS IN BIOLOGY.

Chairs, tables, and persons moved.--Biological table-liftings in
East Boston.--"Mediums," as visible human operators.--Resolve of
the "rappers" at Poughkeepsie.--The unseen agent that moves
tables, beds, &c.--Dancing plates, knives and forks, &c.          264


FACULTY OF IMITATION.

Delivering speeches; imitating orators.--Case related by Walter
Scott.--Case of a man haunted by the devil.--Effects of wine and
heavy eating.--Voice heard by Judge Edmonds.--Lady in Providence
who writes music by "spirits."--Diagram of the spheres, by a lady
in a magnetic state.                                              268


UNSEEN LETTERS AND SIGNATURES.

Imitating unseen letters, signatures, and languages.--Suspicions
concerning Professor Bush.--Singular feat attributed to spirits.
--No difficulty in raising chairs or tables.--Spirits shown by
Egyptian boys.--Unbelief of practising "mediums."--School
children forbidden to move tables, &c.                            273


A DANCING LIGHT.

Dancing light seen in Southboro', Massachusetts.--_Ignis
fatuus_ seen by Dr. Derham.--Corpusants seen by mariners.--
Dampier's account of them.                                        274


SAILORS' OMENS.

Sailors' omens and superstitions.--Devil's power in stirring up
winds.--Losing a cat overboard, a bucket, or a mop.               276


LOVE CHARMS.

Othello winning Desdemona by conjuration.--Execution of a young
lady for giving a love powder.--Her dying confession.--A charm or
an allay for love.                                                277


EFFECTS OF A BELIEF IN A GHOST.

Effects of a belief in the reality of ghosts.--Case at the
University at Cambridge.--A student frightened to death.          279


THE INVISIBLE LADY.

The invisible lady in Boston.--The invisible girl in London.--
Joice Heth, the India rubber woman.--Professor Grimes's
discovery among the "rappers."--Mrs. Culver respecting the
Rochester rappers.                                                280


SORCERERS IN THE EAST.

Persons killed by the enemy's fires.--Singular custom in Java.    281


SINGULAR METAMORPHOSES.

Men turned into tigers by eating a certain root, and turned back
again by eating another.--A tiger-man shot in the woods and
recognized, after having devoured some of his neighbors.--Account
of the wolf mania in Egypt and in Brittany.--A husband that lived
and died a wolf.                                                  282


PERNICIOUS ERRORS RELATING TO HEALTH.

Astrology.--Vegetable oil of swallows, &c.--Cleanliness, diet,
&c.--Ablution.--Ventilation.--Food.--Quality of meats.            284




THE SPIRIT LAND.




INTRODUCTION.


The object of this treatise upon some of the various errors of the past
and present ages is to explain their nature--investigate their
origin--describe their injurious effects--and to offer and recommend
the necessary measures for their banishment. Most persons, even those
who have been well educated, can call to mind the avidity with which,
in their days of childhood, they listened to the nursery tales of
giants, dwarfs, ghosts, fairies, and witches. The effects of these
juvenile impressions are not easily effaced from the mind, and the
impressions themselves are but rarely, if ever, forgotten.

To doubt, in former times, the power of charms, and the veracity of
omens, and ghost stories, was deemed little less than atheism. The
terror caused by them imbittered the lives of persons of all ages. It
either served to shut them out of their own houses, or deterred them
from going abroad after it was dark. The room in which the head of a
family died was for a long time untenanted; particularly if he died
without a will, or was supposed to have entertained any peculiar
religious opinions. If any disconsolate maiden, or love-crossed
bachelor, became the instrument of their own death, the room where the
fatal deed was committed was rendered forever uninhabitable, and not
unfrequently nailed up. If a drunken farmer, returning from market,
fell from his horse, and by the fall broke his own neck, that spot,
ever after, was haunted and impassable. In truth, there was scarcely a
by-lane or cross-way but had its ghost, which appeared in the shape of
a headless cow or horse. Ghosts of a higher degree rode in coaches,
drawn by six headless horses, and driven by a headless coachman. As for
the churchyards, the legitimate habitations of spectres, clothed all in
white, the numbers who swarmed there equalled the living parishioners;
and to pass such a place in the night was more perilous than the
storming of Badajos.

Confuted and ridiculed as these opinions have been, in later days, the
seeds of them are still widely diffused, and at times attempt to spring
up in all their earlier excess. In the year 1832, crowds of men, women,
and children flocked to the village of Waltham, a few miles from
Boston, to see a ghost which was said to make its appearance towards
midnight, walking to and fro in a turf meadow, declaring itself, in
unearthly tones, to be the spirit of a murdered man, whose bones lay in
a mud hole near by. The excitement spread many miles around, and
hundreds from the city and neighboring towns hied to the spot, with
eyes agape, to behold the solemn visitor from the spirit world. And
such was the credulity inspired in the minds of the people, that a
clergyman in the vicinity declared from his pulpit, on the following
Sabbath, that the awful crime of murder had been revealed by the spirit
which had appeared in Waltham! Such is the _excitability_ of the
mind, and its tendency (notwithstanding the light that has been
scattered abroad) to give credence to all the vagaries and nonsense of
the darker ages.




