CHAPTER IX.

FAIRIES, OR WANDERING SPIRITS, AND GYPSIES.

Description of fairies, habits, localities, &c.--Subterranean spirits
in Wales, called _Knockers_.--The _Brownies_ in Scotland.--A farmer
in Ireland who was tormented by fairies.--Method taken to appease
their anger.--Spenser's poem of the Fairy Queen.--Gypsies and their
employments.--Casting the evil eye.--Safeguard against it.--Charm of
the Bible and key.--Superstition called the _elf-shot_.--Practice of
poisoning animals, and the cure.--Superstitions concerning the
loadstone.--Translation of St. Luke into the Gypsy tongue.--
Singular notions of the Gypsies concerning it.--Condemned by the
royal edict at Madrid.--The Gypsy choirs at Moscow.--Anecdote of
Madame Catalini.                                                   61


CHAPTER X.

OMENS, CHARMS, AND DIVINATION.

Books published upon these things.--Their injurious tendency.--A
sample of their contents.--Practice of boxers.--Whistling in a
storm at sea.--Setting hens on an _odd_ number of eggs.--Salutes
of an _odd_ number of guns.--Omen concerning the number _thirteen_.
--Methods of ascertaining who will be a future husband.--Crossing
of knives.--Click of insects.--Advent of comets.                   76


CHAPTER XI.

MODERN MIRACLES.

They partake of superstition.--Instructions of the Savior concerning
them.--Object of Scripture miracles.--Modern miracles not satisfactory.
--Judge Howe's opinion concerning Christianity.--Times of miracles
ceased.                                                            79


CHAPTER XII.

FALSE PROPHETS AND CHRISTS.

History of the prophet Matthias.--His career in Albany and New York.
--His deceptions upon conspicuous individuals.--His arrest for
alleged crimes.--Account of John of Leyden.--Sketch of Cochrane,
and his impositions.                                               81


CHAPTER XIII.

MORMON SUPERSTITION.

Account of the golden plates found by Joseph Smith.--Their
translation and publication in a volume.--Peculiar style of the
writings.--Attempt at imitation.--Mormon preachers speaking with
new tongues.--Increase of the doctrine, and why.--Mormon cities
not to be identified.--Strong indications of fabrication.--
Fluency and earnestness of their preachers.--Traits of the
Cochranites.--Effects produced upon their hearers.--An account
of the _real_ origin of the Mormon Bible, and its author.--Of
Joseph Smith, Jr., the Mormon prophet.--His early characteristics.
--Exposure of the indecent ceremonies at Nauvoo; as established
by Smith and others.                                               96


CHAPTER XIV.

MILLER DELUSION.

Prophecies of Mr. Miller.--His computation of time.--Management
to suit his own particular views.--Keeping the world standing
thirty years on a simple _if_.--Various blunders and mistakes.
--Confession of his errors.--False information respecting signs.
--Disappearance of stars.--Of the Aurora Borealis.--Shooting
stars.--Sun and moon turning to blood.--Darkness of the sun.--
Its cause.--Remarkable appearances in various ages of the world.
--Opinion concerning Halley's comet.--Ignorance of the constitution
of comets.--The comet of 1770.--Tests of signs that shall indicate
the end of time.--Scientific men stationed in various parts of the
earth.--No such changes as have been spoken of by the second
advent preachers, observed by them.                               102


CHAPTER XV.

INTERCOURSE WITH DEPARTED SPIRITS.

Spirits, ghosts, and spectres seen in all ages.--Account of the
magic crystals, or divining glasses.--Seeing spirits in Egypt.--
Lady Blessington's crystal in England.--Spirit of Lord Nelson
described.--The Latin language commonly used by spirits.--An
account of spirits that live in the SUN.--Spirits conversing
with human beings.--Mode of communication by letters of fire,
or large printed _capitals_.--Interview with the spirit of
_Pharaoh_.--His present dwelling in the planet _Jupiter_.--
Information gleaned in conversation with him.--Swedenborg's
account of Sir John Franklin.--Describes his situation, blocked
up by _ice_.--Spirits do not understand about _latitude_ and
_longitude_.--Description of the spirit of Socrates, his dress,
&c.--Account of the emperor Alexander in the spirit world.--
Dickens's account of fashionable dupes in England.--The sciences
of astrology and magic.--Practices of high titled ladies in
London.--Account of famous conjurers, or fortune tellers.--
Account of the "rappers," or "knocking spirits."--Children
frightened by their noises.--Snapping of fingers, and clapping
of hands, imitated by the spirits.--Mrs. Fox asks questions of a
spirit.--Answers given by a succession of _raps_.--Account of a
ghost that appeared in Waltham, Massachusetts.--Conversation with
the ghost by a gentleman.--Said he had been murdered, and told by
whom.--Tones of the ghost, (unearthly,) its mode of walking, &c.
--Great excitement on account of the ghost.--Mode of communication
with the _rapping_ spirits.--Tables and chairs moved, sounds heard,
&c.--Band of music, beating of the _bass drum_, and roar of artillery.
--Guitar played by unseen hands.--Ladies' hair taken down and
braided by spirits.--People touched by unseen hands.--How spirits
produce the sounds of _music_.--How they make the _rapping_ noises.
--Account of an interview with the spirit of Dr. Franklin.--
Sounds heard like trying the batteries in the telegraph office.--
Occupation of Franklin in the spirit world.--Getting up a line of
communication between the two worlds.--Dr. Franklin predicts great
changes in the nineteenth century.--Connection of _magnetism_ with
the _spiritual rappings_.--Clairvoyant interpreters between men
and spirits.--Spiritual postmasters, letter paper, and envelopes.
--Letters received from the spiritual worlds.--The _Spirit Journal_,
in Auburn, New York.--Its pages edited, controlled, and superintended
by _spirits_.--The _prophets_ and _apostles_ its conductors, acting
under the LORD SUPREME.--Blunders and errors of the rapping spirits.
--Ignorant spirits.--Mischief produced by them.--Swedenborg's account
of their stupidity.--How to distinguish the sounds made by an
ignorant or an intelligent spirit.--Wonderful precocity of infant
spirits.--Progression of spirits, both upwards and downwards.--
The spirit of Dr. Channing _deteriorated_ in the other world.--
Theological teachings of the rapping spirits.--Prophecy of
Swedenborg concerning the year 1852.--Noises of the _rappers_
indicative of the approach of his prediction.--Are to be considered
as _omens_ of a new advent.--Compared with the Miller prophecy of
1843.--Miracles, both of the rappers and the Millerites.--A sick
man and his bed taken up by spirits.--The body of a Mr. Gordon
taken up by spiritual hands.--Miracles wrought in favor of
_Millerism_.--Miracles wrought in favor of _witchcraft_.--
Millerites taken up by spiritual hands.--Strange noises made
by _spirits_ among the Adventists.--Houses shaken, mirrors
shattered to pieces, furniture broken.--Four women carried
through the air on a _pole_.--Testimony under oath respecting
it.--Account of a bewitched _ventriloquist_.--Witches in 1850.
--What the editor of a Boston journal says of them.--Witches,
ghosts, spooks, and hobgoblins, in all ages of the world.--
Account of a haunted house in Boston.--Every window illuminated
at midnight.--A young man frightened by the scene.--Singular
notion of the Greenlanders respecting the cause of thunder,
and of the Aurora Borealis.--Notion of the ancients concerning
the foundation of the earth.--Of the mathematician Kepler.--
Performance of Signor Blitz.--Effects produced by _ventriloquism_.
--Singular vibrations of the guitar.--Spirit rappings considered
as a new science.--Noises heard by the Wesley family, in 1716.
--Noises heard by Martin Luther.--Empty barrels and hogsheads
tumbling down stairs.--Information of past, present, and future
events.--The fortune tellers in comparison with the spirit rappers.
--Spirits unwilling or unable to spell their own names.--Spiritual
communications on the decline.--Contrast between the doings of
ancient and modern spirits.--Swedenborg's information concerning
the spirit of Melancthon.--A clairvoyant interview with Tom Paine.
--Account of an interview with Mr. Sunderland.--Dialogue with a
young lady.--Interview with a clairvoyant medium in Lowell.--Facts
respecting mesmeric operations.--People deceived by "sympathetic
spirits."--Judson J. Hutchinson made insane.--Exposure of the
deception practised upon him.--Davis's account of Benjamin
Franklin.--Dr. Phelps concerning the "spirit rappers."--Singular
developments at his house.--How tables, chairs, &c., are moved by
spirits.--Exhibitions of "chin music" in London.--Singular
transactions in England, as related by Dr. Thomas Dick.--Tricks
performed by Joe Collins of Oxford.--Spirits seen by the votaries
of St. Vitus, and the Shakers of later times.                     118


