CHAPTER XII.

PRETENDED PROPHETS AND CHRISTS.


Many have professed a belief in the divine inspiration of some one of
the many false prophets or Christs that have appeared in different ages
of the church. In the year 1830, there was a man in this country,
calling himself Matthias, who declared that he was the very Christ, and
pretended that he had come to judge the world. And strange as it may
seem, he was attended by some individuals of quite respectable
standing, who worshipped him as God! He appeared in pontifical robes,
with his rule in his right hand, and his two-edged sword in the left.
Underneath a rich olive broadcloth cloak, lined and faced with silk and
velvet, he wore a brown frock coat, with several stars on each breast,
and a splendid golden star on his left breast. His belt was of white
cloth fastened by a golden clasp, surmounted by an eagle. He
occasionally put on a cocked hat, of black beaver, trimmed with green,
the rear angle being surmounted by the golden symbol of glory.

On being asked where his residence was, and what was his occupation, he
replied, "I am a traveller, and my legal residence is Zion Hill,
Westchester county, New York; I am a Jewish teacher and priest of the
Most High, saying and doing all that I do, under oath, by virtue of my
having subscribed to all the covenants that God hath made with man from
the beginning up to this time. I am chief high priest of the Jews of
the order of Melchizedec, being the last chosen of the twelve apostles,
and the first in the resurrection which is at the end of 2300 years
from the birth of Mahomet, which terminated in 1830, that being the
summit of the power of the false prophets. I am now denouncing judgment
on the Gentiles, and that judgment is to be executed in this age. All
the blood from Zacharias till the death of the last witness is required
of this generation. Before this generation passeth away, this judgment
shall be executed and declared. The hour of God's judgment is come."

Matthias commenced his public career in Albany; but not making many
converts there, he soon removed to the city of New York. Here he met
with but little success for some time; but it appears that in the
autumn of 1832, he had succeeded in ingratiating himself into the favor
of a number of individuals, among whom were three of the most wealthy
and respectable merchants of Pearl Street. He represented himself to
them to be the Spirit of Truth, which had disappeared from the earth at
the death of Matthias mentioned in the New Testament, and that the
spirit of Jesus Christ entered into that Matthias whom he now
represented, having risen again from the dead. This blasphemous
impostor pretended to possess the spirit of Jesus of Nazareth, and that
he now, at his second appearance of the spirit, was the Father, and had
power to do all things, forgiving sins, and communicating the Holy
Ghost to such as believed on him. And what was most astonishing and
unparalleled, these men, who were before professors of the Christian
religion, were blind enough to believe and confide in all he imposed on
them.

So completely did he succeed in deluding these men, and in impressing
them with the belief that he was actually a high priest of the order of
the mysterious Melchizedec, upon a divine mission to establish the
kingdom of God upon the earth, that he obtained entire control over
them and their estates. "I know the end of all things," he would
assert, illustrating it by placing a piece of paper in a drawer,
leaving one end upon the outside, and saying, "You can see but one end
of the paper, and so the world sees; but I see the whole length of
it--I see the end."

Whenever he saw fit to call upon his dupes to contribute of their
substance for his support and the promotion of the kingdom he was about
to establish, he did so; and if they refused to provide him whatever
money he desired, he threatened to visit upon them (which he declared
he had the power to do) the wrath of the Almighty. But if they believed
in him and obeyed him in all things, he promised them that they should
be called into the kingdom, and he would forgive all their sins, and
they should enjoy eternal happiness. Impudent and blasphemous as such
language and pretensions truly were, the intended effect was produced,
and the prophet received new encouragement by the gratification of
pecuniary abundance. This object gained, he was enabled to adorn his
person with costly apparel, and to obtain other appurtenances and
furniture which he thought were necessary, that all things might
correspond to the nature and dignity of the office which he had
assumed.

In August, 1833, two of his friends and proselytes, Messrs. Pierson and
Folger, were residing at Sing Sing, Westchester county. Thither, about
that time, Matthias repaired, and took up his residence with Mr. Folger
and family. In a week or two, Matthias came to the conclusion that
their dwelling-place did not correspond with his character, and
accordingly suggested to Folger and Pierson that it was their duty to
hire, for his use, a house which he might consecrate wholly to himself.
In this he was accommodated, not only without any hesitation, but with
the acknowledgment that the request was reasonable. Soon after this, it
appeared to Matthias's mind, that his habitation should not be subject
to worldly interests or infidel intrusion; and he accordingly presumed
to require of his two obedient followers the purchase of a house to be
exclusively his own. With this request they agreed to comply. Before it
was accomplished, however, Matthias manifested some new attribute of
his character, and accompanied the revelation by an effort to make
Folger believe that the house in which he then resided at Sing Sing,
and had purchased some time previous for the use of himself and family,
was purchased at the instigation of the Spirit of Truth, for him,
Matthias--Folger having been the instrument under the influence of that
Spirit for that purpose! So complete was Matthias's control, that
Folger believed even this! And having resided with Messrs. Folger and
Pierson about two months, he took _this_ house, thus miraculously
purchased, into his own especial charge. Matthias then required these
gentlemen to give him an account of their property, and having obtained
this statement, which exhibited their easy circumstances, he required
both of them to enter into an agreement to support him, assuring them
they should receive the blessing of God by so doing. This agreement was
accordingly entered into, and Matthias enjoyed the full benefits of it
for several months, when Mr. Folger became bankrupt. His wants were
afterwards supplied by Pierson, until the death of Mr. P., which took
place under very suspicious circumstances. It seems that a short time
previous to this melancholy event, and while Mr. Pierson was yet in
health, Matthias prevailed upon him to assign him his whole estate. And
it seemed, by Matthias's account on his examination, that Messrs.
Folger, Pierson, and Mills frequently declared to him that they
believed him to be the _Father_, and that he was qualified to establish
God's kingdom on earth, and that Zion Hill, which was the place
miraculously purchased at Sing Sing, was transferred to him for that
purpose, together with horses, carriages, and furniture of a house in
Third Street, New York--that it was also agreed that the house and lot
in Third Street should be conveyed to him, and that Mr. Pierson
directed a deed to be made out accordingly, but died before it was
completed. He still considered the property as his own for the original
purpose, and considered it the beginning of the establishment of the
kingdom. It is certain that Mr. Pierson was suddenly taken sick, and it
was believed to be immediately after this contract was made. He fell
under the care of Matthias, who would neither allow his friends to
visit him, nor to call medical aid, declaring himself to "_have power
of life and death_." Mr. Pierson's body having been removed to New
Jersey for interment, a post mortem examination was held by four
respectable physicians, all of whom certified that they found in the
stomach a "_large quantity of an unwholesome and deadly substance_."
Matthias was therefore arrested with the charge of having poisoned Mr.
Pierson, on which he gave bail for appearance at court.

Soon after this, he went to the city of New York, and entering the
family of Mr. Folger, resided with them for several months; but the
mysterious death of Mr. Pierson, and the attending circumstances,
having shaken the confidence of Mr. Folger and his family, they began
to be conscious of their delusion, and resolved to abandon Matthias and
his principles. On announcing their determination to him, he resorted
to his old practice of threats and promises, and told them they must
not throw him destitute on the world; that, if they did so, the
blessing of God would depart from them, and sickness and perhaps death
would follow; but if they gave him money to support him, the blessing
of God should continue to them. Mr. Folger having become bankrupt,
Matthias perhaps was willing to leave him--not, however, without having
first insisted on a supply of money, which he obtained to the amount of
six hundred and thirty dollars, and immediately left the city. On the
morning of that day, Matthias partook of a very little breakfast, and
scarcely tasted of the coffee, alleging, as an excuse, that he was ill.
Immediately after breakfast, Mr. Folger, his wife, and children were
taken sick. Mr. Folger did not suspect the cause of their illness,
until after Matthias had left the city, when, upon examination, he
learned that the black woman who did the cooking for the family had
also abstained from the use of coffee that morning; and from other
circumstances he became confirmed that the woman was bribed by Matthias
to poison the family. The effort was unsuccessful, the poison producing
but a temporary effect. This nefarious transaction induced Mr. Folger
to procure the arrest of Matthias, firmly convinced, at this melancholy
stage, that he was a _base impostor_.

The third gentleman named as one of the dupes of Matthias became a
lunatic under the unfortunate delusion. But on a removal to the
country, and from the influence of the "prophet," he recovered, and
became convinced of his lamentable error.

In the sequel, it appeared that Matthias had received in the aggregate,
from these gentlemen, about ten thousand dollars in money, and
negotiable paper, which he appropriated in furnishing the establishment
at Zion Hill and in Third Street. And by whatever means he obtained
money, it is evident he used it for the wildest and most extravagant
purposes. His wardrobe was most bountifully supplied with new boots,
shoes, and pumps; linen shirts of the most exquisite fineness, the
wristbands fringed with delicate lace; silk stockings, handkerchiefs,
and gloves; coats embroidered with gold; merino morning dresses; and
two caps made of linen cambric, folded in the form of a mitre, richly
embroidered, one with the names of the twelve apostles written around
it, and "Jesus Matthias" adorning the front in prominent characters,
the other surrounded with the names of the twelve tribes, the front
like the other. With his two-edged sword (with gold chain and
mountings) he was to destroy the Gentiles, as Gideon did the
Midianites. With his six feet rule he was to measure the New Jerusalem,
"the gates thereof, and the walls thereof," and divide it into lots for
those who believed on him, and obeyed the Spirit of Truth, as it came
from him, the trumpet. With the golden key which he possessed, he was
to unlock the gates of paradise.

Somewhat versed in the rites and antiquities of the Jews, this impostor
united with a quick and active mind a considerable cunning, a fluent
speech, and a vast amount of persevering impudence, and endeavored to
impress his dogmas by assuming a sanctified and uncompromising air, and
by invariably fixing upon his victim his remarkably fierce and
penetrating eyes. He reasoned plausibly and ingeniously, and was
exceedingly subtle at evasion. Although he never could have obtained an
extensive and permanent influence, even if his knavery had not been
detected, since his schemes were too wild and incoherent, and his
demands too absurd to produce an effect that would endure beyond his
actual and immediate presence, yet that his blasphemous pretensions
should have gained any credence among intelligent minds is to be
greatly lamented. The whole history of these transactions will form a
dark page in the records of modern fanaticism, and will present an
enduring but melancholy evidence of the weakness of human nature.

As an excuse for the conduct of Matthias, or Matthews, which was his
real name, he was supposed by some to be laboring under monomania,
partly hereditary and partly superinduced by religious fanaticism and
frenzy. Still, he was not without "method in his madness;" and it seems
evident that, with a tinge of insanity, he was also much of a knave,
and probably a dupe in part to his own imposture. During his
confinement in jail, awaiting his trial for the alleged murder of Mr.
Pierson, Matthias issued a decree, commanding all the farmers to lay
aside their ploughs, declaring, "As I live, there shall be no more
sowing in the earth until I, the twelfth and last of the apostles, am
delivered out of the house of bondage." He also prophesied that if he
were convicted, White Plains should be destroyed by an earthquake, and
not an inhabitant be left to tell the tale of its destruction; and
strange to say, men were not found wanting who believed in his absurd
and blasphemous predictions. On trial, the physicians who had examined
the stomach of the deceased were led to suspect poison, but could not
say positively that poison had been administered; whereupon the
prisoner was discharged, on the ground that no evidence had been
produced to convict him either of murder or manslaughter. In the case
of his arrest at the instigation of Mr. Folger, that gentleman
afterwards wrote to the district attorney, requesting him to dismiss
the case, it not appearing to be an indictable one, and declaring, that
the day--"so far as passing himself for a _pure_ and _upright_
man--has passed, and there is no danger of his imposing upon any one
here or elsewhere." In a letter written by Mr. Folger, dated New York,
Nov. 8, 1834, and published in the Commercial Advertiser, Mr. Folger
says, "My object is now to rid myself of him and all connected with
him, with as little trouble as possible. Mr. Pierson, myself, and
family have been deeply, very deeply deluded, deceived, and imposed
upon; and I regret exceedingly that the former could not have been
spared to witness the deep deception. We are sensible of our error--we
repent it sincerely; and although we cannot expect to recover, at
present, the situation which we held in society previous to our
acquaintance with this vile creature, yet in time we shall be able to
show that we are enemies to him, and all who undertake to sustain him
in his wickedness and plans to destroy us."

For closeness of resemblance, in many striking features, to the case of
Matthias, was that of the Anabaptists of Munster, in Germany, which
excited the wonder of Europe during the early part of the seventeenth
century, and of which such strange accounts are to be found in the
histories of that epoch. The similarity between the principal of this
sect, known as John of Leyden, and Matthews, not only in doctrine, but
in worldly observance, in the passion for magnificence of apparel and
luxurious living, and in the rites and ceremonies exacted by each, is
so remarkable as almost to lead to the conclusion that the latter had
formed himself and his creed upon the model of his ancient prototype.
The number of deluded proselytes who blindly followed the dictates of
the Anabaptist leader was at one time so great, and their power so
formidable, that several princes of Germany united against them; and it
was not until after a vigorous siege, and an obstinate resistance, that
the city of Munster, of which the fanatics had obtained complete
possession, was taken and their power broken down.

This John of Leyden wore upon his head a triple crown of gold, richly
adorned with gems. Around his neck he wore, suspended by a golden
chain, an ornament of gold, representing the terrestrial globe, with a
cross, and two swords, one of gold, the other of silver, with the
inscription, "King of Righteousness over the whole world." He also
assumed the title of "the Father," and he required all his followers to
pledge themselves to do his will, and, if necessary, to suffer death at
his command, or in his defence and service. He enjoined and enforced a
community of goods, a surrender of all possessions, land, money, arms,
and merchandise to him, as the Father and Lord of all, to be employed
by him in the universal establishment of his kingdom; and he denounced
the vengeance of Heaven and eternal damnation on all such as refused to
believe in him and do his will. All churches and convents he commanded
to be destroyed, the priests denounced as children of darkness, and all
sovereigns he would put to death. He proclaimed the nullity of all
marriages, except such as were solemnized by himself or his own
prophets, but enjoined polygamy, himself setting the example. Each of
his principal followers had from six to eight wives, and both men and
women were compelled to marry. He taught that no man understood the
Scriptures but himself, or those whom he enlightened with his spirit,
and all the prophecies in the Old Testament, relating to the Savior, he
applied to himself, and proclaimed their fulfilment in the
establishment of his kingdom.

In our own country, the most surprising instance of imposture and
delusion, perhaps, that has occurred, was that of the Cochranites,
whose enormities in licentiousness made so much stir in Maine and New
Hampshire a few years since. Cochrane was an officer in the army,
thrown out of commission by the reduction of the military establishment
of the United States, after the conclusion of the last war with
England. Having become poor and penniless, he left Portland, and struck
off into the country, seeking his fortune, and caring not whither he
went. One day, as night drew on, he found himself near a farm house,
weary and hungry, and without a penny to purchase a mouthful of food or
the use of a pillow for the night. The thought struck him suddenly of
throwing himself upon the hospitality of the farmer, for the occasion,
in the character of a minister. Introducing himself as such to the
family, he was cordially received, and as the country was new and
destitute of clergymen, the good people forthwith despatched messengers
to the neighbors, that a minister had come among them, and invited them
in to attend a meeting. The impostor had not anticipated so speedy a
trial of his clerical character; but having assumed it, there was no
escape--he must act the part, for the time being, in the best way he
could. Being neither ignorant nor destitute of talents, he succeeded in
acquitting himself much better than he had anticipated, and gave so
much satisfaction to his audience as to induce him to persevere in the
imposture he had commenced. As he acquired skill and confidence by
practice in his new vocation, his popularity increased, and he soon
found it a profitable occupation. He was followed by multitudes, and it
was not long before he announced himself as some great one, and founded
a new sect of religionists. His command over the audiences which he
addressed is said to have been wonderful, and his influence over his
followers unbounded. It seemed as though he was enabled to hold the
victims of his impostures in a state of enchantment. A professor in an
eastern college having heard of the wonderful sway which Cochrane held
over his disciples, and of the impressions he made upon casual hearers,
determined one evening to go and witness his performances. While
present, although a very cool and grave personage, he said he felt some
strange, undefinable, mysterious influence creeping over him to such a
degree, that he was obliged actually to tear himself away, in
apprehension of the consequences. This gentleman, however, was a
believer in animal magnetism, and was therefore inclined to attribute
it to that cause. It was said that if the impostor did but touch the
hand or neck of a female, his power over her person and reason was
complete. Consequently it led to the most open and loathsome
sensuality. So atrocious was his conduct, that he seduced great numbers
of females, married and unmarried, under the pretext of raising up a
holy race of men. The peace of many families was broken up, and the
village kept an establishment like a seraglio--a disgusting and
melancholy commentary upon the weakness of human nature. His career,
however, was but of short duration.

A history of religious impostures would form a library of itself. The
human mind, in all ages and countries, and under all forms of
government and religion, seems to have been wonderfully susceptible of
delusion and imposition upon that subject, which, of all others, is the
most important for time and eternity. The court of Egypt was deluded by
the impostors who undertook to contend with Moses. And the chosen
people themselves, notwithstanding the direct disclosures which the
Most High had made of himself, in all their wonderful history, were
prone to turn aside from the worship of the true God, to follow the
lying spirits of the prophets of Baal and other deceivers, from the
days of Moses till the destruction of Jerusalem. So, likewise, under
the Christian dispensation, from the defection of Simon Magus to the
wild delirium of Edward Irving, there have been a succession of
Antichrists, until their name is legion--pretenders to divine missions,
the power of working miracles, the gift of tongues--perverting the
Scriptures, leading astray silly men and women--destroying the peace of
families, throwing communities into confusion, and firebrands into the
church--clouding the understandings, and blinding the moral perceptions
of men, and subverting the faith of these even whose mountains stood
strong, and who had been counted among the chosen people of God. "In
the last days," says the apostle Peter, "there shall come scoffers,
walking after their own lusts,"--"chiefly them which walk after the
flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government; presumptuous
are they, self-willed; they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities;
sporting themselves in their own deceivings, having eyes full of
adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls; for
when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the
flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them
who live in error; while they promise them liberty, they themselves are
the servants of corruption." Jude also admonishes us "to remember that
they were foretold as mockers, who should be in the last time, who
should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit."

It is wonderful to observe with what precision these prophecies have
been fulfilled by the clouds of impostors who have appeared--"spoken
great swollen words of vanity," and fallen--since the inspired
sentences were uttered. And it may be regarded as one of the evidences
of the truth of inspiration, that, had the long array of apostates and
deceivers actually stood before the sacred penmen, at the time of their
writing, their characters all naked before them, the likenesses, from
the first Christian apostate to the sensual Mormons, could not have
been drawn with greater fidelity. The "TRUTH OF GOD," distinctly
set forth in the book of Revelation, is an infallible criterion
by which to test the true character of any religious opinion or
practice; nor can any radical or fundamental error long escape
detection, when subjected to this plain and unerring standard.




