PART IV.

ON THE METAPHYSICAL EXPLANATION OF THE PRIMAL ETHICAL PHAENOMENON.




CHAPTER I.

HOW THIS APPENDIX MUST BE UNDERSTOOD.


In the foregoing pages the moral incentive (Compassion) has been
established as a fact, and I have shown that from it alone can proceed
unselfish justice and genuine loving-kindness, and that on these two
cardinal virtues all the rest depend. Now, for the purpose of supplying
Ethics with a foundation, this is sufficient, in a certain sense; that
is, in so far as Moral Science necessarily requires to be supported by
some actual and demonstrable basis, whether existing in the external
world, or in the consciousness. The only alternative is to tread in the
footsteps that so many of my predecessors have left, in other words, to
choose arbitrarily some proposition or other,--some bare and abstract
formula--and make it the source of all that morality prescribes;
or, like Kant, to sublimate a mere idea, that of =law=, into
the key-stone of the ethical arch. But, dismissing this method for
the reasons discussed above, in the Second Part, the investigation
proposed by the Royal Society appears to me now completed. For their
question, as it stands, deals only with the foundation of Ethics; as
to a possible metaphysical explanation of this foundation nothing
whatever is asked. Nevertheless, at the point we have reached, I am
very sensible that the human spirit can find no abiding satisfaction,
no real repose. As in all branches of practical research, so also
in Ethical Science, when all is said, man is inevitably confronted
with an ultimate phaenomenon, which while it renders an account
of everything that it includes, and everything deducible from it,
remains itself an unexplained riddle. So that here, as elsewhere, the
want is felt of a final interpretation (which, obviously, cannot but
be =metaphysical=) of the ultimate data, as such, and through
these,--if they be taken in their entirety--of the world. And here,
too, this want finds utterance in the question: How is it that, what
is present to our senses, and grasped by our intellect, is as it is,
and not otherwise? And how does the character of the phaenomenon, as
manifest to us, shape itself out of the essential nature of things?
Indeed, in Moral Science the need of a metaphysical basis is more
urgent than in any other, because all systems, philosophical no less
than religious, are at one in persistently attaching to =conduct=
not only an ethical, but also a metaphysical significance, which,
passing beyond the mere appearance of things, transcends every
possibility of experience, and therefore stands in the closest
connection with human destiny and with the whole cosmic process. For
if life (it is averred) have a meaning, then the supreme goal to which
it points is undoubtedly ethical. Nor is this view a bare unsupported
theory; it is sufficiently established by the undeniable fact that,
as death draws nigh, the thoughts of each individual assume a moral
trend, equally whether he be credulous of religious dogmas, or not;
he is manifestly anxious to wind up the affairs of his life, now
verging to its end, entirely from the =moral= standpoint. In
this particular the testimony of the ancients is of special value,
standing, as they do, outside the pale of Christian influence. I shall
therefore here quote a remarkable passage preserved by Stobaeus, in his
_Florilegium_ (chap. 44, §. 20). It has been attributed to the earliest
Hellenic lawgiver, Zaleucus, though, according to Bentley and Heyne,
its source is Pythagorean. The language is graphic and unmistakable.
_Δεῑ τίθεσθαι πρὸ ὀμμάτων τὸν καιρὸν τοῡτον, ἐν ᾧ γίγνεται τὸ τέλος
ἑκάστῳ τῆς ἀπαλλαγς τοῡ ξῆν. Πᾱσι γὰρ ἐμπίπτει μεταμέλεια τοῑς μέλλουσι
τελευτᾱν, μεμνημένοις ὧν ἠδικήκασι, καὶ ὁρμὴ τοῡ βούλεσθαι πάντα
πεπράχθαι δικαίως αὐτοῑς_.[1]

Furthermore, to come to an historical personage, we find Pericles, on
his death-bed, unwilling to hear anything about his great achievements,
and only anxious to know that he had never brought trouble on a
citizen. (Plutarch, _Life of Pericles_.) Turning to modern times, if
a very different case may be placed beside the preceding, I remember
having noticed in a report of depositions made before an English jury
the following occurrence. A rough negro lad, fifteen years old, had
been mortally injured in some brawl on board a ship. As he was dying,
he eagerly begged that all his companions might be fetched in haste:
he wanted to ask if he had ever vexed or insulted any one of them, and
after hearing that he had not, his mind appeared greatly relieved. It
is indeed the uniform teaching of experience that those near death wish
to be reconciled with every one before they pass away.

But there is evidence of another kind that Ethics can only be finally
explained by Metaphysics. It is well known that, while the author of an
intellectual performance,--even should it be a supreme masterpiece--is
quite willing to take whatever remuneration he can get, those, on the
other hand, who have done something morally excellent, almost without
exception, refuse compensation for it. The latter fact is specially
observable where conduct rises to the heroic. For instance, when a
man at the risk of his life has saved another, or perhaps many, from
destruction, as a rule, he simply declines all reward, poor though he
may be; because he instinctively feels that the metaphysical value
of his act would be thereby impaired. At the end of Bürger's song,
"The Brave Man," we find a poetical presentment of this psychological
process. Nor does the reality, for the most part, differ at all from
the ideal, as I have frequently noticed in English papers. Conduct
of this kind occurs in every part of the world, and independently of
all religious differences. In human beings there is an undeniable
ethical tendency, rooted (however unconsciously) in Metaphysics, and
without an explanation of life on these lines, no religion could gain
standing-ground; for it is by virtue of their ethical side that they
all alike keep their hold on the mind. Every religion makes its body
of dogmas the basis of the moral incentive which each man feels, but
which he does not, on that account, understand; and it unites the two
so closely, that they appear to be inseparable. Indeed the priests take
special pains to proclaim unbelief and immorality as one and the same
thing. The reason is thus apparent, why believers regard unbelievers
as identical with the vicious, and why expressions such as "godless,"
"atheistic," "unchristian," "heretic," etc., are used as synonymes
for moral depravity. The religions have, in fact, a sufficiently easy
task. =Faith= is the principle they start from. Hence they are
in a position to simply insist on its application to their dogmas,
and this, even to the point of employing threats. But philosophy
has no such convenient instrument ready to hand. If the different
systems be examined, it will be found that the situation is beset with
difficulties, both as regards the foundation to be provided for Ethics,
and in relation to the point of connection discoverable in any such
foundation with the given metaphysical theory. And yet,--as I have
emphasised in the introduction, with an appeal to the authority of
Wolff and Kant--we are under the stringent necessity of obtaining from
Metaphysics a support for Moral Science.

Now, of all the problems that the human intellect has to grapple with,
that of Metaphysics is by far the hardest; so much so that it is
regarded by many thinkers as absolutely insoluble. Apart from this,
in the present case, I labour under the special disadvantage which
the form of a detached monograph involves. In other words, I am not
at liberty to start from some definite metaphysical system, of which
I may be an adherent; because, if I did, either it would have to be
expounded in detail, which would take too much space; or else there
would be the necessity of supposing it granted and unquestioned,--an
exceedingly precarious proceeding. The consequence is that I am as
little able to use the synthetic method here as in the foregoing Part.
Analysis alone is possible: that is, I must work backwards from the
effects to their cause, and not _vice versâ_. This stern obligation,
however, of having at the outset no previous hypothesis, no standpoint
other than the commonly accepted one, made the discovery of the ethical
basis so laborious that, as I look back upon the task, I seem to have
accomplished some wondrous feat of dexterity, not unlike that of a man
who executes with subtlest skill in mid air what otherwise is only
done on a solid support. But now that we have come to the question
whether there can be given a metaphysical explanation of the foundation
obtained, the difficulty of proceeding without any assumption becomes
so enormous, that but one course appears to me open, namely, to attempt
nothing beyond a general sketch of the subject. I shall, therefore,
indicate rather than elaborate the line of thought: I shall point out
the way leading to the goal, but not follow it thither; in short, I
shall present but a very small part of what, under other circumstances,
could be adduced. In adopting this attitude for the reasons stated, I
wish, before beginning, to emphatically remark, that in any case the
actual problem put forward has now been solved; consequently, that what
I here add is an _opus supererogationis_, an appendix to be given and
taken entirely at will.


[1] We ought to realise as if before our eyes that moment
of time when the end comes to each one for deliverance from living.
Because all who are about to die are seized with repentance,
remembering, as they do, their unjust deeds, and being filled with the
wish that they had always acted justly.-- _Ἀπαλλαγή = Erlösung. V_.
Joannes Stobeaus, _Florilegium,_ edit. Meineke; publ. Lipsiae: Teubner,
1855. Vol. ii., p. 164, l. 7 sqq.--(_Translator_.)




