CHAPTER II.

THE METAPHYSICAL GROUNDWORK.


So far all our steps have been supported by the firm rock of
experience. But at this point it fails us, and the solid earth sinks
from under our feet, as we press forward in our search after a final
theoretical satisfaction, there, where no experience can ever by any
possibility penetrate; and happy shall we be, if perchance we gain
one hint, one transient gleam, that may bring us a certain measure
of content. What, however, shall not desert us is the honesty that
has hitherto attended our procedure. We shall not make shift with
dreams, and serve up fairy tales, after the fashion of the so-called
post-Kantian philosophers; nor shall we, like them, seek, by a wordy
exuberance, to impose upon the reader, and cast dust in his eyes. A
little is all we promise; but that little will be presented in perfect
sincerity.

The principle, which we discovered to be the final explanation of
Ethics, now in turn itself requires explaining; so that our present
problem has to deal with that natural Compassion, which in every man
is innate and indestructible, and which has been shown to be the sole
source of =non-egoistic= conduct, this kind alone being of real
moral worth. Now many modern thinkers treat the conceptions of Good
and Bad as =simple=, that is, as neither needing, nor admitting
any elucidation, and then they go on, for the most part, to talk very
mysteriously and devoutly of an "Idea of the Good," out of which
they make a pedestal for their moral system, or at least a cloak for
their poverty.[1] Hence I am obliged in this connection to point out
parenthetically, that these conceptions are anything but =simple=,
much less _a priori_; that they in fact express a relation, and are
derived from the commonest daily experience. Whatever is in conformity
with the desires of any individual will, is, relatively to it, termed
=good=; for instance, good food, good roads, a good omen; the
contrary is called =bad=, and, in the case of living beings,
=malicious=. And so one, who by virtue of his character, has
no wish to oppose what others strive after, but rather, as far as
he reasonably may, shows himself favourable and helpful to them;
one, who, instead of injuring, assists his neighbours, and promotes
their interests, when he can; is named by the latter, in respect to
themselves, a =good man=; the term =good= being applied to
him in the sense of the above definition, and from their own point of
view, which is thus relative, empirical, and centred in the passive
subject. Now, if we examine the nature of such a man, not only as it
affects others, but as it is in itself, we are enabled by the foregoing
exposition to perceive that the virtues of justice and loving-kindness,
which he practises, are due to a direct participation in weal and
woe external to himself; and we have learnt that the source of such
participation is Compassion. If, further, we pause to consider what is
the essential part in this type of character, we shall certainly find
it to lie in the fact that such a person =draws less distinction
between himself and others than is usually done=.

In the eyes of the malicious individual this difference is so great
that he takes direct delight in the spectacle of suffering,--a delight,
which he accordingly seeks without thought of any other benefit to
himself, nay, sometimes, even to his own hurt. From the egoist's point
of view the same difference is still large enough to make him bring
much trouble on his neighbours, in order to obtain a small personal
advantage. Hence for both of these, between the =ego=, which is
limited to their own persons, and the =non-ego=, which includes
all the rest of the world, there is fixed a great gulf, a mighty abyss:
_Pereat mundus, dum ego salvus sim_ (the world may perish, provided
I be safe), is their maxim. For the good man, on the contrary, this
distinction is by no means so pronounced; indeed, in the case of
magnanimous deeds, it appears to become a vanishing quantity, because
then the weal of another is advanced at the cost of the benefactor, the
self of another placed on an equality with his own. And when it is a
question of saving a number of fellow-beings, total self-obliteration
may be developed, the one giving his life for many.

The inquiry now presents itself, whether the latter way of looking at
the relation subsisting between the ego and the non-ego, which forms
the mainspring of a good man's conduct, is mistaken and due to an
illusion; or whether the error does not rather attach to the opposite
view, on which Egoism and Malice are based.

No doubt the theory lying at the root of Egoism is, from the
=empirical standpoint=, perfectly justified. From the testimony of
experience, the =distinction= between one's own person and that of
another appears to be absolute. I do not occupy the same space as my
neighbour, and this difference, which separates me from him physically,
separates me also from his weal and woe. But in the first place, it
should be observed that the knowledge we have Of our own selves is by
no means exhaustive and transparent to its depths. By means of the
intuition, which the brain constructs out of the data supplied by the
senses, that is to say, in an indirect manner, we recognise our body as
an object in space; through an inward perception, we are aware of the
continuous series of our desires, of our volitions, which arise through
the agency of external motives; and finally, we come to discern the
manifold movements, now stronger, now weaker, of our will itself, to
which all feelings from within are ultimately traceable. And that is
all: =for the perceiving faculty is not in its turn perceived=.
On the contrary, the real substratum of our whole phaenomenal nature,
our inmost essence in itself, that which wills and perceives, is not
accessible to us. We see only the outward side of the ego; its inward
part is veiled in darkness. Consequently, the knowledge we possess
of ourselves is in no sort radical and complete, but rather very
superficial. The larger and more important part of our being remains
unknown, and forms a riddle to speculate about; or, as Kant puts it:
"The ego knows itself only as a phaenomenon; of its real essence,
whatever that may be, it has no knowledge." Now, as regards that side
of the self which falls within our ken, we are, undoubtedly, sharply
distinguished, each from the other; but it does not follow therefrom
that the same is true of the remainder, which, shrouded in impenetrable
obscurity, is yet, in fact, the very substance of which we consist.
There remains at least the possibility that the latter is in all men
uniform and identical.

What is the explanation of all plurality, of all numerical diversity of
existence? Time and Space. Indeed it is only through the latter that
the former is possible: because the concept "many" inevitably connotes
the idea either of succession (time), or of relative position (space).
Now, since a homogeneous plurality is composed of =Individuals=,
I call Space and Time, as being the conditions of multiplicity, the
_principium individuationis_ (the principle of individuation); and I
do not here pause to consider whether this expression was exactly so
employed by the Schoolmen.

If in the disclosures which Kant's wonderful acumen gave to the world
there is anything true beyond the shadow of a doubt, this is to be
found in the Transcendental Aesthetics, that is to say, in his
doctrine of the ideality of Space and Time. On such solid foundations
is the structure built that no one has been able to raise even an
apparent objection. It is Kant's triumph, and belongs to the very small
number of metaphysical theories which may be regarded as really proved,
and as actual conquests in that field of research. It teaches us that
Space and Time are the forms of our own faculty of intuition, to which
they consequently belong, and not to the objects thereby perceived;
and further, that they can in no way be a condition of things in
themselves, but rather attach only to their mode of =appearing=,
such as is alone possible for us who have a consciousness of the
external world determined by strictly physiological limits. Now, if to
the Thing in itself, that is, to the Reality underlying the kosmos, as
we perceive it, Time and Space are foreign; so also must multiplicity
be. Consequently that which is objectivated in the countless phaenomena
of this world of the senses cannot but be a unity, a single indivisible
entity, manifested in each and all of them. And conversely, the web of
plurality, woven in the loom of Time and Space, is not the Thing in
itself, but only its =appearance-form=. Externally to the thinking
subject, this appearance-form, as such, has no existence; it is merely
an attribute of our consciousness, bounded, as the latter is, by
manifold conditions, indeed, depending on an organic function.

The view of things as above stated,--that all plurality is only
apparent, that in the endless series of individuals, passing
simultaneously and successively into and out of life, generation
after generation, age after age, there is but one and the same entity
really existing, which is present and identical in all alike;--this
theory, I say, was of course known long before Kant; indeed, it may be
carried back to the remotest antiquity. It is the alpha and omega of
the oldest book in the world, the sacred *Vedas, whose dogmatic part,
or rather esoteric teaching, is found in the *Upanishads.[2] There, in
almost every page this profound doctrine lies enshrined; with tireless
repetition, in countless adaptations, by many varied parables and
similes it is expounded and inculcated. That such was, moreover, the
fount whence Pythagoras drew his wisdom, cannot be doubted, despite
the scanty knowledge we possess of what he taught. That it formed
practically the central point in the whole philosophy of the Eleatic
School, is likewise a familiar fact. Later on, the New Platonists
were steeped in the same, one of their chief tenets being: _διὰ τὴν
ἑνότητα ἀπάντων πάσας ψuχὰς mίαν εἶναι_. (All souls are one, because
all things form a unity.) In the ninth century we find it unexpectedly
appearing in Europe. It kindles the spirit of no less a divine than
Johannes Scotus Erigena, who endeavours to clothe it with the forms and
terminology of the Christian religion. Among the Mohammedans we detect
it again in the rapt mysticism of the *Sûfi.[3] In the West Giordano
Bruno cannot resist the impulse to utter it aloud; but his reward is a
death of shame and torture. And at the same time we find the Christian
Mystics losing themselves in it, against their own will and intention,
whenever and wherever we read of them![4] Spinoza's name is identified
with it. Lastly, in our own days, after Kant had annihilated the old
dogmatism, and the world stood aghast at its smoking ruins, the same
teaching was revived in Schelling's eclectic philosophy. The latter
took all the systems of Plotinus, Spinoza, Kant, and Jacob Boehm,
and mixing them together with the results of modern Natural Science,
speedily served up a dish sufficient to satisfy for the moment the
pressing needs of his contemporaries; and then proceeded to perform a
series of variations on the original theme. The consequence is that
in the learned circles of Germany this line of thought has come to be
generally accepted; indeed even among people of ordinary education,
it is almost universally diffused.[5] A solitary exception is formed
by the University philosophers of the present day. They have the hard
task of fighting what is called =Pantheism=. Being brought
through the stress of battle into great embarrassment and difficulty,
they anxiously catch now at the most pitiful sophisms, now at phrases
of choicest bombast, so only they may patch together some sort of
respectable disguise, wherein to dress up the favourite petticoat
Philosophy, that has duly received official sanction. In a word, the
_Ἕν καὶ πᾱν_[6] has been in all ages the laughing-stock of fools, for
the wise a subject of perpetual meditation. Nevertheless, the strict
demonstration of this theory is only to be obtained from the Kantian
teaching, as I have just shown. Kant himself did not carry it out;
after the fashion of clever orators, he only gave the premises, leaving
to his hearers the pleasure of drawing the conclusion.

Now if plurality and difference belong only to the
=appearance-form=; if there is but one and the same Entity
manifested in all living things: it follows that, when we obliterate
the distinction between the _ego_ and the _non-ego_, we are not the
sport of an illusion. Rather are we so, when we maintain the reality of
individuation,--a thing the Hindus call *Mâyâ,[7] that is, a deceptive
vision, a phantasma. The former theory we have found to be the actual
source of the phaenomenon of Compassion; indeed Compassion is nothing
but its translation into definite expression. This, therefore, is
what I should regard as the metaphysical foundation of Ethics, and
should describe it as the sense which identifies the =ego= with
the =non-ego=, so that the individual directly recognises in
another his own self, his true and very being. From this standpoint
the profoundest teaching of theory pushed to its furthest limits may
be shown in the end to harmonise perfectly with the rules of justice
and loving-kindness, as exercised; and conversely, it will be clear
that practical philosophers, that is, the upright, the beneficent,
the magnanimous, do but declare through their acts the same truth as
the man of speculation wins by laborious research, by the loftiest
flights of intellect. Meanwhile moral excellence stands higher than
all theoretical sapience. The latter is at best nothing but a very
unfinished and partial structure, and only by the circuitous path of
reasoning attains the goal which the former reaches in one step. He
who is morally noble, however deficient in mental penetration, reveals
by his conduct the deepest insight, the truest wisdom; and puts to
shame the most accomplished and learned genius, if the latter's acts
betray that his heart is yet a stranger to this great principle,--the
metaphysical unity of life.

"Individuation is real. The _principium individuationis,_ with the
consequent distinction of individuals, is the order of things in
themselves. Bach living unit is an entity radically different from all
others. In my own self alone I have my true being; everything outside
it belongs to the =non-ego=, and is foreign to me." This is the
creed to the truth of which flesh and bone bear witness: which is at
the root of all egoism, and which finds its objective expression in
every loveless, unjust, or malicious act.

"Individuation is merely an appearance, born of Space and Time; the
latter being nothing else than the forms under which the external
world necessarily manifests itself to me, conditioned as they are
by my brain's faculty of perception. Hence also the plurality and
difference of individuals is but a =phaenomenon=, that is, exists
only as my mental picture. My true inmost being subsists in every
living thing, just as really, as directly as in my own consciousness
it is evidenced only to myself." This is the higher knowledge: for
which there is in Sanskrit the standing formula, =tat tvam asi=,
"that art thou."[8] Out of the depths of human nature it wells up in
the shape of Compassion, and is therefore the source of all genuine,
that is, disinterested virtue, being, so to say, incarnate in every
good deed. It is this which in the last resort is invoked, whenever we
appeal to gentleness, to loving-kindness; whenever we pray for mercy
instead of justice. For such appeal, such prayer is in reality the
effort to remind a fellow-being of the ultimate truth that we are all
one and the same entity. On the other hand, Egoism and its derivatives,
envy, hatred, the spirit of persecution, hardness of heart, revenge,
pleasure at the sight of suffering, and cruelty, all claim support
from the other view of things, and seek their justification in it. The
emotion and joy we experience when we hear of, still more, when we see,
and most of all, when we ourselves do, a noble act, are at bottom
traceable to the feeling of certainty such a deed gives, that, beyond
all plurality and distinction of individuals, which the _principium
individuationis_, like a kaleidoscope, shows us in ever-shifting
evanescent forms, there is an underlying unity, not only truly
existing, but actually accessible to us; for lo! in tangible, objective
form, it stands before our sight.

Of these two mental attitudes, according as the one or the other is
adopted, so the _ϕιλία_ (Love) or the _νεῑκος_ (Hatred) of Empedocles
appears between man and man. If any one, who is animated by _νεῑκος_,
could forcibly break in upon his most detested foe, and compel him to
lay bare the inmost recesses of his heart; to his surprise, he would
find again in the latter his very self. For just as in dreams, all the
persons that appear to us are but the masked images of ourselves; so
in the dream of our waking life, it is our own being which looks on
us from out our neighbours' eyes,--though this is not equally easy to
discern. Nevertheless, =tat tvam asi=.

The preponderance of either mode of viewing life not only determines
single acts; it shapes a man's whole nature and temperament. Hence the
radical difference of mental habit between the =good= character
and the =bad=. The latter feels everywhere that a thick wall
of partition hedges him off from all others. For him the world is
an =absolute non-ego=, and his relation to it an essentially
hostile one; consequently, the key-note of his disposition is hatred,
suspicion, envy, and pleasure in seeing distress. The good character,
on the other hand, lives in an external world homogeneous with his
own being; the rest of mankind is not in his eyes a non-ego; he
thinks of it rather as "myself once more." He therefore stands on an
essentially amicable footing with every one: he is conscious of being,
in his inmost nature, akin to the whole human race,[9] takes direct
interest in their weal and woe, and confidently assumes in their
case the same interest in him. This is the source of his deep inward
peace, and of that happy, calm, contented manner, which goes out on
those around him, and is as the "presence of a good diffused." Whereas
the bad character in time of trouble has no trust in the help of his
fellow-creatures. If he invokes aid, he does so without confidence:
obtained, he feels no real gratitude for it; because he can hardly
discern therein anything but the effect of others' folly. For he is
simply incapable of recognising his own self in some one else; and
this, even after it has furnished the most incontestible signs of
existence in that other person: on which fact the repulsive nature of
all unthankfulness in reality depends. The moral isolation, which thus
naturally and inevitably encompasses the bad man, is often the cause
of his becoming the victim of despair. The good man, on the contrary,
will appeal to his neighbours for assistance, with an assurance equal
to the consciousness he has of being ready himself to help them. As I
have said: to the one type, humanity is a =non-ego=; to the other,
"myself once more." The magnanimous character, who forgives his enemy,
and returns good for evil, rises to the sublime, and receives the
highest meed of praise; because he recognises his real self even there
where it is most conspicuously disowned.

Every purely beneficent act all help entirely and genuinely unselfish,
being, as such, exclusively inspired by another's distress, is, in
fact, if we probe the matter to the bottom, a dark enigma, a piece
of mysticism put into practice; inasmuch as it springs out of, and
finds its only true explanation in, the same higher knowledge that
constitutes the essence of whatever is mystical.

For how, otherwise than metaphysically, are we to account for even
the smallest offering of alms made with absolutely no other object
than that of lessening the want which afflicts a fellow-creature? Such
an act is only conceivable, only possible, in so far as the giver
=knows= that it is his very self which stands before him, clad in
the garments of suffering; in other words, so far as he recognises the
essential part of his own being, under a form not his =own=.[10]
It now becomes apparent, why in the foregoing part I have called
Compassion the great mystery of Ethics.

He, who goes to meet death for his fatherland, has freed himself from
the illusion which limits a man's existence to his own person. Such a
one has broken the fetters of the _principium individuationis_. In his
widened, enlightened nature he embraces all his countrymen, and in them
lives on and on. Nay, he reaches forward to, and merges himself in the
generations yet unborn, for whom he works; and he regards death as a
wink of the eyelids, so momentary that it does not interrupt the sight.

We may here sum up the characteristics of the two human types
above indicated. To the Egoist all other people are uniformly and
intrinsically strangers. In point of fact, he considers nothing
to be truly real, except his own person, and regards the rest of
mankind practically as troops of phantoms, to whom he assigns merely
a relative existence, so far as they may be instruments to serve, or
barriers to obstruct, his purposes; the result being an immeasurable
difference, a vast gulf between =his ego= on the one side, and the
=non-ego= on the other. In a word, he lives exclusively centred in
his own individuality, and on his death-day he sees all reality, indeed
the whole world, coming to an end along with himself.[11] Whereas the
Altruist discerns in all other persons, nay, in every living thing,
his own entity, and feels therefore that his being is commingled, is
identical with the being of whatever is alive. By death he loses only
a small part of himself. Patting off the narrow limitations of the
individual, he passes into the larger life of all mankind, in whom he
always recognised, and, recognising, loved, his very self; and the
illusion of Time and Space, which separated his consciousness from that
of others, vanishes. These two opposite modes of viewing the world are
probably the chief, though not indeed the sole cause of the difference
we find between very good and exceptionally bad men, as to the manner
in which they meet their last hour.

In all ages Truth, poor thing, has been put to shame for being
paradoxical; and yet it is not her fault. She cannot assume the form
of Error seated on his throne of world-wide sovereignty. So then, with
a sigh, she looks up to her tutelary god, Time, who nods assurance
to her of future victory and glory, but whose wings beat the air so
slowly with their mighty strokes, that the individual perishes or ever
the day of triumph be come. Hence I, too, am perfectly aware of the
paradox which this metaphysical explanation of the ultimate ethical
phaenomenon must present to Western minds, accustomed, as they are, to
very different methods of providing Morals with a basis. Nevertheless,
I cannot offer violence to the truth. All that is possible for me to
do, out of consideration for European blindness, is to assert once
more, and demonstrate by actual quotation, that the Metaphysics of
Ethics, which I have here suggested, was thousands of years ago the
fundamental principle of Indian wisdom. And to this wisdom I point
back, as Copernicus did to the Pythagorean cosmic system, which was
suppressed by Aristotle and Ptolemaeus. In the Bhagavadgîtâ (Lectio
XIII.; 27, 28), according to A. W. von Schlegel's translation, we find
the following passage: _Eundem in omnibus animantibus consistentem
summum dominum, istis pereuntibus kaud pereuntem qui cernit, is vere
cernit. Eundem vero cernens ubique praesentem dominum, non violat
semet ipsum sua ipsius culpa: exinde pergit ad summum iter_.[12]

With these hints towards the elaboration of a metaphysical basis for
Ethics I must close, although an important step still remains to be
taken. The latter would presuppose a further advance in Moral Science
itself; and this can hardly be made, because in the West the highest
aim of Ethics is reached in the theory of justice and virtue. What lies
beyond is unknown, or at any rate ignored. The omission, therefore, is
unavoidable; and the reader need feel no surprise, if the above slight
outline of the Metaphysics of Ethics does not bring into view--even
remotely--the corner-stone of the whole metaphysical edifice, nor
reveal the connection of all the parts composing the _Divina Commedia_.
Such a presentment, moreover, is involved neither in the question set,
nor in my own plan. A man cannot say everything in one day, and should
not answer more than he is asked.

He who tries to promote human knowledge and insight is destined to
always encounter the opposition of his age, which is like the dead
weight of some mass that has to be dragged along: there on the ground
it lies, a huge inert deformity, defying all efforts to quicken
its shape with new life. But such a one must take comfort from the
certainty that, although prejudices beset his path, yet the truth is
with him. And Truth does but wait for her ally, Time, to join her; once
he is at her side, she is perfectly sure of victory, which, if to-day
delayed, will be won =to-morrow=.


[1] The conception of _the Good_, in its purity, is an
_ultimate_ one, "an _absolute Idea_, whose substance loses itself in
infinity."--(Bouterweek: _Praktische Aphorismen_, p. 54.)

It is obvious that this writer would like to transform the familiar, nay,
trivial conception "_Good_" into a sort of _Διἴπετής,_ to be set up
as an idol in his temple. _Διἴπετής_ lit., "fallen from Zeus"; and so
"heaven-sent," "a thing of divine origin." Cf. Horn., _Il._. XVI, 174;
_Od._. IV. 477. Eur., _Bacch._, 1268.--(_Translator_.)

[2] The genuineness of the Oupnek'hat has been disputed on
the ground of certain marginal glosses which were added by Mohammedan
copyists, and then interpolated in the text, it has, however, been
fully established by the Sanskrit scholar, F. H. H. Windischmann
(junior) in his _Sancara, sive de Theologumenis Vedanticorum_, 1833,
p. xix; and also by Bochinger in his book _De la Vie Contemplative
chez les Indous_, 1831, p. 12. The reader though ignorant of Sanskrit,
may yet convince himself that Anquetil Duperron's word for word Latin
translation of the Persian version of the Upanishads made by the martyr
of this creed, the Sultan Dârâ-Shukoh, is based on a thorough and
exact knowledge of the language. He has only to compare it with recent
translations of some of the Upanishads by Rammohun Boy, by Poley, and
especially with that of Colebrooke, as also with Röer's, (the latest).
These writers are obviously groping in obscurity, and driven to make
shift with hazy conjectures, so that without doubt their work is much
less accurate. More will be found on this subject in Vol. II. of the
_Parerga_, chap. 16, § 184. [_V. The Upanishads_, translated by Max
Müller, in _The Sacred Books of the East_, Vols. I. and XV. Cf. also
Max Müller, _The Science of Language_, Vol. I., p. 171. Now that an
adequate translation of the original exists, the Oupnek'hat has only
an historical interest. The value which Schopenhauer attached to the
Upanishads is very clearly expressed also in the _Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung_, Preface to the first Edition; and in the _Parerga,_ II.,
chap, xvi., § 184.--(_Translator_.)

[3] For the Sûfi, more correctly *Sūfīy a sect which appeared already
in the first century of the Hijrah, the reader is referred to:
Tholuck's _Blüthensammlung aus der Morgenländischen Mystik_ (Berlin,
1825); Tholuck's _Sûfismus, sive Theosophia Persarum Pantheistica_
(Berlin, 1821); Kremer's _Geschichte der Herrschenden Ideen des
Islâms_ (Leipzig, 1868); _Palmer's Oriental Mysticism_ (London, 1867);
Gobineau's _Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l'Asie Centrale_
(2nd edit. Paris, 1866); _A Dictionary of Islâm_, by T. P. Hughes
(London, 1885), p. 608 sqq.--(_Translator_.)]

[4] This is too well-known to need verification by references.
The _Cantico del Sole_ by St. Francis of Assisi sounds almost like a
passage from the Upanishads or the *Bhagavadgîtâ.--(_Translator_.)]

5:
    On ne peut assez longtemps, chez notre espèce,_
    _Fermer la porte à la Raison._
    _Mais, dès qu'elle entre avec adresse,_
    _Elle reste dans la maison,_
    _Et bientôt elle en est maîtresse._
                                 --(Voltaire.)

    (We men may, doubtless, all our lives
      To Reason bar the door.
    But if to enter she contrives,
      The house she leaves no more,
    And soon as mistress there presides.)

[6] _Τὸ ἔν_= the eternal Reality outside Time and Space _Tὸ
πᾱν_ = the phaenomenal universe.--(_Translator_.)

[7] Mâyâ is "the delusive reflection of the true eternal
Entity."--(_Translator_.)]

[8] This expression is used in the Brahmanical philosophy
to denote the relation between the world-fiction as a whole and its
individualised parts. _V._ A. E. Gough, _Philosophy of the Upanishads_,
1882.--(_Translator_.)

[9] _Homo sum: humani nil a me alienum puto_. Terence,
_Heaut_., I. 1, 25.--(_Translator_.)

[10] It is probable that many, perhaps, most cases of truly
disinterested Compassion--when they really occur--are due not to any
conscious _knowledge_ of this sort, but to an unconscious impulse
springing from the ultimate unity of all living things, and acting, so
to say, automatically.--(_Translator_.)

[11] Cf. Richard Wagner: _Jesus von Nazareth_; pp.
79-90.--(_Translator_.)

[12] That man is endowed with true insight who sees that
the same ruling power is inherent in all things, and that when these
perish, it perishes not. For if he discerns the same ruling power
everywhere present, he does not degrade himself by his own fault:
thence he passes to the highest path.--For the _Bhagavadgîtâ_ the
reader is referred to Vol. VIII. of _The Sacred Books of the East_
(Oxford: Clarendon Press), where (p. 105) this passage is translated as
follows:--"He sees (truly) who sees the supreme lord abiding alike in
all entities, and not destroyed though they are destroyed. For he who
sees the lord abiding everywhere alike, does not destroy himself[*] by
himself, and then reaches the highest goal."

[*]Not to have true knowledge, is equivalent to self-destruction."

Cf. Fauche] Le Mahā-bhārata: Paris, 1867; Vol. VII., p. 128:--

"Celui-là possède une vue nette des choses, qui voit ce principe
souverain en tous les êtres d'une manière égale, et leur survivre,
quand ils périssent. Il ne se fait aucun tort à soi-même par cette vue
d'un principe qui subsiste également partout: puis, après cette vie, il
entre dans la voie supérieure."

The obscurity of Schlegel's Latin in the second sentence is sufficiently
removed by these more recent translations.--(_Translator_.)



JUDICIUM

REGIAE DANICAE SCIENTIARUM SOCIETATIS.


_Quaestionem anno_ 1837 _propositam, "utrum philosophiae moralis
fons et fundamentum in idea moralitatis, quae immediate conscientia
contineatur, et ceteris notionibus fundamentalibus, quae ex ilia
prodeant, explicandis quaerenda sint, an in alio cognoscendi
principio," unus tantum scriptor explicare conatus est, cujus
commentationem, germanico sermone compositam, et his verbis
notatam_: "MORAL PREDIGEN IST LEICHT, MORAL BEGRÜNDEN IST SCHWER,"
_praemio dignam judicare nequivimus. Omisso enim eo, quod potissimum
postulabatur, hoc expeti putavit, ut principium aliquod ethicae
conderetur, itaqae eam partem commentationis suae, in qua principii
ethicae a se propositi et metaphysicae suae nexum exponit, appendices
loco habuit, in qua plus quam postulatum esset praestaret, quum tamen
ipsum thema ejusmodi disputationem flagitaret, in qua vel praecipuo
loco metaphysicae et ethicae nexus consideraretur. Quod autem scriptor
in sympathia fundamentum ethicae constituere conatus est, neque ipsa
disserendi forma nobis satisfecit, neque reapse, hoc fundamentum
sufficere, evicit; quin ipse contra esse confiteri coactus est. Neque
reticendum videtur, plures recentioris aetatis summos philosophos tam
indecenter commemorari, ut justam et gravem offensionem habeat._

JUDGMENT OF THE DANISH ROYAL SOCIETY OF SCIENCES.

In 1837 the following question was set as subject for a Prize Essay:
"Is the fountain and basis of Morals to be sought for in an idea of
morality which lies directly in the consciousness (or conscience), and
in the analysis of the other leading ethical conceptions which arise
from it? Or is it to be found in some other source of knowledge?" There
was only one competitor; but his dissertation, written in German,
and bearing the motto: "_To preach Morality is easy, to found it is
difficult_"[1] we cannot adjudge worthy of the Prize. He has omitted
to deal with the essential part of the question, apparently thinking
that he was asked to establish some fundamental principle of Ethics.
Consequently, that part of the treatise, which explains how the moral
basis he proposes is related to his system of metaphysics, we find
relegated to an appendix, as an "_opus supererogationis_," although
it was precisely the connection between Metaphysics and Ethics that
our question required to be put in the first and foremost place. The
writer attempts to show that compassion is the ultimate source of
morality; but neither does his mode of discussion appear satisfactory
to us, nor has he, in point of fact, succeeded in proving that such a
foundation is adequate. Indeed he himself is obliged to admit that it
is not.[2] Lastly, the Society cannot pass over in silence the fact
that he mentions several recent philosophers of the highest standing in
an unseemly manner, such as to justly occasion serions offence.


[1] The Academy has been good enough to insert the second "is" on its
own account, by way of proving the truth of Longinus' theory (_V. De
Sublimitate_: chap. 39, _ad fin._), that the addition or subtraction
of a single syllable is sufficient to destroy the whole force of a
sentence. (P. Longinus: _De Sublimitate Libellus_; edit. Joannes
Vablen, Bonnae, 1887.)--(_Translator_)

[2] I suppose this is the meaning of _contra esse
confiteri_.--(_Translator_.)






End of Project Gutenberg's The Basis of Morality, by Arthur Schopenhauer


