BOOK II.


I.--"Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The
kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together
against the Lord and against His anointed, saying: 'Let us break their
bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us.'"[199] As we
commonly wonder at a new effect, when we have never been face to face
with its cause; so, as soon as we understand the cause, we look down
with a kind of scorn on those who remain in wonder. I, myself, was
once filled with wonder that the Roman people had become paramount
throughout all the earth, without any to withstand them; for when I
looked at the thing superficially I thought that this supremacy had
been obtained, not by any right, but only by arms and violence. But
after that I had carefully and thoroughly examined the matter, when I
had recognised by the most effectual signs that it was divine
providence that had wrought this, my wonder ceased, and a certain
scornful contempt has taken its place, when I perceive the nations
raging against the pre-eminence of the Roman people; when I see the
people imagining a vain thing, as I of old imagined; when, above all,
I grieve that kings and princes agree in this one matter only, in
opposing their Lord, and His one only Roman Emperor. Wherefore in
derision, yet not without a touch of sorrow, I can cry on behalf of
the glorious people and for Cæsar, together with him who cried on
behalf of the Prince of heaven: "Why do the heathen rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth stand up, and the
rulers take counsel together against the Lord and against His
anointed." But the love which nature implants in us allows not scorn
to last for long; but, like the summer sun that when it has dispersed
the morning clouds shines with full brightness, this love prefers to
put scorn aside, and to pour forth the light which shall set men
right. So, then, to break the bonds of the ignorance of those kings
and princes, and to show that mankind is free from _their_ yoke, I
will comfort myself in company with that most holy prophet, whom I
follow, taking the words which come after: "Let us break their bonds
asunder, and cast away their yoke from us."

[Footnote 199: Ps. ii. 1-3.--(W.)]

These two things will be sufficiently performed, if I address myself
to the second part of the argument, and manifest the truth of the
question before us. For thus, if we show that the Roman Empire is _by
right_, not only shall we disperse the clouds of ignorance from the
eyes of those princes who have wrongly seized the helm of public
government, falsely imputing this thing to the Roman people; but all
men shall understand that they are free from the yoke of these
usurpers. The truth of the question can be made clear not only by the
light of human reason, but also by the ray of God's authority; and
when these two coincide, then heaven and earth must agree together.
Supported, therefore, by this conviction, and trusting in the
testimony both of reason and of authority, I proceed to settle the
second question.


II.--Inquiry concerning the truth of the first doubt has been made as
accurately as the nature of the subject permitted; we have now to
inquire concerning the second, which is: Whether the Roman people
assumed to itself _of right_ the dignity of the Empire? And the first
thing in this question is to find the truth, to which the reasonings
concerning it may be referred as to their proper first principle.

It must be recognised, then, that as there are three degrees in every
art, the mind of the artist, his instrument, and the material on which
he works, so we may look upon nature in three degrees. For nature
exists, first, in the mind of the First Agent, who is God; then in
heaven; as in an instrument, by means of which the likeness of the
Eternal Goodness unfolds itself on shapeless[200] matter. If an artist
is perfect in his art, and his instrument is perfect, any fault in the
form of his art must be laid to the badness of the material; and so,
since God holds the summit of perfection, and since His instrument,
which is heaven, admits of no failure of its due perfection (which is
manifest from our philosophy touching heaven), it follows that
whatever fault is to be found in the lower world is a fault on the
part of the subject matter, and is contrary to the intention of God
who makes nature,[201] and of heaven; and if in this lower world there
is aught that is good, it must be ascribed first to the artist, who is
God, and then to heaven, the instrument of God's art, which men call
nature; for the material, being merely a possibility, can do nothing
of itself.[202]

[Footnote 200: "_Fluitantem._"]

[Footnote 201: "_Dei naturantis._"]

[Footnote 202: Witte refers to _Parad._ xiii. 67, xxix. 32, i.
127-130. Cf. Thom. Aquin. _Summ._ I., q. 66, art. 1-3; q. 110, art. 2;
q. 115, art. 3-6. This view satisfied thinkers to the time of Hooker
(_E.P._ I. iii.), but was criticised by Bacon, _Nov. Org._ i. 66.]

Hence it is apparent that, since all Right[203] is good, it therefore
exists first in the mind of God; and since all that is in the mind of
God is God, according to the saying, "What was made, in Him was
life;"[204] and as God chiefly wishes for what is Himself, it follows
that Right is the wish of God, so far as it is in Him. And since in
God the will and the wish are the same, it further follows that this
Right is the will of God. Again it follows that Right in the world is
nothing else than the likeness of the will of God, and therefore
whatever does not agree with the divine will cannot be Right, and
whatever does agree with the divine will is Right itself. Therefore to
ask if a thing be by Right is only to ask in other words if it is what
God wills. It may therefore be assumed that what God wills to see in
mankind is to be held as real and true Right.

[Footnote 203: "_Jus._"]

[Footnote 204: St. John i. 3.--(W.)]

Besides we must remember Aristotle's teaching in the first book of his
_Ethics_, where he says: "We must not seek for certitude in every
matter, but only as far as the nature of the subject admits."[205]
Therefore our arguments from the first principle already found will be
sufficient, if from manifest evidence and from the authority of the
wise, we seek for the right of that glorious people. The will of God
is an invisible thing, but "the invisible things of God are seen,
being understood by the things which are made." For when the seal is
out of sight, the wax, which has its impression, gives manifest
evidence of it, though it be unseen; nor is it strange that the will
of God must be sought by signs; for the human will, except to the
person himself who wills, is only discerned by signs.[206]

[Footnote 205: _Eth._ i. 7, from Thom. Aq. _Lect._ XI.--(W.)]

[Footnote 206: The image of the wax and seal was a favourite one. V.
_Parad._ vii. 68, viii. 127, xiii. 67-75, quoted by Witte, who also
refers to the _Epist. ad Reges_, § 8, p. 444, ed. Fraticelli.]


III.--My answer then to the question is, that it was by right, and not
by usurpation, that the Roman people assumed to itself the office of
Monarchy, or, as men call it, the Empire, over all mankind. For in the
first place it is fitting that the noblest people should be preferred
to all others; the Roman people was the noblest; therefore it is
fitting that it should be preferred to all others. By this reasoning I
make my proof; for since honour is the reward of goodness, and since
to be preferred is always honour, therefore to be preferred is always
the reward of goodness. It is plain that men are ennobled for their
virtues; that is, for their own virtues or for those of their
ancestors; for nobleness is virtue and ancestral wealth, according to
Aristotle in his Politics; and according to Juvenal, "There is no
nobleness of soul but virtue,"[207] which two statements refer to two
sorts of nobleness, our own and that of our ancestors.[208]

[Footnote 207: Arist. _Pol._ iii. 12; Juv. viii. 20.--(W.)]

[Footnote 208: Witte refers to Dante's commentary on his own Canzone
in the _Convito_ iv. 3, and the _Parad._ xvi. 1.]

To be preferred, therefore, is, according to reason, the fitting
reward of the noble. And since rewards must be measured by desert,
according to that saying of the Gospel, "with what measure ye mete, it
shall be measured to you again;" therefore to the most noble the
highest place should be given. The testimonies of the ancients confirm
our opinion; for Virgil, our divine poet, testifies throughout his
_Æneid_, that men may ever remember it, that the glorious king, Æneas,
was the father of the Roman people. And this Titus Livius, the famous
chronicler of the deeds of the Romans, confirms in the first part of
his work, which takes its beginning from the capture of Troy. The
nobleness of this most unconquerable and most pious ancestor not only
in regard to his own great virtue, but also to that of his forefathers
and of his wives, the nobleness of whom was combined in their
descendant by the rightful law of descent, I cannot unfold at length;
"I can but touch lightly on the outlines of the truth."[209]

[Footnote 209: "Sed summa sequar vestigia rerum." Virg. _Æn._ i. 342
("fastigia" in all good MSS. and edd.).]

For the virtue then of Æneas himself, hear what our poet tells us when
he introduces Ilioneus in the first _Æneid_, praying thus: "Æneas was
our king; in justice and piety he has not left a peer, nor any to
equal him in war." Hear Virgil in the sixth _Æneid_, when he speaks
of the death of Misenus, who had been Hector's attendant in war, and,
after Hector's death, had attached himself to Æneas; for there Virgil
says that Misenus "followed as good a man;" thus comparing Æneas to
Hector, whom[210] Homer ever praises above all men, as the Philosopher
witnesses in his _Ethics_, in what he writes to Nicomachus on habits
to be avoided.

[Footnote 210: _Æn._ i. 544, vi. 170. _Il._ xxiv. 258, quoted in
Aristotle, _Ethics_, vii. 1.--(W.)]

But, as for hereditary virtue, he was ennobled from all three
continents both by his forefathers and his wives. From Asia came his
immediate ancestor, Assaracus, and others who reigned in Phrygia,
which is a part of Asia. Therefore Virgil writes in the third _Æneid_:
"After that it had seemed good to Heaven to overthrow the power of
Asia, and the guiltless race of Priam." From Europe came the male
founder of his race, who was Dardanus; from Africa his grandmother
Electra, daughter of the great king Atlas, to both which things the
poet testifies in the eighth _Æneid_, where Æneas says to Evander:
"Dardanus, the father of our city, and its founder, whom the Greeks
call the son of Atlas and Electra, came to the race of Teucer--Electra,
whose sire was great Atlas, on whose shoulders rests the circle of
heaven." But in the third _Æneid_ Virgil says that Dardanus drew his
origin from Europe. "There is a land which the Greeks have named
Hesperia, an ancient land, strong and wealthy, where the Ænotrians
dwell; it is said that now their descendants have named the country
Italy, from the name of their king. There is our rightful home; from
that land did Dardanus come." That Atlas came from Africa, the
mountain called by his name, which stands in that continent, bears
witness; and Orosius says that it is in Africa in his description of
the world, where he writes: "Its boundary is Mount Atlas, and the
islands which are called 'the happy isles.'" "Its"--that is, "of
Africa," of which he was speaking.[211]

[Footnote 211: _Æn._ iii. 1, viii. 134, iii. 163; Oros. i. 2.--(W.)]

Likewise I find that by marriage also Æneas was ennobled; his first
wife, Creusa, the daughter of king Priam, was from Asia, as may be
gathered from our previous quotations; and that she was his wife our
poet testifies in the third _Æneid_, where Andromache asks Æneas:
"What of the boy Ascanius, whom Creusa bore to thee, while the ruins
of Troy were yet smoking? Lives he yet to breathe this air?"[212] The
second wife was Dido, the queen and foundress of Carthage in Africa.
That she was the wife of Æneas our poet sings in his fourth _Æneid_,
where he says of Dido: "No more does Dido think of love in secret.
She calls it marriage, and with this name she covers her sin." The
third wife was Lavinia, the mother of Albans and Romans alike, the
daughter of king Latinus and his heir, if we may trust the testimony
of our poet in his last _Æneid_, where he introduces Turnus conquered,
praying to Æneas thus: "Thou hast conquered, and the Ausonians have
seen me lift my hands in prayer for mercy; Lavinia is thine."[213]
This last wife was from Italy, the noblest region of Europe.

[Footnote 212: III. 339. The best MSS. of Virgil omit "peperit fumante
Creusa."]

[Footnote 213: _Æn._ xii. 936.--(W.)]

And now that we have marked these things for evidence of our
assertion, who will not rest persuaded that the father of the Romans,
and therefore the Romans themselves, were the noblest people under
heaven? Who can fail to see the divine predestination shown forth by
the double meeting of blood from every part of the world in the veins
of one man?


IV.--Again, that which is helped to its perfection by miracles is
willed by God, and therefore it is of right. This is manifestly true,
for as Thomas says in his third book against the Gentiles, "a miracle
is something done by God beyond the commonly established order of
things."[214] And so he proves that God alone can work miracles; and
his proof is strengthened by the authority of Moses; for on the
occasion of the plague of lice, when the magicians of Pharaoh used
natural principles artfully, and then failed, they said: "This is the
finger of God."[215] A miracle therefore being the immediate working
of the first agent, without the co-operation of any secondary agents,
as Thomas himself sufficiently proves in the book which we have
mentioned, it is impious to say where a miracle is worked in aid of
anything, that that thing is not of God, as something well pleasing to
him, which he foresaw. Therefore it is religious to accept the
contradictory of this. The Roman Empire has been helped to its
perfection by miracles; therefore it was willed by God, and
consequently was and is by right.[216]

[Footnote 214: _Contra Gent._ iii. 101.--(W.)]

[Footnote 215: Exod. vii. 12-15.--(W.)]

[Footnote 216: Witte refers to the _Ep. ad Reges_, § 8, for the same
thought.]

It is proved by the testimony of illustrious authors that God
stretched forth His hand to work miracles on behalf of the Roman
Empire. For Livy, in the first part of his work, testifies that a
shield fell from heaven into the city chosen of God in the time of
Numa Pompilius, the second king of Rome, whilst he was sacrificing
after the manner of the Gentiles. Lucan mentions this miracle in the
ninth book of his Pharsalia, when he is describing the incredible
force of the South wind. He says: "Surely it was thus, while Numa was
offering sacrifices, that the shield fell with which the chosen
patrician youth moves along. The South wind, or the North wind, had
spoiled the people that bore our shields."[217] And when the Gauls had
taken all the city, and, under cover of the darkness, were stealing on
to attack the Capitol itself, the capture of which was all that
remained to destroy the very name of Rome, then as Livy, and many
other illustrious writers agree in testifying, a goose, which none had
seen before, gave a warning note of the approach of the Gauls, and
aroused the guards to defend the Capitol.[218] And our poet
commemorates the event in his description of the shield of Æneas in
the eighth book. "Higher, and in front of the temple stood Manlius,
the watchman of the Tarpeian keep, guarding the rock of the Capitol.
The palace stood out clear, rough with the thatch which Romulus had
laid; here the goose, inlaid in silver, fluttered on the portico of
gold, as it warned the Romans that the Gauls were even now on the
threshold."[219]

[Footnote 217: Luc. ix. 477.--(W.)]

[Footnote 218: V. Liv. v. 47, and the _Convito_, iv. 5.--(W.)]

[Footnote 219: _Æn._ viii. 652.--(W.)]

And when the nobility of Rome had so fallen under the onset of
Hannibal, that nothing remained for the final destruction of the Roman
commonwealth, but the Carthaginian assault on the city, Livy tells us
in the course of his history of the Punic war, that a sudden dreadful
storm of hail fell upon them, so that the victors could not follow up
their victory.[220]

[Footnote 220: Liv. xxvi. 11; Oros. iv. 17.--(W.)]

Was not the escape of Cloelia wonderful, a woman, and captive in the
power of Porsenna, when she burst her bonds, and, by the marvellous
help of God, swam across the Tiber, as almost all the historians of
Rome tell us, to the glory of that city?[221]

[Footnote 221: Liv. ii. 13; Oros. ii. 5.--(W.)]

Thus was it fitting that He should work who foresaw all things from
the beginning, and ordained them in the beauty of His order; so that
He, who when made visible was to show forth miracles for the sake of
things invisible, should, whilst invisible, also show forth miracles
for the sake of things visible.


V.--Further, whoever works for the good of the state, works with Right
as his end. This may be shown as follows. Right is that proportion of
man to man as to things, and as to persons, which, when it is
preserved, preserves society, and when it is destroyed, destroys
society.[222] The description of Right in the Digest does not give the
essence of right, but only describes it for practical purposes.[223]
If therefore our definition comprehends well the essence and reason
of Right, and if the end of any society is the common good of its
members, it is necessary that the end of all Right is the common good,
and it is impossible that that can be Right, which does not aim at the
common good. Therefore Cicero says well in the first book of his
_Rhetoric_: "Laws must always be interpreted for the good of the
state."[224] If laws do not aim at the good of those who live under
them, they are laws only in name; in reality they cannot be laws. For
it behoves them to bind men together for the common good; and Seneca
therefore says well in his book "on the four virtues:" "Law is the
bond of human society."[225] It is therefore plain that whoever aims
at the good of the state, aims at the end of Right; and therefore, if
the Romans aimed at the good of the state, we shall say truly that
they aimed at the end of Right.

[Footnote 222: Cf. Aristotle, _Ethics_, v. 6.]

[Footnote 223: "Jus est ars boni et æqui." L. 1, fr. _Dig. De Justitia
et Jure_, i. 1.--(W.)]

[Footnote 224: _De Invent._ i. 38.--(W.)]

[Footnote 225: Not Seneca, but Martin, Bp. of Braga, [dagger
symbol]580.--(W.) V. _Biog. Univ._]

That in bringing the whole world into subjection, they aimed at this
good, their deeds declare. They renounced all selfishness, a thing
always contrary to the public weal; they cherished universal peace and
liberty; and that sacred, pious, and glorious people are seen to have
neglected their own private interests that they might follow public
objects for the good of all mankind. Therefore was it well written:
"The Roman Empire springs from the fountain of piety."[226]

[Footnote 226: "_Romanum imperium de fonte nascitur
pietatis._"--(WITTE.) He has not been able to trace the saying.]

But seeing that nothing is known of the intention of an agent who acts
by free choice to any but the agent himself, save only by external
signs, and since reasonings must be examined according to the subject
matter (as has already been said), it will be sufficient on this point
if we set forth proofs which none can doubt, of the intention of the
Roman people, both in their public bodies and individually.

Concerning those public bodies by which men seem in a way to be bound
to the state, the authority of Cicero alone, in the second book of the
_De Officiis_, will suffice. "So long," he says, "as the Empire of the
republic was maintained not by injustice, but by the benefits which it
conferred, we fought either for our allies or for the Empire. Our wars
brought with them an ending which was either indulgent, or else was
absolutely necessary. All kings, peoples, and nations found a port of
refuge in the Senate. Our magistrates and generals alike sought renown
by defending our provinces and our allies with good faith and with
justice. Our government might have been called not so much Empire, as
a Protectorate of the whole world." So wrote Cicero.[227]

[Footnote 227: _De Off._ ii. 8.--(W.)]

Of individuals I will speak shortly. Shall we not say that they
intended the common good, who by hard toil, by poverty, by exile, by
bereavement of their children, by loss of limb, by sacrifice of their
lives, endeavoured to build up the public weal? Did not great
Cincinnatus leave us a sacred example of freely laying down his office
at its appointed end, when, as Livy tells us, he was taken from the
plough and made dictator? And after his victory, after his triumph, he
gave back his Imperator's sceptre to the consuls, and returned to the
ploughshare to toil after his oxen.[228] Well did Cicero, arguing
against Epicurus, in the volume _De Finibus_, speak in praise of him,
mindful of this good deed.[229] "And so," he says, "our ancestors took
Cincinnatus from the plough, and made him dictator."

[Footnote 228: Liv. vi. 28, 29; Oros. ii. 12.--(W.)]

[Footnote 229: II. 4.--(W.)]

Has not Fabricius left us a lofty example of resisting avarice, when,
poor man as he was, for the faith by which he was bound to the
republic, he laughed to scorn the great weight of gold which was
offered him, and refused it, scorning it with words which became him
well. His story too is confirmed by our poet in the sixth
_Æneid_,[230] where he speaks of "Fabricius strong in his poverty."

[Footnote 230: VI. 844.--(W.)]

Has not Camillus left us a memorable example of obeying the laws
instead of seeking our private advantage? For according to Livy he was
condemned to exile, and then, after that he had delivered his country
from the invaders, and had restored to Rome her own Roman spoils, he
yet turned to leave the sacred city, though the whole people bade him
stay; nor did he return till leave was given him to come back by the
authority of the Senate. This high-souled hero also is commended in
the sixth _Æneid_, where our poet speaks of "Camillus, that restored
to us our standards."[231]

[Footnote 231: Liv. v. 46; _Æn._ vi. 826.--(W.)]

Was not Brutus the first to teach that our sons, that all others, are
second in importance to the liberty of our country? For Livy tells us
how, when he was consul, he condemned his own sons to death, for that
they had conspired with the enemy. His glory is made new in our poet's
sixth book, where he sings how "The father shall summon the sons to
die for the sake of fair liberty, when they seek to stir fresh
wars."[232]

[Footnote 232: _Æn._ vi. 821.--(W.)]

Has not Mucius encouraged us to dare everything for our country's
sake, when after attacking Porsenna unawares, he watched the hand
which had missed its stroke being burnt, though it was his own, as if
he were beholding the torment of a foe? This also Livy witnesses to
with astonishment.

Add to these those sacred victims the Decii, who laid down their lives
by an act of devotion for the public safety, whom Livy glorifies in
his narrative, not as they deserve, but as he was able. Add to these
the self-sacrifice, which words cannot express, of Marcus Cato, that
staunchest champion of true liberty. These were men of whom the one,
that he might save his country, did not fear the shadow of death;
while the other, that he might kindle in the world the passionate love
of liberty, showed how dear was liberty, choosing to pass out of life
a free man, rather than without liberty to abide in life.[233] The
glory of all these heroes glows afresh in the words of Cicero in his
book _De Finibus_; of the Decii he speaks thus: "Publius Decius, the
head of the Decii, a consul, when he devoted himself for the state,
and charged straight into the Latin host, was he thinking aught of his
pleasure, where and when he should take it;--when he knew that he had
to die at once, and sought that death with more eager desire than,
according to Epicurus, we should seek pleasure? And were it not that
his deed had justly received its praise, his son would not have done
the like in his fourth consulship; nor would his grandson, again, in
the war with Pyrrhus, have fallen, a consul, in battle; and, a third
time in continuous succession in that family, have offered himself a
victim for the commonwealth." But in the _De Officiis_,[234] Cicero
says of Cato: "Marcus Cato was in no different position from his
comrades who in Africa surrendered to Cæsar. The others, had they
slain themselves, would perhaps have been blamed for the act, for
their life was of less consequence,[235] and their principles were not
so strict. But for Cato, to whom nature had given incredible firmness
and who had strengthened this severity by his unremitting constancy to
his principles, and who never formed a resolution by which he did not
abide, he was indeed bound to die rather than to look on the face of a
tyrant."

[Footnote 233: Witte quotes the _Convito_, iv. 5, where all these
examples are recounted, almost in the same language. He compares
_Parad._ vi. 46 (Cincinnatus), _Purgat._ xx. 25 (Fabricius), _Parad._
vi. 47 (Decii), _Purg._ i. where Cato guards the approach to
Purgatory.]

[Footnote 234: I. 31 (W.), carelessly quoted.]

[Footnote 235: "_Levior_" al. "_lenior_."]


VI.--Two things therefore have been made clear: first, that whoever
aims at the good of the state aims at right;[236] and secondly, that
the Roman people in bringing the world into subjection, aimed at the
public weal. Therefore let us argue thus: Whoever aims at right, walks
according to right; the Roman people in bringing the world into
subjection aimed at right, as we have made manifest in the preceding
chapter. Therefore in bringing the world into subjection the Roman
people acted according to right, consequently it was by right that
they assumed the dignity of Empire.

[Footnote 236: "_Finem juris intendit._"]

We reach this conclusion on grounds which are manifest to all. It is
manifest from this, that whosoever aims at right, walks according to
right. To make this clear, we must mark that everything is made to
gain a certain end, otherwise it would be in vain, and as we said
before this cannot be. And as everything has its proper end, so every
end has some distinct thing of which it is the end. And therefore it
is impossible that any two things, spoken of as separate things,[237]
and in so far as they are two, should have the same end as their aim,
for so the same absurdity[238] would follow, that one of them would
exist in vain. Since, then, there is a certain end of right, as we
have explained, it necessarily follows that when we have decided what
that end is, we have also decided what right is; for it is the natural
and proper effect of right. And since in any sequence it is impossible
to have an antecedent without its consequent, for instance, to have
"man" without "animal," as is evident by putting together and taking
to pieces the idea,[239] so also it is impossible to seek for the end
of right without right, for each thing stands in the same relation to
its proper end, as the consequent does to its antecedent; as without
health it is impossible to attain to a good condition of the body.
Wherefore, it is most evidently clear that he who aims at the end of
right must aim in accordance with right; nor does the contradictory
instance which is commonly drawn from Aristotle's treatment of "good
counsel" avail anything.[240] He there says: "It is possible to obtain
what is the right result from a syllogism, which is incorrect, but not
by an argument which is right, for the middle term is wrong." For if
sometimes a right conclusion is obtained from false principles, this
is only by accident, and happens only in so far as the true conclusion
is imported in the words of the inference. Truth never really follows
from falsehood; but the signs of truth may easily follow from the
signs of falsehood. So also it is in matters of conduct. If a thief
helps a poor man out of the spoils of his thieving, we must not call
that charity; but it is an action which would have the form of
charity, if it had been done out of the man's own substance. And so of
the end of right. If anything, such as the end of right, were gained
without right, it would only be the end of right, that is, the common
good, in the same sense that the gift, made from evil gains, is
charity. And so the example proves nothing, for in our proposition we
speak, not of the apparent but of the real end of right. What was
sought, therefore, is clear.

[Footnote 237: "_Per se loquendo._"]

[Footnote 238: "_Inconveniens._"]

[Footnote 239: "_Construendo et destruendo._" Technical terms of the
conditional syllogism, _constructive_ and _destructive_.]

[Footnote 240: [Greek: Euboulia]. _Ethics_, vi. 10.]


VII.--What nature has ordained is maintained of right. For nature in
its providence does not come short of men's providence; for if it were
to come short, the effect would excel the cause in goodness, which is
impossible. But we see that when public bodies are founded, not only
are the relations of the members to each other considered, but also
their capacities for exercising offices; and this is to consider the
end of right in the society or order which is founded, for right is
not extended beyond what is possible. Nature then, in her ordinances,
does not come short in this foresight. Therefore it is clear that
nature, in ordaining a thing, has regard to its capacities; and this
regard is the fundamental principle of right which nature lays down.
From this it follows that the natural order of things cannot be
maintained without right; for this fundamental principle of right is
inseparably joined to the natural order of things. It is necessary,
therefore, that it is of right that this order is preserved.

The Roman people was ordained for empire, by nature, and this may be
shown as follows: The man would come short of perfection in his art,
who aimed only to produce his ultimate form, and neglected the means
of reaching it; in the same way, if nature only aimed at reproducing
in the world the universal form of the divine likeness, and neglected
the means of doing so, she would be imperfect. But nature, which is
the work of the divine intelligence, is wholly perfect; she therefore
aims at all the means by which her final end is arrived at.

Since then mankind has a certain end, and since there is a certain
means necessary for the universal end of nature, it necessarily
follows that nature aims at obtaining that means. And therefore the
Philosopher, in the second book of _Natural Learning_,[241] well shows
that nature always acts for the end. And since nature cannot reach
this end through one man, because that there are many actions
necessary to it, which need many to act, therefore nature must produce
many men and set them to act. And besides the higher influence,[242]
the powers and properties of inferior spheres contribute much to this.
And therefore we see not only that individual men, but also that
certain races are born to govern, and certain others to be governed
and to serve, as the Philosopher argues in the _Politics_;[243] and
for the latter, as he himself says, subjection is not only expedient,
but just, even though they be forced into subjection.

[Footnote 241: Arist. _Phys. Ausc._ ii. 1.--(W.)]

[Footnote 242: _I.e._ of the heavens. Witte quotes _Parad._ viii. 97,
_Purg._ xiv. 38.]

[Footnote 243: I. 5, 11; 6, 9.--(W.)]

And if this is so, it cannot be doubted that nature ordained in the
world a country and a nation for universal sovereignty; if this were
not so, she would have been untrue to herself, which is impossible.
But as to where that country is, and which is that nation, it is
sufficiently manifest, both from what we have said and from what we
shall say, that it was Rome and her citizens or people; and this our
poet very skilfully touches on in the sixth _Æneid_, where he
introduces Anchises prophesying to Æneas, the ancestor of the Romans:
"Others may mould the breathing bronze more delicately--I doubt it
not; they may chisel from marble the living countenance; they may
surpass thee in pleading causes; they may track the course of the
heavens with the rod, and tell when the stars will rise; but thou,
Roman, remember to rule the nations with thy sway. These shall be thy
endowments--to make peace to be the custom of the world; to spare thy
foes when they submit, and to crush the proud."[244] And again, Virgil
skilfully notes the appointment of the _place_, in the fourth
_Æneid_, when he brings in Jupiter speaking to Mercury concerning
Æneas: "His fair mother did not promise him to us to be such as this:
it was not for this that twice she rescues him from Grecian arms; but
that there should be one to rule over Italy, teeming with empires,
tempestuous with wars." It has, therefore, sufficiently been shown
that the Roman people was by nature ordained to empire. Therefore it
was of right that they gained empire, by subduing to themselves the
world.

[Footnote 244: _Æn._ vi. 848, iv. 227.--(W.)]


VIII.--But in order properly to discover the truth in our inquiry, we
must recognise that the judgment of God is sometimes made manifest to
men, and sometimes hidden from them.

It may be made manifest in two ways, namely, by reason and by faith.

There are some judgments of God to which the human reason, by its own
paths, can arrive; as, that a man should risk death to save his
country. For a part should always risk itself to save its whole, and
each man is a part of his State, as is clear from the Philosopher in
his _Politics_.[245] Therefore every man ought to risk himself for his
country, as the less good for the better; whence the Philosopher says
to Nicomachus: "The end is desirable, indeed, even for an individual,
but it is better and more divine for a nation and State."[246] And
this is the judgment of God, for if it were not so, right reason in
men would miss the intention of nature, which is impossible.

[Footnote 245: Arist. _Pol._ i. 2, 12.--(W.)]

[Footnote 246: _Ethics_, i. 1.]

There are also some judgments of God to which, though human reason
cannot reach them by its own powers, yet, by the aid of faith in those
things which are told us in Holy Scripture it can be lifted up: as,
for instance, that no one, however perfect he may be in moral and
intellectual virtues, both in habit and in action, can be saved
without faith; it being supposed that he never heard aught of Christ.
For human reason cannot of itself see this to be just, yet by faith it
can. For in the Epistle to the Hebrews it is written, "without faith
it is impossible to please God;"[247] and in Leviticus, "what man
soever there be of the House of Israel that killeth an ox, or lamb, or
goat in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp, and bringeth it
not to the door of the tabernacle to offer an offering unto the Lord,
blood shall be imputed to that man."[248] The door of the tabernacle
stands for Christ, who is the door of the kingdom of heaven, as may be
proved from the Gospel: the killing of animals represents men's
actions.[249]

[Footnote 247: Cf. _Parad._ xix. 70.--(W.)]

[Footnote 248: Heb. ii. 6; Levit. xvii. 3, 4.--(W.).]

[Footnote 249: Witte quotes from Isidore of Seville, a writer much
used in the middle ages, the following: "In a moral sense, we offer a
calf when we conquer the pride of the flesh; a lamb, when we correct
our irrational impulses; a kid, when we master impurity; a dove, when
we are simple; a turtle-dove, when we observe chastity; unleavened
bread, 'when we keep the feast not in the leaven of malice, but in the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.'"]

But the judgment of God is a hidden one, when man cannot arrive at the
knowledge of it either by the law of nature or by the written law, but
only occasionally by a special grace. This grace comes in several
ways: sometimes by simple revelation, sometimes by revelation assisted
by a certain kind of trial or debate. Simple revelation, too, is of
two kinds: either God gives it of his own accord, or it is gained by
prayer. God gives it of his own accord in two ways, either plainly, or
by a sign. His judgment against Saul was revealed to Samuel plainly;
but it was by a sign that it was revealed to Pharaoh what God had
judged touching the setting free of the children of Israel. The
judgment of God is also given in answer to prayer, as he knew who
spoke in the second book of Chronicles:[250] "When we know not what we
ought to do, this only have we left, to direct our eyes to Thee."

[Footnote 250: 2 Chron. xx. 12 (Vulg.).]

Revelation by means of trial is also of two kinds. It is given either
by casting lots, or by combat; for "to strive" (_certare_), is derived
from a phrase which means "to make certain" (_certum facere_). It is
clear that the judgment of God is sometimes revealed to men by casting
lots, as in the substitution of Matthias in the Acts of the Apostles.

Again the judgment of God is revealed to men by combat in two ways:
either it is by a trial of strength, as in the duels of champions who
are called "_duelliones_," or it is by the contention of many men,
each striving to reach a certain mark first, as happens in the
contests of athletes who run for a prize. The first of these methods
was prefigured among the Gentiles by the contests between Hercules and
Antæus, which Lucan mentions in the fourth book of his _Pharsalia_,
and Ovid in the ninth book of his _Metamorphoses_. The second is
prefigured by the contest between Atalanta and Hippomenes, described
in the tenth book of Ovid's _Metamorphoses_.[251]

[Footnote 251: _Phars._ iv. 593; _Metam._ ix. 183, x. 569.--(W.).]

Moreover, it ought not to pass unnoticed concerning these two kinds of
strife, that while in the first each champion may fairly hinder his
antagonist, in the second this is not so; for athletes must not hinder
one another in their strife, though our poet seems to have thought
differently in the fifth _Æneid_ where Euryalus so receives the
prize.[252] But Cicero has done better in forbidding this practice in
the third book of the _De Officiis_, following the opinion of
Chrysippus.[253] He there says: "Chrysippus is right here, as he often
is, for he says that he who runs in a race should strive with all his
might to win, but in no way should he try to trip up his competitor."

[Footnote 252: V. 335--(W.)]

[Footnote 253: III. 10.--(W.)]

With these distinctions, then, we may assume that there are two ways
in which men may learn the judgment of God, as we have on this point
stated; first by the contests of athletes, and secondly by the
contests of champions. These ways of discovering the judgment of God I
will treat of in the chapter following.


IX.--That people then, which conquered when all were striving hard for
the Empire of the world, conquered by the will of God. For God cares
more to settle a universal strife than a particular one; and even in
particular contests the athletes sometimes throw themselves on the
judgment of God, according to the common proverb: "To whom God makes
the grant, him let Peter also bless."[254] It cannot, then, be
doubted that the victory in the strife for the Empire of the world
followed the judgment of God. The Roman people, when all were striving
for the Empire of the world, conquered; it will be plain that so it
was, if we consider the prize or goal, and those who strove for it.
The prize or goal was the supremacy over all men; for it is this that
we call the Empire. None reached this but the Roman people. Not only
were they the first, they were the only ones to reach the goal, as we
shall shortly see.

[Footnote 254: Witte only gives a query (?). The saying expresses the
Ghibelline view of the relation of the Empire to the Pope; it may have
originated with the coronation of Charles the Great.]

The first man who panted for the prize was Ninus, King of the
Assyrians; but although for more than ninety years (as Orosius
tells[255]) he, with his royal consort Semiramis, strove for the
Empire of the world and made all Asia subject to himself, nevertheless
he never subdued the West. Ovid mentions both him and his queen in the
fourth book of the _Metamorphoses_, when he says, in the story of
Pyramus:[256] "Semiramis girdled the round space with brick-built
walls;" and, "let them come to Ninus' tomb and hide beneath in its
shade."

[Footnote 255: I. 4.--(W.)]

[Footnote 256: _Metam._ iv. 58, 88.--(W.)]

Secondly, Vesoges, King of Egypt, aspired to this prize; but though he
vexed the North and South of Asia, as Orosius relates,[257] yet he
never gained for himself one-half of the world; nay, when, as it
were, between the judges[258] and the goal, the Scythians drove him
back from his rash enterprise.

[Footnote 257: Oros. i. 14.--(W.)]

[Footnote 258: "Athlothetæ." The judges or umpires in the Greek games,
whose seats were opposite to the goal at the side of the stadium.
_Vide_ Smith's _Dictionary of Antiquities_, s.v. "stadium."]

Then Cyrus, King of the Persians, made the same attempt; but after the
destruction of Babylon, and the transference of its Empire to Persia,
he did not even reach the regions of the West, but lost his life and
his object in one day at the hands of Tamiris, Queen of the
Scythians.[259]

[Footnote 259: Oros. ii. 7.--(W.)]

But after that these had failed, Xerxes, the son of Darius and king
among the Persians, assailed the world with so great a multitude of
nations, with so great a power, that he bridged the channel of the sea
which separates Asia from Europe, between Sestos and Abydos. And of
this wonderful work Lucan makes mention in the second book of his
_Pharsalia_:[260] "Such paths across the seas, made by Xerxes in his
pride, fame tells of." But finally he was miserably repulsed from his
enterprise, and could not attain the goal.

[Footnote 260: _Phars._ ii. 692.--(W.)]

Besides these kings, and after their times, Alexander, King of
Macedon, came nearest of all to the prize of monarchy; he sent
ambassadors to the Romans to demand their submission, but before the
Roman answer came, he fell in Egypt, as Livy[261] tells us, as it were
in the middle of the course. Of his burial there, Lucan speaks in the
eighth book of his _Pharsalia_,[262] where he is inveighing against
Ptolemy, King of Egypt: "Thou last of the Lagæan race, soon to perish
in thy degeneracy, and to yield thy kingdom to an incestuous sister;
while for thee the Macedonian is kept in the sacred cave...."

[Footnote 261: Not Livy. Cf. ix. 18, 3, where, speaking of Alexander
and the Romans, he says: "Quem ne famâ quidem illis notum arbitror
fuisse." The story is Greek in origin, coming from Cleitarchus
(according to Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ iii. 9), who accompanied Alexander
on his Asiatic expedition. Cf. Niebuhr, _Lectures on the History of
Rome_, lect. 52, Grote, _History of Greece_, vol. xii. p. 70, note,
who argue for its truth, and Mommsen, _History of Rome_, vol. i. p.
394, who argues against it. Dante, says Witte, used legends about
Alexander now lost. Cf. _Inf._ xiv. 31.]

[Footnote 262: VIII. 692.]

"Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!"
Who will not marvel at thee here? For when Alexander was trying to
hinder his Roman competitor in the race, thou didst suddenly snatch
him away from the contest that his rashness might proceed no further.

But that Rome has won the crown of so great a victory is proved on the
testimony of many. Our poet in his first _Æneid_ says:[263] "Hence,
surely, shall one day the Romans come, as the years roll on, to be the
leaders of the world, from the blood of Teucer renewed; over the sea
and over the land they shall hold full sway."[264] And Lucan, in his
first book, writes: "The sword assigns the kingdom; and the fortune of
that mighty people that rules o'er sea and land and the whole earth,
admitted not two to rule." And Boethius, in his second book,[265]
speaking of the Roman prince says: "With his sceptre he ruled the
nations, those whom Phoebus beholds, from his rising afar to where
he sinks his beams beneath the waves; those who are benumbed by the
frosty Seven Stars of the north, those whom the fierce south wind
scorches with his heat, parching the burning sands." And Luke, the
Scribe of Christ, bears the same testimony, whose every word is true,
where he says: "There went out a decree from Cæsar Augustus that all
the world should be taxed;" from which words we must plainly
understand that the Romans had jurisdiction over the whole world.

[Footnote 263: I. 234.--(W.)]

[Footnote 264: I. 109.--(W.)]

[Footnote 265: _De Consol. Phil._ ii. 6.--(W.)]

From all this evidence it is manifest that the Roman people prevailed
when all were striving to gain the Empire of the world. Therefore it
was by the judgment of God that it prevailed; consequently its Empire
was gained by the judgment of God, which is to say, that it was gained
by right.


X.--And what is gained as the result of single combat or duel is
gained of right. For whenever human judgment fails, either because it
is involved in the clouds of ignorance, or because it has not the
assistance of a judge, then, lest justice should be left deserted, we
must have recourse to Him who loved justice so much that He died to
fulfil what it required by shedding His own blood. Therefore the
Psalmist wrote: "The righteous Lord loveth righteousness." This result
is gained when, by the free consent of the parties, not from hatred
but from love of justice, men inquire of the judgment of God by a
trial of strength as well of soul as of body. And this trial of
strength is called a duel, because in the first instance it was
between two combatants, man to man.

But when two nations quarrel they are bound to try in every possible
way to arrange the quarrel by means of discussion; it is only when
this is hopeless that they may declare war. Cicero and Vegetius agree
on this point, the former in his _De Officiis_,[266] the latter in his
book on war. In the practice of medicine recourse may only be had to
amputation and cauterising when every other means of cure have been
tried. So in the same way, it is only when we have sought in vain for
all other modes of deciding a quarrel that we may resort to the remedy
of a single combat, forced thereto by a necessity of justice.

[Footnote 266: _De Off._ i. 12; _De Re Milit._ iii. _prol._--(W.)]

Two formal rules, then, of the single combat are clear, one which we
have just mentioned, the other, which we touched on before, that the
combatants or champions must enter the lists by common consent, not
animated by private hatred or love, but simply by an eager desire for
justice. Therefore Cicero, in touching on this matter, spoke well when
he said: "Wars, which are waged for the crown of empire, must be waged
without bitterness."[267]

[Footnote 267: "Imperii _gloria_," not "_corona_," in _Cic. de Off._
i. 12.--(W.)]

But, if the rules of single combat be kept when men are driven by
justice to meet together by common consent, in their zeal for justice
(and if they are not, the contest ceases to be a single combat), do
not they meet together in the name of God? And if it is so, is not God
in the midst of them, for He Himself promises us this in the Gospel?
And if God is there, is it not impious to suppose that justice can
fail?--that justice which He loved so much, as we have just seen. And
if single combat cannot fail to secure justice, is not what is gained
in single combat gained as of right?

This truth the Gentiles, too, recognised before the trumpet of the
Gospel was sounded, when they sought for a judgment in the fortune of
single combat. So Pyrrhus, noble both in the manners and in the blood
of Æacidæ, gave a worthy answer when the Roman envoys were sent to him
to treat for the ransom of prisoners. "I ask not for gold; ye shall
pay me no price, being not war-mongers, but true men of war. Let each
decide his fate with steel, and not with gold. Whether it be you or I
that our mistress wills to reign, or what chance she may bring to
each, let us try by valour. Hear ye also this word: those whose valour
the fortune of war has spared, their liberty will I too spare. Take ye
them as my gift."[268] So spoke Pyrrhus. By "mistress" he meant
Fortune, which we better and more rightly call the Providence of God.
Therefore, let the combatants beware that they fight not for money;
then it would be no true single combat in which they fought, for they
would strive in a court of blood and injustice; and let it not be
thought that God would then be present to judge; nay, for it would be
that ancient enemy who had been the instigator of the strife. If they
wish to be true combatants, and not dealers in blood and injustice,
let them keep Pyrrhus before their eyes when they enter the arena, the
man who, when he was striving for empire, so scorned gold, as we have
said.

[Footnote 268: Ennius in _Cic. de Off._ i. 12 (W.) "War-monger" is
Spenser's word. _F.Q._ 3, 10, 29.]

But, if men will not receive the truth which we have proved, and
object, as they are wont, that all men are not equal in strength, we
will refute them with the instance of the victory of David over
Goliath; and if the Gentiles seek for aught more, let them repel the
objection by the victory of Hercules over Antæus. For it is mere folly
to fear that the strength which God makes strong should be weaker than
a human champion. It is, therefore, now sufficiently clear that what
is acquired by single combat is acquired by right.


XI.--But the Roman people gained their empire by duel between man and
man; and this is proved by testimonies that are worthy of all
credence; and in proving this, we shall also show that where any
question had to be decided from the beginning of the Roman Empire, it
was tried by single combat.

For first of all, when a quarrel arose about the settling in Italy of
Father Æneas, the earliest ancestor of this people, and when Turnus,
King of the Rutuli, withstood Æneas, it was at last agreed between the
two kings to discover the good pleasure of God by a single combat,
which is sung in the last book of the _Æneid_. And in this combat
Æneas was so merciful in his victory, that he would have granted life
and peace to the conquered foe, had he not seen the belt which Turnus
had taken on slaying Pallas, as the last verses of our poet describe.

Again, when two peoples had grown up in Italy, both sprung from the
Trojan stem, namely, the Romans and the Albans, and they had long
striven whose should be the sign of the eagle,[269] and the Penates of
Troy, and the honours of empire; at last by mutual consent, in order
to have certain knowledge of the case in hand, the three Horatii, who
were brethren, and the three Curatii, who were also brethren, fought
together before the kings and all the people anxiously waiting on
either side; and since the three Alban champions were killed, while
one Roman survived, the palm of victory fell to the Romans, in the
reign of Hostilius the king. This story has been diligently put
together by Livy, in the first part of his history, and Orosius also
gives similar testimony.[270]

[Footnote 269: "_Il sacrosanto segno._" V. _Parad._ vi. 32.]

[Footnote 270: Liv. i. 24; Oros. ii. 4.]

Next they fought for empire with their neighbours the Sabines and
Samnites, as Livy tells us; all the laws of war were kept; and though
those who fought were very many in number, the war was in the form of
a combat between man and man. In the contest with the Samnites,
Fortune nearly repented her of what she had begun, as Lucan instances
in the second book of his _Pharsalia_:[271] "How many companies lay
dead by the Colline gate then, when the headship of the world and
universal empire well-nigh were transferred to other seats, and the
Samnite heaped the corpses of Rome beyond the numbers[272] of the
Caudine Forks."

[Footnote 271: II. 135.]

[Footnote 272:

                   "Romanaque Samnis
     Ultra Caudinas superavit vulnera furcas."

Another reading is "speravit."]

But after that the intestine quarrels of Italy had ceased, and while
the issue of the strife with Greece and Carthage was not yet made
certain by the judgment of God--for both Greece and Carthage aimed at
empire--then Fabricius for Rome, and Pyrrhus for Greece, fought with
vast hosts for the glory of empire, and Rome gained the day. And when
Scipio for Rome, and Hannibal for Carthage, fought man to man, the
Africans fell before the Italians, as Livy and all the other Roman
historians strive to tell.

Who then is so dull of understanding as not to see that this glorious
people has won the crown of all the world, by the decision of combat?
Surely the Roman may repeat Paul's words to Timothy: "There is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness," laid up, that is, in the eternal
providence of God. Let, then, the presumptuous Jurists see how far
they stand below that watch-tower of reason whence the mind of man
regards these principles: and let them be silent, content to show
forth counsel and judgment according to the meaning of the law.

It has now become manifest that it was by combat of man against man
that the Romans gained their empire: therefore it was by right that
they gained it, and this is the principal thesis of the present book.
Up to this point we have proved our thesis by arguments which mostly
rest on principles of reason; we must now make our point clear by
arguments based on the principles of the Christian faith.


XII.--For it is they who profess to be zealous for the faith of Christ
who have chiefly "raged together," and "imagined a vain thing" against
the Roman empire; men who have no compassion on the poor of Christ,
whom they not only defraud as to the revenues of the Church; but the
very patrimonies of the Church are daily seized upon; and the Church
is made poor, while making a show of justice they yet refuse to allow
the minister of justice to fulfil his office.

Nor does this impoverishment happen without the judgment of God. For
their possessions do not afford help to the poor, to whom belongs as
their patrimony the wealth of the Church; and these possessions are
held without gratitude to the empire which gives them. Let these
possessions go back to whence they came. They came well; their return
is evil: for they were well given, and they are mischievously held.
What shall we say to shepherds like these? What shall we say when the
substance of the Church is wasted, while the private estates of their
own kindred are enlarged? But perchance it is better to proceed with
what is set before us; and in religious silence to wait for our
Saviour's help.

I say, then, that if the Roman empire did not exist by right, Christ
in being born presupposed and sanctioned an unjust thing. But the
consequent is false; therefore the contradictory of the antecedent is
true; for it is always true of contradictory propositions, that if one
is false the other is true. It is not needful to prove the falsity of
the consequent to a true believer: for, if he be faithful, he will
grant it to be false; and if he be not faithful, then this reasoning
is not for him.

I prove the consequence thus: wherever a man of his own free choice
carries out a public order, he countenances and persuades by his act
the justice of that order; and seeing that acts are more forcible to
persuade than words (as Aristotle holds in the tenth book of his
_Ethics_),[273] therefore by this he persuades us more than if it were
merely an approval in words. But Christ, as Luke who writes His
story, says, willed to be born of the Virgin Mary under an edict of
Roman authority, so that in that unexampled census of mankind, the Son
of God, made man, might be counted as man: and this was to carry out
that edict. Perhaps it is even more religious to suppose that it was
of God that the decree issued through Cæsar, so that He who had been
such long years expected among men should Himself enroll himself with
mortal man.

[Footnote 273: _Eth._ x. 1.]

Therefore Christ, by His action, enforced the justice of the edict of
Augustus, who then wielded the Roman power. And since to issue a just
edict implies jurisdiction, it necessarily follows that He who showed
that He thought an edict just, must also have showed that He thought
the jurisdiction under which it was issued just; but unless it existed
by right it were unjust.

And it must be noted that the force of the argument taken to destroy
the consequent, though the argument partly holds from its form, shows
its force in the second figure, if it be reduced as a syllogism, just
as the argument based on the assumption of the antecedent is in the
first figure. The reduction is made thus: all that is unjust is
persuaded to men unjustly; Christ did not persuade us unjustly;
therefore He did not persuade us to do unjust things. From the
assumption of the antecedent thus: all injustice is persuaded to men
unjustly: Christ persuaded a certain injustice to man, therefore He
persuaded unjustly.


XIII.--And if the Roman empire did not exist by right, the sin of Adam
was not punished in Christ. This is false, therefore its contradictory
is true. The falsehood of the consequent is seen thus. Since by the
sin of Adam we were all sinners, as the Apostle says:--"Wherefore, as
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned,"--then, if Christ had
not made satisfaction for Adam's sin by his death, we should still by
our depraved nature be the children of wrath. But this is not so, for
Paul, speaking of the Father in his Epistle to the Ephesians, says:
"Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ
to Himself, according to the good pleasure of His will, to the praise
of the glory of His grace, wherein He hath made us accepted in the
beloved, in whom we have redemption by His blood, the forgiveness of
sins according to the riches of His grace, wherein He has abounded
towards us." And Christ Himself, suffering in Himself the punishment,
says in St. John: "It is finished;" for where a thing is finished,
naught remains to be done.

It is convenient that it should be understood that punishment is not
merely penalty inflicted on him who has done wrong, but that penalty
inflicted by one who has penal jurisdiction. And therefore a penalty
should not be called punishment, but rather injury, except where it is
inflicted by the sentence of a regular judge.[274] Therefore the
Israelites said unto Moses: "Who made thee a judge over us?"

[Footnote 274: "_Ab ordinario judice._"]

If, therefore, Christ had not suffered by the sentence of a regular
judge, the penalty would not properly have been punishment; and none
could be a regular judge who had not jurisdiction over all mankind;
for all mankind was punished in the flesh of Christ, who "hath borne
our griefs and carried our sorrows," as saith the Prophet Isaiah. And
if the Roman empire had not existed by right, Tiberius Cæsar, whose
vicar was Pontius Pilate, would not have had jurisdiction over all
mankind. It was for this reason that Herod, not knowing what he did,
like Caiaphas, when he spoke truly of the decree of heaven, sent
Christ to Pilate to be judged, as Luke relates in his gospel. For
Herod was not the vicegerent of Tiberius, under the standard of the
eagle, or the standard of the Senate; but only a king, with one
particular kingdom given him by Tiberius, and ruling the kingdom
committed to his charge under Tiberius.

Let them cease, then, to insult the Roman empire, who pretend that
they are the sons of the Church; when they see that Christ, the
bridegroom of the Church, sanctioned the Roman empire at the beginning
and at the end of His warfare on earth. And now I think that I have
made it sufficiently clear that it was by right that the Romans
acquired to themselves the empire of the world.

Oh happy people, oh Ausonia, how glorious hadst thou been, if either
he, that weakener of thine empire, had never been born, or if his own
pious intention had never deceived him?[275]

[Footnote 275: Constantine the Great.--(W.)]




