BOOK III.


I.--"He hath shut the lions' mouths and they have not hurt me,
forasmuch as before Him justice was found in me."[276] At the
beginning of this work I proposed to examine into three questions,
according as the subject-matter would permit me. Concerning the two
first questions our inquiry, as I think, has been sufficiently
accomplished in the preceding books. It remains to treat of the third
question; and, perchance, it may arouse a certain amount of
indignation against me, for the truth of it cannot appear without
causing shame to certain men. But seeing that truth from its
changeless throne appeals to me--that Solomon too, entering on the
forest of his proverbs, teaches me in his own person "to meditate on
truth, to hate the wicked;"[277] seeing that the Philosopher, my
instructor in morals, bids me, for the sake of truth, to put aside
what is dearest;[278] I will, therefore, take confidence from the
words of Daniel in which the power of God, the shield of the defenders
of truth, is set forth, and, according to the exhortation of St.
Paul, "putting on the breast-plate of faith," and in the heat of that
coal which one of the seraphim had taken from off the altar, and laid
on the lips of Isaiah, I will enter on the present contest, and, by
the arm of Him who delivered us by His blood from the powers of
darkness, drive out from the lists the wicked and the liar, in the
sight of all the world. Why should I fear, when the Spirit, which is
co-eternal with the Father and the Son, saith by the mouth of David:
"The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, he shall not
be afraid of evil tidings"?[279]

[Footnote 276: Dan. vi. 22. Vulg.--(W.)]

[Footnote 277: Prov. vii. 7. Vulg.--(W.)]

[Footnote 278: Arist. _Eth._ i. 4.--(W.)]

[Footnote 279: Ps. cxii. 7.--(W.)]

The present question, then, concerning which we have to inquire, is
between two great luminaries, the Roman Pontiff and the Roman Prince:
and the question is, does the authority of the Roman Monarch, who, as
we have proved in the second book, is the monarch of the world, depend
immediately on God, or on some minister or vicar of God; by whom I
understand the successor of Peter, who truly has the keys of the
kingdom of heaven?


II.--For this, as for the former questions, we must take some
principle, on the strength of which we may fashion the arguments of
the truth which is to be expounded. For what does it profit to labour,
even in speaking truth, unless we start from a principle? For the
principle alone is the root of all the propositions which are the
means of proof.

Let us, therefore, start from the irrefragable truth that that which
is repugnant to the intention of nature, is against the will of God.
For if this were not true its contradictory would not be false;
namely, that what is repugnant to the intention of nature is not
against God's will, and if this be not false neither are the
consequences thereof false. For it is impossible in consequences which
are necessary, that the consequent should be false, unless the
antecedent were false also.

But if a thing is not "_against the will_" it must either be willed or
simply "not willed," just as "not to hate" means "to love," or "not to
love;" for "not to love" does not mean "to hate," and "not to will"
does not mean "to will not," as is self-evident. But if this is not
false, neither will this proposition be false; "God wills what He does
not will," than which a greater contradiction does not exist.

I prove that what I say is true as follows: It is manifest that God
wills the end of nature; otherwise the motions of heaven would be of
none effect, and this we may not say. If God willed that the end
should be hindered, He would will also that the hindering power should
gain its end, otherwise His will would be of none effect. And since
the end of the hindering power is the non-existence of what it
hinders, it would follow that God wills the non-existence of the end
of nature which He is said to will.

For if God did not will that the end should be hindered, in so far as
He did not will it, it would follow as a consequence to His not
willing it, that He cared nought about the hindering power, neither
whether it existed, nor whether it did not. But he who cares not for
the hindering power, cares not for the thing which can be hindered,
and consequently has no wish for it; and when a man has no wish for a
thing he wills it not. Therefore, if the end of nature can be
hindered, as it can, it follows of necessity that God wills not the
end of nature, and we reach our previous conclusion, that God wills
what He does not will. Our principle is therefore most true, seeing
that from its contradictions such absurd results follow.


III.--At the outset we must note in reference to this third question,
that the truth of the first question had to be made manifest rather to
remove ignorance than to end a dispute. In the second question we
sought equally to remove ignorance and to end a dispute. For there are
many things of which we are ignorant, but concerning which we do not
quarrel. In geometry we know not how to square the circle, but we do
not quarrel on that point. The theologian does not know the number of
the angels, but he does not quarrel about the number. The Egyptian is
ignorant of the political system of the Scythians, but he does not
therefore quarrel concerning it.[280] But the truth in this third
question provokes so much quarrelling that, whereas in other matters
ignorance is commonly the cause of quarrelling, here quarrelling is
the cause of ignorance. For this always happens where men are hurried
by their wishes past what they see by their reason; in this evil bias
they lay aside the light of reason, and being dragged on blindly by
their desires, they obstinately deny that they are blind. And,
therefore, it often follows not only that falsehood has its own
inheritance, but that many men issue forth from their own bounds and
stray through the foreign camp, where they understand nothing, and no
man understands them; and so they provoke some to anger, and some to
scorn, and not a few to laughter.

[Footnote 280: "_Scytharum Civilitatem._" Cf. Arist. _Ethics_, iii. 5,
where [Greek: to bouleuton] is discussed, and thence come the first
and the third example, a little altered, the Egyptian being
substituted for the Spartan.]

Now three classes of men chiefly strive against the truth which we are
trying to prove.

First, the Chief Pontiff, Vicar of our Lord Jesus Christ and the
successor of Peter, to whom we owe, not indeed all that we owe to
Christ, but all that we owe to Peter, contradicts this truth, urged it
may be by zeal for the keys; and also other pastors of the Christian
sheepfolds, and others whom I believe to be only led by zeal for our
mother, the Church. These all, perchance from zeal and not from pride,
withstand the truth which I am about to prove.

But there are certain others in whom obstinate greed has extinguished
the light of reason, who are of their father the devil, and yet
pretend to be sons of the Church. They not only stir up quarrels in
this question, but they hate the name of the most sacred office of
Prince, and would shamelessly deny the principles which we have laid
down for this and the previous questions.

There is also a third class called Decretalists,[281] utterly without
knowledge or skill in philosophy or theology, who, relying entirely on
their Decretals (which doubtless, I think, should be venerated), and
hoping, I believe, that these Decretals will prevail, disparage the
power of the Empire. And no wonder, for I have heard one of them,
speaking of these Decretals, assert shamelessly that the traditions of
the Church are the foundation of the faith. May this wickedness be
taken away from the thoughts of men by those who, antecedently to the
traditions of the Church, have believed in Christ the Son of God,
whether to come, or present, or as having already suffered; and who
from their faith have hoped, and from their hope have kindled into
love, and who, burning with love, will, the world doubts not, be made
co-heirs with Him.

[Footnote 281: _Parad._ ix. 133.--(W.)]

And that such arguers may be excluded once for all from the present
debate, it must be noted that part of Scripture was _before_ the
Church, that part of it came _with_ the Church, and part _after_ the
Church.

_Before_ the Church were the Old and the New Testament--the covenant
which the Psalmist says was "commanded for ever," of which the Church
speaks to her Bridegroom, saying: "Draw me after thee."[282]

[Footnote 282: Ps. cxi. 9. Cant. i. 3.--(W.)]

_With_ the Church came those venerable chief Councils, with which no
faithful Christian doubts but that Christ was present. For we have His
own words to His disciples when He was about to ascend into heaven:
"Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world," to which
Matthew testifies. There are also the writings[283] of the doctors,
Augustine and others, of whom, if any doubt that they were aided by
the Holy Spirit, either he has never beheld their fruit, or if he has
beheld, he has never tasted thereof.

[Footnote 283: "_Scripturæ._"]

_After_ the Church are the traditions which they call Decretals,
which, although they are to be venerated for their apostolical
authority, yet we must not doubt that they are to be held inferior to
fundamental Scripture, seeing that Christ rebuked the Pharisees for
this very thing; for when they had asked: "Why do thy disciples
transgress the tradition of the elders?" (for they neglected the
washing of hands), He answered them, as Matthew testifies: "Why do ye
also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?" Thus He
intimates plainly that tradition was to have a lower place.

But if the traditions of the Church are _after_ the Church, it follows
that the Church had not its authority from traditions, but rather
traditions from the Church; and, therefore, the men of whom we speak,
seeing that they have nought but traditions, must be excluded from the
debate. For those who seek after this truth must proceed in their
inquiry from those things from which flows the authority of the
Church.

Further, we must exclude others who boast themselves to be white sheep
in the flock of the Lord, when they have the plumage of crows. These
are the children of wickedness, who, that they may be able to follow
their evil ways, put shame on their mother, drive out their brethren,
and when they have done all will allow none to judge them. Why should
we seek to reason with these, when they are led astray by their evil
desires, and so cannot see even our first principle?

Therefore there remains the controversy only with the other sort of
men who are influenced by a certain kind of zeal for their mother the
Church, and yet know not the truth which is sought for. With these
men, therefore--strong in the reverence which a dutiful son owes to
his father, which a dutiful son owes to his mother, dutiful to Christ,
dutiful to the Church, dutiful to the Chief Shepherd, dutiful to all
who profess the religion of Christ--I begin in this book the contest
for the maintenance of the truth.


IV.--Those men to whom all our subsequent reasoning is addressed, when
they assert that the authority of the Empire depends on the authority
of the Church, as the inferior workman depends on the architect, are
moved to take this view by many arguments, some of which they draw
from Holy Scripture, and some also from the acts of the Supreme
Pontiff and of the Emperor himself. Moreover, they strive to have some
proof of reason.

For in the first place they say that God, according to the book of
Genesis, made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and
the lesser light to rule the night; this they understand to be an
allegory, for that the lights are the two powers,[284] the spiritual
and the temporal. And then they maintain that as the moon, which is
the lesser light, only has light so far as she receives it from the
sun, so the temporal power only has authority as it receives authority
from the spiritual power.

[Footnote 284: "_Regimina._"]

For the disposing of these, and of other like arguments, we must
remember the Philosopher's words in his book on Sophistry, "the
overthrow of an argument is the pointing out of the mistake."[285]

[Footnote 285: _Soph. El._ ii. 3.--(W.)]

Error may arise in two ways, either in the matter, or in the form of
an argument; either, that is, by assuming to be true what is false, or
by transgressing the laws of the syllogism. The Philosopher raised
objections to the arguments of Parmenides and Melissus on both of
these grounds, saying that they accepted what was false, and that they
did not argue correctly.[286] I use "false" in a large sense, as
including the inconceivable,[287] that which in matters admitting only
of probability has the nature of falseness. If the error is in the
form of an argument, he who wishes to destroy the error must do so by
showing that the laws of the syllogism have been transgressed. If the
error is in the matter, it is because something has been assumed
which is either false in itself, or false in relation to that
particular instance. If the assumption is false in itself, the
argument must be destroyed by destroying the assumption; if it is
false only in that particular instance, we must draw a distinction
between the falseness in that particular instance and its general
truth.

[Footnote 286: Aristotle, _Phys._ i. 2.--(W.)]

[Footnote 287: "_Inopinabili._"]

Having noted these things, to make it more clear how we destroy this
and the further fallacies of our adversaries, we must remark that
there are two ways in which error may arise concerning the mystical
sense, either by seeking it where it is not, or by accepting it in a
sense other than its real sense.

On account of the first of these ways, Augustine says, in his work _Of
the City of God_,[288] that we must not think that all things, of
which we are told, have a special meaning; for it is on account of
that which means something, that that also which means nothing is
woven into a story. It is only with the ploughshare that we turn up
the earth; but the other parts of the plough are also necessary.

[Footnote 288: Dante does not quote St. Augustine's words, but gives
his meaning, xvii. 2.--(W.)]

On account of the second way in which error touching the
interpretation of mysteries may arise, Augustine, in his book
"_concerning Christian doctrine_," speaking of those who wish to find
in Scripture something other than he who wrote the Scripture
meant,[289] says, that such "are misled in the same way as a man who
leaves the straight path, and then arrives at the end of the path by a
long circuit." And he adds: "It ought to be shown that this is a
mistake, lest through the habit of going out of the way, the man be
driven to going into cross or wrong ways." And then he intimates why
such precautions must be taken in interpreting Scripture. "Faith will
falter, if the authority of Scripture be not sure." But I say that if
these things happen from ignorance, we must pardon those who do them,
when we have carefully reproved them, as we pardon those who imagine a
lion in the clouds, and are afraid. But if they are done purposely, we
must deal with those who err thus, as we do with tyrants, who instead
of following the laws of the state for the public good, try to pervert
them for their own advantage.

[Footnote 289: I. 36, 37. Dante writes: "per gyrum." The Benedictine
text has: "per agrum."]

Oh worst of crimes, even though a man commit it in his dreams, to turn
to ill use the purpose of the Eternal Spirit. Such an one does not sin
against Moses, or David, or Job, or Matthew, or Paul, but against the
Eternal Spirit that speaketh in them. For though the reporters of the
words of God are many, yet there is one only that tells them what to
write, even God, who has deigned to unfold to us His will through the
pens of many writers.

Having thus first noted these things, I will proceed, as I said above,
to destroy the argument of those who say that the two great lights are
typical of the two great powers on earth: for on this type rests the
whole strength of their argument. It can be shown in two ways that
this interpretation cannot be upheld. First, seeing that these two
kinds of power are, in a sense, accidents of men, God would thus
appear to have used a perverted order, by producing the accidents,
before the essence to which they belong existed; and it is ridiculous
to say this of God. For the two great lights were created on the
fourth day, while man was not created till the sixth day, as is
evident in the text of Scripture.

Secondly, seeing that these two kinds of rule are to guide men to
certain ends, as we shall see, it follows that if man had remained in
the state of innocence in which God created him, he would not have
needed such means of guidance. These kinds of rule, then, are remedies
against the weakness of sin. Since, then, man was not a sinner on the
fourth day, for he did not then even exist, it would have been idle to
make remedies for his sin, and this would be contrary to the goodness
of God. For he would be a sorry physician who would make a plaster
for an abscess which was to be, before the man was born. It cannot,
therefore, be said that God made these two kinds of rule on the fourth
day, and therefore the meaning of Moses cannot have been what these
men pretend.

We may also be more tolerant, and overthrow this falsehood by drawing
a distinction. This way of distinction is a gentler way of treating an
adversary, for so his arguments are not made to appear consciously
false, as is the case when we utterly overthrow him. I say then that,
although the moon has not light of its own abundantly, unless it
receives it from the sun, yet it does not therefore follow that the
moon is from the sun. Therefore be it known that the being, and the
power, and the working of the moon are all different things. For its
being, the moon in no way depends on the sun, nor for its power, nor
for its working, considered in itself. Its motion comes from its
proper mover, its influence is from its own rays. For it has a certain
light of its own, which is manifest at the time of an eclipse; though
for its better and more powerful working it receives from the sun an
abundant light, which enables it to work more powerfully.

Therefore I say that the temporal power does not receive its being
from the spiritual power, nor its power which is its authority, nor
its working considered in itself. Yet it is good that the temporal
power should receive from the spiritual the means of working more
effectively by the light of the grace which the benediction of the
Supreme Pontiff bestows on it both in heaven and on earth. Therefore
we may see that the argument of these men erred in its form, because
the predicate of the conclusion is not the predicate of the major
premiss. The argument runs thus: The moon receives her light from the
sun, which is the spiritual power. The temporal power is the moon.
Therefore the temporal power receives authority from the spiritual
power. "Light" is the predicate of the major premiss, "authority" the
predicate of the conclusion; which two things we have seen to be very
different in their subject and in their idea.


V.--They draw another argument from the text of Moses, saying that the
types of these two powers sprang from the loins of Jacob, for that
they are prefigured in Levi and Judah, whereof one was founder of the
spiritual power, and the other of the temporal. From this they argue:
the Church has the same relation to the Empire that Levi had to Judah.
Levi preceded Judah in his birth, therefore the Church precedes the
Empire in authority.

This error is easily overthrown. For when they say that Levi and
Judah, the sons of Jacob, are the types of spiritual and temporal
power, I could show this argument, too, to be wholly false; but I will
grant it to be true. Then they infer, as Levi came first in birth, so
does the Church come first in authority. But, as in the previous
argument, the predicates of the conclusion and of the major premiss
are different: authority and birth are different things, both in their
subject and in their idea; and therefore there is an error in the form
of the argument. The argument is as follows: A precedes B in C; D and
E stand in the same relation as A and B; therefore D precedes E in F.
But then F and C are different things. And if it is objected that F
follows from C, that is, authority from priority of birth, and that
the effect is properly substituted for the cause, as if "animal" were
used in an argument for men, the objection is bad. For there are many
men, who were born before others, who not only do not precede those
others in authority, but even come after them: as is plain where we
find a bishop younger than his archpresbyters. Therefore their
objection appears to err in that it assumes as a cause that which is
none.


VI.--Again, from the first book of Kings they take the election and
the deposition of Saul; and they say that Saul, an enthroned king, was
deposed by Samuel, who, by God's command, acted in the stead of God,
as appears from the text of Scripture. From this they argue that, as
that Vicar of God had authority to give temporal power, and to take it
away and bestow it on another, so now the Vicar of God, the bishop of
the universal Church, has authority to give the sceptre of temporal
power, and to take it away, and even to give it to another. And if
this were so, it would follow without doubt that the authority of the
Empire is dependent on the Church, as they say.

But we may answer and destroy this argument, by which they say that
Samuel was the Vicar of God: for it was not as Vicar of God that he
acted, but as a special delegate for this purpose, or as a messenger
bearing the express command of his Lord. For it is clear that what God
commanded him, that only he did, and that only he said.

Therefore we must recognise that it is one thing to be another's
vicar, and that it is another to be his messenger or minister, just as
it is one thing to be a doctor, and another to be an interpreter. For
a vicar is one to whom is committed jurisdiction with law or with
arbitrary power, and therefore within the bounds of the jurisdiction
which is committed to him, he may act by law or by his arbitrary power
without the knowledge of his lord. It is not so with a mere messenger,
in so far as he is a messenger; but as the mallet acts only by the
strength of the smith, so the messenger acts only by the authority of
him that sent him. Although, then, God did this by His messenger
Samuel, it does not follow that the Vicar of God may do the same. For
there are many things which God has done and still does, and yet will
do through angels, which the Vicar of God, the successor of Peter,
might not do.

Therefore we may see that they argue from the whole to a part, thus:
Men can hear and see, therefore the eye can hear and see: which does
not hold. Were the argument negative, it would be good: for instance,
man cannot fly, therefore man's arm cannot fly. And, in the same way,
God cannot, by his messenger, cause what is not to have been,[290] as
Agathon says; therefore neither can his Vicar.

[Footnote 290: As quoted by Aristotle, _Ethics_, vi. 3.--(W.)]


VII.--Further, they use the offering of the wise men from the text of
Matthew, saying that Christ accepted from them both frankincense and
gold, to signify that He was lord and ruler both of things temporal
and of things spiritual; and from this they infer that the Vicar of
Christ is also lord and ruler both of things temporal and of things
spiritual; and that consequently he has authority over both.

To this I answer, that I acknowledge that Matthew's words and meaning
are both as they say, but that the inference which they attempt to
draw therefrom fails, because it fails in the terms of the argument.
Their syllogism runs thus: God is the lord both of things temporal and
of things spiritual, the holy Pontiff is the Vicar of God; therefore
he is lord both of things temporal and of things spiritual. Both of
these propositions are true, but the middle term in them is different,
and _four_ terms are introduced, by which the form of the syllogism is
not kept, as is plain from what is said of "the syllogism
simply."[291] For "God" is the subject of the major premiss, and "the
Vicar of God" is the predicate of the minor; and these are not the
same.

[Footnote 291: Arist. _Anal. Prior._, or rather, the _Summulæ Logicæ_,
l. iv., of Petrus Hispanus.--(W.)]

And if anyone raises the objection that the Vicar of God is equal in
power to God, his objection is idle; for no vicar, whether human or
divine, can be equal in power to the master whose vicar he is, which
is at once obvious. We know that the successor of Peter had not equal
authority with God, at least in the works of nature; he could not make
a clod of earth fall upwards, nor fire to burn in a downward
direction, by virtue of the office committed to him. Nor could all
things be committed to him by God; for God could not commit to any the
power of creation, and of baptism, as is clearly proved,
notwithstanding what[292] the Master says in his fourth book.

[Footnote 292: Peter Lombard, "magister sententiarum," iv. dist. 5, f.
2.--(W.)]

We know also that the vicar of a mortal man is not equal in authority
to the man whose vicar he is, so far as he is his vicar; for none can
give away what is not his. The authority of a prince does not belong
to a prince, except for him to use it; for no prince can give to
himself authority. He can indeed receive authority, and give it up,
but he cannot create it in another man, for it does not belong to a
prince to create another prince. And if this is so, it is manifest
that no prince can substitute for himself a vicar equal to himself in
authority respecting all things, and therefore the objection to our
argument has no weight.


VIII.--They also bring forward that saying in Matthew of Christ to
Peter: "Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven;
and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven;"
which also, from the text of Matthew and John, they allow to have been
in like manner said to all the Apostles. From this they argue that it
has been granted by God to the successor of Peter to be able to bind
and to loose all things; hence they infer that he can loose the laws
and decrees of the Empire, and also bind laws and decrees for the
temporal power; and, if this were so, this conclusion would rightly
follow.

But we must draw a distinction touching their major premiss. Their
syllogism is in this form. Peter could loose and bind all things; the
successor of Peter can do whatever Peter could do; therefore the
successor of Peter can bind and can loose all things: whence they
conclude that he can bind and can loose the decrees and the authority
of the Empire.

Now I admit the minor premiss; but touching the major premiss I draw a
distinction. The universal "everything" which is included in
"whatever" is not distributed beyond the extent of the distributed
term. If I say "all animals run," "all" is distributed so as to
include everything which comes under the class "animal." But if I say
"all men run," then "all" is only distributed so as to include every
individual in the class "man;" and when I say "every grammarian runs,"
then is the distribution even more limited.

Therefore we must always look to see what it is that is to be included
in the word "all," and when we know the nature and extent of the
distributed term, it will easily be seen how far the distribution
extends. Therefore, when it is said "whatsoever thou shalt bind," if
"whatsoever" bore an unlimited sense, they would speak truly, and the
power of the Pope would extend even beyond what they say; for he might
then divorce a wife from her husband, and marry her to another while
her first husband was yet alive, which he can in no wise do. He might
even absolve me when impenitent, which God Himself cannot do.

Therefore it is manifest that the distribution of the term in question
is not absolute, but in reference to something. What this is will be
sufficiently clear if we consider what power was granted to Peter.
Christ said to Peter: "To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven"--that is, "I will make thee the doorkeeper of the kingdom of
heaven." And then He adds: "Whatsoever," which is to say "all
that"--to wit, all that has reference to this duty--"thou shalt have
power to bind and to loose." And thus the universal which is implied
in "whatsoever" has only a limited distribution, referring to the
office of the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And in this sense the
proposition of our opponents is true, but, taken absolutely, it is
manifestly false. I say, then, that although the successor of Peter
has power to bind and to loose, as belongs to him to whom the office
of Peter was committed, yet it does not therefore follow that he has
power to bind and to loose the decrees of the Empire, as our opponents
say, unless they further prove that to do so belongs to the office of
the keys, which we shall shortly show is not the case.


IX.--They further take the words in Luke which Peter spake to Christ,
saying: "Behold, here are two swords;" and they understood that by
these two swords the two kinds of rule were foretold. And since Peter
said "here," where he was, which is to say, "with him," they argue
that the authority of the two kinds of rule rests with the successor
of Peter.

We must answer by showing that the interpretation, on which the
argument rests, is wrong. They say that the two swords of which Peter
spake mean the two kinds of rule which we have spoken of; but this we
wholly deny, for then Peter's answer would not be according to the
meaning of the words of Christ; and also we say that Peter made, as
was his wont, a hasty answer, touching only the outside of things.

It will be manifest that such an answer as our opponents allege would
not be according to the meaning of the words of Christ, if the
preceding words, and the reason of them, be considered. Observe, then,
that these words were spoken on the day of the feast, for a little
before Luke writes thus: "Then came the day of unleavened bread, when
the Passover must be killed;" and at this feast Christ had spoken of
His Passion, which was at hand, in which it was necessary for Him to
be separated from His disciples. Observe, too, that when these words
were spoken the twelve were assembled together, and therefore, shortly
after the words which we have just quoted, Luke says: "And when the
hour was come He sat down, and the twelve Apostles with Him." And
continuing His discourse with them, He came to this: "When I sent you,
without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye anything? And they
said, Nothing. Then said He unto them: But now, he that hath a purse,
let him take it, and likewise his scrip; and he that hath no sword,
let him sell his garment, and buy one." From these words the purpose
of Christ is sufficiently manifest; for He did not say: "Buy, or get
for yourselves, two swords," but rather "twelve swords," seeing that
He spake unto twelve disciples: "He that hath not, let him buy," so
that each should have one. And He said this to admonish them of the
persecution and scorn that they should suffer, as though He would say:
"As long as I was with you men received you gladly, but now you will
be driven away; therefore of necessity ye must prepare for yourselves
those things which formerly I forbade you to have." And therefore if
the answer of Peter bore the meaning which our opponents assign to it,
it would have been no answer to the words of Christ; and Christ would
have rebuked him for answering foolishly, as He often did rebuke him.
But Christ did not rebuke him, but was satisfied, saying unto him: "It
is enough," as though He would say: "I speak because of the necessity;
but if each one of you cannot possess a sword, two are enough."

And that it was Peter's wont to speak in a shallow manner is proved by
his hasty and thoughtless forwardness, to which he was led not only by
the sincerity of his faith, but also, I believe, by the natural purity
and simplicity of his character. All the Evangelists bear testimony to
this forwardness.

Matthew writes that when Jesus had asked His disciples: "Whom say ye
that I am?" Peter answered before them all and said: "Thou art Christ,
the Son of the living God." He writes also that when Christ was saying
to His disciples that he must go up to Jerusalem and suffer many
things, Peter took Him and began to rebuke Him, saying: "Be it far
from Thee, Lord; this shall not be unto Thee." But Christ turned and
rebuked him, and said: "Get thee behind me, Satan." Matthew also
writes that in the Mount of Transfiguration, on the sight of Christ,
and of Moses and Elias, and of the two sons of Zebedee, Peter said:
"Lord, it is good for us to be here; if Thou wilt, let us make here
three tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias." He
also writes that when the disciples were in a ship, in the night, and
Christ went unto them walking on the sea, then Peter said unto Him:
"Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the water." And when
Christ foretold that all His disciples should be offended because of
Him, Peter answered and said: "Though all men shall be offended
because of Thee, yet will I never be offended;" and then: "Though I
should die with Thee, yet will I not deny Thee." And to this saying
Mark bears witness also. And Luke writes that Peter had said to
Christ, a little before the words touching the swords which we have
quoted: "Lord, I am ready to go with Thee, both into prison and to
death." And John says of him, that, when Christ wished to wash his
feet, Peter answered and said: "Lord, dost Thou wash my feet?" and
then: "Thou shalt never wash my feet." The same Evangelist tells us
that it was Peter who smote the High Priest's servant with a sword,
and the other Evangelists also bear witness to this thing. He tells us
also how Peter entered the sepulchre at once, when he saw the other
disciple waiting outside, and how, when Christ was on the shore after
the resurrection, when Peter had heard that it was the Lord, he girt
his fisher's coat unto him (for he was naked) and did cast himself
into the sea. Lastly, John tells that when Peter saw John, he said
unto Jesus: "Lord, and what shall this man do?"

It is a pleasure to have pursued this point about our Chief
Shepherd,[293] in praise of his purity of spirit; but from what I have
said it is plain that when he spake of the two swords, he answered the
words of Christ with no second meaning.

[Footnote 293: "Archimandrita nostro." Cf. _Parad._ xi. 99, of St.
Francis.--(W.)]

But if we are to receive these words of Christ and of Peter typically,
they must not be explained as our adversaries explain them; but they
must be referred to that sword of which Matthew writes: "Think not
that I am come to send peace on the earth; I come not to send peace,
but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father," &c. And this comes to pass not only in words, but also in
fact. And therefore Luke speaks to Theophilus of all "that Jesus began
both to do and to teach." It was a sword of that kind that Christ
commanded them to buy; and Peter said that it was already doubly
there. For they were ready both for words and for deeds, by which they
should accomplish what Christ said that He had come to do by the
sword.


X.--Certain persons say further that the Emperor Constantine, having
been cleansed from leprosy by the intercession of Sylvester, then the
Supreme Pontiff, gave unto the Church the seat of Empire which was
Rome, together with many other dignities belonging to the Empire.[294]
Hence they argue that no man can take unto himself these dignities
unless he receive them from the Church, whose they are said to be.
From this it would rightly follow, that one authority depends on the
other, as they maintain.

[Footnote 294: On the Donation of Constantine, Witte refers to _Inf._
xxxviii. 94; xix. 115; _Purg._ xxxii. 124; _Parad._ xx. 35; _suprà_
ii. 12.]

The arguments which seemed to have their roots in the Divine words,
have been stated and disproved. It remains to state and disprove those
which are grounded on Roman history and in the reason of mankind. The
first of these is the one which we have mentioned, in which the
syllogism runs as follows: No one has a right to those things which
belong to the Church, unless he has them from the Church; and this we
grant. The government of Rome belongs to the Church; therefore no one
has a right to it unless it be given him by the Church. The minor
premiss is proved by the facts concerning Constantine, which we have
touched on.

This minor premiss then will I destroy; and as for their proof, I say
that it proves nothing. For the dignity of the Empire was what
Constantine could not alienate, nor the Church receive. And when they
insist, I prove my words as follows: No man on the strength of the
office which is committed to him, may do aught that is contrary to
that office; for so one and the same man, viewed as one man, would be
contrary to himself, which is impossible. But to divide the Empire is
contrary to the office committed to the Emperor; for his office is to
hold mankind in all things subject to one will: as may be easily seen
from the first book of this treatise. Therefore it is not permitted to
the Emperor to divide the Empire. If, therefore, as they say, any
dignities had been alienated by Constantine, and had passed to the
Church, the "coat without seam"--which even they, who pierced Christ,
the true God, with a spear, dared not rend--would have been rent.[295]

[Footnote 295: Each side in the controversy used the type of the
"seamless robe," one of the Empire (_suprà_ i. 16), the other of the
Church; _e.g._, in the Bull of Boniface VIII., "_Unam Sanctam_."]

Further, just as the Church has its foundation, so has the Empire its
foundation. The foundation of the Church is Christ, as Paul says in
his first Epistle to the Corinthians: "For other foundation can no man
lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ."[296] He is the
rock on which the Church is built; but the foundation of the Empire is
human right. Now I say that, as the Church may not go contrary to its
foundation--but must always rest on its foundation, as the words of
the Canticles say: "Who is she that cometh up from the desert,
abounding in delights, leaning on her beloved?"[297]--in the same way
I say that the Empire may not do aught that transgresses human right.
But were the Empire to destroy itself, it would so transgress human
right. Therefore the Empire may not destroy itself. Since then to
divide the Empire would be to destroy it, because the Empire consists
in one single universal Monarchy, it is manifest that he who exercises
the authority of the Empire may not destroy it, and from what we have
said before, it is manifest that to destroy the Empire is contrary to
human right.

[Footnote 296: 1 Cor. iii. 11.--(W.)]

[Footnote 297: Cant. viii. 5.--(W.)]

Moreover, all jurisdiction is prior in time to the judge who has it;
for it is the judge who is ordained for the jurisdiction, not the
jurisdiction for the judge. But the Empire is a jurisdiction,
comprehending within itself all temporal jurisdiction: therefore it is
prior to the judge who has it, who is the Emperor. For it is the
Emperor who is ordained for the Empire, and not contrariwise.
Therefore it is clear that the Emperor, in so far as he is Emperor,
cannot alter the Empire; for it is to the Empire that he owes his
being. I say then that he who is said to have conferred on the Church
the authority in question either was Emperor, or he was not. If he was
not, it is plain that he had no power to give away any part of the
Empire. Nor could he, if he was Emperor, in so far as he was Emperor,
for such a gift would be a diminishing of his jurisdiction.

Further, if one Emperor were able to cut off a certain portion of the
jurisdiction of the Empire, so could another; and since temporal
jurisdiction is finite, and since all that is finite is taken away by
finite diminutions, it would follow that it is possible for the first
of all jurisdictions to be annihilated, which is absurd.

Further, since he that gives is in the position of an agent, and he to
whom a thing is given in that of a patient, as the Philosopher holds
in the fourth book to Nicomachus,[298] therefore, that a gift may be
given, we require not only the fit qualification of the giver, but
also of the receiver; for the acts of the agent are completed in a
patient who is qualified.[299] But the Church was altogether
unqualified to receive temporal things; for there is an express
command, forbidding her so to do, which Matthew gives thus: "Provide
neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses." For though we
find in Luke a relaxation of the command in regard to certain matters,
yet I have not anywhere been able to find that the Church after that
prohibition had licence given her to possess gold and silver. If
therefore the Church was unable to receive temporal power, even
granting that Constantine was able to give it, yet the gift was
impossible; for the receiver was disqualified. It is therefore plain
that neither could the Church receive in the way of possession, nor
could Constantine give in the way of alienation; though it is true
that the Emperor, as protector of the Church, could allot to the
Church a patrimony and other things, if he did not impair his supreme
lordship, the unity of which does not allow division. And the Vicar of
God could receive such things, not to possess them, but as a steward
to dispense the fruits of them to the poor of Christ, on behalf of the
Church, as we know the Apostles did.

[Footnote 298: _Eth._ iv. 1.--(W.)]

[Footnote 299: "_Dispositio; dispositus; indisposita._"]


XI.--Our adversaries further say that the Pope Hadrian[300] summoned
Charles the Great to his own assistance[301] and to that of the
Church, on account of the wrongs suffered from the Lombards in the
time of their king Desiderius, and that Charles received from that
Pope the imperial dignity, notwithstanding that Michael was emperor at
Constantinople. And therefore they say that all the Roman emperors who
succeeded Charles were themselves the "advocates" of the Church, and
ought by the Church to be called to their office. From which would
follow that dependence of the Empire on the Church which they wish to
prove.

[Footnote 300: A.D. 773.--(W.)]

[Footnote 301: "_Advocavit._"]

But to overset their argument, I reply that what they say is nought;
for a usurpation of right does not make right; and if it were so, it
might be proved in the same way that the Church is dependent on the
Empire; for the Emperor Otto restored the Pope Leo, and deposed
Benedict, leading him into exile to Saxony.[302]

[Footnote 302: Otto I. (964) deposed Benedict V. and restored Leo
VIII.]


XII.--But from _reason_ they thus argue: they take the principle laid
down in the tenth book of "_Philosophia Prima_,"[303] saying that all
things which belong to one genus are to be brought under one head,
which is the standard and measure of all that come under that genus.
But all men belong to one genus: therefore they are to be brought
under one head, as the standard and measure of them all. But the
Supreme Pontiff and the Emperor are men; therefore if the preceding
reasoning be true, they must be brought under one head. And since the
Pope cannot come under any other man, the result is that the Emperor,
together with all other men, must be brought under the Pope, as the
measure and rule of all; and then, what those who argue thus desire
follows.

[Footnote 303: Arist. _Metaph._ x. 1.--(W.)]

To overset this argument, I answer that they are right when they say
that all the individuals of one genus ought to be brought under one
head, as their measure; and that they are again right when they say
that all men belong to one genus, and that they are also right when
they argue from these truths that all men should be brought under one
head, taken from the genus man, as their measure and type. But when
they obtain the further conclusion concerning the Pope and the
Emperor, they fall into a fallacy touching accidental attributes.

That this thing may be understood, it must be clearly known that to be
a man is one thing, and to be a pope or an emperor is another; just as
to be a man is different from being a father or a ruler. A man is that
which exists by its essential form, which gives it its genus and
species, and by which it comes under the category of substance. But a
father is that which exists by an accidental form, that is, one which
stands in a certain relation which gives it a certain genus and
species, and through which it comes under the category of relation. If
this were not so, all things would come under the category of
substance, seeing that no accidental form can exist by itself, without
the support of an existing substance; and this is not so. Seeing,
therefore, that the Pope and the Emperor are what they are by virtue
of certain relations: for they owe their existence to the Papacy and
the Empire, which are both relations, one coming within the sphere of
fatherhood, and the other within that of rule; it manifestly follows
that both the Pope and the Emperor, in so far as they are Pope and
Emperor, must come under the category of relation; and therefore that
they must be brought under some head of that genus.

I say then that there is one standard under which they are to be
brought, as men; and another under which they come, as Pope and
Emperor. For in so far as they are men, they have to be brought under
the best man, whoever he be, who is the measure and the ideal of all
mankind; under him, that is, who is most one in his kind,[304] as may
be gathered from the last book to Nicomachus.[305] When, however, two
things are relative, it is evident that they must either be
reciprocally brought under each other, if they are alternately
superior, or if by the nature of their relation they belong to
connected species; or else they must be brought under some third
thing, as their common unity. But the first of these suppositions is
impossible: for then both would be predicable of both, which cannot
be. We cannot say that the Emperor is the Pope, or the Pope the
Emperor. Nor again can it be said that they are connected in species,
for the idea of the Pope is quite other than the idea of the Emperor,
in so far as they are Pope and Emperor. Therefore they must be reduced
to some single thing above them.

[Footnote 304: "_Ad existentem maxime unum in genere suo._"]

[Footnote 305: _Eth._ x. 5, 7.--(W.)]

Now it must be understood that the relative is to the relative as the
relation to the relation. If, therefore, the Papacy and the Empire,
seeing that they are relations of paramount superiority, have to be
carried back to some higher point of superiority from which they, with
the features which make them different,[306] branch off, the Pope and
Emperor, being relative to one another, must be brought back to some
one unity in which the higher point of superiority, without this
characteristic difference, is found. And this will be either God, to
whom all things unite in looking up, or something below God, which is
higher in the scale of superiority, while differing from the simple
and absolute superiority of God. Thus it is evident that the Pope and
the Emperor, in so far as they are men, have to be brought under some
one head; while, in so far as they are Pope and Emperor, they have to
be brought under another head, and so far is clear, as regards the
argument from reason.

[Footnote 306: "_Cum differentialibus suis._"]


XIII.--We have now stated and put on one side those erroneous
reasonings on which they, who assert that the authority of the Roman
Emperor depends on the Pope of Rome, do most chiefly rely. We have now
to go back and show forth the truth in this third question, which we
proposed in the beginning to examine. The truth will appear plainly
enough if I start in my inquiry from the principle which I laid down,
and then show that the authority of the Empire springs immediately
from the head of all being, who is God. This truth will be made
manifest, either if it be shown that the authority of the Empire does
not spring from the authority of the Church; for there is no argument
concerning any other authority. Or again, if it be shown by direct
proof that the authority of the Empire springs immediately from God.

We prove that the authority of the Church is not the cause of the
authority of the Empire in the following manner. Nothing can be the
cause of power in another thing when that other thing has all its
power, while the first either does not exist, or else has no power of
action.[307] But the Empire had its power while the Church was either
not existing at all, or else had no power of acting. Therefore the
Church is not the cause of the power of the Empire, and therefore not
of its authority either, for power and authority mean the same thing.
Let A be the Church, B the Empire, C the authority or power of the
Empire. If C is in B while A does not exist, A cannot be the cause of
C being in B, for it is impossible for an effect to exist before its
cause. Further, if C is in B while A does not act, it cannot be that A
is the cause of C being in B; for, to produce an effect, it is
necessary that the cause, especially the efficient cause of which we
are speaking, should have been at work first. The major premiss of
this argument is self-evident, and the minor premiss is confirmed by
Christ and the Church. Christ confirms it by His birth and His death,
as we have said; the Church confirms it in the words which Paul spake
to Festus in the Acts of the Apostles: "I stand at Cæsar's
judgment-seat, where I ought to be judged," and by the words which an
angel of God spake to Paul a little afterwards: "Fear not, Paul; thou
must be brought before Cæsar;" and again by Paul's words to the Jews
of Italy: "But when the Jews spake against it, I was constrained to
appeal unto Cæsar; not that I had aught to accuse my nation of," but
"to deliver my soul from death." But if Cæsar had not at that time had
the authority to judge in temporal matters, Christ would not have
argued thus; nor would the angel have brought these words; nor would
he, who spake of himself as "having a desire to depart and to be with
Christ," have made an appeal to a judge not having authority.[308]

[Footnote 307: "_Non virtuante._"]

[Footnote 308: "_Incompetentem._" Acts xxv. 10; xxvii. 24; xxviii. 19.
Phil. i. 23.--(W.)]

And if Constantine had not had the authority over the patronage of the
Church, those things which he allotted from the Empire he could not
have had the right to allot; and so the Church would be using this
gift against right; whereas God wills that offerings should be pure,
as is commanded in Leviticus: "No meat offering that ye shall bring
unto the Lord shall be made with leaven." And though this command
appears to regard those who offer, nevertheless it also regards those
who receive an offering. For it is folly to suppose that God wishes to
be received that which He forbids to be offered, for in the same book
there is a command to the Levites: "Ye shall not make yourselves
abominable with any creeping thing that creepeth; neither shall ye
make yourselves unclean with them, that ye shall be defiled
thereby."[309] But to say that the Church so misuses the patrimony
assigned to her is very unseemly; therefore the premiss from which
this conclusion followed is false.

[Footnote 309: Levit. ii. 11; xi. 43.--(W.)]


XIV.--Again, if the Church had power to bestow authority on the Roman
Prince, she would have it either from God, or from herself, or from
some Emperor, or from the universal consent of mankind, or at least of
the majority of mankind. There is no other crevice by which this power
could flow down to the Church. But she has it not from any of these
sources; therefore she has it not at all.

It is manifest that she has it from none of these sources; for if she
had received it from God, she would have received it either by the
divine or by the natural law: because what is received from nature is
received from God; though the converse of this is not true. But this
power is not received by the natural law; for nature lays down no law,
save for the effects of nature, for God cannot fail in power, where he
brings anything into being without the aid of secondary agents. Since
therefore the Church is not an effect of nature, but of God who said:
"Upon this rock I will build my Church," and elsewhere: "I have
finished the work which Thou gavest me to do," it is manifest that
nature did not give the Church this law.

Nor was this power bestowed by the divine law; for the whole of the
divine law is contained in the bosom of the Old or of the New
Testament, and I cannot find therein that any thought or care for
worldly matters was commanded, either to the early or to the latter
priesthood. Nay, I find rather such care taken away from the priests
of the Old Testament by the express command of God to Moses,[310] and
from the priests of the New Testament by the express command of Christ
to His disciples.[311] But it could not be that this care was taken
away from them, if the authority of the temporal power flowed from the
priesthood; for at least in giving the authority there would be an
anxious watchfulness of forethought, and afterwards continued
precaution, lest he to whom authority had been given should leave the
straight way.

[Footnote 310: Numbers xviii. 20. Cf. _Purg._ xvi. 131.--(W.)]

[Footnote 311: Matt. x. 9.--(W.)]

Then it is quite plain that the Church did not receive this power from
herself; for nothing can give what it has not. Therefore all that does
anything, must be such in its doing, as that which it intends to do,
as is stated in the book "of Simple Being."[312] But it is plain that
if the Church gave to herself this power, she had it not before she
gave it. Thus she would have given what she had not, which is
impossible.

[Footnote 312: Arist. _Metaph._ ix. 8.--(W.)]

But it is sufficiently manifest from what we have previously made
evident that the Church has received not this power from any Emperor.

And further, that she had it not from the consent of all, or even of
the greater part of mankind, who can doubt? seeing that not only all
the inhabitants of Asia and Africa, but even the greater number of
Europeans, hold the thought in abhorrence. It is mere weariness to
adduce proofs in matters which are so plain.


XV.--Again, that which is contrary to the nature of a thing cannot be
counted as one of its essential powers; for the essential powers of
each individual follow on its nature, in order to gain its end. But
the power to grant authority in that which is the realm of our mortal
state is contrary to the nature of the Church.[313] Therefore it is
not in the number of its essential powers. For the proof of the minor
premiss we must know that the nature of the Church means the form [or
essence][314] of the Church. For although men use the word nature not
only of the form of a thing, but also of its matter, nevertheless, it
is of the form that they use it more properly, as is proved in the
book "of Natural Learning."[315] But the [essence or] form of the
Church is nothing else than the life of Christ, as it is contained
both in His sayings and in His deeds. For His life was the example and
ideal of the militant Church, especially of its pastors, and above all
of its chief pastor, to whom it belongs to feed the sheep and the
lambs of Christ. And therefore when Christ left His life unto men for
an example He said in John's Gospel: "I have given you an example that
ye should do as I have done to you." And He said unto Peter specially,
after that He had committed unto him the office of shepherd, the words
which John also reports: "Peter, follow me." But Christ denied before
Pilate that His rule was of this sort, saying: "My kingdom is not of
this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants
fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my
kingdom not from hence."[316]

[Footnote 313: "_Virtus auctorizandi regnum nostræ mortalitatis est
contra naturam Ecclesiæ._"]

[Footnote 314: "_Forma._"]

[Footnote 315: Arist. _Phys. Ausc._ ii. 1.--(W.)]

[Footnote 316: John xiii. 15; xxi. 22; xviii. 36.--(W.)]

But this saying must not be understood to mean that Christ, who is
God, is not the lord of this kingdom, for the Psalmist says: "The sea
is His, and He made it, and His hands formed the dry land."[317] We
must understand it to mean that, as _the pattern of the Church_, He
had not the care of this kingdom. It is as if a golden seal were to
speak of itself, and say: "I am not the standard for such and such a
class of things;" for in so far as it is gold, this saying is untrue,
seeing that gold is the standard of all metals; but it is true in so
far as it is a sign capable of being received by impression.

[Footnote 317: Ps. xcv. 5.--(W.)]

It belongs, then, to the very form of the Church always to speak the
same, always to think the same; and to do the opposite of this is
evidently contrary to its essential form--that is to say, to its
nature. And from this it may be collected that the power of bestowing
authority on this kingdom is contrary to the nature of the Church; for
contrariety which is in thought or word follows from contrariety which
is in the thing thought and the thing said; just as truth and
falsehood in speech come from the being or the not-being of the thing,
as we learn from the doctrine of the _Categories_. It has then become
manifest enough by means of the preceding arguments, by which the
contention of our opponents has been shown to lead to an absurd
result, that the authority of the Empire is not in any way dependent
on the authority of the Church.


XVI.--Although it has been proved in the preceding chapter that the
authority of the Empire has not its cause in the authority of the
Supreme Pontiff; for we have shown that this argument led to absurd
results; yet it has not been entirely shown that the authority of the
Empire depends directly upon God, except as a result from our
argument. For it is a consequence that, if the authority comes not
from the vicar of God, it must come from God Himself. And therefore,
for the complete determination of the question proposed, we have to
prove directly that the emperor or monarch of the world stands in an
immediate relation to the King of the universe, who is God.

For the better comprehending of this, it must be recognised that man
alone, of all created things, holds a position midway between things
corruptible and things incorruptible; and therefore[318] philosophers
rightly liken him to a dividing line between two hemispheres. For man
consists of two essential parts, namely, the soul and the body. If he
be considered in relation to his body only, he is corruptible; but if
he be considered in relation to his soul only, he is incorruptible.
And therefore the Philosopher spoke well concerning the incorruptible
soul when he said in the second book "of the Soul:" "It is this alone
which may be separated, as being eternal, from the corruptible."[319]

[Footnote 318: In the _De Causis_ (_v._ above, i. 11), Propos. 9:
"Intelligentia comprehendit generata et naturam, et horizontem naturæ,
scilicet animam; nam ipsa est supra naturam."--(W.)]

[Footnote 319: Arist. _De Anim._ ii. 2.--(W.)]

If, therefore, man holds this position midway between the corruptible
and the incorruptible, since every middle nature partakes of both
extremes, man must share something of each nature. And since every
nature is ordained to gain some final end, it follows that for man
there is a double end. For as he alone of all beings participates
both in the corruptible and the incorruptible, so he alone of all
beings is ordained to gain two ends, whereby one is his end in so far
as he is corruptible, and the other in so far as he is incorruptible.

Two ends, therefore, have been laid down by the ineffable providence
of God for man to aim at: the blessedness of this life, which consists
in the exercise of his natural powers, and which is prefigured in[320]
the earthly Paradise; and next, the blessedness of the life eternal,
which consists in the fruition of the sight of God's countenance, and
to which man by his own natural powers cannot rise, if he be not aided
by the divine light; and this blessedness is understood by the
heavenly Paradise.

[Footnote 320: See _Purg._ xxviii.: and Mr. Longfellow's note ad loc.]

But to these different kinds of blessedness, as to different
conclusions, we must come by different means. For at the first we may
arrive by the lessons of philosophy, if only we will follow them, by
acting in accordance with the moral and intellectual virtues. But at
the second we can only arrive by spiritual lessons, transcending human
reason, so that we follow them in accordance with the theological
virtues, faith, hope, and charity. The truth of the first of these
conclusions and of these means is made manifest by human reason,
which by the philosophers has been all laid open to us. The other
conclusions and means are made manifest by the Holy Spirit, who by the
mouth of the Prophets and holy writers, and by Jesus Christ, the
co-eternal Son of God, and His disciples, has revealed to us
supernatural truth of which we have great need. Nevertheless human
passion would cast them all behind its back, if it were not that men,
going astray like the beasts that perish,[321] were restrained in
their course by bit and bridle, like horses and mules.

[Footnote 321: "_Sua bestialitate vagantes._" _V._ Ps. xxxii. 10.]

Therefore man had need of two guides for his life, as he had a twofold
end in life; whereof one is the Supreme Pontiff, to lead mankind to
eternal life, according to the things revealed to us; and the other is
the Emperor, to guide mankind to happiness in this world, in
accordance with the teaching of philosophy. And since none, or but a
few only, and even they with sore difficulty, could arrive at this
harbour of happiness, unless the waves and blandishments of human
desires were set at rest, and the human race were free to live in
peace and quiet, this therefore is the mark at which he who is to care
for the world, and whom we call the Roman Prince, must most chiefly
aim at: I mean, that in this little plot of earth[322] belonging to
mortal men, life may pass in freedom and with peace. And since the
order of this world follows the order of the heavens, as they run
their course, it is necessary, to the end that the learning which
brings liberty and peace may be duly applied by this guardian of the
world in fitting season and place, that this power should be dispensed
by Him who is ever present to behold the whole order of the heavens.
And this is He who alone has preordained this, that by it in His
providence He might bind all things together, each in their own order.

[Footnote 322: Cf. _Parad._ xxii. 151. "_L'ajuola che ci fa tanto
feroci._"]

But if this is so, God alone elects, God alone confirms: for there is
none higher than God. And hence there is the further conclusion, that
neither those who now are, nor any others who may, in whatsoever way,
have been called "Electors," ought to have that name; rather they are
to be held as declarers and announcers of the providence of God. And,
therefore, it is that they to whom is granted the privilege of
announcing God's will sometimes fall into disagreement; because that,
all of them or some of them have been blinded by their evil desires,
and have not discerned the face of God's appointment.[323]

[Footnote 323: _V._ Hallam, _Middle Ages_, c. v. Bryce, _Roman
Empire_, c. xiv. Witte, _Præf._ p. xxxiv. xlv.]

It is therefore clear that the authority of temporal Monarchy comes
down, with no intermediate will, from the fountain of universal
authority; and this fountain, one in its unity, flows through many
channels out of the abundance of the goodness of God.

And now, methinks, I have reached the goal which I set before me. I
have unravelled the truth of the questions which I asked: whether the
office of Monarchy was necessary to the welfare of the world; whether
it was by right that the Roman people assumed to themselves the office
of Monarchy; and, further, that last question, whether the authority
of the Monarch springs immediately from God, or from some other. Yet
the truth of this latter question must not be received so narrowly as
to deny that in certain matters the Roman Prince is subject to the
Roman Pontiff. For that happiness, which is subject to mortality, in a
sense is ordered with a view to the happiness which shall not taste of
death. Let, therefore, Cæsar be reverent to Peter, as the first-born
son should be reverent to his father, that he may be illuminated with
the light of his father's grace, and so may be stronger to lighten the
world over which he has been placed by Him alone, who is the ruler of
all things spiritual as well as temporal.


THE END.




CONTENTS

OF

DE MONARCHIA.


