
  The Augustan Reprint Society

       ESSAYS ON TASTE

            from


     John Gilbert Cooper

  _Letters Concerning Taste_

     Third Edition (1757)


             &


       John Armstrong

       _Miscellanies_

           (1770)


   With an Introduction by

         Ralph Cohen



Publication Number 30

Los Angeles

William Andrews Clark Memorial Library

University of California




  _GENERAL EDITORS_
  H. RICHARD ARCHER,    _Clark Memorial Library_
  RICHARD C. BOYS.,     _University of Michigan_
  EDWARD NILES HOOKER,  _University of California, Los Angeles_
  JOHN LOFTIS,          _University of California, Los Angeles_

  _ASSISTANT EDITOR_
  W. EARL BRITTON,      _University of Michigan_

  _ADVISORY EDITORS_
  EMMETT L. AVERY,      _State College of Washington_
  BENJAMIN BOYCE,       _Duke University_
  LOUIS I. BREDVOLD,    _University of Michigan_
  CLEANTH BROOKS,       _Yale University_
  JAMES L. CLIFFORD,    _Columbia University_
  ARTHUR FRIEDMAN,      _University of Chicago_
  LOUIS A. LANDA,       _Princeton University_
  SAMUEL H. MONK,       _University of Minnesota_
  ERNEST MOSSNER,       _University of Texas_
  JAMES SUTHERLAND,     _Queen Mary College, London_
  H.T. SWEDENBERG, JR., _University of California, Los Angeles_




INTRODUCTION


The essays on taste taken from the work of John Gilbert Cooper and
John Armstrong and reprinted in this issue are of interest and value
to the student of the eighteenth century because they typify the
shifting attitudes toward taste held by most mid-century poets and
critics. Cooper, who accepts the Shaftesbury-Hutchesonian thesis of
the internal sense, emphasizes the personal, ecstatic effect of taste.
Armstrong, while accepting the rationalist notions of clarity
and simplicity, attacks methodized rules and urges reliance on
individuality.

Following Shaftesbury and Hutcheson closely, Cooper treats taste as an
immediate, prerational response of an internal sense to the proportion
and harmony in nature, a response from an internal harmony of the
senses, imagination, and understanding to a similar harmony in
external nature. Cooper defines the effect of good taste as a "Glow
of Pleasure which thrills thro' our whole Frame." This "Glow" is
characterized by high emotional sensibility, and it thus minimizes the
passivity which Hutcheson attributes to the internal sense.

Armstrong's sources are more eclectic than Cooper's. Armstrong shows
similarities to Pope in his rationalism, to Dennis in his treatment
of poetry as an expression of the passions, and to Hutcheson in his
emphasis on benevolence and the psychological basis of perception.
But to these views, he frequently adds personal eccentricities. For
example, _Taste: An Epistle to a Young Critic_ reveals its Popean
descent in its tone and form; however, its gastronomic ending displays
Armstrong's interest, as a physician, in the relation of diet to
literary taste. If Armstrong's boast that "I'm a shrewd observer,
and will guess What books you doat on from your fav'rite mess," is
a personal eccentricity, his attack on false criticism and his
exhortation to judge for oneself are typical harbingers of late
eighteenth-century individualism and confidence in the "natural" man.

    An honest farmer, or shepherd [writes Armstrong in "Of
    Taste"], who is acquainted with no language but what is
    spoken in his own county, may have a much truer relish of the
    _English_ writers than the most dogmatical pedant that ever
    erected himself into a commentator, and from his _Gothic_
    chair, with an ill-bred arrogance, dictated false criticism to
    the gaping multitude.[1]

[Footnote 1: John Armstrong, _Miscellanies_ (London, 1770), II, 137.]

Cooper and Armstrong both hold a historically intermediate position
in their attitudes toward taste, accepting early eighteenth-century
assumptions and balancing them with late eighteenth-century emphases.
Neither of them abandons the moral assumption of art which, as
Armstrong explains it, is a belief in "a standard of right and wrong
in the nature of things, of beauty and deformity, both in the natural
and moral world."[2] Cooper, who defines taste as a thrilling response
to art, falls back upon Hutcheson in minimizing the importance of
art and making it secondary to moral knowledge. Armstrong, while
describing taste as the sensitive discrimination of degrees of beauty
and deformity, bases this discrimination not on artistic, but on moral
qualities.

[Footnote 2: _Ibid._, II, 134.]

The complete transition from classic to romantic premises of taste is
characterized by the separation of art from morals. This step neither
Cooper nor Armstrong takes. But they do exhibit tendencies which
explain how the shift was made possible. Both writers insist on a felt
response to a work of art. Cooper emphasizes that this response must
be to the whole work. This assumption implies that a work of art is
an entity complete in itself; it makes possible the argument that
art conveys artistic, not moral knowledge. Cooper, by stressing
sensibility as an effect of taste, suggests the Wordsworthian notion
that the poet is more sensitive than other people.

Armstrong, in addition to his hostility to formal criticism and his
confidence in the natural man, reveals three other tendencies which
later eighteenth-century critics elaborated. Like Edward Young in his
_Conjectures on Original Composition_, 1759, Armstrong opposes slavish
imitation of ancient models and declares that the writer should "catch
their graces without affecting it [them]" so that his "own original
characteristical manner will still distinguish itself."[3] Armstrong
emphasizes exquisiteness of perception as the basis for taste: the
more exquisite the mind, the more is it able to discriminate among
the various degrees of the beautiful and the deformed. Although later
critics repudiate Armstrong's moral discrimination, they transform
it into a refined discrimination of aesthetic qualities. Finally, by
suggesting that the man of genius differs from the man of taste by
his ability to handle a medium, Armstrong implies the possibility of
a technical criticism in terms of the writer's craft, apart from moral
judgment.

[Footnote 3: _Ibid._, II, 168.]

Although the works of Cooper and Armstrong elicited contrasting
popular reactions--_Letters concerning Taste_ running into four
editions from 1755 to 1771 and Armstrong's writings, with the
exception of _The Art of Preserving Health_, never winning much public
favor--neither writer exerted a strong critical influence. Cooper did
not reassess or change significantly the assumptions of Shaftesbury
and Hutcheson. His work was primarily a popularization of their ideas,
and, in its enthusiastic language, its emphasis on sensibility,
and its epistolary form, it seems directed at flattering a female
audience. Armstrong's remarks on taste, written in imitation of
the simplicity and clarity of the rational tradition, are personal
assertions and opinions rather than well-defined or clearly
thought-out critical positions. They are random thoughts rather than a
coherent critical theory.

The significance of Cooper and Armstrong rests, therefore, on certain
representative attitudes toward taste which exhibit the change
"from classic to romantic." On the one hand, they accept the moral
postulates of art, and, on the other, they emphasize the emotional
basis of taste. Cooper treats art as a secondary form of knowledge,
yet emphasizes the thrill that art gives. Armstrong accepts
the standards of clarity and simplicity, while emphasizing the
individuality of response and the need for discriminating particular,
rather than general, qualities. Though Cooper and Armstrong fail to
revaluate the traditions they accept, they exemplify trends which
led others to perform this revaluation and to transform the moral
assumptions into aesthetic criteria.


Bibliographical Note

The two reprints from the twenty letters of John Gilbert Cooper's
_Letters concerning Taste. To which are added Essays on similar and
other Subjects_ are from the third edition, dated 1757; the first
edition was published in 1755 as _Letters concerning Taste_.
The selections by John Armstrong are taken from the two-volume
_Miscellanies_ published in 1770. "The Taste of the Present Age"
received its first publication in this edition, but the other prose
had previously been published in 1758 under the pseudonym of Launcelot
Temple in the first volume of _Sketches: or Essays on Various
Subjects_. The poem _Taste: An Epistle to a Young Critic_ was first
published in 1753.

  Ralph Cohen




LETTERS CONCERNING TASTE.




LETTER I.

To EUPHEMIUS.


Whence comes it, EUPHEMIUS, that you, who are _feelingly_ alive to
each fine Sensation that Beauty or Harmony gives the Soul, should so
often assert, contrary to what you daily experience, _that_ TASTE _is
governed by Caprice, and that_ BEAUTY _is reducible to no Criterion?_
I am afraid your Generosity in this Instance is greater than your
Sincerity, and that you are willing to compliment the circle of your
Friends, in giving up by this Concession that envied Superiority you
might claim over them, should it be acknowledged that those uncommon
Emotions of Pleasure, which arise in your Breast upon the Observation
of moral or natural Elegance, were caused by a more ready and intimate
Perception of that universal TRUTH, which the all-perfect CREATOR
of this harmonious System ordained to be the VENUS of every Object,
whether in the Material World; in the imitative Arts; or in living
Characters and Manners. How irreconcileable are your Doctrines to the
Example you afford us! However, since you press me to justify your
Practice against your Declarations, by giving a Definition of what is
meant by TASTE, I shall not avoid the invidious Office of pointing out
your superior Excellence to others, by proving that TRUTH and BEAUTY
are coincident, and that the warmest Admirers of these CELESTIAL
TWINS, have consequently Souls more nearly allied to ætherial Spirits
of a higher Order. The effect of a _good_ TASTE is that instantaneous
Glow of Pleasure which thrills thro' our whole Frame, and seizes upon
the Applause of the Heart, before the intellectual Power, Reason, can
descend from the Throne of the Mind to ratify it's Approbation, either
when we receive into the Soul beautiful Images thro' the Organs
of bodily Senses; or the Decorum of an amiable Character thro' the
Faculties of moral Perception; or when we recall, by the imitative
Arts, both of them thro' the intermediate Power of the Imagination.
Nor is this delightful and immediate Sensation to be excited in an
undistempered Soul, but by a Chain of Truths, dependent upon one
another till they terminate in the hand of the Divine COMPOSER of the
whole. Let us cast our Eyes first upon the Objects of the Material
World. A rural Prospect upon the very first Glance yields a grateful
Emotion in the Breast, when in a Variety of Scenes there arises from
the whole ONE Order, whose different Parts will be found, by the
critical Eye of Contemplation, to relate mutually to one another,
and each examined apart, to be productive of the Necessaries, the
Conveniencies, and Emoluments of Life. Suppose you was to behold from
an Eminence, thro' a small range of Mountains covered with Woods,
several little Streams gushing out of Rocks, some gently trickling
over Pebbles, others tumbling from a Precipice, and a few gliding
smoothly in Willow-shaded Rivulets thro green Meadows, till their
tributary Waters are all collected by some River God of a larger Urn,
who at some few Miles distance is lost in the Ocean, which heaves
it's broad Bosom to the Sight, and ends the Prospect with an immense
Expanse of Waters. Tell me, EUPHEMIUS, would not such a Scene
captivate the Heart even before the intellectual Powers discover
Minerals in the Mountains; future Navies in the Woods; Civil and
Military Architecture in the Rocks; healing Qualities in the smaller
Streams; Fertility, that the larger Waters distribute along their
serpentising Banks; Herbage for Cattle in the Meadows; and lastly,
the more easy Opportunities the River affords us to convey to other
Climates the Superfluities of our own, for which the Ocean brings us
back in Exchange what we stand in need of from theirs. Now to heighten
this beautiful Landscape, let us throw in Corn Fields, here and there
a Country Seat, and, at proper Distances, small Hamlets, together with
Spires and Towers, as MILTON describes them,

    "bosom'd high in tufted Trees."

Does not an additional Rapture flow in from this Adjunct, of which
Reason will afterwards discover the latent Cause in the same manner
as before. Your favourite Architecture will not fail to afford less
remarkable Instances, that Truth, Beauty, and Utility are inseparable.
You very well know that every Rule, Canon, and Proportion in building
did not arise from the capricious Invention of Man, but from the
unerring Dictates of Nature, and that even what are now the ornamental
Parts of an Edifice, originally were created by Necessity; and are
still displeasing to the Sight, when they are disobedient, if I may
use that moral Expression, to the Order, which Nature, whose Laws
cannot be repealed, first gave to supply that Necessity. Here I appeal
to your own Breast, and let me continue the Appeal by asking you
concerning another Science analogous to this, which is founded upon as
invariable Principles: I mean the Science of living well, in which
you are as happily learned as in the former. Say then, has not every
amiable Character, with which you have been enamoured, been proved by
a cool Examination to contain a _beautiful_ Proportion, in the Point
it was placed in, relative to Society? And what is it that constitutes
Moral Deformity, or what we call Vice, but the Disproportion which any
Agent occasions, in the Fabric of Civil Community, by a Non-compliance
to the general _Order_ which should prevail in it?

As the Arts of Painting, Sculpture, and Poetry are imitative of these,
their Excellence, as ARISTOTLE observes, consists in Faithfulness to
their Original: nor have they any _primary_ Beauty in themselves, but
derive their shadowy Existence in a mimetic Transcript from Objects
in the Material World, or from Passions, Characters, and Manners.
Nevertheless that _internal Sense_ we call TASTE (which is a Herald
for the whole human System, in it's three different Parts, the
refined Faculties of Perception, the gross Organs of Sense, and the
intermediate Powers of Imagination) has as quick a Feeling of this
secondary Excellence of the Arts, as for the primary Graces; and
seizes the Heart with Rapture long before the Senses, and Reason in
Conjunction, can _prove_ this Beauty by collating the Imitations with
their Originals.

If it should be asked _why_ external Objects affect the human Breast
in this Manner, I would answer, that the ALMIGHTY has in this, as well
as in all his other Works, out of his abundant Goodness and Love to
his Creatures, so _attuned_ our Minds to Truth, that all Beauty from
without should make a responsive Harmony vibrate within. But should
any of those more curious Gentlemen, who busy themselves With
Enquiries into Matters, which the Deity, for Reasons known only to
himself, has placed above our limited Capacities, demand _how_ he has
so formed us, I should refer them, with proper Contempt, to their more
aged Brethren, who may justly in Derision be stiled _the Philosophers
of ultimate Causes_. To you, my dear Friend, whose truly philosophical
and religious Taste concludes that whatever GOD ordains is right,
it is sufficient to have proved that _Truth_ is the Cause of all
_Beauty_, and that Truth flows from the Fountain of all Perfection, in
whose unfathomable Depth finite Thought should never venture with
any other Intention than to wonder and adore. But I find I have been
imperceptibly led on from Thought to Thought, not only to trespass
upon the common Stile of a Letter, by these abstruse Reasonings and
religious Conclusions, but upon the ordinary length of one likewise;
therefore shall conclude by complimenting my own Taste in Characters,
when I assure you that I am,

  _Your most affectionate Friend_, &c.




