CHAPTER II. HOLBACH'S WORKS.


Holbach's published works, with the exception of a few scattered
ones, may be divided into three classes, viz., translations of German
scientific works, translations of English deistical writings, and his
own works on theology, philosophy, politics and morals. Those which fall
into none of these categories can be dealt with very summarily. They
are:

1. Two pamphlets on the musical dispute of 1752; _Lettre à une dame d'un
certain âge sur l'état présent de l'Opéra_, (8vo, pp. 11) and _Arrêt
rendu à l'amphithéâtre de l'Opéra_, (8vo, pp. 16,) both directed against
French music and in line with Grimm's _Petit Prophète_ and Rousseau's
_Lettre sur la musique française_.

2. A translation in prose of Akenside's _The Pleasures of Imagination_
(Paris, 1759, 8vo).

3. A translation of Swift's _History of the Reign of Queen Anne_ in
collaboration with M. Eidous (Amsterdam, 1765, 12mo, pp. xxiv + 416).

4. Translations of an _Ode on Human Life_ and a _Hymn to the Sun_ in the
_Variétés littéraires_ (1768).

5. Articles on natural science in the _Encyclopédie_ and article
_Prononciation des langues_ in the _Dictionnaire de Grammaire_ of the
_Encyclopédie méthodique_.

6. Translation of Wallerius' _Agriculture reduced to its true
principles_ (Paris, 1774, 12mo).

7. Two _Facéties philosophiques_ published in Grimm's _Correspondence
Littéraire. L'Abbé et le Rabbin_, and _Essai sur l'art de ramper, à
l'usage des courtisans_.

8. Parts of Raynal's _Histoire philosophique des deux Indes_.

9. Notes to Lagrange's _Vie de Senèque_.


Holbach's translations of German scientific works are as follows:
(Complete titles to be found in Bibliography, Pt. I.)

1. _Art de la Verrerie de Neri, Merret, et Kunckel_ (Paris, Durand,
1752). Original work in Italian. Latin translation by Christopher
Merret. German translation by J. Kunckel of Löwenstern. Holbach's
translation comprises the seven books of Antionio Neri, Merret's
notes on Neri, Kunckel's observations on both these authors, his own
experiments and others relative to glass-making. The translation
was dedicated to Malesherbes who had desired to see the best German
scientific works published in French. In his _Préface du Traducteur_
Holbach writes:

L'envie de me rendre utile, dont tout citoyen doit être animé, m'a fait
entreprendre l'ouvrage que je présente au Public. S'il a le bonheur
de mériter son approbation, quoiqu'il y ait peu de gloire attachée
au travail ingrat et fastidieux d'un Traducteur, je me déterminerai à
donner les meilleurs ouvrages allemands, sur l'Histoire Naturelle,
la Minéralogie, la Métallurgie et la Chymie. Tout le monde sait que
l'Allemagne possede en ce genre des trésors qui ont été jusqu'ici comme
enfouis pour la France.

2. _Minéralogie ou Description générale du règne mineral par J. G.
Wallerius_ (Paris, Durand, 1753) followed by _Hydrologie_ by the same
author. Second edition, Paris, Herrissant, 1759. Originally in Swedish
(Wallerius was a professor of chemistry in the University of Upsala).
German translation by J. D. Denso, Professor of Chemistry, Stargard,
Pomerania. Holbach's translation was made from the German edition which
Wallerius considered preferable to the Swedish. He was assisted by
Bernard de Jussien and Rouelle, and the work was dedicated to a friend
and co-worker in the natural sciences, Monsieur d'Arclais de Montamy.

3. _Introduction à la Minéralogie... oeuvre posthume de M. J. F.
Henckel_, Paris, Cavelier, 1756, first published under title _Henckelius
in Mineralogiâ redivivus_, Dresden, 1747, by his pupil, M. Stephani,
as an outline of his lectures. Holbach's translation made from a German
edition, corrected, with notes on new discoveries added.

4. _Chimie métallurgique... par M. C. Gellert_. Paris, Briasson, 1758,
translated earlier. Approbation May 1, 1753, Privilege Dec. 21, 1754.
Originally a text written by Gellert for four artillery officers whom
the King of Sardinia sent to Freyburg to learn mining-engineering.

5. _Traités de physique, d'histoire naturelle, de mineralogy et de
métallurgie_. Paris, Herrissant, 1759, by J. G. Lehmann, three vols. I.
L'Art des Mines, II. Traité de la formation des métaux, III. Essai d'une
histoire naturelle des couches de la terre. In his preface to the third
volume Holbach has some interesting remarks about the deluge, the irony
of which seems to have escaped the royal censor, Millet, _Docteur en
Théologie_.

"La description si précise et si détaillée que Moïse fait du Deluge dans
la Genèse, ayant une autorité infaillible, puis qu'elle n'est autre
que celle de Dieu même, nous rend certains de la réalité et de
l'universalité de ce châtiment terrible. Il s'agit simplement d'examiner
si les naturalistes, tels que Woodward, Schenchzer, Buttner et M.
Lehmann lui-même ne se sont points trompés, lorsqu'ils ont attribué à
cet événement seul la formation des couches de la terre et lorsqu'ils
s'en sont servis pour expliquer l'état actuel de notre globe. Il semble
que rien ne doit nous empêcher d'agiter cette question; l'Ecriture
sainte se contente de nous apprendre la voie miraculeuse dont Dieu s'est
servi pour punir les crimes du genre humain; elle ne dit rien qui puisse
limiter les sentiments des naturalistes sur les autres effets physiques
que le déluge a pu produire. C'est une matière qu'elle paroît avoir
abandonnée aux disputes des hommes." He then proceeds to question
whether the deluge could have produced the results attributed to it
and argues against catastrophism which, it must be remembered, was the
received geological doctrine down to the days of Lyell. "Les causes les
plus simples sont capables de produire au bout des siècles les effets
les plus grands, surtout lorsqu'elles agissent incessament; et nous
voyons toutes ces causes réunies agir perpétuellement sous nos yeux.
Concluons, donc, de tout ce qui précède, que le déluge, seul et les feux
souterrains seuls ne suffisent point pour expliquer la formation des
couches de la terre. On risquera toujours de se tromper, lorsque par
l'envie de simplifier on voudra dériver tous les phénomènes de la nature
d'une seule et unique cause."

6. _Pyritologie_ by J. F. Henkel, Paris, Herrissant, 1760, a large
volume in quarto, translated by Holbach. It contains _Flora Saturnisans_
(translated by M. Charas and reviewed by M. Roux), Henkel's _Opuscules
Minéralogiques_ and other treatises. Original editions: _Pyritologia_,
Leipzig, 1725, 1754; _Flora Saturnisans_, Leipzig, 1721; _De
Appropriatione Chymica_, Dresden, 1727, and _De Lapidum origine_,
Dresden, 1734, translated into German, with excellent notes, Dresden,
1744, by M. C. F. Zimmermann, a pupil of M. Henkel. Holbach's
translations seem to have been well received because he writes in
this preface: "Je m'estimerai heureux si mon travail peut contribuer à
entretenir et augmenter le goût universel qu'on a conçu pour le saine
physique."

7. _Oeuvres métallurgiques_ de M. J. C. Orschall, Paris, Hardy, 1760.
Orschall still accepted the old alchemist tradition but was sound in
practice and was the best authority on copper. Holbach does not attempt
to justify his physics which was that of the preceding century. Orschall
was held in high esteem by Henckel and Stahl.

8. _Recueil des mémoires des Académies d'Upsal et de Stockholm_, Paris,
Didot, 1764. These records of experiments made in the Royal Laboratories
of Sweden, founded in 1683 by Charles XI, had already been translated
into German and English. Holbach's translation was made from the German
and Latin. He promises further treatises on Agriculture, Natural History
and Medicine.

9. _Traité du Soufre_ by G. E. Stahl, Paris, Didot, 1766. In speaking
of Stahl's theories Holbach says: "Il ne faut pas croire que ces
connaissances soient des vérités stériles propres seulement à satisfaire
une vaine curiosité, elles ont leur application aux travaux de la
métallurgie qui leur doivent la perfection où on les a portés depuis
quelques temps." Holbach understood very clearly the utility of science
in his scheme of increasing the store of human well-being, and would
doubtless have translated other useful works had not other interests
prevented. There is a MSS. note of his in the Bibliothèque Nationale to
M. Malesherbes, then Administrateur de la Librairie Royale; suggesting
other German treatises that might well be translated. (MSS. 22194).


HOLBACH TO MALESHERBES

_Monsieur_

J'ai l'honneur de vous envoyer ci-joint la liste des ouvrages dont
M. Liège fils pourrait entreprendre la traduction. Je n'en connais
actuellement point d'autres qui méritent l'attention du public. M.
Macquer m'a écrit une lettre qui a pour objet les mêmes choses dont vous
m'avez fait l'honneur de me parler, et je lui fais la même réponse.

J'ai l'honneur d'être avec respect, Monsieur,

 Votre très obéissant serviteur
 D'HOLBACH
à Paris ce 6 d'avril 1761


The list of books was as follows:

1. Johann Kunckel's _Laboratorium Chymicum_, 8vo.

2. Georg Ernest Stahl's _Commentary on Becher's Metallurgy_, 8vo.

3. _Concordantia Chymica Becheri_, 40º, published by Stahl.

4. _Cadmologia_, or the _Natural History of Cobalt_, by J. G. Lehmann,
Berlin, 1760, 4°.


After 1760 Holbach became interested in another line of intellectual
activity, namely the writing and translation of anti-religious
literature. His first book of this sort really appeared in 1761 although
no copies bear this date. From 1767 on however he published a great
many works of this character. It is convenient to deal first with his
translations of English deistical writers. They are in chronological
order.

1. _Esprit du clergé, ou le Christianisme primitif vengé des entreprises
et des excès de nos Prêtres modernes_. Londres (Amsterdam), 1767. This
book appeared in England in 1720 under the title of _The Independent
Whig_; its author was Thomas Gordon (known through his Commentaries on
Sallust and Tacitus) who wrote in collaboration with John Trenchard. The
book was partially rewritten by Holbach and then touched up by Naigeon,
who, according to a manuscript note by his brother, "atheised it as
much as possible." It was sold with great secrecy and at a high price--a
reward which the colporters demanded for the risk they ran in peddling
seditious literature. The book was a violent attack on the spirit of
domination which characterized the Christian priesthood at that time.

2. _De L'imposture sacerdotale, ou Recueil de Pièces sur le clergé_,
Londres (Amsterdam), 1767. Another edition 1772 under title _De la
Monstruosité pontificale_ etc.

Contains translations of various pamphlets including Davisson, _A
true picture of Popery_; Brown, _Popery a Craft_, London 1735; Gordon,
_Apology for the danger of the church_, 1719; Gordon, _The Creed of an
Independent Whig_, 1720.

3. _Examen des Prophéties qui servent de fondement à la religion
Chrétienne_, Londres (Amsterdam), 1768. Translation of Anthony Collins,
_A Discourse on the Grounds and Reasons of the Christian Religion_,
London, 1724. Contains also _The Scheme of literal Prophecy considered_,
1727, also by Collins in answer to the works of Clarke, Sherlock,
Chandler, Sykes, and especially to Whiston's _Essay towards restoring
the text of the Old Testament_, one of the thirty-five works directed
against Collins' original _"Discourse"_. Copies of this work have become
very rare.

4. _David, ou l'histoire de l'homme selon le coeur de Dieu_. Londres
(Amsterdam), 1768. This work appeared in England in 1761 and is
attributed to Peter Annet, also to John Noorthook. Some English
eulogists of George II, Messrs. Chandler, Palmer and others, had likened
their late King to David, "the man after God's own heart." The deists,
struck by the absurdity of the comparison, proceeded to relate all
the scandalous facts they could find recorded of David, and by clever
distortions painted him as the most execrable of Kings, in a work
entitled _David or the Man after God's Own Heart_, which formed the
basis of Holbach's translation.

5. _Les prêtres démasqués ou des iniquités du clergé chrétien_. Londres,
1768. Translation of four discourses published under the title _The
Ax laid to the root of Christian Priestcraft by a layman_, London, T.
Cooper, 1742. A rare volume.

6. _Lettres philosophiques..._ Londres (Amsterdam, 1768). Translation
of J. Toland's _Letters to Serena_, London, 1704. The book, which had
become very rare in Holbach's time, had caused a great scandal at the
time of its publication and was much sought after by collectors. It
contains five letters, the first three of which are by Toland, the other
two and the preface by Holbach and Naigeon. The matters treated are,
the origin of prejudices, the dogma of the immortality of the soul,
idolatry, superstition, the system of Spinoza and the origin of movement
in matter.

Diderot said of these works, in writing to Mlle. Volland Nov. 22, 1768
(_Oeuvres_, Vol. XVIII, p. 308): "Il pleut des bombes dans la maison
du Seigneur. Je tremble toujours que quelqu'un de ces téméraires
artilleurs-là ne s'en trouve mal. Ce sont les _Lettres philosophiques_
traduites, ou supposées traduites, de l'anglais de Toland; c'est
_l'Examen des prophéties_; c'est la _Vie de David ou de l'homme selon là
coeur de Dieu_, ce sont mélle diables déchainés.--Ah! Madame de Blacy,
je crains bien que le Fils de l'Homme ne soit à la porte; que la
venue d'Elie ne soit proche, et que nous ne touchions au règne de
l'Anti-christ. Tous les jours, quand je me lève, je regarde par ma
fenêtre, si la grande prostituée de Babylone ne se promène point déjà
dans les rues avec sa grande coupe à la main et s'il ne se fait aucun
des signes prédits dans le firmament."

7. _De la Cruauté religieuse_, Londres (Amsterdam). _Considerations
upon war, upon cruelty in general and religious cruelty in particular_,
London, printed for Thomas Hope, 1761.

8. _Dissertation critique sur les tourmens de l'enfer_ printed in
an original work, _L'Enfer détruit_, Londres (Amsterdam), 1769. A
translation of Whitefoot's _The Torments of Hell, the foundation and
pillars thereof discover'd, search'd, shaken and remov'd_. London, 1658.

9. In the _Recueil philosophique_ edited by Naigeon, Londres
(Amsterdam), 1770. I. Dissertation sur l'immortalité de l'âme.
Translated from Hume. II. Dissertation sur le suicide (Hume). III.
Extrait d'un livre Anglais qui a pour titre le Christianisme aussi
ancien que le monde. (Tindal, Christianity as old as Creation.)

10. _Esprit de Judaïsme, ou Examen raisonné de la Loi de Moyse_. Londres
(Amsterdam), 1770 (1769), translated from Anthony Collins. With the
exception of some of Holbach's own works this is one of the fiercest
denunciations of Judaism and Christianity to be found in print. In fact,
it is very much in the style of Holbach's anti-religious works and shows
beyond a doubt that Holbach derived his inspiration from Collins and the
more radical of the English school. The volume has become exceedingly
rare.

After outlining the history of Judaism the book ends thus:

Ose, donc enfin, ô Europe! secouer le joug insupportable des préjugés
qui t'affligent. Laisse à des Hébreux stupides, à des frénétiques
imbéciles, à des Asiatiques lâches et dégradés, ces superstitions aussi
avilissantes qu'insensées: elles ne sont point faites pour les habitans
de ton climat. Occupe-toi du soin de perfectionner tes gouvernemens, de
corriger tes lois, de réformer tes abus, de régler tes moeurs, et ferme
pour toujours les yeux à ces vraies chimères, qui depuis tant de siècles
n'ont servi qu'à retarder tes progrès vers la science véritable et à
t'écarter de la route du bonheur.

11. _Examen critique de la vie et des ouvrages de Saint Paul_, Londres
(Amsterdam), 1770. A free translation of Peter Annet's _History and
character of St. Paul examined_, written in answer to Lyttelton. New
edition 1790 and translated back into English "from the French of
Boulanger," London, R. Carlile, 1823. A rather unsympathetic account,
but with flashes of real insight into "le système religieux des
Chrétiens dont S. Paul fut évidemment le véritable architecte." (Epître
dédicatoire.)

Annet said of Paul's type of man "l'enthousiaste s'enivre, pour l'ainsi
dire, de son propre vin, il se persuade que la cause de ses passions
est la cause de Dieu (p. 72), mais quelque violent qu'ait pu être
l'enthousiasme de S. Paul, il sentait très bien que la doctrine qu'il
prêchait devait paraître bizarre et insensée à des êtres raisonnables"
(p. 141).

12. _De la nature humaine, ou Exposition des facultés, des actions et
des passions de l'âme_, Londres (Amsterdam), 1772. (Thomas Hobbes.)
Reprinted in a French Edition of Hobbes' works by Holbach and Sorbière,
1787. Appeared first in English in 1640, omitted in a Latin Edition of
Hobbes printed in Amsterdam. In spite of its brevity, Holbach considered
this one of Hobbes' most important and luminous works.

13. _Discours sur les Miracles de Jesus Christ_ (Amsterdam, 1780?).
Translated from Woolston, whom Holbach admired very much for
his uncompromising attitude toward truth. He suffered fines and
imprisonments, but would not give up the privilege of writing as he
pleased. The present discourse was the cause of a quarrel with his
friend Whiston. He died Jan. 27, 1733, "avec beaucoup de fermeté...
il se ferma les yeux et la bouche de ses propres mains, et rendit
l'esprit." This work exists in a manuscript book of 187 pages, written
very fine, in the Bibliothèque Nationale (Mss. français 15224) and was
current in France long before 1780. In fact it is mentioned by Grimm
before 1770, but the dictionaries (Barber, Quérard) generally date it
from 1780.


Before turning to Holbach's original works mention should be made of
a very interesting and extraordinary book that he brought to light,
retouched, and later used as a kind of shield against the attacks of the
parliaments upon his own works.

In 1766 he published a work entitled _L'Antiquité dévoilée par ses
usages, ou Examen critique des principales Opinions, Cérémonies et
Institutions religieuses et politiques des différens Peuples de la
Terre_. Par feu M. Boulanger, Amsterdam, 1766. This is a work based on
an original manuscript by Boulanger, who died in 1759, preceded by
an excellent letter on him by Diderot, published also in the _Gazette
Littéraire_.

The use made by Holbach of Boulanger's name makes it necessary to
consider for a moment this almost forgotten writer. Nicholas Antoine
Boulanger was born in 1722. As a child he showed so little aptitude for
study that later his teachers could scarcely believe that he had turned
out to be a really learned man. As Diderot observes, "ces exemples
d'enfans, rendus ineptes entre les mains des Pédans qui les abrutissent
en dépit de la nature la plus heureuse, ne sont pas rares, cependant
ils surprennent toujours" (p. 1). Boulanger studied mathematics and
architecture, became an engineer and was employed by the government as
inspector of bridges and highways. He passed a busy life in exacting
outdoor work but at the same time his active intellect played over a
large range of human interests. He became especially concerned with
historical origins and set himself to learn Latin and Greek that he
might get at the sources. Not satisfied that he had come to the root of
the matter he learned Arabic, Syriac, Hebrew and Chaldean. Diderot
says "Il lisait et étudiait partout, je l'ai moi-même rencontré sur
les grandes routes avec un auteur rabinnique à la main." He made a
_mappemonde_ in which the globe is divided in two hemispheres, one
occupied by the continents, the other by the oceans, and by a singular
coincidence he found that the meridian of the continental hemisphere
passed through Paris. Some such rearrangement of hemispheres is one of
the commonplaces of modern geography. He furnished such articles as,
_Deluge, Corvée, Société_ for the Encyclopedia and wrote several large
and extremely learned books, among them _Recherches sur l'origine du
Despotisme oriental_ and _Antiquité dévoilée_. He died from overwork at
the age of thirty-seven.

Boulanger's ideas on philosophy, mythology, anthropology and history are
of extraordinary interest today. Diderot relates his saying--"Que si la
philosophie avait trouvé tant d'obstacles parmi nous c'était qu'on avait
commencé par où il aurait fallu finir, par des maximes abstraites, des
raisonnemens généraux, des réflexions subtiles qui ont révolté par leur
étrangeté et leur hardiesse et qu'on aurait admises sans peine si elles
avaient été précédées de l'histoire des faits." He carried over this
inductive method into realm of history, which he thought had been
approached from the wrong side, i.e., the metaphysical, "par consulter
les lumières de la raison" (p. 8). He continues, "j'ai pensé qu'il
devait y avoir quelques circonstances _particulières_. Un fait et non
une spéculation métaphysique m'a toujours semblé devoir être et tribut
naturel et nécessaire de l'histoire." Curiously enough the central fact
in history appeared to Boulanger to be the deluge, and on the basis of
it he attempted to interpret the _Kulturgeschichte_ of humanity. It is
a bit unfortunate that he took the deluge quite as literally as he did;
his idea, however, is obviously the influence of environmental pressure
on the changing beliefs and practices of mankind. Under the spell of
this new point of view, he writes, "Ce qu'on appelle l'histoire n'en est
que la partie la plus ingrate, la plus uniforme, la plus inutile, quoi
qu'elle soit la plus connue. La véritable histoire est couverte par le
voile des temps" (p. 7). Boulanger however was not to be daunted and
on the firm foundation of the fact of some ancient and universal
catastrophe, as recorded on the surface of the earth and in human
mythology, he proceeds to inquire into the moral effects of the changes
in the physical environment back to which if possible the history of
antiquity must be traced. Man's defeat in his struggle with the elements
made him religious, _hinc prima mali labes_. "Son premier pas fut un
faux pas, sa première maxime fut une erreur" (p. 4 sq). But it was not
his fault nor has time repaired the evil moral effects of that early
catastrophe. "Les grandes révolutions physiques de notre globe sont les
véritables époques de l'histoire des nations" (p. 9). Hence have arisen
the various psychological states through which mankind has passed.
Contemporary savages are still in the primitive state--Boulanger
properly emphasizes the relation of anthropology to history--"On
aperçoit qu'il y a une nouvelle manière de voir et d'écrire l'histoire
des hommes" (p. 12) and with a vast store of anthropological and
folklorist learning he writes it so that his assailant, Fabry d'Autrey,
in his _Antiquité justifiée_ (Paris, 1766) is obliged to say with truth,
"Ce n'est point ici un tissus de mensonges grossiers, de sophismes
rebattus et bouffons, appliqués d'un air méprisant aux objets les
plus intéressants pour l'humanité. C'est une enterprise sérieuse et
réfléchie" (p. 11).

In 1767 Holbach published his first original work, a few copies of
which had been printed in Nancy in 1761. This work was _Le Christianisme
dévoilé ou Examen des principes et des effets de la religion
Chrétienne_. Par feu M. Boulanger. Londres (Amsterdam), 1767. There
were several other editions the same year, one printed at John Wilkes'
private press in Westminster. It was reprinted in later collections
of Boulanger's works, and went through several English and Spanish
editions. The form of the title and the attribution of the work to
Boulanger were designed to set persecution on the wrong track. There
has been some discussion as to its authorship. Voltaire and Laharpe
attributed it to Damilaville, at whose book shop it was said to have
been sold, but M. Barbier has published detailed information given him
by Naigeon to the effect that Holbach entrusted his manuscript to M. De
Saint-Lambert, who had it printed by Leclerc at Nancy in 1761. Most
of the copies that got to Paris at that time were bought by several
officers of the King's regiment then in garrison at Nancy, among them M.
de Villevielle, a friend of Voltaire and of Condorcet. Damilaville did
not sell a single copy and even had a great deal of trouble to get one
for Holbach who waited for it a long time. This circumstantial evidence
is of greater value than the statement of Voltaire who was in the habit
of attributing anonymous works to whomever he pleased. [39:2]

The edition of 1767 was printed in Amsterdam as were most of Holbach's
works. We have the details of their publication from Naigeon _cadet_, a
copyist, whose brother, J. A. Naigeon, was Holbach's literary factotum.
In a manuscript note in his copy of the _Système de la Nature_ he tells
how he copied nearly all Holbach's works, either at Paris or at Sedan,
where he was stationed, and where his friend Blon, the postmaster, aided
him, passing the manuscripts on to a Madame Loncin in Liège, who in
turn was a correspondent of Marc-Michel Rey, the printer in Amsterdam.
Sometimes they were sent directly by the diligence or through
travellers. This account agrees perfectly with information given M.
Barbier orally by Naigeon _aîné_. After being printed in Holland the
books were smuggled into France _sous le manteau_, as the expression is,
and sold at absurd rates by colporters. [40:3]

Diderot writing to Falconet early in 1768 [40:4] says: "Il pleut des
livres incrédules. C'est un feu roulant qui crible le sanctuaire de
toutes parts... L'intolérance du gouvernment s'accroit de jour en jour.
On dirait que c'est un projet formé d'éteindre ici les lettres, de
ruiner le commerce de librairie et de nous réduire à la besace et à
la stupidité... _Le Christianisme dévoilé_ s'est vendu jusqu'à quatre
louis."

When caught the colporters were severely punished. Diderot gives
the following instance in a letter to Mlle. Volland Oct. 8, 1768
(Avézac-Lavigne, _Diderot_, p. 161): "Un apprenti avait reçu, en payment
ou autrement, d'un colporteur appelé Lécuyer, deux exemplaires du
_Christianisme dévoilé_ et il avait vendu un de ces exemplaires à son
patron. Celui-ci le défère au lieutenant de police. Le colporteur, sa
femme et l'apprenti sont arrêtés tous les trois; ils viennent d'être
piloriés, fouettés et marqués, et l'apprenti condamné à neuf ans de
galères, le colporteur à cinq ans, et la femme à l'hôpital pour toute sa
vie."

There are two very interesting pieces of contemporary criticism of _Le
Christianisme dévoilé_, one by Voltaire, the other by Grimm. Voltaire
writes in a letter to Madame de Saint Julien December 15, 1766
(_Oeuvres_, XLIV, p. 534, ed. Garnier): "Vous m'apprenez que, dans votre
société, on m'attribue _Le Christianisme dévoilé_ par feu M. Boulanger,
mais je vous assure que les gens au fait ne m'attribuent point du tout
cet ouvrage. J'avoue avec vous qu'il y a de la clarté, de la chaleur,
et quelque fois de l'éloquence; mais il est plein de répétitions, de
négligences, de fautes contre la langue et je serais très-fâché de
l'avoir fait, non seulement comme académicien, mais comme philosophe, et
encore plus comme citoyen.

"Il est entièrement opposé à mes principes. Ce livre conduit à
l'athéisme que je déteste. J'ai toujours regardé l'athéisme comme le
plus grand égarement de la raison, parce qu'il est aussi ridicule de
dire que l'arrangement du monde ne prouve pas un artisan suprême qu'il
serait impertinent de dire qu'une horloge ne prouve pas un horloger.

"Je ne réprouve pas moins ce livre comme citoyen; l'auteur paraît
trop ennemi des puissances. Des hommes qui penseraient comme lui ne
formeraient qu'une anarchie: et je vois trop, par l'example de Genève,
combien l'anarchie est à craindre. Ma coutume est d'écrire sur la marge
de mes livres ce que je pense d'eux, vous verrez, quand vous daignerez
venir à Ferney, les marges de _Christianisme dévoilé_ chargés de
remarques qui montrent que l'auteur s'est trompé sur les faits les plus
essentiels." These notes may be read in Voltaire's works (Vol. XXXI, p.
129, ed. Garnier) and the original copy of _Le Christianisme dévoilé_
in which he wrote them is in the British Museum (c 28, k 3) where it
is jealously guarded as one of the most precious autographs of the
Patriarch of Ferney.

Grimm's notice is from the _Correspondance Littéraire_ of August 15,
1763 (Vol. V, p. 367). "Il existe un livre intitulé _le Christianisme
dévoilé ou Examen des principes et des effets de la religion
Chrétienne_, par feu M. Boulanger, volume in 8º. On voit d'abord qu'on
lui a donné ce titre pour en faire le pendant de _l'Antiquité dévoilée_;
mais il ne faut pas beaucoup se connaître en manière pour sentir que ces
deux ouvrages ne sont pas sortis de la même plume. On peut assurer
avec la même certitude que celui dont nous parlons ne vient point de la
fabrique de Ferney, parce que j'aimerais mieux croire que le patriache
eût pris la lune avec ses dents; cela serait moins impossible que de
guetter sa manière et son allure si complètement qu'il n'en restât
aucune trace quelconque. Par la même raison, je ne crois ce livre
d'aucun de nos philosophes connus, parce que je n'y trouve la manière
d'aucun de ceux qui ont écrit. D'òu vient-il donc? Ma foi, je serais
fâché de le savoir, et je crois que l'auteur aura sagement fait de ne
mettre personne dans son secret. C'est le livre le plus hardi et le
plus terrible qui ait jamais parti dans aucun lieu du monde. La
préface consiste dans une lettre où l'auteur examine si la réligion est
reéllement nécessaire ou seulement utile au maintien ou à la police des
empires, et s'il convient de la respecter sous ce point de vue. Comme
il établit la négative, il entreprend en conséquence de prouver, par
son ouvrage, l'absurdité et l'incohérence du dogme Chrétien et de la
mythologie qui en résulte, et l'influence de cette absurdité sur les
têtes et sur les âmes. Dans la seconde partie, il examine la morale
chrétienne, et il prétend prouver que dans ses principes généraux elle
n'a aucun avantage sur toutes les morales du monde, parce que la justice
et la bonté sont recommandées dans tous les catéchismes de l'univers, et
que chez aucun peuple, quelque barbare qu'il fut, on n'a jamais
enseigné qu'il fallût être injuste et méchant. Quant à ce que la morale
chrétienne a de particulier, l'auteur pretend démontrer qu'elle ne peut
convenir qu'à des enthousiastes peu propres aux devoirs de la société,
pour lesquels les hommes sont dans ce monde. Il entreprend de prouver,
dans la troisième partie, que la religion chrétienne a eu les effets
politiques les plus sinistres et les plus funestes, et que le genre
humain lui doit tous les malheurs dont il a été accablé depuis quinze à
dix-huit siècles, sans qu'on en puisse encore prévoir la fin.

Ce livre est écrit avec plus de véhémence que de véritable éloquence;
il entraine. Son style est châtié et correct, quoique un peu dur et
sec; son ton est grave et soutenu. On n'y apprend rien de nouveau, et
cependant il attache et intéresse. Malgré son incroyable témérité, on
ne peut refuser à l'auteur la qualité d'homme de bien fortement épris du
bonheur de sa race et de la prospérité des sociétés; mais je pense que
ses bonnes intentions seraient une sauvegarde bien faible contre les
mandements et les réquisitions." This is a clear and fair account of
a book that is without doubt the severest criticism of the theory and
practice of historical Christianity ever put in print.

The church very naturally did not let such a book pass unanswered. Abbé
Bergier, a heavy person, triumphantly refuted Holbach in eight hundred
pages in his _Apologia de la Religion Chrétienne contre l'Auteur du
Christianisme dévoilé_, Paris, 1769, which finishes with the fatal
prophecy, "Nous avons de surs garans de nos espérances: tant que le sang
auguste de S. Louis sera sur le trône, _il n'y a point de révolutions
à craindre ni dans la Religion ni dans la politique_. La religion
Chrétienne fondée sur la parole de Dieu... triomphera des nouveaux
Philosophes. Dieu qui veille sur son ouvrage n'a pas besoin de nos
faibles mains pour le soutenir" (Psaume 32, vs. 10, 11).

2. There already existed in 1767 another work by Holbach entitled
_Théologie portative ou Dictionnaire Abrégé de la Religion Chrétienne.
Par Mr Abbé Bernier_. Londres (Amsterdam), 1768 (1767). This book
went through many editions and was augmented by subsequent authors and
editors. Voltaire was already writing to d'Alembert about it August 14,
1767. [44:5]

In a letter to Damilaville, October 16, he writes (Vol. XIV, p. 406):

Depuis trois mois il y a une douzaine d'ouvrages d'une liberté
extrême, imprimés en Hollande. _La Théologie portative_ n'est nullement
théologique: ce n'est qu'une plaisanterie continuelle par ordre
alphabétique; mais il faut avouer qu'il y a des traits si comiques que
plusieurs théologiens mêmes ne pourront s'empêcher d'en rire. Les jeunes
gens et les femmes lisent cette folie avec avidité. Les éditions de tous
les livres dans ce goût se multiplient.

And on February 8, 1768, he wrote:

On fait tous les jours des livres contre la religion, dont je voudrais
bien imiter le style pour la défendre. Y a-t-il de plus salé, que la
plupart des traits qui se trouvent dans la _Théologie portative_? Y
a-t-il rien de plus vigoreux, de plus profondément raisonné, d'écrit
avec une éloquence plus audacieuse et plus terrible, que le _Militaire
philosophe_, ouvrage qui court toute l'Europe? [by Naigeon and Holbach]
Lisez la _Théologie portative_, et vous ne pourrez vous empêcher
de rire, en condammant la coupable hardiesse de l'auteur. Lisez
_l'Imposture sacerdotale_--vous y verrez le style de Démosthène. Ces
livres malheuresement inondent l'Europe; mais quelle est la cause
de cette inondation? Il n'y en a point d'autre que les querelles
théologiques qui ont révolté les laïques. _Il s'est fait une révolution
dans l'esprit humain que rien ne peut plus arrêter: les persécutions ne
pourraient qu'irriter le mal_. [Footnote: the italics are mine.]

It is to be noted however that Voltaire's sentiments varied according to
the point of view of the person to whom he was writing. In a letter to
d'Alembert, May 24, 1769 (Vol. LXV, p. 453), he calls the _Théologie
portative_ "un ouvrage à mon gré, très plaisant, auquel je n'ai
assurément nulle part, ouvrage que je serais très fâché d'avoir fait, et
que je voudrais bien avoir été capable de faire." But in a letter to the
Bishop of Annecy June, 1769, he writes (Vol. XXVIII, p. 73): "Vous lui
[M. de Saint Florentin] imputez, à ce que je vois par vos lettres, des
livres misérables, et jusqu'à _la Theologie portative_, ouvrage fait
apparemment dans quelque cabaret; vous n'êtes pas obligé d'avoir du
goût, mais vous êtes obligé d'être juste" (Vol. XXVIII, p. 73).
Diderot even said of the book: "C'est un assez bon nombre de bonnes
plaisanteries noyées dans un beaucoup plus grand nombre de mauvaises"
and this criticism is just. A few examples of the better jokes will
suffice:

_Adam:_ C'est le premier homme, Dieu en fait un grand nigaud, qui pour
complaire à sa femme eut la bêtise de mordre dans une pomme que ses
descendans n'ont point encore pu digérer.

_Idées Innées:_ Notions inspirées des Prêtres de si bonne heure, si
souvent répétées, que devenu grand l'on croît les avoir eu toujours ou
les avoir reçus dès le ventre de sa mère.

_Jonas:_ La baleine fut à la fin obligée de le vomir tant un Prophète
est un morceau difficile à digérer.

_Magie:_ Il y en a de deux sortes, la blanche et la noire. La première
est très sainte et se pratique journellement dans l'église.

_Protestants:_ Chrétiens amphibies.

_Vierge:_ C'est la mère du fils de Dieu et belle-mère de l'église.

_Visions:_ Lanternes magiques que de tout temps le Père Eternel s'est
amusé à montrer aux Saintes et aux Prophètes.

3. Holbach furnished the last chapter of Naigeon's book _Le Militaire
philosophe, ou Difficulties sur la religion_, Londres (Amsterdam), 1768.
Voltaire ascribed the work to St. Hyacinthe. Grimm recognized that the
last chapter was by another hand and considered it the weakest part of
the book. It attempts to demonstrate that all supernatural religions
have been harmful to society and that the only useful religion is
natural religion or morals. The book was refuted by Guidi, in a "_Lettre
a M. le Chevalier de... [Barthe] entraîné dans l'irreligion par un
libelle intitulé Le Militaire philosophe_ (1770, 12mo).

4. Holbach's next book was _La Contagion sacrée ou l'Histoire naturelle
de la Superstition_, Londres (Amsterdam), 1768. In his preface Holbach
attributed the alleged English original of this work to John Trenchard
but that was only a ruse to avoid persecution. The book is by Holbach.
It has gone through many editions and been translated into English and
Spanish. The first edition had an introduction by Naigeon. According
to him manuscripts of this book became quite rare at one time and were
supposed to have been lost. Later they became more common and this
edition was corrected by collation with six others.


     [PG transcriber's note: at this point there appears to be a break
     in the original text.  A sentence introducing the fifth book in
     this list, "Letters to Eugenie", has evidently been lost.]


The letters were written in 1764, according to Lequinio (_Feuilles
posthumes_), who had his information from Naigeon, to Marguerite,
Marchioness de Vermandois in answer to a very touching and pitiful
letter from that lady who was in great trouble over religion. Her young
husband was a great friend of the Holbachs, but having had a strict
Catholic bringing up she was shocked at their infidelity and warned by
her confessor to keep away from them. "Yet in their home she saw all
the domestic virtues exemplified and beheld that sweet and unchangeable
affection for which the d'Holbachs were eminently distinguished among
their acquaintances and which was remarkable for its striking contrast
with the courtly and Christian habits of the day. Her natural good
sense and love for her friends struggled with her monastic education and
reverence for the priests. The conflict rendered her miserable and she
returned to her country seat to brood over it. In this state of mind she
at length wrote to the Baron and laid open her situation requesting him
to comfort, console, and enlighten her." [47:7] His letters accomplished
the desired effect and he later published them in the hope that they
would do as much for others. They were carefully revised before they
were sent to the press. All the purely personal passages were omitted
and others added to hide the identity of the persons concerned. Letters
of the sort to religious ladies were common at this time. Fréret's were
preventive, Holbach's curative, but appear to be rather strong dose
for a _dévote_. Other examples are Voltaire's _Epître à Uranie_ and
Diderot's _Entretien d'un Philosophe avec la Maréchale de..._.

6. In 1769 Holbach published two short treatises on the doctrine of
eternal punishment which claimed to be translations from English, but
the originals are not to be found. The titles are _De l'intolérance
convaincue de crime et de folie_ as it is sometimes given, and--

7. _L'Enfer détruit ou Examen raisonné du Dogme de l'Eternité des
Peines_. Londres, Amsterdam, 1769. This letter was translated into
English under the title _Hell Destroyed!_ "Now first translated from the
French of d'Alembert without any mutilations," London 1823, which led
Mr. J. Hibbert to say, "I know not why English publishers attribute this
awfully sounding work to the cautious, not to say timid d'Alembert. It
was followed by Whitefoot's _'Torments of Hell,'_ now first translated
from the French." [47:8]


Of Holbach's remaining works on religion two, _Histoire critique de
Jésus Christ_ and _Tableau des Saints_, date from 1770 when he began to
publish his more philosophical works.

8. The _Histoire critique de Jésus Christ ou Analyse raisonnée des
Evangiles_ was published without name of place or date. It was preceded
by Voltaire's _Epître à Uranie_. It is an extremely careful but
unsympathetic analysis of the Gospel accounts, emphasizing all the
inconsistencies and interpreting them with a literalness that they
can ill sustain. From this rationalistic view-point Holbach found the
Gospels a tissue of absurdities and contradictions. His method, however,
would not be followed by the critique of today.

9. The _Tableau des Saints_ is a still more severe criticism of the
heroes of Christendom. Holbach's proposition is "La raison ne connaît
qu'une mesure pour juger et les hommes et les choses, c'est l'utilité
réelle et permanente, qui en résulte pour notre espèce," (p. 111).
Judged by this standard, the saints with their eyes fixed on another
world have fallen far short. "Ils se flattèrent de mériter le ciel en
se rendant parfaitement inutile à la terre" (p. xviii). Holbach much
prefers the heroes of classical antiquity. The book is violent but
learned throughout, and deals not only with the Jewish patriarchs from
Moses on but with the church fathers and Christian Princes down to the
contemporary defenders of the faith. After a rather one-sided account
of the most dreary characters and events in Christian history,
Holbach concludes: "Tel fut, tel est, et tel sera toujours l'esprit du
Christianisme: il est aisé de sentir qu'il est incompatible avec les
principes les plus évidens de la morale et de la saine politique" (p.
208).

10. In _Recueil philosophique_, Londres (Amsterdam), 1770, edited by
Naigeon. Réflexions sur les craintes de la Mort. Problème important--La
Religion est-elle nécessaire à la morale et utile à la Politique. Par M.
Mirabaud.

11. _Essai sur les préjugés, ou De l'influence des opinions sur les
moeurs et sur le bonheur des Hommes_. Londres (Amsterdam), 1770, under
name of Dumarsais. The book pretended to be an elaboration of Dumarsais'
essay on the _Philosophe_ published in the _Nouvelles libertés de
penser_, 1750.

The special interest connected with it was the refutation Frederick the
Great published under the title _Examen de l'Essai sur les préjugés_,
Londres, Nourse, 1770 (16 mo). The King of Prussia writing from the
point of view of a practical, enlightened despot, took special exception
to Holbach's remarks on government. "Il l'outrage avec autant de
grossièreté que d'indécence, il force le gouvernement de prendre fait et
cause avec l'église pour s'opposer à l'ennemi commun. Mais, quand avec
un acharnement violent et les traits de la plus âcre satire, il calomnie
son Roi et le gouvernement de son pays, on le prend pour un frénétique
echappé de ses chaînes, et livré aux transports les plus violens de
sa rage. Quoi, Monsieur le philosophe, protecteur des moeurs et de
la vertu, ignorez vous qu'un bon citoyen doit respecter la forme de
gouvernement sous laquelle il vit, ignorez vous qu'il ne convient point
à un particulier d'insulter les Puissances..." (p. 28).

"Non content d'insulter à toutes les têtes couronnés de l'Europe, notre
philosophe s'amuse, en passant, à répandre du ridicule sur les ouvrages
de Hugo Grotius. J'oserais croire qu'il n'en sera pas cru sur sa
parole, et que le _Droit de la guerre et de la paix_ ira plus loin à la
postérité que _l'Essai sur les préjugés_" (p. 39).

Holbach in his anti-militaristic enthusiasm had used the words
"bourreaux mercenaires"; "epithète élégante," continues Frederick,
"dont il honore les guerriers. Mais souffrions nous qu'un cerveau brûlé
insulte au plus noble emploi de la Societé?" (p.49). He goes on to
defend war in good old-fashioned terms. "Vous déclamez contre la guerre,
elle est funeste en elle-même; mais c'est un mal comme ces autres
fléaux du ciel qu'il faut supposer nécessaires dans l'arrangement de cet
univers parce qu'ils arrivent périodiquement et qu'aucun siècle n'a pu
jusqu'à présent d'en avoir été exempt. J'ai prouvé que de tout temps
l'erreur a dominé dans ce monde; et comme une chose aussi constante peut
être envisagée comme une loi général de la nature, j'en conclus que ce
qui a été toujours sera toujours le même" (p. 19).

Frederick sent his little refutation to Voltaire for his compliments
which were forthcoming. A few days after Voltaire wrote to d'Alembert:

Le roi de Prusse vous a envoyé, sans doute, son petit écrit contre un
livre imprimé cette année, intitulé _Essai sur les préjugés_, ce roi a
aussi les siens, qu'il faut lui pardonner; on n'est pas roi pour rien.
Mais je voudrais savoir quel est l'auteur de cet _Essai_ contre lequel
sa majesté prussienne s'amuse à écrire un peu durement. Serait-il de
Diderot? serait-il de Damilaville? serait-il d'Helvetius? peut-être ne
le connaissez-vous point, je le crois imprimé en Hollande (Vol. LXVI, p.
304).

D'Alembert answered:

Oui, le roi de Prusse m'a envoyé son écrit contre _l'Essai sur les
préjugés_. Je ne suis point étonné que ce prince n'ait pas goûté
l'ouvrage; je l'ai lu depuis cette réfutation et il m'a paru bien long,
bien monotone et trop amer. Il me semble que ce qu'il y de bon dans ce
livre aurait pu et dû être noyé dans moins de pages et je vois que vous
en avez porté à peu près le même jugement (Vol. LXVI, p. 324).

In spite of these unfavorable judgments the _Essai_ was reprinted
as late as 1886 by the Bibliotheque Nationale in its _Collection des
meilleurs auteurs anciens et modernes_, still attributed to Dumarsais
with the account of his life by "le citoyen Daube" which graced the
edition of the year I. (1792)

12. Early in 1770 appeared Holbach's most famous book, the _Système de
la Nature_, the only book that is connected with his name in the minds
of most historians and philosophers. It seems wiser, however, to deal
with this work in a chapter apart and continue the account of his later
publications.

13. The next of which was _Le bon-sens, ou idées naturelles opposées
aux idées surnaturelles. Par l'Auteur du Système de la Nature_, Londres
(Amsterdam), 1772. This work has gone through twenty-five editions or
more and has been translated into English, German, Italian and Spanish.
As early as 1791 it began to be published under the name of the curé
Jean Meslier d'Etrépigny, made so famous by Voltaire's publication of
what was supposed to be his last will and testament in which on his
death bed he abjured and cursed Christianity. Some editions contain in
the preface Letters by Voltaire and his sketch of Jean Meslier. The
last reprint was by De Laurence, Scott & Co., Chicago, 1910. The book
is nothing more or less than the _Système de la Nature_, in a greatly
reduced and more readable form.

Voltaire, to whom it was attributed by some, said to d'Alembert, "Il y
a plus que du bon sens dans ce livre, il est terrible. S'il sort de la
boutique du _Système de la Nature_, l'auteur s'est bien perfectionné."
D'Alembert answered: "Je pense comme vous sur le _Bon-sens_ qui me
paraît un bien plus terrible livre que le _Système de la Nature_." These
remarks were inscribed by Thomas Jefferson on the title page of his copy
of _Bon-sens_. The book has gone through several editions in the United
States and was sold at a popular price. The German translation was
published in Baltimore on the basis of a copy found in a second-hand
book store in New Orleans. The most serious work written against it is
a long and carefully written treatise against materialism by an Italian
monk, Gardini, entitled _L'anima umana e sue proprietà dedotte da
soli principi de ragione, dal P. lettore D. Antonmaria Gardini, monaco
camaldalese, contro i materialisti e specialmente contro l'opera
intitulata, le Bon-Sens, ou Idées Naturelles opposées aux idées
Surnaturelles. In Padova MDCCLXXXI Nella stamperia del Seminario.
Appresso Giovanni Manfré, Con Licenza de Superiori e Privilegio_ (8vo,
p. xx + 284).

14. In 1773 Holbach published his _Recherches sur les Miracles_, a much
more sober work than his previous writings on religion. In this book he
raises the well known difficulties with belief in miracles and brings
a great deal of real learning and logic to bear on the question. The
entire work is in a reasonable and philosophic spirit. His conclusion
is that "une vraie religion doit avoir au défaut de bonnes raisons, des
preuves sensibles, capables de faire impression sur tout ceux qui la
cherchent de bonne foi. Ce ne sont pas les miracles." The same year he
published two serious but somewhat tiresome works on politics.

15. _La politique naturelle_.

16. _Système social_ in which he attempts to reduce government to the
naturalistic principles which were the basis of his entire philosophy.
The first is also attributed to Malesherbes. There is a long and keen
criticism of the _Système Social_ by Mme. d'Epinay in a letter to Abbé
Galiani Jan. 12, 1773 (Gal. _Corresp._, Vol. II, p. 167).

But the most interesting reaction upon it was that of the Abbé Richard
who criticized it from point of view of the divine right of kings in
his long and tiresome work entitled _La Défense de la religion, de
la morale, de la vertu, de la politique et de la société, dans la
réfutation des ouvrages qui ont pour titre, l'un Système Social etc.
Vautre La Politique Naturelle par le R. P. Ch. L. Richard, Professeur de
Théologie_, etc., Paris, Moulard, 1775.

In a preface of forty-seven pages the fears of the conservative old
Abbé are well expressed. The aim of these modern philosophers who are
poisoning public opinion by their writings is to "démolir avec l'antique
édifice de la religion chrétienne, celui des moeurs, de la vertu, de la
saine politique etc. rompre tous les canaux de communication entre la
terre et le ciel, bannir, exterminer du monde le Dieu qui le tira du
néant, y introduire l'impiété la plus complète, la licence la plus
consomnée, l'anarchie la plus entière, la confusion la plus horrible."

17. Holbach's next work, _Ethocratie ou Gouvernement fondé sur la
Morale_, Amsterdam, Rey, 1776, is interesting mainly for its unfortunate
dedication and peroration, inscribed to Louis XVI, who was hailed
therein as a long expected Messiah.

18. Holbach's last works dealt exclusively with morals. They are _La
morale universelle ou les devoirs de l'homme fondés sur la nature_,
Amsterdam, 1771, and

19. A posthumous work, _Elements de la Morale universelle, ou catechisme
de la nature_, Paris, 1790. This is a beautiful little book. It
is simple and clear to the last degree. There have been several
translations in Spanish for the purposes of elementary education
in morals in the public schools. It was composed in 1765. Holbach's
attitude towards morals is indicated by his _Avertissement_--"La morale
est une science dont les principes sont susceptibles d'une démonstration
aussi claire et aussi rigoureuse que ceux du calcul et de la géometrie."




