IX

THE JOURNEYING ATOMS

I


Emerson confessed in his "Journal" that he could not read the
physicists; their works did not appeal to him. He was probably repelled
by their formulas and their mathematics. But add a touch of chemistry,
and he was interested. Chemistry leads up to life. He said he did not
think he would feel threatened or insulted if a chemist should take his
protoplasm, or mix his hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon, and make an
animalcule incontestably swimming and jumping before his eyes. It would
be only evidence of a new degree of power over matter which man had
attained to. It would all finally redound to the glory of matter itself,
which, it appears, "is impregnated with thought and heaven, and is
really of God, and not of the Devil, as we had too hastily believed."
This conception of matter underlies the new materialism of such men as
Huxley and Tyndall. But there is much in the new physics apart from its
chemical aspects that ought to appeal to the Emersonian type of mind.
Did not Emerson in his first poem, "The Sphinx," sing of

    Journeying atoms,
    Primordial wholes?

In those ever-moving and indivisible atoms he touches the very
corner-stone of the modern scientific conception of matter. It is hardly
an exaggeration to say that in this conception we are brought into
contact with a kind of transcendental physics. A new world for the
imagination is open--a world where the laws and necessities of
ponderable bodies do not apply. The world of gross matter disappears,
and in its place we see matter dematerialized, and escaping from the
bondage of the world of tangible bodies; we see a world where friction
is abolished, where perpetual motion is no longer impossible; where two
bodies may occupy the same space at the same time; where collisions and
disruptions take place without loss of energy; where subtraction often
means more--as when the poison of a substance is rendered more virulent
by the removal of one or more atoms of one of the elements; and where
addition often means less--as when three parts of the gases of oxygen
and hydrogen unite and form only two parts of watery vapor; where mass
and form, centre and circumference, size and structure, exist without
any of the qualities ordinarily associated with these things through our
experience in a three-dimension world. We see, or contemplate, bodies
which are indivisible; if we divide them, their nature changes; if we
divide a molecule of water, we get atoms of hydrogen and oxygen gas; if
we divide a molecule of salt, we get atoms of chlorine gas and atoms of
the metal sodium, which means that we have reached a point where matter
is no longer divisible in a mechanical sense, but only in a chemical
sense; which again means that great and small, place and time, inside
and outside, dimensions and spatial relations, have lost their ordinary
meanings. Two bodies get inside of each other. To the physicist, heat
and motion are one; light is only a mechanical vibration in the ether;
sound is only a vibration in the air, which the ear interprets as sound.
The world is as still as death till the living ear comes to receive the
vibrations in the air; motion, or the energy which it implies, is the
life of the universe.

Physics proves to us the impossibility of perpetual motion among
visible, tangible bodies, at the same time that it reveals to us a world
where perpetual motion is the rule--the world of molecules and atoms. In
the world of gross matter, or of ponderable bodies, perpetual motion is
impossible because here it takes energy, or its equivalent, to beget
energy. Friction very soon turns the kinetic energy of motion into the
potential energy of heat, which quickly disappears in that great sea of
energy, the low uniform temperature of the earth. But when we reach the
interior world of matter, the world of molecules, atoms, and electrons,
we have reached a world where perpetual motion _is_ the rule; we have
reached the fountain-head of energy, and the motion of one body is not
at the expense of the motion of some other body, but is a part of the
spontaneous struggling and jostling and vibration that go on forever in
all the matter of the universe. What is called the Brunonian movement
(first discovered by the botanist Robert Brown in 1827) is within reach
of the eye armed with a high-power microscope. Look into any liquid that
holds in suspension very small particles of solid matter, such as dust
particles in the air, or the granules of ordinary water-color paints
dissolved in water: not a single one of the particles is at rest; they
are all mysteriously agitated; they jump hither and thither; it is a
wild chaotic whirl and dance of minute particles. Brown at first thought
they were alive, but they were only non-living particles dancing to the
same tune which probably sets suns and systems whirling in the heavens.
Ramsay says that tobacco smoke confined in the small flat chamber formed
in the slide of a microscope, shows this movement, in appearance like
the flight of minute butterflies. The Brunonian movement is now believed
to be due to the bombardment of the particles by the molecules of the
liquid or gas in which they are suspended. The smaller the particles,
the livelier they are. These particles themselves are made up of a vast
number of molecules, among which the same movement or agitation, much
more intense, is supposed to be taking place; the atoms which compose
the molecules are dancing and frisking about like gnats in the air, and
the electrons inside the atoms are still more rapidly changing places.

We meet with the same staggering figures in the science of the
infinitely little that we do in the science of the infinitely vast. Thus
the physicist deals with a quantity of matter a million million times
smaller than can be detected in the most delicate chemical balance.
Molecules inconceivably small rush about in molecular space
inconceivably small. Ramsay calculates how many collisions the molecules
of gas make with other molecules every second, which is four and one
half quintillions. This staggers the mind like the tremendous
revelations of astronomy. Mathematics has no trouble to compute the
figures, but our slow, clumsy minds feel helpless before them. In every
drop of water we drink, and in every mouthful of air we breathe, there
is a movement and collision of particles so rapid in every second of
time that it can only be expressed by four with eighteen naughts. If the
movement of these particles were attended by friction, or if the energy
of their impact were translated into heat, what hot mouthfuls we should
have! But the heat, as well as the particles, is infinitesimal, and is
not perceptible.


II

The molecules and atoms and electrons into which science resolves matter
are hypothetical bodies which no human eye has ever seen, or ever can
see, but they build up the solid frame of the universe. The air and the
rocks are not so far apart in their constituents as they might seem to
our senses. The invisible and indivisible molecules of oxygen which we
breathe, and which keep our life-currents going, form about half the
crust of the earth. The soft breeze that fans and refreshes us, and the
rocks that crush us, are at least half-brothers. And herein we get a
glimpse of the magic of chemical combinations. That mysterious property
in matter which we call chemical affinity, a property beside which human
affinities and passions are tame and inconstant affairs, is the
architect of the universe. Certain elements attract certain other
elements with a fierce and unalterable attraction, and when they unite,
the resultant compound is a body totally unlike either of the
constituents. Both substances have disappeared, and a new one has taken
their place. This is the magic of chemical change. A physical change, as
of water into ice, or into steam, is a simple matter; it is merely a
matter of more or less heat; but the change of oxygen and hydrogen into
water, or of chlorine gas and the mineral sodium into common salt, is a
chemical change. In nature, chlorine and sodium are not found in a free
or separate state; they hunted each other up long ago, and united to
produce the enormous quantities of rock salt that the earth holds. One
can give his imagination free range in trying to picture what takes
place when two or more elements unite chemically, but probably there is
no physical image that can afford even a hint of it. A snake trying to
swallow himself, or two fishes swallowing each other, or two bullets
meeting in the air and each going through the centre of the other, or
the fourth dimension, or almost any other impossible thing, from the
point of view of tangible bodies, will serve as well as anything. The
atoms seem to get inside of one another, to jump down one another's
throats, and to suffer a complete transformation. Yet we know that they
do not; oxygen is still oxygen, and carbon still carbon, amid all the
strange partnerships entered into, and all the disguises assumed. We can
easily evoke hydrogen and oxygen from water, but just how their
molecules unite, how they interpenetrate and are lost in one another, it
is impossible for us to conceive.

We cannot visualize a chemical combination because we have no experience
upon which to found it. It is so fundamentally unlike a mechanical
mixture that even our imagination can give us no clew to it. It is
thinkable that the particles of two or more substances however fine,
mechanically mixed, could be seen and recognized if sufficiently
magnified; but in a chemical combination, say like iron sulphide, no
amount of magnification could reveal the two elements of iron and
sulphur. They no longer exist. A third substance unlike either has taken
their place.

We extract aluminum from clay, but no conceivable power of vision could
reveal to us that metal in the clay. It is there only potentially. In a
chemical combination the different substances interpenetrate and are
lost in one another: they are not mechanically separable nor
individually distinguishable. The iron in the red corpuscles of the
blood is not the metal we know, but one of its many chemical disguises.
Indeed it seems as if what we call the ultimate particles of matter did
not belong to the visible order and hence were incapable of
magnification.

That mysterious force, chemical affinity, is the true and original
magic. That two substances should cleave to each other and absorb each
other and produce a third totally unlike either is one of the profound
mysteries of science. Of the nature of the change that takes place, I
say, we can form no image. Chemical force is selective; it is not
promiscuous and indiscriminate like gravity, but specific and
individual. Nearly all the elements have their preferences and they will
choose no other. Oxygen comes the nearest to being a free lover among
the elements, but its power of choice is limited.

Science conceives of all matter as grained or discrete, like a bag of
shot, or a pile of sand. Matter does not occupy space continuously, not
even in the hardest substances, such as the diamond; there is space,
molecular space, between the particles. A rifle bullet whizzing past is
no more a continuous body than is a flock of birds wheeling and swooping
in the air. Air spaces separate the birds, and molecular spaces separate
the molecules of the bullet. Of course it is unthinkable that
indivisible particles of matter can occupy space and have dimensions.
But science goes upon this hypothesis, and the hypothesis proves itself.

After we have reached the point of the utmost divisibility of matter in
the atom, we are called upon to go still further and divide the
indivisible. The electrons, of which the atom is composed, are one
hundred thousand times smaller, and two thousand times lighter than the
smallest particle hitherto recognized, namely, the hydrogen atom. A
French physicist conceives of the electrons as rushing about in the
interior of the atom like swarms of gnats whirling about in the dome of
a cathedral. The smallest particle of dust that we can recognize in the
air is millions of times larger than the atom, and millions of millions
of times larger than the electron. Yet science avers that the
manifestations of energy which we call light, radiant heat, magnetism,
and electricity, all come from the activities of the electrons. Sir J.
J. Thomson conceives of a free electron as dashing about from one atom
to another at a speed so great as to change its location forty million
times a second. In the electron we have matter dematerialized; the
electron is not a material particle. Hence the step to the electric
constitution of matter is an easy one. In the last analysis we have pure
disembodied energy. "With many of the feelings of an air-man," says
Soddy, "who has left behind for the first time the solid ground beneath
him," we make this plunge into the demonstrable verities of the newest
physics; matter in the old sense--gross matter--fades away. To the three
states in which we have always known it, the solid, the liquid, and the
gaseous, we must add a fourth, the ethereal--the state of matter which
Sir Oliver Lodge thinks borders on, or is identical with, what we call
the spiritual, and which affords the key to all the occult phenomena of
life and mind.

As we have said, no human eye has ever seen, or will see, an atom; only
the mind's eye, or the imagination, sees atoms and molecules, yet the
atomic theory of matter rests upon the sure foundation of experimental
science. Both the chemist and the physicist are as convinced of the
existence of these atoms as they are of the objects we see and touch.
The theory "is a necessity to explain the experimental facts of chemical
composition." "Through metaphysics first," says Soddy, "then through
alchemy and chemistry, through physical and astronomical spectroscopy,
lastly through radio-activity, science has slowly groped its way to the
atom." The physicists make definite statements about these hypothetical
bodies all based upon definite chemical phenomena. Thus Clerk Maxwell
assumes that they are spherical, that the spheres are hard and elastic
like billiard-balls, that they collide and glance off from one another
in the same way, that is, that they collide at their surfaces and not at
their centres.

Only two of our senses make us acquainted with matter in a state which
may be said to approach the atomic--smell and taste. Odors are material
emanations, and represent a division of matter into inconceivably small
particles. What are the perfumes we smell but emanations, flying atoms
or electrons, radiating in all directions, and continuing for a shorter
or longer time without any appreciable diminution in bulk or weight of
the substances that give them off? How many millions or trillions of
times does the rose divide its heart in the perfume it sheds so freely
upon the air? The odor of the musk of certain animals lingers under
certain conditions for years. The imagination is baffled in trying to
conceive of the number and minuteness of the particles which the fox
leaves of itself in the snow where its foot was imprinted--so palpable
that the scent of a hound can seize upon them hours after the fox has
passed! The all but infinite divisibility of matter is proved by every
odor that the breeze brings us from field and wood, and by the delicate
flavors that the tongue detects in the food we eat and drink. But these
emanations and solutions that affect our senses probably do not
represent a chemical division of matter; when we smell an apple or a
flower, we probably get a real fragment of the apple, or of the flower,
and not one or more of its chemical constituents represented by atoms or
electrons. A chemical analysis of odors, if it were possible, would
probably show the elements in the same state of combination as the
substances from which the odors emanated.

The physicists herd these ultimate particles of matter about; they have
a regular circus with them; they make them go through films and screens;
they guide them through openings; they count them as their tiny flash is
seen on a sensitized plate; they weigh them; they reckon their velocity.
The alpha-rays from radio-active substances are swarms of tiny meteors
flying at the incredible speed of twelve thousand miles a second, while
the meteors of the midnight sky fly at the speed of only forty miles a
second. Those alpha particles are helium atoms. They are much larger
than beta particles, and have less penetrative power. Sir J. J. Thomson
has devised a method by which he has been able to photograph the atoms.
The photographic plate upon which their flight is recorded suggests a
shower of shooting stars. Oxygen is found to be made up of atoms of
several different forms.


III

The "free path" of molecules, both in liquids and in gases, is so minute
as to be beyond the reach of the most powerful microscope. This free
path in liquids is a zigzag course, owing to the perpetual collisions
with other molecules. The molecular behavior of liquids differs from
that of gases only in what is called surface tension. Liquids have a
skin, a peculiar stress of the surface molecules; gases do not, but tend
to dissipate and fill all space. A drop of water remains intact till
vaporization sets in; then it too becomes more and more diffused.

When two substances combine chemically, more or less heat is evolved.
When the combination is effected slowly, as in an animal's body, heat is
slowly evolved. When the combustion is rapid, as in actual fire, heat is
rapidly evolved. The same phenomenon may reach the eye as light, and the
hand as heat, though different senses get two different impressions of
the same thing. So a mechanical disturbance may reach the ear as sound,
and be so interpreted, and reach the hand as motion in matter. In
combustion, the oxygen combines rapidly with the carbon, giving out heat
and light and carbon dioxide, but why it does so admits of no
explanation. Herein again is where life differs from fire; we can
describe combustion in terms of chemistry, but after we have described
life in the same terms something--and this something is the main
thing--remains untouched.

The facts of radio-activity alone demonstrate the truth of the atomic
theory. The beta rays, or emanations from radium, penetrating one foot
of solid iron are very convincing. And this may go on for hundreds of
years without any appreciable diminution of size or weight of the
radio-active substance. "A gram of such substance," says Sir Oliver
Lodge, "might lose a few thousand of atoms a second, and yet we could
not detect the loss if we continued to weigh it for a century." The
volatile essences of organic bodies which we detect in odors and
flavors, are not potent like the radium emanations. We can confine them
and control them, but we cannot control the rays of radio-active matter
any more than we can confine a spirit. We can separate the three
different kinds of rays--the alpha, the beta, and the gamma--by magnetic
devices, but we cannot cork them up and isolate them, as we can musk and
the attar of roses.

And these emanations are taking place more or less continuously all
about us and we know it not. In fact, we are at all times subjected to a
molecular bombardment of which we never dream; minute projectiles,
indivisible points of matter, are shot out at us in the form of
electrons from glowing metals, from lighted candles, and from other
noiseless and unsuspected batteries at a speed of tens of thousands of
miles a second, and we are none the wiser for it. Indeed, if we could
see or feel or be made aware of it, in what a different world we should
find ourselves! How many million-or billion-fold our sense of sight and
touch would have to be increased to bring this about! We live in a world
of collisions, disruptions, and hurtling missiles of which our senses
give us not the slightest evidence, and it is well that they do not.
There is a tremendous activity in the air we breathe, in the water we
drink, in the food we eat, and in the soil we walk upon, which, if
magnified till our senses could take it in, would probably drive us mad.
It is in this interior world of molecular activity, this world of
electric vibrations and oscillations, that the many transformations of
energy take place. This is the hiding-place of the lightning, of the
electrons which moulded together make the thunderbolt. What an
underworld of mystery and power it is! In it slumbers all the might and
menace of the storm, the power that rends the earth and shakes the
heavens. With the mind's eye one can see the indivisible atoms giving up
their electrons, see the invisible hosts, in numbers beyond the power of
mathematics to compute, being summoned and marshalled by some mysterious
commander and hurled in terrible fiery phalanxes across the battlefield
of the storm.

The physicist describes the atom and talks about it as if it were "a
tangible body which one could hold in his hand like a baseball." "An
atom," Sir Oliver Lodge says, "consists of a globular mass of positive
electricity with minute negative electrons embedded in it." He speaks of
the spherical form of the atom, and of its outer surface, of its centre,
and of its passing through other atoms, and of the electrons that
revolve around its centre as planets around a sun. The electron, one
hundred thousand times smaller than an atom, yet has surface, and that
surface is a dimpled and corrugated sheet--like the cover of a mattress.
What a flight of the scientific imagination is that!

The disproportion between the size of an atom and the size of an
electron is vastly greater than that between the sun and the earth.
Represent an atom, says Sir Oliver Lodge, by a church one hundred and
sixty feet long, eighty feet broad, and forty feet high; the electrons
are like gnats inside it. Yet on the electric theory of matter,
electrons are all of the atom there is; there is no church, but only the
gnats rushing about. We know of nothing so empty and hollow, so near a
vacuum, as matter in this conception of it. Indeed, in the new physics,
matter is only a hole in the ether. Hence the newspaper joke about the
bank sliding down and leaving the woodchuck-hole sticking out, looks
like pretty good physics. The electrons give matter its inertia, and
give it the force we call cohesion, give it its toughness, its strength,
and all its other properties. They make water wet, and the diamond hard.
They are the fountain-head of the immense stores of the inter-atomic
energy, which, if it could be tapped and controlled, would so easily do
all the work of the world. But this we cannot do. "We are no more
competent," says Professor Soddy, "to make use of these supplies of
atomic energy than a savage, ignorant of how to kindle a fire, could
make use of a steam-engine." The natural rate of flow of this energy
from its atomic sources we get as heat, and it suffices to keep life
going upon this planet. It is the source of all the activity we see upon
the globe. Its results, in the geologic ages, are stored up for us in
coal and oil and natural gas, and, in our day, are available in the
winds, the tides, and the waterfalls, and in electricity.


IV

The electric constitution of matter is quite beyond anything we can
imagine. The atoms are little worlds by themselves, and the whole
mystery of life and death is in their keeping. The whole difference in
the types of mind and character among men is supposed to be in their
keeping. The different qualities and properties of bodies are in their
keeping. Whether an object is hot or cold to our senses, depends upon
the character of their vibrations; whether it be sweet or sour,
poisonous or innocuous to us, depends upon how the atoms select their
partners in the whirl and dance of their activities. The hardness and
brilliancy of the diamond is supposed to depend upon how the atoms of
carbon unite and join hands.

I have heard the view expressed that all matter, as such, is dead
matter, that the molecules of hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, iron,
phosphorus, calcium, and so on, in a living body, are themselves no more
alive than the same molecules in inorganic matter. Nearly nine tenths of
a living body is water; is not this water the same as the water we get
at the spring or the brook? is it any more alive? does water undergo any
chemical change in the body? is it anything more than a solvent, than a
current that carries the other elements to all parts of the body? There
are any number of chemical changes or reactions in a living body, but
are the atoms and molecules that are involved in such changes radically
changed? Can oxygen be anything but oxygen, or carbon anything but
carbon? Is what we call life the result of their various new
combinations? Many modern biologists hold to this view. In this
conception merely a change in the order of arrangement of the molecules
of a substance--which follows which or which is joined to which--is
fraught with consequences as great as the order in which the letters of
the alphabet are arranged in words, or the words themselves are arranged
in sentences. The change of one letter in a word often utterly changes
the meaning of that word, and the changing of a word in the sentence may
give expression to an entirely different idea. Reverse the letters in
the word "God," and you get the name of our faithful friend the dog.
Huxley and Tyndall both taught that it was the way that the ultimate
particles of matter are compounded that makes the whole difference
between a cabbage and an oak, or between a frog and a man. It is a hard
proposition. We know with scientific certainty that the difference
between a diamond and a piece of charcoal, or between a pearl and an
oyster-shell, is the way that the particles of carbon in the one case,
and of calcium carbide in the other, are arranged. We know with equal
certainty that the difference between certain chemical bodies, like
alcohol and ether, is the arrangement of their ultimate particles, since
both have the same chemical formula. We do not spell acetic acid,
alcohol, sugar, starch, animal fat, vegetable oils, glycerine, and the
like, with the same letters; yet nature compounds them all of the same
atoms of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, but in different proportions and
in different orders.

Chemistry is all-potent. A mechanical mixture of two or more elements
is a simple affair, but a chemical mixture introduces an element of
magic. No conjurer's trick can approach such a transformation as that of
oxygen and hydrogen gases into water. The miracle of turning water into
wine is tame by comparison. Dip plain cotton into a mixture of nitric
and sulphuric acids and let it dry, and we have that terrible explosive,
guncotton. Or, take the cellulose of which cotton is composed, and add
two atoms of hydrogen and one of oxygen, and we have sugar. But we are
to remember that the difference here indicated is not a quantitative,
but a qualitative one, not one affecting bulk, but affecting structure.
Truly chemistry works wonders. Take ethyl alcohol, or ordinary spirits
of wine, and add four more atoms of carbon to the carbon molecule, and
we have the poison carbolic acid. Pure alcohol can be turned into a
deadly poison, not by adding to, but simply by taking from it; take out
one atom of carbon and two of hydrogen from the alcohol molecule, and we
have the poison methyl alcohol. But we are to remember that the
difference here indicated is not a quantitative, but a qualitative one,
not one affecting bulk, but affecting structure.

In our atmosphere we have a mechanical mixture of nitrogen and oxygen,
four parts of nitrogen to one of oxygen. By uniting the nitrogen and
oxygen chemically (N_{2}O) we have nitrous oxide, laughing-gas. Ordinary
starch is made up of three different elements--six parts of carbon, ten
parts of hydrogen, and five parts of oxygen (C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}). Now if
we add water to this compound, we have a simple mixture of starch and
water, but if we bring about a chemical union with the elements of water
(hydrogen and oxygen), we have grape sugar. This sugar is formed in
green leaves by the agency of sunlight, and is the basis of all plant
and animal food, and hence one of the most important things in nature.

Carbon is a solid, and is seen in its pure state in the diamond, the
hardest body in nature and the most valued of all precious stones, but
it enters largely into all living bodies and is an important constituent
of all the food we eat. As a gas, united with the oxygen of the air,
forming carbon dioxide, it was present at the beginning of life, and
probably helped kindle the first vital spark. In the shape of wood and
coal, it now warms us and makes the wheels of our material civilization
go round. Diamond stuff, through the magic of chemistry, plays one of
the principle roles in our physical life; we eat it, and are warmed and
propelled by it, and cheered by it. Taken as carbonic acid gas into our
lungs, it poisons us; taken into our stomachs, it stimulates us;
dissolved in water, it disintegrates the rocks, eating out the carbonate
of lime which they contain. It is one of the principal actors in the
drama of organized matter.


V

We have a good illustration of the power of chemistry, and how closely
it is dogging the footsteps of life, in the many organic compounds it
has built up out of the elements, such as sugar, starch, indigo,
camphor, rubber, and so forth, all of which used to be looked upon as
impossible aside from life-processes. It is such progress as this that
leads some men of science to believe that the creation of life itself is
within the reach of chemistry. I do not believe that any occult or
transcendental principle bars the way, but that some unknown and perhaps
unknowable condition does, as mysterious and unrepeatable as that which
separates our mental life from our physical. The transmutation of the
physical into the psychical takes place, but the secret of it we do not
know. It does not seem to fall within the law of the correlation and the
conservation of energy.

Free or single atoms are very rare; they all quickly find their mates or
partners. This eagerness of the elements to combine is one of the
mysteries. If the world of visible matter were at one stroke resolved
into its constituent atoms, it would practically disappear; we might
smell it, or taste it, if we were left, but we could not see it, or feel
it; the water would vanish, the solid ground would vanish--more than
half of it into oxygen atoms, and the rest mainly into silicon atoms.

The atoms of different bodies are all alike, and presumably each holds
the same amount of electric energy. One wonders, then, how the order in
which they are arranged can affect them so widely as to produce bodies
so unlike as, say, alcohol and ether. This brings before us again the
mystery of chemical arrangement or combination, so different from
anything we know among tangible bodies. It seems to imply that each atom
has its own individuality. Mix up a lot of pebbles together, and the
result would be hardly affected by the order of the arrangement, but mix
up a lot of people, and the result would be greatly affected by the fact
of who is elbowing who. It seems the same among the mysterious atoms, as
if some complemented or stimulated those next them, or had an opposite
effect. But can we think of the atoms in a chemical compound as being
next one another, or merely in juxtaposition? Do we not rather have to
think of them as identified with one another to an extent that has no
parallel in the world of ponderable bodies? A kind of sympathy or
affinity makes them one in a sense that we only see realized among
living beings.

Chemical activity is the first step from physical activity to vital
activity, but the last step is taken rarely--the other two are
universal. Chemical changes involve the atom. What do vital changes
involve? We do not know. We can easily bring about the chemical
changes, but not so the vital changes. A chemical change destroys one or
more substances and produces others totally unlike them; a vital change
breaks up substances and builds up other bodies out of them; it results
in new compounds that finally cover the earth with myriads of new and
strange forms.




