CHAPTER III.

OF THE RELIGION OF THE KERÁ TABITIAN.


According to one of their treatises, they call God _Kajak_,[480] and
believe him to be one, infinite, all mighty; they maintain his
manifestation under three forms, as the Hindus; they say, if any one
finds God, he converses with him without the aid of a palate and of a
tongue: this is the condition of a prophet. They declare moreover that
the spirit is eternal, and that spirits are sent down; the soul, if it
knows itself and God, ascends to the upper world; if not, it remains
in the nether world. The author of this book heard from one of their
distinguished personages that, when the rational soul separates from
this body, it goes to the upper world; and from the heavens it rises
further; and above this there is a sea, in which is a mountain; and on
its top God, the supreme Lord, resides. If that soul has been
virtuous, the divinity manifests itself to it under a pleasing form;
so that from its aspect the soul derives superlative delight, which no
tongue can express, and remains eternally without change, happy and
blissful in its contemplation. But if the soul has been iniquitous,
God appears to it under a strange and terrific figure, than which none
can be more repulsive and hideous, so that from terror it throws
itself from the heavens down, and becomes confined in dust. Among
these sectaries was a man called _Pawn Pishna_, exceedingly pious. Of
this saint’s miracles they relate that, having jumped upon a stone,
the trace of his foot remained impressed upon it, and now they perform
pilgrimages to it. They say further that, when this perfect man
reaches the term of his life, he convokes the people about him, and
out of the crowd he chooses one, to whom in their presence he delivers
his books and his effects, and says: “I will come to thy house;” after
that, his soul leaves the body, which is buried according to their
customs. The wife of this guardian then brings forth a son, whose
tongue develops itself so as to speak in one year, or sooner; he
convokes witnesses, and in their presence he takes the things which
are counted to him by the guardian, to whom he then remits them again,
and utters not a word until the _usual_ age of speech. When he attains
the period of adultness, he takes the state of a durvish. They say
that such an elect man comes into the world for the conversion of
wicked men. These sectaries have temples of idols, which they call
_Chetharten_,[481] and in which they perform their worship. According
to their custom, when a man has two sons, he destines one of them to
become a durvish; and the king himself, having two sons, makes one of
them a durvish. They believe that there are two mansions; the first of
this, the second of the other, world; the son who becomes a durvish
takes possession of the latter, the son who associates with people of
business acquires the portion of the nether world; when the body of
the father and mother become weak and tottering from age, it is the
worldly son who tenders them his services; but when the soul of the
parents separates from the body, it devolves upon the son who is a
durvish to serve them. When a great number of such young durvishes
assembles, then the son of the king, or of any other chief becomes
their head, and they go to _Bármîánek_, which is a magnificent temple
of theirs. When they return from this pilgrimage, they become _Lámas_,
that is, _Hájís_, “pilgrims.” The Lámas abstain from eating flesh and
from women, and keep remote from all worldly affairs; they wear their
hair entangled, and eat from the skull of a man; they carry joints of
human hands filed together upon a string, instead of a rosary;[482]
and instead of horns for trumpets, they keep bones of human
forearms;[483] they say: “We are dead; and dead men have nothing to do
with the things of the living.”

  “We are gone, and we took a separate corner of a sepulchre,
   That our bones might not be a burden to any body’s shoulder.”

This class of men have not their equals in enchantments, juggling,
spells, and magic. Their king, if his mother be not of royal blood, is
by them called _Arghún_, and not considered their true king; whoever
of this sect belongs to the worldly people, does not abstain from
killing animals, eating flesh and meats forbidden by religion, and
associates with every body in eating. When the author of this book
conversed with a learned man of this sect by means of an interpreter,
whenever a question about some subtilty occurred, the translator could
not always by his interpretation satisfy him.

     “Without possessing the tongue, it is strange to make a
        friend by means of the tongue.”


     [480] (T)_kon_(M)_tchog_, “the chief of the rarity, the
     rarest being, God.”――(Dict. Tibetan and English, by
     Alexander Csoma de Körös, p. 66, col. 2, l. 13.)

     [481] [(M)_tchod_-(R)_ten_, “a chapel, a temple.”――(Dict. of
     Csoma de Körös.)

     [482] We find in a treatise entitled “The Sage and the
     Fool,” making part of the Kahgyur, one of the principal
     religious works of the Tibetans, that a brahman, not
     satisfied with his disciple, and desirous of causing his
     ruin, gives him the following advice: “Keep thyself pure
     during seven days; cut off the heads of a thousand men; take
     a single finger of each, to make thyself a rosary; and thou
     shalt undoubtedly, after thy death, be born again in the
     substance of Brahma.”――(See Mr. Schmidt’s Tibetan Grammar.)

     [483] We read in “Turner’s Embassy to Tibet,” that, at a
     religious ceremony, a priest played a sort of flute made of
     the bone of a man’s leg.――(French Transl., p. 61.)

            *     *     *     *     *

     The last four notes have been obligingly furnished to me by
     M. Foucaud, professor of the Tibetan language in Paris.





