CHAPTER V.


Of the religion of the Tarsá[488], containing three sections.

  _Section I_――an account of the Lord Aisíá (Jesus).
  _Section II_――of the creed of the Nasárá.
  _Section III_――of the works of the Tarsá.

Of the Tarsá I saw several learned individuals, such as the Padrî
Fransaî, who is highly esteemed by the Portuguese in Goa, and by those
who are in Surat, a maritime place in India. In the year of the Hejira
1057 (A. D. 1647) the author of this book found him in the port of
Surat.


SECTION THE FIRST: AN ACCOUNT OF THE LORD AISIA (JESUS).――They say
that the birth of the Lord Mesîah took place in the year 3199 of the
creation of the world,[489] 2957 after the deluge of Noah,[490] 2015
years after the birth of Ibráhím,[491] and 1510 from the coming of
Mosîah (Moses);[492] and when the children of Israél were in the 65th
week, which the prophet Dáníel had announced, 752 years after the
building of Rome,[493] in the 42nd year of the reign of Cæsar
_Tiberius_. When Aísía appeared, the high priest said: “We charge
thee, upon thy oath by the living God, say, art thou the son of God?”
The blessed and holy Lord Aísîâ replied to him: “I am what thou hast
said. Verily, we say unto you, you shall see the son of man seated at
the right hand of God, and he shall descend in the clouds of heaven.”
They said: “Thou utterest a blasphemy, because, according to the creed
of the Yahuds, God never descends in the clouds of heaven.” Ishâîá the
prophet has announced the birth of Aîsîá in words the translation of
which is as follows: “A branch from the root of Ishaî shall spring up,
and from this branch shall come forth a flower in which the spirit of
God shall dwell: verily, a virgin shall be pregnant and bring forth a
son.” Isháî is the name of the father of Dávid. When they had
apprehended Aisîa, they spit upon his blessed face and smote him.
Ishâa had predicted it: “I shall give up my body to the smiters, and
my cheek to the diggers _of wounds_; I shall not turn my face from
those who will use bad words, and throw spittle upon me.” When Aflátes
(Pilatus), a judge of the Yahuds, scourged the Lord Aîsiâ in such a
manner that his body from head to foot became but one wound, so was it
as Ishâía had predicted: “He was wounded for our transgressions; I
struck him for his people.” When Pilatus saw that the Yahuds insisted
upon the death and the crucifixion of Jesus, he said: “I take no part
in the blood of this man; I wash my hands clean of this blood.” The
Yahuds answered: “His blood be on us and on our children.” On that
account, the Yahuds are oppressed and curbed down, in retribution of
their iniquities. When they had placed the cross upon the shoulder of
Aísiá, and led him to die, a woman wiped with the border of her
garment the face, full of blood, of the Lord Aîsîa; verily, she
obtained three images of it, and carried them home: the one of these
images exists still in Ispániah, in the royal town which is situated
within the country of the king of Portugal; and is shown there twice
every year:[494] the other is in the town of Milan, in the country of
Italy, and the third in the city of Rome.


     [488] _Tarsa_ is derived from _tarsiden_, “fearing, timid, a
     Christian, an infidel, a pagan, a worshipper of fire.”

     [489] Upon the epoch of the creation of the world we have,
     according to Riccioli, 70, according to Dortous de Mairan,
     75 or 90, and according to the marquis de Fortia d’Urban,
     108 different systems, to which many more may be added.
     These epochs vary from 6984 to 3619 years; that of the
     Dabistan, 3199, is the lowest known to me.

     [490] The deluge is placed:
           By the Septuaginta       2250 years before Christ.
             ――   Archbishop Usher  2348  ――     ――     ――
             ――   Others            3882  ――     ――     ――

     [491] The above epoch differs 94 years from that given by
     Archbishop Usher, viz.: 1921 years before Christ.

     [492] The above epoch differs 19 years from that given by
     Archbishop Usher, viz.: 1510 years before Christ.

     [493] The date of the birth of Christ, as given by our
     chronologers, varies from 747 to 754 years after the
     building of Rome, or is uncertain within seven or six years
     (see Chronologie de Jésus-Christ par M. le marquis de
     Fortia, p. 102-103, Paris, 1830).

     [494] The viscount of Santarem, to whose most extensive
     learning in history and geography, I fortunately had an
     opportunity in Paris of applying for information upon the
     above mentioned fact, gave me the following notice: “In no
     town of Portugal do I find any indication of the existence
     of these relics. I think that there is, in the statement of
     the Dabistán, an error and a confusion with the fact related
     by Brandâo, in 1643, viz.: the famous Portuguese prince don
     Pietro, son of John I., having, on his return from Jerusalem
     to Spain, in 1428, married in the town of Alcoba in
     Catalonia, the countess Isabella, daughter of D. Jayme,
     count of Urgel, gave to the bishop of Valenza an image of
     our Saviour, taken by St. Veronica. These relics were still
     preserved in the cathedral of Valenza in Spain, called by
     distinction ‘the royal town,’ in the year 1643.” It was a
     few years after this (see p. 305), that the author of the
     Dabistán might have received from father Francia, the
     Portuguese missionary, the account above stated.

       *     *     *     *     *

SECTION THE SECOND: OF THE CREED OF THE AI SU YAH (CHRISTIANS). They
say that, in the name of God the Father, God the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, every one ought to bear in his heart and to keep perpetually on
his tongue the Lord Jesus, the Son of God, and never to deny him, if
even it were at the peril of his head.[495] The holy cross is the sign
of the Christians. They reckon fourteen parts of their creed: seven of
which relate to God the Almighty, and seven to the human nature of the
Lord Jesus. The first seven are as follow: 1. to confess that God is
omnipotent and supreme; 2. to believe that he is the Father; 3. to
believe that he is the Son; 4. that he is a pure spirit; 5. that he is
the Creator; 6. that he bestows heaven; 7. that he grants
salvation.[496] The seven other articles, which relate to the human
nature of Jesus are the following: 1. to believe that he is the Son of
God, by the power of the Holy Ghost, born in the body of Maria; 2.
that he was born of Maria, the virgin, and without detriment to her
virginity; 3. that for our sake he was crucified, died, and was
buried; 4. that he shall descend from heaven, and raise up the former
generations, who there anxiously expected his blessed arrival; 5. that
he resuscitated on the third day; 6. that he ascended to heaven, and
sits at the right hand of the Father, the omnipotent and supreme God;
7. that he shall come at the end of the world to judge the living and
the dead, and to reveal their good and bad actions. They call God a
father, because he is bountiful to his servants as a father to his
children. They maintain that, although God has three different
persons, yet, in truth, he is but one being; in such a manner that the
persons are the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, without the unity
of the blessed entity being affected by it, and this peculiarity
belongs to the divinity; in no creature is such an attribute to be
found. Jesus is in truth the Son of God; it is only metaphorically
that other holy personages are called the sons of God; it is in an
abstract sense,[497] inasmuch as, being God, that Jesus came forth in
heaven from the Father, not from the mother; in a similar manner, in
an abstract sense, inasmuch as, being a man upon earth, he has a
mother, but no Father. Jesus did not die, but, having a perfect love
for the sons of Adam, he sacrificed himself for the people, that they
may be liberated again from all sins. They say further, that below the
earth there are four places: the undermost of all is hell, which is
the place of severe punishment for the Satans and the iniquitous.
Another place, above this, is that which they call _purgatory_, that
is, a place of purification for good men, as some of the disobedient
who have rebelled, when they shall have there been purified, go to
heaven. A third place, higher than the last, is called the _limbus_,
in which are children under age; except that of being deprived of the
sight of the Lord Almighty, they are there exempt from all other
suffering. The fourth place is the most elevated of all; they call it
“the House of Ibrahîm,” that is, the dwelling of the souls of the
prophets and holy men: these were formerly not quite happy, because
they expected anxiously the arrival of the Saviour, the Lord Jesus;
when Jesus left the body which was buried, he descended to this fourth
place, and when he rose from the grave, he brought the pure souls with
him, leaving the souls in the three other places where they were.
When, after having been put to death, he was restored to life, his
soul was reunited to his body, and he remained forty days with his
disciples; he then, before their eyes and those of others, ascended to
heaven, and, in the highest place, seated himself at the side of God
Almighty. They declare: “When we say that Jesus is seated at the right
side of God, his Father, we mean not to say that God has a body and is
any thing corporeal. No! the Divine Being has neither right nor left
side. By such a description we intend to be intelligible _to the
vulgar_; for Jesus, in the abstract sense of being the son of God,
possesses the same greatness and power which his Father has, and in
the abstract sense of his being a man, he dwells in the most glorious
and most excellent place, which is in heaven.” They declare further:
“When we say that Jesus shall come on the last day of the world to
judge the dead and the living, and to give their due to all men, we
mean not to imply that all men will then be alive, but by the living
we denote the good men, and by the dead, the wicked.” Except
Christians, nobody else will be found pure and holy. On the day of
resurrection, all men shall live and their souls shall be reunited to
their bodies, and none will ever more die.


     [495] Here the author shows how the Latin word “_filius_” is
     to be written in Arabic or Persian characters.

     [496] Here the author shows how the Latin word “_Deus_” is
     to be written in Arabic or Persian characters.

     [497] I render here, by “abstract sense,” the Persian word
     حيثيت _hâysîyat_, which in the Dictionary is interpreted
     “ubiquity, universality, capacity, merit, conditional
     proposition, examination, etc.”

       *     *     *     *     *

SECTION THE THIRD: OF THE WORKS OF THE CHRISTIANS.――Ten commandments
are established in the Gospel; three of them relate to God, and seven
others to the servants of God: 1. thou shalt love the Lord thy God
above all things; 2. thou shalt not swear by the name of God for the
sake of an argument, that is, thou shalt accustom thyself to the
truth; when this quality shall be manifest in thee, thou wilt never
have occasion for an oath. The wise master of secrets, the king Naser
Khusró says:

     “At any time speak nothing else but truth, that thou mayst
        not have need of an oath.”

3. keep the holy days, that is the Sunday and the other sanctified
days; 4. honor thy father and thy mother; 5. thou shalt not kill: this
means, evidently, thou shalt not kill a living being at all; but they
have interpreted it that only the animal which is a _private_ property
ought not to be killed, such a one as is serviceable, and in life, or
after death, may be of use. The true sense is, that we ought not only
not to kill our brother (and such is any son of Adam), but even not
hurt him by any deed or word; 6. thou shalt not commit fornication,
that is, with a woman not thy own, be she married or without a
husband; 7. thou shalt not steal; 8. thou shalt not calumniate nor
lie: in this command enters that, if any thing bad concerning somebody
be a secret, although we know it as a certainty, we ought nevertheless
to keep it concealed, and not to divulge it, except the bad thing were
against religion and faith, or tended against the king; 9. thou shalt
not covet another’s wife; 10. thou shalt not covet another’s good.

The other five commandments, which are less imperative, are: 1. to
hear mass on Sunday, and on other holy days; and this is a rite of
devotion which a padri performs; and every body ought in solitude to
turn his whole mind towards the remembrance of the sufferings of
Jesus; 2. every one ought to go to confession at least once a year.
The confession implies three conditions: the first is truth; the
second, contrition; the third, completeness; that is, to recount
humbly one’s own sins without diminution or addition, to speak out,
and to beg absolution; 3. it is necessary that every one should take,
yearly, the communion at the Easter feast, that is, when Jesus
attained to manhood and made his testament, establishing the rule of
the holy sacrament, which is a worship; 4. let every man keep the fast
at Christmas, and other fasts, except a person be excused; 5. it is
obligatory to pay the tithes, that is, the tenth part of whatever
grows from the earth, or comes forth from an animal, is to be given to
God.

At the time of prayer, they say, God is to be invoked as our Father;
he loveth us just as a father loveth a son, and his own Son says and
orders that we should call him a father. We ought then to abstain from
sins, that he may enable us to be his children. And when we say to
God: “thou art in heaven,” it is because we think he has chosen
heaven, and for that reason we raise our hearts from the earth
upwards, if even God has no dwelling so as to be beheld in heaven.
Besides, in their prayer, they do not demand bread from God, because
he is displeased at our wanting to-day the necessaries of life for a
future day, but because he wills us to be contented, and to feel no
anxious care about to-morrow. They say, that we ought to pardon the
mischief that we receive from others, in order that God Almighty may
also pardon our transgressions. They offer likewise prayers in praise
of the glorious Mary, saying that the Lord God diffuses abundantly his
grace in any place in which the image of the blessed Lady Mary be
present. In the same manner they consider the image of the Lord Jesus,
and that of the holy cross.

There are seven sacraments, which consist in submissive prayers and
invocations for remission of sins from God the Almighty: 1. _Baptism_;
that is, an external ablution in the name of God, of his Son, and of
the Holy Ghost; for this act any sort of water that may be procured is
acceptable; by this act the soul is purified from the contamination of
all sins; this rite may be performed by the first padri who may be
present, and if none are at hand, by any individual among the
Christians; 2. _Confirmation_; that is, a friction with holy oil,
given in the name of God; and the giver, that is, a padri of
known merit, bestows it on all Christians of an adult age;
_Sanct-Eucharisty_: this, they say, is the holiest of all the
sacraments, as it presents the Lord Jesus under the form of bread,
that he may become the power of the soul. Three conditions are
required in this act: the first is a true faith; the second,
abstinence from sins; the third, to fast, and eat nothing until taking
the sacrament; the time of taking it is Christmas; 4. _Penitence_;
which consists of two conditions that the Lord Jesus has imposed
therein: the first is confession; that is the avowal made by the
sinner of his sins, and the absolution of the padri, as of one who is
the substitute of Jesus, and whose forgiveness is the absolution of
Jesus. Then, it is necessary that the sinner should give a detailed
account of his concealed and open crimes, and to this he must add two
things; the one is an aversion to, and a repentance of, every action
which he may have done without the approbation of God; the other is a
sincere resolution of never undertaking any blamable acts; to execute
faithfully the penance imposed upon him by the padri, as Jesus ordered
a return for every crime. Further, whatever sins, venial or capital,
may have struck the ear of the padri, he ought never, even at the
peril of his head, to reveal or publish them; 5. _Sacrament of extreme
unction_; this is a friction by which they anoint a Christian with
holy oil, and they bestow this sacrament with some words which the
Lord Jesus has spoken. The above five sacraments are obligatory to
every adult Christian; 6. _Ordination_; this sacrament is taken by
devoting one’s self by free choice to the worship of God, which
vocation the Christians recommend; 7. _Matrimony_; this is an
agreement which a man and a woman take together at the time of their
binding themselves in wedlock, that during the whole of their life
they will keep faith to each other. This is peculiar to the adults.
This act is allowable to women frequently at the age of twelve years;
to men at that of fourteen. The man is not permitted to take more than
one wife, and the woman is bound to a single husband. The padri who
gives this sacrament, after having ascertained that there is no
objection to the marriage, and the compact being made before
witnesses, unites both to each other in wedlock according to the
conditions of matrimony.

The Christians say that faith is something by which we know a religion
to be certainly true, and that, whenever God, the Almighty, has sent
his message, however hard and difficult, and out of the natural mode
and rule it may appear, we know that God cannot tell a lie. The truth
is found in the book of God, by means of the evidence given by him who
is the substitute of the Lord Jesus, and whom they call _Pope_. It is
certain that he throws nobody into an error, because the Lord Jesus
has in the holy Gospel, made an arrangement with him to that effect.
It should be known that the life of man depends upon these laudable
qualifications. To search and to acquire knowledge is a laudable
intention, in every business and profession; on that account it is by
method and virtue that affairs find a proper arrangement; knowledge is
the master of things; it is like salt in meat, it is the eye of the
body; and as the sun in heaven. _Justice_ consists in using moderation
in the manifold transactions of men, and in keeping men in peace and
in mutual satisfaction: if therefore every body were contented with
his share, and entertained no desire for more, there would be no war
and contention. _Fortitude_ is something by means of which one obtains
superiority over the difficulties which obstruct the life of men, and
the business of fortitude is to triumph over terror and fear, which
Iblis (Satan) throws into the heart, in order to retain us from acts
which are to be done. _Continence_ is a faculty which bestows measure
and order in sensual pleasures; the business of continence is to
prevent men from being carried away by the delights of the world; we
ought to tend in this life towards godliness; blessed are those who
feel hunger and thirst after God. It is required that, in our devotion
to God there enters no other desire but that of the beatitude to see
the Divine Being; on that account blessed are those whose hearts are
pure, because the sight of God shall be their reward in heaven, and
even in this world they shall in a certain way see God: because those
whose eyes are pure, behold things of _superlative_ beauty; it is
required that we carry strife to a peaceful end, and accomplish our
virtuous endeavors. Those who are in a state of opposition to this,
take with efforts and struggles the road of misery. On that account
blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of
God.

There are fourteen gifts of God, the all merciful; seven of them are
bodily, and seven spiritual. The seven bodily gifts are: 1. to satiate
the hungry; 2. to quench the thirst of the thirsty; 3. to clothe the
naked; 4. to harbor the stranger; 5. to inquire after the sick, and to
console the captive; 6. to procure liberty to prisoners; 7. to bury
the dead. The spiritual acts are as follow: 1. to instruct the
ignorant; 2. to advise the poor _in spirit_; 3. to comfort the heart
of the mourners; 4. to admonish the sinners; 5. to forgive injuries
inflicted; 6. to show forbearance to the deformities of nature; 7. to
offer pious prayers for the living and the dead. The Christians say
that every necessitous individual is worthy of charities, to whatever
religion or sect he may belong, but the person of the same faith, or a
relative, is more deserving of favor. It is a sin, when by choice we
perpetrate an action which is in opposition to the pleasure of God,
and when we abandon an act which we are commanded to perform. A
capital sin is it for a man, by his own choice, to commit an
abominable act and deed, such as the unrighteous spilling of blood,
and whoredom. Of venial sins seven are enumerated: such as stealing
some slight thing without a perfect concurrence of the will in it. The
summary of the capital sins is as follows: pride, avarice, lust,
anger, gluttony, envy, and sloth.

Pride consists in esteeming one’s self higher than others, whence
proceed petulance, which displays itself in vaunting one’s self and
despising others, and in dispute, and disobedience. The remedies to be
applied to it are trust, submission, and obedience to another; these
are suitable means by which the hateful mind may be subdued.

Avarice is a desire without measure of the brittle things of the
world, and the bad consequences which result from it are theft,
deception in buying and selling, lies, and perjury: the remedies for
it may be good works and liberality.

Lust is an unbounded desire of sensual pleasures; but the way and
scandalous display of it is the defilement of women: the remedy to be
sought for counteracting it is chastity.

Anger is a desire without measure of vengeance upon somebody, and the
display of it is hatred of God’s creatures, insulting speeches against
men, contentions, and a total want of mildness: the remedies for it
are patience, forbearance, and the reflection that, for our crimes and
shameful acts, we are deserving of the adversity which comes upon us,
and to keep before our sight the Lord Jesus and his apostles, who
showed nothing but mercy and kindness to those very men who caused
their distress and affliction.

Gluttony is a desire without measure of eating and drinking; the
offspring of this is sensuality, rejection of fasts, slowness in
worship, and all sorts of diseases ruining the body: the remedies for
this are abstinence, moderation in eating and drinking, in order that
a becoming attention to divine favor be excited, the constitution
restored to health, and a return from all extravagance accomplished.

Envy is a pain and sadness derived from the good condition of the
affairs of other people; whence proceeds the jealous intention to find
fault and occasion for detraction. It displays itself by rejoicing at
the distress of one’s neighbors, when related by other tongues, by
reviling certain people, and by leading an unprofitable life: the
remedy for it is affection for mankind on account of their being God’s
creatures, and to consider that happiness and welfare are bestowed
upon them by the mercy of God, and that it is an exceeding offence
against good morals to be afflicted on account of the works and
effects which result from _divine_ disposition.

Sloth is negligence in the worship of God and in good behaviour. It
displays itself by a frequent deficiency in laudable and obligatory
actions, and in always letting slip out of our hands the expedients of
spiritual and material life: the remedy for it is activity and
alacrity.

Hell is a place a worse than which cannot exist, and in this abode one
is imprisoned to all eternity, on account of commission of sins for
punishment, more severe than which none can be imagined. Heaven is a
place full of all sorts of delight; the happiness of this place
manifests itself for all ages by jubilation and pleasure.

Jesus told his disciples: “After me, a great number of men will set
forth pretensions to divine mission, but all will be deceivers: remain
you persevering and steady in your adherence to me, until my coming.”

The Gospel has been translated from the tongue of Jesus into different
languages; namely, into Arabic, Greek, Latin, which last is the
language of the learned among the Firang; into Syriac, and this all
men of letters know.




