CHAPTER IV.


From the book _the Dabistán_, a short account of the religion of the
Yahuds, contained in two sections.

_Section the first_, the information received from the tongue of
Mohammed Sâíd Sarmed.

_Section the second_, upon the translation of the page of Adam, which
is the beginning of the book of Moses (the Pentateuch).


SECTION THE FIRST.――The author of this book never happened to have
intercourse with learned and distinguished men among the Yahuds; and
he set no value upon what he found in the books of foreigners about
their religion: because envy is a corrosion and a fire, which attacks
the enemy. But in the year of the Hejira 1057 (A. D. 1647), when I
came to Hyder abad, I contracted friendship with _Mohammed Sâid
Sarmed_, who was originally from a family of learned Yahuds, of a
class whom they call Rabánián (Rabbins); after an investigation into
the faith of the Rabbins and the perusal of the Mosaic books, he
became a Muselman; he read the scientific works of the wise men of
Iran, such as Mulla Sader, and Mír Abu-’l Kásem, of Kazer sak, and
many others: at last, for the sake of commerce, he undertook by sea
the voyage to Hindustan. When he arrived in the town _Tata_,[484] he
fell in love with a Hindu boy, called Abhi Chand, and, abandoning all
other things, like a Sanyási, naked as he came from his mother, he sat
down before the door of his beloved. The father of the object of his
love, after having found by investigation the purity of the attachment
manifested for his son, admitted Sarmed into his house, and the young
man too met him with an equal affection, so that he could no more
separate from him, and he read the book of Moses, the psalms of David,
and other books with Sarmed. The following verses are the composition
of this young Hindu:

  “I submit to Moses’ law; I am of thy religion, and the guardian of
     thy way:
        I am a Rabbi of the Yahuds, a Kafir, a Muselman.”

The learned rabbis say, according to their belief, among the sons of
Israel it was not required that women should wear a dress, and Sarmed
said that Ishâiá, the prophet, himself used to go naked in his last
days. Sarmeda was a good master of poetry. Here follow some of his
verses:

                         RABAAI, QUATRAIN:

  “Sarmed, whom they intoxicated from the cup of love,
   Whom they called, exalted, and depressed,
   Asked for wine, worship of God, and wisdom:
  (But) they intoxicated him, and made him a worshipper of idols.”

In the praise of the prophet, we find what follows:

                             QUATRAIN:

  “O thou, by whose cheek is wounded the mind of the red rose,
   Internally is the whole blood of the heart, externally the red rose;
   Thou camest so late after Joseph, who was in the garden expecting
     thee,
   That the rose (of his cheek) became first yellow (from vexation)
     and at last (from pleasure) a red rose.”

                         ANOTHER QUATRAIN:

  “This existence has, without the azure sphere, no reality,
   This existence is confined; for, except the absolute being, nothing
     has reality.
        Is God ever in vain? No! God is not in vain.
   This existence is real only with respect to its origin, but whatever
     is derived has no reality.”

                         ANOTHER QUATRAIN:

  “When God weighed in the balance of destiny with the sun,
   The being endowed with every excellence, _Muhammed_,
   This was so heavy that it moved not from its place;
   The other was so light that it flew up to heaven.”

                            A DISTICH.

       “Sarmed, who is a nightingale, has no desire of gold;
   (But) his friend is the rose, and the rose has need of a handful
     of gold.”

                         ANOTHER DISTICH.

  “In the Kâbah and in the idol temple is his stone _the symbol of male
     energy_, and his is _the symbol of female productiveness_;[485]
   In one place it is the black stone _of the temple of Mecca_; in
     another place an idol of the Hindus.”

In the eulogy of Shaikh Mohammed Khan, who was the chief minister of
the illustrious Dara, Sultan Abed Ullah Kat´eb, we find the
following quatrain:

  “O thou, who art the circumference of greatness to the centre of
     the throne!――
   Thou, to whose service a hundred persons are devoted, as is the
     firmament _to the universe_――
   Make thou to me, who am a stranger, my evening equal to midday,
   If at the side of Kateb[486] thou art as happy as at midday.”

The Shaikh desired the society of Sarmed. The author of this book was
one day among the persons present; he said to one called Jerán, who
made the eulogy of the Shaikh: “In a short time the Shaikh will, with
whatever he may have acquired, turn towards the voyage of the other
world, and Mîr Mohammed Sâid Mîr will take complete possession of the
dignity of government;” and the same year the Shaikh undertook to set
out _for Mecca_ from Hyderabad. In the year of the Hejira 1059 (A. D.
1649), in the harbor of Fahardanish, he passed from this bodily ark to
the circle of freedom. Hafiz says:

  “The paradise of eternity is in this cell the share of the durvishes;
   The Kâbah of the universe is the dominion of the durvishes;
   O my heart, be there with reverence: for the sultan and the country
   All are in the service of the majesty of the durvishes.”

Sarmed gave the information that, according to the Yahuds, God, the
Almighty, is corporeal; and that his body is after the image of
mankind, and similar to it; that, during the course of time, he is
dispersed in the same manner as splendor is dissipated. Sarmed
moreover said, that it is mentioned in the Mosaic book and in the holy
writings, that the spirit of the divine body is beauty itself, and
manifests itself under a human form; that punishment and recompense of
the other world are already experienced in this state; that life lasts
one hundred and twenty years; after that, man’s whole life may be
considered as one day, which, when he dies, is followed by night; that
his body assumes partly the form of a mineral, partly that of a
vegetable, and partly that of an animal, and the like; when one
hundred and twenty years have elapsed, night comes to an end, and the
morning appears again; if an atom of his bodily dust be in the east
and another atom in the west, they unite in one place, and life is
renewed to last again one hundred years, as we have said, when night
returns. Punishment and recompense are solely for this world. They
maintain that whatever is, bears eternally the form of mankind,
composed of water and earth.

The Yahuds agree in denying the appearance of _Aisia_ (Jesus) _as a
prophet_; they say that he was a deceiver; and they reject what the
_Aisuyan_, “Christians,” adduce from the Old Testament about the
appearance of Aísya; they maintain that the prophet Ishâía spoke of
himself the words[487] which have been applied to Aísya. They assert
that Ibrâhím was no prophet, but a holy man, and they esteem a holy
man higher than a prophet. They say that, in the Mosaic book, no
mention is made of Pharâún’s pretensions to be a god; but they relate
that this king was a tyrant who oppressed the children of Israel,
wherefore Musiâ (Moses) rose, and protested against his tyranny. As
Pharâún did not attend to his words, he met with his fate. They also
say that it is not to be found in the sacred book that Harun (Aaron)
was joined to Musiâ in the divine mission, although he acted as his
substitute. They agree in saying that Dáúdâ (David) sent Urîa to be
killed, because the king coveted the possession of that man’s wife,
whom he took afterwards, and hence Solíman was begotten. They further
insist that Aísia was no prophet, as the Nazaréans believe. Dáudâ
said: “My hands and feet will fall, and my bones have been counted;”
all this was fulfilled at the time when Aísia suffered death; but they
assert that Dáúda spoke those words of himself, and in such manner all
things which the Nazáréans set forth about Aísia, the Yahuds interpret
clearly in another sense. It is besides written in their sacred book
that, when the children of Isráîl shall perform iniquitous acts,
Muhammad will appear. About this, Sarmed said that, although the name
of the prophet is in the sacred book, yet another meaning may more
evidently be attached to it; but if even the prophet’s very name be
insisted upon, it has no other import but that it exhorts the children
of Isrâíl to convert themselves to his religion, and, in such an
endeavour, carried beyond all bounds, he said many other things.

The Yahuds receive no stranger into their community; circumcision is
the law of their prophet, not that of others. They say also that a
prophet is always living and present, to be the propagator of the law
which is contained in the sacred book. _Abhî Chand_, having translated
a part of the Mosaic book, the author of this work revised it with
Sarmad; they corrected it completely, affixed their mark to it, so
that it became a correct copy, from which is the following:

       *     *     *     *     *

SECTION THE SECOND: ON THE BOOK OF ADAM.

The Dabistan gives here a Persian translation of the Genesis, from the
beginning to chapter VI, verse 8; at the end of which the author says
that this is the only portion of the sacred book of the Jews which he
had an opportunity of examining. According to Eichhorn (see Einleitung
in das alte Testament, 4th edit., vol. II. p. 329) the five books of
Moses were translated into Persian by the rabbi Jacob, son of Joseph,
after the ninth century; the translation contained in the Dabistan is
said to have been executed by Abhi Chand; we cannot say whether it was
made from the Hebrew original, or from the Arabic, or any other
language. We are informed by the baron Hammer-Purgstall (see
Gemaldesaal moslimisher Herrsher, p. 57) that Werka ben Nafil, a
cousin of Khadija, Muhammed’s wife, and a Christian priest, translated
the Old and New Testament from the Hebrew into Arabic; this
translation appears however to have been but little known. Eichhorn
says (loco citato, p. 231), that the first certain traces of a
translation of the Hebrew sacred books into Arabic are to be found in
the tenth century. Pocock mentions (pp. 34, 361) Sâadias, a learned
Jew, who lived from 892 to 941 A. D., as translator of all the books
of the Old Testament into Arabic; and another Jew (not named) who made
a version of the book of Kings into the same language.

The Persian translation of the fragment under our consideration was
revised by the author of the Dabistan, and by Sarmed, who was a Jew
and a Rabbin, converted to Muhammedism, most probably in the first
half of the seventeenth century. As it was undoubtedly executed from
another original copy than that which had served to the translators in
Europe, it appeared interesting enough to examine whether the Persian
version of the Dabistan differs in any material point from the
translations known in Europe. For that purpose I have consulted the
following copies of the Bible:

  I. The polyglot Bible, printed at Paris, 1645, in which I
     chiefly compared the Arabic translation.

  II. The Persian translation, published by the Bible Society
     in 1825.

  III. The German Bible, translated by Martin Luther.

  IV. The English Bible, appointed to be read in Churches, 1837.

  V. The English translation from the original Hebrew, by John
     Bellamy, 1818.

  VI. The French translation from the original Hebrew, by S.
     Cahen, 1831.

  VII. The French translation, by Messrs. Glaire and M. Frank,
     1835.

Here follow some variations which I have remarked in the Persian
translation compared with the text of the versions just enumerated.
(References are made to the respective copies, by repeating the Roman
numbers prefixed to each.)


GENESIS, CHAP. I.

  V. 2. II. III. IV. V. VI. read: “the spirit of God;” I. the
    Arabic translation has “the winds of God;” VI. “un vent
    violent (divin) agitait la surface des eaux;” the Dabistan,

     وباد خدا مى وزيد بہ روي آب

    “And the _wind of God_ blew upon the face of the water.”

  VV. 6. 7. 8. I. the Arabic translation has جلد, _jeld_, “a
    skin, a volume;” II. پرده, _perdah_, “veil, curtain, fence;”
    both Arabic and Persian, only figuratively “heaven;” III.
    German, “veste;” IV. English, and VI. French, “firmament;” V.
    English, “expanse;” VII. French, “étendue” (atmosphere); the
    Dabistan رفيعه, “an elevation.”

  V. 26. V. Mr. Bellamy objects to the translation of this verse
    by the words: “Let us make man in our image” (in which all
    the other versions agree), and he substitutes for it: “We
    will make man;” in the Dabistan we find, in support of Mr.
    Bellamy, بكنم آدم, “I will make man.”


CHAP. II.

  V. 6. All the translations have: “a vapor _watered_ the face of
    the earth;” the Dabistan says: “covered, decked.”

  V. 7. All the copies agree in: “he breathed _into his nostrils_
    the breath of life;” the Dabistan translates: “into his body.”

  V. 8. Every where we read: “God planted a garden _eastward in
    Eden_;” in the Dabistan: “from old times in Eden;” Mr. Cahen
    remarks that Onkelos (a Hebrew commentator before our era)
    interprets in the same manner: “in former times.”

  V. 11. We read generally: “Pison: _that is it which compasseth
    the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold_;” Messrs.
    Glaire and Frank add: “l’or _de ce nom_;” in the Dabistan:

     زمين حوملارا کہ آنجاست بلور و سذك يشب

    “The land Havemla, where there is the beryl (also crystal)
    and the stone jasper (especially a whitish kind found on
    mount Imaus).”

  V. 12. is not in the Dabistan.

  V. 13. In the Dabistan are omitted, after the name of Gihon,
    the words: “the same is it that compasseth the whole land of
    Ethiopia.”

  V. 14. The Dabistan reads, after the name of the river Hîdîkel,
    رونده پيش طايفه يشراو, “running towards the _people of
    Ashur_;” other versions have “towards the east of Assyria.”

  V. 23. VII. Messrs. Glaire and Frank translate: “qu’elle soit
    nommée _Ischâ_ (femme), parce qu’elle a été tirée de _Ish_”
    (homme). This analogous derivation for man and woman does not
    exist in other languages; we find however, in the old Latin,
    _vir_ and _vira_, which words are used in the Latin
    translation of the Samaritan text; in the Arabic version we
    find امرعه for “virago,” and امريه for “virilitas;” the
    translator, in the Dabistan, endeavored to reproduce the same
    derivation, by _ânsán_ and _ânsn_:

     از ابراي همين كَفته ميشود انسان كه كرفته شده است ار اسن

  V. 24. The version in the Dabistan deviates from the other
    translations by the word
          ميخسپند بزنش
    “he will _sleep_ with his wife,” instead of “cleave unto, or
    adhere to, his wife.”


CHAP. III.

     Offers no variation to be pointed out.


CHAP. IV.

  V. 13. The translation in the Dabistan deviates from IV. VI.
    VII. which have: “my _punishment_ is greater than I can
    _bear_;” it agrees with I. II. III. and V. which say: “great
    is my _iniquity_ to be _forgiven_;”

        بزرك است كناه من از برداشتن

  “Great is my _crime_ to be _overlooked_” (disregarded).

  V. 16. There is coincidence between I. II. III. IV. VI. and
    VII. which have: “he dwelt in the land _of Nod_, on the east
    of Eden.” V. Mr. Bellamy translates: “he dwelt in the land
    _wandering_ eastward of Eden;” in the Dabistan:

       نشيست در زمين اواركي ييش عدن

    “He dwelt in the land of vagrancy, before Eden.”


CHAP. V.

  V. 25. All translations have: “Methuselah lived _a hundred
    eighty and seven_ years, and begat Lamech;” in the Dabistan
    we read only “eighty-seven years.”

  V. 27. All versions agree in the words: “All the days of
    Mathuselah were _nine hundred sixty and nine_ years;” in the
    Dabistan we find: “the whole life of Manusalah was eight
    hundred and fifty-nine years” (according to its own text it
    ought to be 869).

  V. 30. According to all versions: “Lamech lived after he begat
    Noah _five hundred ninety and five_ years;” according to the
    Dabistan, only “five hundred years.”

  V. 31. Pursuant to all translations: “the days of Lamech were
    _seven hundred seventy and seven_ years;” pursuant to the
    Dabistan: “six hundred eighty and two years.”


CHAP. VI.

  V. 3. In the Dabistan we read: “My spirit shall not always
    _take patience_ with man;” other versions have: “shall not
    always remain,” or “strive with man.”

  V. 5. is omitted in the Dabistan.

The notice given in the Dabistan of the opinions of the Jews will be
found very incomplete and inaccurate, inasmuch as it is exhibited
without a due distinction of the different Jewish sects, to which they
may be attributed. For a far better account of the Jews, see that of
Makrisi, given in the “Chrestomathie arabe” of Silvestre de Sacy (vol.
I. pp. 284-369), with the various explanatory notes of that celebrated
orientalist.


     [484] Tata is a town belonging to the Amírs of Sind, the
     capital of a district of the same name, and situated near
     the banks of the Indus about 130 miles, by the course of the
     river, from the sea; lat. 22° 44´ N. long. 68° 17´
     E.――(Hamilton’s _East India Gazetteer_.)

     [485] See pp. 152-153.

     [486] _Katéb_, the name of the sultan, signifies the north
     pole; hence the author plays with the words _kateb_,
     “north,” _naśif nahar_, “midday,” and _shám_, “evening.”

     [487] The author leaves us in a total uncertainty about the
     words to which he alludes; if to those of Isaiah, chap.
     LIII, vv. 2-12, the prophet would have predicted his own
     sufferings. According to the learned Jew, Isaac Orobio (see
     _Israel vengé, ou Exposition naturelle des Prophéties que
     les Chrétiens appliquent à Jésus, leur prétendu Messie_),
     the words of Isaiah, chap. LIII, are not to be referred to a
     single individual, but to the whole people of Israel.




