CHAPTER IX--AN EXECUTION


The attainment of honours and dignities is not enjoyed without a portion
of trouble and care, which, like a shadow, follows all temporalities.  On
the very evening of the same day that I was first chosen to be a bailie,
a sore affair came to light, in the discovery that Jean Gaisling had
murdered her bastard bairn.  She was the daughter of a donsie mother,
that could gie no name to her gets, of which she had two laddies, besides
Jean.  The one of them had gone off with the soldiers some time before;
the other, a douce well-behaved callan, was in my lord's servitude, as a
stable boy at the castle.  Jeanie herself was the bonniest lassie in the
whole town, but light-headed, and fonder of outgait and blether in the
causey than was discreet of one of her uncertain parentage.  She was, at
the time when she met with her misfortune, in the service of Mrs
Dalrymple, a colonel's widow, that came out of the army and settled among
us on her jointure.

This Mrs Dalrymple, having been long used to the loose morals of camps
and regiments, did not keep that strict hand over poor Jeanie, and her
other serving lass, that she ought to have done, and so the poor
guileless creature fell into the snare of some of the ne'er-do-weel
gentlemen that used to play cards at night with Mrs Dalrymple.  The
truths of the story were never well known, nor who was the father, for
the tragical issue barred all enquiry; but it came out that poor Jeanie
was left to herself, and, being instigated by the Enemy, after she had
been delivered, did, while the midwife's back was turned, strangle the
baby with a napkin.  She was discovered in the very fact, with the bairn
black in the face in the bed beside her.

The heinousness of the crime can by no possibility be lessened; but the
beauty of the mother, her tender years, and her light-headedness, had won
many favourers; and there was a great leaning in the hearts of all the
town to compassionate her, especially when they thought of the ill
example that had been set to her in the walk and conversation of her
mother.  It was not, however, within the power of the magistrates to
overlook the accusation; so we were obligated to cause a precognition to
be taken, and the search left no doubt of the wilfulness of the murder.
Jeanie was in consequence removed to the tolbooth, where she lay till the
lords were coming to Ayr, when she was sent thither to stand her trial
before them; but, from the hour she did the deed, she never spoke.

Her trial was a short procedure, and she was cast to be hanged--and not
only to be hanged, but ordered to be executed in our town, and her body
given to the doctors to make an atomy.  The execution of Jeanie was what
all expected would happen; but when the news reached the town of the
other parts of the sentence, the wail was as the sough of a pestilence,
and fain would the council have got it dispensed with.  But the Lord
Advocate was just wud at the crime, both because there had been no
previous concealment, so as to have been an extenuation for the shame of
the birth, and because Jeanie would neither divulge the name of the
father, nor make answer to all the interrogatories that were put to
her--standing at the bar like a dumbie, and looking round her, and at the
judges, like a demented creature, and beautiful as a Flanders' baby.  It
was thought by many, that her advocate might have made great use of her
visible consternation, and pled that she was by herself; for in truth she
had every appearance of being so.  He was, however, a dure man, no doubt
well enough versed in the particulars and punctualities of the law for an
ordinary plea; but no of the right sort of knowledge and talent to take
up the case of a forlorn lassie, misled by ill example and a winsome
nature, and clothed in the allurement of loveliness, as the judge himself
said to the jury.

On the night before the day of execution, she was brought over in a
chaise from Ayr between two town-officers, and placed again in our hands,
and still she never spoke.

Nothing could exceed the compassion that every one had for poor Jeanie,
so she wasna committed to a common cell, but laid in the council-room,
where the ladies of the town made up a comfortable bed for her, and some
of them sat up all night and prayed for her; but her thoughts were gone,
and she sat silent.

In the morning, by break of day, her wanton mother, that had been
trolloping in Glasgow, came to the tolbooth door, and made a dreadful
wally-waeing, and the ladies were obligated, for the sake of peace, to
bid her be let in.  But Jeanie noticed her not, still sitting with her
eyes cast down, waiting the coming on of the hour of her doom.  The
wicked mother first tried to rouse her by weeping and distraction, and
then she took to upbraiding; but Jeanie seemed to heed her not, save only
once, and then she but looked at the misleart tinkler, and shook her
head.  I happened to come into the room at this time, and seeing all the
charitable ladies weeping around, and the randy mother talking to the
poor lassie as loudly and vehement as if she had been both deaf and
sullen, I commanded the officers, with a voice of authority, to remove
the mother, by which we had for a season peace, till the hour came.

There had not been an execution in the town in the memory of the oldest
person then living; the last that suffered was one of the martyrs in the
time of the persecution, so that we were not skilled in the business, and
had besides no hangman, but were necessitated to borrow the Ayr one.
Indeed, I being the youngest bailie, was in terror that the obligation
might have fallen to me.

A scaffold was erected at the Tron, just under the tolbooth windows, by
Thomas Gimblet, the master-of-work, who had a good penny of profit by the
job, for he contracted with the town-council, and had the boards after
the business was done to the bargain; but Thomas was then deacon of the
wrights, and himself a member of our body.

At the hour appointed, Jeanie, dressed in white, was led out by the town-
officers, and in the midst of the magistrates from among the ladies, with
her hands tied behind her with a black riband.  At the first sight of her
at the tolbooth stairhead, a universal sob rose from all the multitude,
and the sternest e'e couldna refrain from shedding a tear.  We marched
slowly down the stair, and on to the foot of the scaffold, where her
younger brother, Willy, that was stable-boy at my lord's, was standing by
himself, in an open ring made round him in the crowd; every one
compassionating the dejected laddie, for he was a fine youth, and of an
orderly spirit.

As his sister came towards the foot of the ladder, he ran towards her,
and embraced her with a wail of sorrow that melted every heart, and made
us all stop in the middle of our solemnity.  Jeanie looked at him, (for
her hands were tied,) and a silent tear was seen to drop from her cheek.
But in the course of little more than a minute, all was quiet, and we
proceeded to ascend the scaffold.  Willy, who had by this time dried his
eyes, went up with us, and when Mr Pittle had said the prayer, and sung
the psalm, in which the whole multitude joined, as it were with the
contrition of sorrow, the hangman stepped forward to put on the fatal
cap, but Willy took it out of his hand, and placed it on his sister
himself, and then kneeling down, with his back towards her closing his
eyes and shutting his ears with his hands, he saw not nor heard when she
was launched into eternity.

When the awful act was over, and the stir was for the magistrates to
return, and the body to be cut down, poor Willy rose, and without looking
round, went down the steps of the scaffold; the multitude made a lane for
him to pass, and he went on through them hiding his face, and gaed
straight out of the town.  As for the mother, we were obligated, in the
course of the same year, to drum her out of the town, for stealing
thirteen choppin bottles from William Gallon's, the vintner's, and
selling them for whisky to Maggie Picken, that was tried at the same time
for the reset.




