CHAPTER VIII--ON THE CHOOSING OF A MINISTER


The next great handling that we had in the council after the general
election, was anent the choice of a minister for the parish.  The Rev. Dr
Swapkirk having had an apoplexy, the magistrates were obligated to get Mr
Pittle to be his helper.  Whether it was that, by our being used to Mr
Pittle, we had ceased to have a right respect for his parts and talents,
or that in reality he was but a weak brother, I cannot in conscience take
it on me to say; but the certainty is, that when the Doctor departed this
life, there was hardly one of the hearers who thought Mr Pittle would
ever be their placed minister, and it was as far at first from the
unanimous mind of the magistrates, who are the patrons of the parish, as
any thing could well be, for he was a man of no smeddum in discourse.  In
verity, as Mrs Pawkie, my wife, said, his sermons in the warm summer
afternoons were just a perfect hushabaa, that no mortal could hearken to
without sleeping.  Moreover, he had a sorning way with him, that the
genteeler sort could na abide, for he was for ever going from house to
house about tea-time, to save his ain canister.  As for the young ladies,
they could na endure him at all, for he had aye the sough and sound of
love in his mouth, and a round-about ceremonial of joking concerning the
same, that was just a fasherie to them to hear.  The commonality,
however, were his greatest adversaries; for he was, notwithstanding the
spareness of his abilities, a prideful creature, taking no interest in
their hamely affairs, and seldom visiting the aged or the sick among
them.  Shortly, however, before the death of the doctor, Mr Pittle had
been very attentive to my wife's full cousin, Miss Lizy Pinkie, I'll no
say on account of the legacy of seven hundred pounds left her by an uncle
that made his money in foreign parts, and died at Portsmouth of the liver
complaint, when he was coming home to enjoy himself; and Mrs Pawkie told
me, that as soon as Mr Pittle could get a kirk, I needna be surprised if
I heard o' a marriage between him and Miss Lizy.

Had I been a sordid and interested man, this news could never have given
me the satisfaction it did, for Miss Lizy was very fond of my bairns, and
it was thought that Peter would have been her heir; but so far from being
concerned at what I heard, I rejoiced thereat, and resolved in secret
thought, whenever a vacancy happened, Dr Swapkirk being then fast wearing
away, to exert the best of my ability to get the kirk for Mr Pittle, not,
however, unless he was previously married to Miss Lizy; for, to speak
out, she was beginning to stand in need of a protector, and both me and
Mrs Pawkie had our fears that she might outlive her income, and in her
old age become a cess upon us.  And it couldna be said that this was any
groundless fear; for Miss Lizy, living a lonely maiden life by herself,
with only a bit lassie to run her errands, and no being naturally of an
active or eydent turn, aften wearied, and to keep up her spirits gaed may
be, now and then, oftener to the gardevin than was just necessar, by
which, as we thought, she had a tavert look.  Howsever, as Mr Pittle had
taken a notion of her, and she pleased his fancy, it was far from our
hand to misliken one that was sib to us; on the contrary, it was a duty
laid on me by the ties of blood and relationship, to do all in my power
to further their mutual affection into matrimonial fruition; and what I
did towards that end, is the burden of this current chapter.

Dr Swapkirk, in whom the spark of life was long fading, closed his eyes,
and it went utterly out, as to this world, on a Saturday night, between
the hours of eleven and twelve.  We had that afternoon got an inkling
that he was drawing near to his end.  At the latest, Mrs Pawkie herself
went over to the manse, and stayed till she saw him die.  "It was a
pleasant end," she said, for he was a godly, patient man; and we were
both sorely grieved, though it was a thing for which we had been long
prepared; and indeed, to his family and connexions, except for the loss
of the stipend, it was a very gentle dispensation, for he had been long a
heavy handful, having been for years but, as it were, a breathing lump of
mortality, groosy, and oozy, and doozy, his faculties being shut up and
locked in by a dumb palsy.

Having had this early intimation of the doctor's removal to a better
world, on the Sabbath morning when I went to join the magistrates in the
council-chamber, as the usage is to go to the laft, with the
town-officers carrying their halberts before us, according to the ancient
custom of all royal burghs, my mind was in a degree prepared to speak to
them anent the successor.  Little, however, passed at that time, and it
so happened that, by some wonder of inspiration, (there were, however,
folk that said it was taken out of a book of sermons, by one Barrow an
English Divine,) Mr Pittle that forenoon preached a discourse that made
an impression, in so much, that on our way back to the council-chamber I
said to Provost Vintner, that then was--

"Really Mr Pittle seems, if he would exert himself, to have a nerve.  I
could not have thought it was in the power of his capacity to have given
us such a sermon."

The provost thought as I did, so I replied--"We canna, I think, do better
than keep him among us.  It would, indeed, provost, no be doing justice
to the young man to pass another over his head."

I could see that the provost wasna quite sure of what I had been saying;
for he replied, that it was a matter that needed consideration.

When we separated at the council-chamber, I threw myself in the way of
Bailie Weezle, and walked home with him, our talk being on the subject of
vacancy; and I rehearsed to him what had passed between me and the
provost, saying, that the provost had made no objection to prefer Mr
Pittle, which was the truth.

Bailie Weezle was a man no overladen with worldly wisdom, and had been
chosen into the council principally on account of being easily managed.
In his business, he was originally by trade a baker in Glasgow, where he
made a little money, and came to settle among us with his wife, who was a
native of the town, and had her relations here.  Being therefore an idle
man, living on his money, and of a soft and quiet nature, he was for the
reason aforesaid chosen into the council, where he always voted on the
provost's side; for in controverted questions every one is beholden to
take a part, and he thought it was his duty to side with the chief
magistrate.

Having convinced the bailie that Mr Pittle had already, as it were, a
sort of infeoffment in the kirk, I called in the evening on my old
predecessor in the guildry, Bailie M'Lucre, who was not a hand to be so
easily dealt with; but I knew his inclinations, and therefore I resolved
to go roundly to work with him.  So I asked him out to take a walk, and I
led him towards the town-moor, conversing loosely about one thing and
another, and touching softly here and there on the vacancy.

When we were well on into the middle of the moor, I stopped, and, looking
round me, said, "Bailie, surely it's a great neglec of the magistrates
and council to let this braw broad piece of land, so near the town, lie
in a state o' nature, and giving pasturage to only twa-three of the poor
folk's cows.  I wonder you, that's now a rich man, and with eyne worth
pearls and diamonds, that ye dinna think of asking a tack of this land;
ye might make a great thing o't."

The fish nibbled, and told me that he had for some time entertained a
thought on the subject; but he was afraid that I would be overly
extortionate.

"I wonder to hear you, bailie," said I; "I trust and hope no one will
ever find me out of the way of justice; and to convince you that I can do
a friendly turn, I'll no objec to gie you a' my influence free gratis, if
ye'll gie Mr Pittle a lift into the kirk; for, to be plain with you, the
worthy young man, who, as ye heard to-day, is no without an ability, has
long been fond of Mrs Pawkie's cousin, Miss Lizy Pinky; and I would fain
do all that lies in my power to help on the match."

The bailie was well pleased with my frankness, and before returning home
we came to a satisfactory understanding; so that the next thing I had to
do, was to see Mr Pittle himself on the subject.  Accordingly, in the
gloaming, I went over to where he stayed: it was with Miss Jenny
Killfuddy, an elderly maiden lady, whose father was the minister of
Braehill, and the same that is spoken of in the chronicle of Dalmailing,
as having had his eye almost put out by a clash of glaur, at the stormy
placing of Mr Balwhidder.

"Mr Pittle," said I, as soon as I was in and the door closed.  "I'm come
to you as a friend; both Mrs Pawkie and me have long discerned that ye
have had a look more than common towards our friend, Miss Lizy, and we
think it our duty to enquire your intents, before matters gang to greater
length."

He looked a little dumfoundered at this salutation, and was at a loss for
an answer, so I continued--

"If your designs be honourable, and no doubt they are, now's your time;
strike while the iron's hot.  By the death of the doctor, the kirk's
vacant, the town-council have the patronage; and, if ye marry Miss Lizy,
my interest and influence shall not be slack in helping you into the
poopit."  In short, out of what passed that night, on the Monday
following Mr Pittle and Miss Lizy were married; and by my dexterity,
together with the able help I had in Bailie M'Lucre, he was in due season
placed and settled in the parish; and the next year more than fifty acres
of the town-moor were inclosed on a nine hundred and ninety-nine years'
tack at an easy rate between me and the bailie, he paying the half of the
expense of the ditching and rooting out of the whins; and it was
acknowledged by every one that saw it, that there had not been a greater
improvement for many years in all the country side.  But to the best
actions there will be adverse and discontented spirits; and, on this
occasion, there were not wanting persons naturally of a disloyal
opposition temper, who complained of the inclosure as a usurpation of the
rights and property of the poorer burghers.  Such revilings, however, are
what all persons in authority must suffer; and they had only the effect
of making me button my coat, and look out the crooser to the blast.




