The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Provost
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Provost

Author: John Galt


        
Release date: April 1, 1998 [eBook #1296]
                Most recently updated: April 17, 2007

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1296

Credits: Transcribed from the 1913 T. N. Foulis edition David Price







Transcribed from the 1913 T. N. Foulis edition David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





THE PROVOST


INTRODUCTION


During a recent visit to the West Country, among other old friends we
paid our respects to Mrs Pawkie, the relict of the Provost of that name,
who three several times enjoyed the honour of being chief magistrate in
Gudetown.  Since the death of her worthy husband, and the comfortable
settlement in life of her youngest daughter, Miss Jenny, who was married
last year to Mr Caption, writer to the signet, she has been, as she told
us herself, "beeking in the lown o' the conquest which the gudeman had,
wi' sic an ettling o' pains and industry, gathered for his family."

Our conversation naturally diverged into various topics, and, among
others, we discoursed at large on the manifold improvements which had
taken place, both in town and country, since we had visited the Royal
Burgh.  This led the widow, in a complimentary way, to advert to the hand
which, it is alleged, we have had in the editing of that most excellent
work, entitled, "Annals of the Parish of Dalmailing," intimating, that
she had a book in the handwriting of her deceased husband, the Provost,
filled with a variety of most curious matter; in her opinion, of far more
consequence to the world than any book that we had ever been concerned in
putting out.

Considering the veneration in which Mr Pawkie had been through life
regarded by his helpmate, we must confess that her eulogium on the merits
of his work did not impress us with the most profound persuasion that it
was really deserving of much attention.  Politeness, however, obliged us
to express an earnest desire to see the volume, which, after some little
hesitation, was produced.  Judge, then, of the nature of our emotions,
when, in cursorily turning over a few of the well-penned pages, we found
that it far surpassed every thing the lady had said in its praise.  Such,
indeed was our surprise, that we could not refrain from openly and at
once assuring her, that the delight and satisfaction which it was
calculated to afford, rendered it a duty on her part to lose no time in
submitting it to the public; and, after lavishing a panegyric on the
singular and excellent qualities of the author, which was all most
delicious to his widow, we concluded with a delicate insinuation of the
pleasure we should enjoy, in being made the humble instrument of
introducing to the knowledge of mankind a volume so replete and enriched
with the fruits of his practical wisdom.  Thus, partly by a judicious
administration of flattery, and partly also by solicitation, backed by an
indirect proposal to share the profits, we succeeded in persuading Mrs
Pawkie to allow us to take the valuable manuscript to Edinburgh, in order
to prepare it for publication.

Having obtained possession of the volume, we lost no time till we had
made ourselves master of its contents.  It appeared to consist of a
series of detached notes, which, together, formed something analogous to
an historical view of the different important and interesting scenes and
affairs the Provost had been personally engaged in during his long
magisterial life.  We found, however that the concatenation of the
memoranda which he had made of public transactions, was in several places
interrupted by the insertion of matter not in the least degree
interesting to the nation at large; and that, in arranging the work for
the press, it would be requisite and proper to omit many of the notes and
much of the record, in order to preserve the historical coherency of the
narrative.  But in doing this, the text has been retained inviolate, in
so much that while we congratulate the world on the addition we are thus
enabled to make to the stock of public knowledge, we cannot but
felicitate ourselves on the complete and consistent form into which we
have so successfully reduced our precious materials; the separation of
which, from the dross of personal and private anecdote, was a task of no
small difficulty; such, indeed, as the editors only of the autographic
memoirs of other great men can duly appreciate.




CHAPTER I--THE FORECAST


It must be allowed in the world, that a man who has thrice reached the
highest station of life in his line, has a good right to set forth the
particulars of the discretion and prudence by which he lifted himself so
far above the ordinaries of his day and generation; indeed, the
generality of mankind may claim this as a duty; for the conduct of public
men, as it has been often wisely said, is a species of public property,
and their rules and observances have in all ages been considered things
of a national concernment.  I have therefore well weighed the importance
it may be of to posterity, to know by what means I have thrice been made
an instrument to represent the supreme power and authority of Majesty in
the royal burgh of Gudetown, and how I deported myself in that honour and
dignity, so much to the satisfaction of my superiors in the state and
commonwealth of the land, to say little of the great respect in which I
was held by the townsfolk, and far less of the terror that I was to evil-
doers.  But not to be over circumstantial, I propose to confine this
history of my life to the public portion thereof, on the which account I
will take up the beginning at the crisis when I first entered into
business, after having served more than a year above my time, with the
late Mr Thomas Remnant, than whom there was not a more creditable man in
the burgh; and he died in the possession of the functionaries and
faculties of town-treasurer, much respected by all acquainted with his
orderly and discreet qualities.

Mr Remnant was, in his younger years, when the growth of luxury and
prosperity had not come to such a head as it has done since, a tailor
that went out to the houses of the adjacent lairds and country gentry,
whereby he got an inkling of the policy of the world, that could not have
been gathered in any other way by a man of his station and degree of
life.  In process of time he came to be in a settled way, and when I was
bound 'prentice to him, he had three regular journeymen and a cloth shop.
It was therefore not so much for learning the tailoring, as to get an
insight in the conformity between the traffic of the shop and the board
that I was bound to him, being destined by my parents for the profession
appertaining to the former, and to conjoin thereto something of the
mercery and haberdashery: my uncle, that had been a sutler in the army
along with General Wolfe, who made a conquest of Quebec, having left me a
legacy of three hundred pounds because I was called after him, the which
legacy was a consideration for to set me up in due season in some genteel
business.

Accordingly, as I have narrated, when I had passed a year over my
'prenticeship with Mr Remnant, I took up the corner shop at the Cross,
facing the Tolbooth; and having had it adorned in a befitting manner,
about a month before the summer fair thereafter, I opened it on that day,
with an excellent assortment of goods, the best, both for taste and
variety, that had ever been seen in the burgh of Gudetown; and the winter
following, finding by my books that I was in a way to do so, I married my
wife: she was daughter to Mrs Broderip, who kept the head inn in Irville,
and by whose death, in the fall of the next year, we got a nest egg,
that, without a vain pretension, I may say we have not failed to lay
upon, and clock to some purpose.

Being thus settled in a shop and in life, I soon found that I had a part
to perform in the public world; but I looked warily about me before
casting my nets, and therefore I laid myself out rather to be entreated
than to ask; for I had often heard Mr Remnant observe, that the nature of
man could not abide to see a neighbour taking place and preferment of his
own accord.  I therefore assumed a coothy and obliging demeanour towards
my customers and the community in general; and sometimes even with the
very beggars I found a jocose saying as well received as a bawbee,
although naturally I dinna think I was ever what could be called a funny
man, but only just as ye would say a thought ajee in that way.  Howsever,
I soon became, both by habit and repute, a man of popularity in the town,
in so much that it was a shrewd saying of old James Alpha, the
bookseller, that "mair gude jokes were cracked ilka day in James Pawkie's
shop, than in Thomas Curl, the barber's, on a Saturday night."




