CHAPTER XXX--THE TRADES' BALL


At the conclusion of my second provostry, or rather, as I think, after it
was over, an accident happened in the town that might have led to no
little trouble and contention but for the way and manner that I managed
the same.  My friend and neighbour, Mr Kilsyth, an ettling man, who had
been wonderful prosperous in the spirit line, having been taken on for a
bailie, by virtue of some able handling on the part of Deacon Kenitweel,
proposed and propounded, that there should be a ball and supper for the
trades; and to testify his sense of the honour that he owed to all the
crafts, especially the wrights, whereof Mr Kenitweel was then deacon, he
promised to send in both wine, rum, and brandy, from his cellar, for the
company.  I did not much approve of the project, for divers reasons; the
principal of which was, because my daughters were grown into young
ladies, and I was, thank God, in a circumstance to entitle them to hold
their heads something above the trades.  However, I could not positively
refuse my compliance, especially as Mrs Pawkie was requested by Bailie
Kilsyth, and those who took an active part in furtherance of the ploy, to
be the lady directress of the occasion.  And, out of an honour and homage
to myself, I was likewise entreated to preside at the head of the table,
over the supper that was to ensue after the dancing.

In its own nature, there was surely nothing of an objectionable
principle, in a "trades' ball;" but we had several young men of the
gentle sort about the town, blythe and rattling lads, who were welcome
both to high and low, and to whom the project seemed worthy of a
ridicule.  It would, as I said at the time, have been just as well to
have made it really a trades' ball, without any adulteration of the
gentry; but the hempies alluded to jouked themselves in upon us, and
obligated the managers to invite them; and an ill return they made for
this discretion and civility, as I have to relate.

On the nightset for the occasion, the company met in the assembly-room,
in the New-inns, where we had bespoke a light genteel supper, and had
M'Lachlan, the fiddler, over from Ayr, for the purpose.  Nothing could be
better while the dancing lasted; the whole concern wore an appearance of
the greatest genteelity.  But when supper was announced, and the company
adjourned to partake of it, judge of the universal consternation that was
visible in every countenance, when, instead of the light tarts, and nice
jellies and sillybobs that were expected, we beheld a long table, with a
row down the middle of rounds of beef, large cold veal-pies on pewter
plates like tea-trays, cold boiled turkeys, and beef and bacon hams, and,
for ornament in the middle, a perfect stack of celery.

The instant I entered the supper-room, I saw there had been a plot: poor
Bailie Kilsyth, who had all the night been in triumph and glory, was for
a season speechless; and when at last he came to himself, he was like to
have been the death of the landlord on the spot; while I could remark,
with the tail of my eye, that secret looks of a queer satisfaction were
exchanged among the beaux before mentioned.  This observe, when I made
it, led me to go up to the bailie as he was storming at the bribed and
corrupt innkeeper, and to say to him, that if he would leave the matter
to me, I would settle it to the content of all present; which he,
slackening the grip he had taken of the landlord by the throat, instantly
conceded.  Whereupon, I went back to the head of the table, and said
aloud, "that the cold collection had been provided by some secret
friends, and although it was not just what the directors could have
wished, yet it would be as well to bring to mind the old proverb, which
instructs us no to be particular about the mouth of a gi'en horse."  But
I added, "before partaking thereof, wel'll hae in our bill frae the
landlord, and settle it,"--and it was called accordingly.  I could
discern, that this was a turn that the conspirators did not look for.  It,
however, put the company a thought into spirits, and they made the best
o't.  But, while they were busy at the table, I took a canny opportunity
of saying, under the rose to one of the gentlemen, "that I saw through
the joke, and could relish it just as well as the plotters; but as the
thing was so plainly felt as an insult by the generality of the company,
the less that was said about it the better; and that if the whole bill,
including the cost of Bailie Kilsyth's wine and spirits, was defrayed, I
would make no enquiries, and the authors might never be known."  This
admonishment was not lost, for by-and-by, I saw the gentleman confabbing
together; and the next morning, through the post, I received a twenty-
pound note in a nameless letter, requesting the amount of it to be placed
against the expense of the ball.  I was overly well satisfied with this
to say a great deal of what I thought, but I took a quiet step to the
bank, where, expressing some doubt of the goodness of the note, I was
informed it was perfectly good, and had been that very day issued from
the bank to one of the gentlemen, whom, even at this day, it would not be
prudent to expose to danger by naming.

Upon a consultation with the other gentlemen, who had the management of
the ball, it was agreed, that we should say nothing of the gift of twenty
pounds, but distribute it in the winter to needful families, which was
done; for we feared that the authors of the derision would be found out,
and that ill-blood might be bred in the town.




CHAPTER XXXI--THE BAILIE'S HEAD


But although in the main I was considered by the events and transactions
already rehearsed, a prudent and sagacious man, yet I was not free from
the consequences of envy.  To be sure, they were not manifested in any
very intolerant spirit, and in so far they caused me rather molestation
of mind than actual suffering; but still they kithed in evil, and thereby
marred the full satisfactory fruition of my labours and devices.  Among
other of the outbreakings alluded to that not a little vexed me, was one
that I will relate, and just in order here to show the animus of men's
minds towards me.

We had in the town a clever lad, with a geni of a mechanical turn, who
made punch-bowls of leather, and legs for cripples of the same commodity,
that were lighter and easier to wear than either legs of cork or timber.
His name was Geordie Sooplejoint, a modest, douce, and well-behaved young
man--caring for little else but the perfecting of his art.  I had heard
of his talent, and was curious to converse with him; so I spoke to Bailie
Pirlet, who had taken him by the hand, to bring him and his leather punch-
bowl, and some of his curious legs and arms, to let me see them; the
which the bailie did, and it happened that while they were with me, in
came Mr Thomas M'Queerie, a dry neighbour at a joke.

After some generality of discourse concerning the inventions, whereon
Bailie Pirlet, who was naturally a gabby prick-me-dainty body, enlarged
at great length, with all his well dockit words, as if they were on
chandler's pins, pointing out here the utility of the legs to persons
maimed in the wars of their country, and showing forth there in what
manner the punch-bowls were specimens of a new art that might in time
supplant both China and Staffordshire ware, and deducing therefrom the
benefits that would come out of it to the country at large, and
especially to the landed interest, in so much as the increased demand
which it would cause for leather, would raise the value of hides, and per
consequence the price of black cattle--to all which Mr M'Queerie listened
with a shrewd and a thirsty ear; and when the bailie had made an end of
his paternoster, he proposed that I should make a filling of Geordie's
bowl, to try if it did not leak.

"Indeed, Mr Pawkie," quo' he, "it will be a great credit to our town to
hae had the merit o' producing sic a clever lad, who, as the bailie has
in a manner demonstrated, is ordained to bring about an augmentation o'
trade by his punch-bowls, little short of what has been done wi' the
steam-engines.  Geordie will be to us what James Watt is to the ettling
town of Greenook, so we can do no less than drink prosperity to his
endeavours."

I did not much like this bantering of Mr M'Queerie, for I saw it made
Geordie's face grow red, and it was not what he had deserved; so to
repress it, and to encourage the poor lad, I said, "Come, come,
neighbour, none of your wipes--what Geordie has done, is but arles of
what he may do."

"That's no to be debated," replied Mr M'Queerie, "for he has shown
already that he can make very good legs and arms; and I'm sure I shouldna
be surprised were he in time to make heads as good as a bailie's."

I never saw any mortal man look as that pernickity personage, the bailie,
did at this joke, but I suppressed my own feelings; while the bailie,
like a bantam cock in a passion, stotted out of his chair with the spunk
of a birslet pea, demanding of Mr M'Queerie an explanation of what he
meant by the insinuation.  It was with great difficulty that I got him
pacified; but unfortunately the joke was oure good to be forgotten, and
when it was afterwards spread abroad, as it happened to take its birth in
my house, it was laid to my charge, and many a time was I obligated to
tell all about it, and how it couldna be meant for me, but had been
incurred by Bailie Pirlet's conceit of spinning out long perjink
speeches.




