CHAPTER XIV--THE SECOND PROVOSTRY


I have had occasion to observe in the course of my experience, that there
is not a greater mollifier of the temper and nature of man than a
constant flowing in of success and prosperity.  From the time that I had
been dean of guild, I was sensible of a considerable increase of my
worldly means and substance; and although Bailie M'Lucre played me a
soople trick at the election, by the inordinate sale and roup of his
potatoe-rig, the which tried me, as I do confess, and nettled me with
disappointment; yet things, in other respects, went so well with me that,
about the eighty-eight, I began to put forth my hand again into public
affairs, endowed both with more vigour and activity than it was in the
first period of my magisterial functions.  Indeed, it may be here proper
for me to narrate, that my retiring into the background during the last
two or three years, was a thing, as I have said, done on mature
deliberation; partly, in order that the weight of my talents might be
rightly estimated; and partly, that men might, of their own reflections,
come to a proper understanding concerning them.  I did not secede from
the council.  Could I have done that with propriety, I would assuredly
not have scrupled to make the sacrifice; but I knew well that, if I was
to resign, it would not be easy afterwards to get myself again chosen in.
In a word, I was persuaded that I had, at times, carried things a little
too highly, and that I had the adversary of a rebellious feeling in the
minds and hearts of the corporation against me.  However, what I did,
answered the end and purpose I had in view; folk began to wonder and
think with themselves, what for Mr Pawkie had ceased to bestir himself in
public affairs; and the magistrates and council having, on two or three
occasions, done very unsatisfactory things, it was said by one, and
echoed by another, till the whole town was persuaded of the fact, that,
had I lent my shoulder to the wheel, things would not have been as they
were.  But the matter which did the most service to me at this time, was
a rank piece of idolatry towards my lord, on the part of Bailie M'Lucre,
who had again got himself most sickerly installed in the guildry.  Sundry
tacks came to an end in this year of eighty-eight; and among others, the
Niggerbrae park, which, lying at a commodious distance from the town,
might have been relet with a rise and advantage.  But what did the dean
of guild do?  He, in some secret and clandestine manner, gave a hint to
my lord's factor to make an offer for the park on a two nineteen years'
lease, at the rent then going--the which was done in my lord's name, his
lordship being then provost.  The Niggerbrae was accordingly let to him,
at the same rent which the town received for it in the sixty-nine.
Nothing could be more manifest than that there was some jookerie cookerie
in this affair; but in what manner it was done, or how the dean of
guild's benefit was to ensue, no one could tell, and few were able to
conjecture; for my lord was sorely straitened for money, and had nothing
to spare out of hand.  However, towards the end of the year, a light
broke in upon us.

Gabriel M'Lucre, the dean of guild's fifth son, a fine spirited laddie,
somehow got suddenly a cadetcy to go to India; and there were
uncharitably-minded persons, who said, that this was the payment for the
Niggerbrae job to my lord.  The outcry, in consequence, both against the
dean of guild, and especially against the magistrates and council for
consenting thereto, was so extraordinary, and I was so openly upbraided
for being so long lukewarm, that I was, in a manner, forced again forward
to take a prominent part; but I took good care to let it be well known,
that, in resuming my public faculties, I was resolved to take my own way,
and to introduce a new method and reformation into all our concerns.
Accordingly, at the Michaelmas following, that is, in the eighty-nine, I
was a second time chosen to the provostry, with an understanding, that I
was to be upheld in the office and dignity for two years; and that sundry
improvements, which I thought the town was susceptible of, both in the
causey of the streets and the reparation of the kirk, should be set about
under my direction; but the way in which I handled the same, and brought
them to a satisfactory completeness and perfection, will supply abundant
matter for two chapters.




CHAPTER XV--ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE STREETS


In ancient times, Gudetown had been fortified with ports and gates at the
end of the streets; and in troublesome occasions, the country people, as
the traditions relate, were in the practice of driving in their families
and cattle for shelter.  This gave occasion to that great width in our
streets, and those of other royal burghs, which is so remarkable; the
same being so built to give room and stance for the cattle.  But in those
days the streets were not paved at the sides, but only in the middle, or,
as it was called, the crown of the causey; which was raised and backed
upward, to let the rain-water run off into the gutters.  In progress of
time, however, as the land and kingdom gradually settled down into an
orderly state, the farmers and country folk having no cause to drive in
their herds and flocks, as in the primitive ages of a rampageous
antiquity, the proprietors of houses in the town, at their own cost,
began, one after another, to pave the spaces of ground between their
steadings and the crown of the causey; the which spaces were called
lones, and the lones being considered as private property, the
corporation had only regard to the middle portion of the street--that
which I have said was named the crown of the causey.

The effect of this separation of interests in a common good began to
manifest itself, when the pavement of the crown of the causey, by
neglect, became rough and dangerous to loaded carts and gentlemen's
carriages passing through the town; in so much that, for some time prior
to my second provostry, the carts and carriages made no hesitation of
going over the lones, instead of keeping the highway in the middle of the
street; at which many of the burgesses made loud and just complaints.

One dark night, the very first Sunday after my restoration to the
provostry, there was like to have happened a very sore thing by an old
woman, one Peggy Waife, who had been out with her gown-tail over her head
for a choppin of strong ale.  As she was coming home, with her ale in a
greybeard in her hand, a chaise in full bir came upon her and knocked her
down, and broke the greybeard and spilt the liquor.  The cry was
terrible; some thought poor Peggy was killed outright, and wives, with
candles in their hands, started out at the doors and windows.  Peggy,
however, was more terrified than damaged; but the gentry that were in the
chaise, being termagant English travellers, swore like dragoons that the
streets should be indicted as a nuisance; and when they put up at the
inns, two of them came to me, as provost, to remonstrate on the shameful
condition of the pavement, and to lodge in my hands the sum of ten pounds
for the behoof of Peggy; the which was greater riches than ever the poor
creature thought to attain in this world.  Seeing they were gentlemen of
a right quality, I did what I could to pacify them, by joining in every
thing they said in condemnation of the streets; telling them, at the same
time, that the improvement of the causey was to be the very first object
and care of my provostry.  And I bade Mrs Pawkie bring in the wine
decanters, and requested them to sit down with me and take a glass of
wine and a sugar biscuit; the civility of which, on my part, soon brought
them into a peaceable way of thinking, and they went away, highly
commanding my politess and hospitality, of which they spoke in the
warmest terms, to their companion when they returned to the inns, as the
waiter who attended them overheard, and told the landlord, who informed
me and others of the same in the morning.  So that on the Saturday
following, when the town-council met, there was no difficulty in getting
a minute entered at the sederunt, that the crown of the causey should be
forthwith put in a state of reparation.

Having thus gotten the thing determined upon, I then proposed that we
should have the work done by contract, and that notice should be given
publicly of such being our intent.  Some boggling was made to this
proposal, it never having been the use and wont of the corporation, in
time past, to do any thing by contract, but just to put whatever was
required into the hands of one of the council, who got the work done in
the best way he could; by which loose manner of administration great
abuses were often allowed to pass unreproved.  But I persisted in my
resolution to have the causey renewed by contract; and all the
inhabitants of the town gave me credit for introducing such a great
reformation into the management of public affairs.

When it was made known that we would receive offers to contract, divers
persons came forward; and I was a little at a loss, when I saw such
competition, as to which ought to be preferred.  At last, I bethought me,
to send for the different competitors, and converse with them on the
subject quietly; and I found in Thomas Shovel, the tacksman of Whinstone-
quarry, a discreet and considerate man.  His offer was, it is true, not
so low as some of the others; but he had facilities to do the work
quickly, that none of the rest could pretend to; so, upon a clear
understanding of that, with the help of the dean of guild M'Lucre's
advocacy, Thomas Shovel got the contract.  At first, I could not divine
what interest my old friend, the dean of guild, had to be so earnest in
behalf of the offering contractor; in course of time, however, it spunkit
out that he was a sleeping partner in the business, by which he made a
power of profit.  But saving two three carts of stones to big a dyke
round the new steading which I had bought a short time before at the town-
end, I had no benefit whatever.  Indeed, I may take it upon me to say,
that should not say it, few provosts, in so great a concern, could have
acted more on a principle than I did in this; and if Thomas Shovel, of
his free-will, did, at the instigation of the dean of guild, lay down the
stones on my ground as aforesaid, the town was not wronged; for, no
doubt, he paid me the compliment at some expense of his own profit.




