III

QUESTION OF THE CORRELATION OF METAPHYSICS WITH THE SCIENCES


We have reached two conclusions that are vital here: (1) that the
metaphysical way of looking at the world involves a transformation of
the world of physical science; (2) that it is the same world that lies
open to both science and metaphysics. Out of this arises the problem of
the _correlation_ of the two views; the two interpretations of the
world. If science be right in conceiving the world under such categories
as quantity and natural causation; if science be right in seeking a
mechanical explanation of phenomena (that is, one that excludes
prevision, purpose, and aim); and if metaphysics be right in refusing to
accept this explanation as final and in insisting that the principle of
ultimate interpretation is teleological, that it falls under the
categories of prevision, purpose, and aim; then it is clear that the
problem of correlation is on our hands. In dealing with this problem, it
will be convenient to separate it into two questions: (1) that of the
fact; (2) that of its rationale. The fact of the correlation is a thing
of common experience. We have but to consider the way in which this
Congress of Science has been brought about in order to have an
exhibition of the method of correlation. Originating first in the sphere
of thought and purpose, the design has been actualized through the
operation of mechanical agencies which it has somehow contributed to
liberate. On the scale of individual experience we have the classic
instance of the arm moving through space in obedience to a hidden will.
There can be no question as to the fact and the great difficulty of
metaphysics does not arise in the task of generalizing the fact and
conceiving the world as a system of thought-purposes working out into
forms of the actual through mechanical agencies. This generalization
somehow lies at the foundation of all metaphysical faith, and, this
being the case, the real task here, aside from the profounder question
of the _rationale_, is that of exhibiting the actual points of
correlation; those points in the various stages of the sciences from
physics to ethics and religion, at which the last category or result of
science is found to hold as its immediate implication some first term of
the more ultimate construction of metaphysics. The working out of this
task is of the utmost importance, inasmuch as it makes clear to both the
man of science and the metaphysician the intrinsic necessity of the
correlation. It is a task analogous to the Kantian deduction of the
categories.


IV

QUESTIONS OF THE ULTIMATE NATURE OF REALITY


We come, then, to the question of the rationale of this correlation, and
it is clear here that we are dealing with a phase of the problem of the
ultimate nature of reality. For the question of the correlation now is
how it is possible that our thoughts should affect things so that they
move in response; how mind influences body or the reverse, how, when we
will, the arm moves through space. And without going into details of
discussion here, let us say at once, that whatever the situation may be
for any science,--and it may be that some form of _dualism_ is a
necessary presupposition of science,--for metaphysics it is clear that
no dualism of substances or orders can be regarded as final. The life of
metaphysics depends on finding the one for the many; the one that when
found will also ground the many. If, then, the phenomenon of _mind and
body_ presents the appearance of a correspondence of two different and,
so far as can be determined, mutually exclusive agencies, the problem of
metaphysics is the reduction of these agencies to one species. Here we
come upon the issue between materialism and immaterialism. But inasmuch
as the notion of metaphysics itself seems to exclude materialism, the
vital alternative is that of immaterialism. Again, if psycho-physics
presents as its basal category a _parallelism_ between two orders of
phenomena, psychic and physical, it is the business of metaphysics to
seek the explanation of this dualism in some more ultimate and unitary
conception. Now, since the very notion of metaphysics again excludes the
physical alternative from the category of finality, we are left with the
psychic term as the one that, by virtue of the fact that it embodies a
form of _conscious_ activity, promises to be most fruitful for
metaphysics. From one point of view, then, we have reduced our world to
immaterialism; from another, to some form or analogue of the psychic.
Now it is not necessary here to carry the inquiry further in this
direction. For what metaphysics is interested in, specially, is the fact
that the world must be reduced to one kind of being and one type of
agency. If this be done, it is clear that the dualism of _body and mind_
and the _parallel orders_ of psycho-physics cannot be regarded as final,
but must take their places as phenomena that are relative and reducible
to a more fundamental unity. The metaphysician will say that the arm
moves through space in response to the will, and that everywhere the
correlation between mechanical and teleological agency takes place
because in the last analysis _there is only one type of agency_; an
agency that finds its initiative in interest, thought, purpose, design,
and thus works out its results in the fields of space and mechanical
activities.

Furthermore, on the question to which these considerations lead up; that
of the ultimate interpretation we are to put on the reality of the
world, the issue is not so indeterminate as it might seem from some
points of view. Taking it that the very notion of metaphysics excludes
the material and the physical as ultimate types of the real, we are left
with the notions of the immaterial and the psychic; and while the former
is indefinite, it is a fact that in the psychic and especially in the
form of it which man realizes in his own experience, he finds an
intelligible type and the only one that is available to him for the
definition of the immaterial. He has his choice, then, either to regard
the world as _absolutely opaque_, showing nothing but its phenomenal
dress which ceases to have any meaning; or to apply to the world's inner
nature the intelligible types and analogies of his own form of being.
That this is the alternative that is embodied in the existence of
metaphysics is clearly demonstrated by the fact that the metaphysical
interpretation embodies itself in the categories of _reason_, _design_,
_purpose_, and _aim_. Whatever difficulties we may encounter, then, in
the _use_ and application of the _psychic analogy_ in determining the
nature of the real, it is clear that its employment is inevitable and
indispensable. Let us, then, employ the term _rational_ to that
characterization of the nature of things which to metaphysics is thus
inevitable and indispensable. The world must in the last analysis be
_rational_ in its constitution, and its agencies and forms of being must
be construed as _rational_ in their type.

And here we come upon the last question in this field, that of the
_ultimate being of the world_. We have already concluded that the _real_
is in the last analysis rational. But we have not answered the question
whether there shall be one rational or many. Now it has become clear
that with metaphysics _unity_ is a cardinal interest; that, therefore,
the world must be _one_ in _thought_, _purpose_, _aim_. And it is on
this insight that the metaphysical doctrine of the _absolute_ rests.
There must be _one_ being whose thought and purpose are all-inclusive,
in order that the world may be one and that it may have meaning as a
whole. But the world presents itself as a plurality of finite
_existents_ which our metaphysics requires us to reduce in the last
analysis to the psychic type. What of this plurality of psychic
existents? It is on this basis that metaphysics constructs its doctrine
of _individuality_. Allowing for latitude of opinion here, the trend of
metaphysical reflection sets strongly toward a doctrine of reality that
grounds the world in an Absolute whose all-comprehending thought and
purpose utters or realizes itself in the plurality of finite individuals
that constitutes the world; the degree of reality that shall be ascribed
to the plurality of individuals being a point in debate, giving rise to
the contemporary form of the issue between idealism and realism.
Allowing for minor differences, however, there is among metaphysicians a
fair degree of assent to the doctrine that in order to be completely
rational the world of individual plurality must be regarded as implying
an _Absolute_, which, whether it is to be conceived as an individual or
not, is the author and bearer of the thought and design of the world as
a whole.


