I

THE PRELIMINARY QUESTION


The living problems of any science arise out of two sources: (1) out of
what men may think of it, in view of its nature and claims, and (2) the
problems that at any period are vital to it, and in the solution of
which it realizes the purpose of its existence. Now if we distinguish
the body of the sciences which deal with aspects of the world's
phenomena--and here I would include both the psychic and the
physical--from metaphysics, which professes to go behind the phenomenon
and determine the world in terms of its inner, and, therefore,
_ultimate_ reality, it may be truly said of the body of the sciences
that they are in a position to disregard in a great measure questions
that arise out of the first source, inasmuch as the data from which they
make their departure are obvious to common observation. Our world is all
around us, and its phenomena either press upon us or are patent to our
observation. Lying thus within the field of observation, it does not
occur to the average mind to question either the legitimacy or the
possibility of that effort of reflection which is devoted to their
investigation and interpretation. Metaphysics, however, enjoys no such
immunity as this, but its claims are liable to be met with skepticism or
denial at the outset, and this is due partly to the nature of its
initial claims, and partly to the fact that its real data are less open
to observation than are those of the sciences. I say partly to the
nature of the initial claims of metaphysics, for it is characteristic of
metaphysics that it refuses to regard the distinction between phenomena
and ground or inner nature, on which the sciences rest, as final, and is
committed from the outset to the claim that the real is in its inner
nature one and to be interpreted in the light of, or in terms of, its
inner unity; whereas, science has so indoctrinated the modern mind with
the supposition that only the outer movements of things are open to
knowledge, while their inner and real nature must forever remain
inaccessible to our powers; I say that the modern mind has been so
imbued with this pretension as to have almost completely forgotten the
fact that the distinction of phenomenon and ground is one of science's
own making. Neither the plain man nor the cultured man, if he happens
not to be tinctured with science, finds his world a duality. The things
he deals with are the realities, and it is only when his naïve realism
begins to break down before the complex demands of his growing life,
that the thought occurs to him that his world may be more complex than
he has dreamed. It is clear, then, that the distinction of our world
into phenomena and ground, on which science so largely rests, is a first
product of reflection, and not a fact of observation at all.

If this be the case, it may be possible and even necessary for
reflection at some stage to transcend this distinction. At least, there
can be no reason except an arbitrary one for taking this first step of
reflection to be a finality. And there would be the same justification
for a second step that would transcend this dualism, as for the initial
step out of which the distinction arose; provided, it should be found
that the initial distinction does not supply an adequate basis for a
rational interpretation of the world that can be taken as final. Now, it
is precisely because the dualistic distinction of the sciences does fail
in this regard, that a further demand for a reflective transformation of
the data arises. Let us bear in mind that the data of the sciences are
not the simple facts of observation, but rather those facts transformed
by an act of reflection by virtue of which they become phenomena
distinguished from a more fundamental nature on which they depend and
which itself is not open to observation. The real data of science are
found only when the world of observation has been thus transformed by an
act of reflection. If then at some stage in our effort to interpret our
world it should become clear that the sciences of phenomena, whatever
value their results may possess, are not giving us an interpretation in
terms that can be taken as final, and that in order to ground such an
interpretation a further transformation of our data becomes necessary, I
do not see why any of the sciences should feel that they have cause to
demur. In truth, it is out of just such a situation as this that the
metaphysical interpretation arises (as I propose very briefly here to
show), a situation that supplies a genuine demand in the light of which
the effort of metaphysics to understand its world seems to possess as
high a claim to legitimacy as that of the sciences of phenomena. Let us
take our stand with the plain man or the child, within the world of
unmodified observation. The things of observation, in this world, are
the realities, and at first we may suppose have undergone little
reflective transformation. The first reflective effort to change this
world in any way will, no doubt, be an effort to _number_ or _count_ the
things that present themselves to observation, and out of this effort
will arise the transformation of the world that results from considering
it under the concepts and categories of number. In short, to
mathematical reflection of this simple sort, the things of observation
will resolve themselves into a plurality of countable things, which the
numbering reflection becoming explicit in its ordinal and cardinal
moments will translate into a system that will be regarded as a whole
made up of the sum of its parts. The very first step, then, in the
reflective transformation of things resolves them into a dual system,
the world conceived as a cardinal whole that is made up of its ordinal
parts, and exactly equal to them. This mathematical conception is
moreover purely quantitative; involving the exact and stable equivalence
of its parts or units and that of the sum of the parts with the whole.
Now it is with this purely quantitative transformation that mathematics
and the mathematical sciences begin. We may ask, then, why should there
be any other than mathematical science,[1] and what ground can
non-mathematical science point to as substantiating its claims? I
confess I can see no other final reason than this, that mathematical
science does not meet the whole demand we feel obliged to make on our
world. If mathematics were asked to vindicate itself, it no doubt would
do so by claiming that things present quantitative aspects on which it
founds its procedure. In like manner non-mathematical, or, as we may
call it, physical or natural science, will seek to substantiate its
claims by pointing to certain ultra-quantitative or qualitative aspects
of things. It is true that, so far as things are merely _numerable_,
they are purely quantitative; but mathematics abstracts from the content
and character of its units and aggregates, which may and do change, so
that a relation of stable equivalence is not maintained among them. In
fact, the basis of these sciences is found in the tendency of things to
be always changing and becoming different from what they were before.
The problem of these sciences is how to ground a rational scheme of
knowledge in connection with a fickle world like that of qualitative
change. It is here that reflection finds its problem, and noticing that
the tendency of this world of change is for _a_ to pass into _b_ and
thus to lose its own identity, the act of reflection that rationalizes
the situation is one that connects _a_ and _b_ by relating them to a
common ground _x_ of which they stand as successive manifestations or
symbols. _X_ thus supplies the thread of identity that binds the two
changes _a_ and _b_ into a relation to which the name causation may be
applied. And just as quantitative equivalence is the principle of
relationship among the parts of the simple mathematical world, so here
in the world of the dynamic or natural sciences, the principle of
relation is natural causation.[2] We find, then, that the
non-mathematical sciences rest on a basis that is constituted by a
_second act of reflection_; one that translates our world into a system
of phenomena causally inter-related and connected with their underlying
grounds.

     [Footnote 1: I do not raise the question of qualitative
     mathematics at all. It is clear that the first mathematical
     reflection will be quantitative.]

     [Footnote 2: By natural causation I mean such a relationship
     between _a_ and _b_ in a phenomenal system as enables _a_
     through its connection with its ground to determine _b_.]

We have now reached a point where it will be possible in a few sentences
to indicate the rise of the metaphysical reflection and the ground on
which it rests. If we consider both the mathematical and the physical
ways of looking at things, we will find that they possess this feature
in common,--they are purely external, having nothing to say respecting
the _inner_ and, therefore, _real_ nature of the things with which they
deal. Or, if we concede the latest claims of some of the physical
speculators and agree that the aim of physics is an ultimate physical
explanation of reality, it will still be true that the whole standpoint
of this explanation will be external. Let me explain briefly what I mean
substantially by the term _external_ as I use it here. Every
interpretation of a world is a function of some knowing consciousness,
and consequently of some knowing self. This is too obvious to need
proof. A system will be _external_ to such a knower just to the extent
that the knower finds it dominated and determined by categories that are
different from those of its own determination. A world physically
interpreted is one that is brought completely under the rubrics of
physics and mathematics; whose movements yield themselves completely,
therefore, to a mechanical calculus that gives rise to purely
descriptive formulæ; _or_ to the control of a dynamic principle; that of
natural causation, by virtue of which everything is determined without
thought of its own, by the impulse of another, which impulse itself is
not directly traceable to any thought or purpose. Now, the occasion for
the metaphysical reflection arises when this situation that brings us
face to face, with, nay, makes us part and parcel of, an alien system of
things, becomes intolerable, and the knower begins to demand a closer
kinship with his world. The knower finds the categories of his own
central and characteristic activity in experience. Here he is conscious
of being an agent going out in forms of activity for the realization of
his world. The determining categories of the activity he is most fully
conscious of, are interest, idea, prevision, purpose, and that selective
activity which goes to its termination in some achieved end. The
metaphysical interpretation arises out of the demand that the world
shall be brought into bonds of kinship with the knower. And this is
effected by generalizing the categories of consciousness and applying
them as principles of interpretation to the world. The act of reflection
on which the metaphysical interpretation proceeds is one, then, in which
the world of science is further transformed by bringing the inner nature
of things out of its isolation and translating the world-movements into
process the terms of which are no longer _phenomena and hidden ground_,
but rather inception and realization, or, more specifically, _Idea_ and
_Reality_. And the point to be noted here is the fact that these
metaphysical categories are led up to positivity by an act of reflection
that has for its guiding aim an interpretation of the world that will be
more ultimately satisfactory to the knower than that of the physical or
natural sciences; while negatively, it is led up to by the refusal of
the knowing consciousness to rest in a world alien to its own nature and
in which it is subordinated to the physical and made a mere
epiphenomenon.


