III

THE RESULTS OF THE CONGRESS


The programme of the Congress, as outlined in the previous pages, was in
this case somewhat more than a mere programme. It not only invited to do
a piece of work, but it sought to contribute to the work itself. Yet the
chief work had to be done by others, and their part needed careful
preparation. Yet very little of the preparation showed itself to the
eyes of the larger public, and few were fully aware what a complex
organization was growing up and how many persons of mark were
coöperating.

It was essential to find for every address the best man. Specialists
only could suggest to the committees where to find him. It has been told
before how our invitations were brought to the foreigners first till the
desired number of foreign participants was secured, and how the
Americans followed. As could not be otherwise expected, interferences of
all kinds disturbed the ideal configuration of the first list of
acceptances; substitutes had sometimes to be relied on; and yet, when on
the nineteenth of September President Francis welcomed the Congress of
Arts and Science in the gigantic Festival Hall of the St. Louis
Exposition, the Committee knew that almost four hundred speakers had
completed their manuscripts, and that it was a galaxy which far
surpassed in importance that of any previous international congress. And
the list of those who stood for the success of the work was not confined
to the official speakers. Each Department and each Section had its own
honorary President, who was also chosen by the consent of leading
specialists and whose introductory remarks were to give additional
importance to the gathering. At their side stood the hundred and thirty
Secretaries, carefully chosen from among the productive scholars of the
younger generation. And a large number of informal, yet officially
invited contributors, had announced valuable discussions and addresses
for almost every Section. Invitations to membership finally had been
sent to the universities and scholarly societies of all countries.

That the turmoil of a world's fair is out of harmony with the scholar's
longing for repose and quietude is a natural presupposition, which has
not been disproved by the experience of St. Louis. When Professor
Newcomb, our President, spoke to the opening assembly on the dignity of
scholarship, the scholar's peaceful address was accentuated by the
thunder of the cannons with which Boer and British forces were playing
at war near by. The roaring of the Pike overpowered many a quiet
session, and the patient speaker had not seldom to fight heroically with
a brass band on the next lawn. The trains were delayed, trunks were
mixed up, and the sultry St. Louis weather stirred much secret longing
for the seashore and the mountains, which most had to leave too early
for that pilgrimage to the Mississippi Valley. Yet all this could have
been easily foreseen, and every one knew that all this would soon be
forgotten. These slight discomforts were many times made up for by the
overwhelming beauty of that ivory city in which the civilization of the
world was focused by the united energy of the nations, and it seemed
well worth while to cross the ocean for the delight of that enchantment
which came with every evening's myriad illumination. And every day
brought interesting festivities. No one will forget the receptions of
the foreign commissioners, or the charming hospitality of the leading
citizens of St. Louis, or the enthusiastic banquet which brought one
thousand speakers and presidents and official members of the Congress
together as guests of the master mind of the Exposition, President
Francis.

While the discomfort of external shortcomings was thus easily balanced,
it is more doubtful whether the internal shortcomings of the work can be
considered as fully compensated for. It would be impossible to overlook
these defects in the realization of our plans, even if it may be
acknowledged that they were unavoidable under the given conditions. The
principal difficulty has been that many speakers have not really treated
the topic for the discussion of which they were invited. This deviation
from the plan took various forms. There was in some cases a fundamental
attitude taken which did not harmonize with those logical principles
which had led to the classification; for instance, we had sharply
separated, for reasons fully stated above, the Division of History from
the Division of Mental Sciences, including sociology; yet some papers
for the Division of History clearly indicated sympathy with the
traditional positivistic view, according to which history becomes simply
a part of sociology. And similar variations of the general plan occur in
almost every division. But there cannot be any objection to this
secondary variety as long as the whole framework gives the primary
uniformity. Certainly no one of the contributors is to be blamed for it;
no one was pledged to the philosophy of the general plan, and probably
few would have agreed if any one had had the idea of demanding from
every contributor an identical background of general convictions. Such
monotony would have been even harmful, as the work would have become
inexpressive of the richness of tendencies in the scholarly life of our
time. This was not an occasion where educated clerks were to work up in
a secondhand way a report whose general trend was determined beforehand;
the work demanded original thinkers, with whom every word grows out of a
rich individual view of the totality. If every paper had been meant
merely as a detailed amplification of the logical principles on which
the whole plan was based, it would have been wiser to set young Doctor
candidates to work, who might have elaborated the hint of the general
scheme. To invite the leaders of knowledge meant to give them complete
freedom and to confine the demands of the plan to a most general
direction.

The same freedom, which every one was to have as to the general
standpoint, was intended also for all with regard to the arrangement and
limitation of the topic. All the sectional addresses were supposed to
deal either with relations or with fundamental problems of to-day. It
would have been absurd to demand that in every case the totality of
relations or of problems should be covered or even touched. The result
would have become perfunctory and insignificant. No one intended to
produce a cyclopedia. It was essential everywhere to select that which
was most characteristic of the tendencies of the age and most promising
for the science of the twentieth century. Those problems were to be
emphasized whose solution is most demanded for the immediate progress of
knowledge, and those relations had to be selected through which new
connections, new synthetic thoughts prepare themselves to-day. That this
selection had to be left to the speaker was a matter of course.

Yet it may be said that in all these directions, with reference to the
general standpoint and with reference to problems and relations, the
Organizing Committee had somewhat prepared the choice through the
selection of the speakers themselves. As the standpoints of the leading
speakers were well known, it was not difficult to invite as far as
possible for every place a scholar whose general views would be least
out of harmony with the principles of the plan. For instance, when we
had the task before us of selecting the divisional speakers for the
Normative and for the Mental Sciences, it was only natural to invite for
the first a philosopher of idealistic type and for the latter a
philosopher of positivistic stamp, inasmuch as the whole scheme gave to
the mental sciences the same place which they would have had in a
positivistic scheme, while the normative sciences would have lost the
meaning which they had in our plan if a positivist had simply
psychologized them. In the same way we gave preference as far as
possible, for the addresses on relations, to those scholars whose
previous work was concerned with new synthetic movements, and as
speakers on problems those were invited who were in any case engaged in
the solution of those problems which seemed central in the present state
of science. Thus it was that on the whole the expectation was justified
that the most characteristic relations and the most characteristic
problems would be selected if every invited speaker spoke essentially on
those relations and on those problems with which his own special work
was engaged.

Yet there is no doubt that this expectation was sometimes fulfilled
beyond our anticipation, in an amount of specialization which was no
longer entirely in harmony with the general character of the
undertaking. The general problem has become sometimes only the
starting-point or almost the pretext for speaking on some relation or
problem so detailed that it can hardly stand as a representative symbol
of the whole movement in that sectional field. Especially in the
practical sciences more room was sometimes taken for particular hobbies
and chance aspects than in the eyes of the originators the occasion may
have called for. Yet on the whole this was the exception. The
overwhelming majority of the addresses fulfilled nobly the high hopes of
the Boards, and even in those exceptional cases where the speaker went
his own way, it was usually such an original and stimulating expression
of a strong personality that no one would care to miss this tone in the
symphony of science.

Even now of course, though the Congress days have passed, and only
typewritten manuscripts are left from all those September meetings, it
would be easy to provide, by editorial efforts, for a greater uniformity
and a smoother harmonization. Most of the authors would have been quite
willing to retouch their addresses in the interest of greater objective
uniformity and to accept the hint of an editorial committee in
elaborating more fully some points and in condensing or eliminating
others. Much was written in the desire to bring a certain thought for
discussion before such an eminent audience, while the speaker would be
ready to substitute other features of the subject for the permanent form
of the printed volume. Yet such editorial supervision and transformation
would be not only immodest but dangerous. We might risk gaining some
external uniformity, but only to lose much of the freshness and
immediacy and brilliancy of the first presentation. And who would dare
to play the critical judge when the international contributors are the
leaders of thought? There was therefore not the slightest effort made to
suggest revision of the manuscripts, for which the whole responsibility
must thus fall to the particular author. The reduction to a uniform
language seemed, on the other hand, most natural, and those who had
delivered their addresses in French, German, or Italian themselves
welcomed the idea that their papers should be translated into English by
competent specialists. The short bibliographies, selected mostly through
the chairman of the departments, and the very full index with references
may add to the general usefulness of the eight volumes in which the work
is to be presented.

But the significance of the Congress of Arts and Science ought not to be
measured and valued only by reference to this printed result. Its less
visible side-effects seem in no way less important for scholarship, and
they are fourfold. There was, first, the personal contact between the
scholarly public and the leaders of thought; there was, secondly, the
first academic alliance between the United States and Europe; there was,
thirdly, the first demonstration of a world congress crystallized about
one problem; there was, fourthly, the unique accentuation of the thought
of unity in all human science; and each of these four movements will be
continued and reinforced by the publication of these proceedings.

The first of these four features, the contact of the scholarly public
with the best thinkers of our time, had, to be sure, its limitations. It
was not sought to create a really popular congress. Neither the level of
the addresses, nor the size of the halls, nor the number of invitations
sent out, nor the general conditions of a world's fair at which the
expense of living is high and the distractions thousandfold, favored the
attendance of crowds. It was planned from the first that on the whole
scholars and specialists should attend and that the army should be made
up essentially of officers. If in an astronomical section perhaps thirty
men were present, among whom practically every one was among the best
known directors of observatories or professors of mathematics,
astronomy, or physics, from all countries of the globe, much more was
gained than if three thousand had been in the audience, brought together
by an interest of curiosity in moon and stars. For the most part there
must have been between a hundred and two hundred in each of the 128
sectional meetings, and that was more than the organizers expected. This
direct influence on the interested public is now to be expanded a
thousandfold by the mission work of these volumes. The concentration of
these hundreds of addresses into a few days made it in any case
impossible to listen to more than to a small fraction; these volumes
will bring at last all speakers to coördinated effectiveness; and while
one hall suffered from bad acoustics, another from bad ventilation, and
a third from the passing of the intermural trains, here at least is an
audience in which nothing will disturb the sensitive nerves of the
willing follower.

But much more emphasis is due to the second feature. The Congress was an
epoch-making event for the international world of scholarship from the
fact that it was the first great undertaking in which the Old and the
New Worlds stood on equal levels and in which Europe really became
acquainted with the scientific life of these United States. The contact
of scholarship between America and Europe has, indeed, grown in
importance through many decades. Many American students had studied in
European and especially in German universities and had come back to fill
the professorial chairs of the leading academic institutions. The spirit
of the Graduate School and the work towards the Doctor's degree, yes,
the whole productive scholarship of recent decades had been influenced
by European ideals, and the results were no longer ignored at the seats
of learning throughout the whole world. European scholars had here and
there come as visiting lecturers or as assimilated instructors, and a
few American scholars belonged to the leading European Academies. Yet,
whoever knew the real development of American post-graduate university
life, the rapid advance of genuine American scholarship, the
incomparable progress of the scientific institutions of the New World,
of their libraries and laboratories, museums and associations, was well
aware that Europe had hardly noticed and certainly not fully understood
the gigantic strides of the country which seemed a rival only on
commercial and industrial ground. Europe was satisfied with the
traditional ideas of America's scientific standing which reflected the
situation of thirty years ago, and did not understand that the changes
of a few lustres mean in the New World more than under the firmer
traditions of Europe. American scientific literature was still
neglected; American universities treated in a condescending and
patronizing spirit and with hardly any awareness of the fundamental
differences in the institutions of the two sides. Those European
scholars who crossed the ocean did it with missionary, or perhaps with
less unselfish, intentions, and the Americans who attended European
congresses were mostly treated with the friendliness which the
self-satisfied teacher shows to a promising pupil. The time had really
come when the contrast between the real situation and the traditional
construction became a danger for the scientific life of the time. Both
sides had to suffer from it. The Americans felt that their serious and
important achievements did not come to their fullest effectiveness
through the insistent neglect of those who by the tradition of centuries
had become the habitual guardians of scientific thought. A kind of
feeling of dependency as it usually develops in weak colonies too often
depressed the conscientious scholarship on American soil as the result
of this undue condescension. Yet the greater harm was to the other side.
Once before Europe had had the experience of surprise when American
successes presented themselves where nothing of that kind was
anticipated in the Old World. It was in the field of economic life that
Europe looked down patronizingly on America's industrial efforts, and
yet before she was fully aware how the change resulted, suddenly the
warning signal of the "American danger" was heard everywhere. The
surprise in the intellectual field will not be less. The unpreparedness
was certainly the same. Of course, there cannot be any danger of rivalry
in the scientific field, inasmuch as science knows no competition but
only coöperation. And yet it cannot be without danger for European
science if it willfully neglects and recklessly ignores this eager
working of the modern America. For both sides a change in the situation
was thus not only desirable, but necessary; and to prepare this change,
to substitute knowledge for ignorance, nothing could have been more
effective than this Congress of Arts and Science.

Even if we abstract from the not inconsiderable number of those European
scholars who followed naturally in the path of the invited guests, and
if we consider merely the function of these invited participants, the
importance of the procedure is evident. More than a hundred leading
scholars from all European countries came under conditions where
academic fellowship on an equal footing was a necessary part of the
work. There was not the slightest premium held out which might have
attracted them had not real inter-academic interest brought them over
the ocean, and no missionary spirit was appealed to, as everything was
equally divided between American and foreign contributors. It was a real
feast of international scholarship, in which the importance and the
number of foreigners stamped it as the first significant alliance of the
spirit of learning in the New and the Old Worlds. And it was essentially
for this purpose that the week of personal intermingling in St. Louis
itself was preceded and followed by happy weeks of visits to leading
universities. Almost every one of those one hundred European scholars
visited Harvard and Yale, Chicago and Johns Hopkins, Columbia and
Pennsylvania, saw the treasures of Washington and examined the
exhibitions of American scholarship in the World's Fair itself. The
change of opinion, the disappearance of prejudice, the growth of
confidence, the personal intercollegiate ties which resulted from all
that, have been evident since those days all over Europe. And it is not
surprising that it is just the most famous and most important of the
visitors, famous and important through their width and depth of view,
whose expression of appreciation and admiration for the new achievements
has been loudest.

We insisted that the effectiveness of the Congress showed itself in two
other directions still: on the one side, there was at last a congress
with a unified programme, a congress which stood for a definite thought,
and which brought all its efforts to bear on the solution of one
problem. There seemed a far-reaching agreement of opinion that this new
principle of congress administration had successfully withstood the test
of practical realization. Mere conglomerations of unconnected meetings
with casual programmes and unrelated papers cannot claim any longer to
represent the only possible form of international gatherings of
scholars. More than that, their superfluous and disheartening character
will be felt in future more strongly than before. No congress will
appear fully justified whose printed proceedings do not show a real plan
in its programme. And the consciousness of this mission of the Congress
will certainly be again reinforced by the publication of these volumes,
inasmuch as it is evident that they represent a substantial contribution
to the knowledge of our time which would not have been made without the
special stimulating occasion of the Congress.

And, finally, whether such a congress is held again or not, the impulse
of this one cannot be lost on account of the special end to which all
its efforts have been directed: the unity of scientific knowledge. We
had emphasized from the first that here was the centre of our purposes
in a time whose scientific specialization necessarily involves a
scattering of scholarly work and which yet in its deepest meaning
strives for a new synthesis, for a new unity, which is to give to all
this scattered labor a real dignity and significance; truly nothing was
more needed than an intense accentuation of the internal harmony of all
human knowledge. But for that it is not enough that the masses feel
instinctively the deep need of such unifying movements, nor is it enough
that the philosophers point with logical arguments towards the new
synthesis. The philosopher can only stand by and point the way; the
specialists themselves must go the way. And here at last they have done
so. Leaders of thought have interrupted their specialistic work and have
left their detailed inquiries to seek the fundamental conceptions and
methods and principles which bind all knowledge together, and thus to
work towards that unity from which all special work derives its meaning.
Whether or not their coöperation has produced anything which is final is
a question almost insignificant compared with the fundamental fact that
they coöperated at all for this ideal synthetic purpose. This fact can
never lose its influence on the scholarly effort of our age, and will
certainly find its strongest reinforcement in this unified publication.
It has fulfilled its noblest purpose if it adds strength to the deepest
movement of our time, the movement towards unity of meaning in the
scattered manifoldness of scientific endeavor with which the twentieth
century has opened.




[Illustration: _Simon Newcomb, Ph.D., LL.D._

Dr. Newcomb, the famous Astronomer, is conceded to be the Dean of
American scientists. His eminent services to the Government of the
United States, and his recognized position in foreign and domestic
scientific circles, made him peculiarly fitted to deliver the
introductory address, and to officiate as President of an International
Congress of the leading scientists of the world.

He has been the recipient of honorary degrees from six American and ten
European Universities, and he is a member of almost every important
Academy of Science in Europe and America. He is an officer of the Legion
of Honour, and is the only native American besides Benjamin Franklin who
has been elected an Associate of the Institute de France. From 1861 to
1897 he was Professor of Mathematics in the United States Navy. He also
lectured on Mathematics and Astronomy at Johns Hopkins, and is now a
Professor Emeritus in the Faculty of Arts of that university. Dr.
Newcomb is the author of numerous works on Astronomy and other
scientific subjects.]




PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONGRESS


INTRODUCTORY ADDRESS


DELIVERED AT THE OPENING EXERCISES AT FESTIVAL HALL BY PROFESSOR SIMON
NEWCOMB, PRESIDENT OF THE CONGRESS


THE EVOLUTION OF THE SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATOR


As we look at the assemblage gathered in this hall, comprising so many
names of widest renown in every branch of learning,--we might almost say
in every field of human endeavor,--the first inquiry suggested must be
after the object of our meeting. The answer is, that our purpose
corresponds to the eminence of the assemblage. We aim at nothing less
than a survey of the realm of knowledge, as comprehensive as is
permitted by the limitations of time and space. The organizers of our
Congress have honored me with the charge of presenting such preliminary
view of its field as may make clear the spirit of our undertaking.

Certain tendencies characteristic of the science of our day clearly
suggest the direction of our thoughts most appropriate to the occasion.
Among the strongest of these is one toward laying greater stress on
questions of the beginning of things, and regarding a knowledge of the
laws of development of any object of study as necessary to the
understanding of its present form. It may be conceded that the principle
here involved is as applicable in the broad field before us as in a
special research into the properties of the minutest organism. It
therefore seems meet that we should begin by inquiring what agency has
brought about the remarkable development of science to which the world
of to-day bears witness. This view is recognized in the plan of our
proceedings, by providing for each great department of knowledge a
review of its progress during the century that has elapsed since the
great event commemorated by the scenes outside this hall. But such
reviews do not make up that general survey of science at large which is
necessary to the development of our theme, and which must include the
action of causes that had their origin long before our time. The
movement which culminated in making the nineteenth century ever
memorable in history is the outcome of a long series of causes, acting
through many centuries, which are worthy of especial attention on such
an occasion as this. In setting them forth we should avoid laying stress
on those visible manifestations which, striking the eye of every
beholder, are in no danger of being overlooked, and search rather for
those agencies whose activities underlie the whole visible scene, but
which are liable to be blotted out of sight by the very brilliancy of
the results to which they have given rise. It is easy to draw attention
to the wonderful qualities of the oak; but from that very fact, it may
be needful to point out that the real wonder lies concealed in the acorn
from which it grew.

Our inquiry into the logical order of the causes which have made our
civilization what it is to-day will be facilitated by bringing to mind
certain elementary considerations--ideas so familiar that setting them
forth may seem like citing a body of truisms--and yet so frequently
overlooked, not only individually, but in their relation to each other,
that the conclusion to which they lead may be lost to sight. One of
these propositions is that psychical rather than material causes are
those which we should regard as fundamental in directing the development
of the social organism. The human intellect is the really active agent
in every branch of endeavor,--the _primum mobile_ of civilization,--and
all those material manifestations to which our attention is so often
directed are to be regarded as secondary to this first agency. If it be
true that "in the world is nothing great but man; in man is nothing
great but mind," then should the keynote of our discourse be the
recognition of this first and greatest of powers.

Another well-known fact is that those applications of the forces of
nature to the promotion of human welfare which have made our age what it
is, are of such comparatively recent origin that we need go back only a
single century to antedate their most important features, and scarcely
more than four centuries to find their beginning. It follows that the
subject of our inquiry should be the commencement, not many centuries
ago, of a certain new form of intellectual activity.

Having gained this point of view, our next inquiry will be into the
nature of that activity, and its relation to the stages of progress
which preceded and followed its beginning. The superficial observer, who
sees the oak but forgets the acorn, might tell us that the special
qualities which have brought out such great results are expert
scientific knowledge and rare ingenuity, directed to the application of
the powers of steam and electricity. From this point of view the great
inventors and the great captains of industry were the first agents in
bringing about the modern era. But the more careful inquirer will see
that the work of these men was possible only through a knowledge of the
laws of nature, which had been gained by men whose work took precedence
of theirs in logical order, and that success in invention has been
measured by completeness in such knowledge. While giving all due honor
to the great inventors, let us remember that the first place is that of
the great investigators, whose forceful intellects opened the way to
secrets previously hidden from men. Let it be an honor and not a
reproach to these men, that they were not actuated by the love of gain,
and did not keep utilitarian ends in view in the pursuit of their
researches. If it seems that in neglecting such ends they were leaving
undone the most important part of their work, let us remember that
nature turns a forbidding face to those who pay her court with the hope
of gain, and is responsive only to those suitors whose love for her is
pure and undefiled. Not only is the special genius required in the
investigator not that generally best adapted to applying the discoveries
which he makes, but the result of his having sordid ends in view would
be to narrow the field of his efforts, and exercise a depressing effect
upon his activities. The true man of science has no such expression in
his vocabulary as "useful knowledge." His domain is as wide as nature
itself, and he best fulfills his mission when he leaves to others the
task of applying the knowledge he gives to the world.

We have here the explanation of the well-known fact that the functions
of the investigator of the laws of nature, and of the inventor who
applies these laws to utilitarian purposes, are rarely united in the
same person. If the one conspicuous exception which the past century
presents to this rule is not unique, we should probably have to go back
to Watt to find another.

From this viewpoint it is clear that the primary agent in the movement
which has elevated man to the masterful position he now occupies, is the
scientific investigator. He it is whose work has deprived plague and
pestilence of their terrors, alleviated human suffering, girdled the
earth with the electric wire, bound the continent with the iron way, and
made neighbors of the most distant nations. As the first agent which has
made possible this meeting of his representatives, let his evolution be
this day our worthy theme. As we follow the evolution of an organism by
studying the stages of its growth, so we have to show how the work of
the scientific investigator is related to the ineffectual efforts of his
predecessors.

In our time we think of the process of development in nature as one
going continuously forward through the combination of the opposite
processes of evolution and dissolution. The tendency of our thought has
been in the direction of banishing cataclysms to the theological limbo,
and viewing nature as a sleepless plodder, endowed with infinite
patience, waiting through long ages for results. I do not contest the
truth of the principle of continuity on which this view is based. But it
fails to make known to us the whole truth. The building of a ship from
the time that her keel is laid until she is making her way across the
ocean is a slow and gradual process; yet there is a cataclysmic epoch
opening up a new era in her history. It is the moment when, after lying
for months or years a dead, inert, immovable mass, she is suddenly
endowed with the power of motion, and, as if imbued with life, glides
into the stream, eager to begin the career for which she was designed.

I think it is thus in the development of humanity. Long ages may pass
during which a race, to all external observation, appears to be making
no real progress. Additions may be made to learning, and the records of
history may constantly grow, but there is nothing in its sphere of
thought, or in the features of its life, that can be called essentially
new. Yet, nature may have been all along slowly working in a way which
evades our scrutiny until the result of her operations suddenly appears
in a new and revolutionary movement, carrying the race to a higher plane
of civilization.

It is not difficult to point out such epochs in human progress. The
greatest of all, because it was the first, is one of which we find no
record either in written or geological history. It was the epoch when
our progenitors first took conscious thought of the morrow, first used
the crude weapons which nature had placed within their reach to kill
their prey, first built a fire to warm their bodies and cook their food.
I love to fancy that there was some one first man, the Adam of
evolution, who did all this, and who used the power thus acquired to
show his fellows how they might profit by his example. When the members
of the tribe or community which he gathered around him began to conceive
of life as a whole,--to include yesterday, to-day, and to-morrow in the
same mental grasp--to think how they might apply the gifts of nature to
their own uses,--a movement was begun which should ultimately lead to
civilization.

Long indeed must have been the ages required for the development of this
rudest primitive community into the civilization revealed to us by the
most ancient tablets of Egypt and Assyria. After spoken language was
developed, and after the rude representation of ideas by visible marks
drawn to resemble them had long been practiced, some Cadmus must have
invented an alphabet. When the use of written language was thus
introduced, the word of command ceased to be confined to the range of
the human voice, and it became possible for master minds to extend their
influence as far as a written message could be carried. Then were
communities gathered into provinces; provinces into kingdoms; kingdoms
into the great empires of antiquity. Then arose a stage of civilization
which we find pictured in the most ancient records,--a stage in which
men were governed by laws that were perhaps as wisely adapted to their
conditions as our laws are to ours,--in which the phenomena of nature
were rudely observed, and striking occurrences in the earth or in the
heavens recorded in the annals of the nation.

Vast was the progress of knowledge during the interval between these
empires and the century in which modern science began. Yet, if I am
right in making a distinction between the slow and regular steps of
progress, each growing naturally out of that which preceded it, and the
entrance of the mind at some fairly definite epoch into an entirely new
sphere of activity, it would appear that there was only one such epoch
during the entire interval. This was when abstract geometrical reasoning
commenced, and astronomical observations aiming at precision were
recorded, compared, and discussed. Closely associated with it must have
been the construction of the forms of logic. The radical difference
between the demonstration of a theorem of geometry and the reasoning of
every-day life which the masses of men must have practiced from the
beginning, and which few even to-day ever get beyond, is so evident at a
glance that I need not dwell upon it. The principal feature of this
advance is that, by one of those antinomies of the human intellect of
which examples are not wanting even in our own time, the development of
abstract ideas preceded the concrete knowledge of natural phenomena.
When we reflect that in the geometry of Euclid the science of space was
brought to such logical perfection that even to-day its teachers are not
agreed as to the practicability of any great improvement upon it, we
cannot avoid the feeling that a very slight change in the direction of
the intellectual activity of the Greeks would have led to the beginning
of natural science. But it would seem that the very purity and
perfection which was aimed at in their system of geometry stood in the
way of any extension or application of its methods and spirit to the
field of nature. One example of this is worthy of attention. In modern
teaching the idea of magnitude as generated by motion is freely
introduced. A line is described by a moving point; a plane by a moving
line; a solid by a moving plane. It may, at first sight, seem singular
that this conception finds no place in the Euclidian system. But we may
regard the omission as a mark of logical purity and rigor. Had the real
or supposed advantages of introducing motion into geometrical
conceptions been suggested to Euclid, we may suppose him to have replied
that the theorems of space are independent of time; that the idea of
motion necessarily implies time, and that, in consequence, to avail
ourselves of it would be to introduce an extraneous element into
geometry.

It is quite possible that the contempt of the ancient philosophers for
the practical application of their science, which has continued in some
form to our own time, and which is not altogether unwholesome, was a
powerful factor in the same direction. The result was that, in keeping
geometry pure from ideas which did not belong to it, it failed to form
what might otherwise have been the basis of physical science. Its
founders missed the discovery that methods similar to those of geometric
demonstration could be extended into other and wider fields than that of
space. Thus not only the development of applied geometry, but the
reduction of other conceptions to a rigorous mathematical form was
indefinitely postponed.

Astronomy is necessarily a science of observation pure and simple, in
which experiment can have no place except as an auxiliary. The vague
accounts of striking celestial phenomena handed down by the priests and
astrologers of antiquity were followed in the time of the Greeks by
observations having, in form at least, a rude approach to precision,
though nothing like the degree of precision that the astronomer of
to-day would reach with the naked eye, aided by such instruments as he
could fashion from the tools at the command of the ancients.

The rude observations commenced by the Babylonians were continued with
gradually improving instruments,--first by the Greeks and afterward by
the Arabs,--but the results failed to afford any insight into the true
relation of the earth to the heavens. What was most remarkable in this
failure is that, to take a first step forward which would have led on to
success, no more was necessary than a course of abstract thinking vastly
easier than that required for working out the problems of geometry. That
space is infinite is an unexpressed axiom, tacitly assumed by Euclid and
his successors. Combining this with the most elementary consideration of
the properties of the triangle, it would be seen that a body of any
given size could be placed at such a distance in space as to appear to
us like a point. Hence a body as large as our earth, which was known to
be a globe from the time that the ancient Phœnicians navigated the
Mediterranean, if placed in the heavens at a sufficient distance, would
look like a star. The obvious conclusion that the stars might be bodies
like our globe, shining either by their own light or by that of the sun,
would have been a first step to the understanding of the true system of
the world.

There is historic evidence that this deduction did not wholly escape the
Greek thinkers. It is true that the critical student will assign little
weight to the current belief that the vague theory of Pythagoras--that
fire was at the centre of all things--implies a conception of the
heliocentric theory of the solar system. But the testimony of
Archimedes, confused though it is in form, leaves no serious doubt that
Aristarchus of Samos not only propounded the view that the earth
revolves both on its own axis and around the sun, but that he correctly
removed the great stumbling-block in the way of this theory by adding
that the distance of the fixed stars was infinitely greater than the
dimensions of the earth's orbit. Even the world of philosophy was not
yet ready for this conception, and, so far from seeing the
reasonableness of the explanation, we find Ptolemy arguing against the
rotation of the earth on grounds which careful observations of the
phenomena around him would have shown to be ill-founded.

Physical science, if we can apply that term to an uncoördinated body of
facts, was successfully cultivated from the earliest times. Something
must have been known of the properties of metals, and the art of
extracting them from their ores must have been practiced, from the time
that coins and medals were first stamped. The properties of the most
common compounds were discovered by alchemists in their vain search for
the philosopher's stone, but no actual progress worthy of the name
rewarded the practitioners of the black art.

Perhaps the first approach to a correct method was that of Archimedes,
who by much thinking worked out the law of the lever, reached the
conception of the centre of gravity, and demonstrated the first
principles of hydrostatics. It is remarkable that he did not extend his
researches into the phenomena of motion, whether spontaneous or produced
by force. The stationary condition of the human intellect is most
strikingly illustrated by the fact that not until the time of Leonardo
was any substantial advance made on his discovery. To sum up in one
sentence the most characteristic feature of ancient and medieval
science, we see a notable contrast between the precision of thought
implied in the construction and demonstration of geometrical theorems
and the vague indefinite character of the ideas of natural phenomena
generally, a contrast which did not disappear until the foundations of
modern science began to be laid.

We should miss the most essential point of the difference between
medieval and modern learning if we looked upon it as mainly a difference
either in the precision or the amount of knowledge. The development of
both of these qualities would, under any circumstances, have been slow
and gradual, but sure. We can hardly suppose that any one generation, or
even any one century, would have seen the complete substitution of exact
for inexact ideas. Slowness of growth is as inevitable in the case of
knowledge as in that of a growing organism. The most essential point of
difference is one of those seemingly slight ones, the importance of
which we are too apt to overlook. It was like the drop of blood in the
wrong place, which some one has told us makes all the difference between
a philosopher and a maniac. It was all the difference between a living
tree and a dead one, between an inert mass and a growing organism. The
transition of knowledge from the dead to the living form must, in any
complete review of the subject, be looked upon as the really great event
of modern times. Before this event the intellect was bound down by a
scholasticism which regarded knowledge as a rounded whole, the parts of
which were written in books and carried in the minds of learned men. The
student was taught from the beginning of his work to look upon authority
as the foundation of his beliefs. The older the authority the greater
the weight it carried. So effective was this teaching that it seems
never to have occurred to individual men that they had all the
opportunities ever enjoyed by Aristotle of discovering truth, with the
added advantage of all his knowledge to begin with. Advanced as was the
development of formal logic, that practical logic was wanting which
could see that the last of a series of authorities, every one of which
rested on those which preceded it, could never form a surer foundation
for any doctrine than that supplied by its original propounder.

The result of this view of knowledge was that, although during the
fifteen centuries following the death of the geometer of Syracuse great
universities were founded at which generations of professors expounded
all the learning of their time, neither professor nor student ever
suspected what latent possibilities of good were concealed in the most
familiar operations of nature. Every one felt the wind blow, saw water
boil, and heard the thunder crash, but never thought of investigating
the forces here at play. Up to the middle of the fifteenth century the
most acute observer could scarcely have seen the dawn of a new era.

In view of this state of things, it must be regarded as one of the most
remarkable facts in evolutionary history that four or five men, whose
mental constitution was either typical of the new order of things or who
were powerful agents in bringing it about, were all born during the
fifteenth century, four of them at least at so nearly the same time as
to be contemporaries.

Leonardo da Vinci, whose artistic genius has charmed succeeding
generations, was also the first practical engineer of his time, and the
first man after Archimedes to make a substantial advance in developing
the laws of motion. That the world was not prepared to make use of his
scientific discoveries does not detract from the significance which must
attach to the period of his birth.

Shortly after him was born the great navigator whose bold spirit was to
make known a new world, thus giving to commercial enterprise that
impetus which was so powerful an agent in bringing about a revolution in
the thoughts of men.

The birth of Columbus was soon followed by that of Copernicus, the first
after Aristarchus to demonstrate the true system of the world. In him
more than in any of his contemporaries do we see the struggle between
the old forms of thought and the new. It seems almost pathetic and is
certainly most suggestive of the general view of knowledge taken at that
time that, instead of claiming credit for bringing to light great truths
before unknown, he made a labored attempt to show that, after all, there
was nothing really new in his system, which he claimed to date from
Pythagoras and Philolaus. In this connection it is curious that he makes
no mention of Aristarchus, who I think will be regarded by conservative
historians as his only demonstrated predecessor. To the hold of the
older ideas upon his mind we must attribute the fact that in
constructing his system he took great pains to make as little change as
possible in ancient conceptions.

Luther, the greatest thought-stirrer of them all, practically of the
same generation with Copernicus, Leonardo, and Columbus, does not come
in as a scientific investigator, but as the great loosener of chains
which had so fettered the intellect of men that they dared not think
otherwise than as the authorities thought.

Almost coeval with the advent of these intellects was the invention of
printing with movable type. Gutenberg was born during the first decade
of the century, and his associates and others credited with the
invention not many years afterward. If we accept the principle on which
I am basing my argument, that we should assign the first place to the
birth of those psychic agencies which started men on new lines of
thought, then surely was the fifteenth the wonderful century.

Let us not forget that, in assigning the actors then born to their
places, we are not narrating history, but studying a special phase of
evolution. It matters not for us that no university invited Leonardo to
its halls, and that his science was valued by his contemporaries only as
an adjunct to the art of engineering. The great fact still is that he
was the first of mankind to propound laws of motion. It is not for
anything in Luther's doctrines that he finds a place in our scheme. No
matter for us whether they were sound or not. What he did toward the
evolution of the scientific investigator was to show by his example that
a man might question the best-established and most venerable authority
and still live--still preserve his intellectual integrity--still command
a hearing from nations and their rulers. It matters not for us whether
Columbus ever knew that he had discovered a new continent. His work was
to teach that neither hydra, chimera, nor abyss--neither divine
injunction nor infernal machination--was in the way of men visiting
every part of the globe, and that the problem of conquering the world
reduced itself to one of sails and rigging, hull and compass. The better
part of Copernicus was to direct man to a viewpoint whence he should see
that the heavens were of like matter with the earth. All this done, the
acorn was planted from which the oak of our civilization should spring.
The mad quest for gold which followed the discovery of Columbus, the
questionings which absorbed the attention of the learned, the
indignation excited by the seeming vagaries of a Paracelsus, the fear
and trembling lest the strange doctrine of Copernicus should undermine
the faith of centuries, were all helps to the germination of the
seed--stimuli to thought which urged it on to explore the new fields
opened up to its occupation. This given, all that has since followed
came out in regular order of development, and need be here considered
only in those phases having a special relation to the purpose of our
present meeting.

So slow was the growth at first that the sixteenth century may scarcely
have recognized the inauguration of a new era. Torricelli and Benedetti
were of the third generation after Leonardo, and Galileo, the first to
make a substantial advance upon his theory, was born more than a century
after him. Only two or three men appeared in a generation who, working
alone, could make real progress in discovery, and even these could do
little in leavening the minds of their fellow men with the new ideas.

Up to the middle of the seventeenth century an agent which all
experience since that time shows to be necessary to the most productive
intellectual activity was wanting. This was the attraction of like
minds, making suggestions to each other, criticising, comparing, and
reasoning. This element was introduced by the organization of the Royal
Society of London and the Academy of Sciences of Paris.

The members of these two bodies seem like ingenious youth suddenly
thrown into a new world of interesting objects, the purposes and
relations of which they had to discover. The novelty of the situation is
strikingly shown in the questions which occupied the minds of the
incipient investigators. One natural result of British maritime
enterprise was that the aspirations of the Fellows of the Royal Society
were not confined to any continent or hemisphere. Inquiries were sent
all the way to Batavia to know "whether there be a hill in Sumatra which
burneth continually, and a fountain which runneth pure balsam." The
astronomical precision with which it seemed possible that physiological
operations might go on was evinced by the inquiry whether the Indians
can so prepare that stupefying herb Datura that "they make it lie
several days, months, years, according as they will, in a man's body
without doing him any harm, and at the end kill him without missing an
hour's time." Of this continent one of the inquiries was whether there
be a tree in Mexico that yields water, wine, vinegar, milk, honey, wax,
thread, and needles.

Among the problems before the Paris Academy of Sciences those of
physiology and biology took a prominent place. The distillation of
compounds had long been practiced, and the fact that the more spirituous
elements of certain substances were thus separated naturally led to the
question whether the essential essences of life might not be
discoverable in the same way. In order that all might participate in the
experiments, they were conducted in open session of the Academy, thus
guarding against the danger of any one member obtaining for his
exclusive personal use a possible elixir of life. A wide range of the
animal and vegetable kingdom, including cats, dogs, and birds of various
species, were thus analyzed. The practice of dissection was introduced
on a large scale. That of the cadaver of an elephant occupied several
sessions, and was of such interest that the monarch himself was a
spectator.

To the same epoch with the formation and first work of these two bodies
belongs the invention of a mathematical method which in its importance
to the advance of exact science may be classed with the invention of the
alphabet in its relation to the progress of society at large. The use of
algebraic symbols to represent quantities had its origin before the
commencement of the new era, and gradually grew into a highly developed
form during the first two centuries of that era. But this method could
represent quantities only as fixed. It is true that the elasticity
inherent in the use of such symbols permitted of their being applied to
any and every quantity; yet, in any one application, the quantity was
considered as fixed and definite. But most of the magnitudes of nature
are in a state of continual variation; indeed, since all motion is
variation, the latter is a universal characteristic of all phenomena. No
serious advance could be made in the application of algebraic language
to the expression of physical phenomena until it could be so extended as
to express variation in quantities, as well as the quantities
themselves. This extension, worked out independently by Newton and
Leibnitz, may be classed as the most fruitful of conceptions in exact
science. With it the way was opened for the unimpeded and continually
accelerated progress of the last two centuries.

The feature of this period which has the closest relation to the purpose
of our coming together is the seemingly unending subdivision of
knowledge into specialties, many of which are becoming so minute and so
isolated that they seem to have no interest for any but their few
pursuers. Happily science itself has afforded a corrective for its own
tendency in this direction. The careful thinker will see that in these
seemingly diverging branches common elements and common principles are
coming more and more to light. There is an increasing recognition of
methods of research, and of deduction, which are common to large
branches, or to the whole of science. We are more and more recognizing
the principle that progress in knowledge implies its reduction to more
exact forms, and the expression of its ideas in language more or less
mathematical. The problem before the organizers of this Congress was,
therefore, to bring the sciences together, and seek for the unity which
we believe underlies their infinite diversity.

The assembling of such a body as now fills this hall was scarcely
possible in any preceding generation, and is made possible now only
through the agency of science itself. It differs from all preceding
international meetings by the universality of its scope, which aims to
include the whole of knowledge. It is also unique in that none but
leaders have been sought out as members. It is unique in that so many
lands have delegated their choicest intellects to carry on its work.
They come from the country to which our republic is indebted for a third
of its territory, including the ground on which we stand; from the land
which has taught us that the most scholarly devotion to the languages
and learning of the cloistered past is compatible with leadership in the
practical application of modern science to the arts of life; from the
island whose language and literature have found a new field and a
vigorous growth in this region; from the last seat of the holy Roman
Empire; from the country which, remembering a monarch who made an
astronomical observation at the Greenwich Observatory, has enthroned
science in one of the highest places in its government; from the
peninsula so learned that we have invited one of its scholars to come
and tell us of our own language; from the land which gave birth to
Leonardo, Galileo, Torricelli, Columbus, Volta--what an array of
immortal names!--from the little republic of glorious history which,
breeding men rugged as its eternal snow-peaks, has yet been the seat of
scientific investigation since the day of the Bernoullis; from the land
whose heroic dwellers did not hesitate to use the ocean itself to
protect it against invaders, and which now makes us marvel at the amount
of erudition compressed within its little area; from the nation across
the Pacific, which, by half a century of unequaled progress in the arts
of life, has made an important contribution to evolutionary science
through demonstrating the falsity of the theory that the most ancient
races are doomed to be left in the rear of the advancing age--in a word,
from every great centre of intellectual activity on the globe I see
before me eminent representatives of that world-advance in knowledge
which we have met to celebrate. May we not confidently hope that the
discussions of such an assemblage will prove pregnant of a future for
science which shall outshine even its brilliant past?

Gentlemen and scholars all! You do not visit our shores to find great
collections in which centuries of humanity have given expression on
canvas and in marble to their hopes, fears, and aspirations. Nor do you
expect institutions and buildings hoary with age. But as you feel the
vigor latent in the fresh air of these expansive prairies, which has
collected the products of human genius by which we are here surrounded,
and, I may add, brought us together; as you study the institutions which
we have founded for the benefit, not only of our own people, but of
humanity at large; as you meet the men who, in the short space of one
century, have transformed this valley from a savage wilderness into what
it is to-day--then may you find compensation for the want of a past like
yours by seeing with prophetic eye a future world-power of which this
region shall be the seat. If such is to be the outcome of the
institutions which we are now building up, then may your present visit
be a blessing both to your posterity and ours by making that power one
for good to all mankind. Your deliberations will help to demonstrate to
us and to the world at large that the reign of law must supplant that of
brute force in the relations of the nations, just as it has supplanted
it in the relations of individuals. You will help to show that the war
which science is now waging against the sources of diseases, pain, and
misery offers an even nobler field for the exercise of heroic qualities
than can that of battle. We hope that when, after your all too fleeting
sojourn in our midst, you return to your own shores, you will long feel
the influence of the new air you have breathed in an infusion of
increased vigor in pursuing your varied labors. And if a new impetus is
thus given to the great intellectual movement of the past century,
resulting not only in promoting the unification of knowledge, but in
widening its field through new combinations of effort on the part of its
votaries, the projectors, organizers, and supporters of this Congress of
Arts and Science will be justified of their labors.




DIVISION A--NORMATIVE SCIENCE




DIVISION A--NORMATIVE SCIENCE

SPEAKER: PROFESSOR JOSIAH ROYCE, Harvard University

(_Hall 6, September 20, 10 a. m._)

THE SCIENCES OF THE IDEAL

BY JOSIAH ROYCE

     [Josiah Royce, Professor of History of Philosophy, Harvard
     University, since 1892. b. Grass Valley, Nevada County,
     California, November 20, 1855. A.B. University of
     California, 1875; Ph.D. Johns Hopkins 1878; LL.D. University
     of Aberdeen, Scotland; LL.D. Johns Hopkins. Instructor in
     English Literature and Logic, University of California,
     1878-82. Instructor and Assistant Professor, Harvard
     University, 1882-92. Author of _Religious Aspect of
     Philosophy_; _History of California_; _The Feud of Oakfield
     Creek_; _The Spirit of Modern Philosophy_; _Studies of Good
     and Evil_; _The World and the Individual_; _Gifford
     Lectures_; and numerous other works and memoirs.]


I shall not attempt, in this address, either to justify or to criticise
the name, normative science, under which the doctrines which constitute
this division are grouped. It is enough for my purpose to recognize at
the outset that I am required, by the plans of this Congress, to explain
what scientific interests seem to me to be common to the work of the
philosophers and of the mathematicians. The task is one which makes
severe demands upon the indulgence of the listener, and upon the
expository powers of the speaker, but it is a task for which the present
age has well prepared the way. The spirit which Descartes and Leibnitz
illustrated seems likely soon to become, in a new and higher sense,
prominent in science. The mathematicians are becoming more and more
philosophical. The philosophers, in the near future, will become, I
believe, more and more mathematical. It is my office to indicate, as
well as the brief time and my poor powers may permit, why this ought to
be so.

To this end I shall first point out what is that most general community
of interest which unites all the sciences that belong to our division.
Then I shall indicate what type of recent and special scientific work
most obviously bears upon the tasks of all of us alike. Thirdly, I shall
state some results and problems to which this type of scientific work
has given rise, and shall try to show what promise we have of an early
increase of insight regarding our common interests.


I

The most general community of interest which unites the various
scientific activities that belong to our division is this: We are all
concerned with what may be called ideal truth, as distinct from physical
truth. Some of us also have a strong interest in physical truth; but
none of us lack a notable and scientific concern for the realm of ideas,
viewed as ideas.

Let me explain what I mean by these terms. Whoever studies physical
truth (taking that term in its most general sense) seeks to observe, to
collate, and, in the end, to control, facts which he regards as external
to his own thought. But instead of thus looking mainly without, it is
possible for a man chiefly to take account, let us say, of the
consequences of his own hypothetical assumptions--assumptions which may
possess but a very remote relation to the physical world. Or again, it
is possible for such a student to be mainly devoted to reflecting upon
the formal validity of his own inferences, or upon the meaning of his
own presuppositions, or upon the value and the interrelation of human
ideals. Any such scientific work, reflective, considerate principally of
the thinker's own constructions and purposes, or of the constructions
and purposes of humanity in general, is a pursuit of ideal truth. The
searcher who is mainly devoted to the inquiry into what he regards as
external facts, is indeed active; but his activity is moulded by an
order of existence which he conceives as complete apart from his
activity. He is thoughtful; but a power not himself assigns to him the
problems about which he thinks. He is guided by ideals; but his
principal ideal takes the form of an acceptance of the world as it is,
independently of his ideals. His dealings are with nature. His aim is
the conquest of a foreign realm. But the student of what may be called,
in general terms, ideal truth, while he is devoted as his fellow, the
observer of outer nature, to the general purpose of being faithful to
the verity as he finds it, is still aware that his own way of finding,
or his own creative activity as an inventor of hypotheses, or his own
powers of inference, or his conscious ideals, constitute in the main the
object into which he is inquiring, and so form an essential aspect of
the sort of verity which he is endeavoring to discover. The guide, then,
of such a student is, in a peculiar sense, his own reason. His goal is
the comprehension of his own meaning, the conscious and thoughtful
conquest of himself. His great enemy is not the mystery of outer nature,
but the imperfection of his reflective powers. He is, indeed, as
unwilling as is any scientific worker to trust private caprices. He
feels as little as does the observer of outer facts, that he is merely
noting down, as they pass, the chance products of his arbitrary fantasy.
For him, as for any scientific student, truth is indeed objective; and
the standards to which he conforms are eternal. But his method is that
of an inner considerateness rather than of a curiosity about external
phenomena. His objective world is at the same time an essentially ideal
world, and the eternal verity in whose light he seeks to live has,
throughout his undertakings, a peculiarly intimate relation to the
purposes of his own constructive will.

One may then sum up the difference of attitude which is here in question
by saying that, while the student of outer nature is explicitly
conforming his plans of action, his ideas, his ideals, to an order of
truth which he takes to be foreign to himself--the student of the other
sort of truth, here especially in question, is attempting to understand
his own plans of action, that is, to develop his ideas, or to define his
ideals, or else to do both these things.

Now it is not hard to see that this search for some sort of ideal truth
is indeed characteristic of every one of the investigations which have
been grouped together in our division of the normative sciences. Pure
mathematics shares in common with philosophy this type of scientific
interest in ideal, as distinct from physical or phenomenal truth. There
is, to be sure, a marked contrast between the ways in which the
mathematician and the philosopher approach, select, and elaborate their
respective sorts of problems. But there is also a close relation between
the two types of investigation in question. Let us next consider both
the contrast and the analogy in some of their other most general
features.

Pure mathematics is concerned with the investigation of the logical
consequences of certain exactly stateable postulates or
hypotheses--such, for instance, as the postulates upon which arithmetic
and analysis are founded, or such as the postulates that lie at the
basis of any type of geometry. For the pure mathematician, the truth of
these hypotheses or postulates depends, not upon the fact that physical
nature contains phenomena answering to the postulates, but solely upon
the fact that the mathematician is able, with rational consistency, to
state these assumed first principles, and to develop their consequences.
Dedekind, in his famous essay, "Was Sind und Was Sollen die Zahlen,"
called the whole numbers "freie Schöpfungen des Menschlichen Geistes;"
and, in fact, we need not enter into any discussion of the psychology of
our number concept in order to be able to assert that, however we men
first came by our conception of the whole numbers, for the mathematician
the theory of numerical truth must appear simply as the logical
development of the consequences of a few fundamental first principles,
such as those which Dedekind himself, or Peano, or other recent writers
upon this topic, have, in various forms, stated. A similar formal
freedom marks the development of any other theory in the realm of pure
mathematics. Pure geometry, from the modern point of view, is neither a
doctrine forced upon the human mind by the constitution of any primal
form of intuition, nor yet a branch of physical science, limited to
describing the spatial arrangement of phenomena in the external world.
Pure geometry is the theory of the consequences of certain postulates
which the geometer is at liberty consistently to make; so that there are
as many types of geometry as there are consistent systems of postulates
of that generic type of which the geometer takes account. As is also now
well known, it has long been impossible to define pure mathematics as
the science of quantity, or to limit the range of the exactly stateable
hypotheses or postulates with which the mathematician deals to the world
of those objects which, ideally speaking, can be viewed as measurable.
For the ideally defined measurable objects are by no means the only ones
whose properties can be stated in the form of exact postulates or
hypotheses; and the possible range of pure mathematics, if taken in the
abstract, and viewed apart from any question as to the value of given
lines of research, appears to be identical with the whole realm of the
consequences of exactly stateable ideal hypotheses of every type.

One limitation must, however, be mentioned, to which the assertion just
made is, in practice, obviously subject. And this is, indeed, a
momentous limitation. The exactly stated ideal hypotheses whose
consequences the mathematician develops must possess, as is sometimes
said, sufficient intrinsic importance to be worthy of scientific
treatment. They must not be trivial hypotheses. The mathematician is
not, like the solver of chess problems, merely displaying his skill in
dealing with the arbitrary fictions of an ideal game. His truth is,
indeed, ideal; his world is, indeed, treated by his science as if this
world were the creation of his postulates a "freie Schöpfung." But he
does not thus create for mere sport. On the contrary, he reports a
significant order of truth. As a fact, the ideal systems of the pure
mathematician are customarily defined with an obvious, even though often
highly abstract and remote, relation to the structure of our ordinary
empirical world. Thus the various algebras which have been actually
developed have, in the main, definite relations to the structure of the
space world of our physical experience. The different systems of ideal
geometry, even in all their ideality, still cluster, so to speak, about
the suggestions which our daily experience of space and of matter give
us. Yet I suppose that no mathematician would be disposed, at the
present time, to accept any brief definition of the degree of closeness
or remoteness of relation to ordinary experience which shall serve to
distinguish a trivial from a genuinely significant branch of
mathematical theory. In general, a mathematician who is devoted to the
theory of functions, or to group theory, appears to spend little time in
attempting to show why the development of the consequences of his
postulates is a significant enterprise. The concrete mathematical
interest of his inquiry sustains him in his labors, and wins for him the
sympathy of his fellows. To the questions, "Why consider the ideal
structure of just this system of object at all?" "Why study various
sorts of numbers, or the properties of functions, or of groups, or the
system of points in projective geometry?"--the pure mathematician in
general, cares to reply only, that the topic of his special
investigation appears to him to possess sufficient mathematical
interest. The freedom of his science thus justifies his enterprise. Yet,
as I just pointed out, this freedom is never mere caprice. This ideal
interest is not without a general relation to the concerns even of
common sense. In brief, as it seems at once fair to say, the pure
mathematician is working under the influence of more or less clearly
conscious philosophical motives. He does not usually attempt to define
what distinguishes a significant from a trivial system of postulates, or
what constitutes a problem worth attacking from the point of view of
pure mathematics. But he practically recognizes such a distinction
between the trivial and the significant regions of the world of ideal
truth, and since philosophy is concerned with the significance of ideas,
this recognition brings the mathematician near in spirit to the
philosopher.

Such, then, is the position of the pure mathematician. What, by way of
contrast, is that of the philosopher? We may reply that to state the
formal consequences of exact assumptions is one thing; to reflect upon
the mutual relations, and the whole significance of such assumptions,
does indeed involve other interests; and these other interests are the
ones which directly carry us over to the realm of philosophy. If the
theory of numbers belongs to pure mathematics, the study of the place of
the number concept in the system of human ideas belongs to philosophy.
Like the mathematician, the philosopher deals directly with a realm of
ideal truth. But to unify our knowledge, to comprehend its sources, its
meaning, and its relations to the whole of human life, these aims
constitute the proper goal of the philosopher. In order, however, to
accomplish his aims, the philosopher must, indeed, take account of the
results of the special physical science; but he must also turn from the
world of outer phenomena to an ideal world. For the unity of things is
never, for us mortals, anything that we find given in our experience.
You cannot see the unity of knowledge; you cannot describe it as a
phenomenon. It is for us now, an ideal. And precisely so, the meaning of
things, the relation of knowledge to life, the significance of our
ideals, their bearing upon one another--these are never, for us men,
phenomenally present data. Hence the philosopher, however much he ought,
as indeed he ought, to take account of phenomena, and of the results of
the special physical sciences, is quite as deeply interested in his own
way, as the mathematician is interested in his way, in the consideration
of an ideal realm. Only, unlike the mathematician, the philosopher does
not first abstract from the empirical suggestions upon which his exact
ideas are actually based, and then content himself merely with
developing the logical consequences of these ideas. On the contrary, his
main interest is not in any idea or fact in so far as it is viewed by
itself, but rather in the interrelations, in the common significance, in
the unity, of all fundamental ideas, and in their relations both to the
phenomenal facts and to life! On the whole, he, therefore, neither
consents, like the student of a special science of experience, to seek
his freedom solely through conformity to the phenomena which are to be
described; nor is he content, like the pure mathematician, to win his
truth solely through the exact definition of the formal consequences of
his freely defined hypotheses. He is making an effort to discover the
sense and the unity of the business of his own life.

It is no part of my purpose to attempt to show here how this general
philosophical interest differentiates into the various interests of
metaphysics, of the philosophy of religion, of ethics, of æsthetics, of
logic. Enough--I have tried to illustrate how, while both the
philosopher and the mathematician have an interest in the meaning of
ideas rather than in the description of external facts, still there is a
contrast which does, indeed, keep their work in large measure asunder,
namely, the contrast due to the fact that the mathematician is directly
concerned with developing the consequences of certain freely assumed
systems of postulates or hypotheses; while the philosopher is interested
in the significance, in the unity, and in the relation to life, of all
the fundamental ideals and postulates of the human mind.

Yet not even thus do we sufficiently state how closely related the two
tasks are. For this very contrast, as we have also suggested, is, even
within its own limits, no final or perfectly sharp contrast. There is a
deep analogy between the two tasks. For the mathematician, as we have
just seen, is not evenly interested in developing the consequences of
any and every system of freely assumed postulates. He is no mere solver
of arbitrary ideal puzzles in general. His systems of postulates are so
chosen as to be not trivial, but significant. They are, therefore, in
fact, but abstractly defined aspects of the very system of eternal truth
whose expression is the universe. In this sense the mathematician is as
genuinely interested as is the philosopher in the significant use of his
scientific freedom. On the other hand, the philosopher, in reflecting
upon the significance and the unity of fundamental ideas, can only do so
with success in case he makes due inquiry into the logical consequences
of given ideas. And this he can accomplish only if, upon occasion, he
employs the exact methods of the mathematician, and develops his systems
of ideal truth with the precision of which only mathematical research is
capable. As a fact, then, the mathematician and the philosopher deal
with ideal truth in ways which are not only contrasted, but profoundly
interconnected. The mathematician, in so far as he consciously
distinguishes significant from trivial problems, and ideal systems, is a
philosopher. The philosopher, in so far as he seeks exactness of logical
method, in his reflection, must meanwhile aim to be, within his own
limits, a mathematician. He, indeed, will not in future, like Spinoza,
seek to reduce philosophy to the mere development, in mathematical form,
of the consequences of certain arbitrary hypotheses. He will distinguish
between a reflection upon the unity of the system of truth and an
abstract development of this or that selected aspect of the system. But
he will see more and more that, in so far as he undertakes to be exact,
he must aim to become, in his own way, and with due regard to his own
purposes, mathematical; and thus the union of mathematical and
philosophical inquiries, in the future, will tend to become closer and
closer.


II

So far, then, I have dwelt upon extremely general considerations
relating to the unity and the contrast of mathematical and philosophical
inquiries. I can well conceive, however, that the individual worker in
any one of the numerous branches of investigation which are represented
by the body of students whom I am privileged to address, may at this
point mentally interpose the objection that all these considerations
are, indeed, far too general to be of practical interest to any of us.
Of course, all we who study these so-called normative sciences are,
indeed, interested in ideas, for their own sakes--in ideas so distinct
from, although of course also somehow related to, phenomena. Of course,
some of us are rather devoted to the development of the consequences of
exactly stated ideal hypotheses, and others to reflecting as we can upon
what certain ideas and ideals are good for, and upon what the unity is
of all ideas and ideals. Of course, if we are wise enough to do so, we
have much to learn from one another. But, you will say, the assertion of
all these things is a commonplace. The expression of the desire for
further mutual coöperation is a pious wish. You will insist upon asking
further: "Is there just now any concrete instance in a modern type of
research which furnishes results such as are of interest to all of us?
Are we actually doing any productive work in common? Are the
philosophers contributing anything to human knowledge which has a
genuine bearing upon the interests of mathematical science? Are the
mathematicians contributing anything to philosophy?"

These questions are perfectly fair. Moreover, as it happens, they can be
distinctly answered in the affirmative. The present age is one of a
rapid advance in the actual unification of the fields of investigation
which are included within the scope of this present division. What
little time remains to me must be devoted to indicating, as well as I
can, in what sense this is true. I shall have still to deal in very
broad generalities. I shall try to make these generalities definite
enough to be not wholly unfruitful.

We have already emphasized one question which may be said to interest,
in a very direct way, both the mathematician and the philosopher. The
ideal postulates, whose consequences mathematical science undertakes to
develop, must be, we have said, significant postulates, involving ideas
whose exact definition and exposition repay the labor of scientific
scrutiny. Number, space, continuity, functional correspondence or
dependence, group-structure--these are examples of such significant
ideas; the postulates or ideal assumptions upon which the theory of such
ideas depends are significant postulates, and are not the mere
conventions of an arbitrary game. But now what constitutes the
significance of an idea, or of an abstract mathematical theory? What
gives an idea a worthy place in the whole scheme of human ideas? Is it
the possibility of finding a physical application for a mathematical
theory which for us decides what is the value of the theory? No, the
theory of functions, the theory of numbers, group theory, have a
significance which no mathematician would consent to measure in terms of
the present applicability or non-applicability of these theories in
physical science? In vain, then, does one attempt to use the test of
applied mathematics as the main criticism of the value of a theory of
pure mathematics. The value of an idea, for the sciences which
constitute our division, is dependent upon the place which this idea
occupies in the whole organized scheme or system of human ideas. The
idea of number, for instance, familiar as its applications are, does not
derive its main value from the fact that eggs and dollars and
star-clusters can be counted, but rather from the fact that the idea of
numbers has those relations to other fundamental ideas which recent
logical theory has made prominent--relations, for instance, to the
concept of order, to the theory of classes or collections of objects
viewed in general, and to the metaphysical concept of the self.
Relations of this sort, which the discussions of the number concept by
Dedekind, Cantor, Peano, and Russell have recently brought to
light--such relations, I say, constitute what truly justified Gauss in
calling the theory of numbers a "divine science." As against such deeper
relations, the countless applications of the number concept in ordinary
life, and in science, are, from the truly philosophical point of view,
of comparatively small moment. What we want, in the work of our division
of the sciences, is to bring to light the unity of truth, either, as in
mathematics, by developing systems of truth which are significant by
virtue of their actual relations to this unity, or, as in philosophy, by
explicitly seeking the central idea about which all the many ideas
cluster.

Now, an ancient and fundamental problem for the philosophers is that
which has been called the problem of the categories. This problem of the
categories is simply the more formal aspect of the whole philosophical
problem just defined. The philosopher aims to comprehend the unity of
the system of human ideas and ideals. Well, then, what are the primal
ideas? Upon what group of concepts do the other concepts of human
science logically depend? About what central interests is the system of
human ideals clustered? In ancient thought Aristotle already approached
this problem in one way. Kant, in the eighteenth century, dealt with it
in another. We students of philosophy are accustomed to regret what we
call the excessive formalism of Kant, to lament that Kant was so much
the slave of his own relatively superficial and accidental table of
categories, and that he made the treatment of every sort of
philosophical problem turn upon his own schematism. Yet we cannot doubt
that Kant was right in maintaining that philosophy needs, for the
successful development of every one of its departments, a well-devised
and substantially complete system of categories. Our objection to Kant's
over-confidence in the virtues of his own schematism is due to the fact
that we do not now accept his table of categories as an adequate view of
the fundamental concepts. The efforts of philosophers since Kant have
been repeatedly devoted to the task of replacing his scheme of
categories by a more adequate one. I am far from regarding these purely
philosophical efforts made since Kant as fruitless, but they have
remained, so far, very incomplete, and they have been held back from
their due fullness of success by the lack of a sufficiently careful
survey and analysis of the processes of thought as these have come to be
embodied in the living sciences. Such concepts as number, quantity,
space, time, cause, continuity, have been dealt with by the pure
philosophers far too summarily and superficially. A more thoroughgoing
analysis has been needed. But now, in comparatively recent times, there
has developed a region of inquiry which one may call by the general name
of modern logic. To the constitution of this new region of inquiry men
have principally contributed who began as mathematicians, but who, in
the course of their work, have been led to become more and more
philosophers. Of late, however, various philosophers, who were
originally in no sense mathematicians, becoming aware of the importance
of the new type of research, are in their turn attempting both to
assimilate and to supplement the undertakings which were begun from the
mathematical side. As a result, the logical problem of the categories
has to-day become almost equally a problem for the logicians of
mathematics and for those students of philosophy who take any serious
interest in exactness of method in their own branch of work. The result
of this actual coöperation of men from both sides is that, as I think,
we are to-day, for the first time, in sight of what is still, as I
freely admit, a somewhat distant goal, namely, the relatively complete
rational analysis and tabulation of the fundamental categories of human
thought. That the student of ethics is as much interested in such an
investigation as is the metaphysician, that the philosopher of religion
needs a well-completed table of categories quite as much as does the
pure logician, every competent student of such topics ought to admit.
And that the enterprise in question keenly interests the mathematicians
is shown by the prominent part which some of them have taken in the
researches in question. Here, then, is the type of recent scientific
work whose results most obviously bear upon the tasks of all of us
alike.

A catalogue of the names of the workers in this wide field of modern
logic would be out of place here. Yet one must, indeed, indicate what
lines of research are especially in question. From the purely
mathematical side, the investigations of the type to which I now refer
may be viewed (somewhat arbitrarily) as beginning with that famous
examination into one of the postulates of Euclid's geometry which gave
rise to the so-called non-Euclidean geometry. The question here
originally at issue was one of a comparatively limited scope, namely,
the question whether Euclid's parallel-line postulate was a logical
consequence of the other geometrical principles. But the investigation
rapidly develops into a general study of the foundations of geometry--a
study to which contributions are still almost constantly appearing.
Somewhat independently of this line of inquiry there grew up, during the
latter half of the nineteenth century, that reëxamination of the bases
of arithmetic and analysis which is associated with the names of
Dedekind, Weierstrass, and George Cantor. At the present time, the
labors of a number of other inquirers (amongst whom we may mention the
school of Peano and Pieri in Italy, and men such as Poincaré and
Couturat in France, Hilbert in Germany, Bertrand Russell and Whitehead
in England, and an energetic group of our American mathematicians--men
such as Professor Moore, Professor Halsted, Dr. Huntington, Dr. Veblen,
and a considerable number of others) have been added to the earlier
researches. The result is that we have recently come for the first time
to be able to see, with some completeness, what the assumed first
principles of pure mathematics actually are. As was to be expected,
these principles are capable of more than one formulation, according as
they are approached from one side or from another. As was also to be
expected, the entire edifice of pure mathematics, so far as it has yet
been erected, actually rests upon a very few fundamental concepts and
postulates, however you may formulate them. What was not observed,
however, by the earlier, and especially by the philosophical, students
of the categories, is the form which these postulates tend to assume
when they are rigidly analyzed.

This form depends upon the precise definition and classification of
certain types of relations. The whole of geometry, for instance,
including metrical geometry, can be developed from a set of postulates
which demand the existence of points that stand in certain ordinal
relationships. The ordinal relationships can be reduced, according as
the series of points considered is open or closed, either to the
well-known relationship in which three points stand when one is between
the other two upon a right line, or else to the ordinal relationship in
which four points stand when they are separated by pairs; and these two
ordinal relationships, by means of various logical devices, can be
regarded as variations of a single fundamental form. Cayley and Klein
founded the logical theory of geometry here in question. Russell, and in
another way Dr. Veblen, have given it its most recent expressions. In
the same way, the theory of whole numbers can be reduced to sets of
principles which demand the existence of certain ideal objects in
certain simple ordinal relations. Dedekind and Peano have worked out
such ordinal theories of the number concept. In another development of
the theory of the cardinal whole numbers, which Russell and Whitehead
have worked out, ordinal concepts are introduced only secondarily, and
the theory depends upon the fundamental relation of the equivalence or
nonequivalence of collections of objects. But here also a certain simple
type of relation determines the definitions and the development of the
whole theory.

Two results follow from such a fashion of logically analyzing the first
principles of mathematical science. In the first place, as just pointed
out, we learn _how few and simple are the conceptions and postulates_
upon which the actual edifice of exact science rests. Pure mathematics,
we have said, is free to assume what it chooses. Yet the assumptions
whose presence as the foundation principles of the actually existent
pure mathematics an exhaustive examination thus reveals, show by their
fewness that the ideal freedom of the mathematician to assume and to
construct what he pleases, is indeed, in practice, a very decidedly
limited freedom. The limitation is, as we have already seen, a
limitation which has to do with the essential significance of the
fundamental concepts in question. And so the result of this analysis of
the bases of the actually developed and significant branches of
mathematics, constitutes a sort of empirical revelation of what
categories the exact sciences have practically found to be of such
significance as to be worthy of exhaustive treatment. Thus the
instinctive sense for significant truth, which has all along been
guiding the development of mathematics, comes at least to a clear and
philosophical consciousness. And meanwhile the essential categories of
thought are seen in a new light.

The second result still more directly concerns a philosophical logic. It
is this: Since the few types of relations which this sort of analysis
reveals as the fundamental ones in exact science are of such importance,
the logic of the present day is especially required to face the
questions: _What is the nature of our concept of relations?_ What are
the various possible types of relations? Upon what does the variety of
these types depend? What unity lies beneath the variety?

As a fact, logic, in its modern forms, namely, first that symbolic logic
which Boole first formulated, which Mr. Charles S. Peirce and his pupils
have in this country already so highly developed, and which Schroeder in
Germany, Peano's school in Italy, and a number of recent English writers
have so effectively furthered--and secondly, the logic of scientific
method, which is now so actively pursued, in France, in Germany, and in
the English-speaking countries--this whole movement in modern logic, as
I hold, is rapidly approaching _new solutions of the problem of the
fundamental nature and the logic of relations_. The problem is one in
which we are all equally interested. To De Morgan in England, in an
earlier generation, and, in our time, to Charles Peirce in this country,
very important stages in the growth of these problems are due. Russell,
in his work on the _Principles of Mathematics_ has very lately
undertaken to sum up the results of the logic of relations, as thus far
developed, and to add his own interpretations. Yet I think that Russell
has failed to get as near to the foundations of the theory of relations
as the present state of the discussion permits. For Russell has failed
to take account of what I hold to be the most fundamentally important
generalization yet reached in the general theory of relations. This is
the generalization set forth as early as 1890, by Mr. A. B. Kempe, of
London, in a pair of wonderful but too much neglected, papers, entitled,
respectively, _The Theory of Mathematical Form_, and _The Analogy
between the Logical Theory of Classes and the Geometrical Theory of
Points_. A mere hint first as to the more precise formulation of the
problem at issue, and then later as to Kempe's special contribution to
that problem, may be in order here, despite the impossibility of any
adequate statement.


III

The two most obviously and universally important kinds of relations
known to the exact sciences, as these sciences at present exist, are:
(1) The relations of the type of equality or equivalence; and (2) the
relations of the type of before and after, or greater and less. The
first of these two classes of relations, namely, the class represented,
although by no means exhausted, by the various relations actually
called, in different branches of science by the one name equality, this
class I say, might well be named, as I myself have proposed, the
leveling relations. A collection of objects between any two of which
some one relation of this type holds, may be said to be a collection
whose members, in some defined sense or other, are on the same level.
The second of these two classes of relations, namely, those of the type
of before and after, or greater and less--this class of relations, I
say, consists of what are nowadays often called the serial relations.
And a collection of objects such that, if any pair of these objects be
chosen, a determinate one of this pair stands to the other one of the
same pair in some determinate relation of this second type, and in a
relation which remains constant for all the pairs that can be thus
formed out of the members of this collection--any such collection, I
say, constitutes a one-dimensional open series. Thus, in case of a file
of men, if you choose any pair of men belonging to the file, a
determinate one of them is, in the file, before the other. In the number
series, of any two numbers, a determinate one is greater than the other.
Wherever such a state of affairs exists, one has a series.

Now these two classes of relations, the leveling relations and the
serial relations, agree with one another, and differ from one another in
very momentous ways. They _agree_ with one another in that both the
leveling and the serial relations are what is technically called
_transitive_; that is, both classes conform to what Professor James has
called the law of "skipped intermediaries." Thus, if _A_ is equal to
_B_, and _B_ is equal to _C_, it follows that _A_ is equal to _C_. If
_A_ is before _B_, and _B_ is before _C_, then _A_ is before _C_. And
this property, which enables you in your reasonings about these
relations to skip middle terms, and so to perform some operation of
elimination, is the property which is meant when one calls relations of
this type transitive. But, on the other hand, these two classes of
relations _differ_ from each other in that the leveling relations are,
while the serial relations are not, _symmetrical_ or reciprocal. Thus,
if _A_ is equal to _B_, _B_ is equal to _A_. But if _X_ is greater than
_Y_, then _Y_ is not greater than _X_, but less than _X_. So the
leveling relations are symmetrical transitive relations. But the serial
relations are transitive relations which are not symmetrical.

All this is now well known. It is notable, however, that nearly all the
processes of our exact sciences, as at present developed, can be said to
be essentially such as lead either to the placing of sets or classes of
objects on the same level, by means of the use of symmetrical transitive
relations, or else to the arranging of objects in orderly rows or
series, by means of the use of transitive relations which are not
symmetrical. This holds also of all the applications of the exact
sciences. Whatever else you do in science (or, for that matter, in art),
you always lead, in the end, either to the arranging of objects, or of
ideas, or of acts, or of movements, in rows or series, or else to the
placing of objects or ideas of some sort on the same level, by virtue of
some equivalence, or of some invariant character. Thus numbers,
functions, lines in geometry, give you examples of serial relations.
Equations in mathematics are classic instances of leveling relations.
So, of course, are invariants. Thus, again, the whole modern theory of
energy consists of two parts, one of which has to do with levels of
energy, in so far as the quantity of energy of a closed system remains
invariant through all the transformations of the system, while the other
part has to do with the irreversible serial order of the transformations
of energy themselves, which follow a set of unsymmetrical relations, in
so far as energy tends to fall from higher to lower levels of intensity
within the same system.

The entire conceivable universe then, and all of our present exact
science, can be viewed, if you choose, as a collection of objects or of
ideas that, whatever other types of relations may exist, are at least
largely characterized either by the leveling relations, or by the serial
relations, or by complexes of both sorts of relations. Here, then, we
are plainly dealing with very fundamental categories. The "between"
relations of geometry can of course be defined, if you choose, in terms
of transitive relations that are not symmetrical. There are, to be sure,
some other relations present in exact science, but the two types, the
serial and leveling relations, are especially notable.

So far the modern logicians have for some time been in substantial
agreement. Russell's brilliant book is a development of the logic of
mathematics very largely in terms of the two types of relations which,
in my own way, I have just characterized; although Russell gives due
regard, of course, to certain other types of relations.

But hereupon the question arises, "Are these two types of relations what
Russell holds them to be, namely, ultimate and irreducible logical
facts, unanalyzable categories--mere data for the thinker?" Or can we
reduce them still further, and thus simplify yet again our view of the
categories?

Here is where Kempe's generalization begins to come into sight. These
two categories, in at least one very fundamental realm of exact thought,
can be reduced to one. There is, namely, a world of ideal objects which
especially interest the logician. It is the world of a _totality of
possible logical classes_, or again, it is the ideal world, equivalent
in formal structure to the foregoing, but composed of a _totality of
possible statements_, or thirdly, it is the world, equivalent once more,
in formal structure, to the foregoing, but consisting of a _totality of
possible acts of will_, of possible decisions. When we proceed to
consider the relational structure of such a world, taken merely in the
abstract as such a structure, a relation comes into sight which at once
appears to be peculiarly general in its nature. It is the so-called
illative relation, the relation which obtains between two classes when
one is subsumed under the other, or between two statements, or two
decisions, when one implies or entails the other. This relation is
transitive, but may be either symmetrical or not symmetrical; so that,
according as it is symmetrical or not, it may be used either to
establish levels or to generate series. In the order system of the
logician's world, the relational structure is thus, in any case, a
highly general and fundamental one.

But this is not all. In this the logician's world of classes, or of
statements, or of decisions, there is also another relation observable.
This is the relation of exclusion or mutual opposition. This is a purely
symmetrical or reciprocal relation. It has two forms--obverse or
contradictory opposition, that is, negation proper, and contrary
opposition. But both these forms are purely symmetrical. And by proper
devices each of them can be stated in terms of the other, or reduced to
the other. And further, as Kempe incidentally shows, and as Mrs. Ladd
Franklin has also substantially shown in her important theory of the
syllogism, _it is possible to state every proposition, or complex of
propositions involving the illative relation, in terms of this purely
symmetrical relation of opposition_. Hence, so far as mere relational
form is concerned, the illative relation itself may be wholly reduced to
the symmetrical relation of opposition. This is our first result as to
the relational structure of the realm of pure logic, that is, the realm
of classes, of statements, or of decisions.

It follows that, in describing the logician's world of possible classes
or of possible decisions, _all unsymmetrical, and so all serial,
relations can be stated solely in terms of symmetrical relations, and
can be entirely reduced to such relations_. Moreover, as Kempe has also
very prettily shown, the relation of opposition, in its two forms, just
mentioned, need not be interpreted as obtaining merely between pairs of
objects. It may and does obtain between triads, tetrads, _n_-ads of
logical entities; and so all that is true of the relations of logical
classes may consequently be stated merely by ascribing certain perfectly
symmetrical and homogeneous predicates to pairs, triads, tetrads, n-ads
of logical objects. The essential contrast between symmetrical and
unsymmetrical relations thus, in this ideal realm of the logician,
simply vanishes. The categories of the logician's world of classes, of
statements, or of decisions, are marvelously simple. All the relations
present may be viewed as variations of the mere conception of opposition
as distinct from non-opposition.

All this holds, of course, so far, merely for the logician's world of
classes or of decisions. There, at least, all serial order can actually
be derived from wholly symmetrical relations. But Kempe now very
beautifully shows (and here lies his great and original contribution to
our topic)--he shows, I say, that the ordinal relations of geometry, as
well as of the number system, can all be regarded as indistinguishable
from _mere variations of those relations which, in pure logic, one finds
to be the symmetrical relations obtaining within pairs or triads of
classes or of statements_. The formal identity of the geometrical
relation called "between" with a purely logical relation which one can
define as existing or as not existing amongst the members of a given
triad of logical classes, or of logical statements, is shown by Kempe in
a fashion that I cannot here attempt to expound. But Kempe's result thus
enables one, as I believe, to simplify the theory of relations far
beyond the point which Russell in his brilliant book has reached. For
Kempe's triadic relation in question can be stated, in what he calls its
obverse form, in perfectly symmetrical terms. And he proves very exactly
that the resulting logical relation is precisely identical, in all its
properties, with the fundamental ordinal relation of geometry.

Thus the order-systems of geometry and analysis appear simply as special
cases of the more general order-system of pure logic. The whole, both of
analysis and of geometry, can be regarded as a description of certain
selected groups of entities, which are chosen, according to special
rules, from a single ideal world. This general and inclusive ideal world
consists simply of _all the objects which can stand to one another in
those symmetrical relations wherein the pure logician finds various
statements, or various decisions inevitably standing_. "Let me," says in
substance Kempe, "choose from the logician's ideal world of classes or
decisions, what entities I will; and I will show you a collection of
objects that are in their relational structure, precisely identical with
the points of a geometer's space of _n_ dimensions." In other words, all
of the geometer's figures and relations can be precisely pictured by the
relational structure of a selected system of classes or of statements,
whose relations are wholly and explicitly logical relations, such as
opposition, and whose relations may all be regarded, accordingly, as
reducible to a single type of purely symmetrical relation.

Thus, for _all_ exact science, and not merely for the logician's special
realm, the contrast between symmetrical and unsymmetrical relations
proves to be, after all, superficial and derived. The purely logical
categories, such as opposition, and such as hold within the calculus of
statements, are, apparently, the basal categories of all the exact
science that has yet been developed. Series and levels are relational
structures that, sharply as they are contrasted, can be derived from a
single root.

I have restated Kempe's generalization in my own way. I think it the
most promising step towards new light as to the categories that we have
made for some generations.

In the field of modern logic, I say, then, work is doing which is
rapidly tending towards the unification of the tasks of our entire
division. For this problem of the categories, in all its abstractness,
is still a common problem for all of us. Do you ask, however, what such
researches can do to furnish more special aid to the workers in
metaphysics, in the philosophy of religion, in ethics, or in æsthetics,
beyond merely helping towards the formulation of a table of
categories--then I reply that we are already not without evidence that
such general researches, abstract though they may seem, are bearing
fruits which have much more than a merely special interest. Apart from
its most general problems, that analysis of mathematical concepts to
which I have referred has in any case revealed numerous unexpected
connections between departments of thought which had seemed to be very
widely sundered. One instance of such a connection I myself have
elsewhere discussed at length, in its general metaphysical bearings. I
refer to the logical identity which Dedekind first pointed out between
the mathematical concept of the ordinal number of series and the
philosophical concept of the formal structure of an ideally completed
self. I have maintained that this formal identity throws light upon
problems which have as genuine an interest for the student of the
philosophy of religion as for the logician of arithmetic. In the same
connection it may be remarked that, as Couturat and Russell, amongst
other writers, have very clearly and beautifully shown, the argument of
the Kantian mathematical antinomies needs to be explicitly and totally
revised in the light of Cantor's modern theory of infinite collections.
To pass at once to another, and a very different instance: The modern
mathematical conceptions of what is called group theory have already
received very wide and significant applications, and promise to bring
into unity regions of research which, until recently, appeared to have
little or nothing to do with one another. Quite lately, however, there
are signs that group theory will soon prove to be of importance for the
definition of some of the fundamental concepts of that most refractory
branch of philosophical inquiry, æsthetics. Dr. Emch, in an important
paper in the _Monist_, called attention, some time since, to the
symmetry groups to which certain æsthetically pleasing forms belong, and
endeavored to point out the empirical relations between these groups and
the æsthetic effects in question. The grounds for such a connection
between the groups in question and the observed æsthetic effects,
seemed, in the paper of Dr. Emch to be left largely in the dark. But
certain papers recently published in the country by Miss Ethel Puffer,
bearing upon the psychology of the beautiful (although the author has
approached the subject without being in the least consciously
influenced, as I understand, by the conceptions of the mathematical
group theory), still actually lead, if I correctly grasp the writer's
meaning, to the doctrine that the æsthetic object, viewed as a
psychological whole, must possess a structure closely, if not precisely,
equivalent to the ideal structure of what the mathematician calls a
group. I myself have no authority regarding æsthetic concepts, and speak
subject to correction. But the unexpected, and in case of Miss Puffer's
research, quite unintended, appearance of group theory in recent
æsthetic analysis is to me an impressive instance of the use of
relatively new mathematical conceptions in philosophical regions which
_seem_, at first sight, very remote from mathematics.

That both the group concept and the concept of the self just suggested
are sure to have also a wide application in the ethics of the future, I
am myself well convinced. In fact, no branch of philosophy is without
close relations to all such studies of fundamental categories.

These are but hints and examples. They suffice, I hope, to show that the
workers in this division have deep common interests, and will do well,
in future, to study the arts of coöperation, and to regard one another's
progress with a watchful and cordial sympathy. In a word: Our common
problem is the theory of the categories. That problem can be solved only
by the coöperation of the mathematicians and of the philosophers.




[Illustration: THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY

_Hand-painted Photogravure from a Painting by Otto Knille. Reproduced
from a Photograph of the Painting by permission of the Berlin Photograph
Co._

This famous painting is now in the University of Berlin. Thomas Aquinas,
one of the greatest of the scholastic philosophers, surnamed the
"Angelic Doctor," is delivering a learned discourse before King Louis
IX. To the right of the King stands Joinville, the French chronicler.
The Dominican monk with his hand to his face is Guillaume de Saint
Amour, and Vincent de Beauvais, and another Dominican are seated with
their backs to the platform desk from which Thomas Aquinas is making his
animated address. The picture is thoroughly characteristic of a
University disputation at the close of the Middle Ages.]




DEPARTMENT I--PHILOSOPHY




DEPARTMENT I--PHILOSOPHY

(_Hall 6, September 20, 11.15 a. m._)

  CHAIRMAN: PROFESSOR BORDEN P. BOWNE, Boston University.
  SPEAKERS: PROFESSOR GEORGE H. HOWISON, University of California.
            PROFESSOR GEORGE T. LADD, Yale University.


In opening the Department of Philosophy, the Chairman, Professor Borden
P. Bowne, LL.D., of Boston University, made an interesting address on
the Philosophical Outlook. Professor Bowne said in part:--

     I congratulate the members of the Philosophical Section on
     the improved outlook in philosophy. In the generation just
     passed, philosophy was somewhat at a discount. The great and
     rapid development of physical science and invention,
     together with the profound changes in biological thought,
     produced for a time a kind of chaos. New facts were showered
     upon us in great abundance, and we had no adequate
     philosophical preparation for dealing with them. Such a
     condition is always disturbing. The old mental equilibrium
     is overthrown and readjustment is a slow process. Besides,
     the shallow sense philosophy of that time readily lent
     itself to mechanical and materialistic interpretations, and
     for a while it seemed as if all the higher faiths of
     humanity were permanently discredited. All this has passed
     away. Philosophical criticism began its work and the naïve
     dogmatism of materialistic naturalism was soon disposed of.
     It quickly appeared that our trouble was not due to the new
     facts, but to the superficial philosophy by which they had
     been interpreted. Now that we have a better philosophy, we
     have come to live in perfect peace with the facts once
     thought disturbing, and even to welcome them as valuable
     additions to knowledge....

     The brief naturalistic episode was not without instruction
     for us. It showed conclusively the great practical
     importance of philosophy. Had we had thirty years ago the
     current philosophical insight, the great development of the
     physical and biological sciences would have made no
     disturbance whatever. But being interpreted by a crude
     scheme of thought, it produced somewhat of a storm.
     Philosophy may not contribute much of positive value, but it
     certainly has an important negative function in the way of
     suppressing pretentious dogmatism and fictitious knowledge,
     which often lead men astray. It is these things which
     produce conflicts of science and religion or which find in
     evolution the solvent of all mysteries and the source of all
     knowledge.

     Concerning the partition of territory between science and
     philosophy, there are two distinct questions respecting the
     facts of experience. First, we need to know the facts in
     their temporal and spatial order, and the way they hang
     together in a system of law. To get this knowledge is the
     function of science, and in this work science has
     inalienable rights and a most important practical function.
     This work cannot be done by speculation nor interfered with
     by authority of any kind. It is not surprising, then, that
     scientists in their sense of contact with reality should be
     indignant with, or feel contempt for, any who seek to limit
     or proscribe their research. But supposing this work all
     done, there remains another question respecting the
     causality and interpretation of the facts. This question
     belongs to philosophy. Science describes and registers the
     facts with their temporal and spatial laws; philosophy
     studies their causality and significance. And while the
     scientist justly ignores the philosopher who interferes with
     his inquiries, so the philosopher may justly reproach the
     scientist who fails to see that the scientific question does
     not touch the philosophic one....

     In the field of metaphysics proper I note a strong tendency
     toward personal idealism, or as it might be called,
     Personalism; that is, the doctrine that substantial reality
     can be conceived only under the personal form and that all
     else is phenomenal. This is quite distinct from the
     traditional idealisms of mere conceptionism. It holds the
     essential fact to be a community of persons with a Supreme
     Person at their head while the phenomenal world is only
     expression and means of communication. And to this view we
     are led by the failure of philosophizing on the impersonal
     plane, which is sure to lose itself in contradiction and
     impossibility. Under the form of mechanical naturalism, with
     its tendencies to materialism and atheism, impersonalism has
     once more been judged and found wanting. We are not likely
     to have a recurrence of this view unless there be a return
     to philosophical barbarism. But impersonalism at the
     opposite pole in the form of abstract categories of being,
     causality, unity, identity, continuity, sufficient reason,
     etc., is equally untenable. Criticism shows that these
     categories when abstractly and impersonally taken cancel
     themselves. On the impersonal plane we can never reach unity
     from plurality, or plurality from unity; and we can never
     find change in identity, or identity in change. Continuity
     in time becomes mere succession without the notion of
     potentiality, and this in turn is empty. Existence itself is
     dispersed into nothingness through the infinite divisibility
     of space and time, while the law of the sufficient reason
     loses itself in barren tautology and the infinite regress.
     The necessary logical equivalence of cause and effect in any
     impersonal scheme makes all real explanation and progress
     impossible, and shuts us up to an unintelligible oscillation
     between potentiality and actuality, to which there is no
     corresponding thought....

     Philosophy is still militant and has much work before it,
     but the omens are auspicious, the problems are better
     understood, and we are coming to a synthesis of the results
     of past generations of thinking which will be a very
     distinct progress. Philosophy has already done good service,
     and never better than in recent times, by destroying
     pretended knowledge and making room for the higher faiths of
     humanity. It has also done good service in helping these
     faiths to better rational form, and thus securing them
     against the defilements of superstition and the cavilings of
     hostile critics. With all its aberrations and shortcomings,
     philosophy deserves well of humanity.




PHILOSOPHY: ITS FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTIONS AND ITS METHODS

BY GEORGE HOLMES HOWISON

     [George Holmes Howison, Mills Professor of Intellectual and
     Moral Philosophy and Civil Polity, University of California.
     b. Montgomery County, Maryland, 1834. A.B. Marietta College,
     1852; M.A. 1855; LL.D. _ibid._ 1883. Post-graduate, Lane
     Theological Seminary, University of Berlin, and Oxford.
     Headmaster High School, Salem, Mass., 1862-64; Assistant
     Professor of Mathematics, Washington University, St. Louis,
     1864-66; Tileston Professor of Political Economy, _ibid._
     1866-69; Professor of Logic and the Philosophy of Science,
     Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1871-79; Lecturer on
     Ethics, Harvard University, 1879-80; Lecturer on Logic and
     Speculative Philosophy, University of Michigan, 1883-84.
     Member and vice-president St. Louis Philosophical Society;
     member California Historical Society; American Historical
     Association; American Association for the Advancement of
     Science; National Geographic Society, etc. Author of
     _Treatise on Analytic Geometry_, 1869; _The Limits of
     Evolution_, 1901, 2d edition, 1904; joint author and editor
     of _The Conception of God_, 1897, etc. Editor Philosophical
     Publications of University of California; American Editorial
     Representative _Hibbert Journal_, London.]


The duty has been assigned me, honored colleagues, of addressing you on
the Fundamental Conceptions and the Methods of our common
pursuit--philosophy. In endeavoring to deal with the subject in a way
not unworthy of its depth and its extent, I have found it impossible to
bring the essential material within less compass than would occupy, in
reading, at least four times the period granted by our programme. I have
therefore complied with the rule of the Congress which directs that, if
a more extended writing be left with the authorities for publication,
the reading must be restricted to such a portion of it as will not
exceed the allotted time. I will accordingly read to you, first, a brief
summary of my entire discussion, by way of introduction, and then an
excerpt from the larger document, which may serve for a _specimen_, as
our scholastic predecessors used to say, of the whole inquiry I have
carried out. The impression will, of course, be fragmentary, and I must
ask beforehand for your most benevolent allowances, to prevent a
judgment too unfavorable.

The discussion naturally falls into two main parts: the first dealing
with the Fundamental Conceptions; and the second, with the Methods.

In the former, after presenting the conception of philosophy itself, as
_the consideration of things in the light of the whole_, I take up the
involved Fundamental Concepts in the following order:--

     I. Whole and Part;

    II. Subject and Object (Knowing and Being, Mind and Matter; Dualism,
        Materialism, Idealism);

   III. Reality and Appearance (Noumenon and Phenomenon);

    IV. Cause and Effect (Ground and Consequence; Causal System);

     V. One and Many (Number System; Monism and Pluralism);

    VI. Time and Space (their relation to Number; their Origin and
        Real Meaning);

   VII. Unconditioned and Conditioned (Soul, World, God; their
        Reinterpretation in terms of Pluralism);

  VIII. The True, the Beautiful, the Good (their relation to the
        question between Monism and Pluralism).

These are successively dealt with as they rise one out of the other in
the process of interpreting them and applying them in the actual
creation of philosophy, as this goes on in the historic schools. The
theoretic progress of philosophy is in this way explained by them, in
its movement from natural dualism, or realism, through the successive
forms of monism, materialistic, agnostic, and idealistic, until it
reaches the issue, now coming so strongly forward within the school of
idealism, between the adherents of monism and those of pluralism.

The importance of the Fundamental Concepts is shown to increase as we
pass along the list, till on reaching Cause and Effect, and entering
upon its full interpretation into the complete System of Causes, we
arrive at the very significant conception of the RECIPROCITY OF FIRST
CAUSES, and through it come to the PRIMACY OF FINAL CAUSE, and the
derivative position of the other forms of cause, Material, Formal,
Efficient. The philosophic strength of idealism, but especially of
idealistic pluralism, comes into clear light as the result of this stage
of the inquiry. But it appears yet more decidedly when One and Many,
Time and Space, and their interrelations, are subjected to analysis. So
the discussion next passes to the higher conceptions, Soul, World, God,
by the pathway of the correlation Unconditioned and Conditioned, and its
kindred contrasts Absolute and Relative, Necessary and Contingent,
Infinite and Finite, corroborating and reinforcing the import of
idealism, and, still more decidedly, that of its plural form. Finally,
the strong and favorable bearing of this last on the dissolution of
agnosticism and the habilitation of the ideals, the True, the Beautiful,
and the Good, in a heightened meaning, is brought out.

This carries the inquiry to the second part of it, that of the
Philosophical Methods. Here I recount these in a series of six: the
Dogmatic, the Skeptical, the Critical, the Pragmatic, the Genetic, the
Dialectic. These, I show, in spite of the tendency of the earlier
members in the series to over-emphasis, all have their place and
function in the development of a complete philosophy, and in fact form
an ascending series in methodic effectiveness, all that precede the last
being taken up into the comprehensive Critical Rationalism of the last.
Methodology thus passes upward, over the ascending and widening roadways
of (1) Intuition and Deduction; (2) Experience and Induction; (3)
Intuition and Experience adjusted by Critical Limits; (4) Skepticism
reinforced and made _quasi_-affirmative by Desire and Will; (5)
Empiricism enlarged by substitution of cosmic and psychic history for
subjective consciousness; (6) Enlightened return to a Rationalism
critically established by the inclusion of the preceding elements, and
by the sifting and the grading of the Fundamental Concepts through their
behavior when tested by the effort to make them universal. In this way,
the methods fall into a System, the organic principle of which is this
principle of Dialectic, which proves itself alone able to establish
_necessary_ truths; that is, _truths indeed_,--judgments that are seen
to exclude their opposites, because, in the attempt to substitute the
opposite, the place of it is still filled by the judgment which it aims
to dislodge.

And now, with your favoring leave, I will read the excerpt from my
larger text.

The task to which, in an especial sense, the cultivators of philosophy
are summoned by the plans of the present Congress of Arts and Science,
is certainly such as to stir an ambition to achieve it. At the same
time, it tempers eagerness by its vast difficulty, and the apprehension
lest this may prove insuperable. The task, the officers of the Congress
tell us, is no less than to promote the unification of all human
knowledge. It requires, then, the reduction of the enormous detail in
our present miscellany of sciences and arts, which to a general glance,
or even to a more intimate view, presents a confusion of differences
that seems overwhelming, to a system nevertheless clearly
harmonious,--founded, that is to say, upon universal principles which
control all differences by explaining them, and which therefore, in the
last resort, themselves flow lucidly from a single supreme principle.
Simply to state this meaning of the task set us, is enough to awaken the
doubt of its practicability.

This doubt, we are bound to confess, has more and more impressed itself
upon the general mind, the farther this has advanced in the experience
of scientific discovery. The very increase in the multiplicity and
complexity of facts and their causal groupings increases the feeling
that at the root of things there is "a final inexplicability"--total
reality seems, more and more, too vast, too profound, for us to grasp or
to fathom. And yet, strangely enough, this increasing sense of
mysterious vastness has not in the least prevented the modern mind from
more and more asserting, with a steadily increasing insistence, the
essential and unchangeable unity of that whole of things which to our
ordinary experience, and even to all our sciences, appears such an
endless and impenetrable complex of differences,--yes, of
contradictions. In fact, this assertion of the unity of all things,
under the favorite name of the Unity of Nature, is the pet dogma of
modern science; or, rather, to speak with right accuracy, it is the
stock-in-trade of a _philosophy_ of science, current among many of the
leaders of modern science; for every such assertion, covering, as it
tacitly and unavoidably does, a view about the absolute whole, is an
assertion belonging to the province of philosophy, before whose tribunal
it must come for the assessment of its value. The presuppositions of all
the special sciences, and, above all, this presupposition of the Unity
and Uniformity of Nature, common to all of them, must thus come back for
justification and requisite definition to philosophy--that uppermost and
all-inclusive form of cognition which addresses itself to the whole as
whole. In their common assertion of the Unity of Nature, the exponents
of modern science come unawares out of their own province into quite
another and a higher; and in doing so they show how unawares they come,
by presenting in most instances the curious spectacle of proclaiming at
once their increasing belief in the unity of things, and their
increasing disbelief in its penetrability by our intelligence:--

         _In's Innere der Natur,
          Dringt kein erschaffner Geist,_

is their chosen poet's expression of their philosophic mood. Curious we
have the right to call this state of the scientific mind, because it is
to critical reflection so certainly self-contradictory. How can there be
a real unity belonging to what is inscrutable?--what evidence of unity
can there be, except in intelligible and explanatory continuity?

But, at all events, this very mood of agnostic self-contradiction, into
which the development of the sciences casts such a multitude of minds,
brings them,--brings all of us,--as already indicated, into that court
of philosophy where alone such issues lawfully belong, and where alone
they can be adjudicated. If the unification of the sciences can be made
out to be real by making out its sole sufficient condition, namely, that
there is a genuine, and not a merely nominal, unity in the whole of
reality itself,--a unity that explains because it is itself, not simply
intelligible, but the only completely intelligible of things,--this
desirable result must be the work of philosophy. However difficult the
task may be, it is rightly put upon us who belong to the Department
listed first among the twenty-four in the programme of this
representative Congress.

I cannot but express my own satisfaction, as a member of this
Department, nor fail to extend my congratulations to you who are my
colleagues in it, that the Congress, in its programme, takes openly the
affirmative on this question of the possible unification of knowledge.
The Congress has thus declared beforehand for the practicability of the
task it sets. It has even declared for its not distant accomplishment;
indeed, not impossibly, its accomplishment through the transactions of
the Congress itself; and it indicates, by no uncertain signs, the
leading, the determining part that philosophy must have in the
achievement. In fact, the authorities of the Congress themselves suggest
a solution of their own for their problem. In their programme we see a
renewed Hierarchy of the Sciences, and at the summit of this appears now
again, after so long a period of humiliating obscuration, the figure of
Philosophy, raised anew to that supremacy, as Queen of the Sciences,
which had been hers from the days of Plato to those of Copernicus, but
which she began to lose when modern physical and historical research
entered upon its course of sudden development, and which, until
recently, she has continued more and more to lose as the sciences have
advanced in their career of discoveries,--ever more unexpected, more
astonishing, yet more convincing and more helpful to the welfare of
mankind. May this sign of her recovered empire not fail! If we rejoice
at the token, the Congress has made it our part to see that the title is
vindicated. It is ours to show this normative function of philosophy,
this power to reign as the unifying discipline in the entire realm of
our possible knowledge; to show it by showing that the very nature of
philosophy--its elemental concepts and its directing ideals, its methods
taken in their systematic succession--is such as must result in a view
of universal reality that will supply the principle at once giving rise
to all the sciences and connecting them all into one harmonious whole.

Such, and so grave, my honored colleagues, is the duty assigned to this
hour. Sincerely can I say, Would it had fallen to stronger hands than
mine! But since to mine it has been committed, I will undertake it in no
disheartened spirit; rather, in that temper of animated hope in which
the whole Congress has been conceived and planned. And I draw
encouragement from the place, and its associations, where we are
assembled--from its historic connections not only with the external
expansion of our country, but with its growth in culture, and especially
with its growth in the cultivation of philosophy. For your speaker, at
least, can never forget that here in St. Louis, the metropolis of the
region by which our national domain was in the Louisiana Purchase so
enlarged,--here was the centre of a movement in philosophic study that
has proved to be of national import. It is fitting that we all, here
to-day, near to the scene itself, commemorate the public service done by
our present National Commissioner of Education and his group of
enthusiastic associates, in beginning here, in the middle years of the
preceding century, those studies of Kant and his great idealistic
successors that unexpectedly became the nucleus of a wider and more
penetrating study of philosophy in all parts of our country. It is with
quickened memories belonging to the spot where, more than
five-and-thirty years ago, it was my happy fortune to take some part
with Dr. Harris and his companions, that I begin the task assigned me.
The undertaking seems less hopeless when I can here recall the names and
the congenial labors of Harris, of Davidson, of Brockmeyer, of Snider,
of Watters, of Jones,--half of them now gone from life. They "builded
better than they knew;" and, humbly as they may themselves have
estimated their ingenuous efforts to gain acquaintance with the greatest
thoughts, history will not fail to take note of what they did, as
marking one of the turning-points in the culture of our nation. The
publication of the _Journal of Speculative Philosophy_, granting all the
subtractions claimed by its critics on the score of defects (of which
its conductors were perhaps only too sensible), was an influence that
told in all our circles of philosophical study, and thence in the whole
of our social as well as our academic life.

       *     *     *     *     *

[Here I enter upon the discussion of the subject proper, beginning, as
above indicated, with the Fundamental Conceptions. Having followed these
through the contrasts Whole and Part, Subject and Object, Reality and
Appearance (or Noumenon and Phenomenon), and developed the bearing of
these on the procedure of thought from the dualism of natural realism to
materialism and thence to idealism, with the issue now coming on, in
this last, between monism and pluralism, I strike into the contrast
Cause and Effect, and, noting its unfolding into the more comprehensive
form of Ground and Consequence, go on thence as follows:]

       *     *     *     *     *

It is plain that the contrast Ground and Consequence will enable us to
state the new issue with closer precision and pertinence than Reality
and Appearance, Noumenon and Phenomenon, can supply; while, at the same
time, Ground and Consequence exhibits Cause and Effect as presenting a
contrast that only fulfills what Noumenon and Phenomenon foretold and
strove towards; in fact, what was more remotely, but not less surely,
also indicated by Whole and Part, Knowing and Being, Subject and Object.
For in penetrating to the coherent meaning of these conceptions, the
philosophic movement, as we saw, advanced steadily to the fuller and
fuller translating of each of them into the reality that unifies _by
explanation_, instead of pretending to explain by merely unifying; and
this, of course, will now be put forward explicitly, in the clarified
category of Cause and Effect, transfigured from a physical into a purely
logical relation. What idealism now says, in terms of this, is that the
Cause (or, as we now read it, the Ground) of all that exists is the
Subject; is Mind, the intelligently Self-conscious; and that all things
else, the mere objects, material things, are its Consequence, its
Outcome,--in that sense its Effect. And what the new pluralistic
idealism says, is that the _assemblage of individual minds_--intelligence
being essentially personal and individual, and never merely universal
and collective--is the true total Cause of all, and that every mind thus
belongs to the order of First Causes; nevertheless, that part, and the
most significant part, of the nature of every mind, essential to its
personality and its reason, is _its recognition of other minds in the
very act of its own self-definition_. That is to say, a mind by its
spontaneous nature as intelligence, by its intrinsic rational or logical
genius, puts itself as member of a _system_ of minds; all minds are put
by each other as Ends--completely standard and sacred Objects, as much
parts of the system of true Causes as each is, in its capacity of
Subject; and we have a noumenal Reality that is properly to be described
as the eternal Federal Republic of Spirits.

Consequently, the relation of Cause and Effect now expands and heightens
into a system of the RECIPROCITY OF FIRST CAUSES; causes, that is,
which, while all coefficients in the existence and explanation of that
natural world of experience which forms their passive effect, their
objects of mere perception, are themselves related only in the higher
way of Final Causes--that is, Defining-Bases and Ends--of each other,
making them the logical Complements, and the Objects of conduct, all for
each, and each for all. Hence, the system of causation undergoes a
signal transformation, and proves to be organized by Final Cause as its
basis and root, instead of by Efficient Cause, or Originating Ground, as
the earlier stages of thinking had always assumed.

The causal relation between the absolute or primary realities being
purely Final, or Defining and Purposive; that is to say, the uncoercive
influence of recognition and ideality; all the other forms of cause, as
grouped by Aristotle,--Material, Formal, and Efficient,--are seen to be
the derivatives of Final Cause, as being supplied by the action of the
minds that, as absolute or underived realities, exist only in the
relation of mutual Complements and Ends. Accordingly, Efficient Cause
operates only from minds, as noumena, to matter, as their phenomenon,
their presented contents of experience; or, in a secondary and
derivative sense, from one phenomenon to another, or from one group of
phenomena to another group, these playing the part of transmitters, or
(as some logicians would say) Instrumental Causes, or Means. Cause, as
Material, is hence defined as the elementary phenomenon, and the
combinations of this; and therefore, strictly taken, is merely Effect
(or Outcome) of the self-active consciousness, whose spontaneous forms
of conception and perception become the Formal Cause that organizes the
sum of phenomena into cosmic harmony or unity.

Here, accordingly, comes into view the further and in some respects
deeper conceptual pair, Many and One. The history of philosophic thought
proves that this antithesis is darkly obscure and deeply ambiguous; for
about it have centred a large part of the conflicts of doctrine. This
pair has already been used, implicitly, in exhibiting the development of
the preceding group, Cause and Effect; and in so using it we have
supplied ourselves with a partial clarification of it, and with one
possible solution of its ambiguity. We have seen, namely, how our strong
natural persuasion that philosophy guided by the fundamental concept
Cause must become the search for the One amid the wilderness of the
Many, and that this search cannot be satisfied and ended except in an
all-inclusive Unit, in which the Many is embraced as the integral and
originated parts, completely determined, subjected, and controlled, may
give way to another and less oppressive conception of unity; a
conception of it as the harmony among many free and independent primary
realities, a harmony founded on their intelligent and reasonable mutual
recognition. This conception casts at least _some_ clearing light upon
the long and dreary disputes over the Many and the One; for it exposes,
plainly, the main source of them. They have arisen out of two chief
ambiguities,--the ambiguity of the concept One, and the ambiguity of the
concept Cause in its supreme meaning. The normal contrast between the
One and the Many is a clear and simple contrast: the One is the single
unit, and the Many is the repetition of the unit, or is the collection
of the several units. But if we go on to suppose that there is a
collection or sum of all possible units, and call this the Whole, then,
since there can be no second such, we call it also "one" (or the One, by
way of preëminence), overlooking the fact that it differs from the
simple one, or unit, _in genere_; that it is in fact not a unit at all,
not an elementary member of a series, but the annulment of all series;
that our name "one" has profoundly changed its meaning, and now stands
for the Sole, the Only. Thus, by our forgetfulness of differences, we
fall into deep water, and, with the confused illusions of the drowning,
dream of the One and All as the single _punctum originationis_ of all
things, the Source and Begetter of the very units of which it is in
reality only the resultant and the derivative. Or, from another point of
view, and in another mood, we rightly enough take the One to mean the
coherent, the intelligible, the consistent, the harmonious; and putting
the Many, on the misleading hint of its contrast to the unit, in
antithesis to this One of harmony, we fall into the belief that the Many
cannot be harmonious, is intrinsically a cluster of repulsions or of
collisions, incapable of giving rise to accord; indeed, essentially
hostile to it. So, as accord is the aim and the essence of our reason,
we are caught in the snare of monism, pluralism having apparently become
the equivalent of chaos, and thus the _bête noir_ of rational
metaphysics. Nay, in the opposed camp itself, some of the most ardent
adherents of pluralism, the liveliest of wit, the most exuberant in
literary resources, are the abjectest believers in the hopeless
disjunction and capriciousness of the plural, and hold there is a rift
in the texture of reality that no intelligence, "even though you dub it
'the Absolute,'" can mend or reach across. Yet surely there is nothing
in the Many, as a sum of units, the least at war with the One as a
system of harmony. On the contrary, even in the pure form of the Number
Series, the Many is impossible except on the principle of harmony,--the
units can be collected and summed (that is, constitute the Many), only
if they cohere in a community of intrinsic kindred. Consequently the
whole question of the chaotic or the harmonic nature of a plural world
turns on the nature of the genus which we find characteristic of the
absolutely (_i. e._, the unreservedly) real, and which is to be taken as
the common denomination enabling us to count them and to sum them. When
minds are seen to be necessarily the primary realities, but _also
necessarily federal_ as well as individual, the illusion about the
essential disjunction and non-coherence of the plurally real dissolves
away, and a primordial world of manifold persons is seen to involve no
fundamental or hopeless anarchy of individualism, irreducible in
caprice, but an indwelling principle of harmony, rather, that from the
springs of individual being intends the control and composure of all the
disorders that mark the world of experiential appearance, and so must
tend perpetually to effect this.

The other main source of our confusions over the Many and the One is the
variety of meaning hidden in the concept Cause, and our propensity to
take its most obvious but least significant sense for its supreme
intent. Closest at hand, in experience, is our productive causation of
changes in our sense-world, and hence most obvious is that reading of
Cause which takes it as the producer of changes and, with a deeper
comprehension of it, of the inalterable linkage between changes, whereby
one follows regularly and surely upon another. Thus what we have in
philosophy agreed to call Efficient Cause comes to be mistaken for the
profoundest and the supreme form of cause, and all the other modes of
cause, the Material (or Stuff), the Form (or Conception), and the End
(or Purpose), its consequent and derivative auxiliaries. Under the
influence of this strong impression, we either assume total reality to
be One Whole, all-embracing and all-producing of its manifold modes, or
else view it as a duality, consisting of One Creator and his manifold
creatures. So it has come about that metaphysics has hitherto been
chiefly a contention between pantheism and monotheism, or, as the latter
should for greater accuracy be called, monarchotheism; and, it must be
acknowledged, this struggle has been attended by a continued (though not
continual) decline of this later dualistic theory before the steadfast
front and unyielding advance of the older monism. Thus persistent has
been the assumption that harmony can only be assured by the unity given
in some single productive causation: the only serious uncertainty has
been about the most rational way of conceiving the operation of this
Sole Cause; and this doubt has thus far, on the whole, declined in favor
of the Elder Oriental or monistic conception, as against the Hebraic
conception of extraneous creation by fiat. The frankly confessed mystery
of the latter, its open appeal to miracle, places it at a fatal
disadvantage with the Elder Orientalism, when the appeal is to reason
and intelligibility. It is therefore no occasion for wonder that,
especially since the rise of the scientific doctrine of Evolution, with
its postulate of a universal unity, self-varying yet self-fulfilling,
even the leaders of theology are more and more falling into the monistic
line and swelling the ever-growing ranks of pantheism. If it be asked
here, _And why not?_--_where is the harm of it?_--_is not the whole
question simply of what is true_? the answer is, _The mortal harm of the
destruction of personality, which lives or dies with the preservation or
destruction of individual responsibility; while the completer truth is,
that there are other and profounder (or, if you please, higher) truths
than this of explanation by Efficient Cause_. In fact, there is a higher
conception of Cause itself than this of production, or efficiency; for,
of course, as we well might say, that alone can be the supreme
conception of Cause which can subsist between absolute or unreserved
realities, and such must exclude their production or their necessitating
control by others. So that we ought long since to have realized that
Final Cause, the recognized presence to each other as unconditioned
realities, or Defining Auxiliaries and Ends, is the sole causal relation
that can hold among primary realities; though among such it _can_ hold,
and in fact must.

For the absolute reality of personal intelligences, at once individual
and universally recognizant of others, is called for by other
conceptions fundamental to philosophy. These other fundamental concepts
can no more be counted out or ignored than those we have hitherto
considered; and when we take them up, we shall see how vastly more
significant they are. They alone will prove supreme, truly organizing,
normative; they alone can introduce gradation in truths, for they alone
introduce the judgment of worth, of valuation; they alone can give us
counsels of perfection, for they alone rise from those elements in our
being which deal with ideals and with veritable Ideas. So let us proceed
to them.

       *     *     *     *     *

Our path into their presence, however, is through another pair, not so
plainly antithetic as those we have thus far considered. This pair that
I now mean is Time and Space, which, though not obviously antinomic, yet
owes its existence, as can now be shown, to that profoundest of
concept-contrasts which we earlier considered under the head of Subject
and Object, when the Object takes on its only adequate form of Other
Subject. But in passing from the contrast One and Many towards its
rational transformation into the moral society of Mind and Companion
Minds, we break into this pair of Time and Space, and must make our way
through it by taking in its full meaning.

Time and Space play an enormous part in all our empirical thinking, our
actual use of thought in our sense-perceptive life. And no wonder; for,
in coöperation, they form the postulate and condition of all our
possible sensuous consciousness. Only on them as backgrounds can thought
take on the peculiar clearness of an image or a picture; only on the
screens which they supply can we literally _depict_ an object. And this
clarity of outline and boundary is so dear to our ordinary
consciousness, that we are prone to say there is no sufficient, no real
clearness, unless we can clarify by the bounds either of place or of
date, or of both. In this mood, we are led to deny the reality and
validity of thought altogether, when it cannot be defined in the metes
and bounds afforded by Time or by Space: that which has no date nor
place, we say,--no extent and no duration,--cannot be real; it is but a
pseudo-thought, a pretense and a delusion. Here is the extremely
plausible foundation of the philosophy known as sensationism, the
refined or second-thought form of materialism, in which it begins its
euthanasia into idealism.

Without delaying here to criticise this, let us notice the part that
Time and Space play in reference to the conceptual pair we last
considered, the One and the Many; for not otherwise shall we find our
way beyond them to the still more fundamental conceptions which we are
now aiming to reach. Indeed, it is through our surface-apprehension of
the pair One and Many, as this illumines experience, that we most
naturally come at the pair Time and Space; so that these are at first
taken for mere generalizations and abstractions, the purely nominal
representatives of the actual distinctions between the members of the
Many by our sense perception of this from that, of here from there, of
now from then. It is not till our reflective attention is fixed on the
fact that _there_ and _here_, _now_ and _then_, are _peculiar_
distinctions, wholly different from other contrasts of this with
that,--which may be made in all sorts of ways, by difference of quality,
or of quantity, or of relations quite other than place and date,--it is
not till we realize this _peculiar_ character of the Time-contrast and
the Space-contrast, that we see these singular differential _qualia_
cannot be derived from others, not even from the contrast One and Many,
but are independent, are themselves underived and spontaneous utterances
of our intelligent, our percipient nature. But when Kant first helped
mankind to the realization of this spontaneous (or _a priori_) character
of this pair of perceptive conditions, or Sense-Forms, he fell into the
persuasion, and led the philosophic world into it, that though Time and
Space are not derivatives of the One and the Many read as the numerical
aspect of our perceptive experiences, yet there _is_ between the two
pairs a connection of dependence as intimate as that first supposed, but
in exactly the opposite sense; namely, that the One and the Many are
conditioned by Time and Space, or, when it comes to the last resort, are
at any rate completely dependent upon Time. By a series of units, this
view means, we really understand a set of items discriminated and
related either as points or as instants: in the last analysis, as
instants: that is, it is impossible to apprehend a unit, or to count and
sum units, unless the unit is taken as an instant, and the units as so
many instants. Numbers, Kant holds, are no doubt pure (or quite
unsensuous) percepts,--discerned particulars,--therefore spontaneous
products of the mind _a priori_, but made possible only by the primary
pure percept Time, or, again, through the mediation of this, by the
conjoined pure percept Space; so that the numbers, in their own pure
character, are simply the instants in their series. As the instants, and
therefore the numbers, are pure percepts,--particulars discerned without
the help of sense,--so pure percepts, in a primal and comprehensive
sense, argues Kant, must their conditioning postulates Time and Space
be, to supply the "element," or "medium," that will render such pure
percepts possible.

This doctrine of Kant's is certainly plausible; indeed, it is
impressively so; and it has taken a vast hold in the world of science,
and has reinforced the popular belief in the unreality of thought apart
from Time and Space; an unreality which it is an essential part of
Kant's system to establish critically. But as a graver result, it has
certainly tended to discredit the belief in personal identity as an
abiding and immutable reality, enthroned over the mutations of things in
Time and Space; since all that is in these is numbered and is mutable,
and is rather many than one, yet nothing is believed real except as it
falls under them, at any rate under Time. And with this decline of the
belief in a changeless self, has declined, almost as rapidly and
extensively, the belief in immortality. Or, rather, the permanence and
the identity of the person has faded into a question regarded as
unanswerable; though none the less does this agnostic state of belief
tend to take personality, in any responsible sense of the word, out of
the region of practical concern. With what is unknowable, even if
existing, we can have no active traffic; 't is for our conduct as if it
were not.

So it behooves us to search if this prevalent view about the relation of
One and Many to Time and Space is trustworthy and exact. What place and
function in philosophy must Space and Time be given?--for they certainly
have a place and function; they certainly are among the inexpugnable
conceptions with which thought has to concern itself when it undertakes
to gain a view of the whole. But it may be easy to give them a larger
place and function than belong to them by right. Is it true, then, that
the One and the Many--that the system of Numbers, in short--are
unthinkable except as in Space and Time, or, at any rate, in Time? Or,
to put the question more exactly, as well as more gravely and more
pertinently, Are Space and Time the true _principia individui_, and is
Time preëminently the ultimate _principium individuationis_? Is there
accordingly no individuality, and no society, no associative assemblage,
except in the fleeting world of phenomena, dated and placed? Simply to
ask the question, and thus bring out the full drift of this Kantian
doctrine, is almost to expose the absurdity of it. Such a doctrine,
though it may be wisely refusing to confound personality, true
individuality, with the mere logical singular; nay, worse, with a
limited and special illustration of the singular, the one _here_ or the
one _there_, the one _now_ or the one _then_; nevertheless, by confining
numerability to things material and sensible, makes personal identity
something unmeaning or impossible, and destroys part of the foundation
for the relations of moral responsibility. Though the vital trait of the
person, his genuine individuality, doubtless lies, not in his being
exactly numerable, but in his being aboriginal and originative; in a
word, in his self-activity, in his being a centre of autonomous social
recognition; yet exactly numerable he indeed is, and must be, not
confusable with any other, else his professed autonomy, his claim of
rights and his sense of duty, can have no significance, must vanish in
the universal confusion belonging to the indefinite. Nor, on the other
hand, is it at all true that a number has to be a point or an instant,
nor that things when numbered and counted are implicitly pinned upon
points or, at all events, upon instants. It may well enough be the fact
that in our empirical use of number we have to employ Time, or even
Space, but it is a gaping _non sequitur_ to conclude that we therefore
can count nothing but the placed and the dated. Certainly we count
whenever we _distinguish_,--by whatever means, on whatever ground. To
think is, in general, at least to "distinguish the things that differ;"
but this will not avail except we keep account of the differences; hence
the One and the Many lie in the very bosom of intelligence, and this
fundamental and spontaneous contrast can not only rive Time and Space
into expressions of it, in instants and in points, but travels with
thought from its start to its goal, and as organic factor in
mathematical science does indeed, as Plato in the _Republic_ said, deal
with absolute being, if yet dreamwise; so that One and Many, and Many as
the sum of the ones, makes part of the measure of that primally real
world which the world of minds alone can be. If the contrast One and
Many can pass the bounds of the merely phenomenal, by passing the
temporal and the spatial; if it applies to universal being, to the
noumenal as well as to the phenomenal; then the absolutely real world,
so far as concerns this essential condition, can be a world of genuine
individuals, identifiable, free, abiding, responsible, and there can be
a real moral order; if not, then there can be no such moral world, and
the deeper thought-conceptions to which we now approach must be
regarded, at the best, as fair illusions, bare ideals, which the serious
devotee of truth must shun, except in such moments of vacancy and
leisure as he may venture to surrender, at intervals, to purely hedonic
uses. But if the One and the Many are not dependent on Time and Space,
their universal validity is possible; and it has already been shown that
they are not so dependent, are not thus restricted.

And now it remains to show their actual universality, by exhibiting
their place in the structure of the absolutely real; since nobody calls
in question their pertinence to the world of phenomena. But their
noumenal applicability follows from their essential implication with all
and every difference: no difference, no distinction, that does not carry
counting; and this is quite as true as that there can be no counting
without difference. The One and the Many thus root in Identity and
Difference, pass up into fuller expression in Universal and Particular,
hold forward into Cause and Effect, attain their commanding presentation
in the Reciprocity of First Causes, and so keep record of the contrast
between Necessity and Contingency. In short, they are founded in, and in
their turn help (indispensably) to express, _all_ the categories,--Quality,
Quantity, Relation, Modality. Nor do they suffer arrest there; they hold
in the ideals, the True, the Beautiful, the Good, and in the primary
Ideas, the Self, the World, and God. For all of these differ, however
close their logical linkage may be; and in so far as they differ, each
of them is a counted unit, and so they are many. And, most profoundly of
all, One and Many take footing in absolute reality so soon as we realize
that nothing short of intelligent being can be primordially real,
underived, and truly causal, and that intelligence is, by its idea, at
once an _I_-thinking and a universal recognizant outlook upon others
that think _I_.

Hence Number, so far from being the derivative of Time and Space,
founds, at the bottom, in the self-definition and social recognition of
intelligent beings, and so finds _a priori_ a valid expression in Time
and in Space, as well as in every other primitive and spontaneous form
in which intelligence utters itself. The Pythagorean doctrine of the
rank of Number in the scale of realities is only one remove from the
truth: though the numbers are indeed not the Prime Beings, they do enter
into the essential nature of the Prime Beings; are, so to speak, the
organ of their definite reality and identity, and for that reason go
forward into the entire defining procedure by which these intelligences
organize their world of experiences. And the popular impression that
Time and Space are derivatives from Number, is in one aspect the truth,
rather than the doctrine of Kant is; for though they are not mere
generalizations and abstractions from numbered dates and durations,
places and extents, they do exist as relating-principles which minds
simply _put_, as the conditions _of perceptive experiences_; which by
the nature of intelligence they must number in order to have and to
master; while Number itself, the contrast of One and Many, enters into
the very being of minds, and therefore still holds in Time and in Space,
which are the organs, or _media_, not of the whole being of the mind,
but only of that region of it constituted by sensation,--the material,
the disjunct, the empirical. Besides, the logical priority of Number is
implied in the fact that minds in putting Time and Space _a priori_ must
count them as two, since they discriminate them with complete clearness,
so that it is impossible to work up Space out of Time (as Berkeley and
Stuart Mill so adroitly, but so vainly, attempted to do), or Time out of
Space (as Hegel, with so little adroitness and such patent failure,
attempted to do). No; there Time and Space stand, fixed and
inconfusable, incapable of mutual transmutation, and thus the ground of
an abiding difference between the inner or psychic sense-world and the
outer or physical, between the subjective and the (sensibly) objective.
By means of them, the world of minds discerns and bounds securely
between the privacy of each and the publicity, the life "out of doors,"
which is common to all; between the cohering isolation of the individual
and the communicating action of the society. Indeed, as from this
attained point of view we can now clearly see, the real ground of the
difference between Time and Space, and hence between subjective
perception and the objective existence of physical things, is in the
fact that a mind, in _being_ such,--in its very act of
self-definition,--correlates itself with a _society_ of minds, and so,
to fulfill its nature, in so far as this includes a world of
experiences, must form its experience socially as well as privately, and
hence will put forth a condition of sensuous communication, as well as a
condition of inner sensation. Thus the dualization of the sense-world
into inner and outer, psychic and physical, subjective and objective,
rests at last on the intrinsically social nature of conscious being;
rests on the twofold structure, logically dichotomous, of the
self-defining act; and we get the explanation, from the nature of
intelligence as such, why the Sense-Forms are necessarily two, and only
two. It is no accident that we experience all things sensible in Time or
in Space, or in both together; it is the natural expression of our
primally intelligent being, concerned as that is, directly and only,
with our self and its logically necessary complement, the other selves;
and so the natural order, in its two discriminated but complemental
portions, the inner and the outer, is founded in that moral order which
is given in the fundamental act of our intelligence. It is this resting
of Space upon our veritable Objects, the Other Subjects, that imparts to
it its externalizing quality, so that things in it are referred to the
testing of all minds, not to ours only, and are reckoned external
because measured by that which is alone indeed other than we.

In this way we may burst the restricting limit which so much of
philosophy, and so much more of ordinary opinion, has drawn about our
mental powers in view of this contrast Time and Space, especially with
reference to the One and the Many, and to the persuasion that plural
distinctions, at any rate, cannot belong in the region of absolute
reality. Ordinary opinion either inclines to support a philosophy that
is skeptical of either Unity or Plurality being pertinent beyond Time
and Space, and thus to hold by agnosticism, or, if it affects
affirmative metaphysics, tends to prefer monism to pluralism, when the
number-category is carried up into immutable regions: to represent the
absolutely real as One, somehow seems less contradictory of the "fitness
of things" than to represent it as Many; moreover, carrying the Many
into that supreme region, by implying the belonging there of mortals
such as we, seems shocking to customary piety, and full of extravagant
presumption. Still, nothing short of this can really satisfy our deep
demand for a moral order, a personal responsibility, nay, an adequate
logical fulfillment of our conception of a self as an _intelligence_;
while the clarification which a rational pluralism supplies for such
ingrained puzzles in the theory of knowledge as that of the source and
finality of the contrast Time and Space, to mention no others, should
afford a strong corroborative evidence in its behalf. And, as already
said, this view enables us to pass the limit which Time and Space are so
often supposed to put, hopelessly, upon our concepts of the ideal grade,
the springs of all our aspiration. To these, then, we may now pass.

       *     *     *     *     *

We reach them through the doorways of the Necessary _vs._ the
Contingent, the Unconditioned _vs._ the Conditioned, the Infinite _vs._
the Finite, the Absolute _vs._ the Relative; and we recognize them as
our profoundest foundation-concepts, alone deserving, as Kant so
pertinently said, the name of IDEAS,--the Soul, the World, and God.
Associated with them are what we may call our three Forms of the
Ideal,--the True, the Beautiful, the Good. These Ideas and their
affiliated ideals have the highest directive and settling function in
the organization of philosophy; they determine its schools and its
history, by forming the centre of all its controlling problems; they
prescribe its great subdivisions, breaking it up into Metaphysics,
Æsthetics, and Ethics, and Metaphysics, again, into Psychology
Cosmology, and Ontology,--or Theology in the classic sense, which, in
the modern sense, becomes the Philosophy of Religion; they call into
existence, as essential preparatory and auxiliary disciplines, Logic and
the Theory of Knowledge, or Epistemology. They thus provide the true
distinctions between philosophy and the sciences of experience, and
present these sciences as the carrying out, upon experiential details,
of the methodological principles which philosophy alone can supply;
hence they lead us to view all the sciences as in fact the applied
branches, the completing organs of philosophy, instead of its hostile
competitors.

As for the controlling questions which they start, these are such as
follow: Are the ideals but bare ideals, serving only to cast "a light
that never was, on land or sea?"--are the Ideas only bare ideas, without
any objective being of their own, without any footing in the real,
serving only to enhance the dull facts of experience with auroral
illusions? The philosophic thinker answers affirmatively, or with
complete skeptical dubiety, or with a convinced and uplifting negative,
according to his less or greater penetration into the real meaning of
these deepest concepts, and depending on his view into the nature and
thought-effect of the Necessary and the Contingent, the Unconditioned
and the Conditioned, the Infinite and the Finite, the Absolute and the
Relative.

And what, now, are the accurate, the adequate meanings of the three
Ideas?--what _does_ our profoundest thought intend by the Soul, by the
World, by God? We know how Kant construed them, in consequence of the
course by which he came critically (as he supposed) upon them,--as
respectively the paramount Subject of experiences; the paramount Object
of experiences, or the Causal Unity of the possible series of sensible
objects; and the complete Totality of Conditions for experience and its
objects, itself therefore the Unconditioned. It is worth our notice,
that especially by his construing the idea of God in this way, thus
rehabilitating the classical and scholastic conception of God as the Sum
of all Realities, he laid the foundation for that very transfiguration
of mysticism, that idealistic monism, which he himself repudiated, but
which his three noted successors in their several ways so ardently
accepted, and which has since so pervaded the philosophic world. But
suppose Kant's alleged critical analysis of the three Ideas and their
logical basis is in fact far from critical, far from "exactly
discriminative,"--and I believe there is the clearest warrant for
declaring that it is,--then the assumed "undeniable critical basis" for
idealistic monism will be dislodged, and it will be open to us to
interpret the Ideas with accuracy and consistency--an interpretation
which may prove to establish, not at all any monism, but a rational
pluralism. And this will also reveal to us, I think, that our prevalent
construing of the Unconditioned and the Conditioned, the Necessary and
the Contingent, the Infinite and the Finite, the Absolute and the
Relative, suffers from an equal inaccuracy of analysis, and precisely
for this reason gives a plausible but in fact untrustworthy support to
the monistic interpretation of God, and Soul, and World; or, as Hegel
and his chief adherents prefer to name them, God, Mind, and Nature. If
the Kantian analysis stands, then it seems to follow, clearly enough,
that God is the Inclusive Unit which at once embraces Mind and Nature,
Soul and World, expresses itself in them, and imparts to them their
meaning; and the plain dictate then is, that Kant's personal prejudice,
and the personal prejudices of others like him, in favor of a
transcendent God, must give way to that conception of the Divine, as
immanent and inclusive, which is alone consistent with its being indeed
the Totality of Conditions,--the Necessary Postulate, and the Sufficient
Reason, for both Subject and Object.

But will Kant's analysis stand? Have we not here another of his few but
fatal slips,--like his doctrine of the dependence of Number upon Time
and Space, and its consequent subjection to them? It surely seems so. If
the veritable postulate of categorical syllogizing be, as Kant thinks it
is, merely the Subject, the self as experiencer of presented phenomena,
in contrast to the Object, the causally united sum of possible
phenomena; and if the true postulate of conditional syllogizing is this
cosmic Object, as contrasted with the correlate Subject, then it would
seem we cannot avoid certain pertinent questions. Is such a postulate
Subject any fit and adequate account of the whole Self, of the Soul?--is
there not a vital difference between this subject-self and the Self as
Person?--does not Kant himself imply so, in his doctrine of the primacy
of the Practical Reason? Again: Is not the World, as explained in Kant's
analysis, and as afterwards made by him the solution of the Cosmological
Antinomies, simply the supplemental factor necessarily correlate to the
subjective aspect of the conscious life, and reduced from its uncritical
rôle of thing-in-itself to the intelligible subordination required by
Kant's theory of Transcendental Idealism?--and can this be any adequate
account of the Idea that is to stand in sufficing contrast to the whole
Self, the Person?--what less than the Society of Persons can meet the
World-Idea for that? Further: If with Kant we take the World to mean no
more than this object-factor in self-consciousness, must not the Soul,
the total Self, from which, according to Kant's Transcendental Idealism,
both Space and Time issue, supplying the basis for the immutable
contrast between the experiencing subject and the really experienced
objects,--must not this _whole_ Self be the real meaning of the
"Totality of Conditions, itself unconditioned," which comes into view as
simply the postulate of disjunctive syllogizing? How in the world can
disjunctive syllogizing, the confessed act of the _I_-thinking
intelligence, really postulate anything as Totality of Conditions, in
any other sense than the total of conditions for such syllogizing?--namely,
the conditioning _I_ that organizes and does the reasoning? There is
surely no warrant for calling this total, which simply transcends and
conditions the subject and the object of sensible experiences, by any
loftier name than that which Kant had already given it in the Deduction
of the Categories, when he designated it the "originally synthetic unity
of apperception (self-consciousness)," or "the _I_-thinking (_das
ich-denke_) that must accompany all my mental presentations,"--that is
to say, the whole Self, or thinking Person, idealistically interpreted.
The use of the name God in this connection, where Kant is in fact only
seeking the roots of the three orders of the syllogism _when reasoning
has by supposition been restricted to the subject-matter of experience_,
is assuredly without warrant; yes, without excuse. In fact, it is
because Kant sees that the third Idea, as reached through his analysis,
is intrinsically immanent,--resident in the self that syllogizes
disjunctively, and, because so resident, incapable of passing the bounds
of possible experience,--while he also sees that the idea of God should
mean a Being transcendent of every other thinker, himself a distinct
individual consciousness, though not an empirically limited one,--it is,
I say, precisely because he sees all this, that he pronounces the Idea,
though named with the name of God, utterly without pertinence to
indicate God's existence, and so enters upon that part of his
Transcendental Dialectic which is, in chief, directed to exposing the
transcendental illusion involved in the celebrated Ontological Proof.
Consistently, Kant in this famous analytic of the syllogism should be
talking, not of the Soul, the World, and God, but of the Subject (as
uniting-principle of its sense-_perceptions_), the Object (as
uniting-principle of all possible sense-_percepts_), and the Self (the
whole _I_ presiding over experience in both its aspects, as these are
discriminated in Time and Space). By what rational title--even granting
for the sake of argument that they are the genuine postulates of
categorical and of conditional syllogizing--can this Subject and this
Object, these correlate factors in the Self, rank as Ideas with the Idea
of their conditioning Whole--the Self, that in its still unaltered
identity fulfills, in Practical Reason, the high rôle of Person? If
_this_ no more than meets the standard of Idea, how can _they_ meet it?
How can two somethings, neither of which is the Totality of Conditions,
and both of which are therefore in fact conditioned, deserve the same
title with that which is intrinsically the Totality of Conditions, and,
as such, unconditioned? To call the conditioned and the unconditioned
alike Ideas is a confounding of dignities that Pure Reason should not
tolerate, whether the procedure be read as a leveling down or a leveling
up. Distributing the titles conferred by Pure Reason in this democratic
fashion reminds us too much, unhappily for Kant, of the Cartesian
performances with Substance; whereby God, mind, and matter became alike
"substances," though only God could in truth be said to "require nothing
for his existence save himself," while mind and matter, though
absolutely dependent on God, and derivative from him, were still to be
called substances in the "modified" and Pickwickian sense of being
underived from each other.

But if Kant's naming his third syllogistic postulate the Idea of God is
inconsequent upon his analysis; or if, when the analysis is made
consequent by taking the third Idea to mean the whole Self, the first
and second postulates sink in conceptual rank, so that they cannot with
any pertinence be called Ideas, unless we are willing to keep the same
name when its meaning must be changed _in genere_,--a procedure that can
only encumber philosophy instead of clearing its way,--these
difficulties do not close the account; we shall find other curious
things in this noted passage, upon which part of the characteristic
outcome of Kant's philosophizing so much depends. Besides the misnaming
of the third Idea, we have already had to question, in view of the path
by which he reaches it, the fitness of his calling the first by the
title of the Soul; and likewise, though for other and higher reasons, of
his calling the second by the name of the World. In fact, it comes home
to us that all of the Ideas are, in one way or another, misnomers;
Kant's whole procedure with them, in fine, has already appeared inexact,
inconsistent, and therefore uncritical. But now we shall become aware of
certain other inconsistencies. In coming to the Subject, as the
postulate of categorical syllogizing, Kant, you remember, does so by the
path of the relation Subject and Predicate, arguing that the chain of
categorical prosyllogisms has for its limiting concept and logical motor
the notion of an absolute subject that cannot be a predicate; and as no
subject of a judgment can of itself give assurance of fulfilling this
condition, he concludes this motor-limit of judgment-subjects to be
identical with the Subject as thinker, upon whom, at the last, all
judgments depend, and who, therefore, and who alone, can never be a
predicate merely. In similar fashion, he finds as the motor-limit of the
series of conditional prosyllogisms, which is governed by the relation
Cause and Effect, the notion of an absolute cause--a cause, that is,
incapable of being an effect; and this, as undiscoverable in the chain
of phenomenal causes, which are all in turn effects, he concludes is a
pure Idea, the reason's native conception of a necessary linkage among
all changes in Space, or of a Cosmic Unity among physical phenomena. In
both conceptions, then, whether of the unity of the Subject or of the
World, we seem to have a case of the unconditioned, as each, surely, is
a totality of conditions: the one, for all possible syllogisms by
Subject and Predicate; the other, for all possible syllogisms from Cause
and Effect. Until it can be shown that the syllogisms of the first sort
and the syllogisms of the second are both conditioned by the system of
disjunctive syllogisms, so that the Idea alleged to be the totality of
conditions for this system becomes the conditioning principle for both
the others, there appears to be no ground for contrasting the totality
of conditions presented in it with those presented in the others, as if
it were the absolute Totality of all Conditions, while the two others
are only "relative totalities,"--which would be as much as to say they
were only pseudo-totalities, both being conditioned instead of being
unconditioned. But there seems to be no evidence, not even an
indication, that disjunctive reasoning conditions categorical or
conditional--that it constitutes the whole kingdom, in which the other
two orders of reasoning form dependent provinces, or that for final
validation these must appeal to the disjunctive series and the Idea that
controls it. On the contrary, any such relation seems disproved by the
fact that the three types of syllogism apply alike in all
subject-matter, psychic or physical, subjective or objective, concerning
the Self or concerning the World,--yes, concerning other Selves or even
concerning God; whereas, if the relation were a fact, it would require
that only disjunctive reasoning can deal with the Unconditioned, and
that conditional must confine itself to cosmic material, while
categorical pertains only to the things of inner sense.

Such considerations cannot but shake our confidence in the inquisition
to which Kant has submitted the Ideas of Reason, both as regards what
they really mean and how they are to be correlated. At all events, the
analysis of logical procedure and connection on which his account of
them is based is full of the confusions and oversights that have now
been pointed out, and justifies us in saying that his case is not
established. Hence we are not bound to follow when his three successors,
or their later adherents, proceed in acceptance of his results, and
advance into various forms of idealism, all of the monistic type, as if
the general relation between the three Ideas had been demonstrably
settled by Kant in the monist sense, despite his not knowing this, and
that all we have to do is to disregard his recorded protests, and render
his results consistent, and our idealism "absolute," by casting out from
his doctrine the distinction between the Theoretical and the Practical
Reason, with the "primacy" of the latter, through making an end of his
assumed world of _Dinge an sich_, or "things in themselves." This
movement, I repeat, we are not bound to follow: a rectification of view
as to the meaning of the three Ideas becomes possible as soon as we are
freed from Kant's entangled method of discovering and defining them; and
when this rectification is effected, we shall find that the question
between monism and rational or harmonic pluralism is at least open, to
say no more. Nay, we are not to forget that by the results of our
analysis of the concepts One and Many, Time and Space, and the real
relation between them, plural metaphysics has already won a precedence
in this contest.




THE DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

BY GEORGE TRUMBULL LADD

     [George Trumbull Ladd, Professor of Philosophy, Yale
     University. b. January 19, 1842, Painesville, Ohio. B.A.
     Western Reserve College, 1864; B.D. Andover Theological
     Seminary, 1869; D.D. Western Reserve, 1879; M.A. Yale, 1881;
     LL.D. Western Reserve, 1895; LL.D. Princeton, 1896.
     Decorated with the 3d Degree of the Order of the Rising Sun
     of Japan, 1899; Pastor, Edinburg, Ohio, 1869-71; _ibid._,
     Milwaukee, Wis., 1871-79; Professor of Philosophy, Bowdoin
     College, 1879-81; _ibid._, Yale University, 1881--;
     Lecturer, Harvard, Tokio, Bombay, etc., 1885--, Member
     American Psychological Association, American Society of
     Naturalists, American Philosophical Association, American
     Oriental Society, Imperial Educational Society of Japan,
     Connecticut Academy. Author of _Elements of Physiological
     Psychology_; _Philosophy of Knowledge_; _Philosophy of
     Mind_; _A Theory of Reality_; and many other noted
     scientific works and papers.]


The history of man's critical and reflective thought upon the more
ultimate problems of nature and of his own life has, indeed, its period
of quickened progress, relative stagnation, and apparent decline. Great
thinkers are born and die, "schools of philosophy," so-called, arise,
flourish, and become discredited; and tendencies of various
characteristics mark the national or more general Zeitgeist of the
particular centuries. And always, a certain deep undercurrent, or
powerful stream of the rational evolution of humanity, flows silently
onward. But these periods of philosophical development do not correspond
to those which have been marked off for man by the rhythmic motion of
the heavenly bodies, or by himself for purposes of greater convenience
in practical affairs. The proposal, therefore, to treat any century of
philosophical development as though it could be taken out of, and
considered apart from, this constant unfolding of man's rational life
is, of necessity, doomed to failure. And, indeed, the nineteenth century
is no exception to the general truth.

There is, however, one important and historical fact which makes more
definite, and more feasible, the attempt to present in outline the
history of the philosophical development of the nineteenth century. This
fact is the death of Immanuel Kant, February 12, 1804. In a very unusual
way this event marks the close of the development of philosophy in the
eighteenth century. In a yet more unusual way the same event defines the
beginning of the philosophical development of the nineteenth century.
The proposal is, therefore, not artificial, but in accordance with the
truth of history, if we consider the problems, movements, results, and
present condition of this development, so far as the fulfillment of our
general purpose is concerned, in the light of the critical philosophy of
Kant. This purpose may then be further defined in the following way: to
trace the history of the evolution of critical and reflective thought
over the more ultimate problems of Nature and of human life, in the
Western World during the last hundred years, and from the standpoint of
the conclusions, both negative and positive, which are best embodied in
the works of the philosopher of Königsberg. This purpose we shall try to
fulfill in these four divisions of our theme: (1) A statement of the
problems of philosophy as they were given over to the nineteenth century
by the Kantian Critique; (2) a brief description of the lines of
movement along which the attempts at the improved solution of these
problems have proceeded, and of the principal influences contributing to
these attempts; (3) a summary of the principal results of these
movements--the items, so to say, of progress in philosophy which may be
credited to the last century; and finally, (4) a survey of the present
state of these problems as they are now to be handed down by the
nineteenth to the twentieth century. Truly an immensely difficult, if
not an impossible task, is involved in this purpose!

I. The problems which the critical philosophy undertook definitively to
solve may be divided into three classes. The first is the
epistemological problem, or the problem offered by human knowledge--its
essential nature, its fixed limitations, if such there be, and its
ontological validity. It was this problem which Kant brought to the
front in such a manner that certain subsequent writers on philosophy
have claimed it to be, not only the primary and most important branch of
philosophical discipline, but to comprise the sum-total of what human
reflection and critical thought can successfully compass. "We call
philosophy self-knowledge," says one of these writers. "The theory of
knowledge is the true _prima philosophia_," says another. Kant himself
regarded it as the most imperative demand of reason to establish a
science that shall "determine _a priori_ the possibility, the
principles, and the extent of all cognitions." The burden of the
epistemological problem has pressed heavily upon the thought of the
nineteenth century; the different attitudes toward this problem, and its
different alleged solutions, have been most influential factors in
determining the philosophical discussions, divisions, schools, and
permanent or transitory achievements of the century.

In the epistemological problem as offered by the Kantian philosophy of
cognition there is involved the subordinate but highly important
question as to the proper method of philosophy. Is the method of
criticism, as that method was employed in the three Critiques of Kant,
the exclusive, the sole appropriate and productive way of advancing
human philosophical thought? I do not think that the experience of the
nineteenth century warrants an affirmative answer to this question of
method. This experience has certainly, however, resulted in
demonstrating the need of a more thorough, consistent, and fundamental
use of the critical method than that in which it was employed by Kant.
And this improved use of the critical method has induced a more profound
study of the psychology of cognition, and of the historical development
of philosophy in the branch of epistemology. More especially, however,
it has led to the reinstatement of the value-judgments, as means of
cognition, in their right relations of harmony with the judgments of
fact and of law.

The second of the greater problems which the critical philosophy of the
eighteenth handed on to the nineteenth century is the ontological
problem. This problem, even far more than the epistemological, has
excited the intensest interest, and called for the profoundest thought,
of reflective minds during the last hundred years. This problem engages
in the inquiry as to what Reality is; for to define philosophy from the
ontological point of view renders it "the rational science of reality;"
or, at least, "the science of the supreme and most important realities."
In spite of the fact that the period immediately following the
conclusion of the Kantian criticism was the age when the people were
singing

         "_Da die Metaphysik vor Kurzem unbeerbt abging,_
          _Werden die Dinge an sich jetzo sub hasta verkauft,_"

the cultivation of the ontological problem, and the growth of systematic
metaphysics in the nineteenth century, had never previously been
surpassed. In spite of, or rather because of, the fact that Kant left
the ancient body of metaphysics so dismembered and discredited, and his
own ontological structure, in such hopeless confusion, all the several
buildings both of Idealism and of Realism either rose quickly or were
erected upon the foundations made bare by the critical philosophy.

But especially unsatisfactory to the thought of the first quarter of the
nineteenth century was the Kantian position with reference to the
problem in which, after all, both the few who cultivate philosophy and
the multitude who share in its fruits are always most truly interested;
and this is the ethico-religious problem. In the judgment of the
generation which followed him, Kant had achieved for those who accepted
his points of view, his method of philosophizing, and his results, much
greater success in "removing knowledge" than in "finding room for
faith." For he seemed to have left the positive truths of Ethics so
involved in the negative positions of his critique of knowledge as
greatly to endanger them; and to have entangled the conceptions of
religion with those of morality in a manner to throw doubt upon them
both.

The breach between the human cognitive faculties and the ontological
doctrines and conceptions on which morality and religion had been
supposed to rest firmly, the elaborately argued distrust and skepticism
which had been aimed against the ability of human reason to reach
reality, and the consequent danger which threatened the most precious
judgments of worth and the ontological value of ethical and æsthetical
sentiments, could not remain unnoticed, or fail to promote ceaseless and
earnest efforts to heal it. The hitherto accepted solutions of the
problems of cognition, of being, and of man's ethico-religious
experience, could not survive the critical philosophy. But the solutions
which the critical philosophy itself offered could not fail to excite
opposition and to stimulate further criticism. Moreover, certain factors
in human nature, certain interests in human social life, and certain
needs of humanity, not fully recognized and indeed scarcely noticed by
criticism, could not fail to revive and to enforce their ancient,
perennial, and valid claims.

In a word, Kant left the main problems of philosophy involved in
numerous contradictions. The result of his penetrating but excessive
analysis was unwarrantably to contrast sense with understanding; to
divide reason as constitutive from reason as regulative; to divorce the
moral law from our concrete experience of the results of good and bad
conduct, true morality from many of the noblest desires and sentiments,
and to set in opposition phenomena and noumena, order and freedom,
knowledge and faith, science and religion. Now the highest aim of
philosophy is reconciliation. What wonder, then, that the beginning of
the last century felt the stimulus of the unreconciled condition of the
problems of philosophy at the end of the preceding century! The
greatest, most stimulating inheritance of the philosophy of the
nineteenth century from the philosophy of the eighteenth century was the
"post-Kantian problems."

II. The lines of the movement of philosophical thought and the principal
contributory influences which belong to the nineteenth century may be
roughly divided into two classes; namely, (1) those which tended in the
direction of carrying to the utmost extreme the negative and destructive
criticism of Kant, and (2) those which, either mainly favoring or mainly
antagonizing the conclusions of the Kantian criticism, endeavored to
place the positive answer to all three of these great problems of
philosophy upon more comprehensive, scientifically defensible, and
permanently sure foundations. The one class so far completed the attempt
to remove the knowledge at which philosophy aims as, by the end of the
first half of the century, to have left no rational ground for any kind
of faith. The other class had not, even by the end of the second half of
the century, as yet agreed upon any one scheme for harmonizing the
various theories of knowledge, of reality, and of the ground of morality
and religion. There appeared, however,--especially during the last two
decades of the century,--certain signs of convergence upon positions, to
occupy which is favorable for agreement upon such a scheme, and which
now promise a new constructive era for philosophy. The terminus of the
destructive movement has been reached in our present-day positivism and
philosophical skepticism. For this movement there would appear to be no
more beyond in the same direction. The terminus of the other movement
can only be somewhat dimly descried. It may perhaps be predicted with a
reasonable degree of confidence as some form of ontological Idealism (if
we may use such a phrase) that shall be at once more thoroughly grounded
in man's total experience, as interpreted by modern science, and also
more satisfactory to human ethical, æsthetical, and religious ideals,
than any form of systematic philosophy has hitherto been. But to say
even this much is perhaps unduly to anticipate.

If we attempt to fathom and estimate the force of the various streams of
influence which have shaped the history of the philosophical development
of the nineteenth century, I think there can be no doubt that the
profoundest and the most powerful is the one influence which must be
recognized and reckoned with in all the centuries. This influence is
humanity's undying interest in its moral, civil, and religious ideals,
and in the civil and religious institutions which give a faithful but
temporary expression to these ideals. In the long run, every fragmentary
or systematic attempt at the solution of the problem of philosophy must
sustain the test of an ability to contribute something of value to the
realization of these ideals. The test which the past century has
proposed for its own thinkers, and for its various schools of
philosophy, is by far the severest which has ever been proposed. For the
most part unostentatiously and in large measure silently, the thoughtful
few and the comparatively thoughtless multitude have been contributing,
either destructively or constructively, to the effort at satisfaction
for the rising spiritual life of man. And if in some vague but
impressive manner we speak of this thirst for spiritual satisfaction as
characteristic of any period of human history, we may say, I believe,
that it has been peculiarly characteristic and especially powerful as an
influence during the last hundred years. The opinions, sentiments, and
ideals which shape the development of the institutions of the church and
state, and the freer activities of the same opinions, sentiments, and
ideals, have been in this century, as they have been in every century,
the principal factors in determining the character of its philosophical
development.

But a more definite and visible kind of influence has constantly
proceeded from the centres of the higher education. The
universities--especially of Germany, next, perhaps of Scotland, but also
of England and the United States, and even in less degree of France and
Italy--have both fostered and shaped the evolution of critical and
reflective thought, and of its product as philosophy. In Germany during
the eighteenth century the greater universities had been emancipating
themselves from the stricter forms of political and court favoritism and
of ecclesiastical protection and control. This emancipation had already
operated at the beginning of the nineteenth century, and it continued
more and more to operate throughout this century, for participation in
that free thought whose spirit is absolutely essential to the
flourishing of true philosophy. All the other colleges and universities
can scarcely repay the debt which modern philosophy owes to the
universities of Germany. The institutions of the higher education which
are moulded after this spirit, and which have a generous share of this
spirit, have everywhere been _schools of thought_ as well as schools of
learning and research. Without the increasing numbers and growing
encouragement of such centres for the cultivation of the discipline of
critical and reflective thinking, it is difficult to conjecture how much
the philosophical development of the nineteenth century would have lost.
_Libertas docendi_ and _Academische Freiheit_--without these philosophy
has one of its wings fatally wounded or severely clipped.

Not all the philosophy of the last century, however, was born and
developed in academical centres and under academical influences. In
Germany, Great Britain, and France, the various so-called "Academies" or
other unacademical associations of men of scientific interests and
attainments--notably, the Berlin Academy, which has been called "the
seat of an anti-scholastic popular philosophy"--were during the first
half of the nineteenth century contributing by their conspicuous
failures as well as by their less conspicuous successes, important
factors to the constructive new thought of the latter half of the
nineteenth century. In general, although these men decried system and
were themselves inadequately prepared to treat the problems of
philosophy, whether from the historical or the speculative and critical
point of view, they cannot be wholly neglected in estimating its
development. Clever reasoning, and witty and epigrammatic writing on
scientific or other allied subjects, cannot indeed be called
_philosophy_ in the stricter meaning of the word. But this so-called
"popular philosophy" has greatly helped in a way to free thought from
its too close bondage to scholastic tradition. And even the despite of
philosophy, and sneering references to its "barrenness," which formerly
characterized the meetings and the writings of this class of its
critics, but which now are happily much less frequent, have been on the
whole both a valuable check and a stimulus to her devotees. He would be
too narrow and sour a disciple of scholastic metaphysics and systematic
philosophy, who, because of the levity or scorning of "outsiders,"
should refuse them all credit. Indeed, the lesson of the close of the
nineteenth century may well enough be the motto for the beginning of the
twentieth century: _In philosophy--since to philosophize is natural and
inevitable for all rational beings--there really are no outsiders._

In this connection it is most interesting to notice how men of the type
just referred to, were at the end of the eighteenth century found
grouped around such thinkers as Mendelssohn, Lessing, F.
Nicolai,--representing a somewhat decided reaction from the French
realism to the German idealism. The work of the Academicians in the
criticism of Kant was carried forward by Jacobi, who, at the time of his
death, was the pensioned president of the Academy at Munich. Some of
these same critics of the Kantian philosophy showed a rather decided
preference for the "commonsense" philosophy of the Scottish School.

But both inside and outside of the Universities and Academies the
scientific spirit and acquisitions of the nineteenth century have most
profoundly, and on the whole favorably, affected the development of its
philosophy. In the wider meaning of the word, "science,"--the meaning,
namely, in which science = _Wissenschaft_,--philosophy aims to be
scientific; and science can never be indifferent to philosophy. In their
common aim at a rational and unitary system of principles, which shall
explain and give its due significance to the totality of human
experience, science and philosophy can never remain long in antagonism;
they ought never even temporarily to be divided in interests, or in the
spirit which leads each generously to recognize the importance of the
other. The early part of the last century was, indeed, too much under
the influence of that almost exclusively speculative _Natur-philosophie_,
of which Schelling and Hegel were the most prominent exponents. On the
other hand, the conception of nature as a vast interconnected and
unitary system of a rational order, unfolding itself in accordance with
teleological principles,--however manifold and obscure,--is a noble
conception and not destined to pass away.

On the continent--at least in France, where it had attained its highest
development--the scientific spirit was, at the close of the eighteenth
century, on the whole opposed to systematization. The impulse to both
science and philosophy during both the eighteenth and the nineteenth
centuries, over the entire continent of Europe, was chiefly due to the
epoch-making work of that greatest of all titles in the modern
scientific development of the Western World, the _Principia_ of Newton.
In mathematics and the physical sciences, during the early third or half
of the last century, Great Britain also has a roll of distinguished
names which compares most favorably with that of either France or
Germany. But in England, France, and the United States, during the whole
century, science has lacked the breadth and philosophic spirit which it
had in Germany during the first three quarters of this period. During
all that time the German man of science was, as a rule, a scholar, an
investigator, a teacher, _and a philosopher_. Science and philosophy
thrived better, however, in Scotland than elsewhere outside of Germany,
so far as their relations in interdependence were concerned. Into the
Scottish universities Playfair introduced some of the continental
suggestions toward the end of the eighteenth century, so that there was
less of exclusiveness and unfriendly rivalry between science and
philosophy; and both profited thereby. In the United States, during the
first half or more of the century, so dominant were the theological and
practical interests and influences that there was little free
development of either science or philosophy,--if we interpret the one as
the equivalent of _Wissenschaft_ and understand the other in the
stricter meaning of the word.

The history of the development of the scientific spirit and of the
achievements of the particular sciences is not the theme of this paper.
To trace in detail, or even in its large outlines, the reciprocal
influence of science and philosophy during the past hundred years, would
itself require far more than the space allotted to me. It must suffice
to say that the various advances in the efforts of the particular
sciences to enlarge and to define the conceptions and principles
employed to portray the Being of the World in its totality, have
somewhat steadily grown more and more completely metaphysical, and more
and more of positive importance for the reconstruction of systematic
philosophy. The latter has not simply been disciplined by science,
compelled to improve its method, and to examine all its previous claims.
But philosophy has also been greatly enriched by science with respect to
its material awaiting synthesis, and it has been not a little profited
by the unsuccessful attempts of the current scientific theories to give
themselves a truly satisfactory account of that Ultimate Reality which,
to understand the better, is no unworthy aim of their combined efforts.

During the nineteenth century science has seen many important additions
to that Ideal of Nature and her processes, to form which in a unitary
and harmonizing but comprehensive way is the philosophical goal of
science. The gross mechanical conception of nature which prevailed in
the earlier part of the eighteenth century has long since been
abandoned, as quite inadequate to our experience with her facts, forces,
and laws. The kinetic view, which began with Huygens, Euler, and Ampère,
and which was so amplified by Lord Kelvin and Clerk-Maxwell in England,
and by Helmholtz and others in Germany, on account of its success in
explaining the phenomena of light, of gases, etc., very naturally led to
the attempt to develop a kinetic theory, a doctrine of energetics, which
should explain all phenomena. But the conception of "that which moves,"
the experience of important and persistent qualitative _differentiae_,
and the need of assuming ends and purposes served by the movement, are
troublesome obstacles in the way of giving such a completeness to this
theory of the Being of the World. Yet again the amazing success which
the theory of evolution has shown in explaining the phenomena with which
the various biological sciences concern themselves, has lent favor
during the latter half of the century to the vitalistic and genetic view
of nature. For all our most elaborate and advanced kinetic theories seem
utterly to fail us as explanatory when we, through the higher powers of
the microscope, stand wondering and face to face with the evolution of a
single living cell. But from such a view of the essential Being of the
World as evolution suggests to the psycho-physical theory of nature is
not an impassable gulf. And thus, under its growing wealth of knowledge,
science may be leading up to an Ideal of the Ultimate Reality, in which
philosophy will gratefully and gladly coincide. At any rate, the modern
conception of nature and the modern conception of God are not so far
apart from each other, as either of these conceptions is now removed
from the conceptions covered by the same terms, some centuries gone by.

There is one of the positive sciences, however, with which the
development of philosophy during the last century has been particularly
allied. This science is psychology. To speak of its history is not the
theme of this paper. But it should be noted in passing how the
development of psychology has brought into connection with the physical
and biological sciences the development of philosophy. This union,
whether it be for better or for worse,--and, on the whole, I believe it
to be for better rather than for worse,--has been in a very special way
the result of the last century. In tracing its details we should have to
speak of the dependence of certain branches of psychology on physiology,
and upon Sir Charles Bell's discovery of the difference between the
sensory and the motor nerves. This discovery was the contribution of the
beginning of the century to an entire line of discoveries, which have
ended at the close of the century with putting the localization of
cerebral function upon a firm experimental basis. Of scarcely less
importance has been the cellular theory as applied (1838) by Matthias
Schleiden, a pupil of Fries in philosophy, to plants, and by Theodor
Schwann about the same time to animal organisms. To these must be added
the researches of Johannes Müller (1801-1858), the great biologist, a
listener to Hegel's lectures, whose law of _specific energies_ brings
him into connection with psychology and, through psychology, to
philosophy. Even more true is this of Helmholtz, whose _Lehre von den
Tonempfindungen_ (1862) and _Physiologische Optik_ (1867) placed him in
even closer, though still mediate, relations to philosophy. But perhaps
especially Gustav Theodor Fechner (1801-1887), whose researches in
psycho-physics laid the foundations of whatever, either as psychology or
as philosophy, goes under this name; and whether the doctrine have
reference to the relation of man's mind and body, or to the wider
relations of spirit and matter.

In my judgment it cannot be affirmed that the attempts of the latter
half of the nineteenth century to develop an experimental science of
psychology in independence of philosophical criticism and metaphysical
assumption, or the claims of this science to have thrown any wholly new
light upon the statement, or upon the solution of philosophical
problems, have been largely successful. But certain more definitely
psychological questions have been to a commendable degree better
analyzed and elucidated; the new experimental methods, where confined
within their legitimate sphere, have been amply justified; and certain
_quasi_-metaphysical views respecting the nature of the human mind, and
even, if you will, the nature of the Spirit in general--have been placed
in a more favorable and scientifically engaging attitude toward
speculative philosophy. This seems to me to be especially true with
respect to two problems in which both empirical psychology and
philosophy have a common and profound interest. These are (1) the
complex synthesis of mental functions involved in every act of true
cognition, together with the bearing which the psychology of cognition
has upon epistemological problems; and (2) the yet more complex and
profound analysis, from the psychological point of view, of what it is
to be a self-conscious and self-determining Will, a true Self, together
with the bearing which the psychology of selfhood has upon all the
problems of ethics, æsthetics, and religion.

The more obvious and easily traceable influences which have operated to
incite and direct the philosophical development of the nineteenth
century are, of course, dependent upon the teachings and writings of
philosophers, and the schools of philosophy which they have founded. To
speak of these influences even in outline would be to write a manual of
the history of philosophy during that hundred of years, which has been
of all others by far the most fruitful in material results, whatever
estimate may be put upon the separate or combined values of the
individual thinkers and their so-called schools. No fewer than seven or
eight relatively independent or partially antagonistic movements, which
may be traced back either directly or more indirectly to the critical
philosophy, and to the form in which the problems of philosophy were
left by Kant, sprung up during the century. In Germany chiefly, there
arose the Faith-philosophy, the Romantic School, and Rational Idealism;
in France, Eclecticism and Positivism (if, indeed, the latter can be
called _a_ philosophy); in Scotland, a naïve and crude form of Realism,
which served well for the time as an antagonist of a skeptical idealism,
but which itself contributed to an improved form of Idealism; and in the
United States, or rather in New England, a peculiar kind of
Transcendentalism of the sentimental type. But all these movements of
thought, and others lying somewhere midway between, in a pair composed
of any two, together with a steadfast remainder of almost every sort of
Dogmatism, and all degrees and kinds of Skepticism, have been intermixed
and contending with one another, in all these countries. Such has been
the varied, undefinable, and yet intensely stimulating and interesting
character of the development of systematic and scholastic philosophy,
during the nineteenth century.

The early opposition to Kant in Germany was, in the main, twofold:--both
to his peculiar extreme analysis with its philosophical conclusions, and
also to all systematic as distinguished from a more popular and literary
form of philosophizing. Toward the close of the eighteenth century a
group of men had been writing upon philosophical questions in a spirit
and method quite foreign to that held in respect by the critical
philosophy. It is not wholly without significance that Lessing, whose
aim had been to use common sense and literary skill in clearing up
obscure ideas and improving and illumining the life of man, died in the
very year of the appearance of Kant's _Kritik der reinen Vernunft_. Of
this class of men an historian dealing with this period has said, "There
is hardly one who does not quote somewhere or other Pope's saying, 'The
proper study of mankind is man.'" To this class belong Hamann
(1730-1788), the inspirer of Herder and Jacobi. The former, who was
essentially a poet and a friend of Goethe, controverted Kant with regard
to his doctrine of reason, his antithesis between the individual and the
race, and his schism between things as empirically known and the known
unity in the Ground of their being and becoming. Herder's path to truth
was highly colored with flowers of rhetoric; but the promise was that he
would lead men back to the heavenly city. Jacobi, too, with due
allowance made for the injury wrought by his divorce of the two
philosophies,--that of faith and that of science,--and his excessive
estimate of the value-judgments which repose in the mist of a
feeling-faith, added something of worth by way of exposing the
barrenness of the Kantian doctrine of an unknowable "Thing-in-itself."

From men like Fr. Schlegel (1772-1829), whose valid protest against the
sharp separation of speculative philosophy from the æsthetical, social,
and ethical life, assumed the "standpoint of irony," little real result
in the discovery of truth could be expected. But Schleiermacher
(1768-1834), in spite of that mixture of unfused elements which has made
his philosophy "a rendezvous for the most diverse systems," contributed
valuable factors to the century's philosophical development, both of a
negative and of a positive character. This thinker was peculiarly
fortunate in the enrichment of the conception of experience as
warranting a justifiable confidence in the ontological value of ethical,
æsthetical, and religious sentiment and ideas; but he was most
unfortunate in reviving and perpetuating the unjustifiable Kantian
distinction between cognition and faith in the field of experience. On
the whole, therefore, the Faith-philosophy and the Romantic School can
easily be said to have contributed more than a negative and modifying
influence to the development of the philosophy of the nineteenth
century. Its more modern revival toward the close of the same century,
and its continued hold upon certain minds of the present day, are
evidences of the positive but partial truth which its tenets, however
vaguely and unsystematically, continue to maintain in an æsthetically
and practically attractive way.

The admirers of Kant strove earnestly and with varied success to remedy
the defects of his system. Among the earlier, less celebrated and yet
important members of this group, were K. G. Reinhold (1758-1823), and
Maimon (died, 1800). The former, like Descartes, in that he was educated
by the Jesuits, began the attempt, after rejecting some of the arbitrary
distinctions of Kant and his barren and self-contradictory
"Thing-in-itself," to unify the critical philosophy by reducing it to
some one principle. The latter really transcended Kant in his
philosophical skepticism, and anticipated the Hamiltonian form of the
so-called principle of relativity. Fries (1773-1843), and Hermes
(1775-1831)--the latter of whom saw in empirical psychology the only
true propædeutic to philosophy--should be mentioned in this connection.
In the same group was another, both mathematician and philosopher, who
strove more successfully than others of this group to accept the
critical standpoint of Kant and yet to transcend his negative
conclusions with regard to a theory of knowledge. I refer to Bolzano
(Prague, 1781-1848), who stands in the same line of succession with
Fries and Hermes, and whose works on the _Science of Religion_ (4 vols.
1834) and his _Science of Knowledge_ (4 vols. 1837) are noteworthy
contributions to epistemological doctrine. In the latter we have
developed at great length the important thought that the illative
character of propositional judgments implies an objective relation; and
that in all truths the subject-idea must be objective. In the work on
religion there is found as thoroughly dispassionate and rational a
defense of Catholic doctrine as exists anywhere in philosophical
literature. The limited influence of these works, due in part to their
bulk and their technical character, is on the whole, I think, sincerely
to be regretted.

It was, however, chiefly that remarkable series of philosophers which
may be grouped under the rubric of a "rational Idealism," who filled so
full and made so rich the philosophical life of Germany during the first
half of the last century; whose philosophical thoughts and systems have
spread over the entire Western World, and who are most potent influences
in shaping the development of philosophy down to the present hour. Of
these we need do little more than that we can do--mention their names.
At their head, in time, stands Fichte, who--although Kant is reported to
have complained of this disciple because he lied about him so
much--really divined a truth which seems to be hovering in the clouds
above the master's head, but which, if the critical philosophy truly
meant to teach it, needed helpful deliverance in order to appear in
perfectly clear light. Fichte, although he divined this truth, did not,
however, free it from internal confusion and self-contradiction. It _is_
his truth, nevertheless, that in the Self, as a self-positing and
self-determining activity, must somehow be found the Ground of all
experience and of all Reality.

The important note which Schelling sounded was the demand that
philosophy should recognize "Nature" as belonging to the sphere of
Reality, and as requiring a measure of reflective thought which should
in some sort put it on equal terms with the Ego, for the construction of
our conception of the Being of the World. To Schelling it seemed
impossible to deduce, as Fichte had done, all the rich concrete
development of the world of things from the subjective needs and
constitutional forms of functioning which belong to the finite Self.
And, indeed, the doctrine which limits the origin, existence, and value
of all that is known about this sphere of experience to these needs, and
which finds the sufficient account of all experience with nature in
these forms of functioning, must always seem inadequate and even
grotesque in the sight of the natural sciences. Both Nature and Spirit,
thought Schelling, must be allowed to claim actual existence and equally
real value; while at the same time philosophy must reconcile the seeming
opposition of their claims and unite them in an harmonious and
self-explanatory way. In some common substratum, in which, to adopt
Hegel's sarcastic criticism, as in the darkness of the night "all cows
are black,"--that is in the Absolute, as an Identical Basis of
Differences,--the reconciliation was to be accomplished.

But the constructive idealistic movement, in which Fichte and Schelling
bore so important a part, could not be satisfied with the positions
reached by either of these two philosophers. Neither the physical and
psychological sciences, nor the speculative interests of religion,
ethics, art, and social life, permitted this movement to stop at this
point. In all the subsequent developments of philosophy during the first
half or three quarters of the nineteenth century, undoubtedly the
influence of Hegel was greatest of all individual thinkers. His _motif_
and plan are revealed in his letter of November 2, 1800, to Schelling,
namely, to transform what had hitherto been an ideal into a thoroughly
elaborate system. And in spite of his obvious obscurities of thought and
style, there is real ground for his claim to be the champion of the
common consciousness. It is undoubtedly in Hegel's _Phänomenologie des
Geistes_ (1807), that the distinctive features of the philosophy of the
first half of the last century most clearly define themselves. The
forces of reflection now abandon the abstract analytic method and
positions of the Kantian Critique, and concentrate themselves upon the
study of man's spiritual life as an historical evolution, in a more
concrete, face-to-face manner. Two important and, in the main, valid
assumptions underlie and guide this reflective study: (1) The Ultimate
Reality, or principle of all realities, is Mind or Spirit, which is to
be recognized and known in its essence, not by analysis into its formal
elements (the categories), but as a living development; (2) those formal
elements, or categories to which Kant gave validity merely as
constitutional forms of the functioning of the human understanding,
represent, the rather, the essential structure of Reality.

In spite of these true thoughts, fault was justly found by the
particular sciences with both the speculative method of Hegel, which
consists in the smooth, harmonious, and systematic arrangement of
conceptions in logical or ideal relations to one another; and also with
the result, which reduces the Being of the World to terms of thought and
dialectical processes merely, and neglects or overlooks the other
aspects of racial experience. Therefore, the idealistic movement could
not remain satisfied with the Hegelian dialectic. Especially did both
the religious and the philosophical party revolt against the important
thought underlying Hegel's philosophy of religion; namely, that "the
more philosophy approximates to a complete development, the more it
exhibits the same need, the same interest, and the same content, as
religion itself." This, as they interpreted it, meant the absorption of
religion in philosophy.

Next after Hegel, among the great names of this period, stand the names
of Herbart and Schopenhauer. The former contributes in an important way
to the proper conception of the task and the method of philosophy, and
influences greatly the development of psychology, both as a science that
is pedagogic to philosophy, and as laying the basis for pedagogical
principles and practice. But Herbart commits again the ancient fallacy,
under the spell of which so much of the Kantian criticism was bound; and
which identifies contradictions that belong to the imperfect or illusory
conceptions of individual thinkers with insoluble antinomies inherent in
reason itself. In spite of the little worth and misleading character of
his view of perception, and the quite complete inadequacy of the method
by which, at a single leap, he reaches the one all-explanatory principle
of his philosophy, Schopenhauer made a most important contribution to
the reflective thought of the century. It is true, as Kuno Fischer has
said, that it seems to have occurred to Schopenhauer only twenty-five
years after he had propounded his theory, that will, as it appears in
consciousness, is as truly phenomenal as is intellect. It is also true
that his theory of knowledge and his conception of Reality, as measured
by their power to satisfy and explain our total experience, are
inflicted with irreconcilable contradictions. Neither can we accord firm
confidence or high praise to the "Way of Salvation" which somehow Will
can attain to follow by æsthetic contemplation and ascetic self-denial.
Yet the philosophy of Schopenhauer rightly insists upon our Idealistic
construction of Reality having regard to aspects of experience which his
predecessors had quite too much neglected; and even its spiteful and
exaggerated reminders of the facts which contradict the tendency of all
Idealism to construct a smooth, regular, and altogether pleasing
conception of the Being of the World, have been of great benefit to the
development of the latter half of the nineteenth century.

In estimating the thoughts and the products of modern Idealism we ought
not to forget the larger multitude of thoughtful men, both in Germany
and elsewhere, who have contributed toward shaping the course of
reflection in the attempt to answer the problems which the critical
philosophy left to the nineteenth century. It is a singular comment upon
the caprices of fame that, in philosophy as in science, politics, and
art, some of those who have really reasoned most soundly and acutely, if
not also effectively upon these problems, are little known even by name
in the history of the philosophical development of the century. Among
the earlier members of this group, did space permit, we should wish to
mention Berger, Solger, Steffens, and others, who strove to reconcile
the positions of a subjective idealism with a realistic but pantheistic
conception of the Being of the World. There are others, who like Weisse,
I. H. Fichte, C. P. Fischer, and Braniss, more or less bitterly or
moderately and reasonably, opposed the method and the conclusions of the
Hegelian dialectic. Still another group earned for themselves the
supposedly opprobrious but decidedly vague title of "Dualists," by
rejecting what they conceived to be the pantheism of Hegel. Still
others, like Fries and Beneke and their successors, strove to parallel
philosophy with the particular sciences by grounding it in an empirical
but scientific psychology; and thus they instituted a line of closely
connected development, to which reference has already been made.

Hegel himself believed that he had permanently effected that
reconciliation of the orthodox creed with the cognition of Ultimate
Reality at which his dialectic aimed. In all such attempts at
reconciliation three great questions are chiefly concerned: (1) the
Being of God; (2) the nature of man; (3) the actual and the ideally
satisfactory relations between the two. But, as might have been
expected, a period of wild, irregular, and confused contention met the
attempt to establish this claim. In this conflict of more or less noisy
and popular as well as of thoughtful and scholastic philosophy,
Hegelians of various degrees of fidelity, anti-Hegelians of various
degrees of hostility, and ultra-Hegelians of various degrees of
eccentricity, all took a valiant and conspicuous part. We cannot follow
its history; but we can learn its lesson. Polemical philosophy, as
distinguished from quiet, reflective, and critical but constructive
philosophy involves a most uneconomical use of mental force. Yet out of
this period of conflict, and in a measure as its result, there came a
period of improved relations between science and philosophy and between
philosophy and theology, which was the dawn, toward the close of the
nineteenth century, of that better illumined day into the middle of
which we hope that we are proceeding.

Before leaving this idealistic movement in Germany, and elsewhere as
influenced largely by German philosophy, one other name deserves
mention. This name is that of Lotze, who combined elements from many
previous thinkers with those derived from his own studies and
thoughts,--the conceptions of mechanism as applied to physical
existences and to psychical life, with the search for some monistic
Principle that shall satisfy the æsthetical and ethical, as well as the
scientific demands of the human mind. This variety of interests and of
culture led to the result of his making important contributions to
psychology, logic, metaphysics, and æsthetics. If we find his system of
thinking--as I think we must--lacking in certain important elements of
consistency and obscured in places by doubts as to his real meaning,
this does not prevent us from assigning to Lotze a position which, for
versatility of interests, genial quality of reflection and criticism,
suggestiveness of thought and charm of style, is second to no other in
the history of nineteenth century philosophical development.

In France and in England the first quarter of the last century was far
from being productive of great thinkers or great thoughts in the sphere
of philosophy. De Biran (1766-1824), in several important respects the
forerunner of modern psychology, after revolting from his earlier
complacent acceptance of the vagaries of Condillac and Cabanis, made the
discovery that the "immediate consciousness of self-activity is the
primitive and fundamental principle of human cognition." Meantime it was
only a little group of Academicians who were being introduced, in a
somewhat superficial way, to the thoughts of the Scottish and the German
idealistic Schools by Royer-Collard, Jouffroy, Cousin, and others. A
more independent and characteristic movement was that inaugurated by
Auguste Comte (1798-1857), who, having felt the marked influence of
Saint-Simon when he was only a boy of twenty, in a letter to his friend
Valat, in the year 1824, declares: "I shall devote my whole life and all
my powers to the founding of positive philosophy." In spite of the
impossibility of harmonizing with this point of view the vague and
mystical elements which characterize the later thought of Comte, or with
its carrying into effect the not altogether intelligent recognition of
the synthetic activity of the mind (_tout se réduit toujours à lier_)
and certain hints as to "first principles;" and in spite of the small
positive contribution to philosophy which Comtism could claim to have
made; it has in a way represented the value of two ideas. These are (1)
the necessity for philosophy of studying the actual historical forces
which have been at work and which are displayed in the facts of history;
and (2) the determination not to go by mere unsupported speculation
beyond experience in order to discover knowable Reality. There is,
however, a kind of subtle irony in the fact that the word "Positivism"
should have come to stand so largely for _negative_ conclusions, in the
very spheres of philosophy, morals, and religion where _affirmative_
conclusions are so much desired and sought.

That philosophy in Great Britain was in a nearly complete condition of
decadence during the first half or three quarters of the nineteenth
century was the combined testimony of writers from such different points
of view as Carlyle, Sir William Hamilton, and John Stuart Mill. And yet
these very names are also witnesses to the fact that this decadence was
not quite complete. In the first quarter of the century Coleridge,
although he had failed, on account of weakness both of mind and of
character, in his attempt to reconcile religion to the thought of his
own age, on the basis of the Kantian distinction between reason and the
intellect, had sowed certain seed-thoughts which became fertile in the
soil of minds more vigorous, logical, and practical than his own. This
was, perhaps, especially true in America, where inquirers after truth
were seeking for something more satisfactory than the French skepticism
of the revolutionary and following period. Carlyle's mocking sarcasm was
also not without wholesome effect.

But it was Sir William Hamilton and John Stuart Mill whose thoughts
exercised a more powerful formative influence over the minds of the
younger men. The one was the flower of the Scottish Realism, the other
of the movement started by Bentham and the elder Mill.

That the Scottish Realism should end by such a combination with the
skepticism of the critical philosophy as is implied in Hamilton's law of
the relativity of all knowledge, is one of the most curious and
interesting turns in the history of modern philosophy. And when this law
was so interpreted by Dean Mansel in its application to the fundamental
cognitions of religion as to lay the foundations upon which the most
imposing structure of agnosticism was built by Herbert Spencer, surely
the entire swing around the circle, from Kant to Kant again, has been
made complete. The attempt of Hamilton failed, as every similar attempt
must always fail. Neither speculative philosophy nor religious faith is
satisfied with an abstract conception, about the correlate of which in
Reality nothing is known or ever can be known. But every important
attempt of this sort serves the double purpose of stimulating other
efforts to reconstruct the answer to the problem of philosophy, on a
basis of positive experience of an enlarged type; and also of acting as
a real, if only temporary practical support to certain value-judgments
which the faiths of morality, art, and religion both implicate and, in a
measure, validate.

The influence of John Stuart Mill, as it was exerted not only in his
conduct of life while a servant of the East India Company, but also in
his writings on Logic, Politics, and Philosophy, was, on the whole, a
valuable contribution to his generation. In the additions which he made
to the Utilitarianism of Bentham we have done, I believe, all that ever
can be done in defense of this principle of ethics. And his posthumous
confessions of faith in the ontological value of certain great
conceptions of religion are the more valuable because of the nature of
the man, and of the experience which is their source. Perhaps the most
permanent contribution which Mill made to the development of philosophy
proper, outside of the sphere of logic, ethics, and politics, was his
vigorous polemical criticism of Hamilton's claim for the necessity of
faith in an "Unconditioned" whose conception is "only a fasciculus of
negations of the Conditioned in its opposite extremes, and bound
together merely by the aid of language and their common character of
incomprehensibility."

The history of the development of philosophy in America during the
nineteenth century, as during the preceding century, has been
characterized in the main by three principal tendencies. These may be
called the theological, the social, and the eclectic. From the beginning
down to the present time the religious influence and the interest in
political and social problems have been dominant. And yet withal, the
student of these problems in the atmosphere of this country likes, in a
way, to do his own thinking and to make his own choices of the thoughts
that seem to him true and best fitted for the best form of life. In
spite of the fact that the different streams of European thought have
flowed in upon us somewhat freely, there has been comparatively little
either of the adherence to schools of European philosophy or of the
attempt to develop a national school. Doubtless the influence of English
and Scottish thinking upon the academical circles of America was
greatest for more than one hundred and fifty years after the gift in
1714 by Governor Yale of a copy of Locke's Essay to the college which
bore his name,--and especially upon the reflections and published works
of Jonathan Edwards touching the fundamental problems of epistemology,
ethics, and religion. During the early part of this century these views
awakened antagonism from such writers as Dana, Whedon, Hazard, Nathaniel
Taylor, Jeremiah Day, Henry P. Tappan, and other opponents of the
Edwardean theology, and also from such advocates of so-called
"free-thinking," as had derived their _motifs_ and their views from
English deistical writers like Shaftesbury, or from the skepticism of
Hume.

A more definite philosophical movement, however, which had established
itself somewhat firmly in scholastic centres by the year 1825, and which
maintained itself for more than half a century, went back to the arrival
in this country of John Witherspoon, in 1768, to be the president of
Princeton, bringing with him a library of three hundred books. It was
the appeal of the Scottish School to the "plain man's consciousness" and
to so-called "common sense," which was relied upon to controvert all
forms of philosophy which seemed to threaten the foundations of religion
and of the ethics of politics and sociology. But even during this
period, which was characterized by relatively little independent
thinking in scholastic circles, a more pronounced productivity was shown
by such writers as Francis Wayland, and others; but, perhaps, especially
by Laurens P. Hickok, whose works on psychology and cosmology deserve
especial recognition: while in psychology, as related to philosophical
problems, the principal names of this period are undoubtedly the
presidents of Yale and Princeton,--Noah Porter and James McCosh,--both
of whom (but especially the former) had their views modified by the more
scientific psychology of Europe and the profounder thinking of Germany.

It was Germany's influence, however, both directly and indirectly
through Coleridge and a few other English writers, that caused a ferment
of impressions and ideas which, in their effort to work themselves
clear, resulted in what is known as New England "Transcendentalism." In
America this movement can scarcely be called definitely philosophical;
much less can it be said to have resulted in a system, or even in a
school, of philosophy. It must also be said to have been "inspired but
not borrowed" from abroad. Its principal, if not sole, literary survival
is to be found in the works of Emerson. As expounded by him, it is not
precisely Pantheism--certainly not a consistent and critical development
of the pantheistic theory of the Being of the World; it is, rather, a
vague, poetical, and pantheistical Idealism of a decidedly mystical
type.

The introduction of German philosophy proper, in its nature form, and
essential being, to the few interested seriously in critical and
reflective thinking upon the ultimate problems of nature and of human
life, began with the founding of the _Journal of Speculative
Philosophy_, in 1867, under the direction of William T. Harris, then
Superintendent of Schools in this city.

With the work of Darwin, and his predecessors and successors, there
began a mighty movement of thought which, although it is primarily
scientific and more definitely available in biological science, has
already exercised, and is doubtless destined to exercise in the future,
an enormous influence upon philosophy. Indeed, we are already in the
midst of the preliminary confusions and contentions, but most fruitful
considerations and discoveries belonging to a so-called philosophy of
evolution.

This development has, in the sphere of systematic philosophy, reached
its highest expression in the voluminous works produced through the
latter half of the nineteenth century by Mr. Herbert Spencer, whose
recent death seems to mark the close of the period we have under
consideration. The metaphysical assumptions and ontological value of the
system of Spencer, as he wished it to be understood and interpreted,
have perhaps, though not unnaturally, been quite too much submerged in
the more obvious expressions of its agnostic positivism. In its
psychology, however, the assumption of "some underlying substance in
contrast to all changing forms," distinguishes it from a pure positivism
in a very radical way. But more especially in philosophy, the
metaphysical postulate of a mysterious Unity of Force that somehow
manages to reveal itself, and the law of its operations, to the
developed cognition of the nineteenth century philosopher, however much
it seems to involve the system in internal contradictions, certainly
forbids that we should identify it with the positivism of Auguste Comte.
In our judgment, however, it is in his ethical good sense and integrity
of judgment,--a good sense and integrity which commits to ethics rather
than to sociology the task of determining the highest type of human
life,--and in basing the conditions for the prevalence and the
development of the highest type of life upon ethical principles and upon
the adherence to ethical ideas, that Herbert Spencer will be found most
clearly entitled to a lasting honor.

III. The third number of our difficult tasks is to summarize the
principal results, to inventory the net profits, as it were, of the
development of philosophy during the nineteenth century. This task is
made the more difficult by the heterogeneous nature and as yet
unclassified condition of the development. With the quickening and
diversifying of all kinds and means of intercourse, there has come the
breaking down of national schools and idiosyncrasies of method and of
thought. In philosophy, Germany, France, Great Britain, and indeed,
Italy, have come to intermingle their streams of influence; and from all
these countries these streams have been flowing in upon America. In
psychology, especially, as well as in all the other sciences, but also
to some degree in philosophy, returning streams of influence from
America have, during the last decade or two, been felt in Europe itself.

It must also be admitted that the attempts at a reconstruction of
systematic philosophy which have followed the rapid disintegration of
the Hegelian system, and the enormous accumulations of new material due
to the extension of historical studies and of the particular
sciences,--including especially the so-called "new psychology,"--have
not as yet been fruitful of large results. In philosophy, as in art,
politics, and even scientific theory, the spirit and the opportunity of
the time are more favorable to the gathering of material and to the
projecting of a bewildering variety of new opinions, or old opinions put
forth under new names, than to that candid, patient, and prolonged
reflection and balancing of judgment which a worthy system-building
inexorably requires. The age of breaking up the old, without
assimilating the new, has not yet passed away. And whatever is new,
startling, large, even monstrous, has in many quarters the seeming
preference, in philosophy's building as in other architecture. To the
confusion which reigns even in scholastic circles, contributions have
been arriving from the outside, from philosophers like Nietzsche, and
from men great in literature like Tolstoi. Nor has the matter been
helped by the more recent extreme developments of positivism and
skepticism, which often enough, without any consciousness of their
origin and without the respect for morality and religion which Kant
always evinced, really go back to the critical philosophy.

In spite of all this, however, the last two decades or more have shown
certain hopeful tendencies and notable achievements, looking toward the
reconstruction of systematic philosophy. In this attempt to bring order
out of confusion, to enable calm, prolonged, and reflective thinking to
build into its structure the riches of the new material which the
evolution of the race has secured, a place of honor ought to be given to
France, where so much has been done of late to blend with clearness of
style and independence of thought that calm reflective and critical
judgment which looks all sides of human experience sympathetically but
bravely in the face. In psychology Ribot, and in philosophy, Fouillée,
Renouvier, Secrétan, and others, deserve grateful recognition. No friend
of philosophy can, I think, fail to recognize the probable benefits to
be derived from that movement with which such names as Mach and Ostwald
in Germany are connected, and which is sounding the call to the men of
science to clear up the really distressing obscurity and confusion which
has so long clung to their fundamental conceptions; and to examine anew
the significance of their assumptions, with a view to the construction
of a new and improved doctrine of the Being of the World. And if to
these names we add those of the numerous distinguished investigators of
psychology as pedagogic to philosophy, and, in philosophy, of Deussen,
Eucken, von Hartmann, Riehl, Wundt, and others, we may well affirm that
new light will continue to break forth from that country which so
powerfully aroused the whole Western World at the end of the eighteenth
and beginning of the nineteenth centuries. In Great Britain the name and
works of Thomas Hill Green have influenced the attempts at a
reconstruction of systematic philosophy in a manner to satisfy at one
and the same time both the facts and laws of science and the æsthetical,
ethical, and religious ideals of the age, in a very considerable degree.
And in this attempt, both as it expresses itself in theoretical
psychology and in the various branches of philosophical discipline,
writers like Bradley, Fraser, Flint, Hodgson, Seth, Stout, Ward, and
others, have taken a conspicuous part. Nor are there wanting in Holland,
Italy, and even in Sweden and Russia, thinkers equally worthy of
recognition, and recognized, in however limited and unworthy fashion, in
their own land. The names of those in America who have labored most
faithfully, and succeeded best, in this enormous task of reconstructing
philosophy in a systematic way, and upon a basis of history and of
modern science, I do not need to mention; they are known, or they surely
ought to be known, to us all.

In attempting to summarize the gains of philosophy during the last
hundred years, we should remind ourselves that progress in philosophy
does not consist in the final settlement, and so in the "solving" of any
of its great problems. Indeed, the relations of philosophy to its
grounds in experience, and the nature of its method and of its ideal,
are such that its progress can never be expected to put an end to
itself. But the content of the total experience of humanity has been
greatly enriched during the last century; and the critical and
reflective thought of trained minds has been led toward a more profound
and comprehensive theory of Reality, and toward a doctrine of values
that shall be more available for the improvement of man's political,
social, and religious life.

In view of this truth respecting the limitations of systematic
philosophy, I think we may hold that certain negative results, which are
customarily adduced as unfavorable to the claims of philosophical
progress, are really signs of improvement during the latter half of the
nineteenth century. One is an increased spirit of reserve and caution,
and an increased modesty of claims. This result is perhaps significant
of riper wisdom and more trustworthy maturity. Kant believed himself to
have established for philosophy a system of apodeictic conclusions,
which were as completely forever to have displaced the old dogmatism as
Copernicus had displaced the Ptolemaic astronomy. But the steady
pressure of historical and scientific studies has made it increasingly
difficult for any sane thinker to claim for any system of thinking such
demonstrable validity. May we not hope that the students of the
particular sciences, to whom philosophy owes so much of its enforced
sanity and sane modesty, will themselves soon share freely of the
philosophic spirit with regard to their own metaphysics and ethical and
religious standpoints, touching the Ultimate Reality? Even when the
recoil from the overweening self-satisfaction and crass complacency of
the earlier part of the last century takes the form of melancholy, or of
acute sadness, or even of a mild despair of philosophy, I am not sure
that the last state of that man is not better than the first.

In connection with this improvement in spirit, we may also note an
improvement in the method of philosophy. The purely speculative method,
with its intensely interesting but indefensible disregard of concrete
facts, and of the conclusions of the particular sciences, is no longer
in favor even among the most ardent devotees and advocates of the
superiority of philosophy to those sciences. At the same time,
philosophy may quite properly continue to maintain its position of
independent critic, as well as of docile pupil, toward the particular
sciences.

In the same connection must be mentioned the hopeful fact that the last
two or three decades have shown a decided improvement in the relations
of philosophy toward the positive sciences. There are plain signs of
late that the attitude of antagonism, or of neglect, which prevailed so
largely during the second and third quarters of the nineteenth century,
is to be replaced by one of friendship and mutual helpfulness. And,
indeed, science and philosophy cannot long or greatly flourish without
reciprocal aid, if by science we mean a true _Wissenschaft_ and if we
also mean to base philosophy upon our total experience. For science and
philosophy are really engaged upon the same task,--to _understand and to
appreciate the totality of man's_ _experience_. They, therefore, have
essential and permanent relations of dependence for material, for
inspiration and correction, and for other forms of helpfulness. While,
then, their respective spheres have been more clearly delimited during
the last century, their interdependence has been more forcefully
exhibited. Both of them have been developing a systematic exposition of
the universe. Both of them desire to enlarge and deepen the conception
of the Being of the World, as made known to the totality of human
experience, in its Unity of nature and significance. We cannot believe
that the end of the nineteenth century would sustain the charge which
Fontenelle made in the closing years of the seventeenth century:
"_L'Académie des Sciences ne prend la nature que par petites
parcelles_." Science itself now bids us regard the Universe as a
dynamical Unity, teleologically conceived, because in a process of
evolution under the control of immanent ideas. Philosophy assumes the
same point of view, rather at the beginning than at the end of defining
its purpose; and so feels a certain glad leap at its heart-strings, and
an impulse to hold out the hand to science, when it hears such an
utterance as that of Poincaré: _Ce n'est pas le méchanisme le vrai, le
seul but; c'est l'unité_.

Shall we not say, then, that this double-faced but wholly true lesson
has been learned: namely, that the so-called philosophy of nature has no
sound foundation and no safeguard against vagaries of every sort, unless
it follows the lead of the positive sciences of nature; but that the
sciences themselves can never afford a full satisfaction to the
legitimate aspirations of human reason unless they, too, contribute to
the philosophy of nature--writ large and conceived of as a real-ideal
Unity.

That nature, as known and knowable by man, is a great artist, and that
man's æsthetical consciousness may be trusted as having a certain
ontological value, is the postulate properly derived from the
considerations advanced in the latest, and in some respects the most
satisfactory, of the three Critiques of Kant. The ideal way of looking
at natural phenomena which so delighted the mind of Goethe has now been
placed on broad and sound foundations by the fruitful industries of many
workmen,--such as Karl Ernst von Baer and Charles Darwin,--whose
morphological and evolutionary conceptions of the universe have
transformed the current conceptions of cosmic processes. But the world
of physical and natural phenomena has thereby been rendered not less,
but more, of a Cosmos, an orderly totality.

In addition to these more general but somewhat vague evaluations of the
progress of philosophy during the nineteenth century, we are certainly
called upon to face the question whether, after all, any advance has
been made toward the more satisfactory solution of the definite problems
which the Kantian criticism left unsolved. To this question I believe an
affirmative answer may be given in accordance with the facts of history.
It will be remembered that the first of these problems was the
epistemological. Certainly no little improvement has been made in the
psychology of cognition. We can no longer repeat the mistakes of Kant,
either with respect to the uncritical assumptions he makes regarding the
origin of knowledge in the so-called "faculties" of the human mind or
regarding the analysis of those faculties and their interdependent
relations. It is not the Scottish philosophy alone which has led to the
conclusion that, in the word of the late Professor Adamson, "What are
called acts or states of consciousness are _not_ rightly conceived of as
having for their objects their own modes of existence as ways in which a
subject is modified." And in the larger manner both science and
philosophy, in their negations and their affirmations, and even in their
points of view, have better grounds for the faith of human reason in its
power progressively to master the knowledge of Reality than was the case
a hundred years ago. Nor has the skepticism of the same era, whether by
shallow scoffing at repeated failures, or by pious sighs over the
limitations of human reason, or by critical analysis of the cognitive
faculties "according to well-established principles," succeeded in
limiting our speculative pretensions to the sphere of possible
experience,--in the Kantian meaning both of "principles" and of
"experience." But what both science and philosophy are compelled to
agree upon as a common underlying principle is this: The proof of the
most fundamental presuppositions, as well as of the latest more
scientifically established conclusions, of both science and philosophy,
is the assistance they afford in the satisfactory explanation of the
totality of racial experience.

In the evolution of the ontological problem, as compared with the form
in which it was left by the critical philosophy, the past century has
also made some notable advances. To deny this would be to discredit the
development of human knowledge so far as to say that we know no more
about what nature is, and man is, than was known a hundred years ago. To
say this, however, would not be to speak truth of fact. And here we may
not unnaturally grow somewhat impatient with that metaphysical fallacy
which places an impassable gulf between Reality and Experience. No
reality is, of course, cognizable or believable by man which does not
somehow show its presence in his total experience. But no growth of
experience is possible without involving increase of knowledge
representing Reality. For Reality is no absent and dead, or statical,
Ding-an-Sich. Cognition itself is a commerce of realities. And are there
not plain signs that the more thoughtful men of science are becoming
less averse to the recognition of the truth of ontological philosophy;
namely, that the deeper meaning of their own studies is grasped only
when they recognize that they are ever face to face with what they call
Energy and we call Will, and with what they call laws and we call Mind
as significant of the progressive realization of immanent ideas. This
Ultimate Reality is so profound that neither science nor philosophy will
ever sound all its depths, and so comprehensive as more than to justify
all the categories of both.

Probably, on the whole, there has been less progress made toward a
satisfactory solution of the problems offered by the value-judgments of
ethics and religion, in the form in which these problems were left by
the critical philosophy. The century has illustrated the truth of
Falckenberg's statement: "In periods which have given birth to a
skeptical philosophy, one never looks in vain for the complementary
phenomenon of mysticism." Twice during the century the so-called
"faith-philosophy," or philosophy of feeling, has been borne to the
front, to raise a bulwark against the advancing hosts of
agnostics--occasioned in the first period by the negations of the
Kantian criticism, and in the second by the positive conclusions of the
physical and biological sciences. This form of protesting against the
neglect or disparagement of important factors which belong to man's
æsthetical, ethical, and religious experience, is reasonable and must be
heard. But the extravagances with which these neglected factors have
been posited and appraised, to the neglect of the more definitively
scientific and strictly logical, is to be deplored. The great work
before the philosophy of the present age is the reconciliation of the
historical and scientific conceptions of the Universe with the
legitimate sentiments and ideals of art, morality, and religion. But
surely neither rationalism nor "faith-philosophy" is justified in
pouring out the living child with the muddy water of the bath.

IV. The attempt to survey the present situation of philosophy, and to
predict its immediate future, is embarrassed by the fact that we are all
immersed in it, are a part of its spirit and present form. But if
nearness has its embarrassments, it has also its benefits. Those who are
amidst the tides of life may know better, in a way, how these tides are
tending and what is their present strength, than do those who survey
them from distant, cool, and exalted heights. "_Für jeden einzelnen
bildet der Vater und der Sohn eine greifbare Kette von Lebensereignungen
und Erfahrungen._" The very intensely vital and formative but unformed
condition of systematic philosophy--its protoplasmic character--contains
promises of a new life. If we may believe the view of Hegel that the
systematizing of the thought of any age marks the time when the peculiar
living thought of that age is passing into a period of decay, we may
certainly claim for our present age the prospect of a prolonged
vitality.

The nineteenth century has left us with a vast widening of the
horizon,--outward into space, backward in time, inward toward the
secrets of life, and downward into the depths of Reality. With this
there has been an increase in the profundity of the conviction of the
spiritual unity of the race. In the consideration of all of its problems
in the immediate future and in the coming century--so far as we can see
forward into this century--philosophy will have to reckon with certain
marked characteristics of the human spirit which form at the same time
inspiring stimuli and limiting conditions of its endeavors and
achievements. Chief among these are the greater and more firmly
established principles of the positive sciences, and the prevalence of
the historical spirit and method in the investigation of all manner of
problems. These influences have given shape to the conception which,
although it is as yet by no means in its final or even in thoroughly
self-consistent form, is destined powerfully to affect our philosophical
as well as our scientific theories. This conception is that of
Development. But philosophy, considered as the product of critical and
reflective thinking over the more ultimate problems of nature and of
human life, is itself a development. And it is now, more than ever
before, a development interdependently connected with all the other
great developments.

Philosophy, in order to adapt itself to the spirit of the age, must
welcome and cultivate the freest critical inquiry into its own methods
and results, and must cheerfully submit itself to the demand for
evidences which has its roots in the common and essential experience of
the race. Moreover, the growth of the spirit of democracy, which, on the
one hand, is distinctly unfavorable to any system of philosophy whose
tenets and formulas seem to have only an academic validity or a merely
esoteric value, and which, on the other hand, requires for its
satisfaction a more tenable, helpful, and universally applicable theory
of life and reality, cannot fail, in my judgment, to influence favorably
the development of philosophy. In the union of the speculative and the
practical; in the harmonizing of the interests of the positive sciences,
with their judgments of fact and law, and the interests of art,
morality, and religion, with their value-judgments and ideals; in the
synthesis of the truths of Realism and Idealism, as they have existed
hitherto and now exist in separateness or antagonism; in a union that is
not accomplished by a shallow eclecticism, but by a sincere attempt to
base philosophy upon the totality of human experience;--in such a union
as this must we look for the real progress of philosophy in the coming
century.

Just now there seem to be two somewhat heterogeneous and not altogether
well-defined tendencies toward the reconstruction of systematic
philosophy, both of which are powerful and represent real truths
conquered by ages of intellectual industry and conflict. These two,
however, need to be internally harmonized, in order to obtain a
satisfactory statement of the development of the last century. They may
be called the evolutionary and the idealistic. The one tendency lays
emphasis on mechanism, the other on spirit. Yet it is most interesting
to notice how many of the early workmen in the investigation of the
principle of the conservation and correlation of energy took their point
of departure from distinctly teleological and spiritual conceptions. "I
was led," said Colding,--to take an extreme case,--at the Natural
Science Congress at Innsbruck, 1869, "to the idea of the constancy of
national forces by the religious conception of life." And even
Moleschott, in his _Autobiography_, posthumously published, declares: "I
myself was well aware that the whole conception might be converted; for
since all matter is a bearer of force, endowed with force or penetrated
with spirit, it would be just as correct to call it a spiritualistic
conception." On the other hand, the modern, better instructed Idealism
is much inclined, both from the psychological and from the more purely
philosophical points of view, to regard with duly profound respect all
the facts and laws of that mechanism of Reality, which certainly is not
merely the dependent construction of the human mind functioning
according to a constitution that excludes it from Reality, but is rather
the ever increasingly more trustworthy revealer of Reality. This
tendency to a union of the claims of both Realism and Idealism is
profoundly influencing the solution of each one of these problems which
the Kantian criticism left to the philosophy of the nineteenth century.
In respect of the epistemological problem, philosophy--as I have already
said--is not likely again to repeat the mistakes either of Kant or of
the dogmatism which his criticism so effectually overthrew. It was a
wise remark of the physician Johann Benjamin Erhard, in a letter dated
May 19, 1794, _à propos_ of Fichte: "The philosophy which _proceeds_
from a _single_ fundamental principle, and pretends to deduce everything
from it, is and always will remain a piece of artificial sophistry: only
that philosophy which _ascends_ to the highest principle and exhibits
everything else in perfect harmony with it, is the true one." This at
least ought--one would say--to have been made clear by the century of
discussion over the epistemological problem, since Kant. You cannot
_deduce_ the Idea from the Reality, or the Reality from the Idea. The
problem of knowledge is not, as Fichte held in the form of a fundamental
assumption, an alternative of this sort. The Idea _and_ Reality are, the
rather already there, and to be recognized as in a living unity, in
every cognitive experience. Psychology is constantly adding something
toward the problem of cognition as a problem in synthesis; and is then
in a way contributing to the better scientific understanding of the
philosophical postulate which is the confidence of human reason in its
ability, by the harmonious use of all its powers, progressively to reach
a better and fuller knowledge of Reality.

The ontological problem will necessarily always remain the unsolved, in
the sense of the very incompletely solved problem of philosophy. But as
long as human experience develops, and as long as philosophy bestows
upon experience the earnest and candid efforts of reflecting minds, the
solution of the ontological problem will be approached, but never fully
reached. That Being of the World which Kant, in the negative and
critical part of his work, left as an X, unknown and unknowable, the
last century has filled with a new and far richer content than it ever
had before. Especially has this century changed the conception of the
Unity of the Universe in such manner that it can never return again to
its ancient form. On the one hand, this Unity cannot be made
comprehensible in terms of any one scientific or philosophical principle
or law. Science and philosophy are both moving farther and farther away
from the hope of comprehending the variety and infinite manifoldness of
the Absolute in terms of any one side or aspect of man's complex
experience. But, on the other hand, the confidence in this essential
Unity is not diminished, but is the rather confirmed. As humanity itself
develops, as the Selfhood of man grows in the experience of the world
which is its own environment, and of the world within which it is its
own true Self, humanity may reasonably hope to win an increased, and
increasingly valid, cognition of the Being of the World as the Absolute
Self.

Closely connected, and in a way essentially identical with the
ontological problem, is that of the origin, validity, and rational value
of the ideas of humanity. May it not be said that the nineteenth century
transfers to the twentieth an increased interest in and a heightened
appreciation of the so-called practical problems of philosophy. Science
and philosophy certainly ought to combine--and are they not ready to
combine?--in the effort to secure a more nearly satisfactory
understanding and solution of the problems afforded by the æsthetical,
ethical, and religious sentiments and ideals of the race. To philosophy
this combination means that it shall be more fruitful than ever before
in promoting the uplift and betterment of mankind. The fulfillment of
the practical mission of philosophy involves the application of its
conceptions and principles to education, politics, morals, as a matter
of law and of custom, and to religion as matter both of rational faith
and of the conduct of life.

How, then, can this brief and imperfect sketch of the outline of the
development of philosophy in the nineteenth century better come to a
close than by words of encouragement and of exhortation as well. There
are, in my judgment, the plainest signs that the somewhat too
destructive and even nihilistic tendencies of the second and third
quarters of the nineteenth century have reached their limit; that the
strife of science and philosophy, and of both with religion, is
lessening, and is being rapidly displaced by the spirit of mutual
fairness and reciprocal helpfulness; and that reasonable hopes of a new
and a splendid era of reconstruction in philosophy may be entertained.
For I cannot agree with the _dictum_ of a recent writer on the subject,
that "the sciences are coming less and less to admit of a synthesis, and
not at all of a synthetic philosopher."

On the contrary, I hold that, with an increased confidence in the
capacity of human reason to discover and validate the most secret and
profound, as well as the most comprehensive, of truths, philosophy may
well put aside some of its shyness and hesitancy, and may resume more of
that audacity of imagination, sustained by ontological convictions,
which characterized its work during the first half of the nineteenth
century. And if the latter half of the twentieth century does for the
constructions of the first half of the same century, what the latter
half of the nineteenth century did for the first half of that century,
this new criticism will only be to illustrate the way in which the human
spirit makes every form of its progress.

Therefore, a summons of all helpers, in critical but fraternal spirit,
to this work of reconstruction, for which two generations of enormous
advance in the positive sciences has gathered new material, and for the
better accomplishment of which both the successes and the failures of
the philosophy of the nineteenth century have prepared the men of the
twentieth century, is the winsome and imperative voice of the hour.




SECTION A--METAPHYSICS




SECTION A--METAPHYSICS

(_Hall 6, September 21, 10 a. m._)

  CHAIRMAN:  PROFESSOR A. C. ARMSTRONG, Wesleyan University.
  SPEAKERS:  PROFESSOR A. E. TAYLOR, McGill University, Montreal.
             PROFESSOR ALEXANDER T. ORMOND, Princeton University.
  SECRETARY: PROFESSOR A. O. LOVEJOY, Washington University.


The Chairman of the Section, Professor A. C. Armstrong, of Wesleyan
University, in opening the meeting referred to the continued vitality of
metaphysics as shown by its repeated revivals after the many destructive
attacks upon it in the later modern times: he congratulated the Section
on the fact that the principal speakers were scholars who had made
notable contributions to metaphysical theory.




THE RELATIONS BETWEEN METAPHYSICS AND THE OTHER SCIENCES

BY PROFESSOR ALFRED EDWARD TAYLOR

     [Alfred Edward Taylor, Frothingham Professor of Philosophy,
     McGill University, Montreal, Canada. b. Oundle, England,
     December 22, 1869. M.A. Oxford. Fellow, Merton College,
     Oxford, 1891-98, 1902-; Lecturer in Greek and Philosophy,
     Owens College, Manchester, 1896-1903; Assistant Examiner to
     University of Wales, 1899-1903; Green Moral Philosophy
     Prizeman, Oxford, 1899; Frothingham Professor of Philosophy,
     McGill University, 1903-; Member Philosophical Society,
     Owens College, American Philosophical Association. Author of
     _The Problem of Conduct_; _Elements of Metaphysics_.]


When we seek to determine the place of metaphysics in the general scheme
of human knowledge, we are at once confronted by an initial difficulty
of some magnitude. There seems, in fact, to be no one universally
accepted definition of our study, and even no very general consensus
among its votaries as to the problems with which the metaphysician ought
to concern himself. This difficulty, serious as it is, does not,
however, justify the suspicion that our science is, like alchemy or
astrology, an illusion, and its high-sounding title a mere "idol of the
market-place," one of those _nomina rerum quae non sunt_ against which
the Chancellor Bacon has so eloquently warned mankind. If it is hard to
determine precisely the scope of metaphysics, it is no less difficult to
do the same thing for the undoubtedly legitimate sciences of logic and
mathematics. And in all three cases the absence of definition merely
shows that we are dealing with branches of knowledge which are, so to
say, still in the making. It is not until the first principles of
science are already firmly laid beyond the possibility of cavil that we
must look for general agreement as to its boundary lines, though
excellent work may be done, long before this point has been reached, in
the establishment of individual principles and deduction of consequences
from them. To revert to the parallel cases I have just cited, many
mathematical principles of the highest importance are formulated in the
_Elements_ of Euclid, and many logical principles in the _Organon_ of
Aristotle; yet it is only in our own time that it has become possible to
offer a general definition either of logic or of mathematics, and even
now it would probably be true to say that the majority of logicians and
mathematicians trouble themselves very little about the precise
definition of their respective studies.

The state of our science then compels me to begin this address with a
more or less arbitrary, because provisional, definition of the term
metaphysics, for which I claim no more than that it may serve to
indicate with approximate accuracy the class of problems which I shall
have in view in my subsequent use of the word. By metaphysics, then, I
propose to understand the inquiry which used formerly to be known as
ontology, that is, the investigation into the general character which
belongs to real Being as such, the science, in Aristotelian phraseology,
of ὄντα ᾗ ὄντα (onta hê onta). Or, if the term "real" be objected against as
ambiguous, I would suggest as an alternative account the statement that
metaphysics is the inquiry into the general character by which the
content of _true_ assertions is distinguished from that of _false_
assertions. The two definitions here offered will, I think, be found
equivalent when it is borne in mind that what the second of them speaks
of is exclusively the _content_ which is asserted as true in a true
proposition, not the process of true assertion, which, like all other
processes in the highest cerebral centres, falls under the consideration
of the vastly different sciences of psychology and cerebral physiology.
Of the two equivalent forms of statement, the former has perhaps the
advantage of making it most clear that it is ultimately upon the
objective distinction between the reality and the unreality of that
which is asserted for truth, and not upon any psychological peculiarity
in the process of assertion itself that the distinction between true and
untrue rests, while the second may be useful in guarding against
misconceptions that might be suggested by too narrow an interpretation
of the term "reality," such as, _e. g._, the identification of the
"real" with what is revealed by sensuous perception.

From the acceptance of such a definition two important consequences
would follow. (1) The first is that metaphysics is at once sharply
discriminated from any study of the psychical _process_ of knowledge, if
indeed, there can be any such study distinct from the psychology of
conception and belief, which is clearly not itself the science we have
in view. For the psychological laws of the formation of concepts and
beliefs are exemplified equally in the discovery and propagation of
truth and of error. And thus it is in vain to look to them for any
explanation of the difference between the two. Nor does the otherwise
promising extension of Darwinian conceptions of the "struggle for
existence" and the "survival of the fittest" to the field of opinions
and convictions appear to affect this conclusion. Such considerations
may indeed assist us to understand how true convictions in virtue of
their "usefulness" gradually come to be established and extended, but
they require to presume the truth of these convictions as an antecedent
condition of their "usefulness" and consequent establishment. I should
infer, then, that it is a mistake in principle to seek to replace
ontology by a "theory of knowledge," and should even be inclined to
question the very possibility of such a theory as distinct from
metaphysics on the one hand and empirical psychology on the other. (2)
The second consequence is of even greater importance. The inquiry into
the general character by which the contents of true assertions are
discriminated from the contents of false assertions must be carefully
distinguished from any investigation into the truth or falsehood of
special assertions. To ask how in the end truth differs from falsehood
is to raise an entirely different problem from that created by asking
whether a given statement is to be regarded as true or false. The
distinction becomes particularly important when we have to deal with
what Locke would call assertions of "real existence," _i. e._,
assertions as to the occurrence of particular events in the temporal
order. All such assertions depend, in part at least, upon the admission
of what we may style "empirical" evidence, the immediate unanalyzed
witness of simple apprehension to the occurrence of an alleged matter of
fact. Thus it would follow from our proposed conception of metaphysics
that metaphysics is in principle incapable either of establishing or
refuting any assertion as to the details of our immediate experience of
empirical fact, though it may have important bearings upon any theory of
the general nature of true Being which we may seek to found upon our
alleged experiences. In a word, if our conception be the correct one,
the functions of a science of metaphysics in respect of our knowledge of
the temporal sequence of events psychical and physical must be purely
critical, never constructive,--a point to which I shall presently have
to recur.

One more general reflection, and we may pass to the consideration of the
relation of metaphysics to the various alreadyorganized branches of
human knowledge more in detail. The admission that there is, or may be,
such a study as we have described, seems of itself to involve the
recognition that definite knowledge about the character of what really
"is," is attainable, and thus to commit us to a position of sharp
opposition both to consistent and thorough-going agnosticism and also to
the latent agnosticism of Kantian and neo-Kantian "critical philosophy."
In recognizing ontology as a legitimate investigation, we revert in
principle to the "dogmatist" position common, _e. g._, to Plato, to
Spinoza and to Leibniz, that there is genuine truth which can be known,
and that this genuine truth is not confined to statements about the
process of knowing itself. In fact, the "critical" view that the only
certain truth is truth about the process of knowing seems to be
inherently self-contradictory. For the knowledge that such a proposition
as, _e. g._, "I know only the laws of my own apprehending activity," is
true, would itself be knowledge not about the process of knowing but
about the content known. Thus metaphysics, conceived as the science of
the general character which distinguishes truth from falsehood,
presupposes throughout all knowledge the presence of what we may call a
"transcendent object," that is, a content which is never identical with
the process by which it is apprehended, though it may no doubt be
maintained that the two, the process and its content, if distinct, are
yet not ultimately separable. That they are in point of fact not
ultimately separable would seem to be the doctrine which, under various
forms of statement, is common to and characteristic of all the
"idealistic" systems of metaphysics. So much then in defense of a
metaphysical point of view which seems to be closely akin to that of Mr.
Bradley and of Professor Royce, to mention only two names of
contemporary philosophers, and which might, I think, for the purpose of
putting it in sharp opposition to the "neo-Kantian" view, not unfairly
be called, if it is held to need a name, "neo-Leibnizian."

In passing on to discuss in brief the nature of the boundary lines which
divide metaphysics from other branches of study, it seems necessary to
start with a clear distinction between the "pure" or "formal" and the
"applied" or "empirical" sciences, the more so as in the loose current
employment of language the name "science" is frequently given
exclusively to the latter. In every-day life, when we are told that a
certain person is a "man of science," or as the detestable jargon of our
time likes to say, a "scientist," we expect to find that he is, _e. g._,
a geologist, a chemist, a biologist, or an electrician. We should be a
little surprised to find on inquiry that our "man of science" was a pure
mathematician, and probably more than a little to learn that he was a
formal logician. The distinction between the pure and the empirical
sciences may be roughly indicated by saying that the latter class
comprises all those sciences which yield information about the
particular details of the temporal order of events physical and
psychical, whereas the pure sciences deal solely with the general
characteristics either of all truths, or of all truths of some
well-defined class. More exactly we may say that the marks by which an
empirical is distinguished from a pure science are two. (1) The
empirical sciences one and all imply the presence among their premises
of empirical propositions, that is, propositions which assert the actual
occurrence of some temporal fact, and depend upon the witness of
immediate apprehension, either in the form of sense perception or in
that of what is commonly called self-consciousness. In the vague
language made current by Kant, they involve an appeal to some form of
unanalyzed "intuition." The pure sciences, on the other hand, contain no
empirical propositions either among their premises or their conclusions.
The principles which form their premises are self-evidently true
propositions, containing no reference to the actual occurrence of any
event in the temporal order, and thus involving no appeal to any form of
"intuition." And the conclusions established in a pure science are all
rigidly logical deductions from such self-evident premises. That the
universality of this distinction is still often overlooked even by
professed writers on scientific method seems explicable by two simple
considerations. On the one hand, it is easy to overlook the important
distinction between a principle which is self-evident, that is, which
cannot be denied without explicit falsehood, and a proposition affirmed
on the warrant of the senses, because, though its denial cannot be seen
to be obviously false, the senses appear on each fresh appeal to
substantiate the assertion. Thus the Euclidean postulate about parallels
was long falsely supposed to possess exactly the same kind of
self-evidence as the _dictum de omni_ and the principle of identity
which are part of the foundations of all logic. And further Kant,
writing under the influence of this very confusion, has given wide
popularity to the view that the best known of the pure sciences, that of
mathematics, depends upon the admission of empirical premises in the
form of an appeal to intuition of the kind just described. Fortunately
the recent developments of arithmetic at the hands of such men as
Weierstrass, Cantor, and Dedekind seem to have definitely refuted the
Kantian view as far as general arithmetic, the pure science of number,
is concerned, by proving that one and all of its propositions are
_analytic_ in the strict sense of the word, that is, that they are
capable of rigid deduction from self-evident premises, so that, in what
regards arithmetic, we may say with Schröder that the famous Kantian
question "how are synthetic judgments _a priori_ possible?" is now known
to be meaningless. As regards geometry, the case appears to a
non-mathematician like myself more doubtful. Those who hold with
Schröder that geometry essentially involves, as Kant thought it did, an
appeal to principles not self-evident and dependent upon an appeal to
sensuous "intuition," are logically bound to conclude with him that
geometry is an "empirical," or as W. K. Clifford called it, a "physical"
science, different in no way from mechanics except in the relative
paucity of the empirical premises presupposed, and to class it with the
applied sciences. On the other hand, if Mr. Bertrand Russell should be
successful in his promised demonstration that all the principles of
geometry are deducible from a few premises which include nothing of the
nature of an appeal to sensuous diagrams, geometry too would take its
place among the pure sciences, but only on condition of our recognizing
that its truths, like those of arithmetic, are one and all, as Leibniz
held, strictly analytical. Thus we obtain as a first distinction between
the pure and the empirical sciences the principle that the propositions
of the former class are all analytical, those of the latter all
synthetic. It is not the least of the services which France is now
rendering to the study of philosophy that we are at last being placed by
the labors of M. Couturat in a position to appreciate at their full
worth the views of the first and greatest of German philosophers on this
distinction, and to understand how marvelously they have been confirmed
by the subsequent history of mathematics and of logic.

(2) A consequence of this distinction is that only the pure or formal
sciences can be matter of rigid logical demonstration. Since the
empirical or applied sciences one and all contain empirical premises,
_i. e._, premises which we admit as true only because they have always
appeared to be confirmed by the appeal to "intuition," and not because
the denial of them can be shown to lead to falsehood, the conclusions to
which they conduct us must one and all depend, in part at least, upon
induction from actual observation of particular temporal sequences. This
is as much as to say that all propositions in the applied sciences
involve somewhere in the course of the reasoning by which they are
established the appeal to the calculus of Probabilities, which is our
one method of eliciting general results from the statistics supplied by
observation or experiment. That this is the case with the more concrete
among such applied sciences has long been universally acknowledged. That
it is no less true of sciences of such wide range as mechanics may be
said, I think, to have been definitely established in our own day by the
work of such eminent physicists as Kirchhoff and Mach. In fact, the
recent developments of the science of pure number, to which reference
has been made in a preceding paragraph, combined with the creation of
the "descriptive" theory of mechanics, may fairly be said to have
finally vindicated the distinction drawn by Leibniz long ago between the
truths of reason and the truths of empirical fact, a distinction which
the Kantian trend of philosophical speculation tended during the greater
part of the nineteenth century to obscure, while it was absolutely
ignored by the empiricist opponents of metaphysics both in England and
in Germany. The philosophical consequences of a revival of the
distinction are, I conceive, of far-reaching importance. On the one
side, recognition of the empirical and contingent character of all
general propositions established by induction appears absolutely fatal
to the current mechanistic conception of the universe as a realm of
purposeless sequences unequivocally determined by unalterable "laws of
nature," a result which has in recent years been admirably illustrated
for the English-speaking world by Professor Ward's well-known Gifford
lectures on "Naturalism and Agnosticism." Laws of physical nature, on
the empiristic view of applied science, can mean no more than observed
regularities, obtained by the application of the doctrine of
chances,--regularities which we are indeed justified in accepting with
confidence as the basis for calculation of the future course of temporal
sequence, but which we have no logical warrant for treating as ultimate
truths about the final constitution of things. Thus, for example, take
the common assumption that our physical environment is composed of a
multitude of particles each in every respect the exact counterpart of
every other. Reflection upon the nature of the evidence by which this
conclusion, if supported at all, has to be supported, should convince us
that at most all that the statement ought to mean is that individual
differences between the elementary constituents of the physical world
need not be allowed for in devising practical formulae for the
intelligent anticipation of events. When the proposition is put forward
as an absolute truth and treated as a reason for denying the ultimate
spirituality of the world, we are well within our rights in declining
the consequence on the logical ground that conclusions from an empirical
premise must in their own nature be themselves empirical and contingent.

On the other hand, the extreme empiricism which treats all knowledge
whatsoever as merely relative to the total psychical state of the
knower, and therefore in the end problematic, must, I apprehend, go down
before any serious investigation into the nature of the analytic truths
of arithmetic, a consequence which seems to be of some relevance in
connection with the philosophic view popularly known as Pragmatism. Thus
I should look to the coming regeneration of metaphysics, of which there
are so many signs at the moment, on the one hand, for emphatic
insistence on the right, _e. g._, of physics and biology and psychology
to be treated as purely empirical sciences, and as such freed from the
last vestiges of any domination by metaphysical presuppositions and
foregone conclusions, and on the other, for an equally salutary
purgation of formal studies like logic and arithmetic from the taint of
corruption by the irrelevant intrusion of considerations of empirical
psychology.

We cannot too persistently bear in mind that there is, corresponding to
the logical distinction between the analytic and the synthetic
proposition, a deep and broad general difference between the wants of
our nature ministered to by the formal and the applied sciences
respectively. The formal sciences, incapable of adding anything to our
detailed knowledge of the course of events, as we have seen, enlighten
us solely as to the general laws of interconnection by which all
conceivable systems of true assertions are permeated and bound together.
In a different connection it would be interesting to develop further the
reflection that the necessity of appealing to such formal principles in
all reasoning about empirical matters of fact contains the explanation
of the famous Platonic assertion that the "Idea of Good" or supreme
principle of organization and order in the universe, is itself not an
existent, but something ἔτι ἐπέκεινα τῆς οὐσίας (eti epekeina tês
ousias), "transcending even existence," and the very similar declaration
of Hegel that the question whether "God"--in the sense of such a supreme
principle--exists is frivolous, inasmuch as existence (_Dasein_) is a
category entirely inadequate to express the Divine nature. For my
present purpose it is enough to remark that the need to which the formal
sciences minister is the demand for that purely speculative satisfaction
which arises from insight into the order of interconnection between the
various truths which compose the totality of true knowledge. Hence it
seems a mistake to say, as some theorists have done, that were we born
with a complete knowledge of the course of temporal sequences throughout
the universe, and a faultless memory, we should have no need of logic or
metaphysics, or in fact of inference. For even a mind already in
possession of all true propositions concerning the course of events,
would still lack one of the requisites for complete intellectual
satisfaction unless it were also aware, not only of the individual
truths, but of the order of their interdependence. What Aristotle said
long ago with reference to a particular instance may be equally said
universally of all our empirical knowledge; "even if we stood on the
moon and saw the earth intercepting the light of the sun, we should
still have to ask for the reason _why_." The purposes ministered to by
the empirical sciences, on the other hand, always include some reference
to the actual manipulation in advance by human agency of the stream of
events. We study mechanics, for instance, not merely that we may
perceive the interdependence of truths, but that we may learn how to
maintain a system of bodies in equilibrium, or how to move masses in a
given direction with a given momentum. Hence it is true of applied
science, though untrue of science as a whole, that it would become
useless if the whole past and future course of events were from the
first familiar to us. And, incidentally it may be observed, it is for
the same reason untrue of inference, though true of inductive inference,
that it is essentially a passage from the known to the unknown.

In dealing with the relation of metaphysics to the formal sciences
generally, the great difficulty which confronts us is that of
determining exactly the boundaries which separate one from another.
Among such pure sciences we have by universal admission to include at
least two, pure formal logic and pure mathematics, as distinguished from
the special applications of logic and mathematics to an empirical
material. Whether we ought also to recognize ethics and æsthetics, in
the sense of the general determination of the nature of the good and the
beautiful, as non-empirical sciences, seems to be a more difficult
question. It seems clear, for instance, that ethical discussions, such
as bulk so largely in our contemporary literature, as to what is the
right course of conduct under various conditions, are concerned
throughout with an empirical material, namely, the existing
peculiarities of human nature as we find it, and must therefore be
regarded as capable only of an empirical and therefore problematic
solution. Accordingly I was at one time myself tempted to regard ethics
as a purely empirical science, and even published a lengthy treatise in
defense of that point of view and in opposition to the whole Kantian
conception of the possibility of a constructive _Metaphysik der Sitten_.
It seems, however, possible to hold that in the question "What do we
mean by good?" as distinguished from the question "What in particular is
it right to do?" there is no more of a reference to the empirical facts
of human psychology than in the question "What do we mean by truth?" and
that there must therefore be a non-empirical answer to the problem. The
same would of course hold equally true of the question "What _is_
beauty?" If there are, however, such a pure science of ethics and again
of æsthetics, it must at least be allowed that for the most part these
sciences are still undiscovered, and that the ethical and æsthetical
results hitherto established are in the main of an empirical nature, and
this must be my excuse for confining the remarks of the next two
paragraphs to the two great pure sciences of which the general
principles may be taken to be now in large measure known.

That metaphysics and logic should sometimes have been absolutely
identified, as for instance by Hegel, will not surprise us when we
consider how hard it becomes on the view here defended to draw any hard
and fast boundary line between them. For metaphysics, according to this
conception of its scope, deals with the formulation of the self-evident
principles implied, in there being such a thing as truth and the
deductions which these principles warrant us in drawing. Thus it might
be fairly said to be the supreme science of _order_, and it would not be
hard to show that all the special questions commonly included in its
range, as to the nature of space, time, causation, continuity, and so
forth, are all branches of the general question, how many types of order
among concepts are there, and what is their nature. A completed
metaphysics would thus appear as the realization of Plato's splendid
conception of dialectic as the ultimate reduction of the contents of
knowledge to order by their continuous deduction from a supreme
principle (or, we may add, principles). Now such a view seems to make it
almost impossible to draw any ultimate distinction between logic and
metaphysics. For logic is strictly the science of the mutual implication
of propositions, as we see as soon as we carefully exclude from it all
psychological accretions. In the question what are the conditions under
which one proposition or group of propositions imply another, we exhaust
the whole scope of logic pure and proper, as distinguished from its
various empirical applications. This is the important point which is so
commonly forgotten when logic is defined as being in some way a study of
"psychical processes," or when the reference to the presence of "minds"
in which propositions exist, is intended into logical science. We cannot
too strongly insist that for logic the question so constantly raised in
a multitude of text-books, what processes actually take place when we
pass from the assertion of the premises to the assertion of the
conclusion, is an irrelevant one, and that the only logical problem
raised by inference is whether the assertion of the premises as true
_warrants_ the further assertion of the conclusion, supposing it to be
made. (At the risk of a little digression I cannot help pointing out
that the confusion between a logical and a psychological problem is
committed whenever we attempt, as is so often done, to make the
self-evidence of a principle identical with our psychological inability
to believe the contradictory. From the strictly logical point of view,
all that is to be said about the two sides of such an ultimate
contradiction is that the one is true and the other is false. Whether it
is or is not possible, as a matter of psychical fact for me to affirm
with equal conviction, both sides of a contradiction, knowing that I am
doing so, is a question of empirical psychology which is possibly
insoluble, and at any rate seems not to have received from the
psychologists the attention it deserves. But the logician, so far as I
can see, has no interest as a logician in its solution. For him it would
still be the case even though all mankind should actually and
consciously affirm both sides of a given contradiction, that one of the
affirmations would be true, and the other untrue.) Logic thus seems to
become either the whole or an integral part of the science of order, and
there remain only two possible ways of distinguishing it from
metaphysics. It might be suggested that logical order, the order of
implication between truths, is only one species of a wider genus, order
in general by the side, for example, of spatial, temporal, and numerical
order, and thus that logic is one subordinate branch of the wider
science of metaphysics. Such a view, of course, implies that there are a
plurality of ultimately independent forms of order irreducible to a
single type. Whether this is the case, I must confess myself at present
incompetent to decide, though the signal success with which the
principles of number have already been deduced from the fundamental
definitions and axioms of symbolic logic, and number itself defined, as
by Mr. Russell, in terms of the purely logical concept of
class-relation, seems to afford some presumption to the contrary. Or it
may be held that the difference is purely one of the degree of
completeness with which the inquiry into order is pursued. Thus the
ordinary symbolic logic of what Schröder has called the "identical
calculus," or "calculus of domains," consists of a series of deductions
from the fundamental concepts of class and number, identical equality,
totality or the "logical 1," zero or the null-class, and the three
principles of identity, subsumption, and negation. The moment you cease
to accept these data in their totality as the given material for your
science, and to inquire into their mutual coherence, by asking for
instance whether any one of them could be denied, and yet a body of
consistent results deduced from the rest, your inquiry, it might be
said, becomes metaphysics. So, again, the discussion of the well-known
contradictions which arise when we try to apply these principles in
their entirety and without modification to classes of classes instead of
classes of individuals, or of the problem raised by Peano and Russell,
whether the assertions "Socrates is a man" and "the Greeks are men"
affirm the same or a different relation between their subject and
predicate (which seems indeed to be the same question differently
stated), would generally be allowed to be metaphysical. And the same
thing seems to be equally true of the introduction of time relations
into the interpretation of our symbols for predication employed by Boole
in his treatment of hypotheticals, and subsequently adopted by his
successors as the foundation of the "calculus of equivalent statements."

However we may decide such questions, we seem at least driven by their
existence to the recognition of two important conclusions. (1) The
relation between logical and metaphysical problems is so close that you
cannot in consistency deny the possibility of a science of metaphysics
unless you are prepared with the absolute skeptic to go the length of
denying the possibility of logic also, and reducing the first principles
of inference to the level of formulae which have happened hitherto to
prove useful but are, for all we know, just as likely to fail us in
future application as not. (Any appeal to the doctrine of chances would
be out of place here, as that doctrine is itself based on the very
principles at stake.) (2) The existence of fundamental problems of this
kind which remained almost or wholly unsuspected until revealed in our
own time by the creation of a science of symbolic logic should console
us if ever we are tempted to suspect that metaphysics is at any rate a
science in which all the main constructive work has already been
accomplished by the great thinkers of the past. To me it appears, on the
contrary, that the recent enormous developments in the purely formal
sciences of logic and mathematics, with the host of fundamental problems
they open up, give promise of an approaching era of fresh speculative
construction which bids fair to be no less rich in results than any of
the great "golden" periods in the past history of our science. Indeed,
but that I would avoid the slightest suspicion of a desire to advertise
personal friends, I fancy I might even venture to name some of those to
whom we may reasonably look for the work to be done.

Of the relation of metaphysics to pure mathematics it would be
impertinent for any but a trained mathematician to say very much. I must
therefore be content to point out that the same difficulty in drawing
boundary lines meets us here as in the case of logic. Not so long ago
this difficulty might have been ignored, as it still is by too many
writers on the philosophy of science. Until recently mathematics would
have been thought to be adequately defined as the science of numerical
and quantitative relations, and adequately distinguished from
metaphysics by the non-quantitative and non-numerical character of the
latter, though it would probably have been admitted that the problem of
the definition of quantity and number themselves is a metaphysical one.
But in the present state of our knowledge such an account seems doubly
unsatisfactory. On the one hand, we have to recognize the existence of
branches of mathematics, such as the so-called descriptive geometry,
which are neither quantitative nor numerical, and, on the other,
quantity as distinct from number appears to play no part in mathematical
science, while number itself, thanks to the labors of such men as Cantor
and Dedekind, seems, as I have said before, to be known now to be only a
special type of order in a series. Thus there appears to be ground for
regarding serial order as the fundamental category of mathematics, and
we are thrown back once more upon the difficult task of deciding how
many ultimately irreducible types of order there may be before we can
undertake any precise discrimination between mathematical and
metaphysical science. However we may regard the problem, it is at least
certain that the recent researches of mathematicians into the meaning of
such concepts as continuity and infinity have, besides opening up new
metaphysical problems, done much to transfigure the familiar ones, as
all readers of Professor Royce must be aware. For instance I imagine all
of us here present, even the youngest, were brought up on the
Aristotelian doctrine that there is and can be no such thing as an
actually existing infinite collection, but which of us would care to
defend that time-honored position to-day? Similarly with continuity all
of us were probably once on a time instructed that whereas "quantity" is
continuous, number is essentially "discrete," and is indeed the typical
instance of what we mean by the non-continuous. To-day we know that it
is in the number series that we have our one certain and familiar
instance of a perfect continuum. Still a third illustration of the
transforming light which is thrown upon old standing metaphysical
puzzles by the increasing formal development of mathematics may be found
in the difficulties attendant upon the conception of the "infinitely
little," once regarded as the logical foundation of the so-called
Differential Calculus. With the demonstration, which maybe found in Mr.
Russell's important work, that "infinitesimal," unlike "infinite," is a
purely relative term, and that there are no infinitesimal real numbers,
the supposed logical significance of the concept seems simply to
disappear. Instances of this kind could easily be multiplied almost
indefinitely, but those already cited should be sufficient to show how
important are the metaphysical results which may be anticipated from
contemporary mathematical research, and how grave a mistake it would be
to regard existing metaphysical construction, _e. g._, that of the
Hegelian system, as adequate in principle to the present state of our
organized knowledge. In fact, all the materials for a new
_Kategorienlehre_, which may be to the knowledge of our day what Hegel's
_Logic_ was to that of eighty years ago, appear to lie ready to hand
when it may please Providence to send us the metaphysician who knows how
to avail himself of them. The proof, given since this address was
delivered, by E. Zermelo, that every assemblage can be well ordered, is
an even more startling illustration of the remarks in the text.

It remains to say something of the relation of metaphysical speculation
to the various sciences which make use of empirical premises. On this
topic I maybe allowed to be all the more brief, as I have quite recently
expressed my views at fair length in an extended treatise (_Elements of
Metaphysics_, Bks. 3 and 4), and have nothing of consequence to add to
what has been there said. The empirical sciences, as previously defined,
appear to fall into two main classes, distinguished by a difference
which corresponds to that often taken in the past as the criterion by
which science is to be separated from philosophy. We may study the facts
of temporal sequence either with a view to the actual control of future
sequences or with a view to detecting under the sequence some coherent
purpose. It is in the former way that we deal with facts in mechanics,
for instance, or in chemistry, in the latter that we treat them when we
study history for the purpose of gaining insight into national aims and
character. We may, if we please, with Professor Royce, distinguish the
two attitudes toward fact as the attitude respectively of description
and of appreciation or evaluation. Now as regards the descriptive
sciences, the position to which, as I believe, metaphysicians are more
and more tending is that here metaphysics has, strictly speaking, no
right at all to interfere. Just because of the absence from metaphysics
itself of all empirical premises, it can be no business of the
metaphysician to determine what the course of events will be or to
prescribe to the sciences what methods and hypotheses they shall employ
in the work of such determination. Within these sciences any and every
hypothesis is sufficiently justified, whatever its nature, so long as it
enables us more efficiently than any other to perform the actual task of
calculation and prediction. And it was owing to neglect of this caution
that the _Naturphilosophie_ of the early nineteenth century speedily
fell into a disrepute fully merited by its ignorant presumption. As
regards the physical sciences, the metaphysician has indeed by this time
probably learned his lesson. We are not likely to-day to repeat the
mistake of supposing that it is for us as metaphysicians to dictate what
shall be the physicist's or chemist's definition of matter or mass or
elementary substance or energy, or how he shall formulate the laws of
motion or of chemical composition. Here, at any rate, we can see that
the metaphysician's work is done when his analysis has made it clear
that we are dealing with no self-evident truths such as the laws of
number, but with inductive, and therefore problematic and provisional
results of empirical assumptions as to the course of facts, assumptions
made not because of their inherent necessity, but because of their
practical utility for the special task of calculation. It is only when
such empirical assumptions are treated as self-evident axioms, in fact
when mechanical science gives itself out as a mechanistic philosophy,
that the metaphysician obtains a right to speak, and then only for the
purpose of showing by analysis that the presence of the empirical
postulates which is characteristic of the natural sciences of itself
excludes their erection into a philosophy of first principles.

What is important in this connection is that we should recognize quite
clearly that psychology stands in this respect on precisely the same
logical footing as physics or chemistry. It is tempting to suppose that
in psychology, at any rate, we are dealing throughout with absolute
certainties, realities which "consciousness" apprehends just as they are
without any of that artificial selection and construction which, as we
are beginning to see, is imposed upon the study of physical nature by
the limitations of our purpose of submitting the course of events to
calculation and manipulation. And it is a natural consequence of this
point of view to infer that since psychology deals directly with
realities, it must be taken as the foundation of the metaphysical
constructions which aim at understanding the general character of the
real as such. The consequence, indeed, disappears at once if the views
maintained in this address as to the intimate relation of metaphysics
and logic, and the radical expulsion from logic of all discussion of
mental processes as such, be admitted. But it is still important to note
that the premises from which the conclusion in question was drawn are
themselves false. We must never allow ourselves to forget that, as the
ever-increasing domination of psychology by the highly artificial
methods of observation and experiment introduced by Fechner and Wundt is
daily making more apparent, psychology itself, like physics, deals not
directly with the concrete realities of individual experience, but with
an abstract selected from that experience, or rather a set of artificial
symbols only partially corresponding with the realities symbolized, and
devised for the special object of submitting the realm of mental
sequences to mathematical calculation. We might, in fact, have based
this inference upon the single reflection that every psychological "law"
is obtained, like physical laws, by the statistical method of
elimination of individual peculiarities, and the taking of an average
from an extended series of measurements. For this very reason, no
psychological law can possibly describe the unique realities of
individual experience. We have in psychology, as in the physical
sciences, the duty of suspecting _exact_ correspondence between the
single case and the general "law" to be of itself proof of error
somewhere in the course of our computation. These views, which I suppose
I learned in the first instance from Mr. F. H. Bradley's paper called _A
Defence of Phenomenalism in Psychology_, may now, I think, be taken as
finally established beyond doubt by the exhaustive analysis of Professor
Münsterberg's _Grundzüge der Psychologie_. They possess the double
advantage of freeing the psychologist once for all from any interference
by the metaphysician in the prosecution of his proper study, and
delivering metaphysics from the danger of having assumptions whose sole
justification lies in their utility for the purpose of statistical
computation thrust upon it as self-evident principles. For their full
discussion I may perhaps be allowed to refer to the first three chapters
of the concluding book of my _Elements of Metaphysics_.

When we turn to the sciences which aim at the appreciation or evaluation
of empirical fact, the case seems rather different. It may fairly be
regarded as incumbent on the metaphysician to consider how far the
general conception he has formed of the character of reality can be
substantiated and filled in by our empirical knowledge of the actual
course of temporal sequence. And thus the way seems to lie open to the
construction of what may fairly be called a Philosophy of Nature and
History. For instance, a metaphysician who has rightly or wrongly
convinced himself that the universe can only be coherently conceived as
a society of souls or wills may reasonably go on to ask what views seem
best in accord with our knowledge of human character and animal
intelligence as to the varying degrees of organized intelligence
manifested by the members of such a hierarchy of souls, and the nature
and amount of mutual intercourse between them. And again, he may fairly
ask what general way of conceiving what we loosely call the inanimate
world would at once be true to fundamental metaphysical principles and
free from disagreement with the actual state of our physical hypotheses.
Only he will need to bear in mind that since conclusions on these points
involve appeal to the present results of the inductive sciences, and
thus to purely empirical postulates, any views he may adopt must of
necessity share in the problematic and provisional character of the
empirical sciences themselves, and can have no claim to be regarded as
definitely demonstrated in respect of their details. I will here only
indicate very briefly two lines of inquiry to which these reflections
appear applicable. The growth of evolutionary science, with the new
light it has thrown upon the processes by which useful variations may be
established without the need for presupposing conscious preëxisting
design, naturally gives rise to the question whether such unconscious
factors are of themselves sufficient to account for the actual course of
development so far as it can be traced, or whether the actual history of
the world offers instances of results which, so far as we can see, can
only have issued from deliberate design. And thus we seem justified in
regarding the problem of the presence of ends in Nature as an
intelligible and legitimate one for the philosophy of the future. I
would only suggest that such an inquiry must be prosecuted throughout by
the same empirical methods, and with the same consciousness of the
provisional character of any conclusions we may reach which would be
recognized as in place if we were called on to decide whether some
peculiar characteristic of an animal group or some singular social
practice in a recently discovered tribe does or does not indicate
definite purpose on the part of breeders or legislators.

The same remarks, in my opinion, apply to the familiar problems of
Natural Theology relative to the existence and activity of such
non-human intelligences as are commonly understood by the names "God" or
"gods." Hume and Kant, as it seems to me, have definitely shown between
them that the old-fashioned attempts to demonstrate from self-evident
principles the existence of a supreme personal intelligence as a
condition of the very being of truth all involve unavoidable logical
paralogisms. I should myself, indeed, be prepared to go further, and to
say that the conception of a single personality as the ground of truth
and reality can be demonstrated to involve contradiction, but this I
know is a question upon which some philosophers for whom I entertain the
profoundest respect hold a contrary opinion. The more modest question,
however, whether the actual course of human history affords probable
ground for believing in the activity of one or more non-human
personalities as agents in the development of our species I cannot but
think a perfectly proper subject for empirical investigation, if only it
be borne in mind that any conclusion upon such a point is inevitably
affected by the provisional character of our information as to empirical
facts themselves, and can claim in consequence nothing more than a
certain grade of probability. With this proviso, I cannot but regard the
question as to the existence of a God or of gods as one upon which we
may reasonably hope for greater certainty as our knowledge of the
empirical facts of the world's history increases. And I should be
inclined only to object to any attempt to foreclose examination by
forcing a conclusion either in the theistic or in the atheistic sense on
alleged grounds of _a priori_ metaphysics. In a word, I would maintain
not only with Kant that the "physico-theological" argument is specially
deserving of our regard, but with Boole that it is with it that Natural
Theology must stand or fall.


NOTE ON EXTENSION AND INTENSION OF TERMS

Among the numerous difficulties which beset the teaching of the elements
of formal logic to beginners, one of the earliest is that of deciding
whether all names shall be considered to have meaning both in extension
and intension. As we all know, the problem arises in connection with two
classes of names, (1) proper names of individuals, (2) abstract terms. I
should like to indicate what seems to me the true solution of the
difficulty, though I do not remember to have seen it advocated anywhere
in just the form I should prefer.

(1) As to proper names. It seems clear that those who regard the true
proper name as a meaningless label are nearer the truth than those who
assert with Jevons that a proper name has for its intension all the
predicates which can be truly ascribed to the object named. As has often
been observed, it is a sufficient proof that, for example, John does not
_mean_ "a human being of the male sex," to note that he who names his
daughter, his dog, or his canoe John, makes no false assertion, though
he may commit a solecism. So far the followers of Mill seem to have a
satisfactory answer to Jevons, when they say, for example, that he
confuses the intension of a term with its accidental or acquired
associations. (So, again, we can see that Socrates cannot _mean_ "the
wisest of the Greek philosophers," by considering that I may perfectly
well understand the statement "there goes Socrates" without being aware
that Socrates is wise or a Greek or a philosopher.) And if we objected
that no proper name actually in use is ever without some associations
which in part determine its meaning by restricting its applicability, it
would be a valid rejoinder that in pure logic we have to consider not
the actual usages of language, but those that would prevail in an ideal
language purged of all elements of irrelevancy. In such an ideal
scientific language, it might be said, the proper name would be reduced
to the level of a mere mark serviceable for identification, but
conveying no implication whatever as to the special nature of the thing
identified. Thus it would be indifferent _what_ mark we attach to any
particular individual, just as in mathematics it is indifferent what
alphabetical symbol we appropriate to stand for a given class or number.
I think, however, that even in such an ideal scientific language the
proper name would have a certain intension. In the first place, the use
of proper name seems to inform us that the thing named is not unique, is
not the only member of a class. To a monotheist, for instance, the name
"God" is no true proper name, nor can he consistently give a proper name
to his Deity. It is only where one member of a class has to be
distinguished from others that the bestowal of a proper name has a
meaning. And, further, to give a thing a proper name seems to imply that
the thing is itself not a class. In logic we have, of course, occasion
to form the concept of classes which have other classes for their
individual members. But the classes which compose such classes of
classes could not themselves be identified by means of proper names.
Thus the employment of a proper name seems to indicate that the thing
named is not the only member of its class, and further that it is not
itself a class of individuals. Beyond this it seems to be a mere
question of linguistic convention what information the use of a proper
name shall convey. Hence it ought to be said, not that the proper name
has no intension, but that it represents a limiting case in which
intension is at a minimum.

(2) As to abstract terms. Ought we to say, with so many English formal
logicians, that an abstract term is always singular and non-intensional?
The case for asserting that such terms are all singular, I own, seems
unanswerable. For it is clear that if the name of an attribute or
relation is equally the name of another attribute or relation, it is
ambiguous and thus not properly one term at all. To say, for example,
that whiteness means two or more distinct qualities seems to amount to
saying that it has no one definite meaning. Of course, it is true that
milk is white, paper is white, and snow is white, and yet the
color-tones of the three are distinct. But what we assert here is, not
that there are different whitenesses, but only that there are different
degrees of approximation to a single ideal standard or type of
whiteness. It is just because the whiteness we have in view is one and
not many that we can intelligibly assert, for example, that newly fallen
snow is _whiter_ than any paper. All the instances produced by Mill to
show that abstract terms may be general seem to me either to involve
confusion between difference of kind and difference in degree of
approximation to type, or else to depend upon treating as abstract a
term which is really concrete. Thus when we say red, blue, green, are
different kinds of color, surely what we mean is different kinds of
colored surface. Quà colored, they are not different; I mean just as
much and no more when I say "a red thing is colored," or "has color," as
when I say "a green thing is colored." If Mill were right, the
proposition "red is a color" ought to mean exactly the same as "red is
red." Or, to put it in another way, it would become impossible to form
in thought any concept of a single class of colored things.

But need we infer because abstract terms are singular that therefore
they have no intension and are mere meaningless marks? Commonly as this
inference is made, it seems to me clearly mistaken. It seems, in fact,
to rest upon the vague and ill-defined principle that an attribute can
have no attributes of its own. That it is false is shown, I think, by
the simple reflection that scientific definitions are one and all
statements as to the meaning of abstract names of attributes and
relations. For example, the definition of a circle is a statement as to
the meaning of circularity, the legal definition of responsible persons
a statement as to the meaning of the abstraction "responsibility," and
so on. (We only evade the point if we argue that abstract terms when
used as the subjects of propositions are really being employed
concretely. For "cruelty is odious," for instance, does not merely mean
that cruel acts are odious acts, but that they are odious _because_ they
are cruel.) In fact, the doctrine that abstract terms have no intension
would seem, if thought out, to lead to the view that there are only
classes of individuals, but no classes of classes. Thus to say "cruel
acts are odious because cruel" implies, not only that I can form the
concept of a class of cruel acts, but also that of classes of odious
acts of which the class of cruel acts in its turn is a member. And to
admit as much as this is to admit that the class of cruel acts,
considered as a member of the class of odious acts, shares the common
predicate of odiousness with the other classes of acts composing the
higher class. Hence the true account of abstract terms seems to me to be
that we have in them another limiting case, a case in which the
extension and the intension are coincident. Incidentally, by
illustrating the ambiguity of the principle that attributes have no
attributes of their own, our discussion seems to indicate the advantage
of taking the purely extensional view is opposed to the predicative view
of the import of propositions as the basis of an elementary treatment of
logical doctrine.




THE PRESENT PROBLEMS OF METAPHYSICS

BY ALEXANDER T. ORMOND

     [Alexander Thomas Ormond, McCosh Professor of Philosophy,
     Princeton University, since 1897. b. 1847, Punxsutawney,
     Pennsylvania. Mental Science Fellow, Princeton, 1877-78;
     Post-grad. Bonn and Berlin, 1884-85; Ph.D. Princeton, 1880;
     A.B. _ibid._ 1877; LL.D. Miami, 1899. Professor of
     Philosophy and History, University of Minnesota, 1880-83;
     Professor of Mental Science and Logic, Princeton University,
     1883-97. Member American Philosophical Association, American
     Psychological Association.]


