PART III.—SECOND DIVISION.
SCRIPTURE CONTRADICTS SCRIPTURE.


In the former part of this division numerous examples have been brought
together to prove that the scope of Scripture in one place is not
reconcilable with the statement given in another; it now remains to go
one step further, and show that one Scripture positively contradicts
another.  In the former part the passages alluded to are obviously in
error; in this part one text will be contrasted with another
contradictory text, but it will not be possible to pronounce which is
right, or whether both are not equally in fault.  It will suffice in many
cases simply to set one statement against another statement in separate
columns, and leave the reader to form his own judgment; but in some few
instances a remark or two will be given to point out the scope of the
error to which attention is directed.

        Gen. vi., 19, 20.                     Gen. vii., 2.

The direction given by God to       This plain, positive direction is
Noah was—“Of every living thing     altered in the very next chapter,
of _all flesh_, two of every sort   and a distinction is made between
shalt thou bring into the ark       clean and unclean animals: “Of
. . . they shall be male and [its]  every clean beast thou shalt take
female; of fowls after their        to thee by _sevens_, the male and
kind, and of cattle after their     his female.”
kind, of every creeping thing of
the earth after his kind, _two of   Seven pairs (or 14 animals) is a
every sort_ shall come unto thee    very wide deviation from the
to keep them alive.”                direction, two only of every sort
                                    shall be taken into the ark to
Nothing can be more explicit.  It   keep them alive.
is even expressly said that the
_cattle_ were not to exceed two;
it was to be two “of _all_
flesh;” two of “every sort.”
  Gen. xlvi., 27; Deut. x., 22.              Acts, vii., 14.

In the books of Moses we are more   By what authority does the martyr
than once told that all the souls   Stephen increase this positive
of the house of Jacob which came    assertion by the addition of five
into Egypt were “three score and    more? saying “all the kindred [of
ten.”                               Jacob which came into Egypt] were
                                    three score and 15 souls.”
We read in Gen. xlvi., 26, that the number, exclusive of Joseph and
his two sons, who were already in Egypt, and of Jacob himself, the
founder of the race, “all the souls were three score and six;” but
including these four, the number amounted to “three score and ten.”
By adding together the names set down in Gen. xlvi., 15, 18, 22, 25,
it will be found that the number amounts to 70; the five, therefore,
added by Stephen, had no existence.
     1 Sam., xxx., 1–10, 17.              1 Chron., xii., 20–22.

The Amalekites burnt Ziklag, and    How is this transaction recorded
drove off the women as captives.    by the chronicler?  When David
Three days afterwards David and     reached Ziklag, eight captains
“his men” came to the place and     “of thousands” came to him, and
saw the calamity which had          helped him against the Amalekite
befallen it.  David consulted the   raiders, and so many men flocked
ephod, and was told to pursue the   to his standard to help him, that
“rovers,” for he should not only    his army was “a great host, like
overtake them, but should recover   the host of God.”
all that they had taken captive.
“So David went, he and the _six     Certainly it seems very
hundred men_ that were with him,    improbable that 400 men should be
and came to the brook Besor.”       able to extirpate the whole army
Here David left behind 200 of the   of the Amalekites which must have
men, and with the remaining 400     been pretty numerous, seeing 400
overtook the spoilers, and          men mounted on camels managed to
extirpated them, for “he smote      escape; but these 400 are spoken
them from the twilight even unto    of as mere ciphers, for David and
the evening of the next day, and    his men slew all the whole army,
there escaped not a man of them,    except these [few] young men who
save 400 who fled on camels.”       were on camels.
         2 Sam., ii., 10.                    2 Sam., ii., 11.

Ishbosheth, the rival king of       In the very next verse we are
David, is said to have reigned      informed that David reigned
_two years_; and during these two   _seven years and a half_ over
years, David reigned over Judah     Judah only, during all which time
only.                               Ishbosheth reigned over the rest
                                    of the tribes.
       2 Sam., viii., 4, 5.                1 Chron., xviii., 4.

David, says the writer of this      In the corresponding passage
book, took from Hadadezer, (?)      recorded in the book of
King of Zobah, 1,000 chariots,      Chronicles, we are told that the
and _seven hundred_ horsemen, and   number of horsemen was not 700,
22,000 footmen.                     but _seven thousand_.  The name
                                    of the king is here called
                                    Hadarezer.
        2 Sam., x., 6, 18.                 1 Chron., xix., 18.

Hadarezer hired 33,000 Syrians to   In the book of Chronicles David
oppose David; but David came        is said to have slain _seven
against the allied army and “slew   thousand_ men, which fought in
_seven hundred chariots_ of the     chariots, and forty thousand
Syrians, and forty thousand         _footmen_.
_horsemen_.”
        2 Sam., xxiv., 9.                   1 Chron., xxi., 5.

The “fighting men” at the close     In the book of Chronicles the
of David’s reign are stated in      number of fighting men is even
the book of Samuel to have been     more astounding.  It is given as
1,300,000 (!); of these 800,000     1,570,000; of which 1,100,000
were of Israel, and 500,000 of      belonged to Israel, and 470,000
Judah.                              to Judah.
        2 Sam., xxiv., 13.                 1 Chron., xxi., 12.

When David numbered the people, a   According to Chronicles, the
choice of three evils was given     choice was: _three_ years of
him.  According to Samuel, the      famine, and not seven.
evils were: _seven_ years of
famine, three months pursuit by
his enemies, or three days’
pestilence.
        2 Sam., xxiv., 24.                  Chron., xxi., 25.

In the book of Samuel, David is     In the book of Chronicles, he is
said to have given to Araunah for   said to have given for it 600
the threshing-floor _fifty_         shekels of _gold_ [£547 10s.].
shekels of _silver_ [£5 13s.
6d.].
        1 Kgs., vii., 26.                   2 Chron., iv., 5.

According to the book of Kings,     According to the book of
Solomon’s brazen laver held 2,000   Chronicles, it held 3,000 baths
baths [15,000 gallons].             [about 22,500 gallons].
        2 Kgs., viii., 26.                 2 Chron., xxii., 2.

The writer of the book of Kings     We are here informed that Ahaziah
tells us that Ahaziah was 22        was 42 when he began to reign,
years old when he began to reign,   and not 22.  Both agree in the
and he reigned one year.            length of his reign.
         2 Kgs., xiv., 7.                 2 Chron., xxv., 11–12.

In the book of Kings, Amaziah is    In the book of Chronicles he is
said to have slain 10,000           said to have slain twice that
Edomites in the Valley of Salt.     number: 10,000 he smote, and
                                    10,000 he cast down from the top
                                    of a rock, whereby “they were all
                                    broken in pieces” (!)
        2 Kgs., xxiv., 8.                  2 Chron., xxxvi., 9.

The author of the book of Kings     The author of the book of
tells us that “Jehoiachin was       Chronicles says that “Jehoiachin
_eighteen years_ old when he        was _eight years_ old when he
began to reign, and [he] reigned    began to reign, and he reigned
in Jerusalem three months.”         three months and ten days in
                                    Jerusalem.”
       1 Chron., xxii., 14.                1 Chron., xxix., 4.

David, we are here told,            In this chapter the bequest is
bequeathed to Solomon for the       stated to have been only 3,000
temple the fabulous sum of          talents of gold, and 7,000 of
100,000 talents of gold, and a      silver.  This would amount to
million talents of silver.  In      £166,650,000 English money.  A
English money this would be seven   good round sum for a petty state
thousand million sterling (say      not bigger than Yorkshire, but
7,000,000,000!).                    still considerably reduced from
                                    that given in the previous
                                    record.
        2 Chron. iii., 15.                Jeremiah lii., 21, 22.

According to the chronicler the     Jeremiah tells us the shaft of
height of the two pillars made by   each was only 18 cubits high.  He
Solomon for the temple was 35       agrees in the height of the
cubits in the shaft, on which was   chapiter (five cubits).
a chapiter of five cubits.          According to Jeremiah the entire
Altogether about 80 feet!!          height was about 40 feet, or half
                                    that of the chronicler.
      Jeremiah lii., 28–30.                   Ezra ii., 64.

The “prophet” informs us that the   Ezra states that of the captives
total number of captives taken      taken to Babylon only 42,360 were
from Judah to Babylon was only      willing to return.  All the rest
4,600.  A modest number enough,     preferred to remain where they
compared with the number of         were.  No doubt Ezra would give
fighting men, which averaged        us to understand that more
300,000, according to the Bible     remained in Babylon than went up
historians.                         to the land of their fathers.
The “prophet” has made a mistake in his sum.  The three captivities
were 3,320 + 832 + 745=4,897, not 4,600.  One is puzzled to
understand how 4,000 captives should have so stripped the kingdom as
to leave it a wilderness; we find hundreds of thousands falling in a
single battle without exhausting the country at all.
        Matt. xvii., 1–2.                     Luke ix., 28.

Here we read “After _six_ days      Luke says “About an _eight_ days
Jesus taketh Peter, James, and      after . . . he took Peter, John,
John, and bringeth them up into a   and James, and went up into a
high mountain . . . and was         mountain, and was transfigured.”
transfigured before them.”
          Mark vi., 40.                       Luke ix., 14.

Mark says of the 5000 who were      Luke says that Jesus directed his
fed with five barley loaves and     disciples “to make them sit down
two fishes: “They sat down in       by fifties in a company.”
ranks, by hundreds and by
fifties.”

These last two examples are not very weighty, but in a book which
professes to be inspired, and demands unreserved and unconditional
belief, we expect minute accuracy.  The argument we advance is
accumulative.  Probably no book of good reputation has so many
contradictory passages as the Bible; the examples referred to in this
pamphlet form but a small part of what might be brought forward, if we
allowed ourselves a larger space.

The examples given above are more or less connected with figures.  The
rest of the examples to be stated are independent of such sources of
error.  A few shall be given in detail and others in parallel columns.


Gen., i., 27.


Adam and Eve, we are here told, were created on the sixth day.  The words
are quite explicit, “male and female created he them, and God blessed
them . . . and the evening and the morning were the sixth day.”

We are little prepared to hear in the very next chapter that God did not
create them a male and female on the sixth day, and of course did not
bless them.  What is still more strange is that the chapter opens with
the words: “Thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all the host
of them, and on the seventh day God _ended_ his work which he had made.”

According to v. 21 we find that God did not rest from his work at the
close of the sixth day, nor was his work ended, nor was woman yet made;
for after this “rest,” or during this “sabbath,” we are not told which,
Adam being thrown into a deep sleep, one of his ribs was abstracted, and
out of this rib was Eve made.


Gen., iv. 14.


After Cain had killed his brother Abel he was “driven by God from the
face of the earth;” and Cain said: “My punishment is greater than I can
bear . . .  I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth, and it
shall come to pass that everyone that findeth me shall slay me.”

One would suppose from this that the world was populated at the time, and
not that Cain was the first-born of the human race.


Gen., xlix., 10.


“The sceptre shall not depart from Judah until Shiloh come.”  We are told
that Shiloh [_the peaceful one_] means “the son of peace,” the Messiah,
Jesus Christ.  If so, how thoroughly did facts contradict this prophecy.
Judah had no sceptre till David’s time, 650 years after these words were
spoken; it held the sceptre 460 years, and it departed from Judah 580
years before Shiloh came.


Exodus, xx.


The chapter contains the decalogue read in the Anglican churches every
Sunday morning.  Moses broke the first pair of stone tables, but having
prepared two others Jehovah “wrote upon them the words that were on the
first tables.”

By comparing Exod. xxxiv. with Exod. xx., it will be found that there is
very little resemblance between the first and second decalogue.  Only
three of the ten commandments are at all alike, the other seven of the
first pair of tables find no counterpart in the second.


1 Sam., ix., 2.


Saul is called “a choice young man and a goodly,” yet had he at the time
a son in man’s estate.


1 Sam., xv., 7–20.


Saul positively affirms that he had “utterly destroyed all the
Amalekites, except Agag,” and him Samuel “hewed to pieces.”  Some twenty
years after this extirpation, David is appointed to destroy the very same
people, and he also “smote them from the twilight even unto the evening
of the next day, and there escaped not a man of them, save 400 young men,
which fled on camels.”  (1 Sam. xxx., 17.)  (_See also_ 1 Chron., iv.,
41–43.)


1 Sam., xvi., 18.


When David was introduced to king Saul, he is described as “a mighty
valiant man, and a man of war;” but in the next chapter he is called a
“stripling unpracticed in arms,” and unused to armour.

In the former of these two chapters (v. 21), he is represented as Saul’s
companion, who “stood before the king, and Saul loved him greatly;” in
the latter (xvii., 55, 56), he becomes a stripling wholly unknown to the
monarch and his officers, for Saul asks Abner “whose son is this youth?
and Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.  And Saul
said, Inquire whose son the stripling is.”  Yet this stripling was a
“mighty man of valour,” who had actually been Saul’s “armour bearer” and
beloved companion.  He had lived with Saul, had played to him in his
moody fits, and charmed away his ill-temper, had been a cause of jealousy
to the king, who had even tried to kill him, and yet neither Saul nor
Abner had ever seen him or known his name.


2 Sam., viii., 17.


The writer says there were two high priests during the rebellion of
David, one elected by Saul and the other by David: they were, “Zadok son
of Ahitub, and Ahimelech son of Abiathar.”

If anyone will read the narrative with tolerable care he will see that
Ahimelech was dead, having been slain by Doeg when he put the city of Nob
to the sword (1 Sam. xxii., 18); besides Ahimelech was not the son but
the father of Abiathar, (1 Sam. xxii., 20; xxiii., 6), and the father of
Ahimelech was Ahitub, a “fact” repeated three times in as many verses, in
1 Sam. xxii., 9–12.

This blunder about Ahimelech has been copied into other places, for
example, 1 Sam. xx., 25; 1 Kings iv., 4; 1 Chronicles xviii., 16, but
there cannot be a shadow of doubt that Abiathar, and not Ahimelech, was
the high priest appointed by David: first, because Abiathar fled to David
for safety; secondly, because he was the high priest during the entire
reign of David; and finally, because he was deposed by Solomon, who told
him he would have put him to death if he had not served before David. (1
Kings ii., 26.)


Jeremiah, xxii., 29, 30.


“O earth, earth, earth!” exclaims the prophet, “hear the word of the
Lord—Thus saith the Lord: Write ye this man [Coniah] childless.”

According to 1 Chronicles, iii., 17, 18, Coniah, or Je-coniah had eight
sons, viz: Assir, Salathiel, Malchiram, Pedaiah, Shenazar, Jecamiah,
Hoshama, and Nedabiah.


Jeremiah, xxxvi., 30.


Jehovah told Jeremiah that Jehoiakim “should have none to sit on the
throne of David:” but we are told (2 Chronicles xxxvi., 8) that his son
succeeded him, and after his son his brother.


Ezekiel, xxx., 13.


This and the two following chapters speak of the conquest of Egypt by
Babylon.  The writer says that the country should be made desolate from
north to south, and that there should be “no more a prince of Egypt.”

Not one word of this corresponds with the known history of Egypt.
Herodotus does not give the slightest hint of such a calamity.  Merchants
frequented the country without interruption long after that, and if the
people had been scattered, the cities utterly wasted for 40 years, and
“no king had succeeded to the throne,” it must have been known.  The
silence of historians on this point is a most conclusive proof that the
logic of fact did not accord with the word of prophecy.

The same may be said of the Pharaoh drowned in the Red Sea.  No history
confirms this tale, and no king of Egypt can be made to tally with the
catastrophe.  But Egypt was not an insignificant kingdom like Judah,
which no one knew about; it was the foremost kingdom of the world, and if
one of its kings had been drowned in the sea with all his host, some
mention must have been made thereof.


GENEALOGY OF JESUS CHRIST.


Take another example.  Both Matthew and Luke labour to prove the
genealogy of Christ from David.  Luke traces Joseph to Adam, through
David (iii., 23–36), and Matthew gives the descendants of David down to
“Joseph, the husband of Mary.”  The object of both is to show that Jesus,
through Joseph, came in the direct line, and was therefore of the lineage
of David.

The interpolated miraculous conception, abandoned by biblical scholars,
{53} utterly stultifies the purpose of these pedigrees.  Matthew and Luke
“prove” that Jesus was of the lineage of David because Joseph, the
husband of Mary, was in the direct line.  The miraculous conception goes
to show that Joseph was _not_ the father of Jesus, and consequently that
Jesus was not of the line of David at all.  Here, then, is a dilemma:—_if
Jesus was the son of Joseph his divinity must be given up_; _if he was
not the son of Joseph_, _he was not of the line of David_, _and his
Messiahship must be given up_.

By casting an eye over the two genealogies, it will be seen that they
differ in all points except at certain nodes, and the usual answer is,
that Luke’s is the pedigree of Joseph, and Matthew’s that of Mary.  But
there is not the slightest indication of this difference in the Gospel
text; both profess to give the genealogy of Joseph.  Matthew says, “Jacob
begat _Joseph_, the husband of Mary, of whom Jesus was born” (i., 16);
there cannot be a shadow of doubt that this is meant for the pedigree of
Joseph, the husband of Mary.  If not, the genealogy was that of Rahab the
harlot, for verse 5 tells us that Boaz was the husband of Rahab, of whom
Obed was born.  So again in verse 6, Bathsheba is given as the wife of
David, and mother of Solomon.  Luke says (iii., 23), Jesus was [as was
supposed] the son of Joseph, the son of Heli; and does not even mention
Mary.  The three words in brackets are a mere gloss, and could not have
been written by Luke, as they would destroy the very thing he was trying
to prove: Jesus was the son of Joseph, Joseph of Heli, and Heli was a
descendant of David, Abraham, and Seth.  If Jesus was not really the son
of Joseph, why trouble himself to show that Joseph was in the line of
David, Abraham, and Seth?

But it is quite evident that Matthew and Luke supposed Jesus to be the
son of Joseph.  So did the neighbours of Joseph and Mary, for they said
(Matt, xiii., 55), “Is not this the carpenter’s son?”  It never oozed out
in his native village that Mary’s son was other than her son in the usual
course of nature.  Even Mary herself says to Jesus “thy father and I have
sought thee sorrowing” (Luke ii., 48); Mary calls Joseph the father, and
not the reputed father, of Jesus, and never seems to have had a shadow of
doubt about it.  So was it with the disciples; their adherence to Jesus
had nothing to do with his divinity.  They none of them ever hint at such
a notion.  Philip said to Nathaniel “We have found him of whom Moses
spoke, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph” (John i., 45); not Jesus of
Nazareth, the son of Jehovah, but Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.
All were anxious to prove his lineage from David, and none cared to set
aside so very important a point.  Of course they spoke of him as
“Christ,” but Christ was merely an accepted title for “King of the
theocracy,” and in order that Jesus might be the “Christ,” it was
absolutely essential that he should be a descendant of David. {54}  _The
interpolated legend of the miraculous conception is a fatal blunder_,
_and if accepted would utterly destroy the claim of Jesus to the
Messiahship_.

          Gen., ii., 17.                    Gen., iii., 17–19.

The Lord God said to Adam, “of      Unto Adam God said, “Because thou
the tree of the knowledge of good   hast eaten of the tree of which I
and evil thou shalt not eat of      commanded thee not to eat [not
it; for _in the day_ that thou      _thou shalt surely die_, but] in
eatest thereof thou shalt surely    the sweat of thy face shalt thou
die.”                               eat bread, till thou return unto
                                    the ground.”
Two things strike us in reading the latter passage: (1) Adam did not
“surely die” _on the day_ he ate of the forbidden fruit; and (2)
there is not the slightest hint to justify the common dogma that
_death_ was the penalty incurred by Adam, but simply _toil_—toil
_till_ he died.  “In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread
_till_ thou return unto the ground.”

On the subject of death it may be here remarked that the scripture
makes mention of thousands and hundreds of thousands, who are not to
die at all.  We have the case of Enoch (Gen., v., 24), the case of
Elijah (2 Kings, ii., 11), and all the inhabitants of the earth who
will be alive “at the last day” (1 Corinthians, xv., 51).  Either
death is not “the wages of sin,” or these persons are not of the race
of Adam.  The “curse” is not transmitted to them; if not to them, why
to others?  And what becomes of the dogma of Adam and Christ as
federal heads?  The whole theory is utterly overturned.
1 Kings viii., 9; 2 Chron. v. 10.            Hebrews ix., 4.

The historic books of the Old       The writer of this book affirms
Testament agree in the fact that    that besides the tables of the
there was “nothing in the ark       covenant, there were in the ark
save the two tables which Moses     “the golden pot that had manna,
put therein at Horeb.”              and Aaron’s rod that budded.”
The pot of manna and Aaron’s rod ought to have been in the ark,
inasmuch as Moses was told to place them there (Exod. xvi., 33, 34.;
Numbers xvii., 10); but this is only another instance of the
inconsistency complained of.
     1 Kings, xxii., 48, 49.              2 Chron. xx., 35, 36.

The writer tells us that            In the Book of Kings we are told
“Jehoshaphat made ships of          that Jehoshaphat would not allow
Tarshish [_i.e. Spanish             Ahaziah to join in the adventure
galleons_] to go to Ophir for       to Ophir.  The chronicler says
gold. . . .  Then said Ahaziah to   that “Jehoshaphat joined Ahaziah”
Jehoshaphat, let my servants go     in making these galleons.
with thy servants in the ships,
but he would not.”
       2 Kings, ix., 11–13.                   Hosea, i., 4.

The royal historian distinctly      Hosea says: “The Lord said I will
says that Jehu was expressly        avenge the blood of Jezreel upon
raised by God to the throne of      the house of Jehu, and (because
Israel to extirpate the wicked      he extirpated the house of Ahab)
house of Ahab, and “avenge the      I will cause to cease the kingdom
blood of the prophets shed by       of the house of Israel.”
Jezebel.”
        2 Kings, ix., 27.                  2 Chron., xxii., 9.

The book of Kings informs us that   The chronicler says he was caught
when Jehu fell on the race of       by the agents of Jehu “hid in
Ahab, Ahaziah “fled to Megiddo,     Samaria,” and being taken captive
and there died.”                    to Jehu, was then slain.
         2 Kings, x., 17.                  2 Kings, x., 11, 12.

Here the slaughter of the house     Here it is placed in Jezreel, and
of Ahab is placed in Samaria.       _after_ Jehu had slain “all that
                                    remained of the house of Ahab,
                                    all his great men, and his
                                    kinsfolk, and his priests . . .
                                    he arose and departed and _came
                                    to Samaria_.”

                                    This agrees with Hosea, i., 4,
                                    cited above.
       1 Chron., xi., 1–3.                  2 Sam., ii., 1–11.

On the death of Saul we are here    Here we are informed that David
told that “Then _all Israel_        and his men went to Hebron at the
gathered themselves to David unto   death of Saul, “and the men of
Hebron, saying, . . . thou shalt    _Judah_ came and anointed him
be ruler over . . .  Israel . . .   king over the house of Judah.”
and David made a covenant with
them in Hebron . . . and they       But Abner took Ishbosheth, son of
anointed David king over Israel.”   Saul, and made him king over all
                                    _Israel_.  David was for seven
                                    years and six months king over
                                    the house of Judah only.
       2 Chron., xxiv., 22.                2 Chron., xxiv., 25.

Joash, it is said, “remembered      Here we are told that Joash slew
not the kindness of Jehoiada [his   not the _son_ of Jehoiada, but
foster father], but slew his        the _sons_; for the servants of
_son_,” _i.e._, Zechariah the       Joash conspired against him not
High Priest, see v. 20.             for the blood of Zechariah, but
                                    “for the blood of the sons of
                                    Jehoiada.”
        2 Kings, xii., 13.                 2 Chron., xxiv., 14.

When Jehoash repaired the temple    The chronicler contradicts this
he placed a money-box beside the    assertion point blank, and
altar for voluntary                 affirms that with the money so
contributions, but (says the        collected “were made vessels for
writer) there was not money         the house of the Lord, vessels to
enough collected to make “bowls     minister and to offer, and
of silver, snuffers, basins,        spoons, and vessels of gold and
trumpets, nor _any_ vessels of      silver.”
gold or silver.”
      2 Chron., xxxiii., 15.               2 Kings, xxiii., 6.

Manasseh is represented as having   But in the reign of Manasseh’s
taken the strange gods and idols    grandson, whose name was Josiah,
out of the house of the Lord . . .  these strange gods and idols were
and of having “cast them out of     still in the temple, for Josiah
the city.”                          “took them out of the house of
                                    the Lord . . . and stamped them
                                    to powder.”
        Psalm, lxxii., 20.                1 Chron., xvi., 7–36.

We read, here “the prayers          Here is given a psalm which the
[_i.e._, the psalms] of David,      chronicler says “David delivered
the son of Jesse, are ended.”       first.”  From verse 8 to 22 is
                                    Psalm cv., 1–15; the next 11
                                    verses are Psalm xcvi.; and the
                                    remaining verses are Psalm cvi.,
                                    1, 47, 48.

                                    In the “headings” 18 of the
                                    psalms, after the lxxii., are
                                    ascribed to David, viz., ciii.,
                                    cviii., cix., cx., cxxii.,
                                    cxxiv., cxxxi., cxxxiii.,
                                    cxxxviii., cxxxix., cxl.–cxlv.
          Matt., i., 23.                      Matt., i., 16.

Matthew says the birth of Jesus     The son of Mary was Jesus, called
fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah    the Christ.
(vii., 14), “Behold a virgin
shall conceive and bear a son,
and shall call his name Emmanuel”
[God with us.]
(1)  The child referred to by Isaiah was to be still an infant when
Rezin and Pekah should be cut off.  Isaiah says, “Before the child
[Emmanuel] shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, [Syria
and Israel] shall be [deprived] of both her kings.”  It required no
great penetration to foretell that the league of Ahaz with
Tiglath-pileser the great king, would soon annihilate the petty
princes of Damascus and Israel.

(2)  All scholars, both Jewish and Christian, agree that the child
referred to was the expected infant of Isaiah himself.  Within two
years Pekah fell by the hand of Hoshea, and Resin by the sword of the
Assyrians.

(3)  The Jews affirm that the word virgin [_almah_] does not of
necessity mean a maiden or unmarried woman.  If Isaiah in the text
referred to his wife, she was already mother of at least one child
two years old.  Joel, i., 8, applies the word to a _widow_ advanced
in life: “Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband
of her youth,” _see_ Prov., xxx., 19.
         Matthew, v., 1.                      Luke, vi., 17.

Jesus “seeing the multitude went    Jesus came down with his
up into a _mountain_, and when he   disciples, and _stood_ in the
was _set_, he opened his mouth      _plain_, and said: &c.  [Here
and taught the people.”  [Here      follow the beatitudes.]
follow the beatitudes.]
        Matt., viii., 28.            Mark, v., 1, 2; Luke, viii., 26,
                                                   27.
“When [Jesus] was come to the
other side [of the lake] into the   “When they came over unto the
country of the _Gergesenes_,        other side of the sea into the
there met him _two_ possessed       country of the _Gadarenes_, there
with devils, coming out of the      met him out of the tombs a
tombs.”                             certain man which had devils a
                                    long time.”
        Matt, xx., 20, 21.                   Mark, x., 35–37.

“The _mother_ of Zebedee’s          “James and John the _sons_ of
children . . . said unto [Jesus],   Zebedee came unto [Jesus] saying,
grant that these my two sons may    grant unto us that we may sit one
sit, the one on thy right hand      on thy right hand and the other
and the other on the left in thy    on thy left in thy glory.”
kingdom.”
        Matt., xxii., 46.                    Mark, xii., 34.

Here we are told that Jesus         Mark gives a different version.
puzzled the Pharisees with the      He says a certain scribe asked
question, “How can Christ be        Jesus, “Which is the first
David’s son, seeing that David      commandment of all?”  And when
calls him _lord_?”  “And no man,”   Jesus answered the scribe well,
adds the writer, “from that day     adds, “No man after that durst
forth, durst ask him any more       ask him any question.”
questions.”
                                              Luke, xx., 40.

                                    Luke agrees with neither of his
                                    brother evangelists.  He states
                                    the matter thus: The Sadducees
                                    tell Jesus of a woman who married
                                    seven times, and ask whose wife
                                    of the seven she would be in the
                                    resurrection.  After Jesus had
                                    replied, some of the scribes
                                    remarked, “Master, thou hast well
                                    said,” and Luke adds, “after that
                                    they durst not ask him any
                                    question.”  Which is right would
                                    be hard to say.  Only one can be
                                    so.
Matt., xxvi., 6, &c.; Mark, xiv.,           John, xii., 1, &c.
              3, &c.
                                    John places this anointing in the
Matthew and Mark say that Jesus     house of Lazarus, and says the
was banqueting in the house of      woman’s name was Mary, who took a
Simon the Leper, when a woman       pound of spikenard for the
came and anointed him with          purpose.
spikenard.
There cannot be a doubt that all these refer to the same event or
tradition.  It was just prior to the “entry into Jerusalem” which
brought about the trial and condemnation.  It is wholly incredible
that this anointing with spikenard should have been done twice at
about the same time.
        Matt., xxvi., 34.                    Mark, xiv., 30.

Jesus said to Simon Peter:          Jesus said: “Verily I say unto
“Verily I say unto thee that this   thee that this day, even in this
night _before the cock crow_,       night, before the cock crow
thou shalt deny me thrice.”         _twice_, thou shalt deny me
                                    thrice.”
See also Luke, xxii., 34; and
John xiii., 38.
        Matt., xxvi., 73.                   John, xviii., 26.

Matthew describes the third         John says it was not “they that
“denial” thus: “After a while       stood by,” but “one of the
came _they that stood by_ and       servants of the High Priest,
said to Peter, surely thou art      whose ear Peter [had] cut off.”
one of them, for thy speech         This servant said, “Did not I see
bewrayeth thee.”                    thee in the garden with him,” and
                                    not that “thy speech bewrayeth
Mark and Luke give substantially    thee.”
the same account.
         Matt, xxvi., 74.                   Mark xiv., 68–72.

Matthew, in accordance with his     Mark has another tale to make
dictum, makes Simon Peter deny      good, and says that Simon Peter
thrice any knowledge of Jesus,      denied once, and the cock crew
and, having so done, “immediately   once; after this Peter denied
the cock crew.”                     twice more, and then the cock
                                    crew a second time.
         Matt, xxvii., 5.                     Acts, i., 18.

Matthew says that Judas, after he   Simon Peter says, “This man
had betrayed his master, “went      [Judas] purchased a field with
and hanged himself.”                the reward of iniquity, and
                                    falling headlong, he burst
                                    asunder, and all his bowels
                                    gushed out.”
Simon Peter says that Judas bought a field with the money he received
from the priests.  The evangelist says he flung the money down in the
temple, and the priests bought with it the potter’s field to bury
strangers in.  What is meant by “falling headlong” is very difficult
to make out.
       Matt, xxviii., 2–5.                   Mark xvi., 4, 5.

Matthew tells us that an angel      Mark says the stone was rolled
“rolled back the stone from the     away, and the visitors on
door of the sepulchre, and sat      “entering into the sepulchre saw
upon it; and the angel said,        [the angel] sitting on the right
‘Fear not . . .’”                   side.  And he said,” &c.  Luke
                                    [xxiv., 4] says there were _two
John xxi., 1.  We are told that     men_ who _stood_.  They had
Mary saw two angels _sitting_;      “shining garments,” and they
one at the head and the other at    said, “Why seek ye the living
the feet.                           among the dead?”
   Mark x., 46; Matt, xx., 29.               Luke xviii., 35.

Mark says, and Matthew agrees       Luke says it was not on leaving
with him, that Jesus met with       Jericho, but as he was about to
Bartimeus, the blind beggar, on     _enter_ the city.
_leaving_ Jericho.
          Mark xiv., 69.                     Luke xxii., 58.

In regard to the second denial of   Luke tells us the person was not
Simon Peter, Mark says “A _maid_    a woman, but a man; and Peter
saw him again, and said to _them    answered “Man, I am not,” _i.e._,
that stood by_, this is one of      not one of the disciples.
them.”
          Luke, ix., 1.                     Luke, ix., 38–40.

Here we read that Jesus “called     We are hardly prepared in the
his twelve disciples together,      same chapter to hear that the
and gave them power and authority   disciples had _not_ power to cast
over _all_ devils, and to cure      out devils, and cure diseases,
[all] diseases.”                    for a man says to Jesus, “Master,
                                    a spirit taketh my son and
                                    teareth him; and I brought him to
                                    thy disciples to cast it out, but
                                    they could not.”
          John xix., 6.                      John xviii., 31.

When Jesus was brought before the   This is very strange, seeing the
Roman procurator, Pilate said to    Jews had just said to Pilate, “It
the Jews, “Take ye him, and         is not lawful for us to put any
crucify him.”                       man to death.”
Would any Roman procurator have told the Jews to crucify a criminal,
knowing that it was strictly forbidden by the Roman senate?

CONCLUSION.


The apology that a certain degree of variance is a proof of independent
testimony is quite beside the present question, and so is the argument of
Dr. Whately about Napoleon.  No doubt half-a-dozen correspondents
describing any event in the late war would dwell on different incidents,
and see matters from different stand-points; one would have a bias
towards the French and another towards the Prussians, one would be cast
in a Tory mould and another would have Radical proclivities, one would
see with military eyes and another with the eyes of a civilian, one would
look towards the end and another would limit his vision to the present
action; but who claims for these correspondents divine inspiration? who
believes that they are all baptized into one spirit, and that the spirit
which guides them has guaranteed that they shall speak the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth?  They write as human beings, with
fallible judgments, and all the prejudices of caste, education, interest,
and special advocacy; with so many things to bias judgment, no doubt
there will be considerable variety of statement, but all this in no wise
applies to the Bible writers—they are not supposed to write from any of
these motives, but to be guided and directed by one and the same motive,
and all to be led by the Spirit of unerring truth.  With such writers
there may be considerable verbal difference, but no substantial variety;
there may be shades of variety, and different incidents may strike
different eye-witnesses, but there can be no positive contradiction, and
the same incident cannot be described as two antagonistic facts.  If
Samuel was right when he affirmed that David took from the king of Zobah
700 horsemen, the chronicler was wrong when he said the number was 7000.
If the chronicler was correct in saying that Jehoiachim was only eight
when he ascended the throne, his brother chronicler was in error when he
declared that he was eighteen.  If Jesus was the son of Joseph and Joseph
a descendant of David, then Jesus was of the lineage of David; but if he
was the son of quite another line he was not of the line of David.  If
the writer of the book of Kings was right in saying that no vessels of
gold and silver were made of the money collected in the temple by
Jehoash, the writer of the book of Chronicles could not be correct in
saying that all sorts of gold and silver vessels were made therefrom.  If
Matthew was right in saying that the soldiers arrayed Jesus in a “scarlet
robe,” Mark and John were wrong in pronouncing it to be a “purple
garment;” and if Jesus said to Peter, before the cock crow thou shalt
deny me thrice, he did not say before the cock crow _twice_ thou shalt
deny me thrice.  If the writers were eye and ear witnesses, and if the
guiding Spirit of God brought to their remembrance what Jesus said and
did, such discrepancies could not have occurred.

These contradictions, and their number is legion, are not the shades of
variety, the verbal differences of independent writers of truth, they are
irreconcilable statements, one of which must be wrong, and if both claim
to be guided by the Spirit of Infallible Truth, their claim cannot be
allowed.  It cannot be true that 22 is 42 and 7000 the same as 600; but
give up inspiration and place the Bible on the same platform as any other
ancient record, then everyone is at liberty to weigh its statements and
to hold fast just so much as is consistent with the advanced knowledge of
science, the general scope of experience, and the harmony of history.

                                * * * * *




SUBJECTS OF TWELVE OF THE SERIES.


No. 1.—“On the Identity of the Vital and Cosmical Principle.”  By R.
LEWINS, M.D., Staff Surgeon-Major to Her Majesty’s Forces.
No. 2.—“The Physical Theory of Animal Life.”  A Review by JULIAN.
No. 3.—“The Nature of Man Identical with that of other Animals.”  By
JULIAN.
No. 4.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY; or “Christ and the Christian Idea,
viewed from a Biological standpoint.”  By JULIAN.
No. 5.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY; or “The Mosaic and Christian Ideas
wholly without Originality.”  By JULIAN.
No. 6.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY; or “Life on the Basis of Hylozoism.”
By JULIAN.
No. 7.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY; or “Identity of the Vital and Cosmical
Principle, according to DR. LEWINS.”  By JULIAN.
No. 8.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY—“The Mission of Moses,” from the German
of Schiller.  Annotated by JULIAN.
No. 9.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY—“Christ not divine nor his death
vicarious.”  By JULIAN.
No. 10.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY—“The Curé Meslier and his Will,” from
the German of Strauss, with Preliminary Remarks by JULIAN.
No. 11.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY—“The Bible irreconcilable with science,
experience, and even its own statements.”  By JULIAN.
No. 12.—BIOLOGY _versus_ THEOLOGY.—“The Dinner of the Count de
Boulainvilliers from Voltaire,” with an Introduction by JULIAN (_in the
press_).




FOOTNOTES.


{3}  _Lay Sermons and Reviews_.  This paper, “On the Origin of Species,”
was originally published in the “Westminster Review,” of April, 1860.

{14a}  Job xxxviii., 8.

{14b}  “On the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God as manifested in the
creation of animals, and in their history, habits, and instincts,” by the
Rev. William Kirby, M.A., F.R.S., rector of Barham.

{15}  The common Hebrew cubit was about 22 inches.  The “royal cubit” was
three inches longer.  The Roman cubit was 18 inches.

{19}  See Dr. Davidson’s _Introduction to the New Testament_.  Baur,
Zeller, Hilgenfeld, &c., take the same view.  See also “Biology _versus_
Theology,” No. I.

{20a}  It is obvious that the Book of the Kings, whether of Judah or
Israel, is not the record called the first and second Book of Kings in
our Bible, for it is not unfrequently referred to in the Chronicles, for
“the rest of the acts” of certain kings, but the account in our Books of
Kings, in some cases at any rate, is far more meagre than that of the
Chronicles.  To give one example: 2 Chron. xxvii., 7, refers us for a
more detailed account to the book of the “Kings of Israel and Judah,” but
the record given in 2 Kings, xv., 36–38, is far less ample than that of
the Chronicler.  It is no less certain that the book called “The
Chronicles of the Kings of Israel” cannot be our books of Chronicles,
inasmuch as they wholly omit the Kings of Israel, and speak only of the
Kings of Judah.

{20b}  Perhaps this expression may mean “the general scope of his
preaching,” and not a book.  It may go for what it is worth, and can in
no wise affect the question at issue.

{22}  Take two examples of this etymology.  HEBREW is supposed to be
derived from Heber, sou of Salah, great-grandson of Shem, who is called
“the father of all the children of Heber” (Gen. x., 21–24); but Abraham,
the 6th remove from Heber, is called a Hebrew after he crossed over into
Canaan (Gen. xiv., 13).  The more probable derivation of the word is
_heber_ (an emigrant, one that has crossed over); if so, Abraham was
called a _hebrew_ because he was a sojourner who had crossed over into
the “land of promise.”

Again, CANAAN is said to have been so called from Canaan son of Ham, and
Canaan’s eldest son was, according to the same authority, Sidon, founder
of the Sidonians, and his other sons were founders of the Hittites,
Jebusites, Amorites, Girgasites, Hivites, Arkites, Sinites, Arvadites,
Zemarites, and Hamathites (Gen. x., 15–18).

All this is most improbable, although in keeping with the practice of
ancient chroniclers.  Modern historians find more probable derivations in
some local peculiarity or suggestive characteristic.  Thus Argos, in
Greece, is mythically derived from Argos, its 4th king; but Strabo tells
us the word means _a plain_.  Devonshire is not a corruption of Debon’s
share or lot (_Faery Queen_ ii., 10), but of the Saxon _defn-afon_ (deep
water).  Similarly Canaan means _low lands_, as opposed to “Aram” (the
highlands), and being suited to commerce from its nearness to the coast,
the word in time became a general term for “a trader.”

{23}  Arphaxad was born “two years after the flood” [Gen. xi., 10]; at
the age of 35 he had a son, Salah [v., 12], in thirty more years Salah
had his son Eber, and before Pelez was born, which was 34 years later,
the Dispersion had taken place.

{24}  It may be safely asserted that population, when unchecked,
increases in a geometrical progression of such a nature as to double
itself every 25 years.—_Encyclopædia Britannica_, vol. xviii., p. 3, col.
Practically, such an instance is rare, if not wholly uninstanced.  Take
the increase of England and Wales as an example.  In 1377 it was
2,092,978, in 1483 it was 4,689,000; in the 100 years, ending with 1800,
the population had increased from 5,475,000 to 8,675,000; and in the
century ending with 1860 it increased nearly threefold, the largest
increase we have experienced.  [In 1760 it was 6,736,000, in 1861 it was
20,062,725.]

{26a}  The average size of an ox in the herd is 60 stone (of 8 lbs.), and
of a sheep six stone.  When the Armistice of 28 days was lately proposed,
the supply of Paris for the time was estimated at 34,000 oxen, 8,000
sheep, 8,000 swine, 5,000 calves, 100,000 cwt. of salt meat, eight
million cwt. of hay and straw, 200,000 cwt. of meal, and 30,000 cwt. of
dried vegetables.  For the cooking of food, the estimate was 100,000 tons
of coals, and 14 million square feet of wood.

{26b}  The absurdity of such an increase as even the “small” supposition
of doubling every twenty years will be obvious to any one who will take
the trouble of working out the figures for 440 years, which would bring
us to the reign of David.  At the Exodus the number was three millions;
if they doubled every twenty years the people in the little kingdom of
David would have been twelve and a half trillion!!  And if the increase
of the book of Exodus is taken as the standard the numbers must be
increased a hundred-fold.  Now the whole population of the world is
somewhat more than 1,000 _millions_, so that in a space not so large as
Yorkshire, and three-fourths wilderness, would be gathered together more
than all the inmates of all the world twelve thousand times over.

{27a}  The nominal limits of “the promised land” were the Euphrates and
Mediterranean Sea on the east and west, the “entrance of Hamath” and
“river of Egypt” on the north and south, giving a surface of 60,000
square miles; but Sidonia and Philistia on the west, the land of the
Moabites and Ammonites on the east never belonged to the kingdom of
David, the real extent of which was about 45 miles broad and 100 miles
long.  Yorkshire is 90 by 130, the principality of Wales 65 by 150; so
that the entire kingdom of David in its greatest extent was considerably
smaller than Yorkshire or Wales, and only one quarter of it was
inhabited, the rest being desert or wilderness.

{27b}  Take Prussia.  Every Prussian is liable to be called into military
service as soon as he attains his 20th year, and after he has completed
his 27th year he enters the Landwehr.  Suppose war is proclaimed, then
every layman in Prussia between 20 and 27 is liable to be called into the
ranks, and would constitute a standing army of 200,000 strong; by adding
the Landwehr of the first call, 100,000 more would be supplied; and by
enrolling all who have not rendered their full service to the state, the
entire amount would be increased to 600,000.  How absurd, therefore, to
speak of double the number of soldiers in such a petty nation as Judah or
Israel!  The entire population of Yorkshire is less than two millions, of
Wales not equal to “David’s army;” yet the entire kingdom of David was
smaller than either, and more than three-fourths of it was uninhabited!!

{31}  Our national debt is not half a quarter of this sum, being somewhat
less than 800 millions sterling.  Suppose an English historian had told
us that a king of wealthy England had laid by money enough to pay off the
national debt eight times, what would be thought of the statement?  But
suppose we had been told that one of the kings of Wales or of Northumbria
had saved all this money for a church, would the most credulous believe
it?  France finds it no easy matter to raise 200 millions, and all Europe
would be puzzled to find the money _instanter_, but the king of a little
territory considerably smaller than Belgium managed to raise that sum
thirty-five times over.

{36}  Ahaziah was also called Jehoahaz and Azariah.

{44}  See Virgil, _Geor._ i., 184, 185; _Æneid_, iv., 402–406; Horace,
_Satires_, bk. i., _s._ i., 33 &c.

{53}  See No.  IX. of this Series.

{54}  Ut apud Persas _Arsaces_, apud Romanos _Cæsar_, apud Egyptios
_Pharao_, ita apud Judæos _Christus_ communi nomine rex appellatur.  _Ps.
Clem. Recog._ i., 45, p. 497.

