PART III.
THE BIBLE IRRECONCILABLE WITH ITSELF.


We shall subdivide this head into two parts.  Under the first we will
bring forward biblical blunders or misstatements, and under the second
positive contradictions.

The two former parts of this paper were concerned with the dogma of
_general_ inspiration; this part looks to the _verbal_ inspiration of the
Bible.  There surely can be no safe mean between verbal inspiration and
no inspiration at all.  Give up the verbal inspiration and the wedge is
introduced which must inevitably destroy the whole dogma; but if one
single blunder can be pointed out, that one blunder will be fatal to the
notion of verbal inspiration.

As the errors of Scripture are very numerous, nothing like an exhaustive
list can be included in a small pamphlet like this, but every end will be
served by the instances subjoined, which we have arranged in groups, for
the purpose of preserving something like order.



(_a_.)  _Historical Errors_.


2 Sam. xxi., 8.


The first example we would bring forward refers to Saul’s daughter
Michal, who is called in the book of Samuel “the wife of Adriel.”  Now,
Adriel did not marry Michal (Saul’s youngest daughter), but Merab.
Michal married first David and then Phalti.

This will be evident by a reference to 1 Sam. xviii., 19, 27, where it is
said: “When Merab, Saul’s daughter, should have been given to David, she
was given to Adriel to wife.  And Michal, Saul’s daughter, loved David;
and Saul gave him Michal, his daughter, to wife.”

During the persecution, David fled from the presence of the king, and
Saul then “gave Michal to another husband, whose name was Phalti” (1 Sam.
xxv., 44).  It is, therefore, an historical error to call Michal the
“wife of Adriel.”


2 Chron. xv., 17.


Speaking of Asa, king of Judah, the chronicler says, his “heart was
perfect all his days, [but] the high places were not taken away out of
Israel.”  Where Israel obviously ought to be Judah.  The kingdom of David
was divided into Judah and Israel, and Asa had nothing whatever to do
with the latter.

A similar blunder occurs in 2 Chron. xxi., 3, where Jehoshaphat is called
“the King of Israel,” whereas he was King of Judah, as will appear
evident from 1 Kings, xxii., 41, where it is said “Jehoshaphat, son of
Asa, began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab, king of
Israel.”  (_See also_ 2 Chron. xxiii., 2.)

And again, 2 Chron. xxviii., 27, we have the same error repeated; for,
speaking of Ahaz, king of Judah, the writer says, “they buried him in
Jerusalem, but brought him not into the sepulchres of the Kings of
Israel,” meaning the kings of Judah.


2 Chron. xxi., 12.


Here we have a very glaring error.  Elijah is represented as sending a
threatening letter to Jehoram, king of Judah; but the Tishbite had been
“taken up to heaven in a chariot of fire” during the reign of
Jehoshaphat, Jehoram’s father; and the prophet alluded to should be
Elisha, and not Elijah.

The blunder arises from a confusion in the mind of the chronicler between
Jehoram king of Israel, and Jehoram king of Judah.  This will be
understood by turning to 2 Kings, viii., 20, where the revolt of the
Edomites, which preceded the “threatening letter,” is narrated.  The
translation of Elijah is given six chapters further back, viz. 2 Kings,
ii., 11.


Matt, xxvii., 9.


The writer is speaking of Judas, who returned the money casting it down
before the priests.  This money was used for the purchase of a field to
bury strangers in, and the Evangelist adds: “Then was fulfilled that
which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying: ‘They took the 30 pieces
of silver . . . and gave them for the potter’s field.’”  These are not
the words of Jeremiah at all, but of Zechariah. (xi., 12, 13.)


Mark ii., 26.


Here we have an historical error made by Christ himself.  The disciples
had been blamed for plucking ears of corn on the Sabbath day; whereupon
Jesus retorted—“Have ye not read what David did when he had need and was
an hungered . . . how he went into the house of God in the days of
Abiathar, the High Priest, and did eat the shew bread?”  The High Priest
alluded to was not Abiathar, but Ahimelech.  The account will be found 1
Sam. xxi., 1–6.  “Then came David to Nob, to Ahimelech the [High] Priest
. . . and said to him . . . give me [the] five loaves [under thine hand]
. . .  And the priest answered . . . ‘There is no common bread under mine
hand, but [only] the hallowed bread, . . .  So the priest gave him [the]
hallowed bread.”


Acts, vii., 15, 16.


Here again we have an unpardonable historical error.  The writer says:
“So Jacob died, and our fathers, and were carried over into Sychem, and
laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons
of Emmor.”  This was not Abraham, but Jacob.  Abraham bought of Ephron
the Hittite, the field of Machpelah (_see_ Gen. xxiii., 16, &c.); it was
Jacob who bought the “parcel of a field at the hand of the children of
Hamor [Emmor], Shechem’s father, for 100 pieces of money.”  (Gen.
xxxiii., 19; and Joshua, xxiv., 32.)



(_b_.)  _Erroneous figures_.


These are so numerous it is universally allowed that no dependence is to
be placed upon them; but the instances subjoined are sufficiently
striking, and in any book except the Bible would be termed errors.


Joshua, xv., 21–32.


Here the writer says that twenty-nine cities towards the coast of Edom
were awarded to the tribe of Judah, and he gives the names; but if any
one will count the names set down he will find they amount to
thirty-eight.

The enumeration occupies twelve verses, two of which contain four names,
and the other ten verses three each.


Judges, xii., 6.


This is a very gross error or exaggeration.  The writer says that 42,000
Ephraimites were slain at the passage of the Jordan, because they “could
not frame to pronounce” the word Shibboleth aright.  By turning to the
census (Numbers, xxvi., 37) it will be seen that the entire population of
the tribe was only 32,500, and by comparing this census with the previous
one it will be further seen that the tribe of Ephraim was on the
decrease, but even in its palmiest days it never amounted to 42,000.
(_See_ Numbers, i., 33.)


2 Sam., xv., 7.


Here we have the tale of Absalom’s revolt.  Having murdered his
half-brother Amnon, he fled to Gesher, the court of his grandfather; but
after the lapse of three years he was permitted to return to Jerusalem,
on condition that he kept away from court for two years.  At the
expiration of this time he became reconciled to the aged king, and
“tarried forty years,” when he revolted.

This of course is a blunder.  The whole reign of David was only forty
years, and this was towards its close.  Probably “forty years” should be
forty _days_, but the correction is only a guess, and the text is
responsible for the mistake.


1 Chron., i., 13–15.


The First Book of Chronicles begins with a genealogy from Adam down to
David.  The subject occupies several chapters, but any attempt to
reconcile the numerous genealogies of Scripture is quite hopeless.  Let
any one, for example, take the two tables of Matthew and Luke, and it
will presently appear how little they correspond; or take the genealogy
of Simeon given in Gen., xlvi., 10, and 1 Chron., iv., 24, and compare
them together; or that of the sons of Benjamin given in Gen., xlvi., 21;
1 Chron., vii., 6; and 1 Chron., viii., 1.  In Genesis his sons are said
to be ten, in Chron., vii., they are three, in Chron., viii., they are
five.


1 Chron., ii., 14.


One would have thought that no diversity could possibly exist respecting
David, the favourite king; but what is the fact?  The Bible writers agree
neither respecting his father’s family nor his own.

The reference given above states David to be “the seventh son of Jesse;”
but in 1 Sam., xvi., 10, 11, he is represented to be the eighth son.  The
writer says, “Jesse made seven of his sons pass before Samuel; and Samuel
said: Are these all thy children? and (Jesse answered) there remaineth
yet the youngest, and he keepeth the sheep.”

Similarly, in regard to the sons of David, compare 1 Chron., iii., 6–8,
and 1 Chron., xiv., 5–7, with 2 Sam., v., 15–16.  If anyone had known
about David one would suppose that Samuel would have been that man, but
Samuel says only seven sons were born to David in Jerusalem, whereas the
chronicler says he had nine, viz., (1) Ibhar, (2) Elishua, (3) ELIPHELET,
(4) Nogah, (5) Nepheg, (6) Japhia (7), Elishama, (8) Eliada, (9)
ELIPHELET.  It will be seen that the name Eliphelet occurs twice in the
Book of Chronicles but only once in the book of Samuel.  The other name
omitted by the prophet is Nogah.

Now we are upon the subject of genealogy we would direct attention to two
other examples.  In 1 Chron., iii., 22, we read that the “sons of
Shemaiah [were] Hattush, Igeal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat, six;” but
only five names are given, so that “six” should have been _five_.

The other example is 1 Chron., vii., 14–15, compared with Numbers,
xxvii., 1.  The chronicler says: The children of Manasseh were first
Ashriel, and “the name of the second was Zelophehad, who had daughters;”
but the author of the book of Numbers says Zelophehad was the “son of
Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh,” and
that no mistake may possibly exist respecting the Zelophehad referred to,
the writer expressly mentions that it was the Zelophehad who had “the
daughters.”  (_See_ verse 7.)


1 Chron., vi., 57–60.


Here the chronicler enumerates the cities given to Aaron, and says: “All
their cities were 13;” but according to the list subjoined the number
should have been eleven.


2 Chron., xxi., 20.


We are told that Jehoram at death was 40 years old.  “He was 32 when he
began to reign, and reigned eight years.”  Next chapter [xxii., 2] we are
told that his son, who immediately succeeded him, was 42 years old when
he began to reign; so that Ahaziah was two years older than his father.

What makes the blunder worse is this: Ahaziah was the youngest of several
children [2 Chron., xxi., 17 {36}]; but the blunders do not end even
here, for we are furthermore informed [2 Chron., xxii., 8] that Jehu
“slew the Princes of Judah [even] the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah,”
_i.e._, the grandsons of Jehoram.  The number thus slain was 42 [2 Kings,
x., 13–14], only the author of the book of Kings does not call them
grandsons, but “brethren of Ahaziah.”  Let whichever of these records be
accepted, the error is equally palpable.  If the princes slain by Jehu
were the brothers of Ahaziah, then Jehoram, who died at the age of 40,
had 43 sons, the youngest of which was 42 years old at his father’s
death.  If, on the other hand, the princes referred to were the
grandchildren of Jehoram, then had he 42 grandsons at the age of 40.


2 Chron., xxviii., 7.


This is another example similar to the one above.  Zichri, we are told,
was “a mighty man of Ephraim,” and he “slew Maaseiah, the son of king
Ahaz.”  In the 1st verse of the chapter we are informed that “Ahaz was 20
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned 16 years;” so that his
age at death was 36, and he was succeeded by Hezekiah, his son.

The next chapter [2 Chron., xxix, 1] opens thus—“Hezekiah began to reign
when he was 25 years old;” so that Ahaz at the age of 20, had at least
two sons, one of which was grown to man’s estate, and the other was half
the age of his father.  We read of early marriages, but it is most
unusual for any father to have a son at the early age of four or five,
and it is more likely that the chronicler is in error than that such an
event should be rigidly true.


2 Chron., xxxiv., 1.


A similar statement is made respecting Josiah, who had four sons, and at
least two wives before he was 16.  His four sons were Johanan, Jehoiakim,
Zedekiah, and Shallum [1 Chron., iii., 15].  Shallum, his youngest son,
succeeded him [Jer. xxii., 11]; this young man was also called Jehoahaz,
if the author of the book of Chronicles may be relied on [2 Chron.,
xxxvi., 2].

He was 23 years old at his father’s death, and as Josiah died at the age
of 39, Shallum was born when his father was 16 [2 Chron., xxxiv., 1].  He
reigned only three months, and was then succeeded by Jehoiakim, an elder
brother, who was 25 years old [2 Kings, xxiii., 30]; so that Josiah was
only 14 when his second son was born.  His eldest son Johanan must have
been above 26 years of age, and this would make Josiah under 13 at the
birth of his first-born.

Now, the age of hundreds of persons have been given in the Bible, but no
single example can be found to induce a belief that the Jews were
precocious fathers.  We never find it said that so and so was 4 or 5, 10
or 12 years old, and begat sons and daughters.  The age stated is about
the same as with ourselves, and there is every reason to believe that the
instances referred to above are oversights.


Ezra i., 7–11.


This shall be the last example under this division of our subject, though
far more remains behind than we have here brought under notice.

In this passage Ezra gives the number of gold and silver vessels restored
by Cyrus.  They are the sacred vessels carried by Nebuchadnezzar into
Babylon, and the number restored is estimated at 5,400; but the articles
specified amount to only 2,499.  There were 30 gold chargers, and 30 gold
basins, 1,000 silver chargers, with 1,000 other vessels in silver, 410
silver basins, and 29 knives.  The deficiency, therefore, is 2901.

This miscalculation is sufficiently strange, but the statement becomes
infinitely more astounding when we read the account given us in the book
of Kings respecting the spoliation of these vessels [2 Kings, xxiv., 13].
It is said that Nebuchadnezzar “cut in pieces all the vessels of gold
which Solomon had made.”  This was in the reign of Coniah or Jehoiachin.

In the 19th year of Nebuchadnezzar, in the reign of Zedekiah the captain
of the Babylonian army “broke in pieces” the brazen vessels, but took the
brass; and he broke in pieces the gold and silver vessels, but took the
gold and silver with him to Babylon.  So that the gold and silver vessels
were twice reduced to metal [2 Kings, xxv., 13–16].  Jeremiah [lii.,
17–23] enters into minute details.

These vessels seem to have possessed a wonderful recreative power.  They
were always being taken away to supply a temporary want of money, yet
were always in the temple ready for a new spoliation.

(1)  Shishak, king of Egypt, in the 5th year of king Rehoboam, “took away
the treasures of the house of the Lord; he even took away _all_; and he
took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had made” [1 Kings, xiv.,
25–26].
(2)  Asa followed the example of Shishak, for he also “took _all_ the
silver and gold left in the treasures of the house of the Lord” to give
to Benhadad king of Syria. [1 Kings, xv., 18.]
(3)  Jehoash, king of Judah, could not take away Solomon’s vessels of
gold and silver, because they were gone already, but he “took all the
hallowed things that Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, and Ahaziah had dedicated, and
his own hallowed things, and all the gold found in the treasures of the
house of the Lord . . . and sent it to Hazael king of Syria.” [2 Kings,
xii. 18.]
(4)  Jehoash, king of Israel, also “took _all_ the gold and silver, and
all the vessels found in the house of the Lord,” and returned to Samaria
with his spoils. [2 Kings, xiv., 14.]
(5)  Ahaz, king of Judah, wanted money, and followed the example of his
predecessors, for he also “took the silver and the gold found in the
house of the Lord,” and sent it to the king of Assyria. [2 Kings, xvi.,
8.]
(6)  We have not to tarry long before we come to Hezekiah, who “gave the
king of Assyria all the silver found in the house of the Lord,” and “cut
off the gold from the doors and pillars to give to the king of Assyria.”
[2 Kings, xviii., 15–16.]
(7)  Once more the temple was spoiled, before we come to the final
spoliations by the king of Babylon, in the 8th year of Jehoiachim king of
Judah.  This has been alluded to already.

It will be observed that it is not always said that the vessels were
taken out of the temple, but in several of the spoliations it is said
simply that the treasures were taken out of the house of the Lord; by
turning, however, to 1 Kings, vii., 51, it will be seen that the
“treasures” include the vessels, for we are told that “the silver, and
the gold, and the vessels, did Solomon put among the treasures of the
house of the Lord.”

Hence Shishak took away all the treasures of the temple, all the silver
and the gold and the vessels that Solomon had placed there.  If _all_ in
this case means less than all we have Asa to follow, who took away “all
that was left.”  Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Ahaziah, and Jehoash, made new
vessels and hallowed things, but Jehoash gave all these to Hazael king of
Syria; and though all the treasures were given away already, the king of
Israel makes a raid on the temple and carries off to Samaria “all the
vessels” both of silver and of gold; Ahaz does the same; Hezekiah takes
all the silver vessels and cuts off all the gold ornaments of the doors
and pillars.  After this comes Nebuchadnezzar, who finds all the vessels
of Solomon somehow still treasured in the temple, and seizing on them he
cuts them to pieces, but they are not yet destroyed nor even lost, for
some 10 or 11 years afterwards Nebuzzar-adan, captain of the guard of the
king of Babylon, lays his hand on the sacred vessels, and took them “in
gold and in silver” to Nebuchadnezzar.  Ezra tells us the number amounted
to 5400, but how they could be given to so many, cut to pieces and
repaired, sent to Assyria, Samaria, and Syria, yet be all wonderfully
found safe and sound in a temple in Babylon, is, to say the least, past
understanding.  Come we now to another class of errors.



(_c_.)  _Misstatements_.


Exod. vi., 3.


God is represented as saying: “I appeared unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
by the name God Almighty [El Shadday], but by my name JEHOVAH was I not
known to them.”

Now the name Jehovah occurs over and over again in the Book of Genesis,
and has given rise to the Jehovistic and Elohistic controversy, made
familiar to English readers by Bishop Colenso.  Abraham, we are told,
built an altar to Jehovah near Bethel [Gen. xii. 8.], and another in
Hebron [Gen. xiii., 18.] but stranger still, when the sacrifice of Isaac
was stopped, the patriarch called the spot Jehovah-Jireh [Gen. xxii. 14].
How could he call it so, if the very name Jehovah was unknown to him?


Exod. xvii., 8–13.


The children of Israel had scarcely entered the “wilderness” when the
Amalekites came to oppose them.  A severe battle ensued, in which the
Israelites were at first worsted, but ultimately the foe was “put to the
sword.”

The whole history leads to the belief that the people left Egypt unarmed.
They were slaves, and it is not at all likely that Pharaoh would have
suffered 600,000 slaves to carry swords.  It is very true that our
English version says “the children of Israel went up _harnessed_ out of
the land of Egypt” [Exod. xiii., 18.], but the marginal reading is “by
five in a rank,” which seems the more probable.  No time was given for
preparation, for the people were “urgent to send them away in haste,”
they had not even time to prepare food before they left, but “took their
dough before it was leavened” [Exod. xii., 34].  Having crossed the Red
Sea, they would have no opportunity of procuring swords, so that this
battle must remain a mystery.


1 Sam. xvii., 54.


Here we are told that David, having cut off the head of Goliath, “carried
it to Jerusalem.”  How could this be, seeing that Jerusalem at the time
was in the hand of the Jebusites, and did not fall into the hand of the
Israelites till several years afterwards?  When David slew the giant he
was a mere stripling, say 15 or 16 years of age, but when he took
Jerusalem from the Jebusites he was above 30. [2 Sam. v., 6.]


2 Sam. vii., 12, 13, 16.


The prophet Nathan is commanded by God to say that the Lord “will set up
his seed after him, and establish the kingdom of David for ever;” and
again “thine house and thy kingdom,” says Nathan, “shall be established
for ever, thy throne shall be established for ever.”  What is the fact?
Solomon reigned 40 years, but towards the close of his reign, sat on a
very tottering throne; no sooner did Rehoboam succeed than 10 parts out
of 12 revolted; and in 380 years more the kingdom of Judah had ceased to
exist; so that the repeated promise of Nathan that the kingdom should
endure for ever proved altogether a failure.


Jeremiah, xxxv., 18, 19.


Precisely the same promise was made to the Rechabites, with precisely the
same results: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, because
ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father [to drink no wine],
Jonadab, the son of Rechab, shall not want a man to stand before me for
ever.”  Great efforts have been made to show that the Rechabites still
exist; but I apprehend that few scholars will place any reliance on the
conflicting accounts.  Brett professes they are in Hungary; Niebuhr says
they are in Medina; the “Bible Cyclopædia” asserts that they live in
Mecca; the missionary Wolff maintains that they live near Jerusalem;
Signor Pierotti affirms that he found them in the vicinity of the Dead
Sea.


1 Kings, xxii., 19–23; 2 Chron. xviii., 22.


We are here told that God himself sent lying spirits into His prophets,
not by way of punishment, but in order to mislead; so that, admitting
certain books to have been written by prophets, and even that God sent
His “spirit” to inspire them, it by no means follows that the books are
worthy of credit.  It is not enough to be a prophet, it is not enough to
be moved by the spirit, it is not enough that the spirit comes from God,
we must ourselves decide the all important question whether the spirit is
a “lying spirit” or the “spirit of truth.”  The two kings Ahab and
Jehoshaphat enquired of the prophets whether or not they should make war
against the Syrians, 400 prophets agreed in the answer, go, for “the Lord
will deliver them into your hands.”  Nothing could be plainer, nothing
more decisive; but Michaiah says, don’t believe the prophets, “for the
Lord has put a lying spirit into all their mouths” to compass the
destruction of the two kings.  Here were 400 who said “go,” and one who
said “no,” the prophets have been deceived by a spirit of falsehood.  Is
it at all credible that the God of truth would employ spirits of untruth
to go upon his missions?  How can it be said that God abhors lies when he
employs lying spirits as his ministers?  But, without doubt, the lying
prophet is recognised in Scripture, for besides these 400 we have the
lamentable tale of the old prophet of Bethel, who told the prophet of
Judah to go home with him, declaring that the Lord had sent him, but “he
lied,” and the prophet of Judah was slain by a lion for trusting the word
of his brother prophet [1 Kings, xiii., 18].  There is an inconsistency
in all this revolting to common sense; and so, indeed, is there in the
notion of the parliament referred to in the book of Job [ii., 1], “there
is a day when the sons of God present themselves before Jehovah, and
Satan is present amongst them,” and God speaks to Satan and employs him
to do His bidding.  Paul says there is no fellowship between God and
Belial, light and darkness, and he is right.


2 Kings, iii., 15–20.


Elisha said to the king of Israel, “The Lord will deliver the Moabites
into your hands,” and that Israel should smite “every fenced city of
Moab, and every choice city.”  None of this prophecy came true, and why?
Because the king of Moab, when “he saw the battle was too sore for him,
sacrificed his eldest son on the wall for a burnt offering.”  The
Israelites, seeing this, were panic struck, fled, and left the prophecy
unfulfilled [_see_ verses 26, 27],


2 Chron. xvi., 1.


There is some great mistake here.  “In the thirty-sixth year of the reign
of Asa,” says the chronicler, “Baasha, King of Israel, came up against
Judah, and built Ramah;” but what says the book of Kings?  “In the third
year of Asa, King of Judah, began Baasha to reign over Israel, and he
reigned twenty-four years” [1 Kings, xv., 33]; if this latter statement
is correct Baasha died in the twenty-seventh year of the reign of Asa,
and could not have waged war against him nine years afterwards.


Dan. i., 1.


The writer says that Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, laid siege to
Jerusalem in the _third year of Jehoiakim_; but Jeremiah says [xxv., 1.]
that the _fourth_ year of Jehoiakim was the _first_ of Nebuchadnezzar’s
reign.  So that he was not king at all in the “3rd year of Jehoiakim.”


Matt., i., 17.


Matthew says, “all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen;
and from David to the captivity are fourteen; and from the captivity to
the birth of Christ are fourteen.”  This is true in no sense.  The
“periods” are quite unequal in length; the “genealogies” are not alike in
number; and fourteen in no case is correct.  According to Bible
chronology the first period was 911 years, the second 497, and the third
584.


John, i., 18.


The evangelist says—“No man hath seen God at any time;” similarly we read
in Exodus [xxxiii., 20], “There shall no man see my face and live.”  How
does this agree with Gen. xxxii., 24–30, where Jacob is said to have
wrestled all night with a mysterious being, and “called the name of the
place Peniel, for I have seen God face to face, and my life is
preserved.”  Sarah also “looked upon God” when she was told that her
husband would have a son [Gen. xvi., 13].  Moses, Aaron, Nadab, and
Abihu, with the 70 elders of Israel “saw the God of Israel . . . they saw
God, and did eat and drink” [Exod. xxiv., 9–11].  Moses was on two
occasions 40 days with God, and saw his “similitude,” and spake to him
“mouth to mouth” [Numbers, xii., 8].  Numerous other instances will occur
to every reader; if anything is revealed in Scripture more positively
than another, it is that God has appeared to many, from Adam to John,
talked to them familiarly, and they have lived.


John, xxi., 25.


John says, “There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which,
if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself
could not contain the books that should be written.”  I will not go this
length respecting the mis-statements and errors of Scripture; but it
would be no exaggeration to say, if all were written down, this pamphlet
would not contain them.

 *** _We will conclude this part of our subject with one or two errors of
                            a different sort_.


Deut. i., 1.


The writer says—“These are the words which Moses spake to all Israel on
this side Jordan, in the plain over against the Red Sea.”

At the time he was as near Jordan, and about as far from the Red Sea as
he well could be.  The expression “On this side Jordan” means in this
verse _east_ of the river, but after the Israelites had come into the lot
of their inheritance, “this side Jordan” meant _west_ of the river, and
east of it was called “beyond Jordan” [Joshua, ix., 1, 10].


Judges, vii., 3.


This is another geographical error.  It is stated that Gideon ordered it
to be proclaimed throughout his host that all who had no stomach for the
pending fight with the Midianites were at liberty to depart early from
Mount Gilead.

Now, the encampment of Gideon was in the valley of Jezreel, west of the
Jordan; whereas Mount Gilead is beyond Jordan, far away from the site of
the battle.


2 Chron. xx., 35–37.


This is a third example of geographical confusion, similar to those
marvellous blunders of old Homer.  The chronicler says that Jehoshaphat
built ships in “Ezion-gaber to go to Tarshish.”  Ezion-gaber was a
harbour in the Red Sea, and Tarshish is generally supposed to be
Tartessus, the famous Phœnician emporium near the mouth of the
Guadalquiver, and not far from the modern Cadiz.  It was far more than
the navigators of Jewry could have accomplished to sail from the Red Sea
to Spain, and certainly Jehoshaphat would not have chosen that harbour
for building ships for the Mediterranean.


Prov. vi., 6–8; xxx., 25.


Solomon says: “Go to the ant, thou sluggard—which provideth her meat in
the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.”  No doubt it was a
vulgar error of very wide diffusion that ants feed upon corn, and lay up
a store of grain in harvest time for winter use.  Pliny, Ælian, Ovid,
Virgil, Horace, {44} and several in our own country, have endorsed the
instruction of Solomon, but what is the real fact?  In the first place,
ants are dormant in winter; and in the next place, they do not feed upon
corn, but chiefly on animal food.  What Solomon and others supposed to be
grains of corn are in reality the cocoons which they bring out of their
nests in fine weather to air, and after they have exposed them to the sun
they carry them back again.  Efforts have been made to prove that there
is a species of ant which lives on grain; but even if such could be
found, it is not the exception, but the rule which must characterise the
animal.  No one would say to a person, you are “white as a rose,” or
“black as a cherry;” though there are white roses and black cherries.  In
all proverbial expressions and general allusions, the ordinary character
is referred to, and not the exceptions.


Matt, xiii., 31, 32; Mark, iv., 31, 32.


Jesus said: “A grain of mustard-seed . . . is the least of all seeds, but
when it is grown it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so
that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.”

It is not correct that the “grain of mustard is the least of all seeds.”
Many seeds are smaller, as that of the foxglove and tobacco plant; nor is
it correct that mustard anywhere grows into a tree, “so that the birds of
the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.”

The exaggeration in the corresponding verse of the second Gospel is even
greater than that of Matthew.  Mark says: “It is less than [any of] the
seeds that be sown in the earth . . . but becometh greater than all
herbs, and shooteth out great branches.”

Here, again, critics have come forward to prove that the mustard seed of
the text was not mustard seed, but something else.  Some one fancies he
has discovered a seed which better answers the description, and says
Jesus did not mean mustard, but the seed of the critic.  Such puerile
defence does more harm than good.  Moses did not mean “six days” by _six
days_; Joshua did not mean that the “sun was to stand still,” when he
commanded it so to do; Solomon did not mean “ants” by _ants_; nor Jesus,
“mustard-seed” by _mustard seed_.  In fact, words have no meaning, but
may be fitted with a sliding scale to fit the wishes and knowledge of
every reader.  The dishonesty of this practice is palpable, and any
system which needs such shoring should be suffered to fall through its
own weakness.


1 Chron. iv., 17; and 1 Chron. vii., 14.


Being on the subject of blunders, we would commend our readers to the two
verses referred to above—“The _sons_ of Ezra were Jether, Mered . . . and
Jalon; and _she_ bare Miriam, Shammai, and Ishbah.”

Again.  “The _sons_ of Manasseh [were] Ashriel, whom _she_ bare . . . and
the name of the second was Zelophehad.”  I know not if the reader can
understand these verses; I must candidly confess I am wholly unable to
attach any meaning whatever to them.

Another puzzle will be seen in Ecclesiastes, vii., 27–29, but probably
the translation is in great measure responsible for the obscurity of this
passage.  The preacher says: “Behold, this have I found, counting one by
one to find out the account; which yet my soul seeketh, but I find not:
one man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I
not found.”  It would be no easy matter to make out what the preacher
“has found,” which requires such a blowing of trumpets.  The original
Hebrew may throw some light upon his meaning, but I am certain that if
any candidate for the civil service had written those verses, no examiner
would commend their perspicuity.



