CHAPTER I.

OF WHAT USE IS RELIGION?


Of what use is religion?

All nations, almost all men, have a religion. From the savage in the
woods who has his traditions of how the world began, who has his ghosts
and his devils to fear or to worship, to the Christian and the Buddhist
with their religion full of beautiful conceptions and ideas--all people
have a religion.

And the religion of men is determined for them by their birth. They are
born into it, as they are into their complexions, their habits, their
language. The Continental and Irish Celt is a Roman Catholic, the Teuton
is a follower of Luther, the Slav a member of the Greek Church. The
Anglo-Saxon, who is a compromise of races, has a creed which is a
compromise also, and the Celt of England has his peculiar form of
dissent, more akin perhaps in some ways to Romanism than to Lutheranism.
A Jew is and has been a Jew, a Hindu is a Hindu, Arabs and Turks are
Mahommedans.

It is so with all races of men. A man's religion to-day is that into
which he is born, and those of the higher and older races who change are
few, so very few they but serve strongly to emphasize the rule.

There have been, it is true, periods when this has not been so. There
have been times of change, of conversions, of rapid religious evolution
when the greater faiths have gathered their harvests of men, when
beliefs have spread as a flood threatening to engulf a world. No one has
ever done so. Each has found its own boundary and stayed there. Their
spring tide once passed they have ceased to spread. They have become,
indeed, many of them, but tideless oceans, dead seas of habit ceasing
even to beat upon their shores. Many of them no longer even try to
proselytise, having found their inability to stretch beyond their
boundaries; others still labour, but their gains are few--how few only
those who have watched can know.

Some savages are drawn away here or there, but that is all. The greater
faiths and forms of faith, Catholicism, Lutheranism, the Greek Church,
Mahommedanism, Buddhism, Hinduism, and many others, remain as they
were. Their believers are neither converted nor convert. Men born into
them remain as they were born. They do not change, they are satisfied
with what they have.

They are more than satisfied; they are often, almost always,
passionately attached to their faith.

There is nothing men value more than their religion. There is nothing so
unbearable to them as an attack upon it. No one will allow it. Even the
savage clings to his fetish in the mountain top and will not permit of
insult to it. Men will brave all kinds of disaster and death rather than
deny their faith, that which their fathers believed. It is to all their
highest possession. The Catholic, the Chinese ancestor worshipper, the
Hindu, the Calvinist, the Buddhist, the Jew--their names are too
numerous to mention--none yields to any other in this. It is true of all
faiths. No one faith has any monopoly of this enthusiasm. It is common
to all.

But wherein lies the spell that religion has cast upon the souls of men?
The influence is the same. What is the secret of it?

Can it be that there is some secret common to all religions, some
belief, some doctrine that is the cause of this? If so, what is it? If
there is such a common secret, why is it so hidden?

For hidden it certainly is.

Nothing can be more certain than that no one religion recognises any
such secret in the others. It is the very reverse. The more a man clings
to his own religion the more he scorns all others. Far from
acknowledging any common truth, he denounces all other faiths as
mistaken, as untrue; nay, more, they are to him false, deliberately
false; the enthusiast believes them wicked, the fanatic in his own faith
calls all others devilish. The more a man loves his religion the more he
abominates all others. A Christian would scorn the idea of the essence
of his faith being common to all others, or any other. If there be any
common truth it is a very secret truth.

Is there any secret truth? If so, what is it?

There is a further question.

There is probably no one thing that we learn with more certainty than
this, that whatever exists, whatever persists, does so because it
fulfils a want, because it's of use. It is immaterial where we look, the
rule is absolute. In the material world Darwin and others have shewn it
to us over and over again. When anything is useless it atrophies. So
have the snake and the whale lost their legs, and man his hairy skin and
sense of scent. Males have lost their power of suckling their young;
with females this power has increased. Need developes any thing or any
quality; when it becomes needless it dies. Where we find anything
flourishing and persistent we are sure always that it is so because it
is wanted, because it fills a need.

Religion in some form or another has always existed, has increased and
developed, has grown and gained strength.

Therefore religion, all religions that have existed have filled some
need, all religions that now exist do so because they fulfil some
present use. From the way their believers cherish them the need is a
great and urgent one. These religions are of vital use to their
believers.

What is this great common need and yearning that all men have, and
which, to men in sympathy with it, every religion fulfils?

Can it be that all men have a like need and that all religions have a
common quality which serves that need?

Can it be possible that all races, the Englishman, the Negro, the
Italian, the Russian, the Arab, the Chinaman, and the Pathan, have the
same urgent necessity, and that their urgent necessity is answered by so
many varying religions? If so, what is this necessity which religion
alone can fill, what is this succour that religion alone can give? What
is the use of religion?

These are some of the questions I ask, other men have asked the
same--not many. The majority of men never ask themselves anything of the
sort. They are born into a religion, they live in it more or less, they
die in it. They may question its accuracy in one point or another, for
each man to some extent makes his own faith; but nearly all men take
their faith much as they find it and make the best of it. It does not
occur to them to say, "Why should I want a religion at all? Why not go
without?" They feel the necessity of it. Even the very few who reject
their own faith almost always try for some other, something they hope
will meet their necessity. They will prefer one faith to another. But
they do not first consider why they want a faith at all. They do not
ask, "Of what use is any religion?"

Yet this is in the main the subject of this book, these questions are
the ones I ask, the questions to which I seek an answer. I will repeat
them.

Why are all peoples, all men religious? Is the necessity a common
necessity? If so, what is it?

Why does one form of religion appeal to one people and another to
another people, while remaining hateful to all the rest?

Notwithstanding their common hate, have all religions a common secret?
And if so, what is that?

This book of mine is in part the story of a boy who was born into a
faith and who lost it; it tries to explain why he lost it.

It is the story of a man who searched for a new faith and who did not
find it, because he knew not what he sought. He knew not what religion
was nor why he wanted it. He knew not his need. He sought in religion
for things no religion possesses. He was ill yet he knew not his
disease, and so he could find no remedy. And finally it is an attempt to
discern what religion really means, what it is, what is the use of it,
what men require of it.

There may be among my readers some who will read the early chapters and
will then stop. They will feel hurt perhaps, they will think that there
is here an attack upon their religion, upon all they hold as the Truth
of God. So they will close the book and read no more. I would beg of my
readers not to judge me thus. I would ask them if they read at all to
read to the end. It may be that then they will understand. Even if it be
not so, that the early chapters still seem to be hard, is it not better
to hear such things from a friend than from an enemy? Be sure there are
very many who say and who feel very much harder things than this boy
did. Is it not as well to know them?

These early chapters are of a boy's life; they may be, they should be if
truly written, full of the hardness of youth, its revolt from what it
conceives to be untrue, its intense desire to know, its stern rejection
of all that is not clear and cannot be known. Yet they must be written,
for only by knowing the thoughts of the boy can the later thoughts of
the man be understood?

And I am sure that those who read me to the end, though they may
disagree with what I say, will admit this: that, thinking as I do of
religion, I would not unnecessarily throw a stone at any faith, I would
not thoughtlessly hurt the belief of any believer, no matter what his
religion; because I think I have learnt not only what his faith is to
him, but why it is so, because I have found the use of all religion.




