CHAPTER III.

IDEAL AND PRACTICE.


Such was the boy who went to school, and such was the mental and moral
equipment with which he started.

He found himself in a new world. He had stepped out of a woman's world
into a man's, out of the New Testament into the Old, out of dreams into
reality. For the ideas and beliefs, the knowledge and understanding, the
code of morality and conduct, in a big school, are those of the world.
This filters down from the world of men to the world of little boys, and
the latter is the echo of the former. It is an echo of the great world
sounded by childish hearts, but still a true echo. Then this boy began
to learn new things, a new morality vastly different from the old. And
this is what he learnt: that it is not wrong to fight, but right.
Fighting is not evil but good, all kinds of fighting. The profession of
a soldier is a great and worthy one, perhaps the highest. To fight men,
to kill them and subdue them, is not bad but good--provided, of course,
it is in a good cause. A war is not a regrettable necessity, but a very
glorious opportunity. Both men and boys rejoice to know of battles
greatly fought, of blood and wounds, of death and victory. It makes the
heart bound to hear of such things. Everyone should wish to be able to
do them--in a good cause. Is not the cause of our country always a good
cause? When this boy arrived at school he learnt suddenly that a war was
going on. It was a small frontier war such as we often have. He had not
heard of it at home. Now he heard of it all day. Masters announced
publicly any victory, holidays were given for them, out of school hours
the boys talked of little else. The illustrated papers were full of
sketches of the war, and the weekly papers of accounts of marches and
battles. Boys who had relations, fathers, or uncles, or elder brothers,
at the front rose into sudden fame. Big boys who were hoping to pass
into Sandhurst or Woolwich were heroes; the school was full of the
enthusiasm of the success of our armies. Parties were formed and
generals were appointed; hillocks in the play green were defended and
assaulted, and many grievous blows were given in these mimic fights. One
boy nearly lost his eye. To the boy of which I am writing all this was
new, it was new and delightful, and extraordinarily wicked.

This was not his only awakening, this was not the only subject on which
he learnt new rules. Soldiers must fight, and so must boys, if
necessary, in a good cause. To a soldier all causes are good when his
country bids; to a boy all causes are good when his school code tells
him. Turn the other cheek? Be called a funk and a coward, be derided and
scorned by all the school, be told to be ashamed, and, worse than all,
feel that he ought to be and was ashamed? Not so. Not so. A boy must
fight, too, when his schoolboy honour bids. He even learnt more still
than this. Battle was not always a disagreeable necessity, it was in
itself often a pleasure. "To drink delight of battle with his peers" is
no poet's rhetorical phrase; it is a truth. There is a sheer muscular
physical pleasure in fighting, as all boys know. True blows hurt, but
the blows that hurt most are not on the body, and there is, too, a moral
strength, a moral pleasure, that comes from battles. It is not
disgraceful to fight, it is not even disgraceful to be beaten, but it
would often be very disgraceful not to fight, to turn the other cheek.
All wars are not bad things. They are the storms of God stirring up the
stagnant natures to new purity and life. The people that cannot fight
shall die. He learnt this lesson, not as I have written it. He did not
realise it, he did not put it into words as I have done. It sank into
him unconsciously as the previous teaching had done--and sorely they
disagreed with each other. He learnt other lessons, many of them, in the
same way. He learnt that money is not an evil but a good. When he found
his pocket-money short this soon dawned upon him, and the lesson did not
end there. He found that wealth was almost worshipped, that it had very
great power. He found everyone engaged in the race for wealth, everyone.
His spiritual pastors and masters were no more exempt than anyone else.
They encouraged the race. A boy's schooling was looked upon as his
preparation for the battle of life in which he was to struggle for money
and honours. Men who had attained them were held up to his admiration.
Not the pale-faced curates of the East End, but the great statesman and
soldier, the bishops, the lawyers, the writers, the successful merchants
who had once been at the school, were emblazoned on the wall. No meek,
struggling curate would find a niche there. The race was to the strong,
not the weak. He was learning the law of the survival of the fittest,
and he was further learning that the Sermon on the Mount is not a guide
to be the fittest, in this world at any rate.

I must try again and guard against misconception. The school was a good
school, the tone was good, the masters were all men of high character,
of considerable learning. No school could have been better taught; but
this was the teaching of the school, as it is and must be of all schools
that are worth anything: a boy must be brought up on truths, not
imaginings; he must learn laws, not aspirations; he must be prepared for
the world as it is, not as a visionary might see it.

Therefore this boy learnt at school the great code of conduct which
obtains in the world. Shortly, it is this: not to be quarrelsome, but to
be ready always to fight for a good cause, be the fighting with sword or
fist, with pen or tongue, by word or deed, and when fighting to hit hard
and spare not. He learnt to desire and strive for wealth and honour,
which are good things, not in immoderate excess, which injures other
forms of happiness, but in due and proper amount. He learnt that he
should speak the truth in most things, but not in all. There are worse
things than some lies. There are some lies that are not a disgrace, but
an honour. He learnt that learning was not a snare, but a very necessary
and very admirable thing also, and of all learning that knowledge of the
world, the wicked world, the flesh and the devil, was the most
necessary. Such in broad lines were what he learnt from his
schoolfellows, the code filtered down from above, the code of a public
school. A very admirable code, but how different from what he had first
learnt. There were worlds between them, the immensity that lies between
fact and ideal.

And yet all this time, while this public school code was being driven
into him by precept and example, by coercion and by blows, all this
while, every morning at prayers and every Sunday thrice, he heard the
other code taught in the school chapel. The masters taught it, and the
boys were supposed to accept and believe it--during chapel hours. Once
chapel was over, once Monday morning came, and the other code ruled. No
one remembered the theoretic code of Christ. Boys who brought it forward
in daily life were disliked. They were not bullied, no! but they were
left alone. The tone of the school would never have allowed bullying for
such a cause, but there was an instinctive repulsion to those boys who
talked religion. The others inwardly accused them of cant. Boys who
alleged religious reasons for refusing to fight, to poach, to smoke
occasionally, to commit other little breaches of discipline, were
suspected of bringing forth religion as a cloak to hide the fact that
they were afraid to fight and poach and that smoking made them sick.
That they were very often rightly suspected this boy had no doubt. It
was his first introduction to cant, and it surprised him. Was, then, the
attempt to realise the precepts of Christ in daily life either a folly
or an hypocrisy? As far as he could see it was both.

It must not, of course, be imagined that he thus faced the problem and
gave this answer. He no more faced the problem than any other boy does,
than the great majority of men do. He simply grew up according to his
surroundings, agreeing with them, accepting the rule he found accepted,
developing as his environments made him. But although he did not
mentally face and enumerate his difficulties, he was aware of them just
the same. He was clearly conscious of a conflict between fact and
theory, between teaching and example, between reality and dreams. He
became year after year also more clearly aware of a repugnance rising
within him to religion and to religious teaching. He shrank from it
without realising why. He supposed it was just his natural sin. It was,
of course, that he was proving its unreality as a guide to life. He
began to shrink, too, from all religious topics, from religious services
and religious books. They jarred on him. He found himself also losing
his reverence for his religious teachers--for all his teachers, in
fact--for they all professed religion. Their words had grated on him
first, the difference between what they professed to believe and what he
knew they did believe. Unaware of the reason till much later, almost
unconsciously there grew up in him a contempt towards all his teachers
and masters, a sense that they must be and were hypocrites and
impostors. He found himself at eighteen far adrift from all guidance and
counsel, shunning religion because he saw that the teachings of Christ
were quite unadapted for the world he had to live in, scornful of and
contemning his teachers for what seemed to him hypocrisy.

It was not a satisfactory state for a boy, and the less so because it
was still almost unconscious. He felt all that I have said, the
avoidance, the dislike, but he had not yet faced it to himself and said,
"Why does Christianity jar upon me and seem unreal, what are its
difficulties?" Nor, "What is it that causes my dislike and contempt of
my teachers? They are better men in all ways than I am. They are good
men. I shall never be as good. I honour them in their lives. I admit
that. What is the difficulty?" He was adrift without compass or pilot,
and he did not know it. Yet he was already far from the safe harbour of
trust and belief. The storms and darkness of the sea of life were before
him, and there was no star by which he could steer. He made no effort,
raised as yet no alarm, for he knew not that his anchor had dragged,
that he had lost hold, perhaps never to regain it.




