CHAPTER VIII.

GOD.


Sitting on the hillside when the hot season was coming near its end he
saw the thunderstorms come across the hills. From far away they came,
black shadows in the distance, and the thunder like far off surf upon
the shore. Nearer they would grow and nearer, passing from ridge to
ridge, their long white skirts trailing upon the mountain sides, until
they came right overhead and the lightning flashed blindingly, while the
thunder roared in great trumpet tones that shuddered through the gorges.
The man watched them and he saw how gods were born. It was Thor come
back again--Thor with his hammer, Thor with his giant voice. Thus were
born the gods, Thor and Odin, Balder God of the Summer Sun, Apollo and
Vulcan, Ahriman and Ormuz, night and day.

So were born all the gods. You can read of it in Indian, in Greek, in
Roman, in Norwegian mythology, in any mythology you like. You can see
the belief living still among the Chins, the Shans, the Moopers; for
them the storm-wind and earthquake, the great rivers and the giant
hills, all these have causes, and they who cause them are gods. From
these have grown all the ideas of God that the peoples hold now. They
were originally local, local to the place, local to the people, and as
the people progressed so did their ideas of God.

It seemed to the man lying on his hillside easy to follow how it all
arose; for, indeed, was it not going on about him? Did not the forest
people speak of a god in the great bare rock behind him? Were there not
gods in the ravines, gods in the hidden places of the hills? It was so
easy to realise as he watched the storm-cloud bursting before him, as
the lightning flashed and the thunder trumpet sounded in the hills, that
men should personify these. Nay, more, he saw the wild men about him
actually personifying them. He could understand.

God was the answer to a question; as the question grew so did the
reply.

The savage asks but little. He does not ask "Who am I?" "Who made the
world, and why?" Such questioning comes but in later years. He fears the
thunder; it is to him a great and wonderful and overpowering thing. It
forces itself upon his notice, and he explains it as the voice of a
greater man, a God. He lives in the heavens, for His voice comes from
thence. The giant peaks that swathe themselves in clouds, the volcano
and the earthquake, the great river flowing for ever to the sea, with
its strange floods, its eddies, its deadly undertow, in these too must
be gods. These are the first things that force themselves upon his dim
observance. He wonders, and from his wonder is born a god. But as he
grows in mental stature, in power of seeing, in power of feeling, he
observes other forces. How is the heaven held up, the great heavy dome
as he imagines it? It is Atlas who does so. There is a god of the Autumn
and Spring, of the Summer and Winter. So he personifies all forces he
perceives but does not understand. For he has no idea of force except as
emanating from a Person, of life which is not embodied in some form like
his own or that of some animal. Whenever anything is done it must be
Some One who does it, and that Some One is like himself, only greater
and stronger.

There is not in the savage god any conception differing from that of
man. There is not in any god any realisable conception different from
that of man. The savage god is hungry and thirsty, requires clothes and
houses, has in all things passions and wants like a man. That makes the
god near to the man. With later gods is it different? God can be
realised only by means of the qualities He shares with man. Deduct from
your idea of God all human passions, love and forgiveness, and mercy,
and revenge, and punishment, and what is left? Only words and
abstractions which appeal to no one, and are realisable by no one.
Declare that God requires neither ears to hear nor eyes to see, nor legs
to walk with, nor a body, and what is left? Nothing is left. When
anyone, savage or Christian, realises God he does so by qualities God
shares with man. God is the Big Man who causes things. That is all. To
say that God is a spirit and then to declare that a spirit differs in
essence from a man is playing with words. No realisable conception does
or can differ.

The conception of force by itself is but a very late idea. As one by
one the phenomena of nature attract man's observation he personifies
them. It will be noticed that unless a force intrudes itself on him he
does not personify it. What people ever personified gravity? And why
not? Surely gravity is evident enough. Every time a savage dropped a
stone on his toes he would recognise gravity. But no. That a stone falls
to the ground because a force draws it is an idea very late to enter
man's brain. It seems to him, as he would say, the nature of a stone to
fall. And then gravity acts always in the same way. It is not
intermittent--like lightning, for instance. Therefore he never conceives
of gravity as a force at all. When men had come to perceive that it was
a force, they had passed the personifying stage. But the savage
personified each force as he perceived it. First the sun and storm, till
at last he came to himself and began to study his own life. He had good
and bad luck; that was Fortune. Evil deeds are done, and good; he is
beginning to classify and generalise; there are gods of Good and Evil.
He has come to Ormuz and Ahriman little by little; as his power of
generalising progresses, he drops the smaller gods. They disappear, they
are but attributes of greater gods. And as he grows in mental grasp and
makes himself the centre of his world, so does the God of Man become the
God of Nature too. The greater absorbs the lesser.

The God who cared for man, the God of his past, of his present, of his
future, is become the great God. He rules all the gods until he alone is
God.

So it seemed to the man that God arose, never out of reason, always out
of instinct. There was no difference. It is all the same story. There is
innate in all men a tendency to personify the forces they cannot
understand. Because they want an explanation, and personality is the
only one that offers at first. To attribute effects to persons is
aboriginal science. To attribute them to natural laws is later science.
Each is the answer to the same question. Men personify forces in
different ways according to their mental and emotional stature, to their
capacity for generalising. They express their ideas in different ways
according to their race and their country. The Hindu began with a god in
each force, to represent each idea, and so the lower people still
remain, afraid of many gods. But those of mental stature gradually
generalised, till at last they came to one God, Brahm, and the lesser
gods as emanating from him. This was a hierarchy; and then finally the
greatest thinkers came to one God only, and the idea that the lesser
gods are but representatives of His manifold nature. You can see all the
stages before you now. It is simply a question of brain power, and the
sequence remains the same. First the lesser, then the greater. It is
never the other way on.

So does Christian mythology personify three ideas of God, as a Trinity,
as three Persons in One, and a Devil. The Hindu would express such a
conception of God by a god with three heads. Christianity, rejecting
such crude symbolism, does so by a mystical creed. The Devil is being
dropped. But the Jew and the Mahommedan have only one God. All force
emanates from Him. He is the Cause of all things. He is One.

And yet it is not a reasoned answer, but an instinctive one. The savage,
no more than the Christian, does not reason out his God. The feeling,
the understanding of God is innate, abiding--never the result of a
mental process. The idea of God is a thing in itself; it grows with the
brain, but it is not the result of any process of the brain; just as a
forest tree grows the greater in richer soil.

As the idea of gods increased in majesty, as the numbers decreased and
became merged in three, in two, or in one, so did their power increase.
The gods were at first but local, local to the place, local to the
tribe. So was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who was jealous of
the other gods. And gradually their local god or gods grew into the God
of the whole world. It was only a question of mental development, of the
power of generalisation in conception. Man conceived a ruler of the
world in the Roman Emperor before he conceived an all-powerful God. The
man as he meditated, as he watched, would see the stages before his
eyes. There was the savage, the Kurumba and Moopa with his many gods in
the hills all about; there were the Hindus, the traders whose temples
shewed white in the groves beneath, many steps higher in civilisation
with their supreme Brahm and minor gods emanating from him; there was
the Moslem with his "God is God." He had the stages before his eyes.

Therefore when he came to consider this question of God he found in
God-worship in Hinduism, Parseeism, Mahommedanism, Judaism,
Christianity, no differing conception. They held all the same idea in
different shapes. There was nothing new. God, one or multiple, made the
world according to His own good pleasure, ruled it according to His
will. The savage knew most of God, because his god was but a man
enlarged and the nearer to him for that. With greater contemplation the
crudities have been removed, the manlike qualities disappear one by one,
until with the few greatest thinkers they are all gone. God has become a
"Spirit," an abstraction, an unthinkable, incomprehensible God that is
of no use to anyone; for He cannot be influenced by prayer, He has no
passions to be roused, He has become lost in the heavens, an inscrutable
force. Such was the evolution of God.

Only when he came to Buddhism was there a new thing. He found no longer
God or gods, but Law. That was indeed new, that was indeed very
different from the other faiths. The world came into being under Law, it
progressed under Law, it would end, if it ever did end, under Law. And
this Law was unchanged, unchangeable for ever. Let me consider, he said,
these two conceptions, Personality and Law.

What is this world to the Buddhist? It is a place that has evolved and
is evolving under Law. He does not speak of God creating one thing or
another, but of a sequence of events. The Buddhist was Darwin two
thousand years before Darwin. He saw the rule of Law long before our
scientific men found it in the stars. I do not think it is so easy to
follow the origin of this idea as it is of the idea of God. With the
latter we have the stages before our eyes, but how the Buddhist idea of
law arose we can only conjecture. It is not, I think, an instinct like
the knowledge of God. It is more of a mental process, like the reasoning
of science. It is a negation as opposed to an assertion. It is the
negative pole. It must surely have arisen like modern science from the
observation of facts. I do not say that the idea of law is absent from
other faiths. You see it in the Commandments. Certain sequences were
recognised, but with Judaism they were ascribed to the order of a
Personality. Buddhism, like science, knows of no Personality. The laws
of a Theocracy were always liable to change and correction. The laws of
the Buddhist are inviolable. The Christian thinks laws can be violated,
the Buddhist knows they are inviolable.

You cannot break a law. It is true that many declare otherwise, that
Charles Kingsley in a famous lecture declared you could break the law of
gravity. "The law is," says he, "that a stone should fall to the earth;
but by stretching out your hand you can prevent the stone falling. Thus
you can break the law." So argued Charles Kingsley, so think mistily
many men because they have never troubled to define the words they use.
There is no law that a stone should fall to the earth. The law of
gravity is that bodies attract each other directly as their mass, and
inversely as the square of the distance. You do not break this law by
holding a stone in your hand. Nay, you can feel it acting all the time
you do so. You cannot break this law. You cannot break any law. Law is
another word for the inevitable. Whom did the Greeks put above all the
gods? It was [Greek: anachke], Necessity. Did, then, the Greeks see that
behind all their personification of forces Law ruled? It may be so. They
have the two ideas, God and Law. It is perhaps the old battle of free
will and destination. And which is true? To the Greek Necessity was
behind God, to the Theist God is behind Law. The laws are but His
orders. He can break them and change them and modify them. And yet, it
is so hard to see clearly how Theists can avoid the difficulty. If God's
laws are perfect truths they cannot be alterable. Only the imperfect
would be changed. Yet if God's laws are perfect, is not He, too, bound
by them? And if He be bound, is not His free will, His omnipotence
limited? Surely God cannot transgress His own laws of righteousness; is
there not "necessity" to Him too? But if this be so, then where is the
need of any knowledge beyond the knowledge of law? If it be indeed
eternal, as the Buddhists say, what need for more? In the science of
nature we need not go beyond, we cannot. In the science of man, who is
but part of nature, why should we do so? Is it not better, truer, more
beautiful to believe in everlasting laws of righteousness that rule the
world than to believe that a Personality has to be always arranging and
interfering? Would we not in a state prefer perfect laws to a perfect
king, who, however, was imperfect in this that his laws were imperfect
and had to be checked in their working? Which is the more perfect
conception? Surely that of law. If crime and ignorance, if mistake and
waywardness brought always inevitably their due punishment and
correction, where is a ruler needed? It is imperfection that requires
changing.




