CHAPTER VI.

WHENCE FAITHS COME.


From the East has come all our light. All world religions have begun
there, have grown there, have mostly spread there.

Brahminism and Buddhism, Judaism and Christianity, Mahommedanism and
Parseeism, the cult of the Taoists and Confucians, every belief that has
been a great belief, that has led man captive, has come from the East.
Even the Mythologies of Greece and Rome were from Asiatic sources, from
Babylon and Chaldea. In the North we have originated only Thor and Odin,
Balder and the Valkyries.

I do not think anyone who has lived in the East can doubt why this has
been so. Where is it man's thoughts are deepest and strongest, where is
it that his heart responds to the heart of the world until they beat
throb for throb?

It is never in the North; for the cold winds and dreary skies, the rain
and cloud and gloom, do not draw a man out from himself, but drive him
in. Every keen breeze that blows, every shower, every grey day, reminds
him not of his soul but of his body. It must be kept warm, it must be
fed, it must be housed. He cannot forget that the outside world must be
guarded against, is an enemy to be feared.

And man must live in houses with other people. He cannot be alone, he
cannot ever feel alone with just himself and the world. Yet it is only
in solitude, when alone with Nature, that she will talk to you. For her
voice is very low, and there must be a great silence before she will
tell her secrets.

But there in the East it is not so. For weeks and months, for half the
year may be, one perfect day is joined to another by more perfect
nights.

Only there can man be alone. Only there, in the limitless silence of the
desert, in the unending forests, can you live and forget all other men,
and yourself almost, and be alone with Him who is God.

You want but little, no house to shelter you, no fire, but very little
food and drink and clothes. You do not feel that restless desire to do
something born of cold winds and skies. Your roof by day is the palm or
tamarind, by night you watch the stars wheeling over your head. There
is no one to commune with but Nature, and if you love her as she should
be loved; if you woo her as she would be wooed; if you can send out your
soul to lose itself with her in the wonders of the infinite, then shall
you hear the music of the stars.

Thus has all religion come from the land of the sun: light is the fount
of faith.

Never till you have been to the East can you know what faith is. Have we
not religion, nay religions, in the North? Yes, but not as they have
there. Do we not believe in the West? Yes, but not as they believe.
Faith lies there in the great distances, in the dawn, the noon, the
sunset, in the holiness of the dark. It has sunk into the heart of man.
Consider, what do you see when you land anywhere in the East, what
strikes you most, what is most prominent, not in the landscape, but in
the people?

It is their religion.

You watch the people in the streets and you ask, Why has the merchant in
that shop trident marks on his forehead? Because he is a Hindu and
follows Vishnu. And that clerk who gave me money in the bank, why has he
those other marks? Because he is a Brahmin. And that money-lender seems
to have rubbed his forehead with ashes? He is a Chetty.

They carry their religion about with them, they are proud of it, they
desire all men to know it. See that man's beard, he is a Mahommedan; and
yonder man with a green turban, he is a Seyid. They would not desire you
to doubt it.

Did you ever see Englishmen praying in the streets? Perhaps never.
Certainly if ever you have seen it you condemned it as unnatural. "Let
him pray at home," you have thought. "He is parading his piety." But
here in the East it is different.

Go by the morning train, leave Rangoon Station when the sun is shining
on the great pagoda, and you will see men and women and children lean
out of the carriage windows to salute it, to murmur a prayer. The
Mahommedan spreads his cloth and turns to Mecca, and prays no matter
where he may be. He is not ashamed. It does not seem to him strange. He
does it absolutely naturally, as all these people do all the things that
pertain to their faiths. Neither his fellow-believers nor the adherents
of other faiths wonder.

The Hindu may hate the Mahommedan for social reasons, and the Buddhist
may hate both, but they do not despise each other for being religious.

It would never occur to a Hindu to despise or jeer at a Mahommedan for
spreading his cloth at the street corner and praying. He thinks the
faith a mistaken faith, _he_ would not have it. But if a man is a
Mahommedan it is right of him to pray, of course.

I have never heard, no one has ever heard, one Oriental jeer at another
for being religious, for obeying the commands of his faith. But I have
heard Christians and teachers of Christianity do so very often. We will
jeer at a Mahommedan for praying, at a Hindu for observing his caste, at
a Buddhist for raising his hands in honour to his pagoda, at a Chinaman
for protecting the graves of his fathers. For in the West we have never
known what real religion is. We have it not ourselves, and so we cannot
recognise and honour it in others. No brave man will mock at another
brave man, though an enemy; no one who has loved mocks at another lover,
though he love strange things. Only those jeer who do not know, and the
Christians of the West jeer at the faiths of the East, at the simple
natural religion of the people, because they know not what religion of
the heart can be.

In Europe, what difference does a man's faith make? None. He may live a
lifetime with other men and no one know or care what his faith may be.
Unless he is a poor man and in need of mission, it is considered
impertinence to ask. But here in the East a man's faith is everything.
You cannot get away from it even for a moment. It is an essential part
of him.

There is another thing that strikes one very soon. These Oriental
religions have little or no organisation. Here in Europe there is
nothing so organised as religion. Consider the Catholic faith and the
organisation of Rome. It is a marvel of government, of very strict
government indeed. And the other forms of Western Christianity are not
much behind. The Greek Church is organised as a branch of Government.
So, too, to a lesser extent is the Anglican Church, and if the
Dissenting bodies, as we call them, are not connected with the State,
they have nevertheless a strong system of government.

These organisations are not now, of course, so strong as they were. They
used to drag the men into religion by force, by State aid, they used to
insist on conformity and punish laxity of observance. That is now gone,
but a strong and continuous pressure still exists, exerted by the
Churches in many ways. All Churches in Europe are always having
"missions." Our great cities are full of them, and the country is not
free of them. There has to be a continual shepherding of the flock or
the Church might dwindle sadly. Men have to be preached at and caught
one way or another. All through Europe immense sums are spent yearly in
Christianising the poor.

In the East nothing of this exists. There is no head of Hinduism; that
of the Sultan in Mahommedanism is merely nominal; how slight the
organisation is of Buddhism those who have read my former book will
know.

Hindus are guided by the race of Brahmins, who in turn are guided by no
one. They are a great community themselves, without any organisation or
binding authority. They need no Pope, no Acts of Uniformity. They are
Brahmins because they are so. And so it may be said in general. Faiths
in the East require no strong organisations to hold them together.
Religion is innate in the believers. It seems wonderful. And they have
no missions. If a man feels the need of faith he will seek it and obtain
it. It is there for him if he will come. And all do come. How many
millions in Europe, even in England, have no religious usages? Can you
in the East find one man?

When you think of Europe and its faiths you seem to be in a garden where
the hedges are carefully clipped and the flowers are trained and pruned,
and where you may not walk on the grass. It is all order, and method,
and restriction, for the flowers are exotics and would die without the
tending, they would vary if they were not kept true to type. But the
East is Nature's garden, where the flowers grow wild everywhere; no one
tends them or cares for them, but each grows his own way, developes his
own power and strength, from the lowest grasses to the gorgeous orchid
or the poison lily.

Therefore it may be that in this East, this country whence all religions
have come, where the whole air breathes of faiths and all life is full
of them, the man who has lost his early beliefs may learn new ones.
There is so much to choose from, so many varieties of thought and
emotion.

In this Empire of ours are all the great religions. It is the home of
Brahminism, of the mystical forms of Hinduism, beyond which it has never
spread. There are more Mahommedans here than under the Sultan of Roum.
There are the Parsees here, fugitives long ago from Persia on account of
their faith, the only sun worshippers who are left. There are Jews who
came here no one can tell how long ago, there are Christians who date
back may be eighteen centuries, there are Armenians and Arabs. Within
this Empire live the only race professing a Buddhism that is pure and
without superstition; and beside these there are a hundred other cults,
superstitions, or religions, call them what you will.

From the spirit worship of the Shan plateau to the dignified philosophic
theories of the Brahmo Somaj is a space as wide as the world can show,
yet may it be bridged with religions that differ but by small degrees
till the whole be passed.

If anyone want a faith here are enough and to spare. "Therefore,"
thought the boy, who had now become a man, "I will seek here for what I
want. I know what I want. I have it clearly before me. I have even
written it down. It is not as if I was undertaking a blind search for
something of which I was not sure. These are my three essentials: a
reasonable theory of the universe, a workable and working code of
conduct, a promise in the after life that gives me something to really
desire, to really hope for, to be a haven towards which I may steer. I
will take each subject, each section of a subject, separately and read
it up. I will read up these faiths from books, I will study them as I
can from the people, and I will see what they are. Surely somewhere can
be found what I desire, what I desire so greatly to find."




