CHAPTER VII.

THE WISDOM OF BOOKS.


Therefore the man got books and read them. He read books on Hinduism,
many of them; he read the Vedas and the sacred hymns. He learnt of
Vishnu and Siva, of Krishna and the milkmaids. He found books on caste
and read them, of how these were originally four castes which
subdivided. He read of suttee and the car of Juggernauth. He then turned
to Mahommedanism and the life of Mahommed. He read the Koran. He learned
the early history of the faith, of its rise, of the glory of its result,
of the fall of its great Empire. He saw it had much to do with Judaism,
there were great similarities, there were also differences. He read of
Parseeism, that taught by Zoroaster which they call fire worship; he
read of Jainism, of the cult of the Sikhs, of many another strange
faith; he learned of the spirit worship of the aboriginal tribes among
the mountains, of Phallic worship and its monstrosities.

He read of Confucius and his teachings, of Laotze and his doctrines, of
ancestor worship among the Chinese, of Shintoism in Japan.

Most of all he read about Buddhism. There was something here that
attracted him more than in all the rest. In the life of Gaudama the
Buddha he found a beauty that came to him as a charm, in the teachings
of the Great Teacher there seemed to him a light such as he had not
seen. Mystery and miracle and the supernatural had always jarred on him,
they had an unpleasant savour, as of appeals to the lowest elements in
the minds of the credulous and ignorant. Truth he thought should not
need such meretricious attractions. Here was a faith that needed none of
these things. It could exist without them. It contained explanations,
not dogmas. It was reasonableness instead of hysteria, it denounced
mysticism and the cult of the supernatural.

It took the man several years to read these books, and he lived those
years much alone. His house lay half up a mountain side. Below him lay
tangled masses of hills clothed with dense forest, with here and there a
clearing. Before him was a jagged mountain wall, behind a great bare
dome of rock. It was always wonderful to sit and watch, to see the sun
rise in gold and crimson behind the peaks, while all below lay in a
white mist; to watch the sun rays fall and the mist grow thinner,
showing faint outlines of tree clump and hill contour, till all the mist
was gone and the world was full of golden light. Daily he saw the marvel
of the dawn. He learnt to love it as the most beautiful of things, most
beautiful because full of the promise of untold glory. For the most part
his life was very lonely. There were the labourers who worked for him,
the black, half-nude people who came in gangs in May and left in
February of each year. They were not of his world. He directed their
work, he paid them, but he did not know them. He wondered at them, that
was all, and there were scattered here and there throughout the hills
other Europeans, who lived much the same life as he did, and whom he met
occasionally at their houses or his, or at the club ten miles away. He
liked them, some of them were his best friends, a great part of his life
was theirs also.

But there was, aside from his friends, aside from the merry meetings,
the games, the chaff, the laughter, another life apart. There was a life
he lived to himself, in another world it seemed. His world was of the
mountain and the fell, of the brooks that laughed down the precipice,
of the giant trees, the tangled creepers, the delicate orchid far above.
His thoughts were with them and with his books, for they should be
brothers. He read and he watched, and he tried to understand; he asked
of nature the meaning of these religions, to tell him the secret that he
would know. What is the truth of things--what do you mean? And I----What
do _I_ mean? What is the secret of it all?

The mountains and the trees answered him and told him secrets, the
secrets of their hearts, but not the secret he would know. They murmured
to him of many things, of beauty, of love, of peace, of forgetfulness.
They sang the world's slumber song.

But of whence, of how, of whither they told him nothing, only they
ceased talking when he asked, they ceased their song and there was
silence. They could not tell.

So he lay upon the rocks and read, and the hills and trees wondered
because they knew not of what he read. "Take care," they whispered; "why
trouble? Life is so short, surely it were wise to make the best of it;
for no one can answer what you ask. We die and fall and new trees grow
again, the hills are newly clad each year. The old return in new forms.
We can tell of ourselves, we are not afraid. Our lives are full of
delight. Death has no terror for us. But you? Of you we know nothing. We
have no echo to your words."

Yet the man read on. He dreamed and read and dreamed again.

"I have three wants," he said. "I would know whence I came, I would have
some rule to live by, I would know whither I am going. Religions, many
religions profess to tell men these things, surely somewhere there will
be truth. Nearly all men are satisfied with their religion, cannot I
find one that satisfies me? It is so little that I ask, I have here so
many answers. Amongst them I will be able to find what I want."
Therefore he read on. But in the thoughts of many teachers there is not
clearness, but confusion. In a multitude of counsellors there is not
wisdom, only mist, only the strange shadows made by many lights. He
found that he did not gain. "Sometimes," he said, "I agree with one,
sometimes with another. No one seems to be altogether true. There is
Truth, perhaps, but not the whole Truth. This will not do."

At last he said to himself that he would make a system. He would take
certain ideas from various faiths, he would put them together, he would
compare them one by one and see what he learnt.

There is, he said, the First Cause. What do religions say about this
First Cause? There is Brahma, and Jehovah, and Ahriman, with Ormuz;
there is the Buddhist doctrine of Law, there is the Christian Trinity.
These are some of the chief ideas. What can be made of them? Have they a
common truth? Are the great religions utterly at variance about this
First Cause, or can they agree? I will take this point and consider it
first. What is the First Cause? Then I will pass to another. What does
life mean? Why are we here? Is there any explanation of this? For what
object does man exist? To what end? He did not mean what is the end of
man, but what is the object of man, of life? To whom is it a benefit
that man exists? To God--if there be a God? If not, to whom? It cannot
be that existence is an aimless freak, that it has no object. But what
can this object be? What was to be gained by creating man at all? That
was question number two. There is no answer to this question.

There were many other questions that he asked. And when he had framed a
question he sat down to his books to find the answer. He worked at them
as problems to be solved. He sought in the various faiths described in
his books the answers to these problems. What he found will be shown in
the next few chapters; but let it be understood again how and why he
sought.

He had been born in a faith and brought up in it, and had abandoned it.
He left it because he sought in it certain helps to thought and to life
that it seemed to him religion ought to give. More, it seemed to him
that these answers were of the very essence of religion. His fathers'
faith gave him answers he could not accept, it gave him a rule of life
he could not follow, that seemed to him untrue. Yet would he not be
satisfied with ignorance, he would search further. He wanted a religion,
a belief, and he would find it.

For I want it to be understood very clearly that he was no scoffer, no
denier of religion. It was the very reverse. He so much wanted a faith,
it seemed to him such an eminently necessary thing, that he would not be
content till he had one that he could really accept and believe. He
hated doubt and half acceptance. He wanted a truth that appealed to him
as a whole truth, that held no room for doubt.

"All men," he said, "have religion. They love their faiths, they find in
them help and consolation and guidance, at least they tell me so. Why
am I to be left out? Men say that religion is a treasure beyond words.
Then I, too, would share in the treasure. But I cannot take what has
been offered me. It does not seem to me to be true. I _cannot_ believe
it. This religion repels me. I cannot say how greatly it repels me. They
say it is beautiful. It must be so to some. It is not so to me. Its
music to me is not music, but harshest discord. It is not surely that I
have no desire for religion, no eye for beauty, no ear for harmony, I
know it is not that. No man loves beauty more than I do. There are
things in this faith I have rejected that appeal to me. I see in other
faiths, too, ideas that are beautiful. But no one seems all true, and
none answers my three questions. Yet will I look till I find.

"And meanwhile there are the hills and the woods. These are my dreams.

"But surely in my scheme I shall discover something."




