CHAPTER V.

SCIENTIFIC THEOLOGY--II.


What thought the boy of these explanations? Do you think they helped him
at all? Do you think he was able to accept them as real? Did they throw
any light into the darkness of his doubts?

The boy took them and considered them. He considered them fairly, I am
sure; he would have accepted them if he could. For what he was looking
for was simply guidance and light. He had no desire for aught but this.
If he revolted now from the faith of his people it was because he found
there neither teaching he could accept nor help. If the scientific
theologian shewed him that the error was in him and not in the faith the
boy would, I think, have been glad. So he took these explanations and
considered them, and this is what he thought.

They tell me that the seven days of creation are seven epochs. I did
not ask that. To my question whether man has fallen, as the Bible says,
or risen, as science declares, no reply has been given.

There is only a specious likening of a man's life, saying that man falls
from the innocence of his childhood to sin through the knowledge of
evil, and requires redemption. My question is avoided, and a new sophism
given me which is also untrue. A child is not innocent. It is only
ignorant and weak. Its natural impulses are those of a savage. It
requires to learn the knowledge of good and evil to subdue these
instincts. This symbolism of the child is utterly false. A child is to
us a very beautiful thing because its tenderness, its helplessness, its
clinging affection awaken in us feelings of love, of protection, which
we feel are beautiful. All men should, all men I think do, love
children, but the beauty is in the man's emotions that are awakened, not
in those qualities of the children that awaken them.

To go beyond this and say that a child should be a model to man is to
display ignorance of what children are, to mistake effect for cause, to
exalt childishness into a virtue. Theologians use this argument, which
is merely a play upon our affection for children, to try and induce us
to accept their theology with the same ignorant confidence that a child
accepts all it is told by its parents. It would suit theologians for all
men to be babes in this sense, in their senselessness. But if theology
will bear the light of reason, why ask us to accept it blindly? Why? Is
it because it will not bear scrutiny?

And surely of all the answers, this answer about the character of God is
the most extraordinary. "God is not really unjust or partial, or
revengeful. That is merely the impression His acts make on us." Truly
here is an argument. How can anyone, even God, be judged except in His
acts? If His acts are revengeful, is not He revengeful? "No!" says the
theological scientist, "that is merely your ignorance. Events make a
wrong impression on you."

How, then, am I to judge which are wrong and which are right
impressions? God acts, as it seems to me, angrily; He is not angry. On
other occasions He acts, as it seems, mercifully. How am I to know that
this impression of mercy is not an error? How, in fact, am I to know
that anything exists at all? If God's anger and partiality and
changeableness are merely impressions of my mind, are not all His
attributes merely impressions also, and do not exist? In fact, is not
God Himself merely an impression and He does not exist? Where are you
going to stop? The theologian will doubtless say, "When I tell you."
But then he is unfortunately arrogating to himself an authority which
does not exist, an authority to twist and turn the Bible to suit his own
sophisms, an authority to bind your mind which no one has given him.
Impressions forsooth. What impressions can any candid mind have of the
scientific theologian? And when the boy read the explanation of the
difference between the all-presence of God and the all-presence of
Satan, I am afraid he laughed.

But prayer is a serious matter. No one can feel anything but sorrow to
see the explanation of God and prayer. The theological scientist again
repeats the Bible words and has his own explanation. No, God is not
moved by prayer. This is merely another wrong impression of ours, an
impression taken from the Bible words. The action of prayer is not
objective, but subjective; its effect is not on God, but on you.

Now mark what he has led himself into. Prayer will purify a man. To ask
God for what he wants won't make the slightest difference in God's acts,
but will in your own feelings. Nevertheless, as of course no one would
or could pray unless he hoped to be answered, man must be told that God
does listen. But this is not true. Therefore, according to theological
science, the Bible directly tells us a falsehood in order to lead us
into a good action. Is there any escape from this? There is none. The
whole meaning and reason of prayer is that God _does_ listen, that He
_does_ forgive if asked, that He _does_ help us and save us. Unless a
man held this belief firmly he would not pray. Try and you will see.
Imagine to yourself, as the theologian declares, that God is quite
unmoved by prayer, and that the action of prayer is subjective, and see
if you can get up any prayer at all. It is impossible. How much fervency
will there be in a request you know will not be granted or attended to?
How much subjective action will follow that prayer? The subjective
action is absolutely dependent on your belief that God does listen and
is influenced by your prayer. But the scientific theologian says your
premise is false.

Can you imagine this theologian's prayer? Can you see him kneeling and
uttering supplications to a god whom he knows he cannot affect or
influence, and pausing now and then to see how the subjective effect on
himself was getting on? But it is not even a subject to be bitter over,
only to be sad. Truly, if I wanted to make a man an atheist and a
scoffer, a railer at all religion, at all religious emotions, at all
that is best in our natures, I would take him to a scientific
theologian and have him taught the scientific theological theory of
prayer.

And again, though the boy understood how a man could be the son of his
father, the husband of his wife, the father of his son, three different
relations to three people, it did not help him to understand how he
could be so to one person. A man cannot be his own son and his own
father, and have proceeding from him a third person different and yet
the same. The argument seemed to him childish.

As to the teaching of Christ, of what use is a teaching that is suitable
only to an ideal state of things? Is it any use to me to tell me that if
everyone agreed at once to follow this teaching the world would be
perfect? Even if this were true, what would be the use? The world never
has accepted it and does not do so now. No one does except a few people
who are called visionaries or fanatics. Even the Quakers only accept a
part, and it is well for them that their fellow citizens do not accept
even that part, or these Quakers would soon be robbed of their wealth. A
nation of Quakers would be a nation of slaves. All this talk of what
would happen if at a given signal all the world became perfect is
useless dream talk. I want realities. This code of Christ is not a
reality. No quicker way of destroying civilization and all that it
means could be desired than by attempting to follow it. We must be ready
and prepared to fight other nations, we must have armies and navies, and
we must honour them. We must have magistrates, and police, and prisons,
and gallows.

"I went," thought the boy, "to these theological scientists, for help in
my everyday life, for clear directions and explanations, and what do
they give me? A mass of words meaning nothing, words and words, and
tangled thoughts; evasion and misrepresentation, misty dreams and
cloud-hidden ideals. They cannot explain, and therefore the whole thing
is false. There is no truth anywhere in it. The whole teaching of the
Bible, from the Creation down to the incarnation of Christ and His
second coming, is one huge mistake. Why people keep on believing it I
cannot say. But anyhow I have found out its falseness, and I will not.
Let it all go. It will make no difference and be rather an advantage.
What use have I ever had from this religion that has been dinned into
me? It gave me false ideas of the world and nature which I have had to
unlearn. It gave me an unworkable code of conduct which I never tried to
follow, but I got into trouble for it. To call oneself a Christian is
merely a way of talking. No one is so really, and the only difference
between me and the others will be that while they are not Christians but
think they are, I am not a Christian and know I am not."

Was the boy glad or sorry? I do not know. I think perhaps he was both.
He felt like a man who has shaken off a burden, a load that contained
mere weight and no useful thing. He would step more lightly in future.

But he felt, too, like a man who has skirted a precipice, secure in that
a railing fenced him in from danger, when he suddenly discovers that the
railing is decayed to the core and will vanish at a touch. He felt dizzy
and afraid, and the feeling grew upon him.

May be, he thought, it is a good thing to have a religion. People of all
faiths, of all nations, seem to cling to theirs very strongly. It is the
one thing they cannot bear to lose. Yet I do not know what they get from
it. At least I do not know what people get from Christianity. What I
look for in a faith are these three things.

I wish an explanation of my origin, of the origin of man and his
relation to this world, and to what there may be beyond this world. I
want an explanation I can accept, and that is not contradicted by the
knowledge we acquire from other sources than religion.

And I want a guide to life. I want a guide to life as it is. For I have
to live in the world as it exists, and I would have help and direction
to do so well. I want a teaching and an example I can refer to in my
everyday troubles.

Finally, I would know something of the Hereafter. I would desire to hear
of the after death. I cannot believe that all non-Christians, including
myself and the majority of Christians, go to hell. That is repulsive.
Nor can I believe in the heavens they tell us of. If all be true that
they tell us, it has no attraction this Christian heaven. To be for ever
singing praises is not life but monotony. Did any man in health, and
strength, and sanity ever yearn to die in order to reach this Heaven
they tell us of? Did not Aucassin say long ago that if he were to
believe the monks Heaven was a place for the poor and maimed, the
foolish, the childish and silly, the stupid, the cowards, the ugly, the
undesirable, the failures of earth, and that he cared not for it?
Whoever was unfit for earth was the more fit for heaven. No! If there is
another world it must be different from the conceptions of Heaven and
Hell as are taught. And I would know. These seem to me the essentials of
religion. They are the three things I want. I have not found them. It
may be that in the other greater faiths that hold the world I may find
what I seek. I cannot say. But meanwhile I must do without. It is better
to have no compass than a faulty one. It is better to watch for the
stars, even if the night be thick and it be hard to see.

Such, I think, was what he thought. Whether he ever found what he
sought, whether any faith can give what he asks, whether indeed these
three things are essentials of religion at all, will be found in the
latter part of the book. This part is but the introduction to explain
why and by whom the search was made, and what was sought.




