CHAPTER IX.

GOD AND LAW.


Think what a difference, what an immense difference, it makes to a man
which he believes, how utterly it alters all his attitude to the
Unknown, to the Infinite, whether he believes in God or in Law. For
among all religions, all faiths, all theories of the unknown there are
only these two ideas, Personality or Law, free will or inevitableness.
And how different they are.

In the face of eternity there are two attitudes: that of the Theist,
whether Christian or Jew, Hindu or spirit worshipper; and that of the
Buddhist, the believer in Law. To the believer in God or in gods, what
is the world and what is man? They are playthings in the hands of the
Almighty. God is responsible to no one, He knows no right and wrong, no
necessity beyond Himself, all He does must be right. He is All-powerful.
Man must crouch before Him in fear. If man suffer he must not cry out
against God; he must say in due submissiveness, "Thy will be done." A
man must even be thankful that matters are not worse. If in a shipwreck
many are drowned and few, bereft of all but life, are hardly saved, what
must they do? They must render thanks to God that He didn't drown them
too. Not because they are aware of being punished for any sin, that does
not come to man in calamity. You cannot imagine a common sin that
engulphs men and women, children and babes, from all countries, of all
professions, of many religions, in one common disaster. No! God can be
bribed, not with presents perhaps now, but with reverence. It is the
cringe that deprecates uncontrollable Power. It is the same feeling that
makes the savage lay a fruit or a flower before the Spirit of the Hills
lest he too be killed by the falling rocks.

For what do men imagine God to be? Do you think that each man holds one
wonderful conception of God? Not so. The civilised man's idea of God is
as the savage idea. Each man builds to himself his own God, out of his
ideals, civilised or savage. Truly, if you ask a man to tell you his
idea of God he will answer you vaguely out of his creeds or sacred
books; but if you watch that man's actions towards God, you will soon
discover that his God is but his ideal man glorified.

To a tender woman her God is but the extreme of the tenderness, the
beauty, the compassion which she feels, and the narrowness which she has
but does not realise. And cannot you see in your mind's eye the German
Emperor's God clanking round the heavenly mansions wearing a German
pickelhaube and swearing German oaths? Man's God is but what he admires
most in himself. He can be propitiated, he can be bribed. The savage
does it with a bowl of milk or a honey cake, the mediaeval man did it
with a chapel or a painted window. You say this idea has ceased. Have
you ever prayed to God and said, "Spare me this time and I will be good
in future. I will do this. I will do that." Or, more beautifully, "Spare
him that I love and let the punishment fall on me. Let me bear his
sins." Is not the very idea of atonement expressed by Christ's life? A
price has to be paid to God. He must be bought off. Man's attitude
before God must be that of the child, submissive with downcast eyes,
full of praise, never daring to blame. "Tell me and I will obey, do not
punish me or I perish." Then there is the attitude of the believer in
eternal law. For him the world holds no caprice, no leaning to one side
or another, no revenge, no mercy. Each act carries with it an inevitable
result: reward if the act be good, punishment if it be bad. You can
break a command of God. He may tell you to do a thing and you may
refuse. You cannot break a law. It is the inevitable, the everlasting.
You cannot rebel against law. The sin is not rebellion, but ignorance.
The attitude is not submission, but inquiry, the thirst for truth. Adam
lost Eden because he sought for the knowledge of good and evil. But the
law-believer says that only in wisdom, only in truth, is there any hope.
He stands before the eternal verities with clear eyes to see them, with
a strong heart to bear what his ignorance may make him suffer. Out of
his pain he will learn the sequences of life. He has gained much.

What has he lost? Are not mercy and fatherly care, forgiveness and love,
beautiful things? Yet they, too, are of God. If you know not of Him,
only of Law, have you not lost out of your life some of the greatest
thoughts? How will you comfort your heart when it is sore if you have
not God? Is prayer nothing?

Truly, said the man, these are beautiful things. If I could have them
alone. But I cannot. I fear the other qualities more than I love these.
I would have neither. I would be a man and live under Law. It seems to
me enough. If Law be absolute I see no room for God.

Over against him were the long ridges of the hills where the rain-clouds
gathered from the south. He saw them come in great masses surging up the
valleys and hiding the contours of the hills. The lightning flashed
across the peaks and the thunder echoed in long-drawn trumpet blasts.
"The savage," he said, "saw there only gods warring with one another.
Now with wiser eyes we see the reign of Law. We do not know all the
laws; we cannot even yet tell how much rain will come, whether it will
be famine or plenty. We cannot see the Law, but we never doubt the Law
is there. With man it is the same. Births and deaths, suicides and
murders, are they too not all under Law? Why should not man's soul be so
too? Where is the need of God?"

As he came down the mountain side the rain was falling heavily, as it
can only in the tropics. The dry hollows were already streams, the
streams were foaming torrents. "They act under Law," he said. "Their
life is bounded all by Law." And then of a sudden, watching the foaming
water, he saw more clearly.

"True, the stream runs within its banks, but banks do not make the
stream. Gravity, that drags down these waters, acts in certain sequence,
but that sequence is not gravity. Gravity is a force. When we enumerate
the law we do not define, or know, or understand the force, only the way
it acts. Force is force, and law is law. They are not the same. They do
not explain each other. What a dead thing would law be that had no force
acting within it. Truly, I must see more clearly. Law does not deny
force; nay, but it predicates it--is, in fact, an outcome of it. Law is
a sequence along which force acts; neither can exist without the other.
All force is ruled by law. Yes, but what is force--what are any of the
forces that exist: gravity, and electricity, and heat, and life? Forms
of motion? May be; but whence the motion?

"Ah me!" said the man, "then am I back again at the beginning. Have I
learnt nothing? I thought law might suffice, but it will not. If law is
inevitable, then are we but helpless atoms following the stream of
necessity. Then is freewill dead. Yet there is freewill. There is force,
there is life, whence come these forces? And if one say that force is
God, what then?

"Perhaps there is this: there are two truths--there is God and there is
Law. Both are true, as there is destiny and there is freewill. But how
can that be? I see it is so, that it must be so. But how? Is it that
there are facets of some great truth behind which we can never know?"

The man was weary. "What have I gained? Only that I have a truth, which
I cannot understand, which gives me no help, or but little? Have I
gained anything to help me in life? I have gained this, perhaps, that if
Law be not a full explanation, it is true, as far as it goes; if not a
whole truth, yet it is a truth. Why go further? The scientist cares for
nothing more when he has learned the laws of gravity. He is content to
be ignorant of whence the force comes, because he can go no further. In
the battle of life is not this enough? Can we not, too, be as the
scientist, denying nothing, but searching only for that which we can
know and which will be useful to us? If force be God, yet should His
ways not be mysterious. Let us not shut our eyes and comfort ourselves
in ignorance by saying, 'There is no Law; God is inscrutable, God knows
no Law. He is inexpressible, changeable and uncertain.' But truly there
is Law. Behind the gods, behind God, there _is_ [Greek: anachke], there
is Necessity, there is an unfailing sequence of events, which is
righteousness. Let us learn then what righteousness is. Let us learn
what is true in order to do what is right."

       *       *       *       *       *

But after all it is all speculation. There is no evidence. It is a
theory built on nothing. What is the value of it? Nothing at all. What
is to be gained by all this? Only barren words, finely spun theories
made of air. Where is the proof of God or of Law? There is none.




