CHAPTER II.

EARLY BELIEFS.


The boy of whom I am about to write was brought up until he was twelve
entirely by women. He had masters, it is true, who taught him the usual
things that are taught to boys, and he had playfellows, other boys; but
the masters were with him but an hour or two each day for lessons, and
of the boys he was always the eldest.

Those who have studied how it is that children form their ideas of the
world, of what it is, of what has to be done in it, of how to do it,
will recognise all that this means; for children obtain their ideas of
everything, not from their lessons nor their books nor their teachers,
but from their associates. A teacher may teach, but a boy does not
believe. He believes not what he is told, but what he sees. He forms to
himself rules of conduct modelled on the observed conduct of other
people. Their ideas penetrate his, and he absorbs and adapts them to
his own wants. In a school with other boys, or where a boy has as
playfellows boys older than himself, this works out right. The knowledge
and ideas of the great world filter gradually down. Young men gain it
from older men, the young men pass it to the elder boys, and the bigger
to the smaller, each adapting it as he takes. Thus is wisdom made
digestible by the many processes it passes through, and the child can
take it and find it agree with him.

But with a child brought up with adults and children younger than
himself this is not so. From the latter he can learn nothing; he
therefore adapts himself to the former. He listens to them, he watches
them, unconsciously it is true, but with that terrible penetrative power
children possess. He learns their ideas, and, tough as they may prove to
him, he has to absorb them, and he has not the digestive juice, the
experience that is required to assimilate them. They are unfit for his
tender years, they do not yield the nourishment he requires. He suffers
terribly. A man's ideas and knowledge are not fit for a boy.

And if a man's, how much less a woman's? A boy will become a man; what
he has learnt of men is knowledge of the right kind, though of the wrong
degree. But what he learns from women is almost entirely unsuitable in
kind and in degree. The ideas, the knowledge, the codes of conduct, the
outlook on life that suit a woman are entirely unfitted for a boy.
Consider and you must see how true it is.

This boy, too, was often ill and unable to play, to go out at all
sometimes for weeks in the winter. He seemed always ailing. Thus he had
to spend much of his time alone, and when he was tired of reading or of
wood carving, or colouring plates in a book, he thought. He had often so
much time to think that he grew sick of thought. He hated it. He would
have given very much to be able to get out and run about and play so as
not to think, to be enabled to forget that he had a brain which would
keep on passing phantoms before his inner eyes. There was nothing he
hated so much, nothing he dreaded so deeply as having nothing to do but
think. In later years he took this terror to his heart and made it into
an exceedingly great pleasure, but to the child it was not so.

Therefore, when he was twelve and was sent at last to a large school, he
was different to most boys at that age; for his view of the world, his
knowledge of it, his judgment of it, were all obtained from women. He
saw life much as they did, through the same glasses, though with
different sight. His ideas of conduct were a woman's ideas, his
religion was a woman's religion.

Are not a woman's ideas of conduct the same as a man's? Is not a woman's
Christianity the same as a man's Christianity, if both be Christianity?
And I reply, No! A thousand times no! There is all the world between
them, all that world that is between woman and a man.

As to man's religion I will speak of it later. The woman's ideas of
conduct and religion which this child had absorbed were these. He
believed in the New Testament. I do not mean he disbelieved the Old
Testament, but he did not think of it. Religion to him meant the
teaching of Christ, that very simple teaching that is in the Gospel.
Conduct to him meant the imitation of Christ and the observance of the
Sermon on the Mount. He thought this was accepted by all the world--the
Christian world at least--as true, that everyone, men as well as women,
accepted this teaching not as a mere pious aspiration, not as an
altruistic ideal, but as a real working theory. War was bad, all war.
Soldiers apparently were not all bad--he had been told of Christian
soldiers, though he had no idea how such a contradiction could
occur--but at least they were a dreadful necessity. Wealth and the
pursuit of wealth were bad, wicked even, though here again there were
exceptions. Learning was apt to be a snare. The world was very wicked,
consciously wicked, which accounted for the present state of affairs,
and most people would certainly go to hell. The ideal life was that of a
very poor curate in the East End of London, hard working and unhappy.
These are some of the ideas he learnt, for this is the religion of all
the religious women of England; of all those who are in their way the
very salt of the nation. Their belief is the teaching of Christ, and
that is what this boy learnt. This is what "conduct" and "religion"
meant to him.

I must not be misunderstood. I do not intend to suggest that this boy
was any better than other boys, that his life was less marked by the
peccadilloes of childhood. He was probably much as other boys are as far
as badness or goodness is concerned. His acts, I doubt not, did not very
much differ from theirs. After all, neither boys nor men are very much
guided either by any theoretical "Rule of Life," nor by any view of what
is the true Religion. He acted according to his instincts, but having so
acted the difference between him and other boys came in. Other boys'
instincts led them to poach a trout out of a stream, and rejoice in
their success if they were not caught. This boy's instinct also led him
to poach a trout if he could, but he did not rejoice over it. Poaching
was stealing, and that was a deadly sin. He was aware of that and was
afraid.

Other boys' instincts made them fight on occasions and be proud of it,
whether victor or vanquished, to boast of it publicly perhaps; anyhow,
not to keep it a secret or be ashamed of it. This boy's instincts also
led him several times into fights; but whether victor or not--it was
usually not--he could not appear to be proud of it. The Sermon on the
Mount told him he ought not to have fought that boy who struck him, but
should have turned the other cheek, and he knew very well that it would
be regarded as a sin. It must be kept secret and he must be ashamed of
it, and so with many things. It never occurred to him then to doubt that
the Sermon on the Mount did really contain the correct rule of life for
him, and that any breach of it must be a deadly sin. Among other results
this friction between the natural boy and the rule of conduct he was
taught he ought to adopt, gave the boy a continual sensation of being
wrong. He knew he was continually breaking the Sermon on the Mount and
also other rules of the New Testament. He was perfectly sure he did not
live at all like Christ, and he had a strong, but never then
acknowledged certainty, that he didn't want to. All this, with the
continual reproof of those around him, gave him an incessant feeling of
being wicked. He could not live up to these rules, and he was a very
wicked little boy bound for hell, so he thought of himself.

It is difficult to imagine anything worse for a boy than this. Tell a
boy he is bad, lead him to believe he is bad, make much of his little
sins, reprove him, mourn over him as one of wicked tendencies, and you
will make him wicked. Perpetual struggle to attain an impossible and
unnatural ideal is destructive to any moral fibre. For the boy soon
begins to distrust himself, his own efforts, his own good intentions. He
fails and fails, and he loses heart and begins to count on failure as
certain. Then later he abandons effort as useless. What is the good of
trying without any hope of success? It is useless and foolish. To save
appearances he must pretend, and that is all. But at the time he went to
school he had not quite come to that, for the stress of the world had
not yet fallen upon him. He still believed in what he was taught was the
ideal of life, and tried, in a childish, uncertain way, to act up to
it.




