III

WASTE IN EDUCATION


The subject announced for today was “Waste in Education.” I should like
first to state briefly its relation to the two preceding lectures. The
first dealt with the school in its social aspects, and the necessary
readjustments that have to be made to render it effective in present
social conditions. The second dealt with the school in relation to the
growth of individual children. Now the third deals with the school
as itself an institution, in relation both to society and to its own
members—the children. It deals with the question of organization, because
all waste is the result of the lack of it, the motive lying behind
organization being promotion of economy and efficiency. This question
is not one of the waste of money or the waste of things. These matters
count; but the primary waste is that of human life, the life of the
children while they are at school, and afterward because of inadequate
and perverted preparation.

So, when we speak of organization, we are not to think simply of the
externals; of that which goes by the name “school system”—the school
board, the superintendent, and the building, the engaging and promotion
of teachers, etc. These things enter in, but the fundamental organization
is that of the school itself as a community of individuals, in its
relations to other forms of social life. All waste is due to isolation.
Organization is nothing but getting things into connection with one
another, so that they work easily, flexibly, and fully. Therefore in
speaking of this question of waste in education I desire to call your
attention to the isolation of the various parts of the school system, to
the lack of unity in the aims of education, to the lack of coherence in
its studies and methods.

I have made a chart (I) which, while I speak of the isolations of the
school system itself, may perhaps appeal to the eye and save a little
time in verbal explanations. A paradoxical friend of mine says there is
nothing so obscure as an illustration, and it is quite possible that
my attempt to illustrate my point will simply prove the truth of his
statement.

[Illustration: Chart I.]

The blocks represent the various elements in the school system and are
intended to indicate roughly the length of time given to each division,
and also the overlapping, both in time and in subjects studied, of the
individual parts of the system. With each block is given the historical
conditions in which it arose and its ruling ideal.

The school system, upon the whole, has grown from the top down.
During the Middle Ages it was essentially a cluster of professional
schools—especially law and theology. Our present university comes down to
us from the Middle Ages. I will not say that at present it is a mediaeval
institution, but it had its roots in the Middle Ages, and it has not
outlived all mediaeval traditions regarding learning.

The kindergarten, rising with the present century, was a union of the
nursery and of the philosophy of Schelling; a wedding of the plays and
games which the mother carried on with her children to Schelling’s highly
romantic and symbolic philosophy. The elements that came from the actual
study of child life—the continuation of the nursery—have remained a
life-bringing force in all education; the Schellingesque factors made an
obstruction between it and the rest of the school system—brought about
isolations.

The line drawn over the top indicates that there is a certain interaction
between the kindergarten and the primary school; for, so far as the
primary school remained in spirit foreign to the natural interests of
child life, it was isolated from the kindergarten, so that it is a
problem, at present, to introduce kindergarten methods into the primary
school; the problem of the so-called connecting class. The difficulty is
that the two are not one from the start. To get a connection the teacher
has had to climb over the wall instead of entering in at the gate.

On the side of aims, the ideal of the kindergarten was the moral
development of the children, rather than instruction or discipline; an
ideal sometimes emphasized to the point of sentimentality. The primary
school grew practically out of the popular movement of the sixteenth
century, when, along with the invention of printing and the growth of
commerce, it became a business necessity to know how to read, write, and
figure. The aim was distinctly a practical one; it was utility; getting
command of these tools, the symbols of learning, not for the sake of
learning, but because they gave access to careers in life otherwise
closed.

The division next to the primary school is the grammar school. The term
is not much used in the West, but is common in the eastern states. It
goes back to the time of the revival of learning—a little earlier perhaps
than the conditions out of which the primary school originated, and,
even when contemporaneous, having a different ideal. It had to do with
the study of language in the higher sense; because, at the time of the
Renaissance, Latin and Greek connected people with the culture of the
past, with the Roman and Greek world. The classic languages were the
only means of escape from the limitations of the Middle Ages. Thus there
sprang up the prototype of the grammar school, more liberal than the
university (so largely professional in character), for the purpose of
putting into the hands of the people the key to the old learning, that
men might see a world with a larger horizon. The object was primarily
culture, secondarily discipline. It represented much more than the
present grammar school. It was the liberal element in the college,
which, extending downward, grew into the academy and the high school.
Thus the secondary school is still in part just a lower college (having
an even higher curriculum than the college of a few centuries ago) or a
preparatory department to a college, and in part a rounding up of the
utilities of the elementary school.

There appear then two products of the nineteenth century, the technical
and normal schools. The schools of technology, engineering, etc., are, of
course, mainly the development of nineteenth-century business conditions,
as the primary school was the development of business conditions of the
sixteenth century. The normal school arose because of the necessity for
training teachers, with the idea partly of professional drill and partly
that of culture.

Without going more into detail, we have some eight different parts of
the school system as represented on the chart, all of which arose
historically at different times, having different ideals in view, and
consequently different methods. I do not wish to suggest that all of the
isolation, all of the separation, that has existed in the past between
the different parts of the school system still persists. One must,
however, recognize that they have never yet been welded into one complete
whole. The great problem in education on the administrative side is how
to unite these different parts.

Consider the training schools for teachers—the normal schools. These
occupy at present a somewhat anomalous position, intermediate between
the high school and the college, requiring the high-school preparation,
and covering a certain amount of college work. They are isolated from
the higher subject-matter of scholarship, since, upon the whole, their
object has been to train persons _how_ to teach, rather than _what_ to
teach; while, if we go to the college, we find the other half of this
isolation—learning _what_ to teach, with almost a contempt for methods
of teaching. The college is shut off from contact with children and
youth. Its members, to a great extent, away from home and forgetting
their own childhood, become eventually teachers with a large amount of
subject-matter at command, and little knowledge of how this is related to
the minds of those to whom it is to be taught. In this division between
what to teach and how to teach, each side suffers from the separation.

It is interesting to follow out the interrelation between primary,
grammar, and high schools. The elementary school has crowded up and taken
many subjects previously studied in the old New England grammar school.
The high school has pushed its subjects down. Latin and algebra have been
put in the upper grades, so that the seventh and eighth grades are, after
all, about all that is left of the old grammar school. They are a sort of
amorphous composite, being partly a place where children go on learning
what they already have learned (to read, write, and figure), and partly a
place of preparation for the high school. The name in some parts of New
England for these upper grades was “Intermediate School.” The term was a
happy one; the work was simply intermediate between something that had
been and something that was going to be, having no special meaning on its
own account.

Just as the parts are separated, so do the ideals differ—moral
development, practical utility, general culture, discipline, and
professional training. These aims are each especially represented in
some distinct part of the system of education; and, with the growing
interaction of the parts, each is supposed to afford a certain amount
of culture, discipline, and utility. But the lack of fundamental unity
is witnessed in the fact that one study is still considered good for
discipline, and another for culture; some parts of arithmetic, for
example, for discipline and others for use; literature for culture;
grammar for discipline; geography partly for utility, partly for culture;
and so on. The unity of education is dissipated, and the studies become
centrifugal; so much of this study to secure this end, so much of that to
secure another, until the whole becomes a sheer compromise and patchwork
between contending aims and disparate studies. The great problem in
education on the administrative side is to secure the unity of the whole,
in the place of a sequence of more or less unrelated and overlapping
parts, and thus to reduce the waste arising from friction, reduplication,
and transitions that are not properly bridged.

[Illustration: Chart II.]

In this second symbolic diagram (II) I wish to suggest that really the
only way to unite the parts of the system is to unite each to life. We
can get only an artificial unity so long as we confine our gaze to the
school system itself. We must look at it as part of the larger whole of
social life. This block (A) in the center represents the school system as
a whole. (1) At one side we have the home, and the two arrows represent
the free interplay of influences, materials, and ideas between the home
life and that of the school. (2) Below we have the relation to the
natural environment, the great field of geography in the widest sense.
The school building has about it a natural environment. It ought to be in
a garden, and the children from the garden would be led on to surrounding
fields, and then into the wider country, with all its facts and forces.
(3) Above is represented business life, and the necessity for free play
between the school and the needs and forces of industry. (4) On the other
side is the university proper, with its various phases, its laboratories,
its resources in the way of libraries, museums, and professional schools.

From the standpoint of the child, the great waste in the school comes
from his inability to utilize the experiences he gets outside the school
in any complete and free way within the school itself; while, on the
other hand, he is unable to apply in daily life what he is learning at
school. That is the isolation of the school—its isolation from life. When
the child gets into the schoolroom he has to put out of his mind a large
part of the ideas, interests, and activities that predominate in his home
and neighborhood. So the school, being unable to utilize this everyday
experience, sets painfully to work, on another tack and by a variety of
means, to arouse in the child an interest in school studies. While I was
visiting in the city of Moline a few years ago, the superintendent told
me that they found many children every year who were surprised to learn
that the Mississippi river in the textbook had anything to do with the
stream of water flowing past their homes. The geography being simply a
matter of the schoolroom, it is more or less of an awakening to many
children to find that the whole thing is nothing but a more formal and
definite statement of the facts which they see, feel, and touch every
day. When we think that we all live on the earth, that we live in an
atmosphere, that our lives are touched at every point by the influences
of the soil, flora, and fauna, by considerations of light and heat, and
then think of what the school study of geography has been, we have a
typical idea of the gap existing between the everyday experiences of
the child and the isolated material supplied in such large measure in
the school. This is but an instance, and one upon which most of us may
reflect long before we take the present artificiality of the school as
other than a matter of course or necessity.

Though there should be organic connection between the school and business
life, it is not meant that the school is to prepare the child for any
particular business, but that there should be a natural connection
of the everyday life of the child with the business environment
about him, and that it is the affair of the school to clarify and
liberalize this connection, to bring it to consciousness, not by
introducing special studies, like commercial geography and arithmetic,
but by keeping alive the ordinary bonds of relation. The subject of
compound-business-partnership is probably not in many of the arithmetics
nowadays, though it was there not a generation ago, for the makers of
textbooks said that if they left out anything they could not sell their
books. This compound-business-partnership originated as far back as
the sixteenth century. The joint-stock company had not been invented,
and as large commerce with the Indies and Americas grew up, it was
necessary to have an accumulation of capital with which to handle it.
One man said, “I will put in this amount of money for six months,” and
another, “So much for two years,” and so on. Thus by joining together
they got money enough to float their commercial enterprises. Naturally,
then, “compound partnership” was taught in the schools. The joint-stock
company was invented; compound partnership disappeared, but the problems
relating to it stayed in the arithmetics for two hundred years. They
were kept after they had ceased to have practical utility, for the sake
of mental discipline—they were “such hard problems, you know.” A great
deal of what is now in the arithmetics under the head of percentage is
of the same nature. Children of twelve and thirteen years of age go
through gain and loss calculations, and various forms of bank discount so
complicated that the bankers long ago dispensed with them. And when it is
pointed out that business is not done this way, we hear again of “mental
discipline.” And yet there are plenty of real connections between the
experience of children and business conditions which need to be utilized
and illuminated. The child should study his commercial arithmetic and
geography, not as isolated things by themselves, but in their reference
to his social environment. The youth needs to become acquainted with the
bank as a factor in modern life, with what it does, and how it does it;
and then relevant arithmetical processes would have some meaning—quite
in contradistinction to the time-absorbing and mind-killing examples in
percentage, partial payments, etc., found in all our arithmetics.

The connection with the university, as indicated in this chart, I need
not dwell upon. I simply wish to indicate that there ought to be a free
interaction between all the parts of the school system. There is much of
utter triviality of subject-matter in elementary and secondary education.
When we investigate it, we find that it is full of facts taught that
are not facts, which have to be unlearned later on. Now, this happens
because the “lower” parts of our system are not, in vital connection
with the “higher.” The university or college, in its idea, is a place
of research, where investigation is going on: a place of libraries and
museums, where the best resources of the past are gathered, maintained,
and organized. It is, however, as true in the school as in the university
that the spirit of inquiry can be got only through and with the attitude
of inquiry. The pupil must learn what has meaning, what enlarges his
horizon, instead of mere trivialities. He must become acquainted with
truths, instead of things that were regarded as such fifty years ago or
that are taken as interesting by the misunderstanding of a partially
educated teacher. It is difficult to see how these ends can be reached
except as the most advanced part of the educational system is in complete
interaction with the most rudimentary.

The next chart (III) is an enlargement of the second. The school building
has swelled out, so to speak, the surrounding environment remaining the
same, the home, the garden and country, the relation to business life
and the university. The object is to show what the school must become to
get out of its isolation and secure the organic connection with social
life of which we have been speaking. It is not our architect’s plan for
the school building that we hope to have; but it is a diagrammatic
representation of the idea which we want embodied in the school building.
On the lower side you see the dining-room and the kitchen, at the top
the wood and metal shops and the textile room for sewing and weaving.
The center represents the manner in which all come together in the
library; that is to say, in a collection of the intellectual resources
of all kinds that throw light upon the practical work, that give it
meaning and liberal value. If the four corners represent practice, the
interior represents the theory of the practical activities. In other
words, the object of these forms of practice in the school is not found
chiefly in themselves, or in the technical skill of cooks, seamstresses,
carpenters, and masons, but in their connection, on the social side,
with the life without; while on the individual side they respond to the
child’s need of action, of expression, of desire to do something, to be
constructive and creative, instead of simply passive and conforming.
Their great significance is that they keep the balance between the social
and individual sides—the chart symbolizing particularly the connection
with the social. Here on one side is the home. How naturally the lines
of connection play back and forth between the home and the kitchen and
the textile room of the school! The child can carry over what he learns
in the home and utilize it in the school; and the things learned in the
school he applies at home. These are the two great things in breaking
down isolation, in getting connection—to have the child come to school
with all the experience he has got outside the school, and to leave it
with something to be immediately used in his everyday life. The child
comes to the traditional school with a healthy body and a more or less
unwilling mind, though, in fact, he does not bring both his body and mind
with him; he has to leave his mind behind, because there is no way to
use it in the school. If he had a purely abstract mind, he could bring
it to school with him, but his is a concrete one, interested in concrete
things, and unless these things get over into school life he cannot take
his mind with him. What we want is to have the child come to school with
a whole mind and a whole body, and leave school with a fuller mind and an
even healthier body. And speaking of the body suggests that, while there
is no gymnasium in these diagrams, the active life carried on in its four
corners brings with it constant physical exercise, while our gymnasium
proper will deal with the particular weaknesses of children and their
correction, and will attempt more consciously to build up the thoroughly
sound body as the abode of the sound mind.

[Illustration: Chart III.]

That the dining-room and kitchen connect with the country and its
processes and products it is hardly necessary to say. Cooking may be so
taught that it has no connection with country life and with the sciences
that find their unity in geography. Perhaps it generally has been taught
without these connections being really made. But all the materials that
come into the kitchen have their origin in the country; they come from
the soil, are nurtured through the influences of light and water, and
represent a great variety of local environments. Through this connection,
extending from the garden into the larger world, the child has his most
natural introduction to the study of the sciences. Where did these things
grow? What was necessary to their growth? What their relation to the
soil? What the effect of different climatic conditions? and so on. We all
know what the old-fashioned botany was: partly collecting flowers that
were pretty, pressing and mounting them; partly pulling these flowers to
pieces and giving technical names to the different parts, finding all the
different leaves, naming all their different shapes and forms. It was a
study of plants without any reference to the soil, to the country, or to
growth. In contrast, a real study of plants takes them in their natural
environment and in their uses as well, not simply as food, but in all
their adaptations to the social life of man. Cooking becomes as well a
most natural introduction to the study of chemistry, giving the child
here also something which he can at once bring to bear upon his daily
experience. I once heard a very intelligent woman say that she could
not understand how science could be taught to little children, because
she did not see how they could understand atoms and molecules. In other
words, since she did not see how highly abstract facts could be presented
to the child independently of daily experience, she could not understand
how science could be taught at all. Before we smile at this remark, we
need to ask ourselves if she is alone in her assumption, or whether it
simply formulates the principle of almost all our school practice.

The same relations with the outside world are found in the carpentry
and the textile shops. They connect with the country, as the source of
their materials, with physics, as the science of applying energy, with
commerce and distribution, with art in the development of architecture
and decoration. They have also an intimate connection with the university
on the side of its technological and engineering schools; with the
laboratory and its scientific methods and results.

To go back to the square which is marked the library (Chart III, A):
if you imagine rooms half in the four corners and half in the library,
you will get the idea of the recitation room. That is the place where
the children bring the experiences, the problems, the questions,
the particular facts which they have found, and discuss them so that
new light may be thrown upon them, particularly new light from the
experience of others, the accumulated wisdom of the world—symbolized in
the library. Here is the organic relation of theory and practice; the
child not simply doing things, but getting also the _idea_ of what he
does; getting from the start some intellectual conception that enters
into his practice and enriches it; while every idea finds, directly or
indirectly, some application in experience and has some effect upon life.
This, I need hardly say, fixes the position of the “book” or reading in
education. Harmful as a substitute for experience, it is all-important in
interpreting and expanding experience.

The other chart (IV) illustrates precisely the same idea. It gives the
symbolic upper story of this ideal school. In the upper corners are the
laboratories; in the lower corners are the studios for art work, both
the graphic and auditory arts. The questions, the chemical and physical
problems, arising in the kitchen and shop, are taken to the laboratories
to be worked out. For instance, this past week one of the older groups
of children doing practical work in weaving, which involved the use of
the spinning wheel, worked out the diagrams of the direction of forces
concerned in treadle and wheel, and the ratio of velocities between
wheel and spindle. In the same manner, the plants with which the child
has to do in cooking afford the basis for a concrete interest in botany
and may be taken and studied by themselves. In a certain school in Boston
science work for months was centered in the growth of the cotton plant,
and yet something new was brought in every day. We hope to do similar
work with all the types of plants that furnish materials for sewing and
weaving. These examples will suggest, I hope, the relation which the
laboratories bear to the rest of the school.

[Illustration: Chart IV.]

The drawing and music, or the graphic and auditory arts, represent the
culmination, the idealization, the highest point of refinement of all
the work carried on. I think everybody who has not a purely literary
view of the subject recognizes that genuine art grows out of the work of
the artisan. The art of the Renaissance was great because it grew out of
the manual arts of life. It did not spring up in a separate atmosphere,
however ideal, but carried on to their spiritual meaning processes
found in homely and everyday forms of life. The school should observe
this relationship. The merely artisan side is narrow, but the mere art,
taken by itself, and grafted on from without, tends to become forced,
empty, sentimental. I do not mean, of course, that all art work must be
correlated in detail to the other work of the school, but simply that a
spirit of union gives vitality to the art and depth and richness to the
other work. All art involves physical organs—the eye and hand, the ear
and voice; and yet it is something more than the mere technical skill
required by the organs of expression. It involves an idea, a thought, a
spiritual rendering of things; and yet it is other than any number of
ideas by themselves. It is a living union of thought and the instrument
of expression. This union is symbolized by saying that in the ideal
school the art work might be considered to be that of the shops, passed
through the alembic of library and museum into action again.

Take the textile room as an illustration of such a synthesis. I am
talking about a future school, the one we hope, some time, to have. The
basal fact in that room is that it is a workshop, doing actual things
in sewing, spinning, and weaving. The children come into immediate
connection with the materials, with various fabrics of silk, cotton,
linen, and wool. Information at once appears in connection with these
materials; their origin, history, their adaptation to particular uses,
and the machines of various kinds by which the raw materials are
utilized. Discipline arises in dealing with the problems involved, both
theoretical and practical. Whence does the culture arise? Partly from
seeing all these things reflected through the medium of their scientific
and historic conditions and associations, whereby the child learns to
appreciate them as technical achievements, as thoughts precipitated in
action; and partly because of the introduction of the art idea into
the room itself. In the ideal school there would be something of this
sort: first, a complete industrial museum, giving samples of materials
in various stages of manufacture, and the implements, from the simplest
to the most complex used in dealing with them; then a collection of
photographs and pictures illustrating the landscapes and the scenes
from which the materials come, their native homes, and their places
of manufacture. Such a collection would be a vivid and continual
lesson in the synthesis of art, science, and industry. There would be,
also, samples of the more perfect forms of textile work, as Italian,
French, Japanese, and Oriental. There would be objects illustrating
motives of design and decoration which have entered into production.
Literature would contribute its part in its idealized representation
of the world-industries, as the Penelope in the _Odyssey_—a classic in
literature because the character is an adequate embodiment of a certain
industrial phase of social life. So, from Homer down to the present
time, there is a continuous procession of related facts which have been
translated into terms of art. Music lends its share, from the Scotch song
at the wheel to the spinning song of Marguerite, or of Wagner’s Senta.
The shop becomes a pictured museum, appealing to the eye. It would have
not only materials—beautiful woods and designs—but would give a synopsis
of the historical evolution of architecture in its drawings and pictures.

Thus I have attempted to indicate how the school may be connected
with life so that the experience gained by the child in a familiar,
commonplace way is carried over and made use of there, and what the
child learns in the school is carried back and applied in everyday life,
making the school an organic whole, instead of a composite of isolated
parts. The isolation of studies as well as of parts of the school system
disappears. Experience has its geographical aspect, its artistic and its
literary, its scientific and its historical sides. All studies arise from
aspects of the one earth and the one life lived upon it. We do not have
a series of stratified earths, one of which is mathematical, another
physical, another historical, and so on. We should not be able to live
very long in any one taken by itself. We live in a world where all sides
are bound together. All studies grow out of relations in the one great
common world. When the child lives in varied but concrete and active
relationship to this common world, his studies are naturally unified. It
will no longer be a problem to correlate studies. The teacher will not
have to resort to all sorts of devices to weave a little arithmetic into
the history lesson, and the like. Relate the school to life, and all
studies are of necessity correlated.

Moreover, if the school is related as a whole to life as a whole, its
various aims and ideals—culture, discipline, information, utility—cease
to be variants, for one of which we must select one study and for another
another. The growth of the child in the direction of social capacity and
service, his larger and more vital union with life, becomes the unifying
aim; and discipline, culture, and information fall into place as phases
of this growth.

I wish to say one word more about the relationship of our particular
school to the University. The problem is to unify, to organize,
education, to bring all its various factors together, through putting it
as a whole into organic union with everyday life. That which lies back
of the pedagogical school of the University is the necessity of working
out something to serve as a model for such unification, extending from
work beginning with the four-year-old child up through the graduate
work of the University. Already we have much help from the University
in scientific work planned, sometimes even in detail, by heads of the
departments. The graduate student comes to us with his researches and
methods, suggesting ideas and problems. The library and museum are at
hand. We want to bring all things educational together; to break down
the barriers that divide the education of the little child from the
instruction of the maturing youth; to identify the lower and the higher
education, so that it shall be demonstrated to the eye that there is no
lower and higher, but simply education.

Speaking more especially with reference to the pedagogical side of the
work: I suppose the oldest university chair of pedagogy in our country
is about twenty years old—that of the University of Michigan, founded
in the latter seventies. But there are only one or two that have tried
to make a connection between theory and practice. They teach for the
most part by theory, by lectures, by reference to books, rather than
through the actual work of teaching itself. At Columbia, through the
Teachers College, there is an extensive and close connection between the
University and the training of teachers. Something has been done in one
or two other places along the same line. We want an even more intimate
union here, so that the University shall put all its resources at the
disposition of the elementary school, contributing to the evolution of
valuable subject-matter and right method, while the school in turn will
be a laboratory in which the student of education sees theories and ideas
demonstrated, tested, criticized, enforced, and the evolution of new
truths. We want the school in its relation to the University to be a
working model of a unified education.

A word as to the relation of the school to educational interests
generally. I heard once that the adoption of a certain method in use in
our school was objected to by a teacher on this ground: “You know that
it is an experimental school. They do not work under the same conditions
that we are subject to.” Now, the purpose of performing an experiment is
that other people need not experiment; at least need not experiment so
much, may have something definite and positive to go by. An experiment
demands particularly favorable conditions in order that results may be
reached both freely and securely. It has to work unhampered, with all
the needed resources at command. Laboratories lie back of all the great
business enterprises of today, back of every great factory, every railway
and steamship system. Yet the laboratory is not a business enterprise;
it does not aim to secure for itself the conditions of business life,
nor does the commercial undertaking repeat the laboratory. There is a
difference between working out and testing a new truth, or a new method,
and applying it on a wide scale, making it available for the mass of men,
making it commercial. But the first thing is to discover the truth, to
afford all necessary facilities, for this is the most practical thing
in the world in the long run. We do not expect to have other schools
literally imitate what we do. A working model is not something to be
copied; it is to afford a demonstration of the feasibility of the
principle, and of the methods which make it feasible. So (to come back
to our own point) we want here to work out the problem of the unity, the
organization of the school system in itself, and to do this by relating
it so intimately to life as to demonstrate the possibility and necessity
of such organization for all education.




THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION




