VIII

THE AIM OF HISTORY IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION


If history be regarded as just the record of the past, it is hard to
see any grounds for claiming that it should play any large rôle in the
curriculum of elementary education. The past is the past, and the dead
may be safely left to bury its dead. There are too many urgent demands in
the present, too many calls over the threshold of the future, to permit
the child to become deeply immersed in what is forever gone by. Not so
when history is considered as an account of the forces and forms of
social life. Social life we have always with us; the distinction of past
and present is indifferent to it. Whether it was lived just here or just
there is a matter of slight moment. It is life for all that; it shows
the motives which draw men together and push them apart, and depicts
what is desirable and what is hurtful. Whatever history may be for the
scientific historian, for the educator it must be an indirect sociology—a
study of society which lays bare its process of becoming and its modes of
organization. Existing society is both too complex and too close to the
child to be studied. He finds no clues into its labyrinth of detail and
can mount no eminence whence to get a perspective of arrangement.

If the aim of historical instruction is to enable the child to appreciate
the values of social life, to see in imagination the forces which favor
and let men’s effective co-operation with one another, to understand
the sorts of character that help on and that hold back, the essential
thing in its presentation is to make it moving, dynamic. History must be
presented, not as an accumulation of results or effects, a mere statement
of what happened, but as a forceful, acting thing. The motives—that is,
the motors—must stand out. To study history is not to amass information,
but to use information in constructing a vivid picture of how and why men
did thus and so; achieved their successes and came to their failures.

When history is conceived as dynamic, as moving, its economic and
industrial aspects are emphasized. These are but technical terms which
express the problem with which humanity is unceasingly engaged; how to
live, how to master and use nature so as to make it tributary to the
enrichment of human life. The great advances in civilization have come
through those manifestations of intelligence which have lifted man from
his precarious subjection to nature, and revealed to him how he may make
its forces co-operate with his own purposes. The social world in which
the child now lives is so rich and full that it is not easy to see how
much it cost, how much effort and thought lie back of it. Man has a
tremendous equipment ready at hand. The child may be led to translate
these ready-made resources into fluid terms; he may be led to see man
face to face with nature, without inherited capital, without tools,
without manufactured materials. And, step by step, he may follow the
processes by which man recognized the needs of his situation, thought out
the weapons and instruments that enable him to cope with them; and may
learn how these new resources opened new horizons of growth and created
new problems. The industrial history of man is not a materialistic or
merely utilitarian affair. It is a matter of intelligence. Its record
is the record of how man learned to think, to think to some effect, to
transform the conditions of life so that life itself became a different
thing. It is an ethical record as well; the account of the conditions
which men have patiently wrought out to serve their ends.

The question of how human beings live, indeed, represents the dominant
interest with which the child approaches historic material. It is this
point of view which brings those who worked in the past close to the
beings with whom he is daily associated, and confers upon him the gift of
sympathetic penetration.

The child who is interested in the way in which men lived, the tools
they had to do with, the new inventions they made, the transformations
of life that arose from the power and leisure thus gained, is eager to
repeat like processes in his own action, to remake utensils, to reproduce
processes, to rehandle materials. Since he understands their problems and
their successes only by seeing what obstacles and what resources they
had from nature, the child is interested in field and forest, ocean and
mountain, plant and animal. By building up a conception of the natural
environment in which lived the people he is studying, he gets his hold
upon their lives. This reproduction he cannot make excepting as he gains
acquaintance with the natural forces and forms with which he is himself
surrounded. The interest in history gives a more human coloring, a
wider significance, to his own study of nature. His knowledge of nature
lends point and accuracy to his study of history. This is the natural
“correlation” of history and science.

This same end, a deepening appreciation of social life, decides the place
of the biographic element in historical instruction. That historical
material appeals to the child most completely and vividly when presented
in individual form, when summed up in the lives and deeds of some heroic
character, there can be no doubt. Yet it is possible to use biographies
so that they become a collection of mere stories, interesting, possibly,
to the point of sensationalism, but yet bringing the child no nearer to
comprehension of social life. This happens when the individual who is
the hero of the tale is isolated from his social environment; when the
child is not brought to feel the social situations which evoked his acts
and the social progress to which his deeds contributed. If biography
is presented as a dramatic summary of social needs and achievements,
if the child’s imagination pictures the social defects and problems
that clamored for the man and the ways in which the individual met the
emergency, then the biography is an organ of social study.

A consciousness of the social aim of history prevents any tendency to
swamp history in myth, fairy story, and merely literary renderings. I
cannot avoid the feeling that much as the Herbartian school has done
to enrich the elementary curriculum in the direction of history, it
has often inverted the true relationship existing between history and
literature. In a certain sense the motif of American colonial history
and of De Foe’s _Robinson Crusoe_ are the same. Both represent man
who has achieved civilization, who has attained a certain maturity of
thought, who has developed ideals and means of action, but suddenly
thrown back upon his own resources, having to cope with a raw and often
hostile nature, and to regain success by sheer intelligence, energy,
and persistence of character. But when _Robinson Crusoe_ supplies the
material for the curriculum of the third- or fourth-grade child, are
we not putting the cart before the horse? Why not give the child the
reality with its much larger sweep, its intenser forces, its more vivid
and lasting value for life, using the _Robinson Crusoe_ as an imaginative
idealization in a particular case of the same sort of problems and
activities? Again, whatever may be the worth of the study of savage life
in general, and of the North American Indians in particular, why should
that be approached circuitously through the medium of _Hiawatha_, instead
of at first hand? employing indeed the poem to furnish the idealized and
culminating touches to a series of conditions and struggles which the
child has previously realized in more specific form. Either the life of
the Indian presents some permanent questions and factors in social life,
or it has next to no place in a scheme of instruction. If it has such
a value, this should be made to stand out on its own account, instead
of being lost in the very refinement and beauty of a purely literary
presentation.

The same end, the understanding of character and social relations
in their natural dependence, enables us, I think, to decide upon
the importance to be attached to chronological order in historical
instruction. Considerable stress has of late been laid upon the supposed
necessity of following the development of civilization through the
successive steps in which it actually took place—beginning with the
valleys of the Euphrates and the Nile, and coming on down through Greece,
Rome, etc. The point urged is that the present depends upon the past and
each phase of the past upon a prior past.

We are here introduced to a conflict between the logical and
psychological interpretation of history. If the aim be an appreciation of
what social life is and how it goes on, then, certainly, the child must
deal with what is near in spirit, not with the remote. The difficulty
with the Babylonian or Egyptian life is not so much its remoteness in
time, as its remoteness from the present interests and aims of social
life. It does not simplify enough and does not generalize enough; or,
at least, it does not do so in the right way. It does it by omission
of what is significant now, rather than by presenting these factors
arranged on a lower scale. Its salient features are hard to get at and
to understand, even by the specialist. It undoubtedly presents factors
which contributed to later life, and which modified the course of events
in the stream of time. But the child has not arrived at a point where he
can appreciate abstract causes and specialized contributions. What he
needs is a picture of typical relations, conditions, and activities. In
this respect, there is much of prehistoric life which is much closer to
him than the complicated and artificial life of Babylon or of Egypt. When
a child is capable of appreciating institutions, he is capable of seeing
what special institutional idea each historic nation stands for, and what
factor it has contributed to the present complex of institutions. But
this period arrives only when the child is beginning to be capable of
abstracting causes in other realms as well; in other words, when he is
approaching the time of secondary education.

In this general scheme three periods or phases are recognized: first
comes the generalized and simplified history—history which is hardly
history at all in the local or chronological sense, but which aims at
giving the child insight into, and sympathy with, a variety of social
activities. This period includes the work of the six-year-old children
in studying typical occupations of people in the country and city at
present; of the seven-year-old children in working out the evolution
of inventions and their effects upon life, and of the eight-year-old
children in dealing with the great movements of migration, exploration,
and discovery which have brought the whole round world into human ken.
The work of the first two years is evidently quite independent of any
particular people or any particular person—that is, of historical data
in the strict sense of the term. At the same time, plenty of scope is
provided through dramatization for the introduction of the individual
factor. The account of the great explorers and the discoverers serves to
make the transition to what is local and specific, that which depends
upon certain specified persons who lived at certain specified places and
times.

This introduces us to the second period where local conditions
and the definite activities of particular bodies of people become
prominent—corresponding to the child’s growth in power of dealing with
limited and positive fact. Since Chicago, since the United States,
are localities with which the child can, by the nature of the case,
most effectively deal, the material of the next three years is derived
directly and indirectly from this source. Here, again, the third year
is a transitional year, taking up the connections of American life with
European. By this time the child should be ready to deal, not with social
life in general, or even with the social life with which he is most
familiar, but with certain thoroughly differentiated and, so to speak,
peculiar types of social life; with the special significance of each
and the particular contribution it has made to the whole world-history.
Accordingly, in the next period the chronological order is followed,
beginning with the ancient world about the Mediterranean and coming
down again through European history to the peculiar and differentiating
factors of American history.

The program is not presented as the only one meeting the problem, but
as a contribution; the outcome, not of thought, but of considerable
experimenting and shifting of subjects from year to year, to the problem
of giving material which takes vital hold upon the child and at the same
time leads on, step by step, to more thorough and accurate knowledge of
both the principles and facts of social life, and makes a preparation for
later specialized historic studies.

                          PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.



