VI

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF OCCUPATIONS


By occupation is not meant any kind of “busy work” or exercises that may
be given to a child in order to keep him out of mischief or idleness
when seated at his desk. By occupation I mean a mode of activity on
the part of the child which reproduces, or runs parallel to, some form
of work carried on in social life. In the University Elementary School
these occupations are represented by the shopwork with wood and tools; by
cooking, sewing, and by the textile work herewith reported upon.

The fundamental point in the psychology of an occupation is that it
maintains a balance between the intellectual and the practical phases
of experience. As an occupation it is active or motor; it finds
expression through the physical organs—the eyes, hands, etc. But it also
involves continual observation of materials, and continual planning
and reflection, in order that the practical or executive side may be
successfully carried on. Occupation as thus conceived must, therefore, be
carefully distinguished from work which educates primarily for a trade.
It differs because its end is in itself; in the growth that comes from
the continual interplay of ideas and their embodiment in action, not in
external utility.

It is possible to carry on this type of work in other than trade schools,
so that the entire emphasis falls upon the manual or physical side. In
such cases the work is reduced to a mere routine or custom, and its
educational value is lost. This is the inevitable tendency wherever,
in manual training for instance, the mastery of certain tools, or the
production of certain objects, is made the primary end, and the child is
not given, wherever possible, intellectual responsibility for selecting
the materials and instruments that are most fit, and given an opportunity
to think out his own model and plan of work, led to perceive his own
errors, and find out how to correct them—that is, of course, within
the range of his capacities. So far as the external result is held in
view, rather than the mental and moral states and growth involved in
the process of reaching the result, the work may be called manual, but
cannot rightly be termed an occupation. Of course the tendency of all
mere habit, routine, or custom is to result in what is unconscious and
mechanical. That of occupation is to put the maximum of consciousness
into whatever is done.

This enables us to interpret the stress laid (_a_) upon personal
experimenting, planning, and reinventing in connection with the textile
work, and (_b_) its parallelism with lines of historical development.
The first requires the child to be mentally quick and alert at every
point in order that he may do the outward work properly. The second
enriches and deepens the work performed by saturating it with values
suggested from the social life which it recapitulates.

Occupations, so considered, furnish the ideal occasions for both
sense-training and discipline in thought. The weakness of ordinary
lessons in observation, calculated to train the senses, is that they have
no outlet beyond themselves, and hence no necessary motive. Now, in the
natural life of the individual and the race there is always a reason for
sense-observation. There is always some need, coming from an end to be
reached, that makes one look about to discover and discriminate whatever
will assist him. Normal sensations operate as clues, as aids, as stimuli,
in directing activity in what has to be done; they are not ends in
themselves. Separated from real needs and motives, sense-training becomes
a mere gymnastic and easily degenerates into acquiring what are hardly
more than mere knacks or tricks in observation, or else mere excitement
of the sense organs.

The same principle applies in normal _thinking_. It also does not occur
for its own sake, nor end in itself. It arises from the need of meeting
some difficulty, in reflecting upon the best way of overcoming it, and
thus leads to planning, to projecting mentally the result to be reached,
and deciding upon the steps necessary and their serial order. This
concrete logic of action long precedes the logic of pure speculation or
abstract investigation, and through the mental habits that it forms is
the best of preparations for the latter.

Another educational point upon which the psychology of occupations
throws helpful light is the place of interest in school work. One of the
objections regularly brought against giving in school work any large
or positive place to the child’s interest is the impossibility on such
a basis of proper selection. The child, it is said, has all kinds of
interests, good, bad, and indifferent. It is necessary to decide between
the interests that are really important and those that are trivial;
between those that are helpful and those that are harmful; between those
that are transitory or mark immediate excitement, and those which endure
and are permanently influential. It would seem as if we had to go beyond
interest to get any basis for using interest.

Now, there can be no doubt that occupation work possesses a strong
interest for the child. A glance into any school where such work is
carried on will give sufficient evidence of this fact. Outside of the
school, a large portion of the children’s plays are simply more or less
miniature and haphazard attempts at reproducing social occupations.
There are certain reasons for believing that the type of interest which
springs up along with these occupations is of a thoroughly healthy,
permanent, and really educative sort; and that by giving a larger place
to occupations we should secure an excellent, perhaps the very best, way
of making an appeal to the child’s spontaneous interest, and yet have, at
the same time, some guaranty that we are not dealing with what is merely
pleasure-giving, exciting, or transient.

In the first place, every interest grows out of some instinct or
some habit that in turn is finally based upon an original instinct.
It does not follow that all instincts are of equal value, or that we
do not inherit many instincts which need transformation, rather than
satisfaction, in order to be useful in life. But the instincts which
find their conscious outlet and expression in occupation are bound to
be of an exceedingly fundamental and permanent type. The activities of
life are of necessity directed to bringing the materials and forces of
nature under the control of our purposes; of making them tributary to
ends of life. Men have had to work in order to live. In and through
their work they have mastered nature, they have protected and enriched
the conditions of their own life, they have been awakened to the sense
of their own powers—have been led to invent, to plan, and to rejoice
in the acquisition of skill. In a rough way, all occupations may be
classified as gathering about man’s fundamental relations to the world in
which he lives through getting food to maintain life; securing clothing
and shelter to protect and ornament it, and thus, finally, to provide a
permanent home in which all the higher and more spiritual interests may
center. It is hardly unreasonable to suppose that interests which have
such a history behind them must be of the worthy sort.

However, these interests as they develop in the child not only
recapitulate past important activities of the race, but reproduce those
of the child’s present environment. He continually sees his elders
engaged in such pursuits. He daily has to do with things which are the
results of just such occupations. He comes in contact with facts that
have no meaning, except in reference to them. Take these things out of
the present social life and see how little would remain—and this not
only on the material side, but as regards intellectual, aesthetic, and
moral activities, for these are largely and necessarily bound up with
occupations. The child’s instinctive interests in this direction are,
therefore, constantly reinforced by what he sees, feels, and hears going
on around him. Suggestions along this line are continually coming to
him; motives are awakened; his energies are stirred to action. Again,
it is not unreasonable to suppose that interests which are touched so
constantly, and on so many sides, belong to the worthy and enduring type.

In the third place, one of the objections made against the principle
of interest in education is that it tends to disintegration of mental
economy by constantly stirring up the child in this way or that,
destroying continuity and thoroughness. But an occupation (such as the
textile one herewith reported on) is of necessity a continuous thing. It
lasts, not only for days, but for months and years. It represents, not
a stirring of isolated and superficial energies, but rather a steady,
continuous organization of power along certain general lines. The same
is true, of course, of any other form of occupation, such as shopwork
with tools, or as cooking. The occupations articulate a vast variety of
impulses, otherwise separate and spasmodic, into a consistent skeleton
with a firm backbone. It may well be doubted whether, wholly apart from
some such regular and progressive modes of action, extending as cores
throughout the entire school, it would be permanently safe to give the
principle of “interest” any large place in school work.




THE DEVELOPMENT OF ATTENTION




