CHAPTER IV

PYTHAGORAS

    Virtue and health and all good and God are a harmony.--Pythagoras.

    One is the principle of all.--Philolaus the Pythagorean.

    All things that are known have number.--_Id._

    The principles of all virtue are three, knowledge, power, and
    choice. Knowledge is like sight, whereby we contemplate and judge
    things; power is like bodily strength, whereby we endure and adhere
    to things; choice is like hands to the soul, whereby we stretch out
    and lay hold of things.--Theages the Pythagorean.


The Doric discipline, even in Sparta, where it could exhibit its
character most freely, produced merely soldiers and not free citizens or
cultivated men. It was, nevertheless, in its essential features, the
Hellenic ideal, and numerous attempts were made to remedy its defects
and to give it permanence, by connecting it with higher than mere local
and aristocratic interests. One of the earliest and most noteworthy of
these was made by Pythagoras.

This extraordinary personage appears to have been born in the island of
Samos in the first quarter of the sixth century B.C. Though he was born
among Ionians, his family appears to have been Achaian and, to some
extent, Pelasgian (Tyrrhenian), having emigrated from Phlius in the
Argolid. After distinguishing himself in Ionia, he emigrated in middle
life to Magna Græcia, and took up his abode in the Achaian colony of
Croton, then a rich and flourishing city. The cause of his emigration
seems to have been the tyranny of Polycrates, which apparently imparted
to him a prejudice against Ionic tendencies in general. Whether he
derived any part of his famous learning from visits to Egypt, Phœnicia,
Babylonia, etc., as was asserted in later times, is not clear. It is not
improbable that he visited Egypt, and there is good reason for believing
that he became acquainted with Phœnician theology through Pherecydes of
Syros. That he was an omnivorous student is attested by his
contemporary, Heraclitus. He was undoubtedly affected by the physical
theories current in his time in Ionia, while he plainly drew his
political and ethical ideas from Sparta or Crete.

Of his activity in Ionia we know little; but we may perhaps conclude
that it was of the same nature as that which he afterwards displayed in
Italy. Here he appeared in the triple capacity of theologian, ethical
teacher, and scientist. His chief interest for us lies in the fact that
he was apparently the first man in Greece, and, indeed, in the western
world, who sought to establish an ethical institution apart from the
State. In this respect he bears a strong resemblance to the prophet
Isaiah, who may be said to have originated the idea of a Church (see p.
133). Pythagoras' aim seems to have been to gather round him a body of
disciples who should endeavor to lead a perfect life, based upon certain
theological or metaphysical notions, and guided by a rule of almost
monastic strictness. Like other men who have found themselves in the
midst of irreverence, selfishness, and democratic vulgarity and anarchy,
he believed that his time demanded moral discipline, based upon respect
for authority and character, with a firm belief in future retribution,
and inculcated by a careful study of the order and harmony of nature;
and such discipline he strove, with all his might, to impart. Having no
faith in the capacity of the State to be an instrument for his purpose,
he set to work independently of it, and seems to have met with very
marked success, drawing to him many of the best men and women of
Southern Italy. So numerous and powerful, indeed, did his followers
become that they held the balance of power in several cities, and were
able to use it for the enforcement of their own principles. As these
were exceedingly undemocratic, and opposed to the tendencies of the
time, they finally roused bitter opposition, so that the Pythagoreans
were persecuted and attempts made to exterminate them with fire and
sword. In this way their political influence was broken, and their
assemblies suppressed; but the effect of Pythagoras' teaching was not
lost. His followers, scattered abroad throughout the Hellenic world,
carried his precepts and his life-ideal with them. In the following
centuries they found many noble sympathizers--Pindar, Socrates, Plato,
Epicharmus, etc.--and underwent many modifications, until they finally
witnessed a resurrection, in the forms of Neo-Pythagoreanism and
Neo-Platonism, after the Christian era. In these later guises,
Pythagoreanism lost itself in mysticism and contemplation, turning its
followers into inactive ascetics; but in its original form it seems to
have been especially adapted to produce men of vigorous action and
far-sighted practicality. Milo of Croton, the inimitable wrestler;
Archytas of Tarentum, philosopher, mathematician, musician, inventor,
engineer, general, statesman; and Epaminondas, the greatest and noblest
of Theban generals, were professed Pythagoreans.

We might perhaps express the aim of Pythagoras' pedagogical efforts by
the one word HARMONY. Just as he found harmony everywhere in the
physical world, so he strove to introduce the same into the constitution
of the human individual, and into the relations of individuals with each
other. He may perhaps be regarded as the originator of that view of the
world, of men, and of society which makes all good consist in order and
proportion, a view which recommends itself strongly to idealists, and
has given birth to all those social Utopias, whose static perfection
seems to relieve the individual from the burden of responsibility, and
which have been dangled before the eyes of struggling humanity from his
days to ours. According to this view, which had its roots in Greek
thought generally, the aim of education is to find for each individual
his true place and to make him efficient therein. Man is made for order,
and not order for man. He is born into a world of order, as is shown by
the fact that number and proportion are found in everything that is
known. Pythagoras, in his enthusiasm for his principle, carried his
doctrine of numbers to absurd lengths, identifying them with real
things; but this enthusiasm was not without its valuable results, since
it is to Pythagoras and his school that we owe the sciences of geometry
and music. Moreover, experience must have taught him that it is one
thing to propound a theory, another to make it effective in regulating
human relations. In order to accomplish the latter object, he invoked
the aid of divine authority and of the doctrines of metempsychosis and
future retribution. Hence his educational system had a strong religious
cast, which showed itself even outwardly in the dignified demeanor and
quiet self-possession of his followers.

Harmony, then, to be attained by discipline, under religious sanctions,
was the aim of Pythagoras' teaching. Believing, however, that only a
limited number of persons were capable of such harmony, he selected his
pupils with great care, and subjected them to a long novitiate, in which
silence, self-examination, and absolute obedience played a prominent
part. The aim of this was to enable them to overcome impulse,
concentrate attention, and develop reverence, reflection, and
thoughtfulness, the first conditions of all moral and intellectual
excellence. While the first care was directed to their spiritual part,
their bodies were by no means forgotten. Food, clothing, and exercise
were all carefully regulated on hygienic and moral principles.

Regarding the details of Pythagoras' educational system we are not well
informed; but the spirit and tendency of it have been embalmed for us in
the so-called _Golden Words_, which, if not due to the pen of Pythagoras
himself, certainly reach back to very near his time, and contain nothing
at variance with what we otherwise know of his teaching. We insert a
literal version.

THE GOLDEN WORDS.

    The Gods immortal, as by law disposed,
    First venerate, and reverence the oath:
    Then to the noble heroes, and the powers
    Beneath the earth, do homage with just rites.

    Thy parents honor and thy nearest kin,
    And from the rest choose friends on virtue's scale.
    To gentle words and kindly deeds give way,
    Nor hate thy friend for any slight offence.
    Bear all thou canst; for Can dwells nigh to Must.
    These things thus know.

                          What follow learn to rule:
    The belly first, then sleep and lust and wrath.
    Do nothing base with others or alone:
    But most of all thyself in reverence hold.

    Then practise justice both in deed and word,
    Nor let thyself wax thoughtless about aught:
    But know that death's the common lot of all.

    Be not untimely wasteful of thy wealth,
    Like vulgar men, nor yet illiberal.
    In all things moderation answers best.

    Do things that profit thee: think ere thou act.

    Let never sleep thy drowsy eyelids greet,
    Till thou hast pondered each act of the day:
    "Wherein have I transgressed? What have I done?
    What duty shunned?"--beginning from the first,
    Unto the last. Then grieve and fear for what
    Was basely done; but in the good rejoice.

    These things perform; these meditate; these love.
    These in the path of godlike excellence
    Will place thee, yea, by Him who gave our souls
    The number Four, perennial nature's spring!
    But, ere thou act, crave from the gods success.

    These precepts having mastered, thou shalt know
    The system of the never-dying gods
    And dying men, and how from all the rest
    Each thing is sunder'd, and how held in one:
    And thou shalt know, as it is right thou shouldst,
    That nature everywhere is uniform,
    And so shalt neither hope for things that lie
    Beyond all hope, nor fail of any truth.

    But from such food abstain as we have named,
    And, while thou seek'st to purge and free thy soul,
    Use judgment, and reflect on everything,
    Setting o'er all best Thought as charioteer.

    Be glad to gather goods, nor less to lose.

    Of human ills that spring from spirit-powers
    Endure thy part nor peevishly complain.
    Cure what thou canst: 'tis well, and then reflect:
    "Fate never lays too much upon the good."

    Words many, brave and base, assail men's ears.
    Let these not disconcert or trammel thee;
    But when untruth is spoken, meekly yield.

    What next I say in every act observe:
    Let none by word or deed prevail on thee
    To do or say what were not best for thee.
    Think ere thou act, lest foolish things be done;--
    For thoughtless deeds and words the caitiff mark;--
    But strongly do what will not bring regret.
    Do naught thou dost not know; but duly learn.
    So shall thy life with happiness o'erflow.

    Be not neglectful of thy body's health;
    But measure use in drink, food, exercise--
    I mean by 'measure' what brings no distress.

    Follow a cleanly, simple mode of life,
    And guard against such acts as envy breed.
    Then, if, when thou the body leav'st, thou mount
    To the free ether, deathless shalt thou be,
    A god immortal,--mortal never more!


In this system six things are noteworthy: (1) Its comprehensiveness, in
that it takes account of man's whole nature,--body, soul, and spirit;
affections, intellect, and will, and of all his relations--to gods and
men, to self and nature: (2) Its aimfulness, in that it promises
happiness here and blessedness hereafter, as the reward of right living:
(3) Its piety, in that it everywhere recognizes the need of divine
assistance: (4) Its appreciation of science, as insight into the nature
and grounds of multiplicity and unity: (5) Its stress laid on right
doing, as the condition of right knowing: (6) Its belief in man's
divinity and perfectibility. It is curious that the poem contains no
reference to the doctrine of metempsychosis, which might apparently have
been appealed to as a powerful moral sanction.

That a system like that of Pythagoras, combining the religious, the
mystical, the scientific, the ethical, and the social tendencies of the
Hellenic mind, should have exerted a deep and abiding influence, need
not surprise us. We find profound traces of it, not only in all
subsequent Greek thought, but even in foreign systems, such as Essenism,
whose elements were Hebrew Nazarenism and Greek Pythagoreanism. The
relations between Essenism and Christianity have not yet been
determined. Of the effect of Pythagoras' teaching on Epaminondas I have
already spoken.




