CHAPTER II

QUINTILIAN AND RHETORICAL EDUCATION

    Rhetoric is the counterpart of Dialectic. Both have for their
    subjects those things which, in a certain way, are matters of common
    knowledge, and belong to no definite science. Hence everybody, in
    some degree, is gifted with them; for everybody, to some extent,
    tries to examine and sustain an argument, to defend himself, and to
    accuse others.--Aristotle.

    There is a certain political theory which is made up of many great
    things. A large and important part of it is artificial eloquence,
    which they call rhetoric.--Cicero.

    Every duty which tends to preserve human relations and human society
    must be assigned a higher place than any that stops short with
    knowledge and science.--_Id._

    Zeno, having pressed his fingers together and closed his fist, said
    that was like Dialectic; having spread them out and opened his hand,
    he said Eloquence was like his palm there.--_Id._

    To act considerately is of more moment than to think wisely.--_Id._

    I pass to the pleasure of oratorical eloquence, the delight of which
    one enjoys not at any one moment, but almost every day and every
    hour.--Tacitus.

    Grammar is an experimental knowledge of the usages of language as
    generally current among poets and prose writers. It is divided into
    six parts, (1) trained reading with due regard to prosody [_i.e._
    aspiration, accentuation, quantity, emphasis, metre, etc.], (2)
    exposition according to poetic figures [literary criticism], (3)
    ready statement of dialectical peculiarities and allusions
    [philology, geography, history, mythology], (4) discovery of
    etymologies, (5) accurate account of analogies [accidence and
    syntax], (6) criticism of poetical productions, which is the noblest
    part of the grammatic art [ethics, politics, strategy,
    etc.].--Dionysius Thrax.

    Reading is the rendering of poetic or prose productions without
    stumbling or hesitancy. It must be done with due regard to
    expression, prosody, and pauses. From the expression we learn the
    merit of the piece, from the prosody the art of the reader, and from
    the pauses the meaning intended to be conveyed. In this way we read
    tragedy heroically, comedy conversationally, elegiacs thrillingly,
    epics sustainedly, lyrics musically, and dirges softly and
    plaintively. Any reading done without due observance of these rules
    degrades the merits of the poets and makes the habits of readers
    ridiculous.--_Id._

    Some arts are common, others liberal.... The liberal arts, which
    some call the logical arts, are astronomy, geometry, music,
    philosophy, medicine, grammar, rhetoric.--_Scholia to Dionysius
    Thrax._

    It is obvious that man excels the other animals in worth and speech:
    Why may we not hold that his worth consists as much in eloquence as
    in reason?--Quintilian.

    The civil man, and he who is truly wise, who does not devote himself
    to idle disputes, but to the administration of the commonwealth
    (from which those folks who are called philosophers have farthest
    withdrawn themselves), will be glad to employ every available
    oratorical means to reach his ends, having previously settled in his
    own mind what ends are honorable.--_Id._

    If we count over all the epochs of life, we shall find its pains far
    more numerous than its pleasures.... The first, that of babyhood, is
    trying. The baby is hungry; the nurse sends it to sleep: it is
    thirsty; she washes it: it wants to go to sleep; she takes a rattle
    and makes a noise. When the child has escaped from the nurse, it is
    taken hold of by the pedagogue, the physical trainer, the
    grammar-master, the music-master, the drawing-master. In process of
    time, there are added the arithmetic-master, the geometer, the
    horse-breaker; he rises early; he has no chance for leisure. He
    becomes a cadet; again he has to fear the drill-master, the physical
    trainer, the fencing-master, the gymnasiarch. By all these he is
    whipt, watched, throttled. He graduates from the cadets at twenty;
    again he dreads and watches captain and general, etc.--Teles the
    Stoic (B.C. 260).

    The palmy period in the history of Rome is the period when she had
    no literature. It was only when the Roman nationality began to
    break up, and cosmopolitan Greek tendencies to lay hold upon the
    people, that a literature began to appear. For this reason, Roman
    literature from its very inception is, from absolute necessity,
    filled with the Greek spirit, and stands in the most direct
    opposition to the national spirit of the people.--Mommsen.

    Quintiliane, vagæ moderator summe juventæ,
    Gloria Romanæ, Quintiliane, togæ.--Martial.


Up to the time when Rome began to decline, the school education of her
youth was meagre in the extreme, consisting of reading, writing, and a
little law. All later education that was more than this was borrowed
from the Greeks. It was about the year 200 B.C., at the close of the
Second Punic War, that their influence began clearly to show itself. The
severe Cato, who so cordially despised rhetoricians and philosophers,
learnt Greek in his old age and wrote, for the use of his son, a series
of manuals on ethics, rhetoric, medicine, military science, farming, and
law. At the same time Scipio Africanus spent his leisure hours in
practising gymnastics. From this time on, and just in proportion as Rome
lost her national character and became cosmopolitan, she more and more
adopted Greek manners, Greek religion (or irreligion), and Greek
education. When, finally, in B.C. 146, Greece became a Roman dependency,
it was strictly true that "Captive Greece took captive her rude
conqueror." Thousands of Greek schoolmasters, rhetoricians,
philosophers, etc., flocked to Rome, and, though attempts were made to
expel or suppress them, they held their place, for the simple reason
that the education they offered was a necessity of the time. Rome, the
mistress of the world, had either to become cosmopolitan or perish, and
she preferred the former alternative. She now, for the first time, began
to have a literature and to cultivate her own language. The studies
which she specially affected were (1) grammar, that is, literature, (2)
rhetoric, (3) philosophy, which corresponded to school, college, and
university education. The last, like music and geometry, was, for the
most part, an elegant accomplishment, rather than a serious study. The
physical sciences found little favor.

So long as Roman education was in the hands of Greeks, it was conducted
in the Greek language, and the authors read and discussed were Greek.
But the Romans, though willing enough to borrow Greek culture, were
unwilling to remain permanently in intellectual dependence upon a
conquered people, which in many respects they despised. Strong efforts,
therefore, were made to develop a national literature and a national
education. About the year B.C. 100, Lucius Ælius Præconinus Stilo, a
worthy and conservative Roman knight, opened a private class in Latin
grammar and rhetoric for young men of the upper classes, and from this
time on the direct influence of the Greeks, except in philosophy,
declined. Greek, indeed, continued to be spoken by all persons making
any pretensions to culture; but Latin became the language of Roman
literature. Among the pupils of Stilo were Varro and Cicero, who, along
with Julius Cæsar, may be called the parents of the classical Latin
language, literature, and eloquence. Both Varro and Cæsar wrote works on
grammar. A certain Cornificius (generally known as _Auctor ad
Herennium_) about this time wrote the first Latin treatise on Rhetoric;
but the great authority on the subject, in practice as well as theory,
was Cicero, who wrote no fewer than seven works on it. With Cicero's
death, and the transformation of the republic into an empire, eloquence
lost its noblest use, the defence of liberty. Rhetoric, nevertheless,
continued to be cultivated as a fine art and for forensic use, and,
indeed, was made to cover the whole of the higher education of youth. Of
this art the most celebrated teacher was Quintilian, "the supreme
director of giddy youth, the glory of the Roman toga" (_i.e._ civil
manhood).

Quintilian was born about A.D. 35 in the Spanish city of Calagurris
(Calahorra), where, later, St. Dominic first saw the light. He was
educated in Rome, but afterwards returned to his native place and
established himself as a teacher of rhetoric. About A.D. 68, he was
invited by the Emperor Galba to settle in Rome, which he did, giving
instruction in rhetoric with unparalleled success for twenty years, and
drawing a salary from the government. At the end of that time, he
retired, rich and honored, into private life. It was after this that he
wrote the work which carried his fame down to posterity, his _Institutio
Oratorica_, or Education of the Orator. In the first book of this he
draws out a scheme of preparatory education for the family and the
school; the succeeding ten are devoted to rhetoric, and the last to the
character of the orator, whom he regards as identical with the
cultivated gentleman. It is only the first book that concerns the modern
student of education, and of this I shall now give a brief summary.

The first care of the parent, after the birth of a child, should be to
procure for it a nurse of good moral character and of cultivated speech.
A child that early learns bad habits in acting and speaking, rarely, if
ever, gets cured of them afterwards. Great care ought to be taken with
regard to the child's youthful companions, and to his pedagogue, who
ought to be of good character and well-informed. Its first language
ought to be Greek; but Latin ought to be begun early, and both to be
carefully cultivated. There is no need to follow the ordinary custom of
not allowing the child to learn to read or write before the close of its
seventh year. Much can very profitably be done by play long before that.
It is a mistake to teach children to repeat the alphabet before they
know the forms of the letters. These they may learn from tablets or
blocks. As soon as the letters are recognized, they ought to be written.
Following with a pen the forms of letters engraved on ivory tablets is a
good thing. After letters, syllables must be learnt--all the possible
syllables in both languages. After syllables come words, and after
words, sentences. In all this process, it is of the utmost importance to
secure thoroughness by avoiding haste. The child must not attempt words
till he can read and write all the syllables, nor sentences till he is
perfectly familiar with words. In reading sentences, he must learn to
run ahead, so that, while he is pronouncing one word with his lips, he
is recognizing others with his eye. The writing lesson should be
utilized in order to make the child acquainted with rare words and good
poetry. At this stage, his memory ought to be well exercised, and made
to lay up large stores of good literature for future use. At the same
time, his organs of speech should be well trained, by being made to
pronounce rapidly verses containing difficult combinations of sound.[5]

As soon as he is able, the child should go to school. Home education is
objectionable on many accounts, especially for boys intended for
orators. These, above all others, must learn sociability, tact, and
_esprit de corps_, and form school-friendships. Many moral lessons can
be learnt, and many motives employed, in the school, that are not
possible in the family. Among the latter is ambition, which "though
itself a vice, is the parent of many virtues," and therefore ought to be
freely used. Hardly any motive is so powerful.

When a boy is sent to school, his teacher's first business is to
investigate his character and capacity. The chief marks of ability are
memory and power of imitation. Imitation is not mimicry, which is always
a sign of low nature. Slowness, though objectionable, is better than
precocity, which should be discouraged in every way. Different treatment
is required for different boys: some need the bit, some the spur. The
best boy is the one "whom praise excites, whom glory pleases, who cries
when he is beaten. Such a one may be nourished with emulation; reproach
will sting him; honor will rouse him." Boys ought to have seasons of
rest and play, neither too short to afford recreation, nor too long to
encourage idleness. Games of question and answer are good for
sharpening the wits. In play an excellent opportunity is offered to the
teacher for learning the character of his pupils. Corporal punishment is
altogether to be deprecated, and, indeed, is unneeded when the teacher
does his duty.

What boys learn in school is grammar; but this must be supplemented by
music and astronomy. Without the former it will be impossible to scan
verse; without the latter, to understand certain allusions and modes of
fixing dates in the poets. A little philosophy is necessary for the sake
of understanding such poets as Empedocles and Lucretius; geometry, in
order to give practice in apodictic reasoning, as well as for practical
uses. Thus the curriculum of school education will consist of Grammar,
Music, Astronomy, Philosophy, and Geometry.

Grammar consists of two parts, (1) _Methodics_, or the art of correct
speaking, (2) _Historics_ (German _Realien_), the interpretation of
poets, historians, philosophers, etc. _Methodics_--grammar in the modern
sense--should aim at enabling a boy to speak and write with correctness,
clearness, and elegance. All barbarisms (_i.e._ foreign words and
idioms), solecisms, affectations, and careless pronunciations are to be
avoided. In the use of language, four things are to be taken into
account, (1) reason, (2) antiquity, (3) authority, (4) custom. In
reading, the boy must be taught "where to draw his breath, where to
divide a verse, where the sense is complete, where it begins, where the
voice is to be raised, where lowered, what inflections to use, what is
to be uttered slowly, what rapidly, what forcibly, what gently." "That
he may be able to do all this, he must _understand_. Reading must above
all be manly and grave, with a certain sweetness." Poetry must not be
read either as prose, nor yet in a sing-song way. All theatrical
personification, and all gesticulation smacking of the comedian, are to
be avoided.

For _Histories_ the teacher must be very careful in his selection of
texts. Homer and Virgil are best to begin with. Though their full import
cannot be understood by youth, they awake enthusiasm for what is noble
and spirited, and will often be read in later life. "Tragedies are
useful. There is nourishment in the lyric poets"; but they must be used
with caution and in selections, from which everything relating to love
must be excluded. Even Horace must be expurgated. Satire and comedy,
though of the utmost value for the orator, must be deferred till the
moral character is sufficiently established not to be injured by them.
Passages from the poets ought to be committed to memory. In all reading,
the utmost care ought to be taken to promote purity and manliness
(_sanctitas et virilitas_).

After reading a piece of poetry, boys must be made to analyze and scan
it, to point out peculiarities of language and rhythm, to enumerate the
different meanings of words, to name and explain the various figures of
speech. But far more important than all this it is, that the teacher
should impress on their minds the importance of systematic arrangement
and propriety of description, "showing what is suitable for each rôle,
what is commendable in thought, what in expression, where diffuseness
is proper, and where brevity." In giving collateral information, whether
in history, mythology, or geography, he should keep within bounds,
giving only what is necessary and rests on respectable authority. "It is
one of the virtues of a schoolmaster to be ignorant of some things."

As regards lessons in composition, the teacher should begin by making
his pupils write out from memory the _Fables_ of Æsop, in pure, simple,
direct, and unadorned language. He should then call upon them to turn
poetry into prose, and to paraphrase it, either briefly or diffusely. He
should then make them write out proverbs, apophthegms, aphorisms, short,
brilliant anecdotes, etc. Famous stories related by the poets may be
used as subjects for composition, but chiefly for the sake of
information. Beyond this the schoolmaster should not go in the matter of
composition. The rest should be left to the rhetorician.

It is of great importance in youthful education that several subjects
should be studied at the same time. Boys like and need variety, and,
when they get it, it is truly astonishing how much they can accomplish.
"There is not the slightest reason for fearing that boys will shrink
from the labor of study. No age is less easily fatigued." ... "Boys are
naturally more inclined to hard work than young men."

Such, in brief, is Quintilian's school-programme. It has no place for
physical science (except Astronomy), for manual training, or for
physical exercise. Play is, indeed, permitted as a necessary recreation,
and gymnastics and physical training (παιδοτρίβεια) are recommended in
so far as they are necessary to enable the budding orator to move and
to gesticulate gracefully; but that is all. "Nothing can please that is
not becoming."

As soon as he is ready, the young aspirant for oratorical fame passes
into the hands of the rhetorician, under whom he learns all the arts,
and acquires all that knowledge, necessary to fit him for his
profession. No kind of knowledge, and no moral excellence ought to be
foreign to the orator. Quintilian is very severe upon the philosophers
for claiming, in their title, to be, in an exceptional way, lovers of
wisdom, and maintains that the true orator is the truly wise and good
man. He is surely superior to the philosopher, who turns his back upon
the world and manifests no interest in human affairs. Moreover,
"philosophy may be simulated; eloquence cannot."

The closing chapter of the last book of Quintilian's work treats of the
orator after his retirement from public life. He is to devote himself to
writing and to the study of art, science, and philosophy. The picture is
charming; but it ends with death, and there is nothing beyond. God may
be defined for oratorical purposes; but his existence is a matter of
conjecture.

In Quintilian we have the highest type of the civic man living under a
cosmopolitan despotism. His defects--his pedantry, his servility, his
externality, his worldliness--are only such as are natural to a good man
placed in this position, without any outlook upon a higher existence.




