II

HOW TO ATTAIN KNOWLEDGE OF THE HIGHER WORLDS


In every man there are latent faculties by means of which he may
acquire for himself knowledge of the higher worlds. The mystic, master,
theosophist, or gnostic speaks of a soul-world and a spirit-world,
which are, for him, just as real as the world which we see with our
physical eyes, or touch with our physical hands. And those who wish to
develop the spiritual senses, which unfold psychic knowledge, should
understand that safe advice can be given only by those who have already
developed such power within themselves. As long as the human race has
existed, there have been lodges and schools in which those who
possessed these higher faculties have given instruction to those who
were in search of them. Such are called occult schools, and the
instruction which is imparted therein is called esoteric science, or
occult teaching. This designation sometimes leads to misunderstanding.
He who hears it may be very easily misled into the belief that those
who work in these schools desire to represent a special, privileged
class, which arbitrarily withholds its knowledge from its
fellow-creatures. Indeed, he may even think that perhaps there is
nothing really important behind such knowledge. For he is tempted to
think that, if it were a true knowledge, there would be no need of
making a secret of it: one might then communicate it publicly to the
advantage of all men.

Those who have been initiated into occult knowledge are not in the
least surprised that the uninitiated should so think. Only he who has
to a certain degree experienced this initiation into the higher
knowledge of being can understand the secret of that initiation. But it
may be asked: How, then, shall the uninitiated, considering the
circumstances, develop any interest at all in this so-called mystic
knowledge? How and why ought they to search for something of the nature
of which they can form no idea? Such a question is based upon an
entirely erroneous conception of the real nature of occult knowledge.
There is, in truth, no fundamental difference between occult knowledge
and all the rest of man's knowledge and capacity. This mystic knowledge
is no more a secret for the average man than writing is a secret to him
who has never learned to read. And just as everyone who chooses the
correct method may learn to write, so too can everyone who searches
after the right way become a disciple, and even a teacher. In only one
respect are the conditions here different from those that apply to
external thought-activities. The possibility of acquiring the art of
writing may be withheld from someone through poverty, or through the
state of civilization into which he has been born; but for the
attainment of knowledge in the higher worlds there is no obstacle for
him who sincerely searches for it.

Many believe that it is necessary to find, here or there, the Masters
of the higher knowledge, in order to receive enlightenment from them.
In the first place, he who strives earnestly after the higher knowledge
need not be afraid of any difficulty or obstacle in his search for an
Initiate who shall be able to lead him into the profounder secrets of
the world. Everyone, on the contrary, may be certain that an Initiate
will find him, under any circumstances, if there is in him an earnest
and worthy endeavor to attain this knowledge. For it is a strict law
with all Initiates to withhold from no man the knowledge that is due
him. But there is an equally strict law which insists that no one shall
receive any occult knowledge until he is worthy and well prepared. And
the more strictly he observes these two laws, the more perfect is an
Initiate. The order which embraces all Initiates is surrounded, as it
were, by a wall, and the two laws here mentioned form two strong
principles by which the constituents of this wall are held together.
You may live in close friendship with an Initiate, yet this wall will
separate him from you just as long as you have not become an Initiate
yourself. You may enjoy in the fullest sense the heart, the love of an
Initiate, yet he will only impart to you his secret when you yourself
are ready for it. You may flatter him; you may torture him; nothing
will induce him to divulge to you anything which he knows ought not be
disclosed, inasmuch as you, at the present stage of your evolution, do
not understand rightly how to receive the secret into your soul.

The ways which prepare a man for the reception of such a secret are
clearly prescribed. They are indicated by the unfading, everlasting
letters within the temples where the Initiates guard the higher
secrets. In ancient times, anterior to "history," these temples were
outwardly visible; to-day, because our lives have become so
unspiritual, they are mostly quite invisible to external sight. Yet
they are present everywhere, and all who seek may find them.

Only within his soul may a man discover the means which will open for
him the lips of the Initiate. To a certain high degree he must develop
within himself special faculties, and then the greatest treasures of
the Spirit become his own.

He must begin with a certain fundamental attitude of the soul: the
student of Occultism calls it the Path of Devotion, of Veneration. Only
he who maintains this attitude can, in Occultism, become a disciple.
And he who has experience in these things is able to perceive even in
the child the signs of approaching discipleship. There are children who
look up with religious awe to those whom they venerate. For such people
they have a respect which forbids them to admit, even in the innermost
sanctuary of the heart, any thought of criticism or opposition. These
children grow up into young men and maidens who feel happy when they
are able to look up to anything venerable. From the ranks of such
children are recruited many disciples.

Have you ever paused outside the door of some venerated man, and have
you, on this your first visit, felt a religious awe as you pressed the
handle, in order to enter the room which for you is a holy place? Then
there has been manifested in you an emotion which may be the germ of
your future discipleship. It is a blessing for every developing person
to have such emotions upon which to build. Only it must not be thought
that such qualities contain the germ of submissiveness and slavery.
Experience teaches us that those can best hold their heads erect who
have learned to venerate where veneration is due. And veneration is
always in its own place when it rises from the depths of the heart.

If we do not develop within ourselves this deeply-rooted feeling that
there is something higher than ourselves, we shall never find enough
strength to evolve to something higher. The Initiate has only acquired
the power of lifting his intellect to the heights of knowledge by
guiding his heart into the depths of veneration and devotion. The
heights of the Spirit can only be reached by passing through the
portals of humility. Man can certainly have the right to gaze upon the
Reality, but he must first earn this right. You can only acquire right
knowledge when you are ready to esteem it. There are laws in the
spiritual life, as in the physical life. Rub a glass rod with an
appropriate material and it will become electric, that is to say, it
will acquire the power of attracting small bodies. This exemplifies
natural law. (And if one has learned even a little of physics, one
knows this.) Similarly, if one is acquainted with the first principles
of Occultism, one knows that every feeling of true devotion aids in
developing qualities, which sooner or later, lead to the Path of
Knowledge.

He who possesses within himself this feeling of devotion, or who is
fortunate enough to receive it from his education, brings a great deal
along with him, when, later in life, he seeks an entrance to the higher
knowledge. But he who has had no such preparation will find himself
confronted with difficulties, even upon the first step of the Path of
Knowledge, unless he undertakes, by rigorous self-education, to create
the devotional mood within himself. In our time it is especially
important that full attention be given to this point. Our civilization
tends much more toward criticism, the giving of judgments, and so
forth, than toward devotion, and a selfless veneration. Our children
criticize much more than they worship. But every judgment, every
carping criticism, frustrates the powers of the soul for the attainment
of the higher knowledge, in the same measure that all heartfelt
devotion develops them. In this we do not wish to say anything against
our civilization nor pass judgment upon it. For it is to this critical
faculty, this self-conscious human discernment, this "prove all things
and hold fast to the good," that we owe the greatness of our
civilization. We could never have attained the science, the commerce,
the industry, the law of our time, had we not exercised our critical
faculty everywhere, had we not everywhere applied the standard of our
judgment. But what we have thereby gained in external culture we have
had to pay for with a corresponding loss of the higher knowledge, of
the spiritual life.

Now the important thing that everyone must clearly understand is that,
for him who is right in the midst of the objective civilization of our
time, it is very difficult to advance to the knowledge of the higher
worlds. He can do so only if he work energetically within himself. At a
time when the conditions of outward life were simpler, spiritual
exaltation was easier of attainment. That which ought to be venerated,
that which should be kept holy, stood out in better relief from the
ordinary things of the world. In a period of criticism these ideals are
much lowered; other emotions take the place of awe, veneration,
respect, and prayer. Our own age continually pushes these better
emotions further and further back, so that in the daily life of the
people they play but a very small part. He who seeks for higher
knowledge must create it within himself; he himself must instil it into
his soul. It cannot be done by study; it can only be done through
living. He who wishes to become a disciple must therefore assiduously
cultivate the devotional mood. Everywhere in his environment he must
look for that which demands of him admiration and homage. Whenever his
duties or circumstances permit, he should try to abstain entirely from
all criticism or judgment. If I meet a brother and blame him for his
weakness, I rob myself of power to win the higher knowledge; but if I
try to enter lovingly into his merits, I then gather such power. The
disciple should seek to benefit both himself and others. Experienced
occultists are aware how much they owe to the continual searching for
the good in all things, and the withholding of all harsh criticism.
This must be not only an external rule of life; but it must take
possession of the innermost part of our souls. We have it in our power
to perfect ourselves, and by and by to transform ourselves completely.
But this transformation must take place in the innermost self, in the
mental life. It is not enough that I show respect only in my outward
bearing toward a person; I must have this respect in my thought. The
disciple must begin by drawing this devotion into his thought-life. He
must altogether banish from his consciousness all thoughts of
disrespect, of criticism, and he must endeavor straightway to cultivate
thoughts of devotion.

Every moment, in which we set ourselves to banish from our
consciousness whatever remains in it of disparaging, suspicious
judgment of our fellow-men, brings us nearer to the knowledge of higher
things. And we rise rapidly when, in such moments, we fill our
consciousness with only those thoughts that evoke admiration, respect,
and veneration for men and things. He who has experience in these
matters will know that in every such moment powers are awakened in man
which otherwise would remain dormant. In this way the spiritual eyes of
a man are opened. He begins to see things around him which hitherto he
was unable to perceive. He begins to understand that hitherto he had
seen only a part of the world around him. The man with whom he comes in
contact now shows him quite a different aspect from that which he
showed before. Of course, through this single rule of life, he will not
yet be able to see what has elsewhere been described as the human aura,
because, for that, a still higher training is necessary. But he may
rise to that higher development if he has previously had a thorough
training in devotion.[6]

          [6] In the last chapter of the book entitled _Theosophie_
          (Berlin, C. A. Schwetschke und Sohn), Dr. Rudolf Steiner
          fully describes this "Path of Knowledge;" here it is only
          intended to give some practical details.

Noiseless and unnoticed by the outer world is the following of the
"Path of Discipleship." It is not necessary that anyone should observe
a change in the disciple. He performs his duties as hitherto; he
attends to his business as usual. The transformation goes on only in
the inner part of the soul, hidden from outward sight. At first the
entire soul-life of a man is flooded by this fundamental spring of
devotion for everything which is truly venerable. His entire soul-life
finds in this devotional mood its pivot. Just as the sun, through its
rays, will vivify everything living, so in the life of the disciple
this reverence vivifies all the perceptions of the soul.

At first it is not easy for people to believe that feelings like
reverence, respect, and so forth, have anything to do with their
perceptions. This comes from the fact that one is inclined to think of
perception as a faculty quite by itself, one that stands in no relation
to what otherwise happens in the soul. In so thinking, we do not
remember that it is the soul which perceives. And feelings are for the
soul what food is for the body. If we give the body stones in place of
bread its activity will cease. It is the same with the soul.
Veneration, homage, devotion, are as nutriment which makes it healthy
and strong, especially strong for the activity of perception.
Disrespect, antipathy, and under-estimation, bring about the starvation
and the withering of this activity. For the occultist this fact is
visible in the aura. A soul which harbors the feelings of devotion and
reverence, brings about a change in its aura. Certain yellowish-red or
brown-red tints will vanish, and tints of bluish-red will replace them.
And then the organ of perception opens. It receives information of
facts in its environment of which it hitherto had no knowledge.
Reverence awakens a sympathetic power in the soul, and through this we
attract similar qualities in the beings which surround us, that would
otherwise remain hidden. More effective still is that power which can
be obtained by devotion when another feeling is added. One learns to
give up oneself less and less to the impressions of the outer world,
and to develop in its place a vivid inward life. He who darts from one
impression of the outer world to another, who constantly seeks
dissipations, cannot find the way to Occultism. Neither should the
disciple blunt himself to the outer world; but let his rich inner life
point out the direction in which he ought to lend himself to its
impressions. When passing through a beautiful mountain district, the
man with depth of soul and richness of emotion has different
experiences from the man with few emotions. Only what we experience
within ourselves reveals the beauties of the outer world. One man sails
across the ocean, and only a few inward experiences pass through his
soul; but another will then hear the eternal language of the
world-spirit, and for him are unveiled the mysteries of creation.

One must have learned to control one's own feelings and ideas if one
wishes to develop any intimate relationship with the outer world. Every
phenomenon in that outer world is full of divine splendor, but one must
have felt the Divine within oneself before one may hope to discover it
without. The disciple is told to set apart certain moments of his daily
life during which to withdraw into himself, quietly and alone. At such
times he ought not to occupy himself with his own personal affairs, for
this would bring about the contrary of that at which he is aiming.
During these moments he ought rather to listen in complete silence to
the echoes of what he has experienced, of what the outward world has
told him. Then, in these periods of quiet, every flower, every animal,
every action will unveil to him secrets undreamed of, and thus will he
prepare himself to receive new impressions of the external world, as if
he viewed it with different eyes. For he who merely desires to enjoy
impression after impression, only stultifies the perceptive faculty,
while he who lets the enjoyment afterwards reveal something to him,
thus enlarges and educates it. He must be careful not merely to let the
enjoyment reverberate, as it were; but, renouncing any further emotions
of joy, begin to work upon his pleasurable experiences with an inward
activity. The danger at this point is very great. Instead of working
within one-self, it is easy to fall into the opposite habit of
afterward trying to completely exhaust the enjoyment. Let us not
undervalue the unforeseen sources of error which here confront the
disciple. He must of necessity pass through a host of temptations, each
of which tends only to harden his Ego and to imprison it within itself.
He ought to open it wide for the whole world. It is necessary that he
should seek enjoyment, for in this way only can the outward world get
at him; and if he blunts himself to enjoyment he becomes as a plant
which cannot longer draw nourishment from its environment. Yet, if he
stops at the enjoyment, he is then shut up within himself, and will
only be something to himself and nothing to the world. However much he
may live within himself, however intensely he may cultivate his Ego,
the world will exclude him. He is dead to the world. The disciple
considers enjoyment only as a means of ennobling himself for the world.
Pleasure to him is as a scout who informs him concerning the world, and
after having been taught by pleasure he passes on to work. He does not
learn in order that he may accumulate wisdom as his own treasure, but
in order that he may put his learning at the service of the world.

In all forms of Occultism there is a fundamental principle which must
not be transgressed, if any goal at all is to be reached. All occult
teachers must impress upon their pupils that, _Every branch of
knowledge which you seek only to enrich your own learning, only to
accumulate treasure for yourself, leads you away from the Path; but all
knowledge which you seek for working in the service of humanity and for
the uplifting of the world brings you a step forward_. This law must be
rigidly observed; nor is one a genuine disciple until he has adopted it
as the guide for his whole life. In many occult schools this truth is
expressed in the following short sentence: _Every idea which does not
become an ideal for you, slays a power within your soul: every idea
which becomes an ideal creates within you a vital force_.




