BOOK II.

DIET.


  Enough of air. A desart subject now,
  Rougher and wilder, rises to my sight.
  A barren waste, where not a garland grows
  To bind the muse’s brow; not even a proud
  Stupendous solitude frowns o’er the heath,                           5
  To rouse a noble horror in the soul:
  But rugged paths fatigue, and error leads
  Thro’ endless labyrinths the devious feet.
  Farewel, etherial fields! the humbler arts
  Of life; the table and the homely Gods,                             10
  Demand my song. Elysian gales adieu!

    The blood, the fountain whence the spirits flow,
  The generous stream that waters every part,
  And motion, vigor, and warm life conveys
  To every particle that moves or lives;                              15
  This vital fluid, thro’ unnumber’d tubes
  Pour’d by the heart, and to the heart again
  Refunded; scourg’d for ever round and round,
  Enrag’d with heat and toil, at last forgets
  Its balmy nature; virulent and thin                                 20
  It grows; and now, but that a thousand gates
  Are open to its flight, it would destroy
  The parts it cherish’d and repair’d before.
  Besides, the flexible and tender tubes
  Melt in the mildest, most nectareous tide                           25
  That ripening nature rolls; as in the stream
  Its crumbling banks; but what the vital force
  Of plastic fluids hourly batters down,
  That very force, those plastic particles
  Rebuild: So mutable the state of man.                               30
  For this the watchful appetite was giv’n,
  Daily with fresh materials to repair
  This unavoidable expence of life,
  This necessary waste of flesh and blood.
  Hence the concoctive powers, with various art,                      35
  Subdue the cruder aliments to chyle;
  The chyle to blood; the foamy purple tide
  To liquors, which thro’ finer arteries
  To different parts their winding course pursue;
  To try new changes, and new forms put on,                           40
  Or for the public, or some private use.

    Nothing so foreign but th’ athletic hind
  Can labour into blood. The hungry meal
  Alone he fears, or aliments too thin,
  By violent powers too easily subdu’d,                               45
  Too soon expell’d. His daily labour thaws,
  To friendly chyle, the most rebellious mass
  That salt can harden, or the smoke of years;
  Nor does his gorge the rancid bacon rue,
  Nor that which Cestria sends, tenacious paste                       50
  Of solid milk. But ye of softer clay
  Infirm and delicate! and ye who waste
  With pale and bloated sloth the tedious day!
  Avoid the stubborn aliment, avoid
  The full repast; and let sagacious age                              55
  Grow wiser, lesson’d by the dropping teeth.

      Half subtiliz’d to chyle, the liquid food
  Readiest obeys th’ assimilating powers;
  And soon the tender vegetable mass
  Relents; and soon the young of those that tread                     60
  The stedfast earth, or cleave the green abyss,
  Or pathless sky. And if the Steer must fall,
  In youth and vigor glorious let him die;
  Nor stay till rigid age, or heavy ails,
  Absolve him ill-requited from the yoke.                             65
  Some with high forage, and luxuriant ease,
  Indulge the veteran Ox; but wiser thou,
  From the bleak mountain or the barren downs,
  Expect the flocks by frugal nature fed;
  A race of purer blood, with exercise                                70
  Refin’d and scanty fare: For, old or young,
  The stall’d are never healthy; nor the cramm’d.
  Not all the culinary arts can tame,
  To wholsome food, th’ abominable growth
  Of rest and gluttony; the prudent taste                             75
  Rejects like bane such loathsome lusciousness.
  The languid stomach curses even the pure
  Delicious fat, and all the race of oil;
  For more the oily aliments relax
  Its feeble tone; and with the eager lymph                           80
  (Fond to incorporate with all it meets)
  Coily they mix; and shun with slippery wiles
  The wooed embrace. Th’ irresoluble oil,
  So gentle late and blandishing, in floods
  Of rancid bile o’erflows: What tumults hence,                       85
  What horrors rise, were nauseous to relate.
  Chuse leaner viands, ye of jovial make!
  Chuse sober meals; and rouse to active life
  Your cumbrous clay; nor on th’ enfeebling down,
  Irresolute, protract the morning hours.                             90
  But let the man, whose bones are thinly clad,
  With chearful ease, and succulent repast
  Improve his slender habit. Each extreme
  From the blest mean of sanity departs.

      I could relate what table this demands,                         95
  Or that complexion; what the various powers
  Of various foods: But fifty years would roll,
  And fifty more, before the tale were done.
  Besides, there often lurks some nameless, strange,
  Peculiar thing; nor on the skin display’d,                         100
  Felt in the pulse, nor in the habit seen;
  Which finds a poison in the food that most
  The temp’rature affects. There are, whose blood
  Impetuous rages thro’ the turgid veins,
  Who better bear the fiery fruits of Ind,                           105
  Than the moist Melon, or pale Cucumber.
  Of chilly nature others fly the board
  Supply’d with slaughter, and the vernal pow’rs
  For cooler, kinder, sustenance implore.
  Some even the generous nutriment detest                            110
  Which, in the shell, the sleeping Embryo rears.
  Some, more unhappy still, repent the gifts
  Of Pales; soft, delicious and benign:
  The balmy quintescence of every flower,
  And every grateful herb that decks the spring;                     115
  The fost’ring dew of tender sprouting life;
  The best reflection of declining age;
  The kind restorative of those who lie
  Half-dead and panting, from the doubtful strife
  Of nature struggling in the grasp of death.                        120
  Try all the bounties of this fertile globe,
  There is not such a salutary food,
  As suits with every stomach. But (except,
  Amid the mingled mass of fish and fowl,
  And boil’d and bak’d, you hesitate by which                        125
  You sunk oppress’d, or whether not by all;)
  Taught by experience soon you may discern
  What pleases, what offends. Avoid the cates
  That lull the sicken’d appetite too long;
  Or heave with feverish flushings all the face,                     130
  Burn in the palms, and parch the roughning tongue;
  Or much diminish or too much increase
  Th’ expence which nature’s wise oeconomy,
  Without or waste or avarice, maintains.
  Such cates abjur’d, let prouling hunger loose,                     135
  And bid the curious palate roam at will;
  They scarce can err amid the various stores
  That burst the teeming entrails of the world.

      Led by sagacious taste, the ruthless king
  Of beasts on blood and slaughter only lives:                       140
  The tyger, form’d alike to cruel meals,
  Would at the manger starve: Of milder seeds,
  The generous horse to herbage and to grain
  Confines his wish; tho’ fabling Greece resound
  The Thracian steeds with human carnage wild.                       145
  Prompted by instinct’s never-erring power,
  Each creature knows its proper aliment;
  But man, th’ inhabitant of every clime,
  With all the commoners of nature feeds.
  Directed, bounded, by this pow’r within,                           150
  Their cravings are well-aim’d: Voluptous man
  Is by superior faculties misled;
  Misled from pleasure even in quest of joy.
  Sated with nature’s boons, what thousands seek,
  With dishes tortur’d from their native taste,                      155
  And mad variety, to spur beyond
  Its wiser will the jaded appetite!
  Is this for pleasure? Learn a juster taste;
  And know, that temperance is true luxury.
  Or is it pride? Pursue some nobler aim.                            160
  Dismiss your parasites, who praise for hire;
  And earn the fair esteem of honest men,
  Whose praise is fame. Form’d of such clay as yours,
  The sick, the needy, shiver at your gates.
  Even modest want may bless your hand unseen,                       165
  Tho’ hush’d in patient wretchedness at home.
  Is there no virgin, grac’d with every charm
  But that which binds the mercenary vow?
  No youth of genius, whose neglected bloom
  Unfoster’d sickens in the barren shade?                            170
  No worthy man, by fortune’s random blows,
  Or by a heart too generous and humane,
  Constrain’d to leave his happy natal seat,
  And sigh for wants more bitter than his own?
  There are, while human miseries abound,                            175
  A thousand ways to waste superfluous wealth,
  Without one fool or flatterer at your board,
  Without one hour of sickness or disgust.

      But other ills th’ ambiguous feast pursue,
  Besides provoking the lascivious taste.                            180
  Such various foods, tho’ harmless each alone,
  Each other violate; and oft we see
  What strife is brew’d, and what pernicious bane,
  From combinations of innoxious things.
  Th’ unbounded taste I mean not to confine                          185
  To hermit’s diet, needlessly severe.
  But would you long the sweets of health enjoy,
  Or husband pleasure; at one impious meal
  Exhaust not half the bounties of the year,
  And of each realm. It matters not mean while                       190
  How much to morrow differ from to day;
  So far indulge: ’tis fit, besides, that man,
  To change obnoxious, be to change inur’d.
  But stay the curious appetite, and taste
  With caution fruits you never tried before.                        195
  For want of use the kindest aliment
  Sometimes offends; while custom tames the rage
  Of poison to mild amity with life.

      So heav’n has form’d us to the general taste
  Of all its gifts; so custom has improv’d                           200
  This bent of nature; that few simple foods,
  Of all that earth, or air, or ocean yield,
  But by excess offend. Beyond the sense
  Of light refection, at the genial board
  Indulge not often; nor protract the feast                          205
  To dull satiety; till soft and slow
  A drowzy death creeps on, th’ expansive soul
  Oppress’d, and smother’d the celestial fire.
  The stomach, urg’d beyond its active tone,
  Hardly to nutrimental chyle subdues                                210
  The softest food: unfinish’d and deprav’d,
  The chyle, in all its future wand’rings, owns
  Its turbid fountain; not by purer streams
  So to be clear’d, but foulness will remain.
  To sparkling wine what ferment can exalt                           215
  Th’ unripen’d grape? Or what mechanic skill
  From the crude ore can spin the ductile gold?
  Gross riot treasures up a wealthy fund
  Of plagues: but more immedicable ills
  Attend the lean extreme. For physic knows                          220
  How to disburden the too tumid veins,
  Even how to ripen the half-labour’d blood;
  But to unlock the elemental tubes,
  Collaps’d and shrunk with long inanity,
  And with balsamic nutriment repair                                 225
  The dried and worn-out habit, were to bid
  Old age grow green, and wear a second spring;
  Or the tall ash, long ravish’d from the soil,
  Thro’ wither’d veins imbibe the vernal dew.
  When hunger calls, obey; nor often wait                            230
  Till hunger sharpen to corrosive pain:
  For the keen appetite will feast beyond
  What nature well can bear; and one extreme
  Ne’er without danger meets its own reverse.
  Too greedily th’ exhausted veins absorb                            235
  The recent chyle, and load enfeebled powers
  Oft to th’ extinction of the vital flame.
  To the pale cities, by the firm-set siege
  And famine humbled, may this verse be borne;
  And hear, ye hardiest sons that Albion breeds,                     240
  Long toss’d and famish’d on the wintry main;
  The war shook off, or hospitable shore
  Attain’d, with temperance bear the shock of joy;
  Nor crown with festive rites th’ auspicious day:
  Such feast might prove more fatal than the waves,                  245
  Than war, or famine. While the vital fire
  Burns feebly, heap not the green fuel on;
  But prudently foment the wandering spark
  With what the soonest feels its kindred touch:
  Be frugal ev’n of that: a little give                              250
  At first; that kindled, add a little more;
  Till, by deliberate nourishing, the flame
  Reviv’d, with all its wonted vigor glows.

      But tho’ the two (the full and the jejune)
  Extremes have each their vice; it much avails                      255
  Ever with gentle tide to ebb and flow
  From this to that: So nature learns to bear
  Whatever chance or headlong appetite
  May bring. Besides, a meagre day subdues
  The cruder clods by sloth or luxury                                260
  Collected; and unloads the wheels of life.
  Sometimes a coy aversion to the feast
  Comes on, while yet no blacker omen lours;
  Then is a time to shun the tempting board,
  Were it your natal or your nuptial day.                            265
  Perhaps a fast so seasonable starves
  The latent seeds of woe, which rooted once
  Might cost you labour. But the day return’d
  Of festal luxury, the wise indulge
  Most in the tender vegetable breed:                                270
  Then chiefly when the summer’s beams inflame
  The brazen heavens; or angry Syrius sheds
  A feverish taint thro’ the still gulph of air.
  The moist cool viands then, and flowing cup
  From the fresh dairy-virgin’s liberal hand,                        275
  Will save your head from harm, tho’ round the world
  The dreaded Causos[3] roll his wasteful fires.
  Pale humid Winter loves the generous board.
  The meal more copious, and a warmer fare;
  And longs, with old wood and old wine, to cheer                    280
  His quaking heart. The seasons which divide
  Th’ empires of heat and cold; by neither claim’d.
  Influenc’d by both; a middle regimen
  Impose. Thro’ autumn’s languishing domain
  Descending, nature by degrees invites                              285
  To glowing luxury. But from the depth
  Of winter, when th’ invigorated year
  Emerges; when Favonius flush’d with love,
  Toyful and young, in every breeze descends
  More warm and wanton on his kindling bride;                        290
  Then, shepherds, then begin to spare your flocks;
  And learn, with wise humanity, to check
  The lust of blood. Now pregnant earth commits
  A various offspring to th’ indulgent sky:
  Now bounteous nature feeds with lavish hand                        295
  The prone creation; yields what once suffic’d
  Their dainty sovereign, when the world was young;
  E’re yet the barbarous thirst of blood had seiz’d
  The human breast. Each rolling month matures
  The food that suits it most; so does each clime.                   300

      Far in the horrid realms of winter, where
  Th’ establish’d ocean heaps a monstrous waste
  Of shining rocks and mountains to the pole;
  There lives a hardy race, whose plainest wants
  Relentless earth, their cruel step-mother,                         305
  Regards not. On the waste of iron fields,
  Untam’d, untractable, no harvests wave:
  Pomona hates them, and the clownish God
  Who tends the garden. In this frozen world
  Such cooling gifts were vain: a fitter meal                        310
  Is earn’d with ease; for here the fruitful spawn
  Of Ocean swarms, and heaps their genial board
  With generous fare and luxury profuse.
  These are their bread, the only bread they know;
  These, and their willing slave the deer, that crops                315
  The shrubby herbage on their meager hills.
  Girt by the burning zone, not thus the south
  Her swarthy sons, in either Ind, maintains:
  Or thirsty Lybia; from whose fervid loins
  The lion bursts, and every fiend that roams                        320
  Th’ affrighted wilderness. The mountain herd,
  Adust and dry, no sweet repast affords;
  Nor does the tepid main such kinds produce,
  So perfect, so delicious, as the stores
  Of icy Zembla. Rashly where the blood                              325
  Brews feverish frays; where scarce the tubes sustain
  Its tumid fervor and tempestuous course;
  Kind nature tempts not to such gifts as these.
  But here in livid ripeness melts the grape;
  Here, finish’d by invigorating suns,                               330
  Thro’ the green shade the golden Orange glows;
  Spontaneous here the turgid Melon yields
  A generous pulp; the Coco swells on high
  With milky riches; and in horrid mail
  The soft Ananas wraps its tender sweets.                           335
  Earth’s vaunted progeny: In ruder air
  Too coy to flourish, even to proud to live;
  Or hardly rais’d by artificial fire
  To vapid life. Here with a mother’s smile
  Glad Amalthea pours her copious horn.                              340
  Here buxom Ceres reigns: Th’ autumnal sea
  In boundless billows fluctuates o’er their plains.
  What suits the climate best, what suits the men,
  Nature profuses most, and most the taste
  Demands. The fountain, edg’d with racy wine                        345
  Or acid fruit, bedews their thirsty souls.
  The breeze eternal breathing round their limbs
  Supports in else intolerable air:
  While the cool Palm, the Plantain, and the grove
  That waves on gloomy Lebanon, assuage                              350
  The torrid hell that beams upon their heads.

      Now come, ye Naiads, to the fountains lead;
  Now let me wander thro’ your gelid reign.
  I burn to view th’ enthusiastic wilds
  By mortal else untrod. I hear the din                              355
  Of waters thundering o’er the ruin’d cliffs.
  With holy rev’rence I approach the rocks
  Whence glide the streams renown’d in ancient song.
  Here from the desart down the rumbling steep
  First springs the Nile; here bursts the sounding Po                360
  In angry waves; Euphrates hence devolves
  A mighty flood to water half the East;
  And there, in Gothic solitude reclin’d,
  The chearless Tanais pours his hoary urn.
  What solemn twilight! What stupendous shades                       365
  Enwarp these infant floods! Thro’ every nerve
  A sacred horror thrills, a pleasing fear
  Glides o’er my frame. The forest deepens round;
  And more gigantic still th’ impending trees
  Stretch their extravagant arms athwart the gloom.                  370
  Are these the confines of some fairy world?
  A land of Genii? Say, beyond these wilds
  What unknown nations? If indeed beyond
  Aught habitable lies. And whither leads,
  To what strange regions, or of bliss or pain,                      375
  That subterraneous way? Propitious maids,
  Conduct me, while with fearful steps I tread
  This trembling ground. The task remains to sing
  Your gifts, (so Pæon, so the powers of health
  Command) to praise your chrystal element:                          380
  The chief ingredient in heaven’s various works;
  Whose flexile genius sparkles in the gem,
  Grows firm in oak, and fugitive in wine;
  The vehicle, the source, of nutriment
  And life, to all that vegitate or live.                            385

      O comfortable streams? With eager lips
  And trembling hand the languid thirsty quaff
  New life in you; fresh vigor fills their veins.
  No warmer cups the rural ages knew;
  None warmer sought the sires of human-kind.                        390
  Happy in temperate peace! Their equal days
  Felt not th’ alternate fits of feverish mirth,
  And sick dejection. Still serene and pleas’d,
  They knew no pains but what the tender soul
  With pleasure yields to, and would ne’er forget.                   395
  Blest with divine immunity from ails,
  Long centuries they liv’d; their only fate
  Was ripe old age, and rather sleep than death.
  Oh! could those worthies from the world of Gods
  Return to visit their degenerate sons,                             400
  How would they scorn the joys of modern time,
  With all our art and toil improv’d to pain!
  Too happy they! But wealth brought luxury,
  And luxury on sloth begot disease.

      Learn temperance, friends; and hear without disdain            405
  The choice of water. Thus the Coan[4] sage
  Opin’d, and thus the learn’d of every school.
  What least of foreign principles partakes
  Is best: The lightest then; what bears the touch
  Of fire the least, and soonest mounts in air;                      410
  The most insipid; the most void of smell.
  Such the rude mountain from his horrid sides
  Pours down; such waters in the sandy vale
  For ever boil, alike of winter frosts
  And summer’s heat secure. The lucid stream,                        415
  O’er rocks resounding, or for many a mile
  Hurl’d down the pebbly channel, wholesome yields
  And mellow draughts; except when winter thaws,
  And half the mountains melt into the tide.
  Tho’ thirst were ne’er so resolute, avoid                          420
  The sordid lake, and all such drowsy floods
  As fill from Lethe Belgia’s slow canals;
  (With rest corrupt, with vegetation green;
  Squalid with generation, and the birth
  Of little monsters;) till the power of fire                        425
  Has from profane embraces disengag’d
  The violated lymph. The virgin stream
  In boiling wastes its finer soul in air.

      Nothing like simple element dilutes
  The food, or gives the chyle so soon to flow.                      430
  But where the stomach, indolently given,
  Toys with its duty, animate with wine
  Th’ insipid stream: Tho’ golden Ceres yields
  A more voluptuous, a more sprightly draught;
  Perhaps more active. Wine unmix’d, and all                         435
  The gluey floods that from the vex’d abyss
  Of fermentation spring; with spirit fraught,
  And furious with intoxicating fire;
  Retard concoction, and preserve unthaw’d
  Th’ embodied mass. You see what countless years,                   450
  Embalm’d in fiery quintescence of wine,
  The puny wonders of the reptile world,
  The tender rudiments of life, the slim
  Unrav’lings of minute anatomy,
  Maintain their texture, and unchang’d remain!                      455

      We curse not wine: The vile excess we blame;
  More fruitful, than th’ accumulated board,
  Of pain and misery. For the subtle draught
  Faster and surer swells the vital tide;
  And with more active poison, than the floods                       460
  Of grosser crudity convey, pervades
  The far-remote meanders of our frame.
  Ah! sly deceiver! Branded o’er and o’er,
  Yet still believ’d! Exulting o’er the wreck
  Of sober Vows! But the Parnassian maids                            465
  Another time perhaps shall sing the joys,
  The fatal charms, the many woes of wine;
  Perhaps its various tribes, and various powers.

    Meantime, I would not always dread the bowl,
  Nor every trespass shun. The feverish strife,                      470
  Rous’d by the rare debauch, subdues, expells
  The loitering crudities, that burthen life;
  And, like a torrent full and rapid, clears
  Th’ obstructed tubes. Besides, this restless world
  Is full of chances, which by habit’s power                         475
  To learn to bear is easier than to shun.
  Ah! when ambition, meagre love of gold,
  Or sacred country calls, with mellowing wine
  To moisten well the thirsty suffrages;
  Say how, unseason’d to the midnight frays                          480
  Of Comus and his rout, wilt thou contend
  With Centaurs long to hardy deeds inur’d?
  Then learn to revel; but by slow degrees:
  By slow degrees the liberal arts are won;
  And Hercules grew strong. But when you smooth                      485
  The brows of care, indulge your festive vein
  In cups by well-inform’d experience found
  The least your bane; and only with your friends.
  There are sweet follies, frailties to be seen
  By friends alone, and men of generous minds.                       490

      Oh! seldom may the fated hours return
  Of drinking deep! I would not daily taste,
  Except when life declines, even sober cups.
  Weak withering age no rigid law forbids,
  With frugal nectar, smooth and slow with balm,                     495
  The sapless habit daily to bedew,
  And give the hesitating wheels of life
  Gliblier to play. But youth has better joys;
  And is it wise when youth with pleasure flows,
  To squander the reliefs of age and pain?                           500

      What dext’rous thousands just within the goal
  Of wild debauch direct their nightly course!
  Perhaps no sickly qualms bedim their days,
  No morning admonitions shock the head.
  But ah! what woes remain! Life rolls apace,                        505
  And that incurable disease old age,
  In youthful bodies more severely felt,
  More sternly active, shakes their blasted prime:
  Except kind nature by some hasty blow
  Prevent the lingering fates. For know, whate’er                    510
  Beyond its natural fervor hurries on
  The sanguine tide; whether the frequent bowl,
  High-season’d fare, or exercise to toil
  Protracted; spurs to its last stage tir’d life,
  And sows the temples with untimely snow.
  When life is new, the ductile fibres feel                          515
  The heart’s increasing force; and, day by day,
  The growth advances; till the larger tubes,
  Acquiring (from their elemental[5] veins,
  Condens’d to solid chords) a firmer tone,
  Sustain, and just sustain, th’ impetuous blood.                    520
  Here stops the growth. With overbearing pulse
  And pressure, still the great destroy the small;
  Still with the ruins of the small grow strong.
  Life glows mean time, amid the grinding force
  Of viscous fluids and elastic tubes;                               525
  Its various functions vigorously are plied
  By strong machinery; and in solid health
  The man confirm’d long triumphs o’er disease.
  But the full ocean ebbs: There is a point,
  By nature fix’d, whence life must downwards tend.                  530
  For still the beating tide consolidates
  The stubborn vessels, more reluctant still,
  To the weak throbbings of th’ enfeebled heart.
  This languishing, these strengthning by degrees
  To hard unyielding unelastic bone,                                 535
  Thro’ tedious channels the congealing flood
  Crawls lazily, and hardly wanders on;
  It loiters still: And now it stirs no more.
  This is the period few attain; the death
  Of nature: Thus (so heav’n ordain’d it) life                       540
  Destroys itself; and could these laws have chang’d,
  Nestor might now the fates of Troy relate;
  And Homer live immortal as his song.

      What does not fade? The tower that long had stood
  The crush of thunder, and the warring winds,                       545
  Shook by the slow but sure destroyer Time,
  Now hangs in doubtful ruins o’er its base.
  And flinty pyramids, and walls of brass,
  Descend; the Babylonian spires are sunk;
  Achaia, Rome, and Egypt moulder down.                              550
  Time shakes the liable tyranny of thrones,
  And tottering empires rush by their own weight.
  This huge rotundity we tread grows old;
  And all those worlds that roll around the sun,
  The sun himself, shall die; and ancient Night                      555
  Again involve the desolate abyss:
  Till the great FATHER thro’ the lifeless gloom
  Extend his arm to light another world,
  And bid new planets roll by other laws.
  For thro’ the regions of unbounded space,                          560
  Where unconfin’d omnipotence has room,
  BEING, in various systems, fluctuates still
  Between creation and abhorr’d decay;
  It ever did; perhaps and ever will.
  New worlds are still emerging from the deep;                       565
  The old descending, in their turns to rise.




