BOOK III.

EXERCISE.


  Thro’ various toils th’ adventurous muse has past;
  But half the toil, and more than half, remains.
  Rude is her theme, and hardly fit for song;
  Plain, and of little ornament; and I
  But little practis’d in th’ Aonian arts.                             5
  Yet not in vain such labours have we tried,
  If ought these lays the fickle health confirm.
  To you, ye delicate, I write; for you
  I tame my youth to philosophic cares,
  And grow still paler by the midnight lamps.                         10
  Not to debilitate with timorous rules
  A hardy frame; nor needlessly to brave
  Unglorious dangers, proud of mortal strength;
  Is all the lesson that in wholsome years
  Concerns the strong. His care were ill bestow’d                     15
  Who would with warm effeminacy nurse
  The thriving oak, which on the mountain’s brow
  Bears all the blasts that sweep the wintry heav’n.

      Behold the labourer of the glebe, who toils
  In dust, in rain, in cold and sultry skies:                         20
  Save but the grain from mildews and the flood,
  Nought anxious he what sickly stars ascend.
  He knows no laws by Esculapius given;
  He studies none. Yet him nor midnight fogs
  Infest, nor those envenom’d shafts that fly                         25
  When rabid Sirius fires th’ autumnal noon.
  His habit pure with plain and temperate meals,
  Robust with labour, and by custom steel’d
  To every casualty of varied life;
  Serene he bears the peevish eastern blast,                          30
  And uninfected breaths the mortal South.

      Such the reward of rude and sober life;
  Of labour such. By health the peasant’s toil
  Is well repaid; if exercise were pain
  Indeed, and temperance pain. By arts like these                     35
  Laconia nurs’d of old her hardy sons;
  And Rome’s unconquer’d legions urg’d their way,
  Unhurt, thro’ every toil in every clime.

      Toil, and be strong. By toil the flaccid nerves
  Grow firm, and gain a more compacted tone;                          40
  The greener juices are by toil subdu’d,
  Mellow’d, and subtilis’d; the vapid old
  Expell’d, and all the rancor of the blood.
  Come, my companions, ye who feel the charms
  Of nature and the year; come, let us stray                          45
  Where chance or fancy leads our roving walk:
  Come, while the soft voluptuous breezes fan
  The fleecy heavens, enwrap the limbs in balm,
  And shed a charming languor o’er the soul.
  Nor when bright Winter sows with prickly frost                      50
  The vigorous ether, in unmanly warmth
  Indulge at home; nor even when Eurus’ blasts
  This way and that convolve the lab’ring woods.
  My liberal walks, save when the skies in rain
  Or fogs relent, no season should confine                            55
  Or to the cloister’d gallery or arcade.
  Go, climb the mountain; from th’ etherial source
  Imbibe the recent gale. The chearful morn
  Beams o’er the hills; go, mount th’ exulting steed,
  Already, see, the deep-mouth’d beagles catch                        60
  The tainted mazes; and, on eager sport
  Intent, with emulous impatience try
  Each doubtful track. Or, if a nobler prey
  Delight you more, go chase the desperate deer;
  And thro’ its deepest solitudes awake                               65
  The vocal forest with the jovial horn.

      But if the breathless chase o’er hill and dale
  Exceed your strength; a sport of less fatigue,
  Not less delightful, the prolific stream
  Affords. The chrystal rivulet, that o’er                            70
  A stony channel rolls its rapid maze,
  Swarms with the silver fry. Such, thro’ the bounds
  Of pastoral Stafford, runs the brawling Trent;
  Such Eden, sprung from Cumbrian mountains; such
  The Esk, o’erhung with woods; and such the stream                   75
  On whole Arcadian banks I first drew air,
  Liddal; till now, except in Doric lays
  Tun’d to her murmurs by her love-sick swains,
  Unknown in song: Tho’ not a purer stream,
  Thro’ meads more flow’ry, or more romantic groves,                  80
  Rolls toward the western main. Hail sacred flood!
  May still thy hospitable swains be blest
  In rural innocence; thy mountains still
  Teem with the fleecy race; thy tuneful woods
  For ever flourish; and thy vales look gay                           85
  With painted meadows, and the golden grain!
  Oft, with thy blooming sons, when life was new,
  Sportive and petulant, and charm’d with toys,
  In thy transparent eddies have I lav’d:
  Oft trac’d with patient steps thy fairy banks,                      90
  With the well-imitated fly to hook
  The eager trout, and with the slender line
  And yielding rod sollicite to the shore
  The struggling panting prey; while vernal clouds
  And tepid gales obscur’d the ruffled pool,                          95
  And from the deeps call’d forth the wanton swarms.

      Form’d on the Samian school, or those of Ind,
  There are who think these pastimes scarce humane.
  Yet in my mind (and not relentless I)
  His life is pure that wears no fouler stains.                      100
  But if thro’ genuine tenderness of heart,
  Or secret want of relish for the game,
  You shun the glories of the chace, nor care
  To haunt the peopled stream; the garden yields
  A soft amusement, an humane delight.                               105
  To raise th’ insipid nature of the ground;
  Or tame its savage genius to the grace
  Of careless sweet rusticity, that seems
  The amiable result of happy chance,
  Is to create; and gives a god-like joy,                            110
  Which every year improves. Nor thou disdain
  To check the lawless riot of the trees,
  To plant the grove, or turn the barren mould.
  O happy he! whom, when his years decline,
  (His fortune and his fame by worthy means                          115
  Attain’d, and equal to his moderate mind;
  His life approv’d by all the wise and good,
  Even envied by the vain) the peaceful groves
  Of Epicurus, from this stormy world,
  Receive to rest; of all ungrateful cares                           120
  Absolv’d, and sacred from the selfish crowd.
  Happiest of men! if the same soil invites
  A chosen few, companions of his youth,
  Once fellow-rakes perhaps, now rural friends;
  With whom in easy commerce to pursue                               125
  Nature’s free charms, and vie for sylvan fame:
  A fair ambition; void of strife or guile,
  Or jealousy, or pain to be outdone.
  Who plans th’ enchanted garden, who directs
  The visto best, and best conducts the stream;                      130
  Whose groves the fastest thicken and ascend;
  Whom first the welcome spring salutes; who shews
  The earliest bloom, the sweetest proudest charms,
  Of Flora; who best gives Pomona’s juice
  To match the sprightly genius of Champain.                         135
  Thrice happy days! in rural business past.
  Blest winter nights! when, as the genial fire
  Chears the wide hall, his cordial family
  With soft domestic arts the hours beguile,
  And pleasing talk that starts no timerous fame,                    140
  With witless wantoness to hunt it down:
  Or thro’ the fairy-land of tale or song
  Delighted wander, in fictitious fates
  Engag’d, and all that strikes humanity;
  Till lost in fable, they the stealing hour                         145
  Of timely rest forget. Sometimes, at eve,
  His neighbours lift the latch, and bless unbid
  His festal roof; while, o’er the light repast,
  And sprightly cups, they mix in social joy;
  And, thro’ the maze of conversation, trace                         150
  Whate’er amuses or improves the mind.
  Sometimes at eve (for I delight to taste
  The native zest and flavour of the fruit,
  Where sense grows wild, and takes of no manure)
  The decent, honest, chearful husbandman                            155
  Should drown his labours in my friendly bowl;
  And at my table find himself at home.

      Whate’er you study, in whate’er you sweat,
  Indulge your taste. Some love the manly foils;
  The tennis some; and some the graceful dance.                      160
  Others, more hardy, range the purple heath,
  Or naked stubble; where from field to field
  The sounding coveys urge their labouring flight;
  Eager amid the rising cloud to pour
  The gun’s unerring thunder: And there are                          165
  Whom still the meed[6] of the green archer charms.
  He chuses best, whose labour entertains
  His vacant fancy most: The toil you hate
  Fatigues you soon, and scarce improves your limbs.

      As beauty still has blemish; and the mind                      170
  The most accomplish’d its imperfect side;
  Few bodies are there of that happy mould
  But some one part is weaker than the rest:
  The legs, perhaps, or arms refuse their load,
  Or the chest labours. These assiduously,                           175
  But gently, in their proper arts employ’d,
  Acquire a vigor and elastic spring
  To which they were not born. But weaker parts
  Abhor fatigue and violent discipline.

      Begin with gentle toils; and, as your nerves                   180
  Grow firm, to hardier by just steps aspire.
  The prudent, even in every moderate walk,
  At first but saunter; and by slow degrees
  Increase their pace. This doctrine of the wise
  Well knows the master of the flying steed.                         185
  First from the goal the manag’d coursers play
  On bended reins; as yet the skilful youth
  Repress their foamy pride; but every breath
  The race grows warmer, and the tempest swells;
  Till all the fiery mettle has its way,                             190
  And the thick thunder hurries o’er the plain.
  When all at once from indolence to toil
  You spring, the fibres by the hasty shock
  Are tir’d and crack’d, before their unctuous coats,
  Compress’d, can pour the lubricating balm.                         195
  Besides, collected in the passive veins,
  The purple mass a sudden torrent rolls,
  O’erpowers the heart, and deluges the lungs
  With dangerous inundation: Oft the source
  Of fatal woes; a cough that foams with blood,                      200
  Asthma, and feller Peripneumonie[7],
  Or the slow minings of the hectic fire.

      Th’ athletic fool, to whom what heav’n deny’d
  Of soul is well compensated in limbs,
  Oft from his rage, or brainless frolic, feels                      205
  His vegetation and brute force decay.
  The men of better clay and finer mould
  Know nature, feel the human dignity;
  And scorn to vie with oxen or with apes.
  Pursued prolixly, even the gentlest toil                           210
  Is waste of health: Repose by small fatigue
  Is earn’d; and (where your habit is not prone
  To thaw) by the first moisture of the brows.
  The fine and subtle spirits cost too much
  To be profus’d, too much the roscid balm.                          215
  But when the hard varieties of life
  You toil to learn; or try the dusty chace,
  Or the warm deeds of some important day:
  Hot from the field, indulge not yet your limbs
  In wish’d repose, nor court the fanning gale,                      220
  Nor taste the spring. O! by the sacred tears
  Of widows, orphans, mothers, sisters, sires,
  Forbear! No other pestilence has driven
  Such myriads o’er th’ irremeable deep.
  Why this so fatal, the sagacious muse                              225
  Thro’ nature’s cunning labyrinths could trace:
  But there are secrets which who knows not now,
  Must, ere he reach them, climb the heapy Alps
  Of science; and devote seven years to toil.
  Besides, I would not stun your patient ears                        230
  With what it little boots you to attain.
  He knows enough, the mariner, who knows
  Where lurk the shelves, and where the whirlpools boil,
  What signs portend the storm: To subtler minds
  He leaves to scan, from what mysterious cause                      235
  Charybdis rages in th’ Ionian wave;
  Whence those impetuous currents in the main,
  Which neither oar nor sail can stem; and why
  The roughning deep expects the storm, as sure
  As red Orion mounts the shrowded heaven.                           240

    In ancient times, when Rome with Athens vied
  For polish’d luxury and useful arts;
  All hot and reeking from th’ Olympic strife,
  And warm Palestra, in the tepid bath
  Th’ athletic youth relax’d their weary’d limbs.                    245
  Soft oils bedew’d them, with the grateful pow’rs
  Of Nard and Cassia fraught, to sooth and heal
  The cherish’d nerves. Our less voluptuous clime
  Not much invites us to such arts as these.
  ’Tis not for those, whom gelid skies embrace,                      250
  And chilling fogs; whose perspiration feels
  Such frequent bars from Eurus and the North;
  ’Tis not for those to cultivate a skin
  Too soft; or teach the recremental fume
  Too fast to crowd thro’ such precarious ways.                      255
  For thro’ the small arterial mouths, that pierce
  In endless millions the close-woven skin,
  The baser fluids in a constant stream
  Escape, and viewless melt into the winds.
  While this eternal, this most copious waste                        260
  Of blood degenerate into vapid brine,
  Maintains its wonted measure; all the powers
  Of health befriend you, all the wheels of life
  With ease and pleasure move: But this restrain’d
  Or more or less, so more or less you feel                          265
  The functions labour. From this fatal source
  What woes descend is never to be sung.
  To take their numbers, were to count the sands
  That ride in whirlwind the parch’d Lybian air;
  Or waves that, when the blustering North embroils                  270
  The Baltic, thunder on the German shore.
  Subject not then, by soft emollient arts,
  This grand expence, on which your fates depend,
  To every caprice of the sky; nor thwart
  The genius of your clime: For from the blood                       275
  Least fickle rise the recremental steams,
  And least obnoxious to the styptic air,
  Which breathe thro’ straiter and more callous pores.
  The temper’d Scythian hence, half-naked treads
  His boundless snows, nor rues th’ inclement heaven;                280
  And hence our painted ancestors defied
  The East; nor curs’d, like us, their fickle sky.

      The body moulded by the clime, indures
  Th’ Equator heats, or Hyperborean frost:
  Except by habits foreign to its turn,                              285
  Unwise, you counteract its forming pow’r.
  Rude at the first, the winter shocks you less
  By long acquaintance: Study then your sky,
  Form to its manners your obsequious frame,
  And learn to suffer what you cannot shun.                          290
  Against the rigors of a damp cold heav’n
  To fortify their bodies, some frequent
  The gelid cistern; and, where nought forbids,
  I praise their dauntless heart. A frame so steel’d
  Dreads not the cough, nor those ungenial blasts,                   295
  That breathe the Tertian or fell Rheumatism;
  The nerves so temper’d never quit their tone,
  No chronic languors haunt such hardy breasts.
  But all things have their bounds: And he who makes
  By daily use the kindest regimen                                   300
  Essential to his health, should never mix
  With human kind, nor art nor trade pursue.
  He not the safe vicissitudes of life
  Without some shock endures; ill-fitted he
  To want the known, or bear unusual things.                         305
  Besides, the powerful remedies of pain
  (Since pain in spite of all our care will come)
  Should never with your prosperous days of health
  Grow too familiar: For by frequent use
  The strongest medicines lose their healing power,                  310
  And even the surest poisons theirs to kill.

      Let those who from the frozen Arctos reach
  Parch’d Mauritania, or the sultry West,
  Or the wide flood that waters Indostan,
  Plunge thrice a day, and in the tepid wave                         315
  Untwist their stubborn pores; that full and free
  Th’ evaporation thro’ the softned skin
  May bear proportion to the swelling blood.
  So shall they ’scape the fever’s rapid flames;
  So feel untainted the hot breath of hell.                          320
  With us, the man of no complaint demands
  The warm ablution, just enough to clear
  The sluices of the skin, enough to keep
  The body sacred from indecent soil.
  Still to be pure, even did it not conduce                          325
  (As much it does) to health, were greatly worth
  Your daily pains. ’Tis this adorns the rich;
  The want of this is poverty’s worst woe:
  With this external virtue, age maintains
  A decent grace; without it, youth and charms                       330
  Are loathsome. This the skilful virgin knows:
  So doubtless do your wives. For married sires,
  As well as lovers, still pretend to taste;
  Nor is it less (all prudent wives can tell)
  To lose a husband’s, than a lover’s heart.                         335

      But now the hours and seasons when to toil,
  From foreign themes recall my wandering song.
  Some labour fasting, or but slightly fed,
  To lull the grinding stomach’s hungry rage:
  Where nature feeds too corpulent a frame                           340
  ’Tis wisely done. For while the thirsty veins,
  Impatient of lean penury, devour
  The treasur’d oil, then is the happiest time
  To shake the lazy balsam from its cells.
  Now while the stomach from the full repast                         345
  Subsides; but ere returning hunger gnaws;
  Ye leaner habits give an hour to toil:
  And ye whom no luxuriancy of growth
  Oppresses yet, or threatens to oppress.
  But from the recent meal no labours please,                        350
  Of limbs or mind. For now the cordial powers
  Claim all the wandering spirits to a work
  Of strong and subtle toil, and great event;
  A work of time: and you may rue the day
  You hurried, with ill-seasoned exercise,                           355
  A half concocted chyle into the blood.
  The body overcharg’d with unctuous phlegm
  Much toil demands: The lean elastic less.
  While winter chills the blood, and binds the veins,
  No labours are too hard: By those you ’scape                       360
  The slow diseases of the torpid year;
  Endless to name; to one of which alone,
  To that which tears the nerves, the toil of slaves
  Is pleasure: Oh! from such inhuman pains
  May all be free who merit not the wheel!                           365
  But from the burning Lion when the sun
  Pours down his sultry wrath; now while the blood
  Too much already maddens in the veins,
  And all the finer fluids thro’ the skin
  Explore their flight; me, near the cool cascade                    370
  Reclin’d, or sauntring in the lofty grove,
  No needless slight occasion should engage
  To pant and sweat beneath the fiery noon.
  Now the fresh morn alone and mellow eve
  To shady walks and active rural sports                             375
  Invite. But, while the chilling dews descend,
  May nothing tempt you to the cold embrace
  Of humid skies: Tho’ ’tis no vulgar joy
  To trace the horrors of the solemn wood,
  While the soft evening saddens into night:                         380
  Tho’ the sweet poet of the vernal groves
  Melts all the night in strains of amorous woe.

      The shades descend, and midnight o’er the world
  Expands her sable wings. Great nature droops
  Thro’ all her works. Now happy he whose toil                       385
  Has o’er his languid powerless limbs diffus’d
  A pleasing lassitude: He not in vain
  Invokes the gentle deity of dreams.
  His powers the most voluptuously dissolve
  In soft repose: On him the balmy dews                              390
  Of sleep with double nutriment descend.
  But would you sweetly waste the blank of night
  In deep oblivion; or on fancy’s wings
  Visit the paradise of happy dreams,
  And waken chearful as the lively morn;                             395
  Oppress not nature sinking down to rest
  With feasts too late, too solid, or too full.
  But be the first concoction half-matur’d,
  Ere you to mighty indolence resign
  Your passive faculties. He from the toils                          400
  And troubles of the day to heavier toil
  Retires, whom trembling from the tower that rocks
  Amid the clouds, or Calpe’s hideous height,
  The busy dæmons hurl, or in the main
  O’erwhelm, or bury struggling under ground.                        405
  Not all a monarch’s luxury the woes
  Can counterpoise, of that most wretched man,
  Whose nights are shaken with the frantic fits
  Of wild Orestes; whose delirious brain,
  Stung by the furies, works with poisoned thought!                  410
  While pale and monstrous painting shocks the soul;
  And mangled consciousness bemoans itself
  For ever torn; and chaos floating round.
  What dreams presage, what dangers these or those
  Portend to sanity, tho’ prudent seers                              415
  Reveal’d of old, and men of deathless fame;
  We would not to the superstitious mind
  Suggest new throbs, new vanities of fear.
  ’Tis ours to teach you from the peaceful night
  To banish omens, and all restless woes.                            420

      In study some protract the silent hours,
  Which others consecrate to mirth and wine;
  And sleep till noon, and hardly live till night.
  But surely this redeems not from the shades
  One hour of life. Nor does it nought avail                         425
  What season you to drowsy Morpheus give
  Of th’ ever-varying circle of the day;
  Or whether, thro’ the tedious winter gloom,
  You tempt the midnight or the morning damps.
  The body, fresh and vigorous from repose,                          430
  Defies the early fogs: but, by the toils
  Of wakeful day, exhausted and unstrung,
  Weakly resists the night’s unwholsome breath.
  The grand discharge, th’ effusion of the skin,
  Slowly impair’d, the languid maladies                              435
  Creep on, and thro’ the sickning functions steal.
  So, when the chilling East invades the spring,
  The delicate Narcissus pines away
  In hectic languor; and a slow disease
  Taints all the family of flowers, condemn’d                        440
  To cruel heav’ns. But why, already prone
  To fade, should beauty cherish its own bane?
  O shame! O pity! nipt with pale Quadrille,
  And midnight cares, the bloom of Albion dies!

      By toil subdu’d, the Warrior and the Hind                      445
  Sleep fast and deep; their active functions soon
  With generous streams the subtle tubes supply,
  And soon the tonick irritable nerves
  Feel the fresh impulse, and awake the soul.
  The sons of indolence, with long repose,                           450
  Grow torpid; and, with slowest Lethe drunk,
  Feebly and lingringly return to life,
  Blunt every sense and powerless every limb.
  Ye, prone to sleep (whom sleeping most annoys)
  On the hard mattrass or elastic couch                              455
  Extend your limbs, and wean yourselves from sloth;
  Nor grudge the lean projector, of dry brain
  And springy nerves, the blandishments of down.
  Nor envy while the buried bacchanal
  Exhales his surfeit in prolixer dreams.                            460

    He without riot, in the balmy feast
  Of life, the wants of nature has supplied
  Who rises cool, serene, and full of soul.
  But pliant nature more or less demands,
  As custom forms her; and all sudden change                         465
  She hates of habit, even from bad to good.
  If faults in life, or new emergencies,
  From habits urge you by long time confirm’d,
  Slow may the change arrive, and stage by stage;
  Slow as the shadow o’er the dial moves,                            470
  Slow as the stealing progress of the year.

    Observe the circling year. How unperceiv’d
  Her seasons change! Behold! by slow degrees,
  Stern Winter tam’d into a ruder spring;
  The ripen’d Spring a milder summer glows;                          475
  Departing Summer sheds Pomona’s store;
  And aged Autumn brews the winter-storm.
  Slow as they come, these changes come not void
  Of mortal shocks: The cold and torrid reigns,
  The two great periods of th’ important year,                       480
  Are in their first approaches seldom safe:
  Funereal autumn all the sickly dread,
  And the black fates deform the lovely spring.
  He well advis’d, who taught our wiser sires
  Early to borrow Muscovy’s warm spoils,                             485
  Ere the first frost has touch’d the tender blade;
  And late resign them, tho’ the wanton spring
  Should deck her charms with all her sister’s rays.
  For while the effluence of the skin maintains
  Its native measure, the pleuritic Spring                           490
  Glides harmless by; and Autumn, sick to death
  With sallow Quartans, no contagion breathes.

      I in prophetic numbers could unfold
  The omens of the year: what seasons teem
  With what diseases; what the humid South                           495
  Prepares, and what the Dæmon of the East:
  But you perhaps refuse the tedious song.
  Besides, whatever plagues in heat, or cold,
  Or drought, or moisture dwell, they hurt not you,
  Skill’d to correct the vices of the sky,                           500
  And taught already how to each extream
  To bend your life. But should the public bane
  Infect you, or some trespass of your own,
  Or flaw of nature hint mortality:
  Soon as a not unpleasing horror glides                             505
  Along the spine, thro’ all your torpid limbs;
  When first: the head throbs, or the stomach feels
  A sickly load, a weary pain the loins;
  Be Celsus call’d: The fates come rushing on;
  The rapid fates admit of no delay.                                 510
  While wilful you, and fatally secure,
  Expect to morrow’s more auspicious sun,
  The growing pest, whose infancy was weak
  And easy vanquish’d, with triumphant sway
  O’erpow’rs your life. For want of timely care                      515
  Millions have died of medicable wounds.

    Ah! in what perils is vain life engag’d!
  What slight neglects, what trivial faults destroy
  The hardiest frame! Of indolence, of toil,
  We die; of want, of superfluity.                                   520
  The all-surrounding heaven, the vital air,
  Is big with death. And, tho’ the putrid South
  Be shut; tho’ no convulsive agony
  Shake, from the deep foundations of the world,
  Th’ imprisoned plagues; a secret venom oft                         525
  Corrupts the air, the water, and the land.
  What livid deaths has sad Byzantium seen!
  How oft has Cairo, with a mother’s woe,
  Wept o’er her slaughter’d sons, and lonely streets!
  Even Albion, girt with less malignant skies,                       530
  Albion the poison of the Gods has drunk,
  And felt the sting of monsters all her own.

      Ere yet the fell Plantagenets had spent
  Their ancient rage, at Bosworth’s purple field;
  While, for which tyrant England should receive,                    535
  Her legions in incestuous murders mix’d,
  And daily horrors; till the Fates were drunk
  With kindred blood by kindred hands profus’d:
  Another plague of more gygantic arm
  Arose, a monster never known before                                540
  Rear’d from Cocytus its portentuous head.
  This rapid fury not, like other pests,
  Pursued a gradual course, but in a day
  Rush’d as a storm o’er half th’ astonish’d isle,
  And strew’d with sudden carcasses the land.                        545

    First thro’ the shoulders, or whatever part
  Was seiz’d the first, a fervid vapour sprung.
  With rash combustion thence, the quivering spark
  Shot to the heart, and kindled all within;
  And soon the surface caught the spreading fires.                   550
  Thro’ all the yielding pores the melted blood
  Gush’d out in smoaky sweats; but nought assuag’d
  The torrid heat within, nor aught reliev’d
  The stomach’s anguish. With incessant toil,
  Desperate of ease, impatient of their pain,                        555
  They toss’d from side to side. In vain the stream
  Ran full and clear, they burnt and thirsted still.
  The restless arteries with rapid blood
  Beat strong and frequent. Thick and pantingly
  The breath was fetch’d, and with huge lab’rings heav’d.            560
  At last a heavy pain oppress’d the head,
  A wild delirium came; their weeping friends
  Were strangers now, and this no home of theirs.
  Harass’d with toil on toil, the sinking powers
  Lay prostrate and o’erthrown; a ponderous sleep                    565
  Wrapt all the senses up: They slept and died.

      In some a gentle horror crept at first
  O’er all the limbs; the sluices of the skin
  Withheld their moisture, till by art provok’d
  The sweats o’erflow’d; but in a clammy tide:                       570
  Now free and copious, now restrain’d and slow;
  Of tinctures various, as the temperature
  Had mix’d the blood; and rank with fetid steams:
  As if the pent-up humors by delay
  Were grown more fell, more putrid, and malign.                     575
  Here lay their hopes (tho’ little hope remain’d)
  With full effusion of perpetual sweats
  To drive the venom out. And here the fates
  Were kind, that long they linger’d not in pain.
  For who surviv’d the sun’s diurnal race                            580
  Rose from the dreary gates of hell redeem’d:
  Some the sixth hour oppress’d, and some the third.

      Of many thousands few untainted ’scap’d;
  Of those infected fewer ’scap’d alive:
  Of those who liv’d some felt a second blow;                        585
  And whom the second spar’d a third destroy’d.
  Frantic with fear, they sought by flight to shun
  The fierce contagion. O’er the mournful land
  Th’ infected city pour’d her hurrying swarms:
  Rous’d by the flames that fir’d her seats around,                  590
  Th’ infected country rush’d into the town.
  Some, sad at home, and in the desart some,
  Abjur’d the fatal commerce of mankind;
  In vain: where’er they fled the Fates pursued.
  Others, with hopes more specious, cross’d the main,                595
  To seek protection in far-distant skies;
  But none they found. It seem’d the general air
  Was then at enmity with English blood.
  For, but the race of England, all were safe
  In foreign climes; nor did this fury taste                         600
  The foreign blood which Albion then contain’d.
  Where should they fly? The circumambient heaven
  Involv’d them still; and every breeze was bane.
  Where find relief? The salutary art
  Was mute; and, startled at the new disease,                        605
  In fearful whispers hopeless omens gave.
  To heaven with suppliant rites they sent their pray’rs;
  Heav’n heard them not. Of every hope depriv’d;
  Fatigu’d with vain resources; and subdued
  With woes resistless and enfeebling fear;                          610
  Passive they sunk beneath the weighty blow.
  Nothing but lamentable sounds was heard,
  Nor ought was seen but ghastly views of death;
  Infectious horror ran from face to face,
  And pale despair. ’Twas all the business then                      615
  To tend the sick, and in their turns to die.
  In heaps they fell: And oft one bed, they say,
  The sickening, dying, and the dead contain’d.

      Ye guardian Gods, on whom the Fates depend
  Of tottering Albion! Ye eternal fires,                             620
  That lead thro’ heav’n the wandering year! Ye powers,
  That o’er th’ incircling elements preside!
  May nothing worse than what this age has seen
  Arrive! Enough abroad, enough at home
  Has Albion bled. Here a distemper’d heaven                         625
  Has thin’d her cities; from those lofty cliffs
  That awe proud Gaul, to Thule’s wintry reign;
  While in the West, beyond th’ Atlantic foam,
  Her bravest sons, keen for the fight, have died
  The death of cowards, and of common men;                           630
  Sunk void of wounds, and fall’n without renown.

    But from these views the weeping Muses turn,
  And other themes invite my wandering song.

[Illustration]




