The Project Gutenberg eBook of The art of preserving health: A poem,
by John Armstrong

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The art of preserving health: A poem

Author: John Armstrong

Release Date: March 20, 2023 [eBook #70326]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell, Krista Zaleski and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

A POEM ***






  THE

  ART

  OF PRESERVING

  HEALTH:

  A

  POEM.

  [Illustration]


  _LONDON_:
  Printed for A. MILLAR, opposite to _Katharine-Street_ in the _Strand_.

  MDCCXLIV.

  [Price Four Shillings sewed.]




THE

ART

OF PRESERVING

HEALTH.




BOOK I.

AIR.


  Daughter of Pæon, queen of every joy,
  HYGEIA[1]; whose indulgent smile sustains
  The various race luxuriant nature pours,
  And on th’ immortal essences bestows
  Immortal youth; auspicious, O descend!                               5
  Thou, chearful guardian of the rolling year,
  Whether thou wanton’st on the western gale,
  Or shak’st the rigid pinions of the north,
  Diffusest life and vigour thro’ the tracts
  Of air, thro’ earth, and ocean’s deep domain.                       10
  When thro’ the blue serenity of heav’n
  Thy power approaches, all the wasteful host
  Of pain and sickness, squallid and deform’d,
  Confounded sink into the loathsom gloom,
  Where in deep Erebus involv’d the fiends                            15
  Grow more profane. Whatever shapes of death,
  Shook from the hideous chambers of the globe,
  Swarm thro’ the shuddering air: whatever plagues
  Or meagre famine breeds, or with slow wings
  Rise from the putrid watry element,                                 20
  The damp waste forest, motionless and rank,
  That smothers earth and all the breathless winds,
  Or the vile carnage of th’ inhuman field;
  Whatever baneful breathes the rotten south;
  Whatever ills th’ extremes or sudden change                         25
  Of cold and hot, or moist and dry produce;
  They fly thy pure effulgence: they, and all
  The secret poisons of avenging heaven,
  And all the pale tribes halting in the train
  Of vice and heedless pleasure: or if aught                          30
  The comet’s glare amid the burning sky,
  Mournful eclipse, or planets ill-combin’d,
  Portend disastrous to the vital world;
  Thy salutary power averts their rage,
  Averts the general bane: and but for thee                           35
  Nature would sicken, nature soon would die.

    Without thy chearful active energy
  No rapture swells the breast, no poet sings,
  No more the maids of Helicon delight.
  Come then with me, O Goddess heavenly-gay!                          40
  Begin the song; and let it sweetly flow,
  And let it wisely teach thy wholesom laws:
  “How best the fickle fabric to support
  “Of mortal man; in healthful body how
  “A healthful mind the longest to maintain.”                         45
  ’Tis hard, in such a strife of rules, to chuse
  The best, and those of most extensive use;
  Harder in clear and animated song
  Dry philosophic precepts to convey.
  Yet with thy aid the secret wilds I trace                           50
  Of nature, and with daring steps proceed
  Thro’ paths the muses never trod before.

    Nor should I wander doubtful of my way,
  Had I the lights of that sagacious mind
  Which taught to check the pestilential fire,                        55
  And quel the dreaded Python of the Nile.
  O Thou belov’d by all the graceful arts,
  Thou long the fav’rite of the healing powers,
  Indulge, O MEAD! a well-design’d essay,
  Howe’er imperfect: and permit that I                                60
  My little knowledge with my country share,
  Till you the rich Asclepian stores unlock,
  And with new graces dignify the theme.

    YE who amid this feverish world would wear
  A body free of pain, of cares a mind;                               65
  Fly the rank city, shun its turbid air;
  Breathe not the chaos of eternal smoke
  And volatile corruption, from the dead,
  The dying, sickning, and the living world
  Exhal’d, to sully heaven’s transparent dome                         70
  With dim mortality. It is not air
  That from a thousand lungs reeks back to thine,
  Sated with exhalations rank and fell,
  The spoil of dunghills, and the putrid thaw
  Of nature; when from shape and texture she                          75
  Relapses into fighting elements:
  It is not air, but floats a nauseous mass
  Of all obscene, corrupt, offensive things.
  Much moisture hurts; but here a sordid bath,
  With oily rancor fraught, relaxes more                              80
  The solid frame than simple moisture can.
  Besides, immur’d in many a sullen bay
  That never felt the freshness of the breeze,
  This slumbring deep remains, and ranker grows
  With sickly rest: and (tho’ the lungs abhor                         85
  To drink the dun fuliginous abyss)
  Did not the acid vigour of the mine,
  Roll’d from so many thundring chimneys, tame
  The putrid salts that overswarm the sky;
  This caustick venom would perhaps corrode                           90
  Those tender cells that draw the vital air,
  In vain with all their unctuous rills bedew’d;
  Or by the drunken venous tubes, that yawn
  In countless pores o’er all the pervious skin,
  Imbib’d, would poison the balsamic blood,                           95
  And rouse the heart to every fever’s rage.
  While yet you breathe, away! the rural wilds
  Invite; the mountains call you, and the vales,
  The woods, the streams, and each ambrosial breeze
  That fans the ever undulating sky;                                 100
  A kindly sky! whose fost’ring power regales
  Man, beast, and all the vegetable reign.
  Find then some woodland scene where nature smiles
  Benign, where all her honest children thrive.
  To us there wants not many a happy seat;                           105
  Look round the smiling land, such numbers rise
  We hardly fix, bewilder’d in our choice.
  See where enthron’d in adamantine state,
  Proud of her bards, imperial Windsor sits;
  There chuse thy seat, in some aspiring grove                       110
  Fast by the slowly-winding Thames; or where
  Broader she laves fair Richmond’s green retreats,
  (Richmond that sees an hundred villas rise
  Rural or gay.) O! from the summer’s rage
  O! wrap me in the friendly gloom that hides                        115
  Umbrageous Ham! But if the busy town
  Attract thee still to toil for power or gold,
  Sweetly thou mayst thy vacant hours possess
  In Hampstead, courted by the western wind;
  Or Greenwich, waving o’er the winding flood;                       120
  Or lose the world amid the sylvan wilds
  Of Dulwich, yet by barbarous arts unspoil’d.
  Green rise the Kentish hills in chearful air;
  But on the marshy plains that Essex spreads
  Build not, nor rest too long thy wandering feet.                   125
  For on a rustic throne of dewy turf,
  With baneful fogs her aching temples bound,
  Quartana there presides; a meagre fiend
  Begot by Eurus, when his brutal force
  Compress’d the slothful Naiad of the fens.                         130
  From such a mixture sprung this fitful pest,
  With feverish blasts subdues the sick’ning land:
  Cold tremors come, and mighty love of rest,
  Convulsive yawnings, lassitude, and pains
  That sting the burden’d brows, fatigue the loins,                  135
  And rack the joints, and every torpid limb;
  Then parching heat succeeds, till copious sweats
  O’erflow; a short relief from former ills.
  Beneath repeated shocks the wretches pine;
  The vigour sinks, the habit melts away;                            140
  The chearful, pure and animated bloom
  Dies from the face, with squalid atrophy
  Devour’d, in sallow melancholy clad.
  And oft the sorceress, in her sated wrath,
  Resigns them to the furies of her train;                           145
  The bloated Hydrops, and the yellow fiend
  Ting’d with her own accumulated gall.

    In quest of sites, avoid the mournful plain
  Where osiers thrive, and trees that love the lake;
  Where many lazy muddy rivers flow:                                 150
  Nor for the wealth that all the Indies roll
  Fix near the marshy margin of the main.
  For from the humid soil, and watry reign,
  Eternal vapours rise; the spungy air
  For ever weeps; or, turgid with the weight                         155
  Of waters, pours a sounding deluge down.
  Skies such as these let every mortal shun
  Who dreads the dropsy, palsy, or the gout,
  Tertian, corrosive scurvy, or moist catarrh;
  Or any other injury that grows                                     160
  From raw-spun fibres idle and unstrung,
  Skin ill-perspiring, and the purple flood
  In languid eddies loitering into phlegm.

      Yet not alone from humid skies we pine;
  For air may be too dry. The subtle heaven,                         165
  That winnows into dust the blasted downs,
  Bare and extended wide without a stream,
  Too fast imbibes th’ attenuated lymph
  Which, by the surface, from the blood exhales.
  The lungs grow rigid, and with toil essay                          170
  Their flexible vibrations; or inflam’d,
  Their tender ever-moving structure thaws.
  Spoil’d of its limpid vehicle, the blood
  A mass of lees remains, a drossy tide
  That slow as Lethe wanders thro’ the veins,                        175
  Unactive in the services of life,
  Unfit to lead its pitchy current thro’
  The secret mazy channels of the brain.
  The melancholic fiend, (that worst despair
  Of physic) hence the rust-complexion’d man                         180
  Pursues, whose blood is dry, whose fibres gain
  Too stretch’d a tone: And hence in climes adust
  So sudden tumults seize the trembling nerves,
  And burning fevers glow with double rage.

      Fly, if you can, these violent extremes                        185
  Of air; the wholesome is nor moist nor dry.
  But as the power of chusing is deny’d
  To half mankind, a further task ensues;
  How best to mitigate these fell extreams,
  How breathe unhurt the withering element,                          190
  Or hazy atmosphere: Tho’ custom moulds
  To every clime the soft Promethean clay;
  And he who first the fogs of Essex breath’d
  (So kind is native air) may in the fens
  Of Essex from inveterate ills revive                               195
  At pure Montpelier or Bermuda caught.
  But if the raw and oozy heaven offend,
  Correct the soil, and dry the sources up
  Of watry exhalation; wide and deep
  Conduct your trenches thro’ the spouting bog;                      200
  Solicitous, with all your winding arts,
  Betray th’ unwilling lake into the stream;
  And weed the forest, and invoke the winds
  To break the toils where strangled vapours lie;
  Or thro’ the thickets send the crackling flames.                   205
  Mean time, at home with chearful fires dispel
  The humid air: And let your table smoke
  With solid roast or bak’d; or what the herds
  Of tamer breed supply; or what the wilds
  Yield to the toilsom pleasures of the chase.                       210
  Generous your wine, the boast of rip’ning years,
  But frugal be your cups; the languid frame,
  Vapid and sunk from yesterday’s debauch,
  Shrinks from the cold embrace of watry heavens.
  But neither these, nor all Apollo’s arts,                          215
  Disarm the dangers of the dropping sky,
  Unless with exercise and manly toil
  You brace your nerves, and spur the lagging blood.
  The fat’ning clime let all the sons of ease
  Avoid; if indolence would wish to live.                            220
  Go, yawn and loiter out the long slow year
  In fairer skies. If droughty regions parch
  The skin and lungs, and bake the thick’ning blood;
  Deep in the waving forest chuse your seat,
  Where fuming trees refresh the thirsty air;                        225
  And wake the fountains from their secret beds,
  And into lakes dilate the running stream.
  Here spread your gardens wide; and let the cool,
  The moist relaxing vegetable store
  Prevail in each repast: Your food supplied                         230
  By bleeding life, be gently wasted down,
  By soft decoction and a mellowing heat,
  To liquid balm; or, if the solid mass
  You chuse, tormented in the boiling wave;
  That thro’ the thirsty channels of the blood                       235
  A smooth diluted chyle may ever flow.
  The fragrant dairy from its cool recess
  Its nectar acid or benign will pour
  To drown your thirst; or let the mantling bowl
  Of keen Sherbet the fickle taste relieve.                          240
  For with the viscous blood the simple stream
  Will hardly mingle; and fermented cups
  Oft dissipate more moisture than they give.
  Yet when pale seasons rise, or winter rolls
  His horrors o’er the world, thou may’st indulge                    245
  In feasts more genial, and impatient broach
  The mellow cask. Then too the scourging air
  Provokes to keener toils than sultry droughts
  Allow. But rarely we such skies blaspheme.
  Steep’d in continual rains, or with raw fogs                       250
  Bedew’d, our seasons droop; incumbent still
  A ponderous heaven o’erwhelms the sinking soul.
  Lab’ring with storms in heapy mountains rise
  Th’ imbattled clouds, as if the Stygian shades
  Had left the dungeon of eternal night,                             255
  Till black with thunder all the south descends.
  Scarce in a showerless day the heavens indulge
  Our melting clime; except the baleful east
  Withers the tender spring, and sourly checks
  The fancy of the year. Our fathers talk                            260
  Of summers, balmy airs, and skies serene.
  Good heaven! for what unexpiated crimes
  This dismal change! The brooding elements
  Do they, your powerful ministers of wrath,
  Prepare some fierce exterminating plague?                          265
  Or is it fix’d in the Decrees above
  That lofty Albion melt into the main?
  Indulgent nature! O dissolve this gloom!
  Bind in eternal adamant the winds
  That drown or wither: Give the genial west                         270
  To breathe, and in its turn the sprightly north:
  And may once more the circling seasons rule
  The year; not mix in every monstrous day.

      Mean time, the moist malignity to shun
  Of burthen’d skies; mark where the dry champain                    275
  Swells into chearful hills; where Marjoram
  And Thyme, the love of bees, perfume the air;
  And where the Cynorrhodon[2] with the rose
  For fragrance vies; for in the thirsty soil
  Most fragrant breathe the aromatic tribes.                         280
  There bid thy roofs high on the basking steep
  Ascend, there light thy hospitable fires.
  And let them see the winter morn arise,
  The summer evening blushing in the west;
  While with umbrageous oaks the ridge behind                        285
  O’erhung, defends you from the blust’ring north,
  And bleak affliction of the peevish east.
  O! when the growling winds contend, and all
  The sounding forest fluctuates in the storm,
  To sink in warm repose, and hear the din                           290
  Howl o’er the steady battlements, delights
  Above the luxury of vulgar sleep.
  The murmuring rivulet, and the hoarser strain
  Of waters rushing o’er the slippery rocks,
  Will nightly lull you to ambrosial rest.                           295
  To please the fancy is no trifling good,
  Where health is studied; for whatever moves
  The mind with calm delight, promotes the just
  And natural movements of th’ harmonious frame.
  Besides, the sportive brook for ever shakes                        300
  The trembling air; that floats from hill to hill,
  From vale to mountain, with incessant change
  Of purest element, refreshing still
  Your airy seat, and uninfected Gods.
  Chiefly for this I praise the man who builds                       305
  High on the breezy ridge, whose lofty sides
  Th’ etherial deep with endless billows laves.
  His purer mansion nor contagious years
  Shall reach, nor deadly putrid airs annoy.

      But may no fogs, from lake or fenny plain,                     310
  Involve my hill. And wheresoe’er you build;
  Whether on sun-burnt Epsom, or the plains
  Wash’d by the silent Lee; in Chelsea low,
  Or high Blackheath with wintry winds assail’d;
  Dry be your house: but airy more than warm.                        315
  Else every breath of ruder wind will strike
  Your tender body thro’ with rapid pains;
  Fierce coughs will teize you, hoarseness bind your voice,
  Or moist Gravedo load your aching brows.
  These to defy, and all the fates that dwell                        320
  In cloister’d air tainted with steaming life,
  Let lofty ceilings grace your ample rooms;
  And still at azure noontide may your dome
  At every window drink the liquid sky.

      Need we the sunny situation here,                              325
  And theatres open to the south, commend?
  Here, where the morning’s misty breath infests
  More than the torrid noon? How sickly grow,
  How pale, the plants in those ill-fated vales
  That, circled round with the gigantic heap                         330
  Of mountains, never felt, nor never hope
  To feel, the genial vigor of the sun!
  While on the neighbouring hill the rose inflames
  The verdant spring; in virgin beauty blows
  The tender lily, languishingly sweet;                              335
  O’er every hedge the wanton woodbine roves,
  And autumn ripens in the summer’s ray.
  Nor less the warmer living tribes demand
  The fost’ring sun: whose energy divine
  Dwells not in mortal fire; whose generous heat                     340
  Glows thro’ the mass of grosser elements,
  And kindles into life the pond’rous spheres.
  Chear’d by thy kind invigorating warmth,
  We court thy beams, great majesty of day!
  If not the soul, the regent of this world,                         345
  First born of heaven, and only less than God!

[Illustration]




