BOOK IV.

The PASSIONS.


  The choice of aliment, the choice of air,
  The use of toil and all external things,
  Already sung; it now remains to trace
  What good what evil from ourselves proceeds:
  And how the subtle principle within                                  5
  Inspires with health, or mines with strange decay
  The passive body. Ye poetic Shades,
  That know the secrets of the world unseen,
  Assist my song! For, in a doubtful theme
  Engag’d, I wander thro’ mysterious ways.                            10

    There is, they say, (and I believe there is)
  A spark within us of th’ immortal fire,
  That animates and moulds the grosser frame;
  And when the body sinks, escapes to heaven,
  Its native seat; and mixes with the Gods.                           15
  Mean while this heavenly particle pervades
  The mortal elements, in every nerve
  It thrills with pleasure, or grows mad with pain.
  And, in its secret conclave, as it feels
  The body’s woes and joys, this ruling power                         20
  Weilds at its will the dull material world,
  And is the body’s health or malady.

      By its own toil the gross corporeal frame
  Fatigues, extenuates, or destroys itself:
  Nor less the labours of the mind corrode                            25
  The solid fabric. For by subtle parts,
  And viewless atoms, secret Nature moves
  The mighty wheels of this stupendous world.
  By subtle fluids pour’d thro’ subtle tubes
  The natural, vital, functions are perform’d.                        30
  By these the stubborn aliments are tam’d;
  The toiling heart distributes life and strength;
  These the still-crumbling frame rebuild; and these
  Are lost in thinking, and dissolve in air.

    But ’tis not Thought (for still the soul’s employ’d)              35
  ’Tis painful thinking that corrodes our clay.
  All day the vacant eye without fatigue
  Strays o’er the heaven and earth; but long intent
  On microscopic arts its vigour fails.
  Just so the mind, with various thought amus’d,                      40
  Nor aches itself, nor gives the body pain.
  But anxious Study, Discontent, and Care,
  Love without hope, and Hate without revenge,
  And Fear, and Jealousy, fatigue the soul,
  Engross the subtle ministers of life,                               45
  And spoil the lab’ring functions of their share.
  Hence the lean gloom that Melancholy wears;
  The Lover’s paleness; and the sallow hue
  Of Envy, Jealousy; the meagre stare
  Of sore Revenge: The canker’d body hence                            50
  Betrays each fretful motion of the mind.

    The strong-built pedant; who both night and day
  Feeds on the coarsest fare the schools bestow,
  And crudely fattens at gross Burman’s stall;
  O’erwhelm’d with phlegm lies in a dropsy drown’d,                   55
  Or sinks in lethargy before his time.
  With useful studies you, and arts that please
  Employ your mind, amuse but not fatigue.
  Peace to each drowsy metaphysic sage!
  And ever may the German folio’s rest!                               60
  Yet some there are, even of elastic parts,
  Whom strong and obstinate ambition leads
  Thro’ all the rugged roads of barren lore,
  And gives to relish what their generous taste
  Would else refuse. But may nor thirst of fame                       65
  Nor love of knowledge urge you to fatigue
  With constant drudgery the liberal soul.
  Toy with your books: and, as the various fits
  Of humour seize you, from Philosophy
  To Fable shift; from serious Antonine                               70
  To Rabelais’ ravings, and from prose to song.

    While reading pleases, but no longer, read;
  And read aloud resounding Homer’s strain,
  And weild the thunder of Demosthenes.
  The chest so exercis’d improves its strength;                       75
  And quick vibrations thro’ the bowels drive
  The restless blood, which in unactive days
  Would loiter else thro’ unelastic tubes.
  Deem it not trifling while I recommend
  What posture suits: To stand and sit by turns,                      80
  As nature prompts, is best. But o’er your leaves
  To lean for ever, cramps the vital parts,
  And robs the fine machinery of its play.

      ’Tis the great art of life to manage well
  The restless mind. For ever on pursuit                              85
  Of knowledge bent it starves the grosser powers.
  Quite unemploy’d, against its own repose
  Its turns its fatal edge, and sharper pangs
  Than what the body knows embitter life.
  Chiefly where Solitude, sad nurse of care,                          90
  To sickly musing gives the pensive mind.
  There madness enters; and the dim-ey’d Fiend,
  Sour Melancholy, night and day provokes
  Her own eternal wound. The sun grows pale;
  A mournful visionary light o’erspreads                              95
  The chearful face of nature: earth becomes
  A dreary desart, and heaven frowns above.
  Then various shapes of curs’d illusion rise;
  Whate’er the wretched fears, creating Fear
  Forms out of nothing; and with monsters teems                      100
  Unknown in hell. The prostrate soul beneath
  A load of huge imagination heaves.
  And all the horrors, that the guilty feel,
  With anxious flutterings wake the guiltless breast.

      Such phantoms Pride in solitary scenes,                        105
  Or Fear, on delicate Self-love creates.
  From other cares absolv’d, the busy mind
  Finds in yourself a theme to pore upon;
  It finds you miserable, or makes you so.
  For while yourself you anxiously explore,                          110
  Timorous Self-love, with sick’ning Fancy’s aid,
  Presents the danger that you dread the most,
  And ever galls you in your tender part.
  Hence some for love, and some for jealousy,
  For grim religion some, and some for pride,                        115
  Have lost their reason: some for fear of want
  Want all their lives; and others every day
  For fear of dying suffer worse than death.
  Ah! from your bosoms banish, if you can,
  Those fatal guests: and first the Demon Fear;                      120
  That trembles at impossible events,
  Lest aged Atlas should resign his load
  And heaven’s eternal battlements rush down.
  Is there an evil worse than fear itself?
  And what avails it that indulgent heaven                           125
  From mortal eyes has wrapt the woes to come,
  If we, ingenious to torment ourselves,
  Grow pale at hideous fictions of our own?
  Enjoy the present; nor with needless cares,
  Of what may spring from blind Misfortune’s womb,                   130
  Appal the surest hour that life bestows.
  Serene, and master of yourself, prepare
  For what may come; and leave the rest to heaven.

      Oft from the body, by long ails mistun’d,
  These evils sprung the most important health,                      135
  That of the mind, destroy: And when the mind
  They first invade, the conscious body soon
  In sympathetic languishment declines.
  These chronic passions, while from real woes
  They rise, and yet without the body’s fault                        140
  Infest the soul, admit one only cure;
  Diversion, hurry, and a restless life.
  Vain are the consolations of the wise,
  In vain your friends would reason down your pain.
  Oh ye whose souls relentless love has tam’d                        145
  To soft distress, or friends untimely slain!
  Court not the luxury of tender thought:
  Nor deem it impious to forget those pains
  That hurt the living, nought avail the dead.
  Go, soft enthusiast! quit the cypress groves,                      150
  Nor to the rivulet’s lonely moanings tune
  Your sad complaint. Go, seek the chearful haunts
  Of men, and mingle with the bustling croud;
  Lay schemes for wealth, or power, or fame, the wish
  Of nobler minds, and push them night and day.                      155
  Or join the caravan in quest of scenes
  New to your eyes, and shifting every hour;
  Beyond the Alps, beyond the Apennines.
  Or, more advent’rous, rush into the field
  Where war grows hot; and, raging thro’ the sky,                    160
  The lofty trumpet swells the maddening soul:
  And in the hardy camp and toilsome march
  Forget all softer and less manly cares.

      But most too passive, when the blood runs low,
  Too weakly indolent to strive with pain,                           165
  And bravely by resisting conquer Fate,
  Try Circe’s arts; and in the tempting bowl
  Of poison’d Nectar sweet oblivion drink.
  Struck by the powerful charm, the gloom dissolves
  In empty air; Elysium opens round.                                 170
  A pleasing phrenzy buoys the lighten’d soul,
  And sanguine hopes dispel your fleeting care;
  And what was difficult, and what was dire,
  Yields to your prowess and superior stars:
  The happiest you, of all that e’er were mad,                       175
  Or are, or shall be, could this folly last.
  But soon your heaven is gone; a heavier gloom
  Shuts o’er your head: and, as the thundering stream,
  Swoln o’er its banks with sudden mountain rain,
  Sinks from its tumult to a silent brook;                           180
  So, when the frantic raptures in your breast
  Subside, you languish into mortal man;
  You sleep, and waking find yourself undone.
  For prodigal of life in one rash night
  You lavish’d more than might support three days.                   185
  A heavy morning comes; your cares return
  With tenfold rage. An anxious stomach well
  May be endur’d; so may the throbbing head:
  But such a dim delirium, such a dream,
  Involves you; such a dastardly despair                             190
  Unmans your soul, as madd’ning Pentheus felt
  When, baited round Citheron’s cruel sides,
  He saw two suns, and double Thebes ascend.
  You curse the sluggish Port; you curse the wretch,
  The felon, with unnatural mixture first                            195
  Who dar’d to violate the virgin Wine.
  Or on the fugitive Champain you pour
  A thousand curses; for to heav’n your soul
  It rapt, to plunge you deeper in despair.
  Perhaps you rue even that divinest gift,                           200
  The gay, serene, good-natur’d Burgundy,
  Or the fresh fragrant vintage of the Rhine:
  And with that heaven from mortals had withheld
  The grape, and all intoxicating bowls.

    Besides, it wounds you sore to recollect                         205
  What follies in your loose unguarded hour
  Escap’d. By one irrevocable word,
  Perhaps that meant no harm, you lose a friend.
  Or in the rage of wine your hasty hand
  Performs a deed to haunt you to your grave.                        210
  Add that your means, your health, your parts decay;
  Your friends avoid you; brutishly transform’d
  They hardly know you; or if one remains
  To wish you well, he wishes you in heaven.
  Despis’d, unwept you fall; who might have left                     215
  A sacred, cherish’d, sadly-pleasing name;
  A name still to be utter’d with a sigh.
  Your last ungraceful scene has quite effac’d
  All sense and memory of your former worth.

    How to live happiest; how avoid the pains,                       220
  The disappointments, and disgusts of those
  Who would in pleasure all their hours employ;
  The precepts here of a divine old man
  I could recite. Tho’ old, he still retain’d
  His manly sense, and energy of mind.                               225
  Virtuous and wise he was, but not severe;
  He still remember’d that he once was young;
  His easy presence check’d no decent joy.
  Him even the dissolute admir’d; for he
  A graceful looseness when he pleas’d put on,                       230
  And laughing cou’d instruct. Much had he read,
  Much more had seen; he studied from the life,
  And in th’ original perus’d mankind.

      Vers’d in the woes and vanities of life,
  He pitied man: And much he pitied those                            235
  Whom falsely-smiling fate has curs’d with means
  To dissipate their days in quest of joy.
  Our aim is Happiness; ’tis yours, ’tis mine,
  He said, ’tis the pursuit of all that live;
  Yet few attain it, if ’twas e’er attain’d.                         240
  But they the widest wander from the mark,
  Who thro’ the flow’ry paths of saunt’ring Joy
  Seek this coy Goddess; that from stage to stage
  Invites us still, but shifts as we pursue.
  For, not to name the pains that pleasure brings                    245
  To counterpoise itself, relentless Fate
  Forbids that we thro’ gay voluptuous wilds
  Should ever roam: And were the Fates more kind
  Our narrow luxuries would soon be stale.
  Were these exhaustless, Nature would grow sick,                    250
  And, cloy’d with pleasure, squeamishly complain
  That all was vanity, and life a dream.
  Let nature rest: Be busy for yourself,
  And for your friend; be busy even in vain
  Rather than teize her sated appetites.                             255
  Who never fasts no banquet e’er enjoys;
  Who never toils or watches never sleeps.
  Let nature rest: And when the taste of joy
  Grows keen, indulge; but shun satiety.

      ’Tis not for mortals always to be blest.                       260
  But him the least the dull or painful hours
  Of life oppress, whom sober Sense conducts
  And Virtue, thro’ this labyrinth we tread.
  Virtue and Sense I mean not to disjoin;
  Virtue and Sense are one; and, trust me, he                        265
  Who has not virtue is not truly wise.
  Virtue (for meer good-nature is a fool)
  Is sense and spirit, with humanity:
  ’Tis sometimes angry, and its frown confounds;
  ’Tis even vindictive, but in vengeance just.                       270
  Knaves fain would laugh at it; some great ones dare;
  But at his heart the most undaunted son
  Of fortune dreads its name and awful charms.
  To noblest uses this determines wealth;
  This is the solid pomp of prosperous days;                         275
  The peace and shelter of adversity.
  And if you pant for glory, build your fame
  On this foundation, which the secret shock
  Defies of Envy and all-sapping Time.
  The gawdy gloss of Fortune only strikes                            280
  The vulgar eye: The suffrage of the wise,
  The praise that’s worth ambition, is attain’d
  By Sense alone, and dignity of mind.

      Virtue, the strength and beauty of the soul,
  Is the best gift of heaven: a happiness                            285
  That even above the smiles and frowns of fate
  Exalts great Nature’s favourites: a wealth
  That ne’er encumbers, nor to baser hands
  Can be transfer’d: it is the only good
  Man justly boasts of, or can call his own.                         290
  Riches are oft by guilt and baseness earn’d;
  Or dealt by chance, to shield a lucky knave,
  Or throw a cruel sun-shine on a fool.
  But for one end, one much-neglected use,
  Are riches worth your care: (for Nature’s wants                    295
  Are few, and without opulence supplied.)
  This noble end is, to produce the Soul;
  To shew the virtues in their fairest light;
  To make Humanity the Minister
  Of bounteous Providence; and teach the Breast                      300
  That generous luxury the Gods enjoy.

    Thus, in his graver vein, the friendly Sage
  Sometimes declaim’d. Of Right and Wrong he taught
  Truths as resin’d as ever Athens heard;
  And (strange to tell!) he practis’d what he preach’d.              305
  Skill’d in the Passions, how to check their sway
  He knew, as far as Reason can controul
  The lawless Powers. But other cares are mine:
  Form’d in the school of Pæon, I relate
  What Passions hurt the body, what improve:                         310
  Avoid them, or invite them, as you may.

      Know then, whatever chearful and serene
  Supports the mind, supports the body too.
  Hence the most vital movement mortals feel
  Is Hope; the balm and life-blood of the soul.                      315
  It pleases, and it lasts. Indulgent heaven
  Sent down the kind delusion, thro’ the paths
  Of rugged life; to lead us patient on;
  And make our happiest state no tedious thing.
  Our greatest good, and what we least can spare.                    320
  Is Hope; the last of all our evils, Fear.

    But there are Passions grateful to the breast,
  And yet no friends to Life; perhaps they please
  Or to excess, and dissipate the soul;
  Or while they please, torment. The stubborn Clown,                 325
  The ill-tam’d Ruffian, and pale Usurer,
  (If Love’s omnipotence such hearts can mould)
  May safely mellow into love; and grow
  Refin’d, humane, and generous, if they can.
  Love in such bosoms never to a fault                               330
  Or pains or pleases. But ye finer Souls,
  Form’d to soft luxury, and prompt to thrill
  With all the tumults, all the joys and pains,
  That beauty gives; with caution and reserve
  Indulge the sweet destroyer of repose,                             335
  Nor court too much the Queen of charming cares.
  For, while the cherish’d poison in your breast
  Ferments and maddens; sick with jealousy,
  Absence, distrust, or even with anxious joy,
  The wholsome appetites and powers of life                          340
  Dissolve in languor. The coy stomach loaths
  The genial board: Your chearful days are gone:
  The generous bloom that flush’d your cheeks is fled.
  To sighs devoted and to tender pains,
  Pensive you sit, or solitary stray,                                345
  And waste your youth in musing. Musing first
  Toy’d into care your unsuspecting heart:
  It found a liking there, a sportful fire,
  And that fomented into serious love;
  Which musing daily strengthens and improves                        350
  Thro’ all the heights of fondness and romance:
  And you’re undone, the fatal shaft has sped,
  If once you doubt whether you love or no.
  The body wastes away; th’ infected mind,
  Dissolv’d in female tenderness, forgets                            355
  Each manly virtue, and grows dead to fame.
  Sweet heaven from such intoxicating charms
  Defend all worthy breasts! Not that I deem
  Love always dangerous, always to be shun’d.
  Love well repaid, and not too weakly sunk                          360
  In wanton and unmanly tenderness,
  Adds bloom to Health; o’er every virtue sheds
  A gay, humane, and amiable grace,
  And brightens all the ornaments of man.
  But fruitless, hopeless, disappointed, rack’d                      365
  With jealousy, fatigued with hope and fear,
  Too serious, or too languishingly fond,
  Unnerves the body and unmans the soul.
  And some have died for Love; and some run mad;
  And some with desperate hand themselves have slain.                370

      Some to extinguish, others to prevent,
  A mad devotion to one dangerous Fair,
  Court all they meet; in hopes to dissipate
  The cares of Love amongst a hundred Brides.
  Th’ event is doubtful: for there are who find                      375
  A cure in this; there are who find it not.
  ’Tis no relief, alas! it rather galls
  The wound, to those who are sincerely sick.
  For while from feverish and tumultuous joys
  The nerves grow languid and the soul subsides;                     380
  The tender Fancy smarts with every sting;
  And what was Love before is Madness now.
  Is health your care, or luxury your aim,
  Be temperate still: When Nature bids obey;
  Her wild impatient sallies bear no curb.                           385
  But when the prurient habit of delight,
  Or loose Imagination, spurs you on
  To deeds above your strength, impute it not
  To Nature: Nature all compulsion hates.
  Ah! let nor luxury nor vain renown                                 390
  Urge you to feats you well might sleep without;
  To make what should be rapture a fatigue,
  A tedious task; nor in the wanton arms
  Of twining Laïs melt your manhood down.
  For from the colliquation of soft joys                             395
  How chang’d you rise! the ghost of what you was!
  Languid, and melancholy, and gaunt, and wan;
  Your veins exhausted and your nerves unstrung.
  Spoil’d of its balm and sprightly zest, the blood
  Grows vapid phlegm; along the tender nerves                        400
  (To each slight impulse tremblingly awake)
  A subtle Fiend that mimics all the plagues
  Rapid and restless springs from part to part.
  The blooming honours of your youth are fallen;
  Your vigour pines; your vital powers decay;                        405
  Diseases haunt you; and untimely Age
  Creeps on; unsocial, impotent, and lewd.
  Infatuate, impious, epicure! to waste
  The stores of pleasure, chearfulness, and health!
  Infatuate all who make delight their trade,                        410
  And coy perdition every hour pursue.

      Who pines with Love, or in lascivious flames
  Consumes, is with his own consent undone:
  He chuses to be wretched, to be mad;
  And warn’d proceeds and wilful to his fate.                        415
  But there’s a Passion, whole tempestuous sway
  Tears up each virtue planted in the breast,
  And shakes to ruins proud philosophy.
  For pale and trembling Anger rushes in,
  With fault’ring speech, and eyes that wildly stare;                420
  Fierce as the Tyger, madder than the seas,
  Desperate, and arm’d with more than human strength.
  How soon the calm, humane, and polish’d man
  Forgets compunction, and starts up a fiend!
  Who pines in Love, or wastes with silent Cares,                    425
  Envy, or Ignominy, or tender Grief,
  Slowly descends and ling’ring to the shades.
  But he whom Anger stings, drops, if he dies,
  At once, and rushes apoplectic down;
  Or a fierce fever hurries him to hell.                             430
  For, as the Body thro’ unnumber’d strings
  Reverberates each vibration of the Soul;
  As is the Passion, such is still the Pain
  The Body feels; or chronic, or acute.
  And oft a sudden storm at once o’erpowers                          435
  The Life, or gives your Reason to the winds.
  Such fates attend the rash alarm of Fear,
  And sudden Grief, and Rage, and sudden Joy.

      There are, mean time, to whom the boist’rous fit
  Is Health, and only fills the sails of life.                       440
  For where the Mind a torpid winter leads,
  Wrapt in a Body corpulent and cold,
  And each clogg’d function lazily moves on;
  A generous sally spurns th’ incumbent load,
  Unlocks the breast, and gives a cordial glow.                      445
  But if your wrathful blood is apt to boil,
  Or are your nerves too irritably strung;
  Wave all Dispute; be cautious if you joke;
  Keep Lent for ever; and forswear the Bowl.
  For one rash moment sends you to the shades,                       450
  Or shatters every hopeful scheme of life,
  And gives to horror all your days to come.
  Fate, arm’d with thunder, fire, and every plague
  That ruins, tortures, or distracts mankind,
  And makes the happy wretched in an hour,                           455
  O’erwhelms you not with woes so horrible
  As your own Wrath, nor gives more sudden blows.

      While Choler works, good Friend, you may be wrong;
  Distrust yourself, and sleep before you fight.
  ’Tis not too late to morrow to be brave;                           460
  If Honour bids, to morrow kill or die.
  But calm advice against a raging fit
  Avails too little; and it tries the power
  Of all that ever taught in Prose or Song,
  To tame the Fiend that sleeps a gentle Lamb,                       465
  And wakes a Lion. Unprovok’d and calm,
  You reason well, see as you ought to see,
  And wonder at the madness of mankind:
  Seiz’d with the common rage, you soon forget
  The speculations of your wiser hours.                              470
  Beset with Furies of all deadly shapes,
  Fierce and insidious, violent and slow;
  With all that urge or lure us on to Fate;
  What refuge shall we seek? what arms prepare?
  Where Reason proves too weak, or void of wiles,                    475
  To cope with subtle or impetuous Powers,
  I would invoke new Passions to your aid:
  With Indignation would extinguish Fear,
  With Fear or generous Pity vanquish Rage,
  And Love with Pride; and force to force oppose.                    480

      There is a Charm: a Power that sways the breast;
  Bids every Passion revel or be still;
  Inspires with Rage, or all your Cares dissolves;
  Can sooth Distraction, and almost Despair.
  That Power is Music: Far beyond the stretch                        485
  Of those unmeaning warblers on our stage;
  Those clumsy Heroes, those fat-headed Gods,
  Who move no Passion justly but Contempt:
  Who, like our dancers (light indeed and strong!)
  Do wond’rous feats, but never heard of grace.                      490
  The fault is ours; we bear those monstrous arts,
  Good Heaven! we praise them: we, with loudest peals,
  Applaud the fool that highest lifts his heels;
  And, with insipid shew of rapture, die
  Of ideot notes, impertinently long.                                495
  But he the Muse’s laurel justly shares,
  A Poet he, and touch’d with Heaven’s own fire;
  Who, with bold rage or solemn pomp of sounds,
  Inflames, exalts, and ravishes the soul;
  Now tender, plaintive, sweet almost to pain,                       500
  In Love dissolves you; now in sprightly strains
  Breathes a gay rapture thro’ your thrilling breast;
  Or melts the heart with airs divinely sad;
  Or wakes to horror the tremendous strings.
  Such was the bard, whose heavenly strains of old                   505
  Appeas’d the fiend of melancholy Saul.
  Such was, if old and heathen fame say true,
  The man who bade the Theban domes ascend,
  And tam’d the savage nations with his song;
  And such the Thracian, whose harmonious lyre,                      510
  Tun’d to soft woe, made all the mountains weep;
  Sooth’d even th’ inexorable powers of Hell,
  And half redeem’d his lost Eurydice.
  Music exalts each Joy, allays each Grief,
  Expells Diseases, softens every Pain,                              515
  Subdues the rage of Poison, and the Plague;
  And hence the wise of ancient days ador’d
  One Power of Physic, Melody, and Song.


_The =END=._

[Illustration]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Hygeia the goddess of health, was, according to the genealogy
of the heathen deities, the daughter of Esculapius; who, as well as
Apollo, was distinguished by the name of Pæon.

[2] The wild rose, or that which grows upon the wild briar.

[3] The burning fever.

[4] Hippocrates.

[5] In the human body, as well as in those of other animals, the larger
blood-vessels are composed of smaller ones; which, by the violent
motion and pressure of the fluids in the large vessels, lose their
cavities by degrees, and degenerate into impervious chords or fibres.
In proportion as these small vessels become solid, the larger must of
course grow less extensile, more rigid, and make a stronger resistance
to the action of the heart, and force of the blood. From this gradual
condensation of the smaller vessels, and consequent rigidity of the
larger ones, the progress of the human body from infancy to old age is
accounted for.

[6] This word is much used by some of the old English poets, and
signifies Reward or Prize.

[7] The inflammation of the lungs.




Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and accents have been standardised but all other
spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.


