VII

THE NATURE OF HYPOTHESIS


In the various discussions of the hypothesis which have appeared in
works on inductive logic and in writings on scientific method, its
structure and function have received considerable attention, while its
origin has been comparatively neglected. The hypothesis has generally
been treated as that part of scientific procedure which marks the stage
where a definite plan or method is proposed for dealing with new or
unexplained facts. It is regarded as an invention for the purpose of
explaining the given, as a definite conjecture which is to be tested by
an appeal to experience to see whether deductions made in accordance
with it will be found true in fact. The function of the hypothesis is to
unify, to furnish a method of dealing with things, and its structure
must be suitable to this end. It must be so formed that it will be
likely to prove valid, and writers have formulated various rules to be
followed in the formation of hypotheses. These rules state the main
requirements of a good hypothesis, and are intended to aid in a general
way by pointing out certain limits within which it must fall.

In respect to the origin of the hypothesis, writers have usually
contented themselves with pointing out the kind of situations in which
hypotheses are likely to appear. But after this has been done, after
favorable external conditions have been given, the rest must be left to
"genius," for hypotheses arise as "happy guesses," for which no rule or
law can be given. In fact, the genius differs from the ordinary plodding
mortal in just this ability to form fruitful hypotheses in the midst of
the same facts which to other less gifted individuals remain only so
many disconnected experiences.

This unequal stress which has been laid on the structure and function of
the hypothesis in comparison with its origin may be attributed to three
reasons: (1) The facts, or data, which constitute the working material
of hypotheses are regarded as given to all alike, and all alike are more
or less interested in systematizing and unifying experience. The purpose
of the hypothesis and the opportunity for forming it are thus
practically the same for all, and hence certain definite rules can be
laid down which will apply to all cases where hypotheses are to be
employed. (2) But beyond this there seems to be no clue that can be
formulated. There is apparently a more or less open acceptance of the
final answer of the boy Zerah Colburn, who, when pressed to give an
explanation of his method of instantaneous calculation, exclaimed in
despair: "God put it into my head, and I can't put it into yours."[56]
(3) And, furthermore, there is very often a strong tendency to disregard
investigation into the origin of that which is taken as given, for,
since it is already present, its origin, whatever it may have been, can
have nothing to do with what it is now. The facts, the data, are _here_,
and must be dealt with as they _are_. Their past, their history or
development, is entirely irrelevant. So, even if we could trace the
hypothesis farther back on the psychological side, the investigation
would be useless, for the rules to which a good hypothesis must conform
would remain the same.

Whether or not it can be shown that Zerah Colburn's ultimate explanation
is needed in logic as little as Laplace asserted a similar one to be
required in his celestial mechanics, it may at least be possible to
defer it to some extent by means of a further psychological inquiry. It
will be found that psychological inquiry into the origin of the
hypothesis is not irrelevant in respect to an understanding of its
structure and function; for origin and function cannot be understood
apart from each other, and, since structure must be adapted to function,
it cannot be independent of origin. In fact, origin, structure, and
function are organically connected, and each loses its meaning when
absolutely separated from each other. It will be found, moreover, that
the data which are commonly taken as the given material are not
something to which the hypothesis is subsequently applied, but that,
instead of this external relation between data and hypothesis, the
hypothesis exercises a directive function in determining what are the
data. In a word, the main object of this discussion will be to contend
against making a merely convenient and special way of regarding the
hypothesis a full and adequate one. Though we speak of facts and of
hypotheses that may be applied to them, it must not be forgotten that
there are no facts which remain the same whatever hypothesis be applied
to them; and that there are no hypotheses which are hypotheses at all
except in reference to their function in dealing with our subject-matter
in such a way as to facilitate its factual apprehension. Data are
selected in order to be determined, and hypotheses are the ways in which
this determination is carried on. If, as we shall attempt to show, the
relation between data and hypothesis is not external, but strictly
correlative, it is evident that this fact must be taken into account in
questions concerning deduction and induction, analytic and synthetic
judgments, and the criterion of truth. Its bearing must be recognized in
the investigation of metaphysical problems as well, for reality cannot
be independent of the knowing process. In a word, the purpose of this
discussion of the hypothesis is to determine its nature a little more
precisely through an investigation of its rather obscure origin, and to
call attention to certain features of its function which have not
generally been accorded their due significance.


I

_The hypothesis as predicate._--It is generally admitted that the
function of the hypothesis is to provide a way of dealing with the data
or subject-matter which we need to organize. In this use of the
hypothesis it appears in the rôle of predicate in a judgment of which
the data, or facts, to be construed constitute the subject.

In his attempts to reduce the movements of the planets about the sun to
some general formula, Kepler finally hit upon the law since known as
Kepler's law, viz., that the squares of the periodic times of the
several planets are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances
from the sun. This law was first tentatively advanced as a hypothesis.
Kepler was not certain of its truth till it had proved its claim to
acceptance. Neither did Newton have at first any great degree of
assurance in regard to his law of gravitation, and was ready to give it
up when he failed in his first attempt to test it by observation of the
moon. And the same thing may be said about the caution of Darwin and
other investigators in regard to accepting hypotheses. The only reason
for their extreme care in not accepting at once their tentative
formulations or suggestions was the fear that some other explanation
might be the correct one. This rejection of other possibilities is the
negative side of the matter. We become confident that our hypothesis is
the right one as we lose confidence in other possible explanations; and
it might be added, without falling into a circle, that we lose
confidence in the other possibilities as we become more convinced of our
hypothesis.

It appears that such may be the relation of the positive and negative
sides in case of such elaborate hypotheses as those of Kepler and
Newton; but is it true where our hypotheses are more simple? It is not
easy to understand why the fact that the hypothesis is more simple, and
the time required for its formulation and test a good deal shorter,
should materially change the state of affairs. The question remains:
Why, if there is no opposition, should there be any uncertainty? In all
instances, then, the hypothesis appears as one among other possible
predicates which may be applied to our data taken as subject-matter of a
judgment.

_The predicate as hypothesis._--Suppose, then, the hypothesis is a
predicate; is the predicate necessarily a hypothesis? This is the next
question we are called upon to answer, and, since the predicate cannot
very well be taken aside from the judgment, our question involves the
nature of the judgment.

While it will not be necessary to give a very complete account of the
various definitions of the judgment that might be adduced, still the
mention of a few of the more prominent ones may serve to indicate that
something further is needed. In definitions of the judgment sometimes
the subjective side is emphasized, sometimes the objective side, and in
other instances there are attempts to combine the two. For instance,
Lotze regards the judgment as the idea of a unity or relation between
two concepts, with the further implication that this connection holds
true of the object referred to. J. S. Mill says that every proposition
either affirms or denies existence, coexistence, sequence, causation, or
resemblance. Trendelenburg regards the judgment as a form of thought
which corresponds to the real connection of things, while Ueberweg
states the case a little differently, and says that the essence of
judgment consists in recognizing the objective validity of a subjective
connection of ideas. Royce points to a process of imitation and holds
that in the judgment we try to portray by means of the ideas that enter
into it. Ideas are imitative in their nature. Sigwart's view of the
judgment is that in it we say something about something. With him the
judgment is a synthetic process, while Wundt considers its nature
analytic and holds that, instead of uniting, or combining, concepts into
a whole, it separates them out of a total idea or presentation. Instead
of blending parts into a whole, it separates the whole into its
constituent parts. Bradley and Bosanquet both hold that in the judgment
an ideal content comes into relation with reality. Bradley says that in
every judgment reality is qualified by an idea, which is symbolic. The
ideal content is recognized as such, and is referred to a reality beyond
the act. This is the essence of judgment. Bosanquet seems to perceive a
closer relation between idea and reality, for although he says that
judgment is the "intellectual function which defines reality by
significant ideas," he also tells us that "the subject is both in and
out of the judgment, as Reality is both in and out of my consciousness."

In all these definitions of judgment the predicate appears as ideal. An
ideal content is predicated of something, whether we regard this
something as an idea or as reality beyond, or as reality partly within
and partly without the act of judging; and it is ideal whether we
consider it as one of the three parts into which judgments are usually
divided, or whether we say, with Bosanquet and Bradley, that subject,
predicate, and copula all taken together form a single ideal content,
which is somehow applied to reality. Moreover, we not only judge about
reality, but it seems to be quite immaterial to reality whether we judge
concerning it or not.

Many of our judgments prove false. Not only do we err in our judgments,
but we often hesitate in making them for fear of being wrong; we feel
there are other possibilities, and our predication becomes tentative.
Here we have something very like the hypothesis, for our ideal content
shows itself to be a tentative attempt in the presence of alternatives
to qualify and systematize reality. It appears, then, on the basis of
the views of the judgment that have been mentioned, that not only do we
find the hypothesis taking its place as the predicate of a judgment, but
the predicate is itself essentially of the nature of a hypothesis.

In the views of the judgment so far brought out, reality, with which it
is generally admitted that the judgment attempts to deal in some way,
appears to lie outside the act of judging. Now, everyone would say that
we make some advance in judging, and that we have a better grasp of
things after than before. But how is this possible if reality lies
without or beyond our act of judging? Is the reality we now have the
same that we had to begin with? If so, then we have made no advance as
far as the real itself is concerned. If merely our conception of it has
changed, then it is not clear why we may not be even worse off than
before. If reality does lie beyond our judgment, then how, in the nature
of the case, can we ever know whether we have approached it or have gone
still farther away? To make any claim of approximation implies that we
do reach reality in some measure, at least, and, if so, it is difficult
to understand how it lies beyond, and is independent of, the act of
judging.

_Further analysis of judgment._--It remains to be seen whether a further
investigation of the judgment will still show the predicate to be a
hypothesis. It is evident that in some cases the judgment appears at the
end of a more or less pronounced reflective process, during which other
possible judgments have suggested themselves, but have been rejected.
The history of scientific discovery is filled with cases which
illustrate the nature of the process by which a new theory is developed.
For instance, in Darwin's _Formation of Vegetable Mould through the
Action of Earth Worms_, we find the record of successive steps in the
development of his hypothesis. Darwin suspected from his observations
that vegetable mold was due to some agency which was not yet determined.
He reasoned that if vegetable mold is the result of the life-habits of
earthworms, _i. e._, if earth is brought up by them from beneath the
surface and afterward spread out by wind and rain, then small objects
lying on the surface of the ground would tend to disappear gradually
below the surface. Facts seemed to support his theory, for layers of red
sand, pieces of chalk, and stones were found to have disappeared below
the surface in a greater or less degree. A common explanation had been
that heavy objects tend to sink in soft soil through their own weight,
but the earthworm hypothesis led to a more careful examination of the
data. It was found that the weight of the object and the softness of the
ground made no marked difference, for sand and light objects sank, and
the ground was not always soft. In general, it was shown that where
earthworms were found vegetable mold was also present, and _vice versa_.

In this investigation of Darwin's the conflicting explanations of
sinking stones appear within the main question of the formation of
vegetable mold by earthworms. The facts that disagreed with the old
theory about sinking stones were approached through this new one. But
the theories had something in common, viz., the disappearance of the
stones or other objects: they differed in their further determination of
this disappearance. In this case it may seem as if the facts which were
opposed to the current theory of sinking stones were seen to be
discrepant only after the earthworm hypothesis had been advanced; the
conflict between the new facts and the old theory appears to have
arisen through the influence of the new theory.

There are cases, however, where the facts seem clearly to contradict the
old theory and thus give rise to a new one. For example, we find in
Darwin's introduction to his _Origin of Species_ the following: "In
considering the origin of species it is quite conceivable that a
naturalist reflecting on the mental affinities of organic beings, on
their embryological relations, their geographical distribution,
geological succession, and other such facts, might come to the
conclusion that species had not been independently created but had
descended, like varieties, from other species." It would seem from this
statement that certain data were found for which the older theory of
independent creation did not offer an adequate explanation. And yet the
naturalist would hardly "reflect" on all these topics in a comparative
way unless some other mode of interpretation were already dawning upon
him, which led him to review the accepted reflections or views.

As a more simple illustration, we may cite the common experience of a
person who is uncertain concerning the identity of an approaching
object, say, another person. At first he may not be sure it is a person
at all. He then sees that it is someone, and as the person approaches he
is inclined to believe him to be an acquaintance. As the supposed
acquaintance continues to approach, the observer may distinguish certain
features that cause him to doubt, and then relinquish his supposition
that it is an acquaintance. Or, he may conclude at once that the
approaching person is another individual he knows, and the transition
may be so readily made from one to the other that it would be difficult
to determine whether the discordant features are discordant before the
new supposition arises, or whether they are not recognized as
conflicting till this second person is in mind. Or, again, the
identification of the new individual and the discovery of the features
that are in conflict with the first supposition may appear to go on
together.

Now, marked lines of likeness appear between this relatively simple
judgment and the far more involved ones of scientific research. In the
more extended scientific process we find data contradicting an old
theory and a new hypothesis arising to account for them. The hypothesis
is tested, and along with its verification we have the rejection, or
rather the modification, of the old theory. Similarly, in case of the
approaching stranger all these features are present, though in less
pronounced degree. In scientific investigation there is an interval of
testing by means of more careful consideration of the data and even
actual experimentation. Before an explanation is accepted subject to
test, a number of others may have been suggested and rejected. They may
not have received even explicit recognition. In case of the
identification of the stranger this feature is also present. Between two
fairly definite attempts to identify the mind does not remain a mere
blank or stationary, but other possible identifications may be suggested
which do not have sufficient plausibility to command serious attention;
they are only comparatively brief suggestions or tendencies.

It is to be noted that in all these instances the first supposition was
not _entirely_ abandoned, but was modified and more exactly determined.
(Why it could not be wholly false and the new one wholly new, will be
considered later in connection with discussion of the persistence and
re-formation of habit.) There was such a modification of the old theory
as would meet the requirements of the new data, and the new explanations
thus contained both old and new features.

We have seen that the predicate of the scientific judgment is a
hypothesis which is consciously applied to certain data. If the
similarity between the scientific judgment and the more immediate and
simple judgment is to be maintained, it is clear that the predicate of
the simple judgment must be of like nature. The structure of the two
varieties of judgment differs only in the degree of explicitness which
the hypothesis acquires. That is, the predicate of a judgment, as such,
is ideal; it is meaning, significant quality. If conditions are such as
to make the one judging hesitant or doubtful the mind wavers; the
predicate is not applied at once to the determination or qualification
of data, and hence comes to more distinct consciousness on its own
account. From being "ideal," it becomes _an_ idea. Yet its sole purpose
and value remains in its possible use to interpret data. Let the idea
remain detached, and let the query whether it be a true predicate
(_i. e_., really fit to be employed in determining the present data)
become more critical, and the idea becomes clearly a hypothesis.[57] In
other words, the hypothesis is just the predicate-function of judgment
definitely apprehended and regarded with reference to its nature and
adequacy.

_Psychological analysis of judgment._--This hypothetical nature of the
predicate will be even more apparent after a further psychological
analysis, which, while applying more directly to the simpler and more
immediate judgments, may be extended to the more involved ones as well.

In psychological terms, we may say, in explanation of the judging
process, that some stimulus to action has failed to function properly as
a stimulus, and that the activity which was going on has thus been
interrupted. Response in the accustomed way has failed. In such a case
there arises a division in experience into sensation content as subject
and ideal content as predicate. In other words, an activity has been
going on in accordance with established habits, but upon failure of the
accustomed stimulus to be longer an adequate stimulus this particular
activity ceases, and is resumed in an integral form only when a new
habit is set up to which the new or altered stimulus is adequate. It is
in this process of reconstruction that subject and predicate appear.
Sensory quality marks the point of stress, or seeming arrest, while the
ideal or imaged aspect defines the continuing activity as projected, and
hence that with which start is to be made in coping with the obstacle.
It serves as standpoint of regard and mode of indicated behavior. The
sensation stands for the interrupted habit, while the image stands for
the new habit, that is, the new way of dealing with the
subject-matter.[58]

It appears, then, that the purpose of the judgment is to obtain an
adequate stimulus in that, when stimulus and response are adjusted to
each other, activity will be resumed. But if this reconstruction and
response were to follow at once, would there be any clearly defined act
of judging at all? In such a case there would be no judgment, properly
speaking, and no occasion for it. There would be simply a ready
transition from one line of activity to another; we should have changed
our method of reaction easily and readily to meet the new requirements.
On the one hand, our subject-matter would not have become a clearly
recognized datum with which we must deal; on the other hand, there would
be no ideal method of construing it.[59] Activity would have changed
without interruption, and neither subject nor predicate would have
arisen.

In order that judgment may take place there must be interruption and
suspense. Under what conditions, then, is this suspense and uncertainty
possible? Our reply must be that we hesitate because of more or less
sharply defined alternatives; we are not sure which predicate, which
method of reaction, is the right one. The clearness with which these
alternatives come to mind depends upon the degree of explicitness of the
judgment, or, more exactly, the explicitness of the judgment depends
upon the sharpness of these alternatives. Alternatives may be carefully
weighed one against the other, as in deliberative judgments; or they may
be scarcely recognized as alternatives, as in the case in the greater
portion of our more simple judgments of daily conduct.

_The predicate is essentially hypothetical._--If we review in a brief
résumé the types of judgment we have considered, we find in the explicit
scientific judgment a fairly well-defined subject-matter which we seek
further to determine. Different suggestions present themselves with
varying degrees of plausibility. Some are passed by as soon as they
arise. Others gain a temporary recognition. Some are explicitly tested
with resulting acceptance or rejection. The acceptance of any one
explanation involves the rejection of some other explanation. During the
process of verification or test the newly advanced supposition is
recognized to be more or less doubtful. Besides the hypothesis which is
tentatively applied there is recognized the possibility of others. In
the disjunctive judgment these possible reactions are thought to be
limited to certain clearly defined alternatives, while in the less
explicit judgments they are not so clearly brought out. Throughout the
various forms of judgment, from the most complex and deliberate down to
the most simple and immediate, we found that a process could be traced
which was like in kind and varied only in degree. And, finally, in the
most immediate judgments where some of these features seem to disappear,
the same account not only appears to be the most reasonable one, but
there is the additional consideration, from the psychological side, that
were not the judgment of this doubtful, tentative character, it would be
difficult to understand how there could be judgment as distinct from a
reflex. It appears, then, that throughout, the predicate is essentially
of the nature of a hypothesis for dealing with the subject-matter. And,
however simple and immediate, or however involved and prolonged, the
judgment may be, it is to be regarded as essentially a process of
reconstruction which aims at the resumption of an interrupted
experience; and when experience has become itself a consciously
intellectual affair, at the restoration of a unified objective
situation.


II

_Criticism of certain views concerning the hypothesis._--The explanation
we have given of the hypothesis will enable us to criticise the
treatment it has received from the empirical and the rationalistic
schools. We shall endeavor to point out that these schools have, in
spite of their opposed views, an assumption in common--something given
in a fixed, or non-instrumental way; and that consequently the
hypothesis is either impossible or else futile.

Bacon is commonly recognized as a leader in the reactionary inductive
movement, which arose with the decline of scholasticism, and will serve
as a good example of the extreme empirical position. In place of
authority and the deductive method, Bacon advocated a return to nature
and induction from data given through observation. The new method which
he advanced has both a positive and a negative side. Before any
positive steps can be taken, the mind must be cleared of the various
false opinions and prejudices that have been acquired. This preliminary
task of freeing the mind from "phantoms," or "eidola," which Bacon
likened to the cleansing of the threshing-floor, having been
accomplished, nature should be carefully interrogated. There must be no
hasty generalization, for the true method "collects axioms from sense
and particulars, ascending continuously and by degrees, so that in the
end it arrives at the most general axioms." These axioms of Bacon's are
generalizations based on observation, and are to be applied deductively,
but the distinguishing feature of Bacon's induction is its carefully
graduated steps. Others, too, had proceeded with caution (for instance
Galileo), but Bacon laid more stress than they on the subordination of
steps.

It is evident that Bacon left very little room for hypotheses, and this
is in keeping with his aversion to anticipation of nature by means of
"phantoms" of any sort; he even said explicitly that "our method of
discovery in science is of such a nature that there is not much left to
acuteness and strength of genius, but all degrees of genius and
intellect are brought nearly to the same level."[60] Bacon gave no
explanation of the function of the hypothesis; in his opinion it had no
lawful place in scientific procedure and must be banished as a
disturbing element. Instead of the reciprocal relation between
hypothesis and data, in which hypothesis is not only tested in
experience, but at the same time controls in a measure the very
experience which tests it, Bacon would have a gradual extraction of
general laws from nature through direct observation. He is so afraid of
the distorting influence of conception that he will have nothing to do
with conception upon any terms. So fearful is he of the influence of
pre-judgment, of prejudice, that he will have no judging which depends
upon ideas, since the idea involves anticipation of the fact.
Particulars are somehow to arrange and classify themselves, and to
record or register, in a mind free from conception, certain
generalizations. Ideas are to be registered derivatives of the given
particulars. This view is the essence of empiricism as a logical theory.
If the views regarding the logic of thought before set forth are
correct, it goes without saying that such empiricism is condemned to
self-contradiction. It endeavors to construct judgment in terms of its
subject alone; and the subject, as we have seen, is always a
co-respondent to a predicate--an idea or mental attitude or tendency of
intellectual determination. Thus the subject of judgment can be
determined only with reference to a corresponding determination of the
predicate. Subject and predicate, fact and idea, are contemporaneous,
not serial in their relations (see pp. 110-12).

Less technically the failure of Bacon's denial of the worth of
hypothesis--which is in such exact accord with empiricism in
logic--shows itself in his attitude toward experimentation and toward
observation. Bacon's neglect of experimentation is not an accidental
oversight, but is bound up with his view regarding the worthlessness of
conception or anticipation. To experiment means to set out from an idea
as well as from facts, and to try to construe, or even to discover,
facts in accordance with the idea. Experimentation not only anticipates,
but strives to make good an anticipation. Of course, this struggle is
checked at every point by success or failure, and thus the hypothesis is
continuously undergoing in varying ratios both confirmation and
transformation. But this is not to make the hypothesis secondary to the
fact. It is simply to remain true to the proposition that the
distinction and the relationship of the two is a thoroughly
contemporaneous one. But it is impossible to draw any fixed line between
experimentation and scientific observations. To insist upon the need of
systematic observation and collection of particulars is to set up a
principle which is as distinct from the casual accumulation of
impressions as it is from nebulous speculation. If there is to be
observation of a directed sort, it must be with reference to some
problem, some doubt, and this, as we have seen, is a stimulus which
throws the mind into a certain attitude of response. Controlled
observation is inquiry, it is search; consequently it must be search for
something. Nature cannot answer interrogations excepting as such
interrogations are put; and the putting of a question involves
anticipation. The observer does not inquire about anything or look for
anything excepting as he is after something. This search implies at once
the incompleteness of the particular given facts, and the
possibility--that is ideal--of their completion.

It was not long until the development of natural science compelled a
better understanding of its actual procedure than Bacon possessed.
Empiricism changed to experimentalism. With experimentalism inevitably
came the recognition of hypotheses in observing, collecting, and
comparing facts. It is clear, for instance, that Newton's fruitful
investigations are not conducted in accordance with the Baconian notion.
It is quite clear that his celebrated four rules for philosophizing[61]
are in truth statements of certain principles which are to be observed
in forming hypotheses. They imply that scientific technique had advanced
to a point where hypotheses were such regular and indispensable factors
that certain uniform conditions might be laid down for their use. The
fourth rule in particular is a statement of the relative validity of
hypothesis as such until there is ground for entertaining a contrary
hypothesis.

The subsequent history of logical theory in England is conditioned upon
its attempt to combine into one system the theories of empiristic logic
with recognition of the procedure of experimental science. This attempt
finds its culmination in the logic of John Stuart Mill. Of his interest
in and fidelity to the actual procedure of experimental science, as he
saw it, there can be no doubt. Of his good faith in concluding his
_Introduction_ with the words following there can be no doubt: "I can
conscientiously affirm that no one proposition laid down in this work
has been adopted for the sake of establishing, or with any reference for
its fitness in being employed in establishing, preconceived opinions in
any department of knowledge or of inquiry on which the speculative world
is still undecided." Yet Mill was equally attached to the belief that
ultimate reality, as it is for the human mind, is given in sensations,
independent of ideas; and that all valid ideas are combinations and
convenient ways of using such given material. Mill's very sincerity made
it impossible that this belief should not determine, at every point, his
treatment of the thinking process and of its various instrumentalities.

In Book III, chap. 14, Mill discusses the logic of explanation, and in
discussing this topic naturally finds it necessary to consider the
matter of the proper use of scientific hypotheses. This is conducted
from the standpoint of their use as that is reflected in the technique
of scientific discovery. In Book IV, chap. 2, he discusses "Abstraction
or the Formation of Conceptions"--a topic which obviously involves the
forming of hypotheses. In this chapter, his consideration is conducted
in terms, not of scientific procedure, but of general philosophical
theory, and this point of view is emphasized by the fact that he is
opposing a certain view of Dr. Whewell.

The contradiction between the statements in the two chapters will serve
to bring out the two points already made, viz., the correspondent
character of datum and hypothesis, and the origin of the latter in a
problematic situation and its consequent use as an instrument of
unification and solution. Mill first points out that hypotheses are
invented to enable the deductive method to be applied earlier to
phenomena; that it does this by suppressing the first of the three
steps, induction, ratiocination, and verification. He states that:

    The process of tracing regularity in any complicated, and at first
    sight confused, set of appearances is necessarily tentative; we
    begin by making any supposition, even a false one, to see what
    consequences will follow from it; and by observing how these
    differ from the real phenomena, we learn what corrections to make
    in our assumption.... _Neither induction nor deduction would
    enable us to understand even the simplest phenomena_, if we did
    not often commence by anticipating the results; by making a
    provisional supposition, at first essentially conjectural, as to
    some of the very notions which constitute the final object of the
    inquiry.[62]

If in addition we recognize that, according to Mill, our direct
experience of nature always presents us with a complicated and confused
set of appearances, we shall be in no doubt as to the importance of
ideas as anticipations of a possible experience not yet had. Thus he
says:

    The order of nature, as perceived at a first glance, presents at
    every instant a chaos followed by another chaos. We must decompose
    each chaos into single facts. We must learn to see in the chaotic
    antecedent a multitude of distinct antecedents, in the chaotic
    consequent a multitude of distinct consequents.[63]

In the next section of the same chapter he goes on to state that, having
discriminated the various antecedents and consequents, we then "are to
inquire which is connected with which." This requires a still further
resolution of the complex and of the confused. To effect this we must
vary the circumstances; we must modify the experience as given with
reference to accomplishing our purpose. To accomplish this purpose we
have recourse either to observation or to experiment: "We may either
_find_ an instance in nature _suited to our purposes_, or, by an
artificial arrangement of circumstances, _make_ one" (the italics in
"suited to our purpose" are mine; the others are Mill's). He then goes
on to say that there is no real logical distinction between observation
and experimentation. The four methods of experimental inquiry are
expressly discussed by Mill in terms of their worth in singling out and
connecting the antecedents and consequents which actually belong
together, from the chaos and confusion of direct experience.

We have only to take these statements in their logical connection with
each other (and this connection runs through the entire treatment by
Mill of scientific inquiry), to recognize the absolute necessity of
hypothesis to undertaking any directed inquiry or scientific operation.
Consequently we are not surprised at finding him saying that "the
function of hypotheses is one which must be reckoned absolutely
indispensable in science;" and again that "the hypothesis by suggesting
observations and experiments puts us on the road to independent
evidence."[64]

Since Mill's virtual retraction, from the theoretical point of view, of
what is here said from the standpoint of scientific procedure, regarding
the necessity of ideas is an accompaniment of his criticism of Whewell,
it will put the discussion in better perspective if we turn first to
Whewell's views.[65] The latter began by stating a distinction which
easily might have been developed into a theory of the relation of fact
and idea which is in line with that advanced in this chapter, and indeed
in this volume as a whole. He questions (chap. 2) the fixity of the
distinction between theory and practice. He points out that what we term
facts are in effect simply accepted inferences; and that what we call
theories are describable as facts, in proportion as they become
thoroughly established. A true theory is a fact. "All the great theories
which have successively been established in the world are now thought of
as facts." "The most recondite theories when firmly established are
accepted as facts; the simplest facts seem to involve something of the
nature of theory."

The conclusion is that the distinction is a historic one, depending upon
the state of knowledge at the time, and upon the attitude of the
individual. What is theory for one epoch, or for one inquirer in a given
epoch, is fact for some other epoch, or even for some other more
advanced inquirer in the same epoch. It is theory when the element of
inference involved in judging any fact is consciously brought out; it is
fact when the conditions are such that we have never been led to
question the inference involved, or else, having questioned it, have so
thoroughly examined into the inferential process that there is no need
of holding it further before the mind, and it relapses into
unconsciousness again. "If this greater or less consciousness of our own
internal act be all that distinguishes fact from theory, we must allow
that the distinction is still untenable" (untenable, that is to say, as
a fixed separation). Again, "fact and theory have no essential
difference except in the degree of their _certainty and familiarity_.
Theory, when it becomes firmly established and steadily lodged in the
mind becomes fact." (P. 45; italics mine.) And, of course, it is equally
true that as fast as facts are suspected or doubted, certain aspects of
them are transferred into the class of theories and even of mere
opinions.

I say this conception might have been developed in a way entirely
congruous with the position of this chapter. This would have happened if
the final distinction between fact and idea had been formulated upon the
basis simply of the points, "relative certainty and familiarity." From
this point of view the distinction between fact and idea is one purely
relative to the doubt-inquiry function. It has to do with the evolution
of an experience as regards its conscious surety. It has its origin in
problematic situations. Whatever appears to us as a problem appears as
contrasted with a possible solution. Whatever objects of thought refer
particularly to the problematic side are theories, ideas, hypotheses;
whatever relates to the solution side is surety, unquestioned
familiarity, fact. This point of view makes the distinctions entirely
relative to the exigencies of the process of reflective transformation
of experience.

Whewell, however, had no sooner started in this train of thought than he
turns his back upon it. In chap. 3 he transforms what he had proclaimed
to be a relative, historic, and working distinction into a fixed and
absolute one. He distinguishes between sensations and ideas, not upon a
genetic basis with reference to establishing the conditions of further
operation; but with reference to a fundamentally fixed line of
demarkation between what is passively _given_ to the mind and the
_activity_ put forth by the mind. Thus he reinstates in its most
generalized and fixed, and therefore most vicious, form the separation
which he has just rejected. Sensations are a brute unchangeable element
of fact which exists and persists independent of ideas; an idea is a
mode of mental operation which occurs and recurs in an independent
individuality of its own. If he had carried out the line of thought with
which he began, sensation as fact would have been that residuum of
familiarity and certainty which cannot be eliminated, however much else
of an experience is dissolved in the inner conflict. Idea as hypothesis
or theory would have been the corresponding element in experience which
is necessary to redintegrate this residuum into a coherent and
significant experience.

But since Whewell did not follow out his own line of thought, choosing
rather to fall back on the Kantian antithesis of sense and thought, he
had no sooner separated his fact and idea, his given datum and his
mental relation, than he is compelled to get them together again. The
idea becomes "a general relation which is imposed upon perception by an
act of the mind, and which is different from anything which our senses
directly offer to us" (p. 26). Such conceptions are necessary to connect
the facts which we learn from our senses into truths. "The ideal
conception which the mind itself supplies is superinduced upon the facts
as they are originally presented to observation. Before the inductive
truth is detected, the facts are there, but they are many and
unconnected. The conception which the discoverer applies to them gives
them connection and unity." (P. 42.) All induction, according to
Whewell, thus depends upon superinduction--imposition upon sensory data
of certain ideas or general relations existing independently in the
mind.[66]

We do not need to present again the objections already offered to this
view: the impossibility of any orderly stimulation of ideas by facts,
and the impossibility of any check in the imposition of idea upon fact.
"Facts" and conception are so thoroughly separate and independent that
any sensory datum is indifferently and equally related to any
conceivable idea. There is no basis for "superinducing" one idea or
hypothesis, rather than any other, upon any particular set of data.

In the chapter already referred to upon abstraction, or the formation of
conceptions, Mill seizes upon this difficulty. Yet he and Whewell have
one point in common: they both agree in the existence of a certain
subject-matter which is given for logical purposes quite outside of the
logical process itself. Mill agrees with Whewell in postulating a raw
material of pure sensational data. In criticising Whewell's theory of
superinduction of idea upon fact, he is therefore led to the opposite
assertion of the complete dependence of ideas as such upon the given
facts as such--in other words, he is led to a reiteration of the
fundamental Baconian empiricism; and thus to a virtual retraction of
what he had asserted regarding the necessity of ideas to fruitful
scientific inquiry, whether in the way of observation or
experimentation. The following quotation gives a fair notion of the
extent of Mill's retraction:

    The conceptions then which we employ for the colligation and
    methodization of facts, do not develop themselves from within,
    _but are impressed upon the mind from without_; they are never
    obtained otherwise than by way of comparison and abstraction, and,
    in the most important and most numerous cases, are evolved by
    abstraction _from the very phenomena which it is their office to
    colligate_.[67]

Even here Mill's sense for the positive side of scientific inquiry
suffices to reveal to him that the "facts" are somehow inadequate and
defective, and are in need of assistance from ideas--and yet the ideas
which are to help out the facts are to be the impress of the unsure
facts! The contradiction comes out very clearly when Mill says: "The
really difficult cases are those in which the conception destined to
create light and order out of darkness and confusion has to be sought
for among the very phenomena which it afterward serves to arrange."[68]

Of course, there is a sense in which Mill's view is very much nearer the
truth than is Whewell's. Mill at least sees that "idea" must be relevant
to the facts or data which it is to arrange, which are to have "light
and order" introduced into them by means of the idea. He sees clearly
enough that this is impossible save as the idea develops _within_ the
same experience in which the "dark and confused" facts are presented. He
goes on to show correctly enough how conflicting data lead the mind to a
"confused feeling of an analogy" between the data of the confused
experience and of some other experience which is orderly (or already
colligated and methodized); and how this vague feeling, through
processes of further exploration and comparison of experiences, gets a
clearer and more adequate form until we finally accept it. He shows how
in this process we continually judge of the worth of the idea which is
in process of formation, by reference to its appropriateness to _our
purpose_. He goes so far as to say: "The question of appropriateness is
relative to the _particular object we have in view_."[69] He sums up his
discussion by stating: "We cannot frame good general conceptions
beforehand. That the conception we have obtained is the one we want can
only be known when we have _done the work for the sake of which we
wanted it_."[70]

This all describes the actual state of the case, but it is consistent
only with a logical theory which makes the distinction between fact and
hypothesis instrumental in the transformation of experience from a
confused into an organized form; not with Mill's notion that sensations
are somehow finally and completely given as ultimate facts, and that
ideas are mere re-registrations of such facts. It is perfectly just to
say that the hypothesis is impressed upon the mind (in the sense that
any notion which occurs to the mind is impressed) _in the course_ of an
experience. It is well enough, if one define what he means, to say that
the hypothesis is impressed (that is to say, occurs or is suggested)
through the medium of given facts, or even of sensations. But it is
equally true that the _facts_ are presented and that _sensations_ occur
within the course of an experience which is larger than the bare facts,
because involving the conflicts among them and the corresponding
intention to treat them in some fashion which will secure a unified
experience. Facts get power to suggest ideas to the mind--to
"impress"--only through their position in an entire experience which is
in process of disintegration and of reconstruction--their "fringe" or
feeling of tendency is quite as factual as they are. The fact that "the
conception we have obtained is the one we want can be known only when we
have done the work for the sake of which we wanted it," is enough to
show that it is not bare facts, but facts in relation to want and
purpose and purpose in relation to facts, which originate the
hypothesis.

It would be interesting to follow the history of discussion of the
hypothesis since the time of Whewell and of Mill, particularly in the
writings of Jevons, Venn, and Bosanquet. This history would refine the
terms of our discussion by introducing more complex distinctions and
relations. But it would be found, I think, only to refine, not to
introduce any fundamentally new principles. In each case, we find the
writer struggling with the necessity of distinguishing between fact and
idea; of giving the fact a certain primacy with respect to testing of
idea and of giving the idea a primacy with respect to the significance
and orderliness of the fact; and of holding throughout to a relationship
of idea with fact so intimate that the idea develops only by being
"compared" with facts (that is, used in construing them), and facts get
to be known only as they are "connected" through the idea--and we find
that what is a maze of paradoxes and inconsistencies from an absolute,
from a non-historic standpoint, is a matter of course the moment
it is looked at from the standpoint of experience engaged in
self-transformation of meaning through conflict and reconstitution.

But we can only note one or two points. Jevons's "infinite ballot-box"
of nature which is absolutely neutral as to any particular conception or
idea, and which accordingly requires as its correlate the formation of
every possible hypothesis (all standing in themselves upon the same
level of probability) is an interesting example of the logical
consequences of feeling the need of both fact and hypothesis for
scientific procedure and yet regarding them as somehow arising
independently of each other. It is an attempt to combine extreme
empiricism and extreme rationalism. The process of forming hypotheses
and of deducing their rational consequences goes on at random, because
the disconnectedness of facts as given is so ultimate that the facts
suggest one hypothesis no more readily than another. Mathematics, in its
two forms of measurements as applied to the facts, and of calculation as
applied in deduction, furnishes Jevons the bridge by which he finally
covers the gulf which he has first himself created. Venn's theory
requires little or no restatement to bring it into line with the
position taken in the text. He holds to the origin of hypothesis in the
original practical needs of mankind, and to its gradual development into
present scientific form.[71] He states expressly:

    The _distinction between what is known and what is not known is
    essential to Logic_, and peculiarly characteristic of it in a
    degree not to be found in any other science. Inference is the
    process of passing from one to the other; from facts which we had
    accepted as premises, to those which we have not yet accepted,
    _but are in the act of doing so by the very process in question_.
    No scrutiny of the facts themselves, regarded as objective, can
    ever detect these characteristics of their greater or less
    familiarity to our minds. We must introduce also the subjective
    element if we wish to give any adequate explanation of them.[72]

Venn, however, does not attempt a thoroughgoing statement of logical
distinctions, relations, and operations, as parts "of the act of passing
from the unknown to the known." He recognizes the relation of reflection
to a historic process, which we have here termed "reconstruction," and
the origin and worth of hypothesis as a tool in the movement, but does
not carry his analysis to a systematic form.


III

_Origin of the hypothesis._--In our analysis of the process of judgment,
we attempted to show that the predicate arises in case of failure of
some line of activity going on in terms of an established habit. When
the old habit is checked through failure to deal with new conditions
(_i. e._, when the situation is such as to stimulate two habits with
distinct aims) the problem is to find a new method of response--that is,
to co-ordinate the conflicting tendencies by building up a single aim
which will function the existing situation. As we saw that, in case of
judgment, habit when checked became ideal, an idea, so the new habit is
first formalized as an ideal type of reaction and is the hypothesis by
which we attempt to construe new data. In our inquiry as to how this
formulation is effected, _i. e._, how the hypothesis is developed, it
will be convenient to take some of the currently accepted statements as
to their origin, and show how these statements stand in reference to the
analysis proposed.

_Enumerative induction and allied processes._--It is pointed out by
Welton[73] that the various ways in which hypotheses are suggested may
be reduced to three classes, viz., enumerative induction, conversion of
propositions, and analogy. Under the head of "enumeration" he reminds us
that "every observed regularity of connection between phenomena suggests
a question as to whether it is universal." There are numerous instances
of this in mathematics. For example, it is noticed that 1+3=2^2,
1+3+5=3^2, 1+3+5+7=4^2, etc.; and one is led to ask whether there is any
general principle involved, so that the sum of the first _n_ odd numbers
will be _n_^2, where _n_ is any number, however great. In this early
form of inductive inference there are two divergent tendencies. One is
the tendency to complete enumeration. This _tendency_ is clearly
ideal--it transcends the facts as given. To look for all the cases is
thus itself an experimental inquiry, based upon a hypothesis which it
endeavors to test. But in most cases enumeration can be only incomplete,
and we are able to reach nothing better than probability. Hence the
other tendency in the direction of an analysis of content in search for
a principle of connection in the elements in any _one_ case. For if a
characteristic belonging to a number of individuals suggests a class
where it belongs to all individuals, it must be that it is found in
every individual as such. The hypothesis of complete class involves a
hypothesis as to the character of each individual in the class. Thus a
hypothesis as to extension transforms itself into one as to intension.

But it is analogy which Welton considers "the chief source from which
new hypotheses are drawn." In the second tendency mentioned under
enumerative induction, that is, the tendency to analysis of content or
intension, we are naturally led to analogy, for in our search for the
characteristic feature which determines classification among the
concrete particulars our first step will be an inference by analogy. In
analogy attention is turned from the number of observed instances to
their character, and, because particulars have some feature in common,
they are supposed to be the same in still other respects. While the best
we can reach in analogy is probability, the arguments may be such as to
result in a high degree of certainty. The form of the argument is
valuable in so far as we are able to distinguish between essential and
nonessential characteristics on which to base our analogy. What is
essential and what nonessential depends upon the particular end we have
in view.

In addition to enumerative induction, which Welton has mentioned, it is
to be noted that there are a number of other processes which are very
similar to it in that a number of particulars appear to furnish a basis
for a general principle or method. Such instances are common in
induction, in instruction, and in methods of proof.

If one is to be instructed in some new kind of labor, he is supposed to
acquire a grasp of the method after having been shown in a few instances
how this particular work is to be done; and, if he performs the
manipulations himself, so much the better. It is not asked why the
experience of a few cases should be of any assistance, for it seems
self-evident that an experienced man, a man who has acquired the skill,
or knack, of doing things, should deal better with all other cases of
similar nature.

There is something very similar in inductive proofs, as they are called.
The inductive proof is common in algebra. Suppose we are concerned in
proving the law of expansion of the binomial theorem. We show by actual
calculation that, if the law holds good for the _n_th power, it is true
for the _n_+first power. That is, if it holds for any power, it holds
for the next also. But we can easily show that it does hold for, say,
the second power. Then it must be true for the third, and hence for the
fourth, and so on. Whether this law, though discovered by inductive
processes, depends on deduction for the conclusiveness of its proof, as
Jevons holds;[74] whether, as Erdmann[75] contends, the proof is
thoroughly deductive; or whether Wundt[76] is right in maintaining that
it is based on an exact analogy, while the fundamental axioms of
mathematics are inductive, it is clear that in such proofs a few
instances are employed to give the learner a start in the right
direction. Something suggests itself, and is found true in this case, in
the next, and again in the next, and so on. It may be questioned whether
there is usually a very clear notion of what is involved in the "so on."
To many it appears to mark the point where, after having been taken a
few steps, the learner is carried on by the acquired momentum somewhat
after the fashion of one of Newton's laws of motion. Whether the few
successive steps are an integral part of the proof or merely serve as
illustration, they are very generally resorted to. In fact, they are
often employed where there is no attempt to introduce a general term
such as _n_, or _k_, or _l_, but the few individual instances are deemed
quite sufficient. Such, for instance, is the custom in arithmetical
processes. We call attention to these facts in order to show that
successive cases are utilized in the course of explanation as an aid in
establishing the generality of a law.

In geometry we find a class of proofs in which the successive steps seem
to have great significance. A common proof of the area of the circle
will serve as a fair example. A regular polygon is circumscribed about
the circle. Then as the number of its sides are increased its area will
approach that of the circle, as its perimeter approaches the
circumference of the circle. The area of the circle is thus inferred to
be [pi]_R_^2, since the area of the polygon is always (1/2)_R_×
perimeter, and in case of the circle the circumference = 2[pi]_R_.
Here again we get under such headway by means of the polygon that we
arrive at the circle with but little difficulty. Had we attempted the
transition at once, say, from a circumscribed square, we should
doubtless have experienced some uncertainty and might have recoiled from
what would seem a rash attempt; but as the number of the sides of our
polygon approach infinity--that mysterious realm where many paradoxical
things become possible--the transition becomes so easy that our polygon
is often said to have truly become a circle.

Similarly, some statements of the infinitesimal calculus rest on the
assumption that slight degrees of difference may be neglected. Though
the more modern theory of limits has largely displaced this attitude in
calculus and has also changed the method of proof in such geometrical
problems as the area of the circle, the underlying motive seems to have
been to make transitions easy, and thus to make possible a continued
application of some particular method or way of dealing with things.

But granted that this is all true, what has it to do with the origin of
the hypothesis? It seems likely that the hypothesis may be suggested by
a few successive instances; but are these to be classed with the
successive steps in proof to which we have referred? In the first place,
we attempt to prove our hypothesis because we are not sure it is true;
we are not satisfied that there are no other tenable hypotheses. But if
we do test it, is not such test enough? It depends upon how thorough a
grasp we have of the situation; but, in general, each test case adds to
its probability. The value of tests lies in the fact that they
strengthen and tend to confirm our hypothesis by checking the force of
alternatives. One instance is not sufficient because there are other
possible incipient hypotheses, or more properly tendencies, and the
enumeration serves to bring one of these tendencies into prominence in
that it diminishes other vague and perhaps subconscious tendencies and
strengthens the one which suddenly appears as the mysterious product of
genius.

The question might arise why the mere repetition of conflicting
tendencies would lead to a predominance of one of them. Why would they
not all remain in conflict and continue to check any positive result? It
is probably because there never is any absolute equilibrium. The
successive instances tend to intensify and bring into prominence some
tendency which is already taking a lead, so to speak. And it may be said
further in this connection that only as seen from the outside, only as a
mechanical view is taken, does there appear to be an excluding of
definitely made out alternatives.

In explanation of the part played by analogy in the origin of
hypotheses, Welton points out that a mere number of instances do not
take us very far, and that there must be some "_specification_ of the
instances as well as numbering of them," and goes on to show that the
argument by enumerative induction passes readily into one from analogy,
as soon as attention is turned from the number of the observed instances
to their character. It is not necessary, however, to pass to analogy
through enumerative induction. "When the instances presented to
observation offer immediately the characteristic marks on which we base
the inference to the connection of S and P, we can proceed at once to an
inference from analogy, without any preliminary enumeration of the
instances."[77]

Welton, and logicians generally, regard analogy as an inference on the
basis of partial identity. Because of certain common features we are led
to infer a still greater likeness.

Both enumerative induction and analogy are explicable in terms of habit.
We saw in our examination of enumerative induction that a form of
reaction gains strength through a series of successful applications.
Analogy marks the presence of an identical element together with the
tendency to extend this "partial identity" (as it is commonly called)
still farther. In other words, in analogy it is suggested that a type of
reaction which is the same in certain respects may be made similar in a
greater degree. In enumerative induction we lay stress on the number of
instances in which the habit is applied. In analogy we emphasize the
content side and take note of the partial identity. In fact, the
relation between enumerative induction and analogy is of the same sort
as that existing between association by contiguity and association by
similarity. In association by contiguity we think of the things
associated as merely standing in certain temporal or spatial relations,
and disregard the fact that they were elements in a larger experience.
In case of association by similarity we regard the like feature in the
things associated as a basis for further correction.

In conversion of propositions we try to reverse the direction of the
reaction, so to speak, and thereby to free the habit, to get a mode of
response so generalized as to act with a minimum cue. For instance, we
can deal with A in a way called B, or, in other words, in the same way
that we did with other things called B. If we say, "Man is an animal,"
then to a certain extent the term "animal" signifies the way in which we
regard "man." But the question arises whether we can regard all animals
as we do man. Evidently not, for the reaction which is fitting in case
of animals would be only partially applicable to man. With the animals
that are also men we have the beginning of a habit which, if unchecked,
would lead to a similar reaction toward all animals, _i. e._, we would
say: "All animals are men." Man may be said to be the richer concept, in
that only a part of the reaction which determines an object to be a man
is required to designate it as an animal. On the other hand, if we start
with animal, then (except in case of the animals which are men) there is
lacking the subject-matter which would permit the fuller concept to be
applied. By supplying the conditions under which animal=man we get a
reversible habit. The equation of technical science has just this
character. It represents the maximum freeing or abstraction of a
predicate _qua_ predicate, and thereby multiplies the possible
applications of it to subjects of future judgments, and lessens the
amount of shearing away of irrelevancies and of re-adaptation necessary
when so used in any particular case.

_Formation and test of the hypothesis._--The formation of the hypothesis
is commonly regarded as essentially different from the process of
testing, which it subsequently undergoes. We are said to observe facts,
invent hypotheses, and _then_ test them. The hypothesis is not required
for our preliminary observations; and some writers, regarding the
hypothesis as a formulation which requires a difficult and elaborate
test, decline to admit as hypotheses those more simple suppositions,
which are readily confirmed or rejected. A very good illustration of
this point of view is met with in Wundt's discussion of the hypothesis,
by an examination of which we hope to show that such distinctions are
rather artificial than real.

The subject-matter of science, says Wundt,[78] is constituted by that
which is actually given and that which is actually to be expected. The
whole content is not limited to this, however, for these facts must be
supplemented by certain presuppositions, which are not given in a
factual sense. Such presuppositions are called hypotheses and are
justified by our fundamental demand for unity. However valuable the
hypothesis may be when rightly used, there is constant danger of
illegitimately extending it by additions that spring from mere
inclinations of fancy. Furthermore, the hypothesis in this proper
scientific sense must be carefully distinguished from the various
inaccurate uses, which are prevalent. For instance, hypotheses must not
be confused with expectations of fact. As cases in point Wundt mentions
Galileo's suppositions that small vibrations of the pendulum are
isochronous, and that the space traversed by a falling body is
proportional to the square of the time it has been falling. It is true
that such anticipations play an important part in science, but so long
as they relate to the facts themselves or to their connections, and can
be confirmed or rejected any moment through observation, they should not
be classed with those added presuppositions which are used to
co-ordinate facts. Hence not all suppositions are hypotheses. On the
other hand, not every hypothesis can be actually experienced. For
example, one employs in physics the hypothesis of electric fluid, but
does not expect actually to meet with it. In many cases, however, the
hypothesis becomes proved as an experienced fact. Such was the course of
the Copernican theory, which was at first only a hypothesis, but was
transformed into fact through the evidence afforded by subsequent
astronomical observation.

Wundt defines a theory as a hypothesis taken together with the facts for
whose elucidation it was invented. In thus establishing a connection
between the facts which the hypothesis merely suggested, the theory
furnishes at the same time partly the foundation (_Begründung_) and
partly the confirmation (_Bestätigung_) of the hypothesis.[79] These
aspects, Wundt insists, must be sharply distinguished. Every hypothesis
must have its _Begründung_, but there can be _Bestätigung_ only in so
far as the hypothesis contains elements which are accessible to actual
processes of verification. In most cases verification is attainable in
only certain elements of the hypothesis. For example, Newton was obliged
to limit himself to one instance in the verification of his theory of
gravitation, viz., the movements of the moon. The other heavenly bodies
afforded nothing better than a foundation in that the supposition that
gravity decreases as the square of the distance increases enabled him to
deduce the movements of the planets. The main object of his theory,
however, lay in the deduction of these movements and not in the proof of
universal gravity. With the Darwinian theory, on the contrary, the main
interest is in seeking its verification through examination of actual
cases of development. Thus, while the Newtonian and the greater part of
the other physical theories lead to a deduction of the facts from the
hypotheses, which can be verified only in individual instances, the
Darwinian theory is concerned in evolving as far as possible the
hypothesis out of the facts.

Let us look more closely at Wundt's position. We will ask, first,
whether the distinction between hypotheses and expectations is as
pronounced as he maintains; and, second, whether the relation between
_Begründung_ and _Bestätigung_ may not be closer than Wundt would have
us believe.

As examples of the hypothesis Wundt mentions the Copernican hypothesis,
Newton's hypothesis of gravitation, and the predictions of the
astronomers which led to the discovery of Neptune. As examples of mere
expectations we are referred to Galileo's experiments with falling
bodies and pendulums. In case of Newton's hypothesis there was the
assumption of a general law, which was verified after much labor and
delay. The heliocentric hypothesis of Copernicus, which was invented for
the purpose of bringing system and unity into the movements of the
planets, has also been fairly well substantiated. In the discovery of
Neptune we have, apparently, not the proof of a general law or the
discovery of further peculiarities of previously known data, but rather
the discovery of a new object or agent by means of its observed effects.
In each of these instances we admit that the hypothesis was not readily
suggested or easily and directly tested.

If we turn to Galileo's pendulum and falling bodies, it is clear first
of all that he did not have in mind the discovery of some object, as was
the case in the discovery of Neptune. Did he, then, either contribute to
the proof of a general law or discover further characteristics of things
already known in a more general way? Wundt tells us that Galileo only
determined a little more exactly what he already knew, and that he did
this with but little labor or delay.

What, then, is the real difference between hypothesis and expectation?
If we compare Galileo's determination of the law of falling bodies with
Newton's test of his hypothesis of gravitation, we see that both
expectation and hypothesis were founded on observation and took the form
of mathematical formulæ. Each tended to confirm the general law
expressed in its formula, though there was, of course, much difference
in the time and labor required. If we compare the Copernican hypothesis
with Galileo's supposition concerning the pendulum, we find again that
they agree in regard to general purpose and method, and differ in the
difficulty of verification. If the experiment with the pendulum only
substituted exactness for inexactness, did the Copernican theory do
anything different in _kind_? It is true that the more exact statement
of the swing of the pendulum was expressed in quantitative form, but
quantitative statement is no criterion of either the presence or the
absence of the hypothesis.

Again, we may compare the pendulum with Kepler's laws. What was Kepler's
hypothesis, that the square of the periodic times of the several planets
are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun,
except a more exact formulation of facts which were already known in a
more general way? Wundt's position seems to be this: whenever a
supposition or suggestion can be tested readily, it should not be
classed as a hypothesis. This would make the distinction one of degree
rather than kind, and it does not appear how much labor we must expend,
or how long our supposition must evade our efforts to test it, before it
can win the title of hypothesis.

In the second place, we have seen that Wundt draws a sharp line between
_Begründung_ and _Bestätigung_. It is doubtless true that every
hypothesis requires a certain justification, for unless other facts can
be found which agree with deductions made in accordance with it, its
only support would be the data from which it is drawn. Such support as
this would be obtained through a process too clearly circular to be
seriously entertained. The distinction which Wundt draws between
_Begründung_ and _Bestätigung_ is evidently due to the presence of the
experimental element in the latter. For descriptive purposes this
distinction is useful, but is misleading if it is understood to mean
that there is mere experience in one case and mere inference in the
other. The difference is rather due to the relative parts played by
inference and by accepted experience in each. In _Begründung_ the
inferential feature is the more prominent, while in _Bestätigung_ the
main emphasis is on the experiential aspect. It must not be supposed,
however, that either of these aspects can be wholly absent. It is
difficult to understand how any hypothesis can be entertained at all
unless it meets in some measure the demand with reference to which it
was invented, viz., a unification of conflicts in experience. And, _in
so far_, it is confirmed. The motive which casts doubt upon its adequacy
is the same that leads to its re-forming as a hypothesis, as a mental
concept.

The difficulties in Wundt's position are thus due to a failure to take
account of the reconstructive nature of the judgment. The predicate,
supposition, or hypothesis, whatever we may choose to call it, is formed
because of the check of a former habit. The judgment is an ideal
application of a new habit, and its test is the attempt to act in
accordance with this ideal reconstruction. It must not be thought,
however, that our supposition is first fully developed and then tried
and accepted or rejected without modification. On the contrary, its
growth is the result of successive minor tests and corresponding minor
modifications in its form. Formation and test are merely convenient
distinctions in a larger process in which forming, testing, and
_re_-forming go on together. The activity of experimental verification
is not only a testing, a confirming or weakening of the validity of a
hypothesis, but it is equally well an evolution of the _meaning_ of the
hypothesis through bringing it into closer relations with specific data
not previously included in defining its import. _Per contra_, a purely
reflective and deductive consideration which develops the idea as
hypothesis, _in so far_ as it introduces the determinateness of
previously accepted facts within the scope, comprehension, or intension
of the idea, is in so far forth, a verification.

If the view which we have maintained is correct, the hypothesis is not
to be limited to those elaborate formulations of the scientist which he
seeks to confirm by crucial tests. The hypothesis of the investigator
differs from the comparatively rough conjecture of the plain man only in
its greater precision. Indeed, as we have attempted to show, the
hypothesis is not a method which we may employ or not as we choose; on
the contrary, as predicate of the judgment it is present in a more or
less explicit form if we judge at all. Whether the time and labor
required for its confirmation or rejection is a matter of a lifetime or
a moment, its nature remains the same. Its function is identical with
that of the predicate. In short, the hypothesis is the predicate so
brought to consciousness and defined that those features which are not
noticed in the ordinary judgment are brought into prominence. We then
recognize the hypothesis to be what in fact the predicate always is,
viz., a method of organization and control.




