XI

SOME LOGICAL ASPECTS OF PURPOSE

INTRODUCTORY


Whenever and wherever it was discovered that the content of experience
as given in immediate perception could be reconstructed through ideas,
then and there began to emerge such questions as these: What is the
significance of this reconstructive power? What is the relation between
it and the immediate experience? What is the relative value of each in
experience as a whole? What is their relation to truth and error? If
thinking leads to truth, and thought must yet get its material from
perception, how then shall the product of thought escape infection from
the material? On the other hand, if truth is to be found in the
immediate experience, can it here be preserved from the blighting
effects of thought? For so insistent and pervasive is this activity of
thought that it appears to penetrate into the sanctum of perception
itself. Turning to a third possibility, if it should be found that truth
and error are concerned with both--that they are products of the
combined activity of perception and reflection--then just what does each
do? And what in their operations marks the difference between truth and
error? Or still again, if truth and error cannot be found in the
operations of perception and reflection as such, then they must be
located in the relation of these processes to something else. If so,
what is this something else? Out of such questions as these is logic
born.

There may be those who will object to some of these questions as
"logical" problems--those who would limit logic to a description of the
forms and processes of reconstruction, relegating the question of the
criterion of truth and error to "epistemology." This objection we must
here dismiss summarily by saying that, by whatever name it is called, a
treatment of the forms and processes of thought must deal with the
criterion of truth and error, since these different "forms" are just
those which thought assumes in attempting to reach truth under different
conditions.

Certainly in the beginning the Greeks regarded their newly discovered
power of thought as anything but formal. Indeed, it soon became so
"substantial" that it was regarded as simply a new world of fact, of
existence alongside of, or rather above, the world of perception. But
Socrates hailed ideas as deliverers from the contradictions and
paradoxes into which experience interpreted in terms of immediate
sense-perception had fallen. In the concept Socrates found a solution
for the then pressing problems of social life. The Socratic universal is
not a mere empty form which thought imposes upon the world. It is
something which thought creates in order that a life of social
interaction and reciprocity may go on. This need not mean that the
Greeks were reflectively conscious of this, but that this was the way
the concept was actually used and developed by Socrates.

In attempting to formulate the relation between this new world of ideas
and immediate sense-experience, Plato constructed his scheme of
substantiation and participation. The Platonic doctrine of
substantiation and participation is an expression of the conviction that
anything so valuable as Socrates had shown ideas to be could not be
merely formal or unreal. Up to the discovery of these ideas reality lay
in the "substances" of perception. Hence in order to have that reality
to which their worth, their value in life, entitled them, the ideas must
be substantiated.

This introduction of the newly discovered ideas into the world of
substances and reality wrought, of course, a change in the conception
of the latter--a change which has well-nigh dominated the entire
philosophic development ever since. Let us recall that the aim of
Socrates was to find something that would prevent society from going to
pieces under the influence of the disintegrating conception of
experience as a mere flux of given immediate content. Now, in the
concepts Socrates discovered the basis for just this much-needed
wholeness and stability. Moreover, the fact that unity and stability
were the actual social needs of the hour led not only to the concepts
which furnished them being conceived as substantial and real, but to
their being regarded as a higher type of reality, as "more real" than
the given, immediate experiences of perception. They were higher and
more real because, just then, they answered the pressing social need.

The ideas supplied this unity because they furnished ends, purposes, to
the given material of perception. The given is now given for something;
for something more, too, than mere contemplation. Socrates also showed,
by the most acute analysis, that the content of these ends, these
purposes, was social through and through.

From the ethical standpoint this teleological character of the idea is
clearly recognized. But as "real," the ideas must be stated in the
metaphysical terms of substance and attribute. Here the social need is
abstracted from and lost to sight. The fundamental attributes of the
ideas are now a metaphysical unity and stability. Hence unity and
stability, wholeness and completeness, are the very essence of reality,
while multiplicity and change constitute the nature of appearance. Thus
does Plato's reality become, as Windelband says, "an immaterial
eleaticism which seeks true being in the ideas without troubling itself
about the world of generation and occurrence which it leaves to
perception and opinion."[164]

Now it is the momentum of this conception of reality as a stable and
complete system of absolute ideas, the development of which we have just
roughly sketched, that is so important historically. Why this conception
of reality, which apparently grew out of a particular historical
situation, should have dominated philosophic theory for over two
thousand years appears at first somewhat puzzling. Those who still hold
and defend it will of course say that this survival is evidence of its
validity. But, after all, our human world may be yet very young. It may
be that "a thousand years are but as yesterday." At any rate philosophy
has never been in a hurry to reconstruct conceptions which served their
day and generation with such distinction as did the Platonic conception
of reality. And this is true to the evolutionary instinct that
experience has only its own products as material for further
construction. On the other hand, the principle of evolution with equal
force demands that only as _material_, not as final forms of experience,
shall these products continue. It may be that philosophy has not yet
taken the conception of evolution quite seriously. At all events it is
certain that long after it has been found that, instead of being eternal
and complete, the concept undergoes change, that it has simply the
stability and wholeness demanded by a particular and concrete situation;
after it has been discovered, in other words, that the stability and
wholeness, instead of attaching to the content of an idea, are simply
the functions of any content used as a purpose--after all this has been
accepted in psychology, the conception of truth and reality which arose
under an entirely different conception of the nature of thought still
survives.

This change in the conception of the character of the ideas, with no
corresponding change in the conception of reality, marks the divorce of
thought and reality and the rise of the epistemological problem. Let us
recall that in Plato the relation between the higher and ultimate
reality, as constituted by the complete and "Eternal Ideas," and the
lower reality of perception, is that of archetype and ectype.
Perceptions attempt to imitate and copy the ideas. Now, when the ideas
are found to be changing, and when further the interpenetration of
perception and conception is discovered, reality as fixed and complete
must be located elsewhere. And just as in the old system it was the
business of perception to imitate the "Eternal Ideas," so here it is
still assumed that thought is to imitate the reality wherever now it is
to be located. And as regards the matter of location, the old conception
is not abandoned. The elder Plato is mighty yet. Reality must still be a
completed system of fixed and eternal "things in themselves,"
"relations," or "noumena" of some sort which _our_ ideas, now
constituted by both perception and conceptional processes, are still to
"imitate," "copy," "reflect," "represent," or at least "symbolize" in
some fashion.

From this point on, then, thought has two functions: one, to help
experience meet and reorganize into itself the results of its own past
activity; the other, to reflect or represent in some sense the absolute
system of reality. For a very long time the latter has continued to
constitute the logical problem, the former being relegated to the realm
of psychology.

But this discovery of the reconstructive function of the idea and its
assignment to the jurisdiction of psychology did not leave logic where
it was before, nor did it lighten its task. Logic could not shut its
eyes to this "psychological" character of the idea.[165] Indeed, logic
had to take the idea as psychology described it, then do the best it
could with it for its purpose.

The embarrassment of logic by this reconstructive character of the idea
even Aristotle discovered to some extent in the relation of the Platonic
perceptions to the eternal ideas. He found great difficulty in getting a
flowing stream of consciousness to imitate or even symbolize an
eternally fixed and completed reality. And since we have discovered, in
addition, that the idea is so palpably a reconstructive activity, the
difficulties have not diminished.

In such a situation it could only be a question of time until solutions
of the problem should be sought by attempting to bring together these
two functions of the idea. Perhaps after all the representation of
objects in an absolute system is involved in the reconstruction of our
experience. Or perhaps what appears as reconstructions of our
experience--as desiring, struggling, deliberating, choosing, willing, as
sorrows and joys, failures and triumphs--are but the machinery by which
the absolute system is represented. At any rate, these two functions
surely cannot be regarded as belonging to the idea as color and form
belong to a stone. We should never be satisfied with such a brute
dualism as this.

Without any further historical sketch of attempts at this synthesis, I
desire to pass at once to a consideration of what I am sure everyone
will agree must stand as one of the most brilliant and in every way
notable efforts in this direction--Mr. Royce's Aberdeen lectures on "The
World and the Individual." It is the purpose here to examine that part
of these lectures, and it is the heart of the whole matter, in which the
key to the solution of the problem of the relation between ideas and
reality is sought precisely in the purposive character of the idea. This
will be found especially in the "Introduction" and in the chapter on
"Internal and External Meaning of Ideas."[166]


I. THE PURPOSIVE CHARACTER OF IDEAS

With his unerring sense for fundamentals, Mr. Royce begins by telling us
that the first thing called for by the problem of the relation of ideas
to reality is a discussion of the nature of ideas. Here Mr. Royce says
he shall "be guided by certain psychological analyses of the mere
contents of our consciousness, which have become prominent in recent
discussion."[167]

    Your intelligent ideas of things never consist of mere imagery of
    the thing, but always involve a consciousness of how you propose
    to act toward the thing of which you have ideas.... Complex
    scientific ideas viewed as to their conscious significance are, as
    Professor Stout has well said, plans of action, ways of
    constructing the object of your scientific consciousness.... By
    the word idea, then, as we shall use it, when, after having
    criticised opposing theory, we come to state in these lectures our
    own thesis, I shall mean in the end any state of consciousness,
    whether simple or complex, which when present is then and there
    viewed as at least a partial expression, or embodiment of a single
    conscious purpose.... In brief, an idea in my present definition
    may, and in fact always does, if you please, appear to be
    representative of a fact existent beyond itself. But the _primary_
    character which makes it an idea is _not its representative
    character_, is not its vicarious assumption of the responsibility
    of standing for a being beyond itself, but is its inner character
    as _relatively fulfilling the purpose_, that is as presenting the
    partial fulfilment of the purpose which is in the consciousness of
    the moment wherein the idea takes place.[168]... Now this purpose,
    just in so far as it gets a present conscious embodiment in the
    contents, and in the form of the complex state called the idea,
    constitutes what I shall hereafter call the internal meaning of
    the idea.[169]... But ideas often seem to have a meaning; yes, as
    one must add, finite ideas always undertake or appear to have a
    meaning that is not exhausted by this conscious internal meaning
    presented and relatively fulfilled at the moment when the idea is
    there for our finite view. The melody sung, the artists' idea, the
    thought of your absent friend, a thought on which you love to
    dwell, all these not merely have their obvious internal meaning
    as meeting a conscious purpose by their very presence, but also
    they at least appear to have that other sort of meaning, that
    reference beyond themselves to objects, that cognitive relation to
    outer facts, that attempted correspondence with outer facts, which
    many accounts of our ideas regard as their primary inexplicable
    and ultimate character. I call this second, and for me still
    problematic, and derived aspect of the nature of ideas, their
    apparently external meaning.[170]

From all this it is quite evident that Mr. Royce accepts and welcomes
the results of the work of modern psychology on the nature of the idea.
The difficulty will come in making the connection between these accepted
results and the Platonic conception of ultimate reality as stated in the
following:

    To be means simply to express, to embody the complete internal
    meaning of _a certain absolute system of ideas_. A system,
    moreover, which is genuinely implied in the true internal meaning
    or purpose of every finite idea, however fragmentary.[171]

It may be well to note here in passing that, notwithstanding the avowed
subordination here of the representative to the reconstructive character
of the ideas, the former becomes very important in the chapter on the
relation of internal to external meaning, where the problem of truth and
error is considered.

In this account of the two meanings of the idea, which I have tried to
state as nearly as possible in the author's own words, there appear some
conceptions of idea, of purpose, and of their relation to each other,
that play an important part in the further treatment and in determining
the final outcome. In the description of the internal meaning there
appear to be two quite different conceptions of the relation of idea to
purpose. One regards the idea as itself constituting the purpose or plan
of action; the other describes the idea as "the partial fulfilment" of
the purpose. (1) "Complex scientific ideas, viewed as to their
conscious significance, are, as Professor Stout has well said, _plans of
action_." (2) "You sing to yourself a melody; you are then and there
conscious that the melody, as you hear yourself singing it, _partially
fulfils_ and embodies a purpose."[172] When we come to the problem of
the relation between the internal and external meaning, we shall find
that the idea as internal meaning comes into a third relation to
purpose, viz., that of _having_ the further purpose to agree or
correspond to the external meaning. "Is the correspondence reached
between idea and object the precise correspondence that the idea itself
intended? If it is, the idea is true.... Thus it is not mere agreement,
but intended agreement, that constitutes truth."[173] Thus the idea is
(1) the purpose, (2) the partial fulfilment of the purpose, and (3) has
a further purpose--to correspond to an object in the "absolute system of
ideas."

The first statement of the internal meaning as constituting the plan or
purpose is, I take it, the conception of the internal meaning as an
ideal construction which gives a working form, a definition to the
"indefinite sort of restlessness" and blind feeling of dissatisfaction
out of which the need of and demand for thought arises.[174] This
accords with the scientific conception of the idea as a working
hypothesis. If this interpretation of idea were steadily followed
throughout, it is difficult to see how it could fail to lead to a
conception of reality quite different from that described as "a certain
absolute system of ideas."

The second definition of internal meaning is the one in which it is
stated as the "partial expression," "embodiment," and "fulfilment" of a
single conscious purpose, and in which subsequently and consequently the
idea is identified with "any conscious act," for example, singing. The
first part of the statement appears to say that the idea of a melody is
in "partial fulfilment" of the idea regarded as the purpose to sing the
melody. But, as the first statement of internal meaning implies, how can
one have a purpose to sing the melody except in and through the idea? It
is precisely the construction of an idea that transforms the vague
"indefinite restlessness" and dissatisfaction into a purpose. The idea
is the defining, the sharpening of the blind activity of mere sensation,
mere want, into a plan of action.

However, Mr. Royce meets this difficulty at once by the statement that
the term "idea" here not only covers the activity involved in forming
the idea, _e. g._, the idea of singing, but includes the action of
singing, which fulfils this purpose. "In the same sense _any conscious
act_ at the moment when you perform it not merely expresses, but is, in
my present sense, an idea."[175]

But this sort of an adjustment between the idea as the purpose and as
the fulfilment of the purpose raises a new question. What here becomes
of the distinction between immediate and mediating experience? Surely
there is a pretty discernible difference between experience as a
purposive idea and the experience which fulfils this purpose. To call
them both "ideas" is at least confusing, and indeed it appears that it
is just this confusion that obscures the fundamental difficulty in
dealing, later on, with the problem of truth and error. To be sure, the
very formation of the idea as the purpose, the "plan of action," is the
beginning of the relief from the "indefinite restlessness." On the other
hand, it defines and sharpens the dissatisfaction. When this vague
unrest takes the form of a purpose to attain food or shelter, or to sing
in tune, it is of course the first step toward solution. But this very
definition of the dissatisfaction intensifies it. The idea as purpose,
then, instead of being the fulfilment, appears to be the plan, the
method of fulfilment. The fulfilling experience is the further
experience to which the idea points and leads.

To follow a little farther this relation between the purposive and
fulfilling aspects of experience, it is of course apparent that the idea
as the purpose, the "plan of action," must as a function go over into
the fulfilling experience. My purpose to sing the melody must remain, in
so far as the action is a conscious one, until the melody is sung. I say
"as a function," for the specific content of this purpose is
continuously changing. The purpose is certainly not the same in content
after half the melody has been sung as it is at the beginning. This
means that the purpose is being progressively fulfilled; and as part of
the purpose is fulfilled each moment, so a part of the original content
of the idea drops out; and when the fulfilling process of this
particular purpose is complete, or is suspended--for, in Mr. Royce's
view, it never is complete in human experience--that purpose then gives
way to some other, perhaps one growing out of it, but still one regarded
as another. A purpose realized, fulfilled, cannot persist as a purpose.
We may desire to repeat the experience in memory; _i. e._, instead of
singing aloud, simply, as Mr. Royce says, "silently recall and listen to
its imagined presence." But here we must remember that the memory
experience, as such, is not an idea in the logical sense at all. It is
an immediate experience that is fulfilling the idea of the song which
constitutes the purpose to recall it, just as truly as the singing aloud
fulfils the idea of singing aloud. Shouting, whistling, or "listening in
memory to the silent notes" may all be equally immediate, fulfilling
experiences. Doubtless the idea as purpose involves memory, as Mr. Royce
says.[176] But it is a memory used as a purpose, and it is just this use
of the memory material as a purpose that makes it a logical idea. In
its content the purposive idea is just as immediate and as mechanical as
any other part of experience. "Psychology explains the presence and the
partial present efficacy of this purpose by the laws of motor processes,
of habit, or of what is often called association."[177] Here "idea,"
however, simply means, as Mr. Royce takes it in his second statement,
conscious content of any sort. But this is not the meaning of "idea" in
the logical sense. The logical idea is a conscious content used as an
organizer, as "a plan of action," to get other contents. If, for
example, in the course of writing a paper one wishes to recall an
abstract distinction, as the distinction dawns in consciousness, it is
not an idea in the logical sense. It is just as truly an immediate
fulfilling experience as is a good golf stroke. So in the
mathematician's most abstruse processes, which Mr. Royce so admirably
portrays, the results for which he watches "as empirically as the
astronomer alone with his star" are not ideas in the logical sense; they
are immediate, fulfilling experiences.[178] The distinction between the
idea as the mediating experience--that is, the logical idea--and the
immediate fulfilling experience is therefore not one of content, but of
use.

There is a sense, however, in which the idea as a purpose can be taken
as the partial fulfilment of another purpose; in the sense that any
purpose is the outgrowth of activity involving previous purposes. This
becomes evident when we inquire into the "indefinite restlessness" and
dissatisfaction out of which the idea as purpose springs.
Dissatisfaction presupposes some activity already going on in attempted
fulfilment of some previous purpose. If one is dissatisfied with his
singing, or with not singing, it is because one has already purposed to
participate in the performance of a company of people which now he finds
singing a certain melody, or one has rashly contracted to entertain a
strenuous infant who is vociferously demanding his favorite ditty. This
is only saying that any given dissatisfaction and the purpose to which
it gives rise grow out of activity involving previous purposing. But
this does not do away with the distinction between the idea as a purpose
and the immediate fulfilling experience.

If the discussion appears at this point to be growing somewhat captious,
let us pass to a consideration of the relation between internal and
external meanings, where the problem of truth and error appears, and
where the vital import of these distinctions becomes more obvious.


II. PURPOSE AND THE JUDGMENT

Mr. Royce begins with the traditional definition of truth, which he then
proceeds to reinterpret:

    Truth is very frequently defined in terms of external meaning as
    _that about which we judge_.... In the second place, truth has
    been defined as the _correspondence between our ideas and their
    objects_[179].... When we undertake to express the objective
    validity of any truth, we use judgment. These judgments, if
    subjectively regarded, that is, if viewed merely as processes of
    our own present thinking, whose objects are external to
    themselves, involve in all their more complex forms, combinations
    of ideas, devices whereby we weave already present ideas into more
    manifold structure, thereby enriching our internal meaning; but
    the act of judgment has always its other, its objective aspect.
    The ideas when we judge are also to possess external meaning....
    It is true, as Mr. Bradley has well said, that the intended
    subject of every judgment is reality itself. The ideas that we
    combine when we judge about external meanings are to have value
    for us as truth only in so far as they not only possess internal
    meaning, but also imitate, by their structure, what is at once
    other than themselves, and, in significance, something above
    themselves. That, at least, is the natural view of our
    consciousness, just in so far as, in judging, we conceive our
    thought as essentially other than its external object, and as
    destined merely to correspond thereto. Now we have by this time
    come to feel how hard it is to define the Reality to which our
    ideas are thus to conform, and about which our judgments are said
    to be made, so long as we thus sunder external and internal
    meanings.[180]

_The universal judgment._--The problem is, then, to discover just the
nature and ground of this relation between the internal and external
meaning, between the idea and its object. This relation is established
in the act of judgment. Taking first _the universal judgment_, we find
here that the internal meaning has at best only a negative relation to
the external meaning.

    To say that all A is B is in fact merely to assert that the real
    world contains no objects that are A, but that fail to be of the
    class B. To say that no A is B is to assert that the real world
    contains no objects that are at once A and B.[181]

The universal judgments then "tell us indirectly what is in the realm of
external meaning; but only by first telling us what is not."[182]

However, these universal judgments have after all a positive value in
the realm of internal meaning; that is, as mere thought.

    This negative character of the universal judgments holds true of
    them, as we have just said, just in so far as you sunder the
    external and internal meaning, and just in so far as you view the
    real as the beyond, and as the merely beyond. If you turn your
    attention once more to the realm of ideas, viewed as internal
    meaning, you see, indeed, that they are constantly becoming
    enriched in their inner life by all this process. To know by inner
    demonstration that 2+2=4 and that this is necessarily so, is not
    yet to know that the external world, taken merely as the Beyond,
    contains any true or finally valid variety of objects at all, any
    two or four objects that can be counted.... On the other hand, so
    far as your internal meaning goes, to have experienced within that
    which makes you call this judgment necessary, is indeed to have
    observed a character about your own ideas which rightly seems to
    you very positive.[183]

This passage deserves especial attention. In the light of Kant, and in
view of Mr. Royce's general definition of the judgment as the reference
of internal to external meanings, one is puzzled to find that for the
mathematician the positive value of the judgment "two and two are four"
is confined to the realm of internal meaning. To be sure, Mr. Royce says
that this limitation of the positive value of the universal judgment to
the world of internal meaning occurs only when the external and internal
meaning are sundered. But the point is: Does the mathematician or anyone
else ever so sunder as to regard the judgment "two and two are four" as
of positive value only as internal meaning? Indeed, in another
connection Mr. Royce himself shows most clearly that mathematical
results are as objective and as empirical as the astronomer's star.[184]
Nor would it appear competent for anyone to say here: "Of course, they
are not internal meanings _after_ we come to see, through the kind
offices of the epistemologist, that the internal meanings are valid of
the external world." We are insisting that they are never taken by the
mathematician and scientists at first as merely internal meaning whose
external meaning is then to be established. Surely the mathematical
judgment, or any other, does not require an epistemological midwife to
effect the passage from internal to external meaning. The external
meaning is there all the while in the form of the diagrams and motor
tensions and images with which the mathematician works. The difficulty
here again seems to be that the distinction above discussed between the
idea in the logical sense, as purpose, and the immediate fulfilling
experience is lost sight of. The relation between two and four is not
first discovered as a merely internal meaning. It is discovered in the
process of fulfilling some purpose involving the working out of this
relation. So the sum of the angles of a triangle is not discovered as a
mere internal meaning whose external meaning is then to be found. It is
found _in working with_ the triangle. It is discovered _in_ the
triangle. And, once more, it matters not if the triangle here is a mere
memory image. In relation to the purpose, to the logical idea, it is as
truly external and objective as pine sticks or chalk marks. The streams
of motor, etc., images that flow spontaneously under the stimulus of the
purpose are just as immediate fulfilling experiences as the manipulation
of sticks or chalk lines.

The difficulty in keeping the universal judgment, as a judgment, in
terms of merely internal meaning may be seen from the following:

    As to these two types of judgments, the universal and the
    particular, they both, as we have seen, make use of experience.
    The universal judgments arise in the realm where experience and
    idea have already fused into one whole; and this is precisely the
    realm of internal meanings. Here one constructs and observes the
    consequences of one's construction. But the construction is at
    once an experience _of fact and an idea_.... Upon the basis of
    such ideal constructions one makes universal judgments. These in a
    fashion still to us, at this stage, mysterious, undertake to be
    valid of that other world--the world of external meaning.[185]

One is somewhat puzzled to know just what is meant by the fusion "of
experience and idea." We must infer that it means the fusion of some
aspect of experience which can be set over against idea, and this has
always meant the external meaning, and this interpretation seems
further warranted by the statement immediately following which describes
the fusion as one "of _fact_ and idea." The situation then seems to be
this: An internal and an external meaning, a fact and an idea, "fuse
into one whole" and thus constitute that which is yet "precisely the
realm of internal meanings," which aims to be valid of still another
world of external meanings. And this waives the question of how
experience fused into one whole can be an internal meaning, since as
such it must be in opposition and reference to an external meaning; or
conversely, how experience can be at once fact _and_ idea and still be
"fused into one whole."

Nor does the difficulty disappear when we turn to the aspects of
universality and necessity. What is the significance and basis of
universality and necessity as confined merely to the realm of internal
meaning?

    So far as your internal meaning goes, _to have experienced within
    that which makes you call this judgment necessary_ is, indeed, to
    have observed a character about your own ideas which rightly seems
    to you very positive.[186]

But what is it that we "experience within" which makes us call this
judgment necessary? In the discussion of the relation of the universal
judgment to the disjunctive judgment, through which the former is shown
to get even its negative force, there is an interesting statement:

    One who inquires into a matter upon which he believes himself able
    to decide in universal terms, _e. g._, in mathematics, has present
    to his mind, at the outset, questions such as admit of alternative
    answers. "A," he declares, "in case it exists at all, is either B
    or C." Further research shows universally, perhaps, that No A is
    B.

The last sentence is the statement referred to. What is meant by
"further research shows universally, perhaps, that No A is B"? What kind
of "research," internal or external, can show this? In short, there
appears to be as much difficulty with universality and necessity in the
realm of internal meaning as in the reference of internal to external
meaning.[187]

Instead, however, of discussing this point, Mr. Royce pursues the
problem of the relation of the external and internal meaning, and finds
that regarded as sundered there is no basis so far for even the negative
universality and necessity in the reference of the internal meaning to
the external.

    For at this point arises the ancient question, How can you know at
    all that your judgment is universally valid, even in this ideal
    and negative way, about that external realm of validity, in so far
    as it is external, and is merely your Other,--the Beyond? Must you
    not just dogmatically say that that world must agree with your
    negations? This judgment is indeed positive. But how do you prove
    it? The only answer has to be in terms which already suggest how
    vain is the very sundering in question. If you can predetermine,
    even if but thus negatively, what cannot exist in the object, the
    object then cannot be merely foreign to you. It must be somewhat
    predetermined by your Meaning.[188]

But in the universal judgment this determination, as referred to the
external meaning, is only negative.

_The particular judgment._--It is then through the particular judgment
that the universal judgment is to get any positive value in its
reference to the external meaning.

    As has been repeatedly pointed out in the discussions on recent
    Logic, the particular judgments--whose form is Some A is B, or
    Some A is not B--are the typical judgments that positively assert
    Being in the object viewed as external. This fact constitutes
    their essential contrast with the universal judgments. They
    undertake to cross the chasm that is said to sunder internal and
    external meanings; and the means by which they do so is always
    what is called "external experience."

It is now high time to ask why the internal meaning seeks this external
meaning. Why does it seek an object? Why does it want to cross the
chasm? In other words, what is the significance of the demand for the
particular judgment? In the introduction we have been told, as a matter
of description, that the internal meanings do seek the external meaning,
but why do they? We have also been told that universal judgments
"develop and enrich the realm of internal meaning." Why, then, should
there be a demand for the external meaning, for a further object? The
answer is:

    We have our internal meanings. We develop them in inner
    experience. There they get presented as something of universal
    value, _but always in fragments_. They, therefore, so far
    dissatisfy. We conceive of the Other wherein these meanings shall
    get some sort of final fulfilment.[189]

It is, then, the incomplete and fragmentary character of the internal
meaning that demands the particular judgment. The particular judgment is
to further complete and determine the incomplete and indeterminate
internal meaning. And yet no sooner is this particular judgment made
than we are told that "it is a form at once positive, and very
unsatisfactorily indeterminate." Again:[190]

    The judgments of experience, the particular judgments, express a
    positive but still imperfect determination of internal meaning
    through external experience. The limit or goal of this process
    would be an individual judgment wherein the will expressed its own
    final determination.[191]

Apparently, then, the particular judgment to which the internal meaning
appeals for completion and determination only succeeds in increasing the
fragmentary and indeterminate character.

This brings us to another "previous question." Just what are we to
understand by this "fragmentary" and "indeterminate" character of the
internal meaning? In what sense, with reference to what, is it
incomplete and fragmentary? Later we shall be told that it is with
reference to "its own final and completely individual expression." This
is to be reached in the individual judgment. And if we ask what is meant
by this final, complete, and individual expression--which, by the way,
no human being can experience--we read, wondering all the while how it
can be known, that it is simply "the expression that seeks no other,"
that "is satisfied," that "is conclusive of the search for
perfection."[192] Waiving for the present questions concerning the basis
of this satisfaction and perfection, all this leaves unanswered our
query concerning the other end of the matter, viz., the meaning and
criterion of the fragmentary and indeterminate character of these
internal meanings.

If we here return to the first definition of internal meaning of the
idea as a purpose in the sense of "a plan of action," such as "singing
in tune," or getting the properties of a geometrical figure, it does not
seem difficult to find a basis and meaning for this fragmentary and
indeterminate character. First we may note in a general way that it is
of the very essence of a plan or purpose to lead on to a fulfilling
experience such as singing in tune, or reaching a mathematical equation.
But here this fulfilling experience to which the plan points is not a
mere working out of detail inside the plan itself, although, indeed,
this does take place. If this were all the fulfilling experience meant,
it is difficult to see how we should escape subjective idealism.[193] We
start with a relatively indeterminate idea and end with a more
determinate _idea_, though, indeed, there is yet no criterion for this
increased determination. To be sure, the idea as a plan of action, as
has already been stated, does undergo change and does become, if you
please, more definite and complete as a plan; but this does not
constitute its fulfilment. Its fulfilment surely is to be found in the
immediate experiences of singing, etc., to which the idea points and
leads.

The fragmentary and incomplete character of the internal meaning as a
plan of action does not, then, after all, so much describe the plan
itself as it does the general condition of experience out of which the
idea arises. Experience takes on the form of a plan, of an idea,
precisely because it has fallen apart, has become "fragmentary." It is
just the business of the internal meaning, as Mr. Royce so well shows,
to form a plan, an ideal, an hypothetical synthesis that shall stimulate
an activity, which shall satisfactorily heal the breach. "Fragmentary"
is a quality, then, that belongs, not to the idea in itself considered,
but to the general condition of experience, of which the idea as a plan
is an expression.

If, now, the fragmentary character of the internal meaning is determined
simply with relation to the fulfilling experiences, such as singing in
tune, adjustments of geometrical figures, etc., to which it points and
leads, it seems as if the completion of the internal meaning must be
defined in the same terms. And this would appear to open a pretty
straight path to the redefinition of truth and error.


III. THE CRITERION OF TRUTH AND ERROR

At the outset, truth was defined as the "correspondence" or "agreement"
of an idea with its object. But we have seen that correspondence or
agreement with an object means the completion and determination of the
idea itself, and since the idea is here a specific "plan of action," it
would seem that the "true" idea would be the one that can complete
itself by stimulating a satisfying activity. The false idea would be
one that cannot complete itself in a satisfying activity, such as
singing in tune, constructing a mathematical equation, etc., and just
this solution is very clearly expounded by our author. In the case of
mathematical inquiry,

    In just so far as we _pause satisfied_ we observe that there "is
    no other" mathematical fact to be sought _in the direction of the
    particular inquiry in hand_. Satisfaction of purpose by means of
    _presented fact_ and such determinate satisfaction as sends us to
    no other experience for further light and fulfillment, precisely
    this outcome is itself the Other that is sought when we begin our
    inquiry.[194]

So "when other facts of experience are sought," if I watch for stars or
for a chemical precipitate, or for a turn in the stock market, or in the
sickness of a friend, my ideas are true when they are satisfied with
"the presented facts." Again,

    It follows that the finally determinate form of the object of any
    finite idea is that form which the idea itself would assume
    whenever it became individuated, or in other words, became a
    completely determined idea, an idea or will fulfilled by a wholly
    adequate empirical content, for which no other content need be
    substituted or from the point of view of the satisfied idea, could
    be substituted.[195]

In such passages as these it seems clear that the test of the truth of
an idea is its power to bring us to the point where we "pause
satisfied," where "no other content need be substituted," etc. Nor in
such passages does there seem to be any doubt of reaching satisfaction
in particular cases. Here, it appears, we _may_ sing in tune, we _may_
get the desired precipitate, and possibly even interpret the stock
market correctly. Of course, the discord, the hunger, the loss, will
come again; but so will new ideas, new truths. "Man thinks in order to
get control of his world and thereby of himself."[196] Then the control
actually gained must measure the value, the truth of his thought. Do you
wish to sing in tune, "then your musical ideas are false if they lead
you to strike what are then called false notes."[197]

It should also be noticed that here this desired determination does not
consist in a further determination of the mere idea as such. It is found
in "the presented fact," in the immediate activity of singing, of
getting precipitates, etc. As has already been pointed out, it is only
by using the term "idea" for both the purpose and the fulfilling act of
singing that this "pause of satisfaction" can be ascribed to the further
determination of the idea. As such, as also before remarked, the sort of
determination that the idea here gets means its termination, its
disappearance in the immediate experiences of singing, etc., to which it
leads. The "indefinite restlessness" of hunger and cold would scarcely
be satisfied by getting more determinate and specific _ideas_ only of
food and shelter. The satisfaction comes when the ideas are "realized,"
when the "plans" are swallowed up in fulfilment.

But in all this nothing has been said about "the certain absolute system
of ideas," nor does there appear to be here any demand for it. To be
sure, in the passages just considered, experience has been found to
become "fragmentary," but it has also been found capable of healing, of
wholing itself, not of course into any "final whole," but into the unity
of "satisfaction" as regards "the particular inquiry in hand." There is
of course failure as well, but this also is not final. It means simply
that we must look farther for the "pause of satisfaction," that we must
construct another idea, another "plan of action."

But, after having shown that the idea as a plan of action may lead to
satisfaction in the particular case, and that its success or failure so
to do is one measure of its truth or falsity, we are now suddenly
aroused to the fact that after all thought does not lead us to the
completed "absolute system of ideas," to a final stage of eternal
unbroken satisfaction.

    But never in our human process of experience do we reach that
    determination. It is for us the object of love and of hope, of
    desire and of will, of faith and of work, but never of present
    finding.[198]

If at this point one asks: Whence this absolute system of ideas? Why
have we to reckon with it at all? there appears to be little that is
satisfying. Indeed, it seems difficult to get rid of the impression that
this "certain absolute system of ideas" is on our hands as a
philosophical heirloom from the time of Plato, so hallowed by time and
so established by centuries of acceptance that we have ceased to ask for
its credentials. To ground it in the "essentially fragmentary character
of human experience" appears to be a _petitio_, for experience does not
appear "essentially fragmentary" in this sense until after the absolute
system has been posited.

And this brings to notice that at this point both the fragmentary and
unitary characters of experience take on new meaning. So far this
fragmentary character has been defined with reference to "the particular
inquiry in hand." Now, since the distinction between absolute and human
experience has emerged, the fragmentary character becomes an absolute
quality of the latter in contrast with the former. So, _mutatis
mutandis_, of unity. Up to this point unity, wholeness, has been
possible within human experience in the case of particular problems,
such as singing in tune, etc. But with the appearance of the absolute
system of ideas, wholeness is now the exclusive quality of the latter,
as incompleteness is of human experience, though of course the _working_
unity, the unity resulting in "pauses of satisfaction," must still
remain in the latter.

The problem now is to somehow work the absolute system of ideas into
connection with the conception of the idea as a purpose, as a concrete
plan of action. Here is where the third conception of the relation
between idea and purpose, described at the beginning, comes into
play--the conception in which the idea, instead of being the purpose, or
the fulfilment of a purpose, _has_ the purpose to correspond with, or
represent "its own final and completely individual expression,"
contained in the absolute system. From the previous standpoint the
idea's "own final and completely individual expression" has been found
in the fulfilling experiences of singing in tune, getting mathematical
equations, chemical precipitates, etc. Here this complete individual
experience can never be found in finite, human experience, but must be
sought in the absolute system--and this can be only "the object of love
and hope, of desire and will, never of present finding."

Notwithstanding the many previous protestations that the purposive
function of the idea is its "primary" and "most essential" character, we
are here forced to fall back upon correspondence--representation as the
primary, the essential, and indeed, it appears at times, as the sole
function. For in the attempt to bring these two functions together the
purposive function is swallowed up in the representative. The idea still
is, or has a purpose, a "plan of action," but this purpose, this plan,
is now nothing but to represent and correspond with its own final and
completed form in the absolute system. By this simple _coup_ is the
purposive function of the idea reduced at once to the representative.
Nor is it pertinent to urge at this point that every purpose involves
representation, that the plan must be some sort of an image or scheme
which symbolizes and stimulates the thing to be done. This no one would
question, but now the sole "thing to be done" apparently is to perfect
this representation of the complete and individual form in the absolute
system.[199]

Once more, an array of passages could be marshaled from almost every
page refuting any such interpretation as this, but they would be
passages expounding the part played by the idea in such concrete
experiences as singing, measuring, etc., not in representing an absolute
system of ideas. Even as regards the latter one might urge that, by
insisting on the active character of the idea, we could after all regard
this absolute system as a life of will after the fashion of our own,
were it not at once described as "the complete embodiment," "the final
fulfilment," of finite ideas. A life consisting of mere fulfilment seems
a baffling paradox. And its timeless character only adds to the
difficulty. Moreover, if we regard the system as constituted by such
concrete activities as measuring and singing, etc., while we have saved
will, we shall now have to fallback upon our first conception of truth
as found in the idea which unifies the fragmentary condition of
experience as related to specific problems, not fragmentary as related
to an absolute system.

This brings us to the final and crucial point of the discussion, the
part which purpose plays in the determination of _truth_ and _error_
from the standpoint of "the absolute system of ideas." When is this
purpose of the idea to correspond with its absolute, final, and
completed form fulfilled, or partially fulfilled? And here at the very
outset is a difficulty. We have read repeatedly that the idea is itself
"the partial fulfilment of a purpose." It is now to seek an object which
shall increase this degree of fulfilment, but still this fulfilment
shall be incomplete. And when we come to consider error, it too will be
found to consist in a partial fulfilment. So it appears that there are
three stages of "partial fulfilment" to be discriminated, one belonging
to the idea itself, another to finite truth, and still another to error.

Returning to the problem, from this point on we find the two
standpoints, that of the specific situation and that of the absolute
system, so closely interwoven and entangled that they are followed with
great difficulty. We have already seen that the idea seeks
correspondence with its object, because it is "fragmentary,"
"incomplete," "indetermined." And there we found that this indeterminate
and fragmentary character belonged to the idea as a purpose, a plan of
seeking relief from some sort of "restlessness" and "dissatisfaction,"
such as singing out of tune, etc. Here it is the incompleteness of an
imperfect representation of its object in the absolute system that is
the _motif_, and how it is to effect an improvement in its imperfect
condition is now the problem. Here again the appeal is to purpose.
Whatever may constitute the absolute system, one thing is assured:
nothing in it can be an object except as the finite idea "intends it,"
purposes it, to be its object. Again must we ask: On what basis is this
object in the absolute system selected at all? In general the answer is:
On the basis of a need of "further determination;" but when we further
analyze this, we find it means on the basis of a specific want or need,
such as food, shelter, measuring, singing, etc. The basis of the
selection, then, is entirely on the side of the concrete, finite
situation.

Here, too, we might ask: Whence the confidence that there will be found
something in the absolute system that will fulfil the purpose generated
on the side of the finite? Must we not here fall back on something like
a pre-established harmony? To this our author would say: "Yea, verily.
The fact that the absolute system responds to the finite needs does
precisely show that the finite and the absolute cannot be sundered." But
when we try to state _how_ the purpose generated on the side of the
finite can be met by the absolute system, the account again seems to run
so much in terms of the finite experience that to call it a system of
"final," "completed," and "fulfilled" ideas does not seem accurate. We
must note here, too, the shifting in the sense of "purpose." The idea
selects its object on the basis of the material needed to relieve the
unrest and dissatisfaction of singing out of tune, etc. But now it is to
be satisfied by increasing the extent of its representation of its
object in the absolute system.

And now, finally, what shall mark the attainment of this purpose of the
idea to correspond and represent "its own completed form"? When is the
correspondence and representation true? Simply at the point where "we
pause satisfied," where "no other content need be substituted, or from
the point of view of the satisfied idea could be substituted." That is
all; there is no other answer. There are other statements, but they all
come to the same thing. For instance:

    It is true--this instant's idea--if, in its own measure, and on
    its own plan, it corresponds, even in its vagueness, to its own
    final and completely individual expression.[200]

But the moment we ask what this "final and individual expression" is,
and what is meant by "in its own measure," and "on its own plan," we
are thrown back at once upon the preceding statement. The next sentence
following the passage just quoted does indeed define this "individual
expression." "Its expression would be the very life of fulfilment of
purpose which this present idea already fragmentarily begins, as it
were, to express." But how can we know that the expression is
"fragmentary" unless we have some experience of wholeness?

And here perhaps is the place to say, what has been implied all along,
that this absolutely "fragmentary" character of human experience is an
abstraction of the relatively disintegrated condition into which
experience temporarily falls, which abstraction is then reinstated as a
fixed quality, overlooking the fact that experience becomes fragmentary
only that it may again become whole. The absolute system, the final
fulfilment, is in the same case. It too is but the hypostatized
abstraction of the function of becoming whole, of wholing and
fulfilling, which manifests itself in the "pauses of satisfaction."

"But," Mr. Royce would say, "the wholeness of the particular instance is
after all not a true and perfect wholeness, because we can always think
of the fulfilling experience as possibly different, as having a possibly
different embodiment." But this implies also a different purpose.
Moreover, it abstracts the purpose from the specific conditions under
which the purpose develops. Thus in singing in tune one doubtless could
easily imagine himself singing another tune, on another occasion, in
another key, in a clear tenor instead of a cracked bass, etc. But if on
_this_ occasion, in _this_ song, and with _this_ cracked bass voice one,
accepting all these conditions, does, with malice aforethought, purpose
to strike the tune, and happily succeeds, why, for that purpose formed
under the known and accepted conditions, is not the accomplishment final
and absolute? Nor is the case any different, so far as I can see, in
mathematical experience. To quote again:

    You think of numbers, and accordingly count one, two, three. Your
    idea of these numbers is abstract, a mere generality. Why? Because
    there could be other cases of counting, and other numbers counted
    than the present counting process shows you, and why so? Because
    your purpose in counting is not wholly fulfilled by the numbers
    now counted.[201]

I confess I cannot see here in what respect the purpose is not
fulfilled. Doubtless there could be "other cases of counting," and
"other numbers," but these may not be included in my present purpose,
which is simply to count here and now. In this passage the purpose is
not very fully defined. One's counting is usually for something, if for
nothing more than merely to illustrate the process. In this latter case
one's purpose would be completely fulfilled by just the numbers used
when he should "pause satisfied" with the illustration. Or, if I wish to
show the properties of numbers, then the discovery that there can always
be more of them fulfils my purpose, since this endless progression is
one of the properties. Or yet again, if one should suddenly become
enamored of the process of counting, and forthwith should purpose to
devote the rest of his days to it, it would still be fortunate that
there were always other numbers to be counted. In other words, the idea
as a purpose is formed with reference to, and out of, specific
conditions. In the last analysis the problem always is: What is to be
done here and now with the actual material at hand, under the present
conditions? As the purpose is determined by these specific conditions,
so is the fulfilment. To say that the fulfilment might be different is
virtually to say that the purpose might have been different, or indeed
that the universe might have been different.

This necessity of falling back upon the character of the idea as a
purpose in the sense of the specific "plan of action" comes into still
bolder relief in the consideration of error from the standpoint of "the
absolute system of ideas." As already mentioned, the initial and
persistent problem here is to distinguish at all between truth and error
in our experience from this standpoint. All our efforts at representing
the absolute system must fall short. What can we mean, then, by calling
some of our ideas true and others false? The definition of error is as
follows:

    An error is an error about a specific object, only in case the
    purpose, imperfectly defined by the vague idea at the instant when
    the error is made, is better defined, is in fact, better fulfilled
    by an object whose determinate character in some wise, although
    never absolutely, opposes the fragmentary efforts first made to
    define them.[202]

But in relation to the absolute system the later part of this statement
holds of all our ideas. There always is the absolute object which would
"better define" and "better fulfil" our purposes. Hence it is only in
reference to the "specific" instances of singing, measuring, etc., that
a basis for the distinction can be found. Here our plan is not true so
long as its mission of relieving the specific unrest and
dissatisfaction, the specific discord or hunger, is unfulfilled.

The only criterion, then, which we have been able to find for the
fulfilment of the purpose, for the truth of the idea as representing an
object in the absolute system, is the sense of wholeness, the "pause of
satisfaction," which we experience in realizing such specific purposes
as "singing in tune." And if it be said again: "Precisely so; this only
shows how intimate is the relation between our experience and the
absolute system of ideas;" then must it also be said once more, either
that the absolute system can be nothing more than an abstraction of the
element of wholeness or wholing in our experience, or that thus far the
relation appears to rest upon sheer assumption.

Again, it may be insisted, as suggested at the outset of this
discussion, that the idea can well have two purposes: one to help
constitute and solve the specific problems of daily life; the other to
represent the absolute system. Very well, we must then make out a case
for the latter. If the purposes are to be different, the purpose to
represent the Absolute should have a criterion of its own. This we have
not been able to find. On the contrary, whenever pushed to the point of
stating a criterion for the representation of the absolute system, we
have had to appeal, in every case, to the fulfilment of a specific
finite purpose. And even if this purpose to represent the absolute
system had some apparent standard of its own, we should not be content
to leave the matter so. We should scarcely be satisfied to observe as a
mere matter of fact that the idea has a reconstructive function, and
_also_ a representative function. Such a brute dualism would be
intolerable.


IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In the end, the outcome of the endeavor to establish a connection
between the relation of the idea to human experience and its relation to
the absolute system does not appear satisfying. The idea is left either
with two independent purposes--one to reconstruct finite experience, the
other to represent and symbolize the absolute system--or one of these
purposes is merged in the other. When the attempt is made from the
standpoint of the absolute system, the reconstructive purpose is
swallowed up in the representative. When, on the other hand, the need
for a basis of distinction between truth and error "here on this bank
and shoal of time" is felt, the representative disappears in the
reconstructive function. Nowhere are we able to discover a true
unification. To be sure, we have been told again and again that the
representation of the absolute object, if only we could accomplish it,
would be "the final fulfilment," "completion," and "realization" of the
human, finite purpose. But besides a confessed impotency at the very
start, this involves, as we have seen, either a sudden transformation of
the specific purpose of singing in tune, etc., into that of representing
the absolute system, or a sheer assumption that the representation of
the absolute object does somehow help in the realization of the specific
finite purpose. Nowhere is there any account of _how_ this help would be
given.

And this suggests that if the analysis of the idea as purpose, given at
the outset of Mr. Royce's lecture, had been developed further, if the
conditions and origin of purpose had been examined, it is difficult to
see how this discrepancy could have escaped disclosure. Mr. Royce starts
his account by simply accepting from psychology a general description of
the purposive character of the idea. Even in the more detailed passages
on purpose we have nothing but descriptions of purpose after it is
formed. Nothing is said of the origin of this purposiveness. The
purposive character of experience is of course very manifest, but what
is the significance of this purposing in experience as a whole? What is
the source and the material of the purposes?

It is this uncritical acceptance of the purposive quality of the idea
that obscures the irrelevancy of its relation to the absolute system. If
the idea must merely be or have a purpose, then it may as well be that
of representing the absolute system as any other. Of course, there are
troublesome questions as to how our finite ideas ever got such a
purpose; but, after all, if it is simply a matter of having any sort of
a purpose, representing the absolute system may answer as well as
anything. But when now we come to deal with the problem of fulfilment,
with the question of truth and error, we have to reckon with this
neglect of the source of this purposiveness.

It is this unanalyzed ground of the purpose that makes the matter of
fulfilment so ambiguous. Such an analysis, we believe, would have shown
that the conditions out of which the idea as a purpose arises determine
also the sort of fulfilment possible. There are, indeed, one or two very
general, but very significant, statements in this direction, if they
were only followed up. For instance:

    In doing what we often call "making up our minds" we pass from a
    vague to a definite state of will and of resolution. In such cases
    we begin with perhaps a very indefinite sort of restlessness which
    arouses the question: "What is it that I want, what do I desire,
    what is my real purpose?"

In other words, what does this restlessness mean? What is the matter?
What is to be done?

Purpose is born, then, out of restlessness and dissatisfaction. But
whence comes this restlessness and dissatisfaction? Surely we cannot at
this point charge it to a discrepancy between our finite idea and the
absolute object, since it is just this restlessness that is giving birth
to the purposive idea. One thing, at any rate, appears pretty certain:
this "indefinite restlessness" presupposes some sort of activity already
going on. The restlessness is not generated in a vacuum. But why should
this activity get into a condition to be described as "indefinite
restlessness" and dissatisfaction?

Repugnant as it will be to many to have psycho-physical, to say nothing
of biological, doctrines introduced into a logical discussion, I confess
that, at this point facing the issue squarely, I see no other way. And
it appears to me that just at this point it is the fear of
phenomenalistic giants that has kept logic wandering so many years in
the wilderness.

What, then, in this action already going on is responsible for this
restlessness? First let us note that "indefinite restlessness" and
"dissatisfaction" are terms descriptive of what Mr. James calls "the
first thing in the way of consciousness." This assumes consciousness as
a factor in activity. So that our question now becomes: What is the
significance of this factor of restless, dissatisfied consciousness in
activity? Now, there appears no way of getting at the part which
consciousness plays different from that of discovering the function of
anything else. And this way is simply that of observing, as best we may,
the conditions under which consciousness operates, and what it does.
Here the biologist and psychologist with one voice inform us that this
indefinite restlessness which marks the point of the operation of
consciousness arises where, in a co-ordinated system of activities,
there develop out of the continuation of the activity itself new
conditions calling for a readjustment and reconstruction of the
activity, if it is to go on. Consciousness then appears to be the
function which makes possible the reorganization of the results of a
process back into the process itself, thus constituting and preserving
the continuity of activity. So interpreted, consciousness appears to be
an essential element in the conception of a self-sustaining activity.
This "indefinite restlessness," in which consciousness begins, marks,
then, the operation of the function of reconstruction without which
activity would utterly break down.

Precisely because, then, the idea "as a plan" is projected and
constructed in response to this restlessness must its fulfilment be
relevant to it. It is when the idea as a purpose, a plan, born out of
this matrix of restlessness, begins to aspire to the absolute system,
and attempts to ignore or repudiate its lowly antecedents, that the
difficulties concerning fulfilment begin. They are the difficulties that
beset every ambition which aspires to things foreign to its inherited
powers and equipment.

A detailed account at this point of the construction and fulfilment of
the idea as "a plan of action" would contain a consecutive
reinterpretation of Mr. Royce's principal rubrics. Such an account the
limits of this paper forbid. We shall have to be content with pointing
out in a general way a few instances by way of illustration.

In the first place, it is in this matrix of indefinite restlessness out
of which the idea is born that the "fragmentary character of
experience," of which Mr. Royce is so keenly conscious, appears. But,
once more, this fragmentary character is discernible only by contrast
with the wholeness on both sides of the fragments; the wholeness that
precedes the restlessness, and the new "pause of satisfaction" toward
which it points. Nor must we forget that the habit matrix, out of the
disintegration of which the restlessness is immediately born, does not
exist as some metaphysical ultimate out of which thought as such has
evolved. Back of it is some previous purpose in whose service habit was
enlisted. On the other hand, this disintegration means that the old
purpose, the old plan, must be reconstructed; that it, along with the
disintegrated habit, becomes the material for a new plan, a new wholing
of experience.

In the next place, the construction of this new plan of action does
involve "re-presentation." The first step in the transition from the
condition of "indefinite restlessness" toward a "plan" is the diagnosis,
the definition of the restlessness. This involves the re-presentation in
consciousness of the activities, out of which the restlessness has
arisen. This re-presentation is also the beginning of the
reconstruction. The diagnosis of the singing activity as being "out of
tune" is the negative side of beginning to sing in tune. It is now a
commonplace of psychology that all representation is reconstruction. And
this is where Mr. Royce's emphasis of the symbolic, the algebraic, as
against the copy type of representation, has its application. All we
want here is some sort of an image--visual, auditory, motor, it matters
not--that shall serve to focus attention upon the singing activities
until they are reconstructed sufficiently to bring us to the "pause of
satisfaction."[203] But nowhere in all this is there any reference to
the idea's object in the absolute system. Nor does there appear to be
any call or place for such reference. The representation here is a part
of the very process of forming the plan of further reconstruction out of
the materials of the specific situation. Representation is not the
plan's own end and aim. This is to stimulate a new set of activities
that shall lead out of the present state of unrest and dissatisfaction.

It is also true, as already mentioned, that in the process of fulfilling
the plan, of realizing the idea, further determination and specification
is produced in the plan itself. The idea as a plan is certainly not
formed all at once. Nor does it reach and maintain a fixed content. No
purpose is ever realized in its original content. But this does not mean
that its realization is, therefore, "partial," "incomplete," or
"fragmentary." It is a part of its business to change. The purpose is
not there for its own sake. The purpose is there as a _means_ to the
reorganization and reconstruction of experience. It exists, as Mr. Royce
says, as an instrument, "as a tool" for "introducing control into
experience." And as, in the process of use, a tool always undergoes
modification, so here, as an instrument for reconstructing habit, the
plan, too, undergoes reconstruction. Indeed, as regards its content, it
is itself, as Mr. Royce says, as much a habit, as much "the product of
association," as any part of experience. The purposing function, the
purposing activity, remains; its content is constantly shifting.

Here, too, is where "the submission of the idea to the object" takes
place. Only, here, it is not a submission to an object already
constituted as it is in Mr. Royce's conception of the absolute system.
The idea as an hypothetical plan of action, as a trial construction,
must be tested by the activities it is attempting to reconstruct. That
is to say, at this point the question is: Does the plan apply to the
activities actually involved in the unrest? Has it diagnosed the case
properly, and is it therefore one in and through which these activities
can operate and come to unity again? The "submission" here is the
submission of the purpose, the end, to the material out of which it is
formed, and with which it must work. But again this material to which
the idea submits itself is anything but finally fixed and "complete" in
form. On the contrary, as we have seen, it is just the fragmentary and
incomplete condition of this material that calls for the idea. Yet the
idea as a plan must be true to its mission, and to this material, and in
this sense must submit itself to whatever modifications and
reconstruction the material "dictates" as necessary in order that it may
function in and through the plan.[204]

On the other hand--and this is the point to which Mr. Royce gives most
emphasis--it is equally apparent that "the idea must determine its
object." On this all philosophy, from Plato down, which approaches
reality "from the side of ideas" is at stake. And this does not appear
impossible if, again, the object is not already and eternally fixed and
complete. If the object is one constructed out of the very mass of habit
material which the idea is reconstructing, and if "determination" means
not copying, but construction, then, indeed, must the idea "determine
its object." Just for that does it have its being. That is its sole
mission. Here the determination of the object by the idea is not a mere
abstract postulate; it is not based upon a general consideration of the
disastrous consequences to our logical and ethical assumptions, if it
were not so determined. Here not only the general necessity for it, but
the _modus operandi_ of this determination, is apparent. But, at the
risk of tedious iteration, must it again be said that for the
determination of the completed and perfected object in the absolute
system not only is there nowhere any _modus_ to be found, but, even if
there were, it is difficult to see what it would have to do with the
kind of determination demanded by such a specific sort of unrest as
"singing out of tune," etc. The process of submission is thus a
reciprocal one. Neither in the object nor in the idea is there a fixed
scheme or order _to_ which the other must submit and conform. And this
is simply the logical commonplace that submission cannot be a one-sided
affair, that determination must be reciprocal.

This brings us to what might as well have been our introductory as our
concluding observation. It has just been said that the determination of
the object by the idea is a vital matter in any philosophy which
approaches reality "from the side of ideas." Such a way of approach must
assert "the primacy of the world of ideas over the world as a
fact."[205] Mr. Royce thus further states the case:

    I am one of those who hold that when you ask what is an idea, and
    how can ideas stand in any true relation to reality, you attack
    the world knot in the way that promises most for the untying of
    its meshes. This way is of course very ancient. It is the way of
    Plato.... It is in a different sense the way of Kant. If you view
    philosophy in this fashion, you subordinate the study of the world
    as fact to a reflection upon the world as idea. Begin by accepting
    upon faith and tradition the mere brute reality of the world as
    fact, and there you are sunk deep in an ocean of mystery.... The
    world of fact surprises you with all sorts of strange
    contrasts.... It baffles you with caprices like a charming and yet
    hopelessly wayward child, or like a bad fairy. The world of fact
    daily announces itself to you as a defiant mystery.[206]

Here we have concisely stated at the outset of the lectures the position
which we have seen to be fraught with so many difficulties: the
position, namely, which accepts to start with the opposition of the
world as idea and the world as fact, as something given, instead of
something to be accounted for; and which assumes that this opposition
stands in the way of reaching reality, whereas it possibly may be of the
very essence of reality. To be sure, the above statement of this
opposition between the world as fact and as idea is but the expository
starting-point. And it is true that the rest of the argument is occupied
in the attempt to close this breach. But, as we have seen, except where
the idea is expounded as a specific purpose, arising out of a specific
experience of unrest, such as singing out of tune, etc.--except in this
case, the breach is taken as found and the attempt to heal it is made by
working forward from the opposition as given instead of back to its
source. This opposition, of course, has its forward goal, but the
difficulty is to find it without an exploration of its source. It is
back in that matrix out of which the opposition has arisen that the line
of direction to the goal is to be found.

Moreover, in starting from this opposition of fact and idea as given,
the only method of quelling it seems to be either that of reducing one
side to terms of the other, or of appealing to some new, and therefore
external unifying, agency. But if the factors in the opposition are
found, not one in submission _to_ the other, nor having the "primacy"
_over_ the other, but as co-ordinate and mutually determining functions,
developed from a common matrix and co-operating in the work of
reconstructing experience, some of the difficulties involved in the
alternative methods just mentioned appear to drop out.[207]

The point may be clearer if we recur to the passage and ask just what is
meant by "the defiantly mysterious," "baffling," and "capricious"
character of the world as fact--as "brute reality." First, if by the
world as "fact;" as "brute reality," we mean experience so brute that it
is not yet "lighted up with ideas," it is difficult to see how it could
be mysterious or capricious, since mystery and caprice appear only when
experience ceases to be taken merely as it comes and an inquiry for
connections and meanings has begun. That is to say, there can be neither
mystery nor caprice except in relation to some sort of order. And order
is always a matter of ideas. But it is sufficient to submit Mr. Royce's
own statement on this point:

    We all of us from moment to moment have experience. This
    experience comes to us in part as brute fact; light and shade,
    sound and silence, pain and grief and joy.... These given facts
    flow by; and were they all, our world would be too much of a blind
    problem for us even to be puzzled by its meaningless
    presence.[208]

If next we take the world of fact as in contrast and co-ordinate with
the world of ideas, mystery and caprice here, certainly, are not all on
the side of the fact. Here, again, must they be functions of the
relation between fact and idea. We have seen that without thought there
is neither mystery nor caprice. The idea then cannot take part in the
production of mystery and caprice, and forthwith deny its parenthood. Of
course, mystery and caprice are not the final fruits of this co-ordinate
opposition of fact and idea. They are but the _first_ fruits--the
relatively unorganized embryonic mass which through the further
activities of the parent functions shall develop into the symmetry of
truth and law.

There appears then no ultimate "primacy" of either idea or fact over the
other. Nor does either appear as a better way of approach _to_ reality
than the other. It is only when we say: "Lo! here in the idea," _or_
"Lo! there in the fact is reality," that we find it "imperfect,"
"incomplete," and "fragmentary," and must straightway "look for
another." But surely not in "a certain absolute system of ideas," which
is "the object of love and hope, of desire and will, of faith and work,
but never of present finding," shall we seek it. Rather precisely in the
loving and hoping, desiring and willing, believing and working, shall we
find that reality in which and for which both the "World as fact" and
the "World as idea" have their being.




INDEX


  ABSOLUTE:
    as constituting reality, 348;
    as related to truth and error, 363 ff.;
    as a hypostatized abstraction, 369.

  ABSOLUTE SELF, 330.

  ACCESSORY:
    thought as, 58 ff.

  ACTIVITY:
    as social, 74;
    thought as, 78;
    interrupted, and judgment, 154;
    and hypothesis, 170;
    as sensori-motor, 193, 200;
    (see Function, Reconstruction).

  ÆSTHETIC EXPERIENCE:
    appreciative rather than reflective, 255;
    not a form of valuation, 339, 340.

  ALTERNATIVES: in judgment, 155;
    (see Disjunction).

  ANALOGY, 171, 172, 175;
    in relation to habit, 176.

  ANAXAGORAS:
    in relation to the One and the Many, 219;
    his [Greek: nous], 220, 221.

  ANAXIMANDER:
    and the infinite, 209;
    his process of segregation, 214, 215.

  ANAXIMENES:
    his [Greek: archê], 209;
    his scheme of rarefaction and condensation, 209, 213, 215, 224.

  ANGELL, J. R., 14 note, 345 note.

  ANIMISM, 49 note.

  ANTECEDENTS OF THOUGHT (see Stimulus).

  APPLIED LOGIC: Lotze's definition, 6.

  APPRECIATION:
    distinguished from reflection, 255, 339;
    not to be identified with valuation, 320-24, 338.

  [Greek: Archê]:
    meaning of search for, 211 ff.

  ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS:
    refers to meanings, 33, 34;
    connection with thought, 80;
    doctrine of: analogous to subjectivism in ethics, 261;
    presupposes a mechanical metaphysics, 330, 331 note.

  ATOMISTS:
    treatment of the One and the Many, 221.

  AUSTRIAN ECONOMISTS, 307, 333.

  AUTHORITY AND CUSTOM:
    logic of attitude of obedience to, 286;
    social conditions compatible with dominance of, 286;
    failure of, as moral control, 286.


  BACON:
    extreme empirical position, 156 ff.;
    view of induction, 157, 158.

  "BAD":
    practical significance of, as moral predicate, 259;
    relation to "wrong," 335.

  BALDWIN, J. M., 257 note, 378 note.

  Becoming: as relative, 206.

  "BEGRÜNDUNG" AND "BESTÄTIGUNG":
    Wundt's distinction of, 179;
    criticised, 181, 182.

  BIOLOGY:
    view of sensation, 58;
    use of, in logic, 374, 375.

  BOSANQUET, B., 59 note, 147, 189, 190, 191, 300;
    (see Study V).

  BRADLEY, F. H., 47 note, 54 note, 90 ff., 147, 189, 190, 191, 192,
          194, 299 note 2, 331 note, 332 note, 353.

  BRENTANO, 250 note.

  BUTLER, J., 277.


  CERTAIN, THE:
    relation to tension, 50, 51;
    as datum, 57.

  COEFFICIENTS OF REALITY, PERCEPTION, AND RECOGNITION:
    defined, 263-7;
    present in economic and ethical experience, 267-9.

  COEXISTENCE, COINCIDENCE, AND COHERENCE, 28, 29, 33-6, 58, 59, 68.

  CONCEPTIONS:
    Lotze's view of, 59;
    Bacon's attitude toward, 157;
    relation to fact, 168;
    function in Greek philosophy, 342;
    (see Idea, Image, Hypothesis).

  CONCEPTUAL LOGIC:
    as related to idea and image, 188-92.

  CONSCIENCE:
    evolution of, 286, 287;
    ambiguous and transitional character of, 287;
    metaphysical implications of, as moral standard, 288;
    not autonomous, 288.

  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS:
    dangers of, consequent upon ideal of self-realization, 316;
    Green's defense of, referred to, 316 note.

  CONSERVATION:
    of energy and mass, 206;
    (see Energy).

  CONTENT OF KNOWLEDGE:
    and logical object, originates in tension, 49;
    thought's own, 65;
    and datum, 69;
    as truth, 79 ff.;
    as static and dynamic, 73, 93 ff., 110 ff.;
    (see Study IV; Objectivity, Validity).

  CONTINUITY, 10, 13, 55.

  CONTROL:
    idea and, 75, 129.

  CONVERSION OF PROPOSITIONS, 171;
    in relation to habit, 176.

  COPERNICUS:
    his theory, 178;
    compared with Galileo's supposition, 179-81.

  COPULA, 118 ff.;
    scheme of mediation between subject and predicate, 208, 214 ff.

  CORRESPONDENCE:
    of datum and idea, 51;
    of thought-content and thought-activity, 70;
    as criterion of truth, 82 ff., 353 ff.


  DARWIN, CHARLES, 146, 150, 179.

  DATUM OF THOUGHT, 7, 8, 24;
    as fact, 26, 50, 52;
    Lotze's theory of, stated, 55;
    criticised, 56 ff.;
    relation to induction, 61;
    and content, 60, 70;
    (see Study III; Content, Fact, Stimulus).

  DEDUCTION, 211, 212.

  DEFINITION:
    invented by Socrates, 203.

  DEMOCRITUS:
    attempts at definition, 203.

  DEMONSTRATIVE JUDGMENT, 134.

  DETERMINATION:
    as criterion of truth, 362 ff.;
    impossibility of complete, in finite experience, 364.

  DEWEY, JOHN, 58 note, 86 note, 266 note 2, 316 note, 381 note.

  DIALECTIC:
    Zeno as originator of, 203.

  DIOGENES OF APOLLONIA, 222 ff.

  DISJUNCTION:
    in judgment, 115, 138.

  DYNAMIC:
    ideas as, and as static, 73, 76;
    reality as, 126.


  EARTH:
    as an element, 213.

  ECONOMIC JUDGMENT:
    involves same type of process as physical, 235;
    a process of valuation, 236;
    type of situation evoking, 241-6, 293-5, 302, 303;
    distinguished from ethical, 243 note, 246 note, 271, 302, 303;
    relation to physical, 246 note 3;
    subject of, the means of action, 259, 304;
    analysis of process of, 304-12;
    distinguished from "pull and haul," 237, 238;
    psychological account of, 310, 311;
    a reconstructive process, 311, 312.

  "EGOISM, NEO-HEGELIAN," 316.

  EHRENFELS, C. VON, 318 note.

  EIDOLA:
    Bacon's view of, 157.

  ELEATICS:
    their logical position, 216 ff.

  ELEMENTS:
    as four, 213;
    as infinite, 213 ff.

  EMERSON, R. W., 204, 246 note.

  EMPEDOCLES:
    attempts at definition, 203;
    treatment of the One and the Many, 218 ff.

  EMPIRICISM, 11, 29, 47, 48, 61 ff.;
    and rationalism, 80;
    criticised, 156;
    Jevons, 169;
    treatment of imagery, 186-8.

  ENDS:
    controlling factors in acquisition of knowledge, 229;
    may themselves be objects of attention and judgment, 233;
    judgment of, inseparable from factual judgment, 234;
    conflict of, related, the occasion for ethical judgment, 238-41;
    indirect conflict of unrelated, the occasion for economic judgment,
          241-3;
    the subject-matter of ethical judgment, 258, 259;
    definition of, the goal of all judgment, 264, 272;
    not always explicit in judgment-process, 269, 270;
    nature of relation between, in ethical judgment, 273, 274, 291, 292;
    types of factual condition implied in acceptance of, 275, 276;
    warranted by factual judgment, 276;
    nature of, unrelatedness of, in economic judgment, 293-5, 302, 303;
    (see Purpose).

  ENERGY:
    principle of conservation of, 206, 299, 300;
    not valid in sphere of valuation, 328.

  "ENERGY-EQUIVALENCE":
    principle of, in economic judgment, 308, 309;
    meaning of, 309 note.

  EPISTEMOLOGY, 5-7, 10, 11, 13, 17, 18, 47, 73, 341;
    origin of problem of, 344, 345.

  ERDMANN, BENNO:
    concerning induction, 173.

  ERROR:
    criterion of, 371.

  ETHICAL JUDGMENT:
    involves same type of process as physical, 235;
    a process of valuation, 236, 332;
    type of situation evoking, 237-41, 291-4;
    distinguished from mechanical "pull and haul" between ends, 237,
          238;
    distinguished from economic judgment, 243 note, 246 note, 271, 302,
          303;
    subject of, an end of action, 258;
    analysis of process of, 295-302;
    a reconstructive process, 295, 299.

  EXISTENCE:
    _versus_ meaning, 216, 217.

  EXPERIENCE:
    duality of, 16;
    logic of, 19-21;
    how organized, 42;
    relation of thought to organization of, 43-8;
    as disorganized, 75;
    (see Absolute, Functions).

  EXPERIMENT:
    as form of deduction, 212.


  FACT:
    as equivalent to datum, 26, 50 ff.;
    criteria for determining, 106 ff.;
    as reality, 110;
    in relation to both idea and reality, 380 ff.;
    and theory, conflict between, 150, 151;
    mutual dependence of, 168;
    Whewell's view of, 163;
    (see Datum, Idea, Reality, Truth).

  FACTUAL JUDGMENT:
    inadequate to complete mediation of conduct, 230-34;
    controlled by ends, 269;
    incidental to judgments of valuation, 272, 295;
    types of, implied in acceptance of an end, 275, 276;
    presents warrant for acceptance of ends, 277.

  FITE, W., 331 note.

  FRAGMENTARY, 72;
    as quality of internal meaning, 360, 361;
    as an attribute of finite experience, 364, 376;
    (see Stimulus, Tension).

  FUNCTIONS: OF EXPERIENCE, 16;
    logic of, 18, 23;
    distinguished from status, 16;
    of thought, 23, 24, 78, 85;
    total, as stimulus to thought, 36-8, 80;
    different, and logical distinctions, 42;
    different, confused by Lotze, 56;
    sensations as, 58.


  GENETIC:
    method, significance of, 14, 15, 187;
    distinctions, importance of, 24, 53, 62, 71, 85;
    effect of ignoring, 53, 62, 71;
    (see Psychology).

  "GOOD":
    practical significance of, as moral predicate, 259;
    relation to "right," 335.

  GORE, W. C., 377 note.

  GORGIAS, 225.

  GREEK VIEW OF THOUGHT AND REALITY, 342 ff.

  GREEN, T. H., 274 note, 288 note 3, 315 note, 316 note, 330, 331.


  HABIT:
    relation of judgment to, interruption and resumption of, 154;
    and hypothesis, 170;
    and analogy, 176;
    and simple enumeration, 176;
    and conversion, 176;
    and logical meaning, 198;
    logical function of, 375, 376.

  HERACLITUS:
    his position, 215 ff.

  HIPPO, 209.

  HOBBES, THOMAS, 301.

  HOMOGENEITY:
    of the world-ground, 207;
    of the world, 209, 210.

  HUTCHESON, F., 301.

  HYPOTHESIS:
    nature of, VII, 143-83;
    unequal stress commonly laid on its origin, structure, and function,
          143-5;
    relation of data and hypothesis strictly correlative, 145, 152, 168;
    as predicate, 146, 183;
    negative and positive sides of, 146, 155;
    came to be recognized with rise of experimentalism, 159;
    and test, 174, 175, 177 ff.;
    origin of, 170, 171 ff.;
    supposition and, 178;
    interdependence of formation and test of, 182.


  IDEA:
    continuous with fact, 9, 10, 12;
    distinction from fact, 13, 110;
    Lotze's confusion regarding, 31, 32, 41, 65;
    association of, 33;
    contrast with datum, 52-4;
    functional conception of, 70, 112 ff.;
    objective validity of, 72-5;
    as entire content of judgment, 119;
    existential aspect of, 97, 99 ff., 113;
    in relation to reference, 97 ff., 103, 129;
    representational theory of, 100 ff., 113 ff., 141, 347 ff., 372 ff.;
    universality of, 97 ff., 113 ff.;
    as not referred to reality, 97 ff.;
    as forms of control, 129;
    function in judgment, 153, 154;
    distinguished from image, 183-93;
    distinction criticised, 199-202;
    problems accompanying discovery of, 341;
    in Greek thought, 342;
    instrumental and representative functions of, 346 ff., 372 ff.;
    purposive character of, 347 ff.;
    external and internal meaning of, 347 ff.;
    Royce's absolute system of, 348;
    triple relation to purpose in Royce's account, 349 ff.;
    logical _versus_ memorial, 351;
    in relation to fact and reality, 379 ff.;
    (see Hypothesis, Image, Predicate).

  IDEAS:
    Platonic, 247.

  IMAGE:
    as merely fanciful, 53;
    in relation to meaning, 54;
    place of, in judgment, 154;
    distinction from idea, 189-93;
    distinction criticised, 199-202;
    as direct and indirect stimulus, 195-7.

  IMAGERY:
    empirical criteria of, 186;
    function of, 187;
    as representative, 186-8, 194;
    psychological function of, 193-7;
    logical function of, 198, 199.

  IMMEDIATE:
    as related to mediation, 342, 350 ff.

  IMPRESSION:
    Lotze's definition of, 27, 28, 29, 32;
    objective determination of, 30, 31;
    objective quality of, 31, 68;
     as psychic, 53;
    as transformed by thought into meanings or ideas, 67 ff.;
    (see Idea, Meaning, Sensation).

  INDETERMINATE:
    as quality of finite experience, 364.

  INDUCTION:
    Bacon's view of, 157;
    by enumeration and allied processes, 171;
    and habit, 176;
    _versus_ deduction, 211, 212.

  INFERENCE:
    Lotze's view of, 60;
    in relation to judgment, 117.

  INSTRUMENTAL:
    as character of thought, 78-82, 128, 140, 346 ff., 372 ff.;
    (see Purpose).

  INTERACTION:
    physical, 218 ff.

  INTEREST:
    direction of, 205.

  INVENTION:
    form of deduction, 212.


  JAMES, WILLIAM, 81 note, 352 note, 375.

  JEVONS, W. STANLEY, 169, 173.

  JONES, HENRY, 43 note, 59 note, 66.

  JUDGMENT:
    Lotze's definition of, 59 and note;
    relation of, to ideas, 60;
    structure of, 75 note;
    Bosanquet's theory of, 86 ff.;
    as a function, 107 ff.;
    dead and live, 108;
    definition of, 86, 111;
    relation to inference, 116 ff.;
    limits of single, 123 ff.;
    negative, 114 ff.;
    of perception, 88 ff., 96;
    parts of, 118 ff., 207, 208;
    time relations of, 120 ff.;
    as individual, 136;
    as instrumental, 128, 140;
    as categorical and hypothetical, 136;
    as impersonal, 131;
    as intuitive, 139;
    various definitions of, 147 ff.;
    analysis of, 149 ff.;
    disjunctive, 155;
    psychology of, 153;
    purpose of, 154;
    and interrupted activity, 154;
    unique system of, 224-30;
    general analysis of, 230-32;
    purposive character of, 353 ff.;
    universal, 354;
    particular, 358;
    individual, 359, 360;
    mathematical, 354 ff., 370;
    (see Economic, Ethical, Factual judgments, Copula, Predicate,
          Reflection, Subject).


  KANT, I., 43, 46, 60 note, 163, 263, 301.

  KEPLER, 146, 181.

  KNOWLEDGE:
    in relation to reality, 102 ff.;
    meaning and, 128;
    "copy" and "instrumental" theories of, 129, 140, 141;
    (see Judgment, Truth).

  KÜLPE, O., 250 note.


  LOGIC:
     origin of, 4;
    types of, 5-22;
    as generic and specific, 18, 23;
    relations to psychology, 14, 15, 63, 64, 184, 185, 192 ff.;
    effect of modern psychology upon, 345;
    relation to genetic method, 15-18;
    problems illustrated, 19, 20;
    social significance of, 20;
    eristic the source of formal, 203;
    pre-Socratic, 203;
    and epistemology, 341, 342;
    (see Epistemology, Psychology).

  LOTZE:
    criticised, Studies II, III, IV;
    applied logic, 6;
    thought as accessory, 56;
    view of judgment, 147;
    similarity between him and Whewell, 165 note;
    quoted, 6, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 42, 56 note, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67,
          68, 69, 73, 77, 83, 84.


  MANY:
    the, and the One, 210 ff., 218 ff.

  MARGINAL UTILITY:
    principle of, 307, 337 note.

  Martineau, J., 262.

  MATHEMATICS:
    certain forms of proof in, 172 ff.;
    judgments of, 354 ff., 370.

  MCGILVARY, E. B., 257 note.

  MEAD, G. H., 38 note, 337 note.

  MEANING:
    and logical idea, 30, 31, 32, 33, 41, 97;
    as content of thought, 66 ff.;
    three types of, 68;
    as property of independent idea, 73-5;
    and association of ideas, 33, 80;
    and reference, 97;
    world of, 98, 103, 112;
    and knowledge, 89, 128, 190;
    equivalent to response, 198;
    _versus_ existence, 216-18;
    inner and outer, 347 ff.;
    (see Content, Idea, Reference).

  MEANS:
    as external and constitutive, 78;
    reapplication of, the problem of economic valuation, 242, 243, 246,
          259, 260, 303, 304;
    objective in so far as not known adequately for one's purpose, 256;
    definition of, incidental to all judgment, 272;
    factual determination of, sometimes determinative of ends also, 270.

  MEDIATION:
    in relation to the immediate, 350 ff.

  MELISSUS:
    his dialectic, 214.

  METAPHYSICS, 8, 9, 13, 18, 85;
    and logic of experience, 13;
    as natural history, 13-18;
    worth, 19-22;
    logical and, 72, 74;
    (see Epistemology, Logic).

  MILL, J. STUART, 147, 160 ff., 162, 166.

  MIXTURE:
    logical meaning of idea of, 219, 220, 222.

  MONISM, 224.

  MOORE, A. W., 76 note, 346 note.

  MOTION:
    conservation of, 206.


  NEGATION, 97, 114 ff.

  NEO-HEGELIAN, 43, 316.

  NEWTON, I., 146, 159, 179;
    his notes for philosophizing, 159 note.

  [Greek: Nomô] _versus_ [Greek: physei], 226.

  NORMATIVE AND GENETIC, 16;
    (see End, Purpose, Validity, Value).


  OBEDIENCE:
    a factor in genesis of morality, 257
    (see also Authority and Custom).

  OBJECT:
    how defined, 38, 39, 74, 76;
    socially current, 230;
    real, individual in significance, 230;
    nature of the ethical, 240, 328;
    of the economic, 259, 260, 328;
    (see Substance).

  OBJECTIVITY:
    Lotze's view of, 68 (see Study IV);
    types of, 68;
    Lotze's distinction of logical and ontological, 72, 73;
    distinction denied, 341, 342;
    scope of conception of, 235;
    commonly denied to other than factual judgments, 247, 248;
    not a property of sense-elements as such, 248, 249;
    a category of "apperception," 250;
    a mark of the problematic as such, 250, 251, 255;
    not ascertainable by any specific method, 252;
    "obtrusiveness" as evidence of, 253;
    "reliability" as evidence of, 263;
    conditions of experience of, 253-6;
    conditions of, present in the ethical and economic situations,
          257-60;
    a real characteristic of ethical and economic judgment, 261-3;
    not dependent on social currency, 318-20;
    nor on possibility of social currency, 320-24;
    nor on permanence, 324-9;
    (see Reality, Validity).

  ONE:
    the, and the Many, 210 ff., 218 ff.


  PARMENIDES:
    his logical position, 216 ff.;
    influence on Platonic-Aristotelian logic, 217.

  PARTICIPATION:
    significance of, in Plato, 342 ff.

  PARTICULARITY:
    of an idea, 99, 113;
    of a judgment, 358.

  PERCEPTION:
    judgments of, 88 ff., 96.

  PERFECT, THE, 126.

  PHYSICAL JUDGMENT (see Factual judgment).

  [Greek: Physei] _versus_ [Greek: nomô], 226.

  [Greek: Physis], 207, 224.

  PLATO, 53 note;
    on ideas and reality, 342 ff., 378, 379.

  PLURALISM, 81 note.

  POSITING:
    thought as, 68.

  PREDICATE:
    how constituted, 75 note;
    in relation to reality, 101, 103;
    as hypothesis, 147, 153, 155, 156, 183, 186;
    develops out of imaged end, 232;
    interaction with subject, 232;
    in ethical judgment, 258, 291-6;
    in economic, 259, 260, 309-11;
    (see Copula, Judgment, Hypothesis, Idea, Image).

  PREDICATION, 118 ff.

  PRE-ESTABLISHED HARMONY:
    in Royce's philosophy, 368.

  PRESUPPOSITIONS, 204, 206.

  PROBLEMATIC (see Tension).

  PROOF:
    inductive, 172, 173;
    of hypothesis, 174, 175;
    relation of, to origin of hypothesis, 179-82;
    Wundt's view of, 177, 178.

  PROPOSITION:
    and judgment, 118.

  PROTAGORAS, 226.

  PRUDENCE:
    ethical status of, as a virtue, 246.

  PYTHAGOREANS, THE:
    their logical position, 216;
    use of experiment, 216.

  PSYCHICAL:
    distinguished from physical, 25;
    Lotze's view of impression as barely, 27, 28, 30;
    view criticised, 31-4, 41, 42;
    two meanings of, 38 note;
    psychical mechanism, 31;
    idea as, 53;
    problem of logical and, 54 and note, 64;
    activity of thought also made, by Lotze, 77 and note;
    subjective result, 84;
    (see Impression).

  PSYCHOLOGY:
    and logic, 14-16, 26, 63, 64, 153, 154, 184, 185, 192 ff., 345, 348;
    principle of, functional, 229, 230;
    genesis of, 280, 281;
    logical value of functional, 293.

  PSYCHOLOGISTS' FALLACY, 37.

  PURPOSE:
    logical importance of, 4, 9, 10, 13, 15, 20, 35, 58, 76, 80, 154;
    logical aspects of, Study XI;
    in an idea, 347 ff.;
    in judgment, 353 ff.;
    in criterion of truth and error, 361 ff.;
    origin of, as idea, 373 ff.;
    as method, 377;
    (see End, Reconstruction).


  QUALES:
    of sensation, 55, 56, 60 note.

  QUALITIES:
    primary and secondary, 221.

  QUESTION:
    and judgment, 97, 114 ff.


  RATIONALISM:
    criticised, 156 ff., 188 ff., 298 ff.

  RATIONALITY:
    of world, 206.

  REALITY:
    as constructed by thought, 94 ff., 104;
    as developing, 126;
    as including fact and idea, 108, 110, 125, 382;
    as independent of thought, 85, 87 ff., 104;
    as subject of subject, 88 ff.;
    popular criterion of, 105 ff.;
    possibility of knowledge of, 91 ff., 102 ff., 125;
    for the individual, 94 ff., 103, 112, 224 ff.;
    as relative to judging, 149;
    as given in sensation, 160;
    "perception" and "recognition" coefficients of, 263-7, 277;
    these present in ethical and economical experience, 267-9;
    apprehension of, emotional, 263;
    scope of complete conception of, 235, 340;
    degrees of, 340;
    Platonic conception of, 343 ff.;
    Royce's conception of, 348;
    as related to fact and idea, 379 ff.;
    (see Fact, Truth, Validity).

  REASON, SUFFICIENT:
    principle of, 206.

  RECONSTRUCTION:
    the function of thinking, 38, 40, 46, 75, 76, 85;
    effect of denying this, 47, 71, 72;
    data and, 49 ff.;
    in judgment, 154, 291, 295, 299, 311, 312, 346, 347;
    (see Habit, Stimulus, Tension).

  REFERENCE:
    as social, 74;
    problem of reference of ideas, 82 ff.;
    as meaning, 97 ff.;
    functional conception of, 113;
    paradox of, 99;
    idea as, 129.

  REFLECTION:
    as derived, 1-12;
    naïve, 3, 9;
    subject-matter of, 7, 8;
    logic and, 3, 18, 23;
    _versus_ constitutive thought, 43-8;
    distinguished, 255;
    general nature of, 269;
    end not always explicit in, 270;
    outcome of, statable in terms of end or means, 272;
    (see Judgment, Thought).

  REFLECTIVE JUDGMENT, 134.

  REPRESENTATION:
    as one of the two functions of an idea, 345, 347 ff., 372;
    significance of, in ideal reconstruction, 376.

  RESPONSE:
    failure of, and origin of judgment, 154.

  RESTLESSNESS:
    as source of reflection and purpose, 374 ff.;
    (see Tension).

  RHETORIC:
    origin of, 203, 204.

  "RIGHT" (see "Good").

  ROYCE, JOSIAH:
    referred to, 76 note, 147;
    theory of ideas discussed, 346-82;
    quoted, 347, 348, 349, 350, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 359,
          362, 364, 366 note, 368, 370, 371, 374, 379, 380, 381.


  SATISFACTION:
    pause of, as marking attainment of truth, 362 ff.

  SCHILLER, F. C. S., 327 note, 345 note.

  SCIENCE:
    relation to naïve experience, 10, 11;
    its historic stages, 11, 12;
    distinction of logical procedure from epistemology, 13;
    same history as philosophy, 21, 22.

  SELF, EMPIRICAL:
    genesis and content of concept of, 290, 292, 331, 332 note 1.

  SELF, "ENERGETIC":
    implied in experience of "warrant," 277, 278;
    stimulus to development of concept of empirical self, 279-81;
    essential principle in all valuation, 281-5;
    evolution of moral attitude of reference to, 285-9;
    logical function of, in valuation, 296;
    important place in economic valuation, 308, 309;
    not capable of being described in terms of purpose or ideal, 313-16;
    Bradley's misinterpretation of, 332 note.

  SELF-REALIZATION (see also Green, T. H.):
    theory of, as moral ideal futile, 298;
    logically congruous with determinism and hedonism, 330, 331.

  SENSATIONS:
    logical import of, 57;
    as functions of experience, 58;
    as point of contact with reality, 90;
    place in judgment, 154;
    and ideas, 164 ff.;
    (see Impressions, Psychical).

  SENSORI-MOTOR ACTIVITY, 193, 200.

  SHAFTESBURY, 301.

  SIGWART, C.:
    view of judgment, 147.

  SKEPTICISM, 50 note, 85.

  "SOCIAL CURRENCY":
    implies an identity of aspect of an object to different persons,
          229;
    object having, an abstraction like social individual, 229;
    not a test of objectivity, 318-29.

  SOCRATES:
    function of concept, 342.

  SOPHISTS, THE, 225.

  SPENCER, H., 248, 250 note 1, 315 note.

  STANDARD (see also Predicate):
    identified with predicate in ethical judgment, 238-40;
    function of, in ethical judgment, 274, 299, 300;
    morphology and mode of reconstruction of, 296, 297;
    an ultimate ethical, impossible, 299;
    objectivity of, 300, 301.

  STIMULUS:
    of thought, 7, 8, 17, 24, 37-40, 47, 81;
    Lotze's view of, 27, 29, 30;
    view criticised, 30-36;
    confusion of datum with, 61;
    defined, 75;
    and judgment, 153-4;
    as condition of thinking, 193 ff.;
    as direct and indirect, 195-7;
    of ethical judgment, 238-41, 291;
    of economic, judgment, 241-6, 302;
    (see Content, Datum).

  STOUT, G. F.:
    referred to, 349.

  STRATTON, G. M., 318 note.

  STRUCTURE, 15, 16, 17, 18, 24, 75;
    (see Function).

  SUBJECT:
    of judgment, how constituted, 75 note;
    as constructed by thought, 94 ff., 103;
    as a part of judgment, 118 ff.;
    as reality, 88 ff.;
    as inside and outside of judgment, 93, 96;
    functional theory of, 111, 125;
    as that requiring explanation, 208, 211 ff.;
    as modified by deduction, 212;
    given by analysis of situation, 232;
    interacts with predicate in judgment, 232;
    of ethical judgment, 258, 296-8;
    of economic judgment, 259, 260, 304, 309-11;
    (see Copula, Datum, Judgment, Predicate).

  SUBJECTIVE:
    distinguished from objective, 25;
    Lotze's view of impressions as purely, 27, 28;
    view criticised, 31;
    definition of, 39;
    developed only within reflection, 52, 53;
    (see Psychical).

  SUBJECTIVISM:
    in Lotze, 83, 84;
    in Royce, 360.

  SUBJECT-MATTER OF THOUGHT:
    distinguished as stimulus, datum, and content, 7, 8, 24;
    confusion of these (genetic) distinctions, 17, 18;
    as antecedent, Study II;
    as datum, Study III;
    as content, Study IV.

  SUBSTANCE:
    ethical theories based on logic involved in rationalistic conception
          of, 298, 299;
    meaning of concept of, 326, 327;
    type-form of conduct analogous to concept of a particular kind of,
          327, 328.

  SUBSTANTIATION:
    significance of Plato's, of ideas, 342 ff.

  SUPPOSITION AND HYPOTHESIS, 178-81.

  SWEET, HENRY: quoted, 153 note.

  SYNTHETIC (see Reconstruction).


  TAYLOR, A. E., 299 note 2, 315 note, 316, 324.

  TELEOLOGY (see End, Purpose).

  TEMPTATION:
    ethical, 238, 301;
    economic, 305.

  TENSION:
    as stimulus to thought, 37, 38, 49, 50, 53, 70, 85;
    in relation to constitution of sensory datum, 53, 58, 59, 70;
    constitution of meaning as distinct from fact, 75, 85, 154, 237-46,
          250, 251, 255, 291-5, 374 ff.;
    (see Purpose, Reconstruction).

  THALES:
    his [Greek: archê], water, 209;
    in relation to deduction, 212, 214.

  THOUGHT:
    forms of, 58 ff.;
    as modes of organizing data, 63;
    three kinds according to Lotze, 68, 69;
    as positing and distinguishing, 69;
    validity of its function, 76-82;
    of its products, 82-5;
    instrumental character, 78-82;
    as discriminating sensory qualities, 200-202;
    (see Judgment, Reflection).

  TIME:
    as involved in judgment, 120 ff.

  TRANSCENDENTALISM, 29, 43-8.

  TRENDELENBURG, A.:
    view of judgment, 147.

  TRUTH: criterion of, 84;
    Bosanquet's conception of, 105;
    popular criterion of, 105 ff.;
    and purpose, Study XI;
    representational _versus_ teleological view of, 341 ff.;
    criterion of, 361 ff.;
    (see Objectivity, Validity).


  UEBERWEG:
    view of judgment, 147.

  UNIFORMITY:
    of nature, 206.

  UNITY:
    of the world, 207.

  UNIVERSAL:
    first and second according to Lotze, 56, 59, 69;
    ideas as, 97 ff., 113;
    judgment as, 136;
    Mr. Royce's treatment of, 354 ff.;
    necessity and, 357.


  VALIDITY:
    of thought, 7, 8;
    relation to genesis, 14, 15;
    test, 17, 18;
    defines content of thought, 24;
    problem of, Study IV;
    Lotze's dilemma regarding, 71-85;
    of bare object of thought, 72-6;
    of activity of thought, 76-82;
    of product of thought, 82-5;
    (see Objectivity, Reality, Truth).

  VALUE:
    Lotze's distinction of, from existence, 28, 29;
    view criticised, 31, 41, 45;
    organized, of experience, 42-8;
    determined in and by a logical process, 233;
    nature of consciousness of, 273, 333-5;
    function of consciousness of, 335-7;
    properly mediate and functional in character, 338-40.

  VALUATION (see also Ethical judgment, Economic judgment):
    includes only ethical and economic types of judgment, 227, 236,
          338-40;
    general account of process of, 272, 295;
    reconstructive of self as well as of reality, 312.

  VENN, JOHN:
    origin of hypothesis, 169.


  "WARRANT":
    consciousness of, accompanies purely factual as well as valuational
          judgment processes, 276, 277;
    the constitutive feature of survey of factual conditions, 278, 279.

  WELTON, J.:
    origin of hypothesis, 171.

  WHEWELL, WILLIAM, 163;
    view of sensations and ideas, 164, 165;
    of induction, 165;
    a certain agreement between him and Mill, 166.

  WIESER, F. VON, 335 note 2.

  WILL:
    as related to thought, 366 note;
    (see Activity, End, Purpose).

  WUNDT, W.:
    view of judgment, 147;
    view of mathematical induction, 173;
    formation and proof of hypothesis, 177 ff.;
    distinction between supposition and hypothesis, 178 ff.

  "WRONG" (see "Bad").


  XENOPHANES:
    his logical position, 216.


  ZENO:
    his dialectic, 214.




FOOTNOTES


[1] _Logic_ (translation, Oxford, 1888), Vol. I, pp. 10, 11. Italics
mine.

[2] See ANGELL, "The Relations of Structural and Functional Psychology
to Philosophy," _The Decennial Publications of the University of
Chicago_, Vol. III (1903), Part II, pp. 61-6, 70-72.

[3] See _Philosophical Review_, Vol. XI, pp. 117-20.

[4] See statements regarding the psychological and the logical in _The
Child and the Curriculum_, pp. 28, 29.

[5] LOTZE, _Logic_ (translation, Oxford, 1888), Vol. I, p. 2. For the
preceding exposition see Vol. I, pp. 1, 2, 13, 14, 37, 38; also
_Microkosmus_, Book V, chap. 4.

[6] LOTZE, _Logic_, Vol. I, pp. 6, 7.

[7] LOTZE, _Logic_ (translation, Oxford, 1888), Vol. I, p. 25.

[8] _Ibid._, Vol. I, p. 36.

[9] _Ibid._

[10] _Microkosmus_, Book V, chap. 4.

[11] _Logic_, Vol. II, p. 235; see the whole discussion, §§ 325 through
327.

[12] The emphasis here is upon the term "existences," and in its plural
form. Doubtless the distinction of some experiences as belonging to me,
as mine in a peculiarly intimate way, from others as chiefly concerning
other persons, or as having to do with things, is an early one. But this
is a distinction of _concern_, of value. The distinction referred to
above is that of making an _object_, or presentation, out of this felt
type of value, and thereby breaking it up into distinct "events," etc.,
with their own laws of inner connection. This is the work of
psychological analysis. Upon the whole matter of the psychical I am glad
to refer to PROFESSOR GEORGE H. MEAD'S article entitled "The Definition
of the Psychical," Vol. III, Part II, of _The Decennial Publications of
the University of Chicago_.

[13] We have a most acute and valuable criticism of Lotze from this
point of view in PROFESSOR HENRY JONES, _Philosophy of Lotze_, 1895. My
specific criticisms agree in the main with his, and I am glad to
acknowledge my indebtedness. But I cannot agree in the belief that the
business of thought is to qualify reality as such; its occupation
appears to me to be determining the reconstruction of some aspect or
portion of reality, and to fall within the course of reality itself;
being, indeed, the characteristic medium of its activity. And I cannot
agree that reality as such, with increasing fulness of knowledge,
presents itself as a thought-system, though, as just indicated, I have
no doubt that reality appears as thought-specifications or values, just
as it does as affectional and æsthetic and the rest of them.

[14] Bradley's criticisms of rationalistic idealism should have made the
force of this point reasonably familiar.

[15] The common statement that primitive man projects his own volitions,
emotions, etc., into objects is but a back-handed way of expressing the
truth that "objects," etc., have only gradually emerged from their
life-matrix. Looking back, it is almost impossible to avoid the fallacy
of supposing that somehow such objects were there first and were
afterward emotionally appreciated.

[16] Of course, this very element may be the precarious, the ideal, and
possibly fanciful of some other situation. But it is to change the
historic into the absolute to conclude that therefore everything is
uncertain, all at once, or as such. This gives metaphysical skepticism
as distinct from the working skepticism which is an inherent factor in
all reflection and scientific inquiry.

[17] But this is a slow progress within reflection. Plato, who was
influential in bringing this general distinction to consciousness, still
thought and wrote as if "image" were itself a queer sort of objective
existence; it was only gradually that it was disposed of as psychical,
or a phase of immediate experience.

[18] Of course, this means that what is excluded and so left behind in
the problem of determination of _this_ objective content is regarded as
psychical. With reference to other problems and aims this same psychic
existence is initial, not survival. Released from its prior absorption
in some unanalyzed experience it gains standing and momentum on its own
account; _e. g._, the "personal equation" represents what is eliminated
from a given astronomic time-determination as being purely subjective,
or "source-of-error." But it is initiatory in reference to new modes of
technique, re-readings of previous data--new considerations in
psychology, even new socio-ethical judgments. Moreover, it remains a
fact, and even a worthful fact, as a part of one's own "inner"
experience, as an immediate _psychical reality_. That is to say, there
is a region of _personal_ experience (mainly emotive or affectional)
already recognized as a sphere of value. The "source of error" is
disposed of by making it a _fact_ of this region. The recognition of
falsity does not _originate_ the psychic (p. 38, note).

[19] Of course, this is a further reflective distinction. The plain man
and the student do not determine the extraneous, irrelevant, and
misleading matter as image in a _psychological_ sense, but only as
_fanciful_ or fantastic. Only to the psychologist and for _his_ purpose
does it break up into image and meaning.

[20] Bradley, more than any other writer, has seized upon this double
antithesis, and used it first to condemn the logical as such, and then
turned it around as the impartial condemnation of the psychical also.
See _Appearance and Reality_. In chap. 15 he metes out condemnation to
"thought" because it can never take in the psychical existence or
reality which is present; in chap. 19, he passes similar judgment upon
the "psychical" because it is brutally fragmentary. Other
epistemological logicians have wrestled--or writhed--with this problem,
but I believe Bradley's position is impregnable--from the standpoint of
ready-made differences. When the antithesis is treated as part and lot
of the process of defining the truth of a particular subject-matter, and
thus as historic and relative, the case is quite otherwise.

[21] Vol. I, pp. 28-34.

[22] It is interesting to see how explicitly Lotze is compelled finally
to differentiate two aspects in the antecedents of thoughts, one of
which is necessary in order that there may be anything to call out
thought (a lack, or problem); the other in order that when thought is
evoked it may find data at hand--that is, material in shape to receive
and respond to its exercise. "The manifold matter of ideas is brought
before us, not only in the _systematic order of its qualitative
relationships_, but in the rich _variety of local and temporal
combinations_.... The _combinations of heterogeneous ideas_ ... forms
the _problems_, in connection with which the efforts of thought to
reduce coexistence to coherence will _subsequently_ be made. The
_homogeneous or similar_ ideas, on the other hand, give occasion to
separate, to connect, and to count their repetitions." (Vol. I, pp. 33,
34; italics mine.) Without the heterogeneous variety of the local and
temporal juxtapositions there would be nothing to excite thought.
Without the systematic arrangement of quality there would be nothing to
meet thought and reward it for its efforts. The homogeneity of
qualitative relationships, _in the pre-thought material_, gives the
tools or instruments by which thought is enabled successfully to tackle
the heterogeneity of collocations and conjunctions also found in the
same material! One would suppose that when Lotze reached this point he
might have been led to suspect that in this remarkable adjustment of
thought-stimuli, thought-material, and thought-tools to one another, he
must after all be dealing, not with something prior to the
thought-function, but with the necessary elements in and of the
thought-situation.

[23] _Supra_, p. 30.

[24] For the identity of sensory experience with the point of greatest
strain and stress in conflicting or tensional experience, see "The
Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology," _Psychological Review_, Vol. III, p.
57.

[25] For the "accessory" character of thought, see LOTZE, Vol. I, pp. 7,
25-7, 61, etc.

[26] BOSANQUET, _Logic_ (Vol. I, pp. 30-34), and Jones (_Philosophy of
Lotze_, 1895, chap. 4) have called attention to a curious inconsistency
in Lotzes's treatment of judgment. On one hand, the statement is as
given above. Judgment grows out of conception in making explicit the
determining relation of universal to its own particular, implied in
conception. But, on the other hand, judgment grows not out of conception
at all, but out of the question of determining connection in change.
Lotze's nominal reason for this latter view is that the conceptual world
is purely static; since the actual world is one of change, we need to
pass upon what really goes together (is causal) in the change as
distinct from such as are merely coincident. But, as Jones clearly
shows, it is also connected with the fact that, while Lotze nominally
asserts that judgment grows out of conception, he treats conception as
the result of judgment since the first view makes judgment a mere
explication of the content of an idea, and hence merely expository or
analytic (in the Kantian sense) and so of more than doubtful
applicability to reality. The affair is too large to discuss here, and I
will content myself with referring to the oscillation between
conflicting contents, and gradation of sensory qualities already
discussed (p. 56, note). It is judgment which grows out of the former,
because judgment is the whole situation as such; conception is referable
to the latter because it _is_ one abstraction within the whole (the
solution of possible meanings of the data) just as the datum is another.
In truth, since the sensory datum is not absolute, but comes in a
historical context, the qualities apprehended as constituting the datum
simply define the locus of conflict in the entire situation. They are
attributives of the contents-in-tension of the colliding things, not
calm untroubled ultimates. On pp. 33 and 34 of Vol. I, Lotze recognizes
(as we have just seen) that, as matter of fact, it is both sensory
qualities in their systematic grading, or quantitative determinations
(see Vol. I, p. 43, for the recognition of the necessary place of the
quantitative in the true concept), _and_ the "rich variety of local and
temporal combinations," that provoke thought and supply it with
material. But, as usual, he treats this simply as a historical accident,
not as furnishing the key to the whole matter. In fine, while the
heterogeneous collocations and successions constitute the problematic
element that stimulates thought, quantitative determination of the
sensory quality furnishes one of the two chief means through which
thought deals with the problem. It is a reduction of the original
colliding contents to a form in which the effort at redintegration gets
maximum efficiency. The concept, as ideal meaning, is of course the
other partner to the transaction. It is getting the various possible
meanings-of-the-data into such shape as to make them most useful in
construing the data. The bearing of this upon the subject and predicate
of judgment cannot be discussed here.

[27] See Vol. I, pp. 38, 59, 61, 105, 129, 197, for Lotze's treatment of
these distinctions.

[28] Vol. I, p. 36; see also Vol. II, pp. 290, 291.

[29] Vol. II, p. 246; the same is reiterated in Vol. II, p. 250, where
the question of origin is referred to as a corruption in logic. Certain
psychical acts are necessary as "conditions and occasions" of logical
operations, but the "deep gulf between psychical mechanism and thought
remains unfilled."

[30] _Philosophy of Lotze_, chap. 3, "Thought and the Preliminary
Process of Experience."

[31] Vol. I, p. 38.

[32] Vol. I, p. 13; last italics mine.

[33] Vol. I, p. 14; italics mine.

[34] See Vol. I, pp. 16-20. On p. 22 this work is declared to be not
only the first, but the most indispensable of all thought's operations.

[35] Vol. I, p. 26.

[36] Vol. I, p. 35.

[37] Vol. I, p. 36; see the strong statements already quoted, p. 30.
What if this canon were applied in the first act of thought referred to
above: the original objectification which transforms the mere state into
an abiding quality or meaning? Suppose, that is, it were said that the
first objectifying act cannot make a substantial (or attached) quale out
of a mere state of feeling; it must _find_ the distinction it makes
there already! It is clear we should at once get a _regressus ad
infinitum_. We here find Lotze face to face with this fundamental
dilemma: thought either arbitrarily forces in its own distinctions, or
else just repeats what is already there--is either falsifying or futile.
This same contradiction, so far as it affects the impression, has
already been discussed. See p. 31.

[38] Vol. I, p. 31.

[39] As we have already seen, the concept, the meaning as such, is
always a factor or status in a reflective situation; it is always a
predicate of judgment, in use in interpreting and developing the logical
subject, or datum of perception. See Study VII, on the Hypothesis.

[40] ROYCE, in his _World and Individual_, Vol. I, chaps. 6 and 7, has
criticised the conception of meaning as valid, but in a way which
implies that there is a difference between validity and reality, in the
sense that the meaning or content of the valid idea becomes real only
when it is experienced in direct feeling. The above implies, of course,
a difference between validity and reality, but finds the test of
validity in exercise of the function of direction or control to which
the idea makes pretension or claim. The same point of view would
profoundly modify Royce's interpretation of what he terms "inner" and
"outer" meaning. See MOORE, _The University of Chicago Decennial
Publications_, Vol. III, on "Existence, Meaning, and Reality."

[41] Vol. II, pp. 257, 265 and in general Book III, chap. 4. It is
significant that thought itself, appearing as an act of thinking over
against its own content, is here treated as psychical. Even this
explicit placing of thinking in the psychical sphere, along with
sensations and the associative mechanism, does not, however, lead Lotze
to reconsider his statement that the psychological problem is totally
irrelevant and even corrupting as regards the logical. Consequently, as
we see in the text, it only gives him one more difficulty to wrestle
with: how a process which is _ex officio_ purely psychical and
subjective can yet yield results which are valid, in a logical, to say
nothing of an ontological, sense.

[42] Professor James's satisfaction in the
contemplation of bare pluralism, of disconnection, of radical
having-nothing-to-do-with-one-another, is a case in point. The
satisfaction points to an æsthetic attitude in which the brute diversity
becomes itself one interesting object; and thus unity asserts itself in
its own denial. When discords are hard and stubborn, and intellectual
and practical unification are far to seek, nothing is commoner than the
device of securing the needed unity by recourse to an emotion which
feeds on the very brute variety. Religion and art and romantic affection
are full of examples.

[43] Lotze even goes so far in this connection as to say that the
antithesis between our ideas and the objects to which they are directed
is itself a part of the world of ideas (Vol. II, p. 192). Barring the
phrase "world of _ideas_" (as against world of continuous experiencing)
he need only have commenced at this point to have traveled straight and
arrived somewhere. But it is absolutely impossible to hold both this
view and that of the original independent existence of something given
to and in thought and an independent existence of a thought-activity,
thought-forms, and thought-contents.

[44] The criticism of Bosanquet's theory of the judgment offered in this
paper is from the standpoint of the theory of the judgment developed by
Professor John Dewey, in his lectures on "The Theory of Logic." While
the chief interest of the paper, as the title implies, is critical, it
has been necessary to devote a portion of it to the exposition of the
point of view from which the criticism is made.--H. B. T.

[45] The references throughout this paper are to the pages of Vol. I of
BERNARD BOSANQUET, _Logic or the Morphology of Knowledge_, Oxford, 1888.

[46] F. H. BRADLEY, _Principles of Logic_, p. 64.

[47] The difficulty, of course, is not a merely formal one, much less a
verbal one. Instinctively we grant to Bosanquet his statement that
reality is a continuous whole; we feel it almost captious to question
his right to it. But why? Because the _content of judgment_ is
continuous; judgment is always engaged with the determination of a
related totality. But if all content is ideal, and judgment is just the
application of this content to reality in virtue of an isolated contact,
surely it begs the entire question to say that reality apart from the
content applied is continuous, and then to use this assertion to justify
the objective validity of the judgment--its element of permanent truth.

[48] There is good reason for believing that Mr. Bosanquet escapes, in
his own mind, the difficulty by the term "correspondence." "The name
stands for these elements in the idea which _correspond_ in the separate
worlds;" we may even be accused of injustice in confusing this
correspondence with bare identity of existence. But if one idea
corresponds to another in the sense of referring to it, what is this but
the fact to be explained--how an existence can refer beyond itself?

[49] This conclusion is clearly recognized by BRADLEY, _Appearance and
Reality_, chap. 4.

[50] It would be suggestive to inquire in what sense conscious thought
claims to know. Is it a general claim which thought _qua_ thought puts
forth, or is it the claim of the content of some particular thought? The
former, of course, is a mere pious aspiration having no reference to
specific validity or truth; the latter is precisely the problem under
consideration.

[51] Bosanquet would seem to have followed Lotze in this insertion of a
world of "meanings" intermediate between the individual idea as such and
the real object as such. See the criticism already passed, pp. 93-5.

[52] Or, the situation as questioned is itself a fact, and a perfectly
determinate (though not determined) one. See pp. 38, 50.

[53] Of course, the distinction between the process of arriving as
temporal, and the essential relation of subject and predicate as
eternal, harks back to the notion of judgment as the process by which
"we" reproduce, or make real for ourselves, a reality already real
within itself. And it involves just the same difficulties. The relation
of subject and predicate--this simultaneous distinction and mutual
reference--has meaning only in an act of adjustment, of attempt to
control, within which we distribute our conditions. When the act is
completed, the relation of subject and predicate, as subject and
predicate, quite disappears. An eternal relation of the two is
meaningless; we might as well talk of an eternal reaching for the same
distant object by the same hand. In such conceptions, we have only
grasped a momentary phase of a situation, isolated it, and set it up as
an entity. Significant results would be reached by considering the
"synthetic" character (in the Kantian sense) of judgment from this point
of view. All modern logicians agree that judgment must be ampliative,
must extend knowledge; that a "trifling proposition" is no judgment at
all. What does this mean save that judgment is developmental,
transitive, in effect and purport? And yet these same writers conceive
of Reality as a _finished system of content in a complete and
unchangeable single Judgment_! It is impossible to evade the
contradiction save by recognizing that since it is the business of
judgment to transform, its test (or Truth) is successful performance of
the particular transformation it has set itself, and that transformation
is temporal.

[54] It is worth considering whether this may not be the reality of
Royce's distinction between outer and inner meaning. An anticipation of
experience is the working prerequisite of the control which will realize
the idea, _i. e._, the experience anticipated. One is no more "inner" or
"outer" than the other.

[55] _Logik_, p. 304.

[56] DE MORGAN, _Budget of Paradoxes_, pp. 55, 56; quoted by WELTON,
_Logic_, Vol. II, p. 60.

[57] Advanced grammarians treat this matter in a way which should be
instructive to logicians. The hypothesis, says SWEET (§ 295 of _A New
English Grammar, Logical and Historical_, Oxford, 1892), suggests an
affirmation or negation "as objects of thought." "In fact, we often say
_supposing_ (that is, 'thinking') _it is true_, instead of _if it is
true_." In a word, the hypothetical judgment as such puts explicitly
before us the content of thought, of the predicate or hypothesis; and in
so far is a moment in judgment rather than adequate judgment itself.

[58] This carries with it, of course, the notion that "sensation" and
"image" are not distinct psychical existences in themselves, but are
distinguished logical forces.

[59] Concerning the strict correlativity of subject and predicate, data
and hypothesis, see p. 34.

[60] _Novum Organum_, Vol. I, p. 61.

[61] Newton's "Rules for Philosophizing" (_Principia_, Book III) are as
follows:

Rule I. "No more causes of natural things are to be admitted than such
as are both true, and sufficient to explain the phenomena of those
things."

Rule II. "Natural effects of the same kind are to be referred as far as
possible to the same causes."

Rule III. "Those qualities of bodies that can neither be increased nor
diminished in intensity, and which are found to belong to all bodies
within reach of our experiments are to be regarded as qualities of all
bodies whatever."

Rule IV. "In experimental philosophy propositions collected by induction
from phenomena are to be regarded either as accurately true or very
nearly true notwithstanding any contrary hypothesis, till other
phenomena occur, by which they are made more accurate or are rendered
subject to exceptions."

[62] Book III, chap. 2, sec. 5; italics mine. The latter part of the
passage, beginning with the words "If we did not often commence," etc.,
is quoted by Mill from Comte. The words "neither induction nor deduction
would enable us to understand even the simplest phenomena" are his own.

[63] Book III, chap. 7, sec. 1.

[64] Book III, chap. 14, secs. 4 and 5.

[65] WILLIAM WHEWELL, _The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_,
London, 1840.

[66] The essential similarity between Whewell's view and that of Lotze,
already discussed (see chap. 3) is of course explainable on the basis of
their common relationship to Kant.

[67] _Logic_, Book IV, chap. 2, sec. 2; italics mine.

[68] _Ibid._

[69] _Ibid._, sec. 4; in sec. 6 he states even more expressly that any
conception is appropriate in the degree in which it "helps us toward
what we wish to understand."

[70] _Ibid._, sec. 6; italics mine.

[71] VENN, _Empirical Logic_, p. 383.

[72] VENN, _Empirical Logic_, p. 25; italics mine.

[73] WELTON, _Manual of Logic_, Vol. II, chap. 3.

[74] W. S. JEVONS, _Principles of Science_, pp. 231, 232.

[75] B. ERDMANN, "Zur Theorie des Syllogismus und der Induktion,"
_Philosophische Abhandlungen_, Vol. VI, p. 230.

[76] WUNDT, _Logik_, 2d ed., Vol. II, p. 131.

[77] WELTON, _Manual of Logic_, Vol. II, p. 72.

[78] _Op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 452 ff.

[79] _Op. cit._, Vol. I, pp. 454-461.

[80] BOSANQUET, _Logic_, Vol. I, p. 46.

[81] BRADLEY, _Principles of Logic_, p. 10.

[82] _Op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 74.

[83] BRADLEY, _Principles of Logic_, p. 11.

[84] _Op. cit._, Vol. I, pp. 75, 76.

[85] BRADLEY, _op. cit._, pp. 4-6.

[86] _Op. cit._, pp. 7, 8.

[87] This study may be regarded as in some sense a development of pp.
7-10 of _The Necessary and the Contingent in the Aristotelian System_,
published in 1896 by The University of Chicago Press. While quite
independent in treatment, the two papers supplement each other.

[88] The best special illustration of this truth with which I am
acquainted is presented for the science of chemistry in an article by F.
WALD, "Die Genesis der stöchiometrischen Grundgesetze," in _Zeitschrift
für physikalische Chemie_, Vol. XVIII (1895), pp. 337 ff.

[89] [Greek: Xi] 201, 246.

[90] H 99.

[91] In allusion to fr. 90 (DIELS). DIELS finds in fr. 108 (fr. 18,
BYWATER), [Greek: oti sophon esti pantôn kechôrismenon] the thought that
God is the Absolute, comparing the [Greek: Nous] of Anaxagoras and the
[Greek: chôristê idea] of Plato and the [Greek: ousia chôristê] of
Aristotle. He assumes that [Greek: sophon]=[Greek: logos] and concedes
great significance to the fragment. But this interpretation is utterly
incompatible with everything else that we know of Heraclitus, and should
be admitted only if it were the only one admissible. ZELLER discusses
the fragment at length, Vol. I, p. 629, 1. If Diels's interpretation be
accepted, the exposition above given of Heraclitus's logical position
must be abandoned.

[92] It has been, and in some quarters is still, the fashion to say that
Heraclitus is the originator of the doctrine of relativity; but Zeller
is quite right in denying the charge. No doubt his teachings lent
themselves readily to such a development, but he did not so express
himself. According to him the _contrarieties coexist in the process_.

[93] _Cf._ RITTER-PRELLER, § 65_c_.

[94] This, in a word, is the burden of my study of _The Necessary and
the Contingent in the Aristotelian System_.

[95] I have in preparation a study of the problem of physical
interaction in Pre-Socratic philosophy which deals with this question in
all its phases.

[96] This statement is, of course, figurative, since Empedocles denied
the existence of a void.

[97] I cannot now undertake a defense of this statement, which runs
counter to certain ancient reports, but must reserve a full discussion
for my account of physical interaction.

[98] The motive for making this assumption was clearly the desire to
make of the [Greek: Nous] the prime mover in the world while exempting
it from reaction on the part of the world, which would have been
unavoidable if its nature had contained parts of other things. It is the
same problem of "touching without being touched in return" that led
Aristotle to a similar definition of God and of the rational soul. The
same difficulty besets the absolutely "simple" soul of Plato's _Phaedo_
and the causality of the Ideas.

[99] ARISTOTLE, _De Generatione et Corruptione_, 323^b 10 f.

[100] We have seen that this distinction was latent in Anaximenes's
process of rarefaction and condensation. For other matters see CHAIGNET,
_Histoire de la Psychologie_, Vol. I, p. 114, whose account, however,
needs to be corrected in some particulars.

[101] I say "perhaps" because ancient reports differ as to the precise
relation of position and arrangement to the distinction between
qualities, primary and secondary.

[102] This is only another instance of what MR. VENN (_Empirical Logic_,
p. 56) has wittily alluded to as "screwing up the cause and the effect
into close juxtaposition."

[103] Simplicius says [Greek: euthys meta to prooimion]; see DIELS, _Die
Fragmente der Vorsokratiker_ (Berlin, 1903), p. 347, l. 18.

[104] Fr. 2, DIELS.

[105] See DIELS, _Fragmente der Vorsokratiker_, p. 343, l. 2; p. 344, l.
27.

[106] 320 C f.

[107] Considerations of space as well as circumstances attending the
immediate preparation of this discussion for the press have precluded
any but the most general and casual reference to the recent literature
of the subject. Much of this literature only imperfectly distinguishes
the logical and psychological points of view, so that critical reference
to it, unaccompanied by detailed restatement and analysis of the
positions criticised, would be useless.

[108] In order to avoid complicating the problems, we have here employed
the common notion that the physical world, physical object, and property
may be taken for granted as possible adequate contents of judgment, and
that the problem is only as to the objectivity of economic and ethical
contents. Of course we may, in the end, come to believe that the
"physical" object is itself an economic construct, in the large sense of
"economic;" that is, an instrument of an effective or successful
experience. Thus in terms of the illustration used above, in the
attitude of entertaining in a general way the plan of building a house
_of some sort or other_, one may have before him various building
materials the ascertained qualities of which are, it may be, socially
recognized as in a general way fitting them for such a use. There is
doubtless so much of real foundation for the common notion here referred
to. But along with the _definition_ of the plan in ethical and economic
judgment, along with the determination actually to build a house, and a
house of a certain specific kind, must go _further_ determination of the
means in their physical aspects, a determination which all the while
reacts into the process of determination of the end. See below, p. 246,
note 3.

[109] In the moral life, as elsewhere, the distinction of deduction and
induction is one of degree. There is but one _type_ or _method_ of
inference, though some inferences may approach more closely than do
others the limit of pure "subsumption."

[110] See III below.

[111] It is no part of the present view that the ends which enter into
economic conflict are incapable of becoming organic and intrinsically
interrelated members of the provisional system of life. On the contrary,
the very essence of our contention is that adjustment established
between two such conflicting ends in economic judgment is in itself
ethical and a member of the provisional system of the individual's ends
of life, and will stand as such, subject to modification through changes
elsewhere in the system, so long as the economic conditions in view of
which it was determined remained unchanged. The "mutual exclusiveness"
of the ends in ethical deliberation is simply the correlate of a
relative fixity in certain of the conditions of life. A man's command
over the means of obtaining such things as books and fuel varies much
and often suddenly in a society like ours from time to time; but, on the
other hand, his physical condition, his intelligence, his powers of
sympathy, and his spiritual capacity for social service commonly do not.
Hence there can be and is a certain more or less definite and permanent
comprehensive scheme of conduct morally obligatory upon him so far as
the exercise of these latter faculties is concerned, but so far as his
conduct depends upon the variable conditions mentioned, it cannot be
prescribed in general terms, nor will any provisional ideal of moral
selfhood admit any such prescriptions as integral elements into itself.
The moral self is an ideal construct based upon these fixed conditions
of life--conditions so fixed that the spiritual furtherance or
deterioration likely to result from certain modes of conduct involving
and affecting them can be estimated directly and with relative ease by
the "ethical" method of judgment. Implied in such a construct is, of
course, a reference to certain relatively permanent social and also
physical conditions. In so far as society and physical nature, and for
that matter the individual's own nature, are _variable_, these are the
subjects of "scientific" or "factual" judgments incidental to the
determination of problems by the "economic" method--problems, that is,
for which no _general_ answer, through reference to a more or less
definite and stable working concept of the self, can be given. Thus our
knowledge of the physical universe is largely, if not chiefly,
incidental to and conditioned by our economic experience. Again, our
economic judgments are in every case determinative of the self in
situations in which, as presented by (perhaps even momentarily) variable
conditions, physical, social, or personal, the ethical method is
inapplicable. In a socialistic state, in which economic conditions might
be more stable than in our present one, many problems in consumption
which now are economic in one sense would be ethical because admitting
of solution by reference to the type of self presupposed in the
established state program of production and distribution. Even now it is
not easy to specify an economic situation the solution of which is
absolutely indifferent ethically. There is a possibility of intemperance
even in so "æsthetic" an indulgence as Turkish rugs.

[112] Accordingly there can be no distinction of ends, some as ethical,
others as economic, but from an ethical standpoint indifferent, and yet
others as amenable neither to ethical nor to economic judgment. The type
of situation and the corresponding mode of judgment employed determines
whether an end shall be for the time being ethical, economic, or of
neither sort conspicuously.

[113] The right of Prudence to rank among the virtues cannot, on our
present view, be questioned. Economic judgment, though it must be
valuation of means, is essentially choice of ends--and, as would appear,
choice of a sort peculiarly difficult by reason of the usually slight
intrinsic relation between the ends involved and also by reason of the
absence of effective points of view for comparison. Culture, as Emerson
remarks, "sees prudence not to be a several faculty, but a name for
wisdom and virtue conversing with the body and its wants." And again,
"The spurious prudence, making the senses final, is the god of sots and
cowards, and is the subject of all comedy.... [The true prudence] takes
the laws of the world whereby man's being is conditioned, as they are,
and keeps these laws that it may enjoy their proper good" (Essay on
_Prudence_).

[114] Here again we purposely use inaccurate language. Strictly, the
ends here spoken of as competing are such, we must say, only because
they are as yet in a measure indeterminate, wanting in "clearness," and
are not yet understood in their true economic character; likewise the
means are wanting in that final shade or degree of physical and
mechanical determinateness which they are presently to possess as means
to a finally determinate economic end. Thus economic judgment, by which
is to be understood determination of an end of action by the economic
method and in accordance with economic principles, involves in general
physical re-determination of the means. The means which at the outset of
the present economic judgment-process appear as physically available
indifferently for either of the tentative ends under consideration are
only in a general way the same means for knowledge as they will be when
the economic problem has been solved. They are, so far as now
determinate, the outcome of former physical judgment-processes
incidental to the definition of economic ends in former situations like
the present.

[115] In our discussion of this preliminary question there is no attempt
to furnish what might be called an _analysis_ of the consciousness of
objectivity. This has been undertaken by various psychologists in recent
well-known contributions to the subject. For our purpose it is necessary
only to specify the intellectual and practical attitude out of which the
consciousness of objectivity arises; not the sensory "elements" or
factors involved in its production as an experience.

[116] So, on the other hand, our vague organic sensations are possibly
more instructive as they are, _for their own purpose_, than they would
be if more sharply discriminated and complexly referred.

For convenience we here meet the view under consideration with its own
terminology; we by no means wish to be understood as indorsing this
terminology as psychologically correct. The sense-quality of which we
read in "structural psychology" is, we hold, not a structural unit at
all, but in fact a highly abstract development out of that unorganized
whole of sensory experience in which reflective attention begins. There
is, for example, no such thing as the simple unanalyzable sense-quality
"red" in consciousness until judgment has proceeded far enough to have
constructed a definite and measured experience which may be symbolized
as "object-before-me-possessing-the-attribute-red." In place of the
original sensory total-experience we now have a more or less developed
perceptual (_i. e._, judgmental) total-experience. It is an instance of
the "psychological fallacy" to interpret what are really elements of
_meaning_ in a perceived object constructed in judgment (for this is the
true nature of the "simple idea of sensation" or "sense-element") as so
many bits of psychical material which were isolated from each other at
the outset, and have been externally joined together in their present
combination.

[117] The phrase is Külpe's and is used in his sense of consciousness
taken as a whole, as, for example, attentive, apperceptive, volitional,
rather than in the sense made familiar by Spencer and others.

[118] The foregoing discussion is in many ways similar to Brentano's
upon the same subject. In discussing his first class of modes of
consciousness, the _Vorstellungen_, he says: "We find no contrasts
between presentations excepting those of the objects to which the
presentations refer. Only in so far as warm and cold, light and dark, a
high note and a low, form contrasts can we speak of the corresponding
presentations as contrasted; and, in general, there is in any other
sense than this no contrast within the entire range of these conscious
processes" (_Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte_, Bd. I, p. 29).
This may stand as against any attempt to find contrast between abstract
sense-qualities taken apart from their objective reference. What is,
however, the ground of distinction between the presented objects?
Apparently this must be answered in the last resort as above. In this
sense we should need finally to interpret "sensuous" and "material" in
terms of objectivity as above defined, rather than the reverse. They are
cases in or specifications of the determination of adequate stimuli.

[119] In this connection reference may be made to the well-known
disturbing effect of the forced introduction of attention to details
into established sensori-motor co-ordinations, such as "typewriting,"
playing upon the piano, and the like.

[120] _Cf._ PROFESSOR BALDWIN'S _Social and Ethical Interpretations_,
and PROFESSOR MCGILVARY'S recent paper on "Moral Obligation,"
_Philosophical Review_, Vol. XI, especially pp. 349 f.

[121] Manifestly, as indicated just above, this accepted value of the
object implies fuller physical knowledge of the object than was
possessed at the outset of the economic judgment. See above, p. 234,
note; p. 246, note 3; and p. 271, below.

[122] _Types of Ethical Theory_, Vol. II, p. 5.

[123] See p. 253 above.

[124] It is not so much the case that the object, on the one side,
excites in the agent's consciousness, on the other, the "sensations of
resistance" which have played such a part in recent controversy on the
subject, as that (1) the object in certain of its promptings is
"resisting" certain other of its promptings, or that (2) certain
"positive" activities of the agent are being inhibited by certain
"negative" activities, thereby giving rise to the "emotion of
resistance." That "positive" and "negative" are here used in a
teleological way will be apparent. It is surely misleading to speak of
"_sensations_ of resistance" even in deprecatory quotation marks, except
as "sensation" is used in its everyday meaning, viz., experience of
strongly sensory quality.

[125] The general theory of emotion which is here presupposed, and
indeed is fundamental to the entire discussion, may be found in
PROFESSOR DEWEY'S papers on "The Theory of Emotion," _Psychological
Review_, Vol. I, p. 553; Vol. II, p. 13.

[126] Such is, in fact, the teaching of the various forms of ethical
intuitionism, and we find it not merely implied, but explicitly
affirmed, in a work in many respects so remote from intuitionism in its
standpoint as GREEN'S _Prolegomena to Ethics_. See pp. 178-81, and
especially pp. 355-9.

[127] Sermon II.

[128] Not to imply of course that psychologically or logically the
distinction of conditions and means is other than a convenient
superficial one.

[129] Manifestly we have here been approaching from a new direction the
"Recognition coefficient" of reality described above. See p. 266.

[130] This, if it were intended as an account of the genesis of
psychology as a science and of the psychological interest on the part of
the individual, would doubtless be most inadequate. We have, for one
thing, made no mention of the part which error and resulting practical
failure play in stimulating an interest in the _judgmental_ processes of
observation and the like, and in technique of the control of these.
Here, as well as in the processes of _execution_ of our purposes, must
be found many of the roots of psychology as a science. Moreover, no
explanation has been offered above for the appropriation by the
"energetic" self of these phenomena of interruption and retardation of
its energy as being, in fact, its own, or within itself. The problem
would appear to be psychological, and so without our province, and we
gladly pass it by.

[131] We can, of course, undertake no minute analysis of the
psychological mechanism or concatenation of the process here sketched in
barest outline. Our present purpose is wholly that of description.
Slight as our account of the process of transition is, we give it space
only because it seems necessary to do so in order to make intelligible
the accounts yet to be given of the conscious valuation processes for
which the movement here described prepares the way.

It will be observed that we assume above that the purpose is _successful
as planned_ and _by succeeding_ brings about the undesirable results.
Failure in execution of the purpose as such could only, in the manner
already outlined, prompt a more adequate investigation of the _factual
conditions_.

[132] The case is not essentially altered in logical character if for
the Levitical law be substituted the general principles of the new
dispensation read off details by an authoritative church or by "private
judgment."

[133] A remark may be added here by way of caution. The presented self,
we have said, attenuates to a mere maxim or tacit presumption in favor
of a certain type of logical procedure in dealing with the situation. It
must be remembered that the presented self, like all other presentation,
is and comes to be for the sake of its function in experience, and so is
practical from the start. The process sketched above is therefore not
from bare presented content as such to a methodological presumption,
which, as methodological and not contentual, is qualitatively different
from what preceded it.

[134] _Recognized_ authority is, of course, not the same thing by any
means as authority unrecognized because absolutely dominant.

[135] We may be pardoned for supplying from the history of ethics no
illustrations of this slight sketch.

[136] In fact, as suggested above, the _Prolegomena to Ethics_ is in
many respects essentially intuitional in spirit, though its intuitionism
is of a modern discreetly attenuated sort.

[137] This would appear to be the logical value of functional psychology
as a science of mental process.

[138] We have already given a slight sketch of the historical process
here characterized in the barest logical terms.

[139] Further consideration of the problem of factual judgment must be
deferred to Part V.

[140] The relation of the empirical self to the "energetic" and to
standards will come in for statement in Part V in the connection just
referred to.

[141] It might be possible to construct a "logic" of these various types
of working moral standard in such a way as to show that in each type
there is implied the one next higher morphologically, and ultimately the
highest--that is, some sort of concept of the "energetic" self.

[142] It matters not at all whether, in ethics or metaphysics, our
universal be abstract or on the other hand "concrete," like Green's
conception of the self, or a "Hegelian" Absolute. Its logical use in the
determination of particulars must be essentially the same in either
case.

[143] In this connection reference may be made to MR. TAYLOR'S recent
work, _The Problem of Conduct_. Mr. Taylor reduces the moral life to
terms of an ultimate conflict between the ideals of egoism and social
justice, holding that the conflict is in theory irreconcilable. With
this negative attitude toward current standards in ethical theory one
may well be in accord without accepting Mr. Taylor's further contention
that a theory of ethics is therefore impossible. Because the "ethics of
subsumption" is demonstrably futile it by no means follows that a method
of ethics cannot be developed along the lines of modern scientific logic
which shall be as valid as the procedure of the investigator in the
sciences. Mr. Taylor's _logic_ is virtually the same as that of the
ethical theories which he criticises; because an ethical _ideal_ is
impossible, a theory of ethics is impossible also. One is reminded of
MR. BRADLEY'S criticism of knowledge in the closing chapters of the
_Logic_ as an interesting parallel.

[144] MR. BOSANQUET'S discussion of the place of the principle of
teleology in analogical inference will be found suggestive in this
connection (_Logic_, Vol. II, chap. iii).

[145] See above, p. 243 and p. 259 _ad fin._

[146] We use the expression "energy-_equivalent_" because the "excess"
gained by the self through the past adjustment is not of importance at
just this point. The essential significance of the means now is not that
they "cost" less than they promised to bring in in energy, but that
_because they required sacrifice the self will now lose unless they are
allowed to fulfil the promise_. They are the logical equivalent of the
established modes of consumption from the standpoint of conservation of
the energies of the self, not the mathematical equivalent.

It would be desirable, if there were space, to present a brief account
of the psychological basis of the concepts of energy and
energy-equivalence which here come into play, but this must be omitted.

[147] Putting it negatively, the renunciation of the new end involves a
"greater" sacrifice than all the sacrifices which adherence to the
present system of consumption can compensate.

[148] Green, as is well known, allows that any formulation of the ideal
self must be incomplete, but holds that it is not for this reason
useless. But this is to assume that development in the ideal is never to
be radically reconstructive, that the ideal is to expand and fill out
along established and unchangeable lines of growth so that all increase
shall be in the nature of accretion. The self as a system is fixed and
all individual moral growth is in the nature of approximation to this
absolute ideal. This would appear to be essentially identical in a
logical sense with Mr. Spencer's hypothesis of social evolution as a
process of gradual approach to a condition of perfect adaptation of
society and the individual to each other in an environment to which
society is perfectly adapted--a condition in which "perfectly evolved"
individuals shall live in a state of blessedness in conformity to the
requirements of "absolute ethics." For a criticism of this latter type
of view see MR. TAYLOR'S above-mentioned work (chap. v, _passim_).

[149] For GREEN'S cautious defense of conscientiousness as a moral
attitude see the _Prolegomena to Ethics_, Book IV, chap. i; and for a
statement of the present point of view as bearing upon Green's
difficulty, see DEWEY, _The Study of Ethics: A Syllabus_, p. 37 _ad
fin._, and _Philosophical Review_, Vol. II, pp. 661, 662.

[150] Along the line thus inadequately suggested might be found an
answer to certain criticisms of the attempt to dispense with a
metaphysical idea of the self. Such criticisms usually urge that without
reference to a metaphysical ideal no meaning attaches to such
conceptions as "adjustment," "expansion," "furtherance," and the like as
predicated of the moral acts of an agent in their effect upon the
"energetic" self. Anything that one may do, it is said, is expansive of
the self, if it be something new, except as we judge it by a
metaphysical ideal of a rightly expanded self. For an excellent
statement of this general line of criticism see STRATTON, "A
Psychological Test of Virtue," _International Journal of Ethics_, Vol.
XI, p. 200.

[151] The polemic of certain recent writers (as, for example, EHRENFELS
in his _System der Werttheorie_) against the objectivity of judgments of
value appears to rest upon an uncritical acceptance of the time-honored
distinction between "primary" and "secondary" qualities as equivalent to
the logical distinction of subjective and objective. Thus EHRENFELS
confutes "das Vorurteil von der objectiven Bedeutung des Wertbegriffes"
by explaining it as due to a misleading usage of speech expressive of
"an impulse, deep-rooted in the human understanding, to objectify its
presentations" and then goes on to say "We do not desire things because
we recognize the presence in them of a mysterious impalpable essence of
Value but we ascribe value to them because we desire them." (_Op. cit._,
Bd. I, p. 2.) This may serve to illustrate the easy possibility of
confusing the logical and psychological points of view, as likewise does
EHRENFELS's formal definition of value. (Bd. I., p. 65.)

[152] The essential dependence of factual judgment upon the rise of
economic and ethical conflict is implied in the widely current doctrine
of the teleological character of knowledge. It is indeed nowadays
something like a commonplace to say in one sense or another that
knowledge is relative to ends, but it is not always recognized by those
who hold this view that an end never appears as such in consciousness
alone. The end that guides in the construction of factual knowledge is
an end in ethical or economic conflict with some other likewise
indeterminate end in the manner above discussed.

[153] See above, pp. 282, 283.

[154] _Cf._ SCHILLER, _Riddles of the Sphinx_, chap. vii, §§ 10-14.

[155] It would appear that the principle of the conservation of energy
is valid only in the physical sphere; but the logical significance of
this limitation cannot be here discussed.

[156] That the assumption mentioned is the essential basis of the twin
theories of associationism in psychology and hedonism in ethics is shown
by DR. WARNER FITE in his article, "The Associational Conception of
Experience," _Philosophical Review_, Vol. IX, pp. 283 ff. _Cf._ MR.
BRADLEY's remarks on the logic of hedonism in his _Principles of Logic_,
pp. 244-9.

[157] The "energetic" self is apparently MR. BRADLEY'S fourth "meaning
of self," the self as monad--"something moving parallel with the life of
a man, or, rather, something not moving, but literally _standing_ in
relation to his successive variety" (_Appearance and Reality_ [1st ed.]
p. 86, in chap. ix, "The Meanings of the Self"). Mr. Bradley's
difficulty appears to come from his desiring a psychological content for
what is essentially a logical conception--a confusion (if we may be
permitted the remark) which runs through the entire chapter to which we
refer and is responsible for the undeniable and hopeless incoherency of
the various meanings of the self, as Mr. Bradley therein expounds them.
"If the monad stands aloof," says Mr. Bradley, "either with no character
at all or a private character apart, then it may be a fine thing in
itself, but it is a mere mockery to call it the self of a man" (p. 87).
Surely this is to misconstrue and then find fault with that very
character of essential _logical_ apartness from any possibility of
determination in point of descriptive psychological content which
constitutes the whole value of the "energetic" self as a logical
conception stimulative of the valuation-process and so inevitably of
factual judgment. See pp. 258, 259, above. The reader may find for
himself in Mr. Bradley's enumeration of meanings our concept of the
empirical self. But surely the "energetic" and empirical selves would
appear on our showing to have no necessary conflict with each other.

[158] In the first of these inseparable aspects valuation is
determinative of Rightness and Wrongness; in the second it presents the
object as Good or Bad. See p. 259, above.

[159] See, for example, WIESER, _Natural Value_ (Eng. trans.), p. 17.

[160] See pp. 307-12 above.

[161] The illustration, as also the general principle which it here is
used to illustrate, was suggested some years since by Professor G. H.
Mead in a lecture course on the "History of Psychology," which the
writer had the advantage of attending.

[162] The conservative function of valuation may be further illustrated
by reference to the well-known principle of marginal utility of which we
have already made mention (p. 307 above), and which has played so great
a part in modern economic theory. The value of the unit quantity of a
stock of any commodity is, according to this principle, measured by the
least important single use in the schedule of uses to which the stock as
a whole is to be applied. Manifestly, then, adherence to this valuation
placed upon the unit quantity is in so far conservative of the whole
schedule and the marginal value is a "short-hand" symbol expressive of
the value of the whole complex purpose presented in the schedule.
Moreover, the increase of marginal value concurrently with diminution of
the stock through consumption, loss, or reapplication is not indicative
so much of a change of purpose as of determination to adhere to so much
of the original program of consumption as may still be possible of
attainment with the depleted supply of the commodity.

[163] Thus except on this condition we should deny the propriety of
speaking of the value of a friend or of a memento or sacred relic. The
purpose of accurate definition of the function of such objects as these
in the attainment of one's ends is foreign to the proper attitude of
loving, prizing, or venerating them. We may ethically value the _act_ of
sacrifice for a friend or of solicitous care of the memento, but the
object of our sacrifice or solicitude has simply the direct or immediate
"qualitative" emotional character appropriate to the kinds of activity
to which it is the adequate stimulus.

[164] _History of Philosophy_ (TUFT's translation), p. 117.

[165] _Cf._ PROFESSOR J. R. ANGELL's article, "Relations of Structural
and Functional Psychology to Philosophy," _Decennial Publications of the
University of Chicago_, Vol. III, pp. 10-12; also _Philosophical
Review_, Vol. XII, No. 3. _Cf._ also MR. SCHILLER's essay on "Axioms as
Postulates" in _Personal Idealism_.

[166] From this point on this paper is an expansion of some paragraphs,
pp. 11-13, in an article on "Existence, Meaning, and Reality," printed
from Vol. III of the First Series of the _Decennial Publications of the
University of Chicago_.

[167] P. 22.

[168] Pp. 22, 23; italics mine.

[169] P. 25.

[170] P. 26.

[171] p. 36; italics mine.

[172] Pp. 22, 23; italics mine.

[173] P. 307.

[174] P. 327.

[175] P. 23; italics mine.

[176] _Cf._ p. 34; also p. 22.

[177] P. 35.

[178] This warns us that in the phrase, "a plan of action," the term
"action" must be more inclusive than it is in much current discussion.
It must not be limited to gymnastic performance. It must apply to any
sort of activity planned for, and which, when it arrives, fulfils the
plan. This, I take it, is the import of the paragraph at the top of p. 7
of PROFESSOR JAMES's _Philosophical Conceptions and Practical Results_.

[179] P. 270.

[180] Pp. 270, 271.

[181] P. 276.

[182] P. 277.

[183] Pp. 280, 281.

[184] See p. 256.

[185] P. 289; italics mine.

[186] P. 281; italics mine.

[187] It is worth noting in passing that here the universal appears to
be located in finite experience, while the ground of the particular is
in the absolute.

[188] P. 282.

[189] P. 284; italics mine.

[190] P. 283.

[191] P. 332.

[192] P. 339.

[193] This ghost of subjectivism haunts the entire part of the essay in
which the final fulfilment of finite ideas is found in "a certain
absolute system of ideas."

[194] P. 330; italics mine.

[195] P. 337.

[196] P. 286.

[197] P. 307.

[198] P. 297.

[199] This reduction of the purposive to the representative function
carries with it an interesting implication concerning the whole
character and relationship of thought and will. From beginning to end,
on almost every page, Mr. Royce insists upon the idea as an expression
of will. At the outset we read: "When we try to define the idea in
itself, as a conscious fact, our best means is to lay stress upon the
sort of will or active meaning which any idea involves for the mind that
forms the idea" (p. 22). Again: "The idea is a will seeking its own
determination. It is nothing else" (p. 332)--and so on throughout the
lectures. And we have already seen how consistently this is worked out
in the analysis of concrete acts, such as singing, etc. But now, as
related to the absolute system, the will, as embodied in the idea, is to
find its final determination in approximating the certain absolute
system of ideas. This would seem to make will but little more than the
mere form of representation itself. The idea is a will, but in its
relation to truth its will is "to correspond even in its vagueness to
its own final and completely individual expression."

[200] P. 339.

[201] P. 338.

[202] P. 335.

[203] _Cf._ MR. GORE'S paper, above.

[204] _Cf._ BALDWIN'S _Development and Evolution_, pp. 250, 251, on the
necessity of the submission of the "new experience" to the test of its
ability to utilize habit. Interpreted broadly, habit might here mean the
whole mechanical side, including organism _and_ environment, and so
include Mr. Baldwin's second or "extra-organic" test.

[205] P. 19.

[206] Pp. 17, 18.

[207] See, above, PROFESSOR DEWEY'S Study III, pp. 49 ff.

[208] P. 55.




      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

1. Footnotes have been renumbered and moved from the middle of a
chapter to the end of the main text.

2. Other than that, printer's inconsistencies in spelling,
punctuation, hyphenation, and ligature usage have been retained.

