V

A CRITICAL STUDY OF BOSANQUET'S THEORY OF JUDGMENT[44]


Bosanquet's theory of the judgment, in common with all such theories of
the judgment, necessarily involves the metaphysical problem of the
nature of reality and of the relation of thought to reality. That the
judgment is the function by which knowledge is attained is a proposition
which would meet with universal acceptance. But knowledge is itself a
relation of some sort between thought and reality. The view which any
logician adopts as to the nature of the knowledge-process is accordingly
conditioned by his metaphysical presuppositions as to the nature of
reality. It is equally true that the theory of the judgment developed
from any metaphysical standpoint serves as a test of the validity of
that standpoint. We shall attempt in the present paper to show how
Bosanquet's theory of the judgment develops from his view of the nature
of reality, and to inquire whether the theory succeeds in giving such an
account of the knowledge-process as to corroborate the presupposition
underlying it.

Bosanquet defines judgment as "the intellectual function which defines
reality by significant ideas and in so doing affirms the reality of
those ideas" (p. 104).[45] The form of the definition suggests the
nature of his fundamental problem. There is, on the one hand, a world
of reality which must be regarded as having existence outside of and
independently of the thoughts or ideas we are now applying to it; and
there is, on the other hand, a world of ideas whose value is measured by
the possibility of applying them to reality, of qualifying reality by
them. The judgment is the function which makes the connection between
these two worlds. If judgment merely brought one set of ideas into
relation with another set, then it could never give us anything more
than purely hypothetical knowledge whose application to the real world
would remain forever problematic. It would mean that knowledge is
impossible, a result which seems to be contradicted by the existence of
knowledge. The logician must, therefore, as Bosanquet tells us, regard
it as an essential of the act of judgment that it always refers to a
reality which goes beyond and is independent of the act itself (p. 104).
His central problem thus becomes that of understanding what the nature
of reality is which permits of being defined by ideas, and what the
nature of an idea is that it can ever be affirmed to be real. How does
the real world get representation in experience, and what is the
guarantee that the representation, when obtained, is correct?

The defining of the problem suggests the view of the nature of reality
out of which Bosanquet's theory of the judgment grows. The real world is
to him a world which has its existence quite independently of the
process by which it is known. The real world is there to be known, and
is in no wise modified by the knowledge which we obtain of it. The work
of thought is to build up a world of ideas which shall represent, or
correspond to, the world of reality. The more complete and perfect the
correspondence, the greater our store of knowledge.

Translated into terms of the judgment, this representational view means
that the subject of the judgment must always be reality, while the
predicate is an idea. But when we examine the content of any universal
judgment, or even of an ordinary judgment of perception, the subject
which appears in the judgment is evidently not reality at all, if by
reality we mean something which is in no sense constituted by the
thought-process. When I say, "The tree is green," the subject, tree,
cannot be regarded as a bit of reality which is given ready-made to the
thought-process. The ability to perceive a tree, to distinguish it from
other objects and single it out for the application of an idea,
evidently implies a long series of previous judgments. The content
"tree" is itself ideal. As Bosanquet forcibly states it: "If a sensation
or elementary perception is in consciousness (and if not we have nothing
to do with it in logic), it already bears the form of thinking" (p. 33).
How, then, can it serve as the subject of a judgment? Bosanquet's
solution of the problem is to say that the real subject of a judgment is
not the grammatical subject which appears in a proposition, but reality
itself. In the more complex forms of judgment the reference to reality
is disguised by the introduction of explicit ideas to designate the
portion of reality to which reference is made (pp. 78, 79). In the
simplest type of judgment known, however, the qualitative judgment of
perception, the reference to reality appears within the judgment itself.
The relations of thought to reality and of the elements of the judgment
to one another can, accordingly, most readily be seen in the
consideration of this rudimentary form of judgment in which the various
parts lie bare before us.

Bosanquet describes it as follows:

    If I say, pointing to a particular house, "That is my home," it is
    clear that in this act of judgment the reference conveyed by the
    demonstrative is indispensable. The significant idea "my home" is
    affirmed, not of any other general significant idea in my mind,
    but of something which is rendered unique by being present to me
    in perception. In making the judgment, "That is my home," I extend
    the present sense-perception of a house in a certain landscape by
    attaching to it the ideal content or meaning of "home;" and
    moreover, in doing this, I pronounce the ideal content to be, so
    to speak, of one and the same tissue with what I have before me in
    my actual perception. That is to say, I affirm the meaning of the
    idea, or the idea considered as a meaning, to be a real quality of
    that which I perceive in my perception.

    The same account holds good of every perceptive judgment; when I
    see a white substance on a plate and judge that "it is bread" I
    affirm the reference, or general meaning which constitutes the
    symbolic idea "bread" in my mind, to be a real quality of the spot
    or point in present perception which I attempt to designate by the
    demonstrative "this." The act defines the given but indefinite
    real by affirmation of a quality, and affirms reality of the
    definite quality by attaching it to the previously undefined real.
    Reality is given for me _in_ present sensuous perception, and _in_
    the immediate feeling of my own sentient existence that goes with
    it. (Pp. 76, 77.)

Again, he says that the general features of the judgment of perception
are as follows:

    There is a presence of a something in contact with our sensitive
    self, which, as being so in contact, has the character of reality;
    and there is the qualification of this reality by the reference to
    it of some meaning _such as can_ be symbolized by a name (p. 77).

Our point of contact with reality, the place where reality gets into the
thought-process, is, according to this view, to be found in the
simplest, most indefinite type of judgment of perception. We meet with
reality in the mere undefined "this" of primitive experience. But each
such elementary judgment about an undefined "this" is an isolated bit of
experience. Each "this" could give us only a detached bit of reality at
best, and the further problem now confronts us of how we ever succeed in
piecing our detached bits of reality together to form a real world.
Bosanquet's explanation is, in his words, this:

    The real world, as a definite organized system, is _for me_ an
    extension of this present sensation and self-feeling by means of
    judgment, and it is the essence of judgment to effect and sustain
    such an extension (p. 77).

Again he says:

    The subject in every judgment of Perception is some given spot or
    point in sensuous contact with the percipient self. But, as all
    reality is continuous, the subject is not _merely_ this given spot
    or point. It is impossible to confine the real world within this
    or that presentation. Every definition or qualification of a point
    in present perception is affirmed of the real world which is
    continuous with present perception. The ultimate subject of the
    perceptive judgment is the real world as a whole, and it is of
    this that, in judging, we affirm the qualities or characteristics.
    (P. 78.)

The problem is the same as that with which Bradley struggles in his
treatment of the subject of the judgment, and the solution is also the
same. Bradley's treatment of the point is perhaps somewhat more
explicit. Like Bosanquet, he starts with the proposition that the
subject of the judgment must be reality itself and not an idea, because,
if it were the latter, judgment could never give us anything but a union
of ideas, and a union of ideas remains forever universal and
hypothetical. It can never acquire the uniqueness, the singularity,
which is necessary to make it refer to the real. Uniqueness can be found
only in our contact with the real. But just where does our contact with
the real occur? Bradley recognizes the fact that it cannot be the
_content_--even in the case of a simple sensation--which gives us
reality. The content of a sensation is a thing which is in my
consciousness, and which has the form which it presents because it is in
my consciousness. Reality is precisely something which is not itself
sensation, and cannot be in my consciousness. If I say, "This is white,"
the "this" has a content which is a sensation of whiteness. But the
sensation of whiteness is not reality. The experience brings with it an
assurance of reality, not because its content is the real, but because
it is "my direct encounter in sensible presentation with the real
world."[46] To make the matter clearer, Bradley draws a distinction
between the _this_ and the _thisness_. In every experience, however
simple, there is a content--a "thisness"--which is not itself unique.
Considered merely as content, it is applicable to an indefinite number
of existences; in other words, it is an idea. But there is also in every
experience a "this" which is unique, but which is not a content. It is a
mere sign of existence which gives the experience uniqueness, but
nothing else. The "thisness" falls on the side of the content, and the
"this" on the side of existence. It is exactly the distinction which
Bosanquet has in mind in the passages quoted in which he tells us that
"reality is given for me _in_ present sensuous perception, and _in_ the
immediate feeling of my own sentient existence which goes with it;" and
again when he says: "There is a presence of a something in contact with
our sensitive self, which, as being so in contact, has the character of
reality." The same point is made somewhat more explicitly in his
introduction when he says that the individual's present perception is
not, indeed, reality as such, but is his present point of contact with
reality as such (p. 3).

But has this distinction between the content of an experience and its
existence solved the problem of how we _know_ reality? When Bosanquet
talks of knowing reality, he means possessing ideas which are an
accurate reproduction of reality. It is still far from clear how,
according to his own account, we could ever have any assurance that our
ideas do represent reality accurately, if we can nowhere find a point
at which the content of an experience can be held to give us reality.
The case is still worse when we go beyond the problem of how any
particular bit of reality can be known, and ask ourselves how reality as
a whole can be known. The explanation offered by both Bradley and
Bosanquet is that by means of judgment we extend the bit of reality of
whose existence we get a glimpse through a peep-hole in the curtain of
sensuous perception, and thus build up the organized system of reality.
In a passage previously quoted, Bosanquet tells us that all reality is
continuous, and therefore the real subject of a judgment cannot be the
mere spot or point which is given in sensuous perception, but must be
the real world as a whole. But how does he know that reality is
continuous, and that the real world is an organized system? Our only
knowledge of reality comes through judgment, and judgment brings us into
contact with reality only at isolated points. When he tells us that
reality is a continuous whole, he does so on the basis of a metaphysical
presupposition which is not justifiable by his theory of the judgment.
The only statement about reality which could be maintained on the basis
of his theory is that some sort of a reality exists, but the theory
furnishes equal justification for the assurance that this reality is of
such a nature that we can never know anything more about it than the
bare fact of its existence. Moreover, the bare fact of the existence of
reality comes to us merely in the form of a feeling of our own sentient
existence which goes with sense-perception. But the mere assurance that
somewhere behind the curtain of sensuous perception reality exists (even
if this could go unchallenged), accompanied by the certainty that we can
never by any possibility know anything more about it, is practically
equivalent to the denial of the possibility of knowledge.[47]

Although the denial of the possibility of knowledge seems to be the
logical outcome of the premises, it is not the conclusion reached by
Bosanquet. At the outset of his treatise, Bosanquet propounds the
fundamental question we have been considering in these words: "How does
the analysis of knowledge as a systematic function, or system of
functions, explain that relationship in which truth appears to consist,
between the human intelligence on the one hand, and fact or reality on
the other?" His answer is: "To this difficulty there is only one reply.
If the object-matter of reality lay genuinely outside the system of
thought, not only our analysis, but thought itself, would be unable to
lay hold of reality." (Pp. 2, 3.) The statement is an explicit
recognition of the impossibility of bridging the chasm between a reality
outside the content of knowledge and a known real world. It brings
before us the dilemma contained in Bosanquet's treatment of the subject
of the judgment. On the one hand the subject of the judgment must be
outside the realm of my thoughts. If it were not, judgment would merely
establish a relation between my ideas and would give me no knowledge of
the real world. On the other hand, the subject of the judgment must be
within the realm of my thoughts. If it were not, I could never assert
anything of it; could never judge, or know it. The stress he lays on the
first horn of the dilemma has been shown. It remains to show his
recognition of the second horn, and to find out whether or not he
discovers any real reconciliation between the two.

Bosanquet sums up the section of the introduction on knowledge and its
content, truth, with the following paragraph:

    The real world for every individual is thus emphatically _his_
    world; an extension and determination of his present perception,
    which perception is to him not indeed reality as such, but his
    point of contact with reality as such. Thus in the enquiry which
    will have to be undertaken as to the logical subject of the
    judgment, we shall find that the subject, however it may shift,
    contract, and expand, is always in the last resort some greater or
    smaller element of this determinate reality, which the individual
    has constructed by identifying significant ideas with that world
    of which he has assurance through his own perceptive experience.
    In analyzing common judgment it is ultimately one to say that _I
    judge_ and that _the real world for me, my real world, extends
    itself_, or maintains its organized extension. This is the
    ultimate connection by which the distinction of subject and
    predication is involved in the act of affirmation or enunciation
    which is the differentia of judgment. (Pp. 3, 4).

Here the subject of the judgment appears as an element of a reality
_which the individual has constructed_ by identifying significant ideas
with that world of which he has assurance through his own perceptive
experience. But the very point with reference to the subject of the
judgment previously emphasized is that it is not and cannot be something
which the individual has constructed. The subject of the judgment must
be reality, and reality does not consist of ideas, even if it be
determined by them. It does not mend matters to explain that the
individual has constructed his real world by identifying significant
ideas with that world of which he has assurance through his own
perceptive experiences, because, as we have seen, "the individual's
perceptive experiences" either turn out to be merely similar mental
constructions made at a prior time, so that nothing is gained by
attaching to them, or else they mean once more the mere shock of contact
which is supposed to give assurance that some sort of reality exists,
but which gives no assurance of what it is. That and what, this and
thisness still remain detached. When he talks of _the real world for any
individual_ we are left entirely in the dark as to what the relation
between _the real world as it is for any individual_ and _the real
world as it is for itself_ may be, or how the individual is to gain any
assurance that _the real world as it is for him_ represents _the real
world as it is for itself_.

Another attempt at a reconciliation of these opposing views leaves us no
better satisfied. The passage is as follows:

    The real world, as a definite organized system, is _for me_ an
    extension of this present sensation and self-feeling by means of
    judgment, and it is the essence of judgment to effect and sustain
    such an extension. It makes no essential difference whether the
    ideas whose content is pronounced to be an attribute of reality
    appear to fall within what is given in perception, or not. We
    shall find hereafter that it is vain to attempt to lay down
    boundaries between the given and its extension. The moment we try
    to do this we are on the wrong track. The given and its extension
    differ not absolutely but relatively; they are continuous with
    each other, and the metaphor by which we speak of an extension
    conceals from us that the so-called "given" is no less artificial
    than that by which it is extended. It is the character and quality
    of being directly in contact with sense-perception, not any fixed
    datum of content, that forms the constantly shifting center of the
    individual's real world, and spreads from that center over every
    extension which the system of reality receives from judgment. (P.
    77.)

In this passage by the "given" he evidently means the content of sensory
experience, the thisness, the what. It is, as he says, of the same stuff
as that by which it is extended. Both the given and that by which it is
extended are artificial in the sense of not being _real_ according to
Bosanquet's interpretation of reality; they are ideas. But if all this
is admitted, what becomes of the possibility of knowledge? Bosanquet
undertakes to rescue it by assuring us again that it is the character
and quality of being directly in contact with sense-perception, not any
fixed datum of content, that forms the center of the individual's real
world and gives the stamp of reality to his otherwise ideal extension of
this center. Here again we find ourselves with no evidence that the
_content_ of our knowledge bears any relation to reality. We have merely
the feeling of vividness attached to sensory experience which seems to
bring us the certainty that there is some sort of a reality behind it,
but this is not to give assurance that our ideal content even belongs
rightfully to that against which we have bumped, much less of _how_ it
belongs--and only this deserves the title "knowledge."

In the chapter on "Quality and Comparison," in which he takes up the
more detailed treatment of the simplest types of judgment of perception,
he comes back to the same contradiction, and again attempts to explain
how both horns of his dilemma must be true. The passage is this:

    The Reality to which we ascribe the predicate is undoubtedly
    self-existent; it is not _merely_ in my mind or in my act of
    judgment; if it were, the judgment would only be a game with my
    ideas. It is well to make this clear in the case before us, for in
    the later forms of the judgment it will be much disguised. Still
    the reality which attracts my concentrated attention is also
    within my act of judgment; it is not even the whole reality
    present to my perception; still less of course the whole
    self-existent Reality which I dimly presuppose. The immediate
    subject of the judgment is a mere aspect, too indefinite to be
    described by explicit ideas except in as far as the qualitative
    predication imposes a first specification upon it. _This_ Reality
    _is_ in my judgment; it is the point at which the actual world
    impinges upon my consciousness as real, and it is only by judging
    with reference to this point that I can refer the ideal content
    before my mind to the whole of reality which I at once believe to
    exist, and am attempting to construct. The Subject is both in and
    out of the Judgment, as Reality is both in and out of my
    consciousness. (Pp. 113, 114.)

The conclusion he reaches is a mere restatement of the difficulty. The
problem he is trying to solve is how the subject _can_ be both in and
out of the judgment, and how the subject without is related to the
subject within. The mere assertion that it is so does not help us to
understand it. His procedure seems like taking advantage of two
meanings of sense-perception, its conscious quality and its brute abrupt
immediacy, and then utilizing this ambiguity to solve a problem which
grows out of the conception of judgment as a reference of idea to
reality.

Turning from his treatment of the world of fact to his discussion of the
world of idea, from the subject to the predicate, as it appears in his
theory of the judgment we find again a paradox which must be recognized
and cannot be obviated. An idea is essentially a meaning. It is not a
particular existence whose essence is uniqueness as is the case with the
subject of the judgment, but is a meaning whose importance is that it
may apply to an indefinite number of unique existences. Its
characteristic is universality. And yet an idea regarded as a psychical
existence, an idea as a content in my mind, is just as particular and
unique as any other existence. How, then, does it obtain its
characteristic of universality? Bosanquet's answer is that it must be
universal by means of a reference to something other than itself. Its
meaning resides, not in its existence as a psychical image, but in its
reference to something beyond itself. Now, any idea that is affirmed is
referred to reality, but do ideas exist which are not being affirmed? If
so, their reference cannot be to reality. Bosanquet discusses the
question in the second section of his introduction as follows:

    It is not easy to deny that there is a world of ideas or of
    meanings, which simply consists in that identical reference of
    symbols by which mutual understanding between rational beings is
    made possible. A _mere_ suggestion, a _mere_ question, a _mere_
    negation, seem all of them to imply that we sometimes _entertain_
    ideas without affirming them of reality, and therefore without
    affirming their reference to be a reference to something real or
    their meaning to be fact. We may be puzzled indeed to say what an
    idea can mean, or to what it can refer, if it does not mean or
    refer to something real--to some element in the fabric
    continuously sustained by the judgment which is our consciousness.
    On the other hand, it would be shirking a difficulty to neglect
    the consideration that an idea, while denied of reality, may
    nevertheless, or even must, possess an identical and so
    intelligible reference--a symbolic value--for the rational beings
    who deny it. A reference, it may be argued, must be a reference to
    something. But it seems as if in this case the something were the
    fact of reference itself, the rational convention between
    intelligent beings, or rather the world which has existence,
    whether for one rational being or for many, merely as contained in
    and sustained by such intellectual reference.

    I only adduce these considerations in order to explain that
    transitional conception of an objective world or world of
    meanings, distinct from the real world or world of facts, with
    which it is impossible wholly to dispense in an account of thought
    starting from the individual subject. The paradox is that the real
    world or world of fact thus seems for us to fall within and be
    included in the objective world or world of meanings, as if all
    that is fact were meaning, but not every meaning were fact. This
    results in the contradiction that something is objective, which is
    not real. (Pp. 4, 5.)

In the seventh section of the introduction Bosanquet explains his
meaning further by what the reader is privileged to regard as a flight
of the imagination--a mere simile--which he thinks may, nevertheless,
make the matter clearer.

    We might try to think that the world, _as known to each of us_, is
    constructed and sustained by his individual consciousness; and
    that every other individual also frames for himself, and sustains
    by the action of his intelligence, the world in which he in
    particular lives and moves. Of course such a construction is to be
    taken as a reconstruction, a construction by way of knowledge
    only; but for our present purpose this is indifferent. Thus we
    might think of the ideas and objects of our private world rather
    as corresponding to than as from the beginning identical with
    those which our fellow-men are occupied in constructing each
    within his own sphere of consciousness. And the same would be true
    even of the objects and contents within our own world, in as far
    as an act or effort would be required to maintain them, of the
    same kind with that which was originally required to construct
    them.... Thus the paradox of reference would become clearer. We
    should understand that we refer to a correspondence by means of a
    content. We should soften down the contradiction of saying that a
    name to meet which we have and can get nothing but an idea,
    nevertheless does not stand for that idea but for something else.
    We should be able to say that the name stands for those elements
    in the idea which correspond in all our separate worlds, and in
    our own world of yesterday and of today, considered as so
    corresponding. (Pp. 45, 46.)

According to this view, the idea obtains the universality which
constitutes it an idea by a sort of process of elimination. It is like a
composite photograph. It selects only the common elements in a large
number of particular existences, and thus succeeds in representing, or
referring to, all the particular existences which have gone to make it
up. But when we come to consider the bearing which this view of
universality, or generalized significance, has on our estimate of the
knowledge-process, we feel that it has not solved the problem for us. In
the first place, the idea _in its existence_ is just as particular when
regarded as made up of the common elements of many ideas as is any of
the ideas whose elements are taken. A composite photograph is just as
much a single photograph as any one of the photographs which are taken
to compose it. The chasm between the particularity of the psychical
image and the universality of its meaning is not bridged by regarding
the content of the image as made up by eliminating unlike elements in a
number of images. The stuff with which thought has to work is still
nothing more than a particular psychical image, and the problem of what
gives it its logical value as a general significance is still unsolved.
Nor does it seem possible to find anything in the _existence_ of the
image which could account for its reference to something outside of
itself. The _fact_ of reference itself becomes an ultimate mystery.[48]

But even waiving this difficulty, the judgment must still
appear truncated, if it really totally disregard a part of its
content--_i. e._, the particular existence of the image as part of the
judging consciousness. The theory holds that the particular existence of
the image has no logical value. It is only its meaning, or general
reference, which has logical value. But the image _qua_ image is just as
real as that to which it is supposed to refer. If the judgment really
does ignore its existence, then it ignores a portion of the reality it
attempts to represent, and stands self-confessed as a failure.[49] At
still another point, ideas, as Bosanquet represents them, prove to be
unsatisfactory tools to use in the work of building up reality. In
Bosanquet's words: "The meaning tyrannizes over the psychical image in
another respect. Besides crushing out of sight its particular and
exclusive existence, it also crushes out part of its content" (p. 74).
The idea, as we use it, is not, as to content, a complete or accurate
representation of anything real. To take Bosanquet's illustration:

    Some one speaks to me of the Ægean sea, which I have never seen.
    He tells me that it is a deep blue sea under a cloudless sky,
    studded with rocky islands. The meanings of these words are a
    problem set to my thought. I have to meet him in the world of
    objective references, which as intelligent beings we have in
    common. How I do this is my own affair, and the precise images at
    my command will vary from day to day, and from minute to minute.
    It sounds simple to say that I combine my recollections of sea and
    sky at Torbay with those of the island-studded waters of Orkney
    or the Hebrides. Even so, there is much to adjust and to neglect;
    the red cliffs of Torbay, and the cloudy skies of the north. But
    then again, my recollections are already themselves symbolic
    ideas; the reference to Torbay or the Hebrides is itself a problem
    set to thought, and puts me upon the selection of index-elements
    in fugitive images that are never twice the same. I have _first_
    to symbolize the color of Torbay, using for the purpose any blue
    that I can call to mind, and fixing, correcting, subtracting from,
    the color so recalled, till I reduce it to a mere index quality;
    and _then_ I have to deal in the same way with the meaning or
    significant idea so obtained, clipping and adjusting the qualities
    of Torbay till it seems to serve as a symbol of the Ægean. (Pp.
    74, 75.)

And by the time all this is performed what sort of a representation of
reality is the idea? Evidently a very poor and meager and fragmentary
one.

It is so poor and fragmentary, that it cannot itself be that which is
affirmed of reality. It must be some other fuller existence to be found
in the world of meanings which is affirmed. And yet how the meager
content of the idea succeeds in referring to the world of meanings, and
acting as the instrument for referring a meaning to reality, is not at
all clear. It seems impossible to explain reference intelligibly by the
concept of a _correspondence_ of contents.

The fundamental difficulty in the interpretation of the predicate is the
same one that we encountered in the interpretation of the subject. If
the predicate is to be affirmed of reality (and if it be not, it has no
logical value), then it must, when affirmed, be in some sense an
accurate representation of reality. But the predicate is an idea, and,
moreover, an idea which is, both in its existence and in its meaning
palpably the outcome of transformations wrought upon given sensory
contents by the individual consciousness. Since the one point of contact
with reality is in sensory experience, the more simple sensory
experiences are reacted upon and worked over, the farther they recede
from reality. The idea seems, therefore, in its very essence, a thing
which never can be affirmed of reality. As image it is itself a reality,
but not affirmed; as meaning it is that reality (the image) manipulated
for individual ends. Why suppose that by distorting reality we get it in
shape to affirm _of_ reality? Moreover, the farther an idea is removed
from immediate sensory experience--in other words, the more abstract it
becomes--the less is the possibility of affirming it of reality. The
final outcome of this point of view, if we adhere rigorously to its
logic is that the more thinking we do, the less we know about the real
world. Bosanquet avoids this conclusion by a pure act of faith. If
knowledge is to be rescued, we must believe that the work done by
consciousness upon the bits of reality given in sensory experience
really does succeed in building up a knowledge of reality for us. As
Bosanquet puts it: "The presentation of Reality, qualified by an ideal
content, is one aspect of Subject and Predication; and my individual
percipient consciousness determining itself by a symbolic idea is the
other. That the latter is identified with the former follows from the
claim of conscious thought that its nature is to know."[50] (P. 83.)

To sum up the situation, Bosanquet starts out with the assumption that
by knowledge we must mean knowledge of a world entirely independent of
our ideas. If we fail to make this assumption, knowledge becomes merely
a relation between ideas. But its whole importance seems to us to rest
on the conviction that it does give us knowledge of a world which is
what it is quite independently of our ideas about it, and cannot in any
sense be modified by what we think about it. What knowledge does is to
give us a copy or representation of the real world, whose value depends
on the accuracy of the representation. And yet when we examine any
individual knowing consciousness, the subject which appears within the
judgment is never some portion of the world which exists outside of the
knowing consciousness, but always some portion of the world which exists
within the knowing consciousness, and which is constituted by the
knowledge process. The predicate which is affirmed of reality is
constantly found to derive its meaning, its generalized significance,
not from its correspondence with, or reference to, the real world
outside of the knowing consciousness, but from reference to a world of
meanings, which consists in a sort of convention among rational
beings--a world whose existence is distinctly within the knowing
consciousness and not outside of it.[51] Between the real world, as
Bosanquet conceives it, and the world of knowledge, we find inserted on
the side of the subject, the world _as known to each of us_, and on the
side of the predicate, the _objective world of meanings_. Neither of
these is the real world. Both of them are ideal, _i. e._, are
constructions of the individual consciousness. We nowhere find any
satisfactory explanation of how these ideal worlds are related to the
real world. There is merely the assertion that we must believe that they
represent the real world in order that we may believe that knowledge
exists. But the fact remains that whenever we try to analyze and explain
any particular judgment, what we find ourselves dealing with is always
the world as it exists to us as subject, and the objective world of
meanings as predicate. If we stop here, then knowledge turns out to be
just what Bosanquet asserted at the outset that it was _not, i. e._, a
relation between ideas. When we demand a justification for going farther
than this, we find none except the claim of conscious thought that its
nature is to know--a claim whose justice we have no possible means of
testing, and which would not, even if admitted, be of the slightest
value in deciding which _particular_ judgment is true and which false.

Bosanquet's development of his subject has proved to be throughout the
necessary logical outcome of the presuppositions with reference to
reality from which he starts. The fundamental difficulty of erecting a
theory of the knowledge-process upon such a basis is recognized by him
at the start in a passage already quoted: "If the object-matter of
reality lay genuinely outside the system of thought, not only our
analysis, but thought itself, would be unable to lay hold of reality"
(p. 2). But, in spite of this assertion, his fundamental conception of
reality remains that of a system which does lie outside the
thought-process. His theory is an attempt to reconcile the essentially
irreconcilable views that reality is outside of the thought-process, and
that it is inside of the thought-process, and he succeeds only by
calling upon our faith that so it is.

If it be true, as it seems to him to be, that we are compelled to adhere
to both of these views of reality, then surely there is no other
outcome. It means, however, that we finally resign all hope of _knowing_
reality. We may _have faith_ in its existence, but we have no way of
deciding what particular judgment has reality in it as it should have
it, and what as it should not. All stand (and fall) on the same basis.
But does not Bosanquet himself point out a pathway which, if followed
farther, would reach a more satisfactory view of the realm of knowledge?
He has shown us that the only sort of reality _we know_, or can know, is
the reality which appears within our judgment-process--the reality as
known to us. Would it not be possible to drop the presupposed reality
outside of the judgment-process (with which judgment is endeavoring to
make connections) and content ourselves with the sort of reality which
appears within the judgment-process? In other words, may there not be a
satisfactory view of reality which frankly recognizes its organic
relation to the knowledge-process, without at the same time destroying
its value as reality? Is it possible to admit that reality is in a sense
constituted in the judgment without making it at the same time the
figment of the individual imagination--"a game with ideas"?

Let us assume for the moment that the real difficulty with Mr.
Bosanquet's conception, the error that keeps him traveling in his
hopeless circles, is the notion that truth is a matter of reference of
ideas as such to reality as such, leading us to oscillate between the
alternatives that either all ideas have such reference, and so are true,
constitute knowledge; or else none have such reference, and so are
false; or else are mere ideas to which neither truth nor falsity can be
attributed. Let us ask if truth is not rather some _specific_ relation
within experience, something which characterizes one idea rather than
another, so that our problem is not how an idea can refer to a reality
beyond itself, but what are the marks by which we discriminate a true
reference from a false one. Then let us ask for the criterion used in
daily life and in science by which to test reality.

If we ask the philosophically unsophisticated individual why he believes
that his house still exists when he is away from it and has no immediate
evidence of the fact, he will tell you it is because he has found that
he can go back to it time and again and see it and walk into it. It
never fails him when he acts upon the assumption that it is there. He
would never tell you that he believed in its existence when he was not
experiencing it because his mental picture of his house stood for and
represented accurately an object in the real world which was
nevertheless of a different order of existence from his mental picture.
When you ask the physicist why he believes that the laws of motion are
true, he will tell you that it is because he finds that bodies always
do behave according to them. He can predict just what a body will do
under given circumstances. He is never disappointed however long he
takes it for granted that the laws of motion are true and that bodies
behave according to them. The only thing that could make him question
their truth would be to find some body which did not prove to behave in
accordance with them. The criterion is the same in both cases. It is the
practical criterion of what as a matter of fact will work. That which
can safely be taken for granted as a basis for further action is
regarded as real and true. It remains real so long, and only so long, as
it continues to fulfil this condition. As soon as it ceases to do so, it
ceases to be regarded as real. When a man finds that he can no longer
obtain the accustomed experience of seeing and entering his house, he
ceases to regard it as real. It has burned down, or been pulled down.
When a physicist finds that a body does not, as a matter of fact, behave
as a given law leads him to expect it would behave, he ceases to regard
the law as _true_.

The contrast between the naïve view of the criterion of reality and the
one we have just been discussing may be brought out by considering how
we should have to interpret from each standpoint the constant succession
of facts in the history of science which have ceased to be facts. For
illustration take the former fact that the earth is flat. It ceased to
be a fact, says the theory we have been reviewing, because further
thought-constructions of the real world convinced us that there is no
reality which the idea "flat-world" represents. The idea "round-world"
alone reproduces reality. It ceased to be a fact, says the naïve view,
because it ceased to be a safe guide for action. Men found they could
sail around the world. Correspondence in one case is pictorial, and its
existence or non-existence can, as we have seen, never be ascertained.
In the other, correspondence is response, adjustment, the co-meeting of
specific conditions in further constituting of experience.

In actual life, therefore, the criterion of reality which we use is a
practical one. The test of reality does not consist in ascertaining the
relationship between an idea and an _x_ which is not idea, but in
ascertaining what experience can be taken for granted as a safe basis
for securing other experiences. The evident advantage of the latter
view, leaving aside for the moment the question of its adequacy in other
respects, is that it avoids the fundamental skepticism at once suggested
by the former. How can we ever be sure that the fact which we have
discovered will stand the test of further thought-constructions? Perhaps
it comes no nearer to reality than the discarded one. Obviously we never
_can_ be sure that any particular content of thought represents reality
so accurately and perfectly that it will never be subject to revision.
If, however, the test of reality is the _adequacy_ of a given content of
consciousness as a stimulus to action, as a mode of control, we have an
applicable standard. A given content of consciousness is real--is a
fact--so long as the act resulting from it is adequate in adaptation to
other contents. It ceases to be real as soon as the act it stimulates
proves to be inadequate.

The view which places the ultimate test of facts, not in any
relationship of contents or existences, but in the practical outcome of
thought, is the one which seems to follow necessarily from a
thoroughgoing conception of the judgment as a function--an act. Our
fundamental biological conception of the activities of living organisms
is that acts exist for the sake of their results. Acts are always
stimulated by some definite set of conditions, and their value is always
tested by the adequacy with which they meet this set of conditions. The
judgment is no exception to the rule. It is always an act stimulated by
some set of conditions which needs readjusting. Its outcome is a
readjustment whose value is and can be tested only by its adequacy. It
is accordingly entirely in line with our reigning biological conceptions
to expect to find the ultimate criterion of truth and reality in the
practical outcome of thought, and to seek for an understanding of the
nature of the "real" and of the "ideal" within the total activity of
judgment.

One difficulty besets us at the outset of such an investigation--that of
being sure that we have a genuine judgment under examination. A large
portion of the so-called judgments considered by logicians, even by
those who emphasize the truth that a judgment is an _act_, are really
not judgments at all, but contents of thought which are the outcome of
judgments--what might be called dead judgments, instead of live
judgments. When we analyze a real act of judgment, as it occurs in a
living process of thought, we find given elements which are always
present. There is always a certain situation which demands a reaction.
The situation is always in part determined and taken for granted, and in
part questioned. It is determined in so far as it is a definite
situation of some sort; it is undetermined in so far as it furnishes an
inadequate basis for further action and therefore comes to consciousness
as a problem. For example, take one of the judgments Bosanquet uses.
"This is bread." We have first to inquire when such a judgment actually
occurs in the living process of thought. A man does not make such a
judgment in the course of his thinking unless there is some instigation
to do so. Perhaps he is in doubt as to whether the white object he
perceives is bread or cake. He wants some bread, but does not want cake.
A closer inspection convinces him that it is bread, and the finished
judgment is formulated in the proposition: "This is bread." What is the
test of the reality of the bread, and the truth of the judgment?
Evidently the act based on it. He eats the bread. If it tastes like
bread and affects him like bread, then the bread was real and the
judgment true. If, on the other hand, it does not taste like bread, or
if it makes him violently ill, then the "bread" was not real and the
judgment was false. In either case, the "this"--the experience to be
interpreted--is unquestioned. The man does not question the fact that he
has a perception of a white object. So much is taken for granted and is
unquestioned within that judgment. But there is another part of the
experience which is questioned, and which remains tentative up to the
conclusion of the act of judgment; that is the doubt as to whether the
perceived white object is bread or something else. Every live judgment,
every judgment as it normally occurs in the vital process of thought,
must have these phases. It is only when a judgment is taken out of its
context and reduced to a mere memorandum of past judgments that it fails
to reveal such parts. The man may, of course, go farther back. He may
wonder whether this is really white or not. But he falls back then on
something else which he takes unquestioningly--a "this" experience of
some sort or other.

So far we have considered the practical criterion of reality merely as
the one which is actually operative in everyday life, and as the one
suggested by our biological theory of the functions of living organisms.
It also offers a suggestion for the modified view of the nature of
reality for which we are in search. Our previous discussion brought out
incidentally a contradiction in the traditional theory of the nature of
reality which it will be worth while to consider further. In dealing
with the subject of the judgment, reality seemed to be made synonymous
with fact. In this sense fact, or the real, was set off against the
ideal. Knowledge was viewed as the correspondence between real and
ideal. When we came to deal with the ideal itself--with the predicate
of the judgment--there appeared in it an element of fact or reality
which proved a serious stumbling-block for the theory. As image in my
mind, the idea is just as real as the so-called facts; but this sort of
reality according to the theory in question is neither the reality about
which we are judging nor a real quality of it. Both Bradley and
Bosanquet are forced to admit that the judgment ignores it, and is in so
far by nature inadequate to its appointed task of knowing reality.

The suggestion which the situation offers for a new theory is that the
view of reality has been too narrow. Reality must evidently be a broad
enough term to cover both fact and idea. If so, the reality must be
nothing more nor less than the total process of experience with its
continual opposition of fact and idea, and their continual resolution
through activity. That which previous theory has been calling the real
is not the total reality, but merely one aspect of it. The problem of
relation of fact and idea is thus the problem of the relation of one
form of reality to another, and so a determinate soluble one, not a
_merely_ metaphysical or general one. Granting this, does it still
remain true that reality in the narrower sense, reality as fact, can be
regarded as a different order of existence from the ideal, and set over
against the thought-process? Evidently not. Fact and idea become merely
two aspects of a total reality. The way in which fact and idea are
distinguished has already been suggested by the practical and biological
criterion of fact, or reality in the narrower sense. From this point of
view, fact is not a different order of existence from idea, but is
merely a part of the total process of experience which functions in a
given way. It is merely that part of experience which is taken as given,
and which serves as a stimulus to action. Thus the essential nature of
fact, or reality in the popular sense, falls not at all on the side of
its content, but on the side of its function. Similarly the ideal is
merely that part of the total experience which is taken as tentative.
There is no problem as to how either of them is related to reality. In
this relationship they _are_ reality. That which previous theories had
been calling the whole of reality now appears as merely one aspect of
it--the fact aspect--artificially isolated from the rest.

When we translate this view of the nature of reality into terms of a
theory of the judgment, we find that we can agree with Bosanquet in his
definition of a judgment. It is an act, and an act which refers an ideal
content to reality. The judgment must be an act, because it is
essentially an adaptation--a reaction toward a given situation. The
subject of the judgment is that part of the content of experience which
represents the situation to be reacted to. It is that which is taken for
granted as given in each case. Now this is, as we have seen, reality--in
the narrower sense of that term. What Bosanquet has been calling reality
now appears merely as the subject of the judgment taken out of its
normal function and considered as an isolated thing. It is an artificial
abstraction. It is accordingly true, as Bosanquet insists, that the
subject of the judgment must always be reality--both in his sense of the
term and in ours. This reality is not real, however, by virtue of its
independence from the judgment, but by virtue of its function within the
judgment. His fundamental problem with reference to the subject of the
judgment is disposed of from this point of view. The subject is wholly
within the judgment, not in any sense outside of it; but it is at the
same time true that the subject of the judgment is reality. The fact
that the subjects of all judgments--even those of the most elementary
type--bear evident marks of the work done by thought upon them, ceases
to be a problem. The subject is essentially a thing constituted by the
doubt-inquiry process, and functioning within it. The necessity for an
intermediate _real world as it is to me_ between the real world and the
knowing process disappears, because the _real world as it is to me_ is
the only real world of which the judgment can take account. There is no
longer any divorce between the content of the subject and its existence.
Reality in his sense of the term--reality as fact--does not fall on the
side of _existence_ in distinction from content, but on the side of
_function_ in distinction from content.

The predicate of the judgment is that part of the total experience which
is taken as doubtful, or tentative. As we have seen, every act of
adaptation involves a definite situation to be reacted to (subject) and
an indefinite or tentative material with which to react (predicate). We
have pointed out that a situation which demands a judgment never appears
in consciousness as mere questioned or questionable situation.[52] There
is always present, as soon as the doubt arises, some sort of tentative
solution. This is the predicate or idea. Just as the fact, or real in
the narrower sense, is that which is taken as given in the situation, so
the ideal is that which is taken as tentative. Its ideality does not
consist in its reference to another order of existence, the objective
world of meanings, but in its function within the judgment, the estimate
of the whole situation as leading up to the adequate act. Just as we no
longer have any need for the mediation of the _real world as known to
me_ between subject and reality, so we no longer need _the objective
world of meanings_ to bridge the chasm between the predicate and
reality. The difficulty of understanding how ideas can be used to build
up facts disappears when we regard fact and idea, not as different
orders of existence, but as contents marking different phases of a total
function.

Ideas, as Bosanquet represented them, proved to be extremely
unsatisfactory tools to use in building up a knowledge of reality. In
the first place, their value as instruments of thought depends upon
their universality. We have already reviewed Bosanquet's difficulties in
attempting to explain the universality of ideas. The universality of an
idea cannot reside in its mere existence as image. Its existence is
purely particular. Its universality must reside in its reference to
something outside of itself. But no explanation of how the particular
existence--image--could refer to another and fuller content of a
different order of existence could be discovered. The fact of reference
remained an ultimate mystery. From the new point of view the image gains
its universality through its organizing function. It represents an
organized habit which may be brought to bear upon the present situation,
and which serves, by directing action, to organize and unify experience
as a whole. It is only as function that the concept of reference can be
made intelligible.

Of course, considered as content, the idea is just as particular from
this point of view as from any other. We still have to discuss the
question as to whether or not the particularity of the idea has a
logical value. The fact that it had none in Bosanquet's theory sets a
limit to the validity of thought. But if the real test of the validity
of a judgment is the act in which it issues, then the existential aspect
of the idea must have logical value. The existential aspect of the idea
is the "my" side of it. It is as my personal experience that it exists.
But it is only as my idea that it has any impulsive power, or can issue
in action. Far from being ignored, therefore, the existential aspect is
essential to the logical, the determinative, value of an idea.

Ideas, according to the representational theory of knowledge, proved to
be a poor medium for knowing reality in still another respect. They are
in their very nature contents that have been reduced from the fulness
of experience to mere index-signs. Even though their reference to a
fuller content in the objective world of meanings presented no problem,
still this objective world of meanings is far removed from reality. And
yet, in order to know, we must be able to affirm ideas of reality. On
the functional theory of ideas, their value does not rest at all upon
their representational nature. They are not taken either in their
existence or in their meaning as representations of any other content.
They are taken as contents which mark a given function, and their value
is determined entirely by the adequacy of the function of which they are
the conscious expression. Their content may be as meager as you please.
It may have been obtained by a long process of reducing and transforming
sensory experience, but if it serve to enable its possessor to meet the
situation which called it up with the appropriate act, then it has truth
and value in the fullest sense. The reduction of the idea to a mere
index-sign presents no problem when we realize that it is the tool of a
given function, not the sign for a different and fuller content. The
idea thus becomes a commendable economy in the thought-process, rather
than a reprehensible departure from reality.

We have already upon general considerations criticised the point of view
which holds that ideality consists in reference to another content. In
arguing that this reference cannot be primarily to reality itself, but
rather to an intermediate world of meanings, Bosanquet cites the
question and the negative judgment. In the question ideas are not
affirmed of reality, and in negation they are definitely denied of
reality, hence their reference cannot be to reality. It must therefore
be to an objective world of meanings. It may be worth while to point out
in passing that, from the functional point of view, the part played by
ideas in the question and in negative judgment is the same that it is in
affirmation.

We have brought out the fact that all judgment arises in a doubt. The
earliest stage of judgment is accordingly a question. Whether the
process stops at that point, or is carried on to an affirmation or
negation, depends upon the particular conditions. The ideas which appear
in questions present no other problem than those of affirmation. They
are ideas, not by virtue of their reference to another content in the
world of meanings, but by virtue of their function, _i. e._, that of
constituting that part of the total experience which is taken as
doubtful, and hence as in process.

In order to make this point clear with reference to negative judgments,
it will be necessary to consider the relation of negative and positive
judgments somewhat more in detail. All judgment is in its earliest
stages a question, but a question is never _mere_ question. There are
always present some suggestions of an answer, which make the process
really a disjunctive judgment. A question might be defined as a
disjunctive judgment in which one member of the disjunction is expressed
and the others implied. If the process goes on to take the form of
affirmation or negation, one of the suggested answers is selected. To
follow out the illustration of the bread used above, the judgment arises
in a doubt as to the nature of the white object perceived, but the doubt
never takes the form of a blank question. It at once suggests certain
possible solutions drawn from the mass of organized experience at the
command of the person judging. At this stage the judgment is
disjunctive. In the illustration it would probably take the form: "This
is either bread or cake." The further course of the judgment rejects the
cake alternative, and selects the bread, and the final outcome of the
judgment is formulated in the proposition: "This is bread." But how did
it happen that it did not take the form: "This is not cake"? That
proposition is also involved in the outcome, and implied in the judgment
made. The answer is that the form taken by the final outcome depends
entirely on the direction of interest of the person making the judgment.
If his interest happened to lie in obtaining bread, then the outcome
would naturally take the form: "This is bread," and his act would
consist in eating it. If he happened to want cake, the natural form
would be, "This is not cake," and his act would consist in refraining
from eating. In other words, the question as to whether a judgment turns
out to be negative or positive is a question of whether the stress of
interest happens to fall on the selected or on the rejected portions of
the original disjunction. Every determination of a subject through a
predicate includes both. The selection of one or the other according to
interest affects the final formulation of the process, but does not
change the relations of its various phases. An idea in a negative
judgment is just what it is in a positive judgment. In neither case is
it constituted an idea by reference to some other content.

So far we have outlined Bosanquet's theory of the judgment; have noted
the apparently insoluble problems inherent in his system, and have
sketched a radically different theory which offered a possible solution
for his difficulties. It now remains to develop the implications of the
new theory further by comparing its application to some of the more
important problems of logic with that of Bosanquet. In closing we shall
have to inquire to what extent the new theory of the judgment with its
metaphysical implications has proved more satisfactory than that of
Bosanquet.

The special problems to be considered are (1) the relation of judgment
to inference; (2) the parts of the judgment and their relationship; (3)
the time element in the judgment; and (4) the way in which one judgment
can be separated from another.

1. The discussion of the relation between judgment and inference comes
up incidentally in Bosanquet's treatment of the distinction between a
judgment and a proposition (p. 79). The proposition, he says, is merely
the enunciative sentence which represents the act of thought called
judgment. With this distinction we should agree. In his discussion of
the point, however, he criticises Hegel's doctrine that a judgment is
distinguished from a proposition in that a judgment maintains itself
against a doubt, while a proposition is a mere temporal affirmation, not
implying the presence of a doubt. The ground of his criticism is that
judgment must be regarded as operative before the existence of a
conscious doubt, and that, while it is true, as Hegel suggests, that
judgment and inference begin together, they both begin farther back than
the point at which conscious doubt arises. Doubt marks the point at
which inference becomes conscious of its ground. Now, it is undoubted
that inferences in which the ground is implicit exist at an earlier
stage of experience than those in which it is explicit. The former we
usually call simple apprehension, and the latter judgment. What
Bosanquet wishes to do is to make the term "judgment" cover both the
implicit and the explicit activities. The question at once arises
whether such a use of terms is accurate. There is certainly a wide
difference between an inference which is conscious of its ground, and
one which is not. It is conceivably a distinction of philosophic
importance. To slur the difference by applying one name to both
accomplishes nothing. It will be remembered that the presence of a
conscious doubt is the criterion of judgment adopted in the standpoint
from which we have been criticising Bosanquet's theory. We should
accordingly make the term "inference" a wider one than the term
"judgment." A judgment is an inference which is conscious of its ground.
Since fact and idea have been represented as constituted in and through
judgment, the question which at once suggests itself is: What, from such
a standpoint, is the criterion of fact and idea in the stage of
experience previous to the appearance of judgment? The answer is that
the question involves the psychological fallacy. There is no such
distinction as fact and idea in experience previous to the appearance of
judgment. The distinction between fact and idea arises only at the
higher level of experience at which inference becomes conscious of its
grounds. To ask what they were previous to that is to ask _what_ they
were before they _were_--a question which, of course, cannot be
answered.

Our reason for not adopting Hegel's distinction between a judgment and a
proposition would accordingly not be the same as Bosanquet's. The
question has already been touched upon in the distinction between dead
and live judgments. What Hegel calls a proposition is really nothing but
a dead judgment. His illustration of a temporal affirmation is the
sentence: "A carriage is passing the house." That sentence would be a
judgment, he says, only in case there were some doubt as to whether or
not a carriage was passing. But the question to be answered first is:
When would such a "statement" occur in the course of our experience? It
is impossible to conceive of any circumstances in which it would
naturally occur, unless there were some doubt to be solved either of our
own or of another. Perhaps one is expecting a friend, and does not know
at first whether it is a carriage or a cart which is passing. Perhaps
some one has been startled, and asks: "What is this noise?" What Hegel
wishes to call a proposition is, accordingly, nothing but a judgment
taken out of its setting.

2. In dealing with the traditional three parts of the judgment--subject,
predicate, and copula--Bosanquet disposes of the copula at once, by
dividing the judgment into subject and predication. But the two terms
"subject" and "predication" are not co-ordinate. Subject, as he uses it,
is a static term indicating a _content_. Predication is a dynamic term
indicating the act of predicating. It implies something which is
predicated of something else, _i. e._, two contents and the act of
bringing them into relation. Now, if what we understand by the copula is
the _act_ of predicating abstracted from the content which is predicated
of another content, then it does not dispose of the copula as a separate
factor in judgment to include thing predicated and act of predicating
under the single term "predication." The term "predication" might just
as reasonably be made to absorb the subject as well, and would then
appear--as it really is--synonymous with the term "judgment."

But Bosanquet's difficulties with the parts of the judgment are not
disposed of even by the reduction to subject and predication. He goes on
to say:

    It is plain that the judgment, however complex, is a single idea.
    The relations within it are not relations between ideas, but are
    themselves a part of the idea which is predicated. In other words,
    the subject must be outside the judgment in order that the content
    of the judgment may be predicated of it. If not, we fall back into
    "my idea of the earth goes round my idea of the sun," and this, as
    we have seen, is never the meaning of "The earth goes round the
    sun." What we want is, "The real world has in it as a fact what I
    mean by earth-going-round-sun." (P. 81.)

We have already pointed out the difficulties into which Bosanquet's
presupposition as to the nature of reality plunges him. This is but
another technical statement of the same problem. If the subject is
really outside of judgment, then the entire _content_ of the judgment
must fall on the side of predicate, or idea. In the paragraphs that
follow, Bosanquet brings out the point that the judgment must
nevertheless contain the distinction of subject and predicate, since it
is impossible to affirm without introducing a distinction into the
_content_ of the affirmation. Yet he considers this distinction to be
_merely_ a difference within an identity. It serves to mark off the
grammatical subject and predicate, but cannot be the essential
distinction of subject and predicate. His solution of the puzzle is
really the one for which we have been contending, _i. e._, that "the
real world is primarily and emphatically my world," but he still cannot
be satisfied with that kind of a real world as ultimate. Behind the
subject which presents my world he postulates a real world which is not
my world, but which my world represents. It is the relation between this
real world and the total content of a judgment which he considers the
essential relation of judgment. This leaves him--as we have pointed
out--as far as ever from a theory of the relation of thought to reality,
and, moreover, with no criterion for the distinction of subject and
predicate within the judgment. To say that it is a difference within an
identity does not explain how, on a mere basis of content, such a
difference is distinguished within an identity or how it assumes the
importance it actually has. He vibrates between taking the whole
intellectual content as predicate, the reality to be represented as
subject (in which case the copula would be the "contact of
sense-perception") and a distinction appearing without reasonable ground
or bearing _within_ the intellectual content. When subject and predicate
are regarded as the contents in which phases of a function appear, this
difficulty no longer exists.

3. In discussing the time relations within judgment (p. 85) Bosanquet
first disposes of the view which holds that the subject is prior to the
predicate in time, and is distinguished from the predicate by its
priority. He emphasizes the fact that no content of consciousness can
have the significance of a subject, except with reference to something
already referred to it as predicate. But while it cannot be true that
the parts of the judgment fall outside of one another in time, it is yet
evident that in one sense at least the judgment is in time. To make this
clear, Bosanquet draws a provisional distinction between the process of
arriving at a judgment and the completed judgment. The process of
arriving at a judgment is a process of passing from a subject with an
indefinite provisional predicate--a sort of disjunctive judgment--to a
subject with a defined predicate. This process is evidently in time, but
it is as evidently not a transition from subject to predicate. It is, as
he says, a modification, _pari passu_, of both subject and predicate.
The same distinction, he thinks, must hold of the judgment when
completed. But this throws us into a dilemma with reference to the
time-factor in judgment. Time either is or is not an essential factor in
judgment. If it is not essential, then how explain the evident fact that
the judgment as an intellectual process does have duration? If it is
essential, then how explain the fact that its parts do not fall outside
one another in time? Bosanquet evidently regards the former problem as
the easier of the two. His solution is that, while the judgment is an
intellectual process in time, still this is a purely external aspect.
The essential relation between subject and predicate is not in time,
since they are coexistent; therefore time is not an essential element in
judgment.

The first point at which we take issue with this treatment of time in
relation to judgment is in the distinction between the process of
arriving at the judgment and the completed judgment. Bosanquet himself
defines judgment as an intellectual act by which an ideal content is
referred to reality. Now, at what point does this act begin? Certainly
at the point where an ideal content is first applying to reality, and
this, as he points out, is at the beginning of the process which he
describes as the process of arriving at a judgment. It is nothing to the
point that at this stage the predicate is tentative, while later it
becomes defined. His process of arriving at the judgment is exactly the
process we have been describing as the early stages of any and every
judgment. When he talks about the judgment as completed, he has
apparently shifted from the dynamic view of judgment implied in his
definition to a static view. All he could mean by a completed
judgment--in distinction to the total activity of arriving at a
judgment--is the new content of which we find ourselves possessed when
the total process of predication is complete. But this content is not a
judgment at all. It is a new construction of reality which may serve
either as subject or as predicate in future judgments.

Now, if we regard the judgment as the total activity by which an ideal
content is referred to reality, then must we not regard time as an
essential element? Bosanquet answers this question in the negative,
because he believes that if time is an essential element, then the parts
of the judgment must necessarily fall outside one another in time. But
is this necessary? If the essence of judgment is the very modification,
_pari passu_, of subject and predicate, then time must be an essential
element in it, but it is not at all necessary that its elements should
fall outside of one another in time. In other words, the dilemma which
Bosanquet points out on p. 87 is not a genuine one. There is no
difficulty involved in admitting that the judgment is a transition in
time, and still holding that its _parts_ do not fall outside _one
another_ in time. His own solution of the problem--_i. e._, that,
although judgment is an intellectual process in time, still time is not
an essential feature of it, because subject and predicate are coexistent
and judgment is a relation between them--involves a desertion of his
dynamic view of judgment. He defines judgment, not as a relation between
subject and predicate, but as an intellectual _act_.[53]

4. The discussion of the time-element in judgment leads up to the next
puzzle--that as to the way in which one judgment can be marked off from
another in the total activity of thought. Bosanquet has pointed out that
subject and predicate are both of them present at every stage of the
judging process, and are undergoing progressive modification. If,
therefore, we take a cross-section of the process at any point, we find
both subject and predicate present; but a cross-section at one point
would not reveal quite the same subject and predicate as the
cross-section at another point. He comes to the conclusion that judgment
breaks up into judgments as rhomboidal spar into rhomboids (p. 88). It
is, accordingly, quite arbitrary to mark out any limits for a single
judgment. The illustration he gives of the point is as follows:

    Take such an every-day judgment of mixed perception and inference
    as, "He is coming down stairs and going into the street." It is
    the merest chance whether I break up the process thus, into two
    judgments as united by a mere conjunction, or, knowing the man's
    habits, say, when I hear him half way down stairs, "He is going
    out." In the latter case I summarize a more various set of
    observations and inferences in a single judgment; but the judgment
    is as truly single as each of the two which were before separated
    by a conjunction; for each of them was also a summary of a set of
    perceptions, which might, had I chosen, have been subdivided into
    distinct propositions expressing separate judgments; _e. g._, "He
    has opened his door, and is going toward the staircase, and is
    half way down, and is in the passage," etc. If I simply say, "He
    is going out," I am not a whit the less conscious that I judge all
    these different relations, but I then include them all in a single
    systematic content "going out." (P. 89.)

But is it a question of merest chance which of these various
possibilities is actualized? Is Bosanquet really looking--as he
thinks--at the actual life of thought, or is he considering, not what as
a matter of fact does take place under a concrete set of circumstances,
but what might take place under slightly differing sets of
circumstances? If it is true that judgment is a crisis developing
through adequate interaction of stimulus and response into a definite
situation, beginning with doubt and ending with a solution of the doubt,
then it is not true that its limits are purely arbitrary. It begins with
the appearance of the problem and its tentative solutions, and ends with
the solution of a final response. It does, of course, depend upon
momentary interest, but this does not make its limits arbitrary, for the
interest is inherent, not external. In the case of Bosanquet's
illustration, the question of whether one judgment or half a dozen is
made is not a question of merest chance. It depends upon where the
interest of the person making the judgment is centered--in other words,
upon what is the particular doubt to be solved. If the real doubt is as
to whether the man will stay in his room or go out, then when he is
heard leaving his room the solution comes in the form: "He is going
out." But if the doubt is as to whether he will stay in his room, go
out, or go into some other room, then the succession of judgments
occurs, each of which solves a problem. "He has opened his door"--then
he is not going to stay in his room; "He is going toward the
staircase"--then he is not going into a room in the opposite direction,
etc. It is impossible to conceive of such a series of judgments as
actually being made, unless each one represents a problematic situation
and its determination. The only time that a man would, as a matter of
fact, choose to break up the judgment, "He is going out," into such a
series, would be the time when each member of the series had its own
special interest as representing a specific uncertain aim or problem.
Nor is it altogether true that in making the judgment, "He is going
out," one is not a whit the less conscious that he judges all these
different relations. He judges only such relations as are necessary to
the solution of the problem in hand. If hearing the man open his door is
a sufficient basis for the solution, then that is the only one which
consciously enters into the formation of the judgment.

We have attempted to bring out in the preceding pages what seem to be
the contradictions and insoluble problems involved in Bosanquet's theory
of the judgment, and to exhibit them as the logical outcome of his
metaphysical presuppositions. We have also tried to develop another
theory of the judgment involving a different view of the nature of
reality, and to show that the new theory is able to avoid the
difficulties inherent in Bosanquet's system. The change in view-point
briefly is this: Instead of regarding the real world as self-existent,
independently of the judgments we make about it, we viewed it as the
totality of experience which is assured, _i. e._, determined as to
certainty or specific availability, through the instrumentality of
judgment. We thus avoided the essentially insoluble problem of how a
real world whose content is self-existent quite outside of knowledge can
ever be correctly represented by ideas. The difficulty in understanding
the relation of the subject and the predicate of judgment to reality
disappears when we cease to regard reality as self-existent outside of
knowledge. Subject and predicate become instrumentalities in the process
of building up reality. Thought no longer seems to carry us farther and
farther from reality as ideas become abstract and recede from the
immediate sensory experience in which contact with the real occurs. On
the contrary, thought carries us constantly toward reality. Finally, we
avoid the fundamental skepticism about the possibility of knowledge
which, from the other standpoint, is forced upon us by the long
succession of facts which have faded into the realm of false opinions,
and the lack of any guarantee that our present so-called knowledge of
reality shall not meet the same fate. From that point of view, reality
seems to be not only unknown, but unknowable.

The criticism sure to be passed upon the alternative view developed is
that the solution of Bosanquet's problems which it affords is not a real
solution, but rather the abandonment of an attempt at a solution. It
represents reality as a thing which is itself in process of development.
It would force us to admit that the reality of a hundred years ago, or
even of yesterday, was not in content the reality of today. A growing,
developing reality is, it will be said, an imperfect reality, while we
must conceive of reality as complete and perfect in itself. The only
answer which can be made is to insist again that we have no right to
assume that reality is such an already completed existence, unless such
an assumption enables us to understand experience and organize it into a
consistent whole. The attempt of this paper has been to show that such a
conception of reality really makes it inherently impossible to give an
intelligible account of experience as a whole, while the view which
regards reality as developing in and through judgment does enable us to
build up a consistent and understandable view of the world. This
suggests that the "perfect" may not after all be that which is finished
and ended, but that whose reality is so abundant and vital as to issue
in continuous self-modification. The Reality that evolves and moves may
be more perfect, less finite, than that which has exhausted itself.
Moreover, only the view that Reality is developmental in quality, and
that the instrument of its development is judgment involving the
psychical in its determination of subject and predicate gives the
psychical as such any significant place in knowledge or in reality.
According to the view of knowledge as representation of an eternal
content, the psychical is a mere logical surd.




