CHAPTER XI

MINISTRY IN THE UNSEEN LIFE

Section 1

Is it allowable here to make a venture of faith and speculate on a
matter of which we cannot give definite proof?  There is a beautiful
old allegory of KNOWLEDGE, the strong mailed knight, tramping over the
great table-land that he surveyed, and testing and making his ground
sure at every step, while beside him, just above the ground, moved the
white-winged angel FAITH.

Side by side they moved, till the path broke short off on the verge of
a vast precipice.  Knowledge could go no further.  There was no footing
for the ponderous knight; but the white-winged angel rose majestically
from the ground and moved across the chasm, where her companion could
not follow.

Our path has broken off--knowledge can go no further.  May we speculate
with faith on something we cannot prove?  I am thinking of a
speculation very dear to myself, about that progress of our dear ones
in the presence of Christ.  Will not much of that progress in the life
beyond come through unselfish ministry to others?  Let us see what
reason there is to hope it.

Think of all the true hearts who have lived on earth the Christ life of
unselfish helpfulness.  Can you imagine them never helping any one
there, where growth in love is God's highest aim for them?

Think of our Lord's mysterious preaching in the Life after Death and
remember that some of the best known teachers of the early Church
believed that the apostles and others had followed His example.  (See
Chapter IV, p. 59.)

Think that there are countless millions in the World of the Departed
born in heathen lands, born in Christian lands, who had no chance on
earth of knowing Christ in a way to win their love for Him.

Think, how shall His command be fulfilled by His Church, "Go preach the
good news to every creature"--EVERY creature.  What a mockery it seems
with the heathen dying half a million every week if no work for Christ
goes on in the Unseen!  If millions of those Hindoos who have died
without the Gospel would have accepted it, do you think it is not being
taught to any of them now?  If the men of ancient Tyre and Sidon would
have repented at the teaching and work of Christ, if the mighty works
had been done in them, do you not think He has taken care since that
the men of Tyre and Sidon should have their chance?  If the heathen
Socrates, and Plato, and Marcus Aurelius, and Epictetus would have
fallen at His feet as their Master and Friend--and you know they
would--do you think they have not learned to know Him by now?  If
honest hearts in our own land who have died repelled from Him through
their ignorance and through stupid misrepresentations would have loved
Him if they knew Him as He really is, do you think that no one is
helping them to understand Him now?  Can we doubt that somehow within
the Veil they will learn more fully of His tender love?  And judging
from what we know of God's methods on earth, is it unreasonable to
think that they will learn it from their brethren?  True, God might
help them by means of the angels.  But in God's dealings with men's
souls on earth not angels but men were the helpers He gave them.  Even
in the stupendous miracle of the conversion of St. Paul it was a man
(Ananias) whom God sent to help him.


Section 2

Here comes an interesting question about the doctrine of Election.  To
the generation before us it was a horrible doctrine clashing with all
sense of fairness or right.  Men said it meant that God decreed certain
men to eternal Heaven and certain others to eternal Hell by His own
arbitrary will.  The stern revolt of Conscience at length sent us back
to study our Bibles more carefully.  We found that in the first
recorded case of election Abraham was called _for the good of others_
"that in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be
blessed."

We saw reason to believe that Abraham's case was a type of all other
elect--_elect for the service of others_.  We found that the Bible
consistently and throughout affirms that when "God calls or separates
one man to Himself it is for the good of other men; that when He
selects one family it is that all families should be blessed; that when
He chooses one nation it is for the welfare of all nations; that when
He elects and establishes a church it is for the spiritual benefit of
the world.  No man, no family, no nation, no church possesses any gift
or privilege or superior capacity or power for its own use and welfare
alone but for the general good."  So we learned that God's word is true
in spite of our stupid misunderstanding of it and that this doctrine of
Election rightly understood is one of the noblest things in the whole
Bible.

Now comes my question.  Are God's elect in the Hereafter life still
"_elect for the service of others_"?  Are those loving souls who are
joyfully accepting Christ's service here,--destined for a still more
glorious service in this ministry in the Unseen--the "first-fruits" of
a great harvest which through them the Lord will reap in the Hereafter?
Will some be just saved, saved so as by fire, saved "by the skin of
their teeth," as we say, missing the noble destiny of the "elect," the
joy of being a blessing to their race?


Section 3

"You have preached your last sermon," said one to Frederick Denison
Maurice as he was dying.  "Aye," he said; "but only my last sermon in
THIS life."  He believed he was going through the veil to preach to
men.  I believe it too, though I cannot prove it, nay, even though
there be difficulties in the way of believing it.  And many men greater
than we are believing it, impelled by the stirring of Divine impulses
within.

Do not think of it as merely a work for preachers and teachers.  Every
brave boy here who is trying to do right, every poor woman who is
learning to love, every one who is blessing the world by kindly
unselfishness, is helping on the Kingdom of God on earth and will be
helping on the Kingdom of God beyond.

Surely there will be scope for them all.  When you think of that great
mingled crowd that is daily passing through the gates of death, all
sorts and conditions--from the strong saints of God to the poor
children brought up in homes of sin--you need have little doubt that
there is room for service.

If it be true, ah! think of it, you who are trying to forget
yourselves, and live for others--think of the blessedness of your life
in the waiting land.  With the weak and the ignorant needing to be
helped; with the little children needing to be mothered and loved; with
the great heathen world, who have gone within the veil, never yet
having heard of Christ.


Section 4

If it be true, think how it takes away the reproach of "glorified
selfishness," which many attribute to the Christians' glad hope.

Think how it helps in the perplexities about God's dealings when young
and useful lives are taken from the earth.  An angry mourner said to me
recently, "I don't believe God has anything to do with it, else why
should He take away a noble life like that and leave all these stupid
useless people in the world?"  I told him of my hope of this ministry
in the Unseen and suggested that perhaps God did not want ONLY the
stupid useless people.

And think especially how it deepens the importance of our life on earth
to feel that it has a bearing on our usefulness for ever.  The more we
increase our talents here, the more we shall be able to help our
Saviour there.  He Himself suggests this in the parables of the Talents
and the Pounds.  "Thy pound has gained five, I will set thee over five
cities.  Thy pound has gained ten, I will set thee over ten cities.  I
will give thee a larger and nobler work hereafter."  Is not that an
incentive to stir one's blood?  The more I grow in love, in
unselfishness, in knowledge of God, in righteousness of life, the more
use I shall be to my dear Lord and to my brethren for ever.




