The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Psychology of Beauty
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Psychology of Beauty

Author: Ethel Puffer Howes


        
Release date: February 1, 2003 [eBook #3751]
                Most recently updated: January 8, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/3751







This Project Gutenberg Etext prepared by Tony Adam
Anthony-adam@tamu.edu





The Psychology of Beauty

by Ethel D. Puffer




PREFACE

THE human being who thrills to the experience of beauty in
nature and in art does not forever rest with that experience
unquestioned.  The day comes when he yearns to pierce the
secret of his emotion, to discover what it is, and why, that
has so stung him--to defend and to justify his transport to
himself and to others.  He seeks a reason for the faith that
is in him.  And so have arisen the speculative theories of
the nature of beauty, on the one hand, and the studies of
concrete beauty and our feelings about it, on the other.
Speculative theory has taken its own way, however, as a
part of philosophy, in relating the Beautiful to the other
great concepts of the True and the Good; building up an
architectonic of abstract ideas, far from the immediate
facts and problems of the enjoyment of beauty.  There has
grown up, on the other hand, in the last years, a great
literature of special studies in the facts of aesthetic
production and enjoyment.  Experiments with the aesthetic
elements; investigations into the physiological psychology
of aesthetic reactions; studies in the genesis and development
of art forms, have multiplied apace.  But these are still
mere groups of facts for psychology; they have not been taken
up into a single authoritative principle.  Psychology cannot
do justice to the imperative of beauty, by virtue of which,
when we say "this is beautiful," we have a right to imply
that the universe must agree with us.  A synthesis of these
tendencies in the study of beauty is needed, in which the
results of modern psychology shall help to make intelligible
a philosophical theory of beauty.  The chief purpose of this
book is to seek to effect such a union.

A way of defining Beauty which grounds it in general principles,
while allowing it to reach the concrete case, is set forth in
the essay on the Nature of Beauty.  The following chapters aim
to expand, to test, and to confirm this central theory, by
showing, partly by the aid of the aforesaid special studies,
how it accounts for our pleasure in pictures, music, and
literature.

The whole field of beauty is thus brought under discussion;
and therefore, though it nowhere seeks to be exhaustive in
treatment, the book may fairly claim to be a more or less
consistent and complete aesthetic theory, and hence to
address itself to the student of aesthetics as well as to the
general reader.  The chapter on the Nature of Beauty, indeed,
will doubtless be found by the latter somewhat technical, and
should be omitted by all who definitely object to professional
phraseology.  The general conclusions of the book are
sufficiently stated in the less abstract papers.

Of the essays which compose the following volume, the first,
third, and last are reprinted, in more or less revised form,
from the "Atlantic Monthly" and the "International Monthly."
Although written as independent papers, it is thought that
they do not unduly repeat each other, but that they serve to
verify, in each of the several realms of beauty, the truth
of the central theory of the book.

The various influences which have served to shape a work of
this kind become evident in the reading; but I cannot refrain
from a word of thanks to the teachers whose inspiration and
encouragement first made it possible.  I owe much gratitude
to Professor Mary A. Jordan and Professor H. Norman Gardiner
of Smith College, who in literature and in philosophy first
set me in the way of aesthetic interest and inquiry, and to
Professor Hugo Munsterberg of Harvard University, whose
philosophical theories and scientific guidance have largely
influenced my thought.

WELLESLEY COLLEGE, April 24, 1905.



CONTENTS
                                                      PAGE
I.    CRITICISM AND AESTHETICS.............................1
II.   THE NATURE OF BEAUTY................................27
III.  THE AESTHETIC REPOSE................................57
IV.   THE BEAUTY OF FINE ART..............................89
        A.  THE BEAUTY OF VISUAL FORM.....................91
        B.  SPACE COMPOSITION AMONG THE OLD MASTERS......128
V.    THE BEAUTY OF MUSIC................................149
VI.   THE BEAUTY OF LITERATURE...........................203
VII.  THE NATURE OF THE EMOTIONS OF THE DRAMA............229
VIII. THE BEAUTY OF IDEAS................................263



I
CRITICISM AND AESTHETICS



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF BEAUTY

