CHAPTER VIII

WORDS, PHRASES AND PRONUNCIATION


=PHRASES AVOIDED IN GOOD SOCIETY=

It is difficult to explain why well-bred people avoid certain words and
expressions that are admitted by etymology and grammar. So it must be
merely stated that they have and undoubtedly always will avoid them.
Moreover, this choice of expression is not set forth in any printed guide
or book on English, though it is followed in all literature.

To liken Best Society to a fraternity, with the avoidance of certain
seemingly unimportant words as the sign of recognition, is not a fantastic
simile. People of the fashionable world invariably use certain expressions
and instinctively avoid others; therefore when a stranger uses an
"avoided" one he proclaims that he "does not belong," exactly as a
pretended Freemason proclaims himself an "outsider" by giving the wrong
"grip"--or whatever it is by which Brother Masons recognize one another.

People of position are people of position the world over--and by their
speech are most readily known. Appearance on the other hand often passes
muster. A "show-girl" may be lovely to look at as she stands in a
seemingly unstudied position and in perfect clothes. But let her say "My
Gawd!" or "Wouldn't that jar you!" and where is her loveliness then?

And yet, and this is the difficult part of the subject to make clear, the
most vulgar slang like that quoted above, is scarcely worse than the
attempted elegance which those unused to good society imagine to be the
evidence of cultivation.

People who say "I come," and "I seen it," and "I done it" prove by their
lack of grammar that they had little education in their youth.
Unfortunate, very; but they may at the same time be brilliant, exceptional
characters, loved by everyone who knows them, because they are what they
seem and nothing else. But the caricature "lady" with the comic picture
"society manner" who says "Pardon _me_" and talks of "retiring," and
"residing," and "desiring," and "being acquainted with," and "attending"
this and that with "her escort," and curls her little finger over the
handle of her teacup, and prates of "culture," does not belong to Best
Society, and _never_ will! The offense of pretentiousness is committed
oftener perhaps by women than by men, who are usually more natural and
direct. A genuine, sincere, kindly American man--or woman--can go anywhere
and be welcomed by everyone, provided of course, that he is a man of
ability and intellect. One finds him all over the world, neither aping the
manners of others nor treading on the sensibilities of those less
fortunate than himself.

Occasionally too, there appears in Best Society a provincial in whose
conversation is perceptible the influence of much reading of the Bible.
Such are seldom if ever stilted or pompous or long-worded, but are
invariably distinguished for the simplicity and dignity of their English.

There is no better way to cultivate taste in words, than by constantly
reading the best English. None of the words and expressions which are
taboo in good society will be found in books of proved literary standing.
But it must not be forgotten that there can be a vast difference between
literary standing and popularity, and that many of the "best sellers" have
no literary merit whatsoever.

To be able to separate best English from merely good English needs a long
process of special education, but to recognize bad English one need merely
skim through a page of a book, and if a single expression in the left-hand
column following can be found (unless purposely quoted in illustration of
vulgarity) it is quite certain that the author neither writes best English
nor belongs to Best Society.

        NEVER SAY:                       CORRECT FORM:
    In our residence we retire       At our house we go to bed
    early (or arise)                 early (or get up)

    I desire to purchase             I should like to buy

    Make you acquainted with         (See Introductions)

    Pardon _me_!                     I beg your pardon. Or,
                                     Excuse me! Or, sorry!

    Lovely food                      Good food

    Elegant home                     Beautiful house--or place

    A stylish dresser                She dresses well, or she
                                     wears lovely clothes

    Charmed! or Pleased to           How do you do!
    meet you!

    Attended                         Went to

    I trust I am not trespassing     I hope I am not in the way
                                     (unless trespassing on private
                                     property is actually
                                     meant)

    Request (meaning ask)            Used only in the third person
                                     in formal written invitations.

    Will you accord me permission?   Will you let me? or May I?

    Permit me to assist you          Let me help you

    Brainy                           Brilliant or clever

    I presume                        I suppose

    Tendered him a banquet           Gave him a dinner

    Converse                         Talk

    Partook of liquid refreshment    Had something to drink

    Perform ablutions                Wash

    A song entitled                  Called (proper if used in
                                     legal sense)

    I will ascertain                 I will find out

    Residence or mansion             House, or big house

    In the home                      In some one's house or At
                                     home

    Phone, photo, auto               Telephone, photograph,
                                     automobile

"Tintinnabulary summons," meaning bell, and "Bovine continuation," meaning
cow's tail, are more amusing than offensive, but they illustrate the
theory of bad style that is pretentious.

As examples of the very worst offenses that can be committed, the
following are offered:

"Pray, accept my thanks for the flattering ovation you have tendered me."

"Yes," says the preposterous bride, "I am the recipient of many admired
and highly prized gifts."

"Will you permit me to recall myself to you?"

Speaking of bridesmaids as "pretty servitors," "dispensing hospitality,"
asking any one to "step this way."

Many other expressions are provincial and one who seeks purity of speech
should, if possible, avoid them, but as "offenses" they are minor:

Reckon, guess, calculate, or figure, meaning think.

Allow, meaning agree.

Folks, meaning family.

Cute, meaning pretty or winsome.

Well, I declare! 'Pon my word!

Box party, meaning sitting in a box at the theater.

Visiting with, meaning talking to.

There are certain words which have been singled out and misused by the
undiscriminating until their value is destroyed. Long ago "elegant" was
turned from a word denoting the essence of refinement and beauty, into
gaudy trumpery. "Refined" is on the verge. But the pariah of the language
is culture! A word rarely used by those who truly possess it, but so
constantly misused by those who understand nothing of its meaning, that it
is becoming a synonym for vulgarity and imitation. To speak of the proper
use of a finger bowl or the ability to introduce two people without a
blunder as being "evidence of culture of the highest degree" is precisely
as though evidence of highest education were claimed for who ever can do
sums in addition, and read words of one syllable. Culture in its true
meaning is widest possible education, _plus_ especial refinement and
taste.

The fact that slang is apt and forceful makes its use irresistibly
tempting. Coarse or profane slang is beside the mark, but "flivver,"
"taxi," the "movies," "deadly" (meaning dull), "feeling fit," "feeling
blue," "grafter," a "fake," "grouch," "hunch" and "right o!" are typical
of words that it would make our spoken language stilted to exclude.

All colloquial expressions are little foxes that spoil the grapes of
perfect diction, but they are very little foxes; it is the false elegance
of stupid pretentiousness that is an annihilating blight which destroys
root and vine.

In the choice of words, we can hardly find a better guide than the lines
of Alexander Pope:

    "In words, as fashions, the same rule will hold;
    Alike fantastic, if too new, or old:
    Be not the first by whom the new are tried,
    Nor yet the last to lay the old aside."


=PRONUNCIATION=

Traits of pronunciation which are typical of whole sections of the
country, or accents inherited from European parents must not be confused
with crude pronunciations that have their origin in illiteracy. A
gentleman of Irish blood may have a brogue as rich as plum cake, or
another's accent be soft Southern or flat New England, or rolling
Western; and to each of these the utterance of the others may sound too
flat, too soft, too harsh, too refined, or drawled, or clipped short, but
not uncultivated.

To a New York ear, which ought to be fairly unbiased since the New York
accent is a composite of all accents, English women chirrup and twitter.
But the beautifully modulated, clear-clipped enunciation of a cultivated
Englishman, one who can move his jaws and not swallow his words whole,
comes as near to perfection in English as the diction of the Comédie
Française comes to perfection in French.

The Boston accent is very crisp and in places suggestive of the best
English but the vowels are so curiously flattened that the speech has a
saltless effect. There is no rhyming word as flat as the way they say
"heart"--"haht." And "bone" and "coat"--"bawn," "cawt," to rhyme with awe!

Then South, there is too much salt--rather too much sugar. Every one's
mouth seems full of it, with "I" turned to "ah" and every staccato a
drawl. But the voices are full of sweetness and music unknown north of the
Potomac.

The Pennsylvania burr is perhaps the mother of the Western one. It is
strong enough to have mothered all the r's in the wor-r-rld!
Philadelphia's "haow" and "caow" for "how" and "cow," and "me" for "my" is
quite as bad as the "water-r" and "thot" of the West.

N'Yawk is supposed to say "yeh" and "Omurica" and "Toosdeh," and
"puddin'." Probably five per cent. of it does, but as a whole it has no
accent, since it is a composite of all in one.

In best New York society there is perhaps a generally accepted
pronunciation which seems chiefly an elimination of the accents of other
sections. Probably that is what all people think of their own
pronunciation. Or do they not know, whether their inflection is right or
wrong? Nothing should be simpler to determine. If they pronounce according
to a standard dictionary, they are correct; if they don't, they have an
"accent" or are ignorant; it is for them to determine which. Such
differences as between saying wash or wawsh, ad_ver_tisement or
adver_tise_ment are of small importance. But no one who makes the least
pretence of being a person of education says: kep for kept, genelmun or
gempmun or laydee, vawde-vil, or eye-talian.


=HOW TO CULTIVATE AN AGREEABLE SPEECH=

First of all, remember that while affectation is odious, crudeness must be
overcome. A low voice is always pleasing, not whispered or murmured, but
low in pitch. Do not talk at the top of your head, nor at the top of your
lungs. Do not slur whole sentences together; on the other hand, do not
pronounce as though each syllable were a separate tongue and lip exercise.

As a nation we do not talk so much too fast, as too loud. Tens of
thousands twang and slur and shout and burr! Many of us drawl and many
others of us race tongues and breath at full speed, but, as already said,
the speed of our speech does not matter so much. Pitch of voice matters
very much and so does pronunciation--enunciation is not so
essential--except to one who speaks in public.

Enunciation means the articulation of whatever you have to say distinctly
and clearly. Pronunciation is the proper sounding of consonants, vowels
and the accentuation of each syllable.

There is no better way to cultivate a perfect pronunciation; apart from
association with cultivated people, than by getting a small pronouncing
dictionary of words in ordinary use, and reading it word by word, marking
and studying any that you use frequently and mispronounce. When you know
them, then read any book at random slowly aloud to yourself, very
carefully pronouncing each word. The consciousness of this exercise may
make you stilted in conversation at first, but by and by the "sense" or
"impulse" to speak correctly will come.

This is a method that has been followed by many men handicapped in youth
through lack of education, who have become prominent in public life, and
by many women, who likewise handicapped by circumstances, have not only
made possible a creditable position for themselves, but have then given
their children the inestimable advantage of learning their mother tongue
correctly at their mother's knee.




