The Project Gutenberg eBook of Sartor Resartus, and  On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Sartor Resartus, and  On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History

Author: Thomas Carlyle


        
Release date: February 15, 2007 [eBook #20585]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20585

Credits: Produced by Jason Isbell, Barbara Tozier and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Jason Isbell, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





                          EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY

                 Founded 1906 by J. M. Dent (d. 1926)
                   Edited by Ernest Rhys (d. 1946)


                       ESSAYS & BELLES-LETTRES


                   SARTOR RESARTUS _and_ ON HEROES

                   BY THOMAS CARLYLE . INTRODUCTION

                      BY PROFESSOR W. H. HUDSON




    THOMAS CARLYLE, born in 1795 at Ecclefechan, the son of a
    stonemason. Educated at Edinburgh University. Schoolmaster for
    a short time, but decided on a literary career, visiting Paris
    and London. Retired in 1828 to Dumfriesshire to write. In 1834
    moved to Cheyne Row, Chelsea, and died there in 1881.




                           SARTOR RESARTUS

                              ON HEROES

                             HERO WORSHIP


                            THOMAS CARLYLE


                    LONDON: J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.
                  NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO. INC.




                         _All rights reserved
                        Made in Great Britain
                    at The Temple Press Letchworth
                                 for
                        J. M. Dent & Sons Ltd.
                   Aldine House Bedford St. London
                 First published in this edition 1908
                         Last reprinted 1948_




INTRODUCTION


One of the most vital and pregnant books in our modern literature,
"Sartor Resartus" is also, in structure and form, one of the most
daringly original. It defies exact classification. It is not a
philosophic treatise. It is not an autobiography. It is not a romance.
Yet in a sense it is all these combined. Its underlying purpose is to
expound in broad outline certain ideas which lay at the root of
Carlyle's whole reading of life. But he does not elect to set these
forth in regular methodic fashion, after the manner of one writing a
systematic essay. He presents his philosophy in dramatic form and in a
picturesque human setting. He invents a certain Herr Diogenes
Teufelsdroeckh, an erudite German professor of "Allerley-Wissenschaft,"
or Things in General, in the University of Weissnichtwo, of whose
colossal work, "Die Kleider, Ihr Werden und Wirken" (On Clothes: Their
Origin and Influence), he represents himself as being only the student
and interpreter. With infinite humour he explains how this prodigious
volume came into his hands; how he was struck with amazement by its
encyclopaedic learning, and the depth and suggestiveness of its
thought; and how he determined that it was his special mission to
introduce its ideas to the British public. But how was this to be
done? As a mere bald abstract of the original would never do, the
would-be apostle was for a time in despair. But at length the happy
thought occurred to him of combining a condensed statement of the main
principles of the new philosophy with some account of the
philosopher's life and character. Thus the work took the form of a
"Life and Opinions of Herr Teufelsdroeckh," and as such it was offered
to the world. Here, of course, we reach the explanation of its
fantastic title--"Sartor Resartus," or the Tailor Patched: the tailor
being the great German "Clothes-philosopher," and the patching being
done by Carlyle as his English editor.

As a piece of literary mystification, Teufelsdroeckh and his treatise
enjoyed a measure of the success which nearly twenty years before had
been scored by Dietrich Knickerbocker and his "History of New York."
The question of the professor's existence was solemnly discussed in at
least one important review; Carlyle was gravely taken to task for
attempting to mislead the public; a certain interested reader actually
wrote to inquire where the original German work was to be obtained.
All this seems to us surprising; the more so as we are now able to
understand the purposes which Carlyle had in view in devising his
dramatic scheme. In the first place, by associating the
clothes-philosophy with the personality of its alleged author (himself
one of Carlyle's splendidly living pieces of characterisation), and by
presenting it as the product and expression of his spiritual
experiences, he made the mystical creed intensely human. Stated in the
abstract, it would have been a mere blank _-ism_; developed in its
intimate relations with Teufelsdroeckh's character and career, it is
filled with the hot life-blood of natural thought and feeling.
Secondly, by fathering his own philosophy upon a German professor
Carlyle indicates his own indebtedness to German idealism, the
ultimate source of much of his own teaching. Yet, deep as that
indebtedness was, and anxious as he might be to acknowledge it, he was
as a humourist keenly alive to certain glaring defects of the great
German writers; to their frequent tendency to lose themselves among
the mere minutiae of erudition, and thus to confuse the unimportant and
the important; to their habit of rising at times into the clouds
rather than above the clouds, and of there disporting themselves in
regions "close-bordering on the impalpable inane;" to their too
conspicuous want of order, system, perspective. The dramatic machinery
of "Sartor Resartus" is therefore turned to a third service. It is
made the vehicle of much good-humoured satire upon these and similar
characteristics of Teutonic scholarship and speculation; as in the
many amusing criticisms which are passed upon Teufelsdroeckh's volume
as a sort of "mad banquet wherein all courses have been confounded;"
in the burlesque parade of the professor's "omniverous reading"
(_e.g._, Book I, Chap. V); and in the whole amazing episode of the
"six considerable paper bags," out of the chaotic contents of which
the distracted editor in search of "biographic documents" has to make
what he can. Nor is this quite all. Teufelsdroeckh is further utilised
as the mouthpiece of some of Carlyle's more extravagant speculations
and of such ideas as he wished to throw out as it were tentatively,
and without himself being necessarily held responsible for them. There
is thus much point as well as humour in those sudden turns of the
argument, when, after some exceptionally wild outburst on his
_eidolon's_ part, Carlyle sedately reproves him for the fantastic
character or dangerous tendency of his opinions.

It is in connection with the dramatic scheme of the book that the
third element, that of autobiography, enters into its texture, for the
story of Teufelsdroeckh is very largely a transfigured version of the
story of Carlyle himself. In saying this, I am not of course thinking
mainly of Carlyle's outer life. This, indeed, is in places freely
drawn upon, as the outer lives of Dickens, George Eliot, Tolstoi are
drawn upon in "David Copperfield," "The Mill on the Floss," "Anna
Karenina." Entepfuhl is only another name for Ecclefechan; the picture
of little Diogenes eating his supper out-of-doors on fine summer
evenings, and meanwhile watching the sun sink behind the western
hills, is clearly a loving transcript from memory; even the idyllic
episode of Blumine may be safely traced back to a romance of Carlyle's
youth. But to investigate the connection at these and other points
between the mere externals of the two careers is a matter of little
more than curious interest. It is because it incorporates and
reproduces so much of Carlyle's inner history that the story of
Teufelsdroeckh is really important. Spiritually considered, the whole
narrative is, in fact, a "symbolic myth," in which the writer's
personal trials and conflicts are depicted with little change save in
setting and accessories. Like Teufelsdroeckh, Carlyle while still a
young man had broken away from the old religious creed in which he had
been bred; like Teufelsdroeckh, he had thereupon passed into the
"howling desert of infidelity;" like Teufelsdroeckh, he had known all
the agonies and anguish of a long period of blank scepticism and
insurgent despair, during which, turn whither he would, life responded
with nothing but negations to every question and appeal. And as to
Teufelsdroeckh in the Rue Saint-Thomas de l'Enfer in Paris, so to
Carlyle in Leith Walk, Edinburgh, there had come a moment of sudden
and marvellous illumination, a mystical crisis from which he had
emerged a different man. The parallelism is so obvious and so close as
to leave no room for doubt that the story of Teufelsdroeckh is
substantially a piece of spiritual autobiography.

This admitted, the question arises whether Carlyle had any purpose,
beyond that of self-expression, in thus utilising his own experiences
for the human setting of his philosophy. It seems evident that he had.
As he conceived them, these experiences possessed far more than a
merely personal interest and meaning. He wrote of himself because he
saw in himself a type of his restless and much-troubled epoch; because
he knew that in a broad sense his history was the history of thousands
of other young men in the generation to which he belonged. The age
which followed upon the vast upheaval of the Revolution was one of
widespread turmoil and perplexity. Men felt themselves to be wandering
aimlessly "between two worlds, one dead, the other powerless to be
born." The old order had collapsed in shapeless ruin; but the promised
Utopia had not been realised to take its place. In many directions the
forces of reaction were at work. Religion, striving to maintain itself
upon the dogmatic creeds of the past, was rapidly petrifying into a
mere "dead Letter of Religion," from which all the living spirit had
fled; and those who could not nourish themselves on hearsay and
inherited formula knew not where to look for the renewal of faith and
hope. The generous ardour and the splendid humanitarian enthusiasms
which had been stirred by the opening phases of the revolutionary
movement, had now ebbed away; revulsion had followed, and with it the
mood of disillusion and despair. The spirit of doubt and denial was
felt as a paralysing power in every department of life and thought,
and the shadow of unbelief lay heavy on many hearts.

It was for the men of this "sad time" that Carlyle wrote
Teufelsdroeckh's story; and he wrote it not merely to depict the
far-reaching consequences of their pessimism but also to make plain to
them their true path out of it. He desired to exhibit to his age the
real nature of the strange malady from which it was suffering in order
that he might thereupon proclaim the remedy.

What, then, is the moral significance of Carlyle's "symbolic myth"?
What are the supreme lessons which he uses it to convey?

We must begin by understanding his diagnosis. For him, all the evils
of the time could ultimately be traced back to their common source in
what may be briefly described as its want of real religion. Of churches
and creeds there were plenty; of living faith little or nothing was
left. Men had lost all vital sense of God in the world; and because of
this, they had taken up a fatally wrong attitude to life. They looked
at it wholly from the mechanical point of view, and judged it by
merely utilitarian standards. The "body-politic" was no longer
inspired by any "soul-politic." Men, individually and in the mass,
cared only for material prosperity, sought only outward success, made
the pursuit of happiness the end and aim of their being. The divine
meaning of virtue, the infinite nature of duty, had been forgotten,
and morality had been turned into a sort of ledger-philosophy, based
upon calculations of profit and loss.

It was thus that Carlyle read the signs of the times. In such
circumstances what was needed? Nothing less than a spiritual rebirth.
Men must abandon their wrong attitude to life, and take up the right
attitude. Everything hinged on that. And that they might take up this
right attitude it was necessary first that they should be convinced of
life's essential spirituality, and cease in consequence to seek its
meaning and test its value on the plane of merely material things.

Carlyle thus throws passionate emphasis upon religion as the only
saving power. But it must be noted that he does not suggest a return
to any of the dogmatic creeds of the past. Though once the expression
of a living faith, these were now for him mere lifeless formulas. Nor
has he any new dogmatic creed to offer in their place. That mystical
crisis which had broken the spell of the Everlasting No was in a
strict sense--he uses the word himself--a conversion. But it was not a
conversion in the theological sense, for it did not involve the
acceptance of any specific articles of faith. It was simply a complete
change of front; the protest of his whole nature, in a suddenly
aroused mood of indignation and defiance, against the "spirit which
denies;" the assertion of his manhood against the cowardice which had
so long kept him trembling and whimpering before the facts of
existence. But from that change of front came presently the vivid
apprehension of certain great truths which his former mood had thus
far concealed from him; and in these truths he found the secret of
that right attitude to life in the discovery of which lay men's only
hope of salvation from the unrest and melancholy of their time.

From this point of view the burden of Carlyle's message to his
generation will be readily understood. Men were going wrong because
they started with the thought of self, and made satisfaction of self
the law of their lives; because, in consequence, they regarded
happiness as the chief object of pursuit and the one thing worth
striving for; because, under the influence of the current rationalism,
they tried to escape from their spiritual perplexities through logic
and speculation. They had, therefore, to set themselves right upon all
these matters. They had to learn that not self-satisfaction but
self-renunciation is the key to life and its true law; that we have no
prescriptive claim to happiness and no business to quarrel with the
universe if it withholds it from us; that the way out of pessimism
lies, not through reason, but through honest work, steady adherence to
the simple duty which each day brings, fidelity to the right as we
know it. Such, in broad statement, is the substance of Carlyle's
religious convictions and moral teaching. Like Kant he takes his stand
on the principles of ethical idealism. God is to be sought, not
through speculation, or syllogism, or the learning of the schools, but
through the moral nature. It is the soul in action that alone finds
God. And the finding of God means, not happiness as the world
conceives it, but blessedness, or the inward peace which passes
understanding.

The connection between the transfigured autobiography which serves to
introduce the directly didactic element of the book and that element
itself, will now be clear. Stripped of its whimsicalities of
phraseology and its humorous extravagances, Carlyle's philosophy
stands revealed as essentially idealistic in character. Spirit is the
only reality. Visible things are but the manifestations, emblems, or
clothings of spirit. The material universe itself is only the vesture
or symbol of God; man is a spirit, though he wears the wrappings of
the flesh; and in everything that man creates for himself he merely
attempts to give body or expression to thought. The science of
Carlyle's time was busy proclaiming that, since the universe is
governed by natural laws, miracles are impossible and the supernatural
is a myth. Carlyle replies that the natural laws are themselves only
the manifestation of Spiritual Force, and that thus miracle is
everywhere and all nature supernatural. We, who are the creatures of
time and space, can indeed apprehend the Absolute only when He weaves
about Him the visible garments of time and space. Thus God reveals
Himself to sense through symbols. But it is as we regard these symbols
in one or other of two possible ways that we class ourselves with the
foolish man or with the wise. The foolish man sees only the symbol,
thinks it exists for itself, takes it for the ultimate fact, and
therefore rests in it. The wise man sees the symbol, knows that it is
only a symbol, and penetrates into it for the ultimate fact or
spiritual reality which it symbolises.

Remote as such a doctrine may at first sight seem to be from the
questions with which men are commonly concerned, it has none the less
many important practical bearings. Since "all Forms whereby Spirit
manifests itself to sense, whether outwardly or in the imagination,
are Clothes," civilisation and everything belonging to it--our
languages, literatures and arts, our governments, social machinery and
institutions, our philosophies, creeds and rituals--are but so many
vestments woven for itself by the shaping spirit of man. Indispensable
these vestments are; for without them society would collapse in
anarchy, and humanity sink to the level of the brute. Yet here again
we must emphasise the difference, already noted, between the foolish
man and the wise. The foolish man once more assumes that the vestments
exist for themselves, as ultimate facts, and that they have a value of
their own. He, therefore, confuses the life with its clothing; is even
willing to sacrifice the life for the sake of the clothing. The wise
man, while he, too, recognises the necessity of the vestments, and
indeed insists upon it, knows that they have no independent
importance, that they derive all their potency and value from the
inner reality which they were fashioned to represent and embody, but
which they often misrepresent and obscure. He therefore never confuses
the life with the clothing, and well understands how often the
clothing has to be sacrificed for the sake of the life. Thus, while
the utility of clothes has to be recognised to the full, it is still
of the essence of wisdom to press hard upon the vital distinction
between the outer wrappings of man's life and that inner reality which
they more or less adequately enfold.

The use which Carlyle makes of this doctrine in his interpretation of
the religious history of the world and of the crisis in thought of his
own day, will be anticipated. All dogmas, forms and ceremonials, he
teaches, are but religious vestments--symbols expressing man's deepest
sense of the divine mystery of the universe and the hunger and thirst
of his soul for God. It is in response to the imperative necessities
of his nature that he moulds for himself these outward emblems of his
ideas and aspirations. Yet they are only emblems; and since, like all
other human things, they partake of the ignorance and weakness of the
times in which they were framed, it is inevitable that with the growth
of knowledge and the expansion of thought they must presently be
outgrown. When this happens, there follows what Carlyle calls the
"superannuation of symbols." Men wake to the fact that the creeds and
formulas which have come down to them from the past are no longer
living for them, no longer what they need for the embodiment of their
spiritual life. Two mistakes are now possible, and these are, indeed,
commonly made together. On the one hand, men may try to ignore the
growth of knowledge and the expansion of thought, and to cling to the
outgrown symbols as things having in themselves some mysterious
sanctity and power. On the other hand, they may recklessly endeavour
to cast aside the reality symbolised along with the discredited symbol
itself. Given such a condition of things, and we shall find religion
degenerating into formalism and the worship of the dead letter, and,
side by side with this, the impatient rejection of all religion, and
the spread of a crude and debasing materialism. Religious symbols,
then, must be renewed. But their renewal can come only from within.
Form, to have any real value, must grow out of life and be fed by it.

The revolutionary quality in the philosophy of "Sartor Resartus"
cannot, of course, be overlooked. Everything that man has woven for
himself must in time become merely "old clothes"; the work of his
thought, like that of his hands, is perishable; his very highest
symbols have no permanence or finality. Carlyle cuts down to the
essential reality beneath all shows and forms and emblems: witness his
amazing vision of a naked House of Lords. Under his penetrating gaze
the "earthly hulls and garnitures" of existence melt away. Men's habit
is to rest in symbols. But to rest in symbols is fatal, since they are
at best but the "adventitious wrappages" of life. Clothes "have made
men of us"--true; but now, so great has their influence become that
"they are threatening to make clothes-screens of us." Hence "the
beginning of all wisdom is to look fixedly on clothes ... till they
become transparent." The logical tendency of such teaching may seem to
be towards utter nihilism. But that tendency is checked and qualified
by the strong conservative element which is everywhere prominent in
Carlyle's thought. Upon the absolute need of "clothes" the stress is
again and again thrown. They "have made men of us." By symbols alone
man lives and works. By symbols alone can he make life and work
effective. Thus even the world's "old clothes"--its discarded forms
and creeds--should be treated with the reverence due to whatever has
once played a part in human development. Thus, moreover, we must be on
our guard against the impetuosity of the revolutionary spirit and all
rash rupture with the past. To cast old clothes aside before new
clothes are ready--this does not mean progress, but sansculottism, or
a lapse into nakedness and anarchy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The lectures "On Heroes and Hero-Worship," here printed with "Sartor
Resartus," contain little more than an amplification, through a series
of brilliant character-studies, of those fundamental ideas of history
which had already figured among Teufelsdroeckh's social speculations.
Simple in statement and clear in doctrine, this second work needs no
formal introduction. It may, however, be of service just to indicate
one or two points at which, apart from its set theses, it expresses or
implies certain underlying principles of all Carlyle's thought.

In the first place, his philosophy of history rests entirely on "the
great man theory." "Universal History, the history of what man has
accomplished in the world," is for him "at bottom the History of the
Great Men who have worked here." This conception, of course, brings
him into sharp conflict with that scientific view of history which was
already gaining ground when "Heroes and Hero-Worship" was written, and
which since then has become even more popular under the powerful
influence of the modern doctrine of evolution. A scientific historian,
like Buckle or Taine, seeks to explain all changes in thought, all
movements in politics and society, in terms of general laws; his habit
is, therefore, to subordinate, if not quite to eliminate, the
individual; the greatest man is treated as in a large measure the
product and expression of the "spirit of the time." For Carlyle,
individuality is everything. While, as he is bound to admit, "no one
works save under conditions," external circumstances and influences
count little. The Great Man is supreme. He is not the creature of his
age, but its creator; not its servant, but its master. "The History of
the World is but the Biography of Great Men."

Anti-scientific in his reading of history, Carlyle is also
anti-democratic in the practical lessons he deduces from it. He
teaches that our right relations with the Hero are discipular
relations; that we should honestly acknowledge his superiority, look
up to him, reverence him. Thus on the personal side he challenges that
tendency to "level down" which he believed to be one alarming result
of the fast-spreading spirit of the new democracy. But more than this.
He insists that the one hope for our distracted world of to-day lies
in the strength and wisdom of the few, not in the organised unwisdom
of the many. The masses of the people can never be safely trusted to
solve for themselves the intricate problems of their own welfare. They
need to be guided, disciplined, at times even driven, by those great
leaders of men, who see more deeply than they see into the reality of
things, and know much better than they can ever know what is good for
them, and how that good is to be attained. Political machinery, in
which the modern world had come to put so much faith, is only another
delusion of a mechanical age. The burden of history is for him always
the need of the Able Man. "I say, Find me the true _Koenning_, King,
Able Man, and he _has_ a divine right over me." Carlyle thus throws
down the gauntlet at once to the scientific and to the democratic
movements of his time. His pronounced antagonism to the modern spirit
in these two most important manifestations must be kept steadily in
mind in our study of him.

Finally, we have to remember that in the whole tone and temper of his
teaching Carlyle is fundamentally the Puritan. The dogmas of
Puritanism he had indeed outgrown; but he never outgrew its ethics.
His thought was dominated and pervaded to the end, as Froude rightly
says, by the spirit of the creed he had dismissed. By reference to
this one fact we may account for much of his strength, and also for
most of his limitations in outlook and sympathy. Those limitations the
reader will not fail to notice for himself. But whatever allowance has
to be made for them, the strength remains. It is, perhaps, the secret
of Carlyle's imperishable greatness as a stimulating and uplifting
power that, beyond any other modern writer, he makes us feel with him
the supreme claims of the moral life, the meaning of our own
responsibilities, the essential spirituality of things, the
indestructible reality of religion. If he had thus a special message
for his own generation, that message has surely not lost any of its
value for ours. "Put Carlyle in your pocket," says Dr. Hal to Paul
Kelver on his starting out in life. "He is not all the voices, but he
is the best maker of men I know." And as a maker of men, Carlyle's
appeal to us is as great as ever.

WILLIAM HENRY HUDSON.


    _Life of Schiller_ (_Lond. Mag._, 1823-4), 1825, 1845.
    (Supplement published in the People's Edition, 1873). _Wilhelm
    Meister Apprenticeship_, 1824. _Elements of Geometry and
    Trigonometry_ (from the French of Legendre), 1824. _German
    Romance_, 1827. _Sartor Resartus_ (_Fraser's Mag._, 1833-4),
    1835 (Boston), 1838. _French Revolution_, 1837, 1839.
    _Critical and Miscellaneous Essays_, 1839, 1840, 1847, 1857.
    (In these were reprinted Articles from _Edinburgh Review_,
    _Foreign Review_, _Foreign Quarterly Review_, _Fraser's
    Magazine_, _Westminster Review_, _New Monthly Magazine_,
    _London and Westminster Review_, _Keepsake Proceedings of the
    Society of Antiquaries of Scotland_, _Times_). _Chartism_,
    1840. _Heroes, Hero-worship, and the Heroic in History_, 1841.
    _Past and Present_, 1843. _Oliver Cromwell's Letters and
    Speeches: with Elucidations_, 1845. _Thirty-five Unpublished
    Letters of Oliver Cromwell_, 1847 (Fraser). _Original
    Discourses on the Negro Question_ (Fraser, 1849), 1853.
    _Latter-day Pamphlets_, 1850. _Life of John Sterling_, 1851.
    _History of Friedrich II. of Prussia_, 1858-65. _Inaugural
    Address at Edinburgh_, 1866. _Shooting Niagara: and After?_
    1867 (from "Macmillan"). _The Early Kings of Norway; also an
    Essay on the Portraits of John Knox_, 1875.

    There were also contributions to Brewster's _Edinburgh
    Encyclopaedia_, vols. xiv., xv., and xvi.; to _New Edinburgh
    Review_, 1821, 1822; _Fraser's Magazine_, 1830, 1831; _The
    Times_, 19 June, 1844 ("Mazzini"); 28 November, 1876; 5 May,
    1877; _Examiner_, 1848; _Spectator_, 1848.

    First Collected Edition of Works, 1857-58 (16 vols.).

    _Reminiscences_, ed. by Froude in 1881, but superseded by C.
    E. Norton's edition of 1887. Norton has also edited two
    volumes of _Letters_ (1888), and Carlyle's correspondence with
    Emerson (1883) and with Goethe (1887). Other volumes of
    correspondence are _New Letters_ (1904), _Carlyle Intime_
    (1907), _Love Letters_ (1909), _Letters to Mill, Sterling, and
    Browning_ (1923), all ed. by Alexander Carlyle. See also _Last
    Words of Carlyle_, 1892.

    The fullest _Life_ is that by D. A. Wilson. The first of six
    volumes appeared in 1923, and by 1934 only one remained to be
    published.




CONTENTS


SARTOR RESARTUS


BOOK I

  CHAP.                                                     PAGE
     I. PRELIMINARY                                            1
    II. EDITORIAL DIFFICULTIES                                 5
   III. REMINISCENCES                                          9
    IV. CHARACTERISTICS                                       20
     V. THE WORLD IN CLOTHES                                  25
    VI. APRONS                                                31
   VII. MISCELLANEOUS-HISTORICAL                              34
  VIII. THE WORLD OUT OF CLOTHES                              37
    IX. ADAMITISM                                             43
     X. PURE REASON                                           47
    XI. PROSPECTIVE                                           52

BOOK II

     I. GENESIS                                               61
    II. IDYLLIC                                               68
   III. PEDAGOGY                                              76
    IV. GETTING UNDER WAY                                     90
     V. ROMANCE                                              101
    VI. SORROWS OF TEUFELSDROeCKH                             112
   VII. THE EVERLASTING NO                                   121
  VIII. CENTRE OF INDIFFERENCE                               128
    IX. THE EVERLASTING YEA                                  138
     X. PAUSE                                                149

BOOK III

     I. INCIDENT IN MODERN HISTORY                           156
    II. CHURCH-CLOTHES                                       161
   III. SYMBOLS                                              163
    IV. HELOTAGE                                             170
     V. THE PHOENIX                                          174
    VI. OLD CLOTHES                                          179
   VII. ORGANIC FILAMENTS                                    183
  VIII. NATURAL SUPERNATURALISM                              191
    IX. CIRCUMSPECTIVE                                       201
     X. THE DANDIACAL BODY                                   204
    XI. TAILORS                                              216
   XII. FAREWELL                                             219

APPENDIX--TESTIMONIES OF AUTHORS                             225

SUMMARY                                                      231


ON HEROES, HERO-WORSHIP, AND THE HEROIC IN HISTORY

LECTURE I
THE HERO AS DIVINITY. Odin. Paganism: Scandinavian
Mythology                                                    239

LECTURE II
THE HERO AS PROPHET. Mahomet: Islam                          277

LECTURE III
THE HERO AS POET. Dante; Shakspeare                          311

LECTURE IV
THE HERO AS PRIEST. Luther; Reformation: Knox; Puritanism    346

LECTURE V
THE HERO AS MAN OF LETTERS. Johnson, Rousseau, Burns         383

LECTURE VI
THE HERO AS KING. Cromwell, Napoleon: Modern Revolutionism   422


INDEX                                                        469




SARTOR RESARTUS




BOOK FIRST




CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY


Considering our present advanced state of culture, and how the Torch
of Science has now been brandished and borne about, with more or less
effect, for five-thousand years and upwards; how, in these times
especially, not only the Torch still burns, and perhaps more fiercely
than ever, but innumerable Rush-lights, and Sulphur-matches, kindled
thereat, are also glancing in every direction, so that not the smallest
cranny or doghole in Nature or Art can remain unilluminated,--it might
strike the reflective mind with some surprise that hitherto little or
nothing of a fundamental character, whether in the way of Philosophy
or History, has been written on the subject of Clothes.

Our Theory of Gravitation is as good as perfect: Lagrange, it is well
known, has proved that the Planetary System, on this scheme, will
endure forever; Laplace, still more cunningly, even guesses that it
could not have been made on any other scheme. Whereby, at least, our
nautical Logbooks can be better kept; and water-transport of all kinds
has grown more commodious. Of Geology and Geognosy we know enough:
what with the labours of our Werners and Huttons, what with the ardent
genius of their disciples, it has come about that now, to many a Royal
Society, the Creation of a World is little more mysterious than the
cooking of a dumpling; concerning which last, indeed, there have been
minds to whom the question, _How the apples were got in_, presented
difficulties. Why mention our disquisitions on the Social Contract, on
the Standard of Taste, on the Migrations of the Herring? Then, have we
not a Doctrine of Rent, a Theory of Value; Philosophies of Language,
of History, of Pottery, of Apparitions, of Intoxicating Liquors? Man's
whole life and environment have been laid open and elucidated;
scarcely a fragment or fibre of his Soul, Body, and Possessions, but
has been probed, dissected, distilled, desiccated, and scientifically
decomposed: our spiritual Faculties, of which it appears there are not
a few, have their Stewarts, Cousins, Royer Collards: every cellular,
vascular, muscular Tissue glories in its Lawrences, Majendies,
Bichats.

How, then, comes it, may the reflective mind repeat, that the grand
Tissue of all Tissues, the only real Tissue, should have been quite
overlooked by Science,--the vestural Tissue, namely, of woollen or
other cloth; which Man's Soul wears as its outmost wrappage and
overall; wherein his whole other Tissues are included and screened,
his whole Faculties work, his whole Self lives, moves, and has its
being? For if, now and then, some straggling, broken-winged thinker
has cast an owl's-glance into this obscure region, the most have
soared over it altogether heedless; regarding Clothes as a property,
not an accident, as quite natural and spontaneous, like the leaves of
trees, like the plumage of birds. In all speculations they have
tacitly figured man as a _Clothed Animal_; whereas he is by nature a
_Naked Animal_; and only in certain circumstances, by purpose and
device, masks himself in Clothes. Shakespeare says, we are creatures
that look before and after: the more surprising that we do not look
round a little, and see what is passing under our very eyes.

But here, as in so many other cases, Germany, learned, indefatigable,
deep-thinking Germany comes to our aid. It is, after all, a blessing
that, in these revolutionary times, there should be one country where
abstract Thought can still take shelter; that while the din and frenzy
of Catholic Emancipations, and Rotten Boroughs, and Revolts of Paris,
deafen every French and every English ear, the German can stand
peaceful on his scientific watch-tower; and, to the raging, struggling
multitude here and elsewhere, solemnly, from hour to hour, with
preparatory blast of cowhorn, emit his _Hoeret ihr Herren und lasset's
Euch sagen_; in other words, tell the Universe, which so often forgets
that fact, what o'clock it really is. Not unfrequently the Germans
have been blamed for an unprofitable diligence; as if they struck into
devious courses, where nothing was to be had but the toil of a rough
journey; as if, forsaking the gold-mines of finance and that political
slaughter of fat oxen whereby a man himself grows fat, they were apt
to run goose-hunting into regions of bilberries and crowberries, and
be swallowed up at last in remote peat-bogs. Of that unwise science,
which, as our Humorist expresses it,--

                'By geometric scale
  Doth take the size of pots of ale;'

still more, of that altogether misdirected industry, which is seen
vigorously thrashing mere straw, there can nothing defensive be said.
In so far as the Germans are chargeable with such, let them take the
consequence. Nevertheless, be it remarked, that even a Russian steppe
has tumuli and gold ornaments; also many a scene that looks desert and
rock-bound from the distance, will unfold itself, when visited, into
rare valleys. Nay, in any case, would Criticism erect not only
finger-posts and turnpikes, but spiked gates and impassable barriers,
for the mind of man? It is written, 'Many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased.' Surely the plain rule is, Let each
considerate person have his way, and see what it will lead to. For not
this man and that man, but all men make up mankind, and their united
tasks the task of mankind. How often have we seen some such
adventurous, and perhaps much-censured wanderer light on some
out-lying, neglected, yet vitally-momentous province; the hidden
treasures of which he first discovered, and kept proclaiming till the
general eye and effort were directed thither, and the conquest was
completed;--thereby, in these his seemingly so aimless rambles,
planting new standards, founding new habitable colonies, in the
immeasurable circumambient realm of Nothingness and Night! Wise man
was he who counselled that Speculation should have free course, and
look fearlessly towards all the thirty-two points of the compass,
whithersoever and howsoever it listed.

Perhaps it is proof of the stunted condition in which pure Science,
especially pure moral Science, languishes among us English; and how
our mercantile greatness, and invaluable Constitution, impressing a
political or other immediately practical tendency on all English
culture and endeavour, cramps the free flight of Thought,--that this,
not Philosophy of Clothes, but recognition even that we have no such
Philosophy, stands here for the first time published in our language.
What English intellect could have chosen such a topic, or by chance
stumbled on it? But for that same unshackled, and even sequestered
condition of the German Learned, which permits and induces them to
fish in all manner of waters, with all manner of nets, it seems
probable enough, this abstruse Inquiry might, in spite of the results
it leads to, have continued dormant for indefinite periods. The Editor
of these sheets, though otherwise boasting himself a man of confirmed
speculative habits, and perhaps discursive enough, is free to confess,
that never, till these last months, did the above very plain
considerations, on our total want of a Philosophy of Clothes, occur to
him; and then, by quite foreign suggestion. By the arrival, namely, of
a new Book from Professor Teufelsdroeckh of Weissnichtwo; treating
expressly of this subject, and in a style which, whether understood or
not, could not even by the blindest be overlooked. In the present
Editor's way of thought, this remarkable Treatise, with its Doctrines,
whether as judicially acceded to, or judicially denied, has not
remained without effect.

'_Die Kleider, ihr Werden und Wirken_ (Clothes, their Origin and
Influence): _von Diog. Teufelsdroeckh, J.U.D. etc._ _Stillschweigen und
Co^{gnie}._ _Weissnichtwo_, 1831.

'Here,' says the _Weissnichtwo'sche Anzeiger_, 'comes a Volume of that
extensive, close-printed, close-meditated sort, which, be it spoken
with pride, is seen only in Germany, perhaps only in Weissnichtwo.
Issuing from the hitherto irreproachable Firm of Stillschweigen and
Company, with every external furtherance, it is of such internal
quality as to set Neglect at defiance.' * * * * 'A work,' concludes
the wellnigh enthusiastic Reviewer, 'interesting alike to the
antiquary, the historian, and the philosophic thinker; a masterpiece
of boldness, lynx-eyed acuteness, and rugged independent Germanism and
Philanthropy (_derber Kerndeutschheit und Menschenliebe_); which will
not, assuredly, pass current without opposition in high places; but
must and will exalt the almost new name of Teufelsdroeckh to the first
ranks of Philosophy, in our German Temple of Honour.'

Mindful of old friendship, the distinguished Professor, in this the
first blaze of his fame, which however does not dazzle him, sends
hither a Presentation-copy of his Book; with compliments and encomiums
which modesty forbids the present Editor to rehearse; yet without
indicated wish or hope of any kind, except what may be implied in the
concluding phrase: _Moechte es_ (this remarkable Treatise) _auch im
Brittischen Boden gedeihen_!




