BOOK I

CHAP. I. _Preliminary_

    No Philosophy of Clothes yet, notwithstanding all our Science.
    Strangely forgotten that Man is by nature a _naked_ animal.
    The English mind all-too practically absorbed for any such
    inquiry. Not so, deep-thinking Germany. Advantage of
    Speculation having free course. Editor receives from Professor
    Teufelsdroeckh his new Work on Clothes (p. 1).

CHAP. II. _Editorial Difficulties_

    How to make known Teufelsdroeckh and his Book to English
    readers; especially _such_ a book? Editor receives from the
    Hofrath Heuschrecke a letter promising Biographic Documents.
    Negotiations with Oliver Yorke. _Sartor Resartus_ conceived.
    Editor's assurances and advice to his British reader (p. 5).

CHAP. III. _Reminiscences_

    Teufelsdroeckh at Weissnichtwo. Professor of Things in General
    at the University there: Outward aspect and character;
    memorable coffee-house utterances; domicile and watch-tower:
    Sights thence of City-life by day and by night; with
    reflections thereon. Old 'Liza and her ways. Character of
    Hofrath Heuschrecke, and his relation to Teufelsdroeckh (p. 9).

CHAP. IV. _Characteristics_

    Teufelsdroeckh and his Work on Clothes: Strange freedom of
    speech: transcendentalism; force of insight and expression;
    multifarious learning: Style poetic, uncouth:
    Comprehensiveness of his humour and moral feeling. How the
    Editor once saw him laugh. Different kinds of Laughter and
    their significance (p. 20).

CHAP. V. _The World in Clothes_

    Futile cause-and-effect Philosophies. Teufelsdroeckh's Orbis
    Vestitus. Clothes first invented for the sake of Ornament.
    Picture of our progenitor, the Aboriginal Savage. Wonders of
    growth and progress in mankind's history. Man defined as a
    Tool-using Animal (p. 25).

CHAP. VI. _Aprons_

    Divers Aprons in the world with divers uses. The Military and
    Police Establishment Society's working Apron. The Episcopal
    Apron with its corner tucked in. The Laystall. Journalists now
    our only Kings and Clergy (p. 31).

CHAP. VII. _Miscellaneous-Historical_

    How Men and Fashions come and go. German Costume in the
    fifteenth century. By what strange chances do we live in
    History! The costume of Bolivar's Cavalry (p. 34).

CHAP. VIII. _The World out of Clothes_

    Teufelsdroeckh's Theorem, "Society founded upon Cloth"; his
    Method, Intuition quickened by Experience.--The mysterious
    question, Who am I? Philosophic systems, all at fault: A
    deeper meditation has always taught, here and there an
    individual, that all visible things are appearances only; but
    also emblems and revelations of God. Teufelsdroeckh first
    comes upon the question of Clothes: Baseness to which Clothing
    may bring us (p. 37).

CHAP. IX. _Adamatism_

    The universal utility of Clothes, and their higher mystic
    virtue, illustrated. Conception of Mankind stripped naked; and
    immediate consequent dissolution of civilised Society (p. 43).

CHAP. X. _Pure Reason_

    A Naked World possible, nay actually exists, under the clothed
    one. Man, in the eye of Pure Reason, a visible God's Presence.
    The beginning of all wisdom, to look fixedly on Clothes till
    they become transparent. Wonder, the basis of Worship:
    Perennial in man. Modern Sciolists who cannot wonder:
    Teufelsdroeckh's contempt for, and advice to them (p. 47).

CHAP. XI. _Prospective_

    Nature not an Aggregate, but a Whole. All visible things are
    emblems, Clothes; and exist for a time only. The grand scope
    of the Philosophy of Clothes.--Biographic Documents arrive.
    Letter from Heuschrecke on the importance of Biography.
    Heterogeneous character of the documents: Editor sorely
    perplexed; but desperately grapples with his work (p. 52).


BOOK II

CHAP. I. _Genesis_

    Old Andreas Futteral and Gretchen his wife: their quiet home.
    Advent of a mysterious stranger, who deposits with them a
    young infant, the future Herr Diogenes Teufelsdroeckh.
    After-yearnings of the youth for his unknown Father. Sovereign
    power of Names and Naming. Diogenes a flourishing Infant (p.
    61).

CHAP. II. _Idyllic_

    Happy Childhood! Entepfuhl: Sights, hearings and experiences
    of the boy Teufelsdroeckh; their manifold teaching. Education;
    what it can do, what cannot. Obedience our universal duty and
    destiny. Gneschen sees the good Gretchen pray (p. 68).

CHAP. III. _Pedagogy_

    Teufelsdroeckh's School. His Education. How the ever-flowing
    Kuhbach speaks of Time and Eternity. The Hinterschlag
    Gymnasium; rude Boys; and pedant Professors. The need of true
    Teachers, and their due recognition. Father Andreas dies: and
    Teufelsdroeckh learns the secret of his birth: His reflections
    thereon. The Nameless University. Statistics of Imposture much
    wanted. Bitter fruits of Rationalism: Teufelsdroeckh's
    religious difficulties. The young Englishman Herr Towgood.
    Modern Friendship (p. 76).

CHAP. IV. _Getting under Way_

    The grand thaumaturgic Art of Thought. Difficulty in fitting
    Capability to Opportunity, or of getting underway. The
    advantage of Hunger and Bread-Studies. Teufelsdroeckh has to
    enact the stern mono-drama of _No object and no rest_.
    Sufferings as Auscultator. Given up as a man of genius,
    Zaehdarm House. Intolerable presumption of young men. Irony
    and its consequences. Teufelsdroeckh's Epitaph on Count
    Zaehdarm (p. 90).

CHAP. V. _Romance_

    Teufelsdroeckh gives up his Profession. The heavenly mystery
    of Love. Teufelsdroeckh's feeling of worship towards women.
    First and only love. Blumine. Happy hearts and free tongues.
    The infinite nature of Fantasy. Love's joyful progress; sudden
    dissolution; and final catastrophe (p. 101).

CHAP. VI. _Sorrows of Teufelsdroeckh_

    Teufelsdroeckh's demeanour thereupon. Turns pilgrim. A last
    wistful look on native Entepfuhl: Sunset amongst primitive
    Mountains. Basilisk-glance of the Barouche-and-four. Thoughts
    on View-hunting. Wanderings and Sorrowings (p. 112).

CHAP. VII. _The Everlasting No_

    Loss of Hope, and of Belief. Profit-and-Loss Philosophy,
    Teufelsdroeckh in his darkness and despair still clings to
    Truth and follows Duty. Inexpressible pains and fears of
    Unbelief. Fever-crisis: Protest against the Everlasting No:
    Baphometic Fire-baptism (p. 121).

CHAP. VIII. _Centre of Indifference_

    Teufelsdroeckh turns now outwardly to the _Not-me_; and finds
    wholesomer food. Ancient Cities: Mystery of their origin and
    growth: Invisible inheritances and possessions. Power and
    virtue of a true Book. Wagram Battlefield: War. Great Scenes
    beheld by the Pilgrim: Great Events, and Great Men. Napoleon,
    a divine missionary, preaching _La carriere ouverte aux
    talens_. Teufelsdroeckh at the North Cape: Modern means of
    self-defence. Gunpowder and duelling. The Pilgrim, despising
    his miseries, reaches the Centre of Indifference (p. 128).

CHAP. IX. _The Everlasting Yea_

    Temptations in the Wilderness: Victory over the Tempter.
    Annihilation of Self. Belief in God, and love to Man. The
    origin of Evil, a problem ever requiring to be solved anew:
    Teufelsdroeckh's solution. Love of Happiness a vain whim: A
    Higher in man than Love of Happiness. The Everlasting Yea.
    Worship of Sorrow. Voltaire: his task now finished. Conviction
    worthless, impossible, without Conduct. The true Ideal, the
    Actual: Up and work! (p. 138).

CHAP. X. _Pause_

    Conversion; a spiritual attainment peculiar to the modern Era.
    Teufelsdroeckh accepts Authorship as his divine calling. The
    scope of the command _Thou shalt not steal_.--Editor begins to
    suspect the authenticity of the Biographical documents; and
    abandons them for the great Clothes volume. Result of the
    preceding ten Chapters: Insight into the character of
    Teufelsdroeckh: His fundamental beliefs, and how he was forced
    to seek and find them (p. 149).


