PART II

CRITIQUE OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT


§ 61. _Of the objective purposiveness of Nature_

We have on transcendental principles good ground to assume a subjective
purposiveness in nature, in its particular laws, in reference to its
comprehensibility by human Judgement and to the possibility of the
connexion of particular experiences in a system. This may be expected
as possible in many products of nature, which, as if they were devised
quite specially for our Judgement, contain a specific form conformable
thereto; which through their manifoldness and unity serve at once to
strengthen and to sustain the mental powers (that come into play in the
employment of this faculty); and to which therefore we give the name of
_beautiful_ forms.

But that the things of nature serve one another as means to purposes,
and that their possibility is only completely intelligible through
this kind of causality--for this we have absolutely no ground in the
universal Idea of nature, as the complex of the objects of sense. In
the above-mentioned case, the representation of things, because it
is something in ourselves, can be quite well thought _a priori_ as
suitable and useful for the internally purposive determination of our
cognitive faculties; but that purposes, which neither are our own
nor belong to nature (for we do not regard nature as an intelligent
being), could or should constitute a particular kind of causality, at
least a quite special conformity to law,--this we have absolutely no
_a priori_ reason for presuming. Yet more, experience itself cannot
prove to us the actuality of this; there must then have preceded a
rationalising subtlety which only sportively introduces the concept of
purpose into the nature of things, but which does not derive it from
Objects or from their empirical cognition. To this latter it is of
more service to make nature comprehensible according to analogy with
the subjective ground of the connexion of our representations, than to
cognise it from objective grounds.

Further, objective purposiveness, as a principle of the possibility of
things of nature, is so far removed from _necessary_ connexion with
the concept of nature, that it is much oftener precisely that upon
which one relies to prove the contingency of nature and of its form.
When, _e.g._ we adduce the structure of a bird, the hollowness of its
bones, the disposition of its wings for motion and of its tail for
steering, _etc._, we say that all this is contingent in the highest
degree according to the mere _nexus effectivus_ of nature, without
calling in the aid of a particular kind of causality, namely that of
purpose (_nexus finalis_). In other words, nature, considered as mere
mechanism, could have produced its forms in a thousand other ways
without stumbling upon the unity which is in accordance with such a
principle. It is not in the concept of nature but quite apart from it
that we can hope to find the least ground _a priori_ for this.

Nevertheless the teleological act of judgement is rightly brought to
bear, at least problematically, upon the investigation of nature;
but only in order to bring it under principles of observation and
inquiry according to the _analogy_ with the causality of purpose,
without any pretence to _explain_ it thereby. It belongs therefore to
the reflective and not to the determinant judgement. The concept of
combinations and forms of nature in accordance with purposes is then
at least _one principle more_ for bringing its phenomena under rules
where the laws of simply mechanical causality do not suffice. For we
bring in a teleological ground, where we attribute causality in respect
of an Object to the concept of an Object, as if it were to be found in
nature (not in ourselves); or rather when we represent to ourselves the
possibility of the Object after the analogy of that causality which
we experience in ourselves, and consequently think nature technically
as through a special faculty. If we did not ascribe to it such a
method of action, its causality would have to be represented as blind
mechanism. If, on the contrary, we supply to nature causes acting
_designedly_, and consequently place at its basis teleology, not merely
as a _regulative_ principle for the mere _judging_ of phenomena, to
which nature can be thought as subject in its particular laws, but as a
_constitutive_ principle of the _derivation_ of its products from their
causes; then would the concept of a natural purpose no longer belong
to the reflective but to the determinant Judgement. Then, in fact, it
would not belong specially to the Judgement (like the concept of beauty
regarded as formal subjective purposiveness), but as a rational concept
it would introduce into natural science a new causality, which we only
borrow from ourselves and ascribe to other beings, without meaning to
assume them to be of the same kind with ourselves.




FIRST DIVISION

ANALYTIC OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT


§ 62. _Of the objective purposiveness which is merely formal as
distinguished from that which is material_

All geometrical figures drawn on a principle display a manifold,
oft admired, objective purposiveness; _i.e._ in reference to
their usefulness for the solution of several problems by a single
principle, or of the same problem in an infinite variety of ways. The
purposiveness is here obviously objective and intellectual, not merely
subjective and aesthetical. For it expresses the suitability of the
figure for the production of many intended figures, and is cognised
through Reason. But this purposiveness does not make the concept of the
object itself possible, _i.e._ it is not regarded as possible merely
with reference to this use.

In so simple a figure as the circle lies the key to the solution of a
multitude of problems, each of which would demand various appliances;
whereas the solution results of itself, as it were, as one of the
infinite number of elegant properties of this figure. Are we, for
example, asked to construct a triangle, being given the base and
vertical angle? The problem is indeterminate, _i.e._ it can be solved
in an infinite number of ways. But the circle embraces them altogether
as the geometrical locus of the vertices of triangles satisfying
the given conditions. Again, suppose that two lines are to cut one
another so that the rectangle under the segments of the one should be
equal to the rectangle under the segments of the other; the solution
of the problem from this point of view presents much difficulty. But
all chords intersecting inside a circle divide one another in this
_proportion_. Other curved lines suggest other purposive solutions
of which nothing was thought in the rule that furnished their
construction. All conic sections in themselves and when compared with
one another are fruitful in principles for the solution of a number of
possible problems, however simple is the definition which determines
their concept.--It is a true joy to see the zeal with which the old
geometers investigated the properties of lines of this class, without
allowing themselves to be led astray by the questions of narrow-minded
persons, as to what use this knowledge would be. Thus they worked out
the properties of the parabola without knowing the law of gravitation,
which would have suggested to them its application to the trajectory of
heavy bodies (for the motion of a heavy body can be seen to be parallel
to the curve of a parabola). Again, they found out the properties
of an ellipse without surmising that any of the heavenly bodies had
weight, and without knowing the law of force at different distances
from the point of attraction, which causes it to describe this curve
in free motion. While they thus unconsciously worked for the science
of the future, they delighted themselves with a purposiveness in
the [essential] being of things which yet they were able to present
completely _a priori_ in its necessity. _Plato_, himself master of
this science, hinted at such an original constitution of things in
the discovery of which we can dispense with all experience, and at
the power of the mind to produce from its supersensible principle the
harmony of beings (where the properties of number come in, with which
the mind plays in music). This [he touches upon] in the inspiration
that raised him above the concepts of experience to Ideas, which seem
to him to be explicable only through an intellectual affinity with the
origin of all beings. No wonder that he banished from his school the
man who was ignorant of geometry, since he thought he could derive
from pure intuition, which has its home in the human spirit, that
which _Anaxagoras_ drew from empirical objects and their purposive
combination. For in the very necessity of that which is purposive,
and is constituted just as if it were designedly intended for our
use,--but at the same time seems to belong originally to the being
of things without any reference to our use--lies the ground of our
great admiration of nature, and that not so much external as in our
own Reason. It is surely excusable that this admiration should through
misunderstanding gradually rise to the height of fanaticism.

But this intellectual purposiveness, although no doubt objective (not
subjective like aesthetical purposiveness), is in reference to its
possibility merely formal (not real). It can only be conceived as
purposiveness in general without any [definite] purpose being assumed
as its basis, and consequently without teleology being needed for it.
The figure of a circle is an intuition which is determined by means
of the Understanding according to a principle. The unity of this
principle which I arbitrarily assume and use as fundamental concept,
applied to a form of intuition (space) which is met with in myself as
a representation and yet _a priori_, renders intelligible the unity of
many rules resulting from the construction of that concept, which are
purposive for many possible designs. But this purposiveness does not
imply a _purpose_ or any other ground whatever. It is quite different
if I meet with order and regularity in complexes of _things_, external
to myself, enclosed within certain boundaries; as, _e.g._ in a garden,
the order and regularity of the trees, flower-beds, and walks. These
I cannot expect to derive _a priori_ from my bounding of space made
after a rule of my own; for this order and regularity are existing
things which must be given empirically in order to be known, and not
a mere representation in myself determined _a priori_ according to a
principle. So then the latter (empirical) purposiveness, as _real_, is
dependent on the concept of a purpose.

But the ground of admiration for a perceived purposiveness, although
it be in the being of things (so far as their concepts can be
constructed), may very well be seen, and seen to be legitimate.
The manifold rules whose unity (derived from a principle) excites
admiration, are all synthetical and do not follow from the _concept_
of the Object, _e.g._ of a circle; but require this Object to be
given in intuition. Hence this unity gets the appearance of having
empirically an external basis of rules distinct from our representative
faculty; as if therefore the correspondence of the Object to that
need of rules which is proper to the Understanding were contingent in
itself, and therefore only possible by means of a purpose expressly
directed thereto. Now because this harmony, notwithstanding all
this purposiveness, is not cognised empirically but _a priori_, it
should bring us of itself to this point--that space, through whose
determination (by means of the Imagination, in accordance with a
concept) the Object is alone possible, is not a characteristic of
things external to me, but a mere mode of representation in myself.
Hence, in the figure which I draw _in conformity with a concept_,
_i.e._ in my own mode of representing that which is given to me
externally, whatever it may be in itself, _it is I that introduce
the purposiveness_; I get no empirical instruction from the Object
about the purposiveness, and so I require in it no particular purpose
external to myself. But because this consideration already calls for
a critical employment of Reason, and consequently cannot be involved
in the judging of the Object according to its properties; so this
latter [judging] suggests to me immediately nothing but the unification
of heterogeneous rules (even according to their very diversity) in
a principle. This principle, without requiring any particular _a
priori_ basis external to my concept, or indeed, generally speaking,
to my representation, is yet cognised _a priori_ by me as true. Now
_wonder_ is a shock of the mind arising from the incompatibility of a
representation, and the rule given by its means, with the principles
already lying at its basis; which provokes a doubt as to whether
we have rightly seen or rightly judged. _Admiration_, however, is
wonder which ever recurs, despite the disappearance of this doubt.
Consequently the latter is a quite natural effect of that observed
purposiveness in the being of things (as phenomena). It cannot
indeed be censured, whilst the unification of the form of sensible
intuition (space)--with the faculty of concepts (the Understanding)--is
inexplicable to us; and that not only on account of the union being
just of the kind that it is, but because it is enlarging for the mind
to surmise [the existence of] something lying outside our sensible
representations in which, although unknown to us, the ultimate
ground of that agreement may be met with. We are, it is true, not
necessitated to cognise this if we have only to do _a priori_ with the
formal purposiveness of our representations; but the fact that we are
compelled to look out beyond it inspires at the same time an admiration
for the object that impels us thereto.

We are accustomed to speak of the above-mentioned properties of
geometrical figures or of numbers as _beautiful_, on account of a
certain _a priori_ purposiveness they have for all kinds of cognitive
uses, this purposiveness being quite unexpected on account of the
simplicity of the construction. We speak, _e.g._ of this or that
_beautiful_ property of the circle, which was discovered in this or
that way. But there is no aesthetical act of judgement through which we
find it purposive, no act of judgement without a concept which renders
noticeable a mere _subjective_ purposiveness in the free play of our
cognitive faculties; but an intellectual act according to concepts
which enables us clearly to cognise an objective purposiveness,
_i.e._ availableness for all kinds of (infinitely manifold) purposes.
We must rather call this _relative perfection_ than a beauty of the
mathematical figure. To speak thus of an _intellectual beauty_ cannot
in general be permissible; for otherwise the word beauty would lose
all determinate significance, or the intellectual satisfaction all
superiority over the sensible. We should rather call a _demonstration_
of such properties beautiful, because through it the Understanding
as the faculty of concepts, and the Imagination as the faculty of
presenting them, feel themselves strengthened _a priori_. (This, when
viewed in connexion with the precision introduced by Reason, is spoken
of as elegant.) Here, however, the satisfaction, although it is based
on concepts, is subjective; while perfection brings with itself an
objective satisfaction.


§ 63. _Of the relative, as distinguished from the inner, purposiveness
of nature_

Experience leads our Judgement to the concept of an objective and
material purposiveness, _i.e._ to the concept of a purpose of nature,
only when[105] we have to judge of a relation of cause to effect which
we find ourselves able to apprehend as legitimate only by presupposing
the Idea of the effect of the causality of the cause as the fundamental
condition, in the cause, of the possibility of the effect. This can
take place in two ways. We may regard the effect directly as an art
product, or only as material for the art of other possible natural
beings; in other words, either as a purpose or as a means towards the
purposive employment of other causes. This latter purposiveness is
called utility (for man) or mere advantage (for other creatures), and
is merely relative; while the former is an inner purposiveness of the
natural being.

For example, rivers bring down with them all kinds of earth serviceable
for the growth of plants which sometimes is deposited inland, often
also at their mouths. The tide brings this mud to many coasts over
the land or deposits it on the shore; and so, more especially if men
give their aid so that the ebb shall not carry it back again, the
fruit-bearing land increases in area, and the vegetable kingdom gains
the place which formerly was the habitation of fish and shells. In
this way has nature itself brought about most of the extensions of the
land, and still continues to do so, although very slowly.--Now the
question is whether this is to be judged a purpose of nature, because
it contains utility for men. We cannot put it down to the account of
the vegetable kingdom, because just as much is subtracted from sea-life
as is added to land-life.

Or, to give an example of the advantageousness of certain natural
things as means for other creatures (if we suppose them to be means),
no soil is more suitable to pine trees than a sandy soil. Now the deep
sea, before it withdrew from the land, left behind large tracts of sand
in our northern regions, so that on this soil, so unfavourable for all
cultivation, widely extended pine forests were enabled to grow, for the
unreasoning destruction of which we frequently blame our ancestors.
We may ask if this original deposit of tracts of sand was a purpose
of nature for the benefit of the possible pine forests? So much is
clear, that if we regard this as a purpose of nature, we must also
regard the sand as a relative purpose, in reference to which the ocean
strand and its withdrawal were means: for in the series of the mutually
subordinated members of a purposive combination, every member must be
regarded as a purpose (though not as a final purpose), to which its
proximate cause is the means. So too if cattle, sheep, horses, etc.,
are to exist, there must be grass on the earth, but there must also
be saline plants in the desert if camels are to thrive; and again
these and other herbivorous animals must be met with in numbers if
there are to be wolves, tigers, and lions. Consequently the objective
purposiveness, which is based upon advantage, is not an objective
purposiveness of things in themselves; as if the sand could not be
conceived for itself as an effect of a cause, viz. the sea, without
attributing to the latter a purpose, and regarding the effect, namely,
the sand, as a work of art. It is a merely relative purposiveness
contingent upon the thing to which it is ascribed; and although in the
examples we have cited, the different kinds of grass are to be judged
as in themselves organised products of nature, and consequently as
artificial, yet are they to be regarded, in reference to the beasts
which feed upon them, as mere raw material.

But above all, though man, through the freedom of his causality, finds
certain natural things of advantage for his designs--designs often
foolish, such as using the variegated plumage of birds to adorn his
clothes, or coloured earths and the juices of plants for painting his
face; often again reasonable as when the horse is used for riding, the
ox or (as in Minorca) the ass or pig for ploughing--yet we cannot even
here assume a relative natural purpose. For his Reason knows how to
give things a conformity with his own arbitrary fancies for which he
was not at all predestined by nature. Only, _if_ we assume that men are
to live upon the earth, then the means must be there without which they
could not exist as animals, and even as rational animals (in however
low a degree of rationality); and thereupon those natural things,
which are indispensable in this regard, must be considered as natural
purposes.

We can hence easily see that external purposiveness (advantage of one
thing in respect of others) can be regarded as an external natural
purpose only under the condition, that the existence of that [being],
to which it is immediately or distantly advantageous, is in itself a
purpose of nature. Since that can never be completely determined by
mere contemplation of nature, it follows that relative purposiveness,
although it hypothetically gives indications of natural purposes, yet
justifies no absolute teleological judgement.

Snow in cold countries protects the crops from the frost; it makes
human intercourse easier (by means of sleighs). The Laplander finds in
his country animals by whose aid this intercourse is brought about,
_i.e._ reindeer, who find sufficient sustenance in a dry moss which
they have to scratch out for themselves from under the snow, and who
are easily tamed and readily permit themselves to be deprived of that
freedom in which they could have remained if they chose. For other
people in the same frozen regions marine animals afford rich stores;
in addition to the food and clothing which are thus supplied, and the
wood which is floated in by the sea to their dwellings, these marine
animals provide material for fuel by which their huts are warmed. Here
is a wonderful concurrence of many references of nature to one purpose;
and all this applies to the cases of the Greenlander, the Lapp, the
Samoyede, the inhabitant of Yakutsk, etc. But then we do not see why,
generally, men must live there at all. Therefore to say that vapour
falls out of the atmosphere in the form of snow, that the sea has its
currents which float down wood that has grown in warmer lands, and that
there are in it great sea monsters filled with oil, _because_ the idea
of advantage for certain poor creatures is fundamental for the cause
which collects all these natural products, would be a very venturesome
and arbitrary judgement. For even if there were none of this natural
utility, we should miss nothing as regards the adequateness of natural
causes to nature’s constitution; much more even to desire such a
tendency in, and to attribute such a purpose to, nature would be the
part of a presumptuous and inconsiderate fancy. For indeed it might be
observed that it could only have been the greatest unsociability among
men which thus scattered them into such inhospitable regions.


§ 64. _Of the peculiar character of things as natural purposes_

In order to see that a thing is only possible as a purpose, that is,
to be forced to seek the causality of its origin not in the mechanism
of nature but in a cause whose faculty of action is determined through
concepts, it is requisite that its form be not possible according to
mere natural laws, _i.e._ laws which can be cognised by us through the
Understanding alone when applied to objects of Sense; but that even the
empirical knowledge of it as regards its cause and effect presupposes
concepts of Reason. This _contingency_ of its form in all empirical
natural laws in reference to Reason affords a ground for regarding its
causality as possible only through Reason. For Reason, which must
cognise the necessity of every form of a natural product in order to
comprehend even the conditions of its genesis, cannot assume such
[natural] necessity in that particular given form. The causality of its
origin is then referred to the faculty of acting in accordance with
purposes (a will); and the Object which can only thus be represented as
possible is represented as a purpose.

If in a seemingly uninhabited country a man perceived a geometrical
figure, say a regular hexagon, inscribed on the sand, his reflection
busied with such a concept would attribute, although obscurely, the
unity in the principle of its genesis to Reason, and consequently would
not regard as a ground of the possibility of such a shape the sand, or
the neighbouring sea, or the winds, or beasts with familiar footprints,
or any other irrational cause. For the chance against meeting with
such a concept, which is only possible through Reason, would seem so
infinitely great, that it would be just as if there were no natural
law, no cause in the mere mechanical working of nature capable of
producing it; but as if only the concept of such an Object, as a
concept which Reason alone can supply and with which it can compare the
thing, could contain the causality for such an effect. This then would
be regarded as a purpose, but as a product of _art_, not as a natural
purpose (_vestigium hominis video_).[106]

But in order to regard a thing cognised as a natural product as a
purpose also--consequently as a _natural purpose_, if this is not a
contradiction--something more is required. I would say provisionally:
a thing exists as a natural purpose, if it is [although in a double
sense][107] both _cause and effect of itself_. For herein lies a
causality the like of which cannot be combined with the mere concept
of a nature without attributing to it a purpose; it can certainly be
thought without contradiction, but cannot be comprehended. We shall
elucidate the determination of this Idea of a natural purpose by an
example, before we analyse it completely.

In the first place, a tree generates another tree according to a
known natural law. But the tree produced is of the same genus; and so
it produces itself _generically_. On the one hand, as effect it is
continually self-produced; on the other hand, as cause it continually
produces itself, and so perpetuates itself generically.

Secondly, a tree produces itself as an _individual_. This kind of
effect no doubt we call growth; but it is quite different from any
increase according to mechanical laws, and is to be reckoned as
generation, though under another name. The matter that the tree
incorporates it previously works up into a specifically peculiar
quality, which natural mechanism external to it cannot supply; and
thus it develops itself by aid of a material which, as compounded,
is its own product. No doubt, as regards the constituents got from
nature without, it must only be regarded as an educt; but yet in
the separation and recombination of this raw material we see such
an originality in the separating and formative faculty of this kind
of natural being, as is infinitely beyond the reach of art, if the
attempt is made to reconstruct such vegetable products out of elements
obtained by their dissection or material supplied by nature for their
sustenance.

_Thirdly_, each part of a tree generates itself in such a way that the
maintenance of any one part depends reciprocally on the maintenance of
the rest. A bud of one tree engrafted on the twig of another produces
in the alien stock a plant of its own kind, and so also a scion
engrafted on a foreign stem. Hence we may regard each twig or leaf of
the same tree as merely engrafted or inoculated into it, and so as an
independent tree attached to another and parasitically nourished by
it. At the same time, while the leaves are products of the tree they
also in turn give support to it; for the repeated defoliation of a tree
kills it, and its growth thus depends on the action of the leaves upon
the stem. The self-help of nature in case of injury in the vegetable
creation, when the want of a part that is necessary for the maintenance
of its neighbours is supplied by the remaining parts; and the abortions
or malformations in growth, in which certain parts, on account of
casual defects or hindrances, form themselves in a new way to maintain
what exists, and so produce an anomalous creature, I shall only mention
in passing, though they are among the most wonderful properties of
organised creatures.


§ 65. _Things regarded as natural purposes are organised beings_

According to the character alleged in the preceding section, a thing,
which, though a natural product, is to be cognised as only possible as
a natural purpose, must bear itself alternately as cause and as effect.
This, however, is a somewhat inexact and indeterminate expression
which needs derivation from a determinate concept.

Causal combination as thought merely by the Understanding is a
connexion constituting an ever-progressive series (of causes and
effects); and things which as effects presuppose others as causes
cannot be reciprocally at the same time causes of these. This sort
of causal combination we call that of effective causes (_nexus
effectivus_). But on the other hand, a causal combination according to
a concept of Reason (of purposes) can also be thought, which regarded
as a series would lead either forwards or backwards; in this the thing
that has been called the effect may with equal propriety be termed the
cause of that of which it is the effect. In the practical department of
human art we easily find connexions such as this; _e.g._ a house, no
doubt, is the cause of the money received for rent, but also conversely
the representation of this possible income was the cause of building
the house. Such a causal connexion we call that of final causes (_nexus
finalis_). We may perhaps suitably name the first the connexion of
real causes, the second of those which are ideal; because from this
nomenclature it is at once comprehended that there can be no more than
these two kinds of causality.

For a thing to be a natural purpose in the _first_ place it is
requisite that its parts (as regards their being and their form) are
only possible through their reference to the whole. For the thing
itself is a purpose and so is comprehended under a concept or an Idea
which must determine _a priori_ all that is to be contained in it.
But so far as a thing is only thought as possible in this way, it is
a mere work of art; _i.e._ a product of one rational cause distinct
from the matter (of the parts), whose causality (in the collection and
combination of the parts) is determined through its Idea of a whole
possible by their means (and consequently not through external nature).

But if a thing as a natural product is to involve in itself and in its
internal possibility a reference to purposes,--_i.e._ to be possible
only as a natural purpose, and without the causality of the concepts of
rational beings external to itself,--then it is requisite _secondly_
that its parts should so combine in the unity of a whole that they are
reciprocally cause and effect of each other’s form. Only in this way
can the Idea of the whole conversely (reciprocally) determine the form
and combination of all the parts; not indeed as cause--for then it
would be an artificial product--but as the ground of cognition, for him
who is judging it, of the systematic unity and combination of all the
manifold contained in the given material.

For a body then which is to be judged in itself and its internal
possibility as a natural purpose, it is requisite that its parts
mutually depend upon each other both as to their form and their
combination, and so produce a whole by their own causality; while
conversely the concept of the whole may be regarded as its cause
according to a principle (in a being possessing a causality according
to concepts adequate to such a product). In this case then the
connexion of _effective causes_ may be judged as an _effect through
final causes_.

In such a product of nature every part not only exists _by means
of_ the other parts, but is thought as existing _for the sake of_
the others and the whole, that is as an (organic) instrument. Thus,
however, it might be an artificial instrument, and so might be
represented only as a purpose that is possible in general; but also
its parts are all organs reciprocally _producing_ each other. This can
never be the case with artificial instruments, but only with nature
which supplies all the material for instruments (even for those of
art). Only a product of such a kind can be called a _natural purpose_,
and this because it is an _organised_ and _self-organising being_.

In a watch one part is the instrument for moving the other parts, but
the wheel is not the effective cause of the production of the others;
no doubt one part is for the sake of the others, but it does not exist
by their means. In this case the producing cause of the parts and of
their form is not contained in the nature (of the material), but is
external to it in a being which can produce effects according to Ideas
of a whole possible by means of its causality. Hence a watch wheel
does not produce other wheels, still less does one watch produce other
watches, utilising (organising) foreign material for that purpose;
hence it does not replace of itself parts of which it has been
deprived, nor does it make good what is lacking in a first formation by
the addition of the missing parts, nor if it has gone out of order does
it repair itself--all of which, on the contrary, we may expect from
organised nature.--An organised being is then not a mere machine, for
that has merely _moving_ power, but it possesses in itself _formative_
power of a self-propagating kind which it communicates to its materials
though they have it not of themselves; it organises them, in fact, and
this cannot be explained by the mere mechanical faculty of motion.

We say of nature and its faculty in organised products far too little
if we describe it as an _analogon of art_; for this suggests an
artificer (a rational being) external to it. Much rather does it
organise itself and its organised products in every species, no doubt
after one general pattern but yet with suitable deviations, which
self-preservation demands according to circumstances. We perhaps
approach nearer to this inscrutable property, if we describe it as
an _analogon of life_; but then we must either endow matter, as mere
matter, with a property which contradicts its very being (hylozoism),
or associate therewith an alien principle _standing in communion_ with
it (a soul). But in the latter case we must, if such a product is to be
a natural product, either presuppose organised matter as the instrument
of that soul, which does not make the soul a whit more comprehensible;
or regard the soul as artificer of this structure and so remove
the product from (corporeal) nature. To speak strictly, then, the
organisation of nature has in it nothing analogous to any causality we
know.[108] Beauty in nature can be rightly described as an analogon of
art, because it is ascribed to objects only in reference to reflection
upon their _external_ aspect, and consequently only on account of the
form of their external surface. But _internal natural perfection_,
as it belongs to those things which are only possible as _natural
purposes_, and are therefore called organised beings, is not analogous
to any physical, _i.e._ natural, faculty known to us; nay even,
regarding ourselves as, in the widest sense, belonging to nature, it
is not even thinkable or explicable by means of any exactly fitting
analogy to human art.

The concept of a thing as in itself a natural purpose is therefore no
constitutive concept of Understanding or of Reason, but it can serve
as a regulative concept for the reflective Judgement, to guide our
investigation about objects of this kind by a distant analogy with our
own causality according to purposes generally, and in our meditations
upon their ultimate ground. This latter use, however, is not in
reference to the knowledge of nature or of its original ground, but
rather to our own practical faculty of Reason, in analogy with which we
considered the cause of that purposiveness.

Organised beings are then the only beings in nature which, considered
in themselves and apart from any relation to other things, can be
thought as possible only as purposes of nature. Hence they first
afford objective reality to the concept of a _purpose of nature_, as
distinguished from a practical purpose; and so they give to the science
of nature the basis for a teleology, _i.e._ a mode of judgement about
natural Objects according to a special principle which otherwise we
should in no way be justified in introducing (because we cannot see _a
priori_ the possibility of this kind of causality).


§ 66. _Of the principle of judging of internal purposiveness in
organised beings_

This principle, which is at the same time a definition, is as follows:
_An organised product of nature is one in which every part is
reciprocally purpose, [end] and means._ In it nothing is vain, without
purpose, or to be ascribed to a blind mechanism of nature.

This principle, as regards its occasion, is doubtless derived from
experience, viz. from that methodised experience called observation;
but on account of the universality and necessity which it ascribes to
such purposiveness it cannot rest solely on empirical grounds, but
must have at its basis an _a priori_ principle, although it be merely
regulative and these purposes lie only in the idea of the judging
[subject] and not in an effective cause. We may therefore describe
the aforesaid principle as a _maxim_ for judging of the internal
purposiveness of organised beings.

It is an acknowledged fact that the dissectors of plants and animals,
in order to investigate their structure and to find out the reasons,
why and for what end such parts, such a disposition and combination
of parts, and just such an internal form have been given them, assume
as indisputably necessary the maxim that nothing in such a creature
is _vain_; just as they lay down as the fundamental proposition of
the universal science of nature, that _nothing_ happens _by chance_.
In fact, they can as little free themselves from this teleological
proposition as from the universal physical proposition; for as without
the latter we should have no experience at all, so without the former
we should have no guiding thread for the observation of a species of
natural things which we have thought teleologically under the concept
of natural purposes.

Now this concept brings the Reason into a quite different order of
things from that of a mere mechanism of nature, which is no longer
satisfying here. An Idea is to be the ground of the possibility
of the natural product. But because this is an absolute unity of
representation, instead of the material being a plurality of things
that can supply by itself no definite unity of composition,--if that
unity of the Idea is to serve at all as the _a priori_ ground of
determination of a natural law of the causality of such a form of
composition,--the purpose of nature must be extended to _everything_
included in its product. For if we once refer action of this sort _on
the whole_ to any supersensible ground of determination beyond the
blind mechanism of nature, we must judge of it altogether according to
this principle; and we have then no reason to regard the form of such
a thing as partly dependent on mechanism--for by such mixing up of
disparate principles no certain rule of judging would be left.

For example, it may be that in an animal body many parts can be
conceived as concretions according to mere mechanical laws (as the
hide, the bones, the hair). And yet the cause which brings together the
required matter, modifies it, forms it, and puts it in its appropriate
place, must always be judged of teleologically; so that here everything
must be considered as organised, and everything again in a certain
relation to the thing itself is an organ.


§ 67. _Of the principle of the teleological judging of nature in
general as a system of purposes_

We have already said above that the _external_ purposiveness of natural
things affords no sufficient warrant for using them as purposes of
nature in order to explain their presence, and for regarding their
contingently purposive effects as the grounds of their presence
according to the principle of final causes. Thus we cannot take
for natural purposes, _rivers_ because they promote intercourse
among inland peoples, _mountains_ because they contain the sources
of the rivers and for their maintenance in rainless seasons have a
store of snow, or the _slope_ of the land which carries away the
water and leaves the country dry; because although this shape of the
earth’s surface be very necessary for the origin and maintenance of
the vegetable and animal kingdoms, it has nothing in itself for the
possibility of which we are forced to assume a causality according to
purposes. The same is true of plants which man uses for his needs or
his pleasures; of beasts, the camel, the ox, the horse, dog, etc.,
which are indispensable to him as well for food as because they are
used in his service in many different ways. In the case of things
which we have no reason for regarding in themselves as purposes, such
external relation can only be hypothetically judged as purposive.

To judge of a thing as a natural purpose on account of its internal
form is something very different from taking the existence of that
thing to be a purpose of nature. For the latter assertion we require
not merely the concept of a possible purpose, but the knowledge of
the final purpose (_scopus_) of nature. But this requires a reference
of such knowledge to something supersensible far transcending all our
teleological knowledge of nature, for the purpose of [the existence
of][109] nature must itself be sought beyond nature. The internal form
of a mere blade of grass is sufficient to show that for our human
faculty of judgement its origin is possible only according to the
rule of purposes. But if we change our point of view and look to the
use which other natural beings make of it, abandon the consideration
of its internal organisation and only look to its externally purposive
references, we shall arrive at no categorical purpose; all this
purposive reference rests on an ever more distant condition, which, as
unconditioned (the presence of a thing as final purpose), lies quite
outside the physico-teleological view of the world. For example, grass
is needful for the ox, which again is needful for man as a means of
existence, but then we do not see why it is necessary that men should
exist (a question this, which we shall not find so easy to answer if we
sometimes cast our thoughts on the New Hollanders or the inhabitants
of Tierra del Fuego). So conceived, the thing is not even a natural
purpose, for neither it (nor its whole genus) is to be regarded as a
natural product.

Hence it is only so far as matter is organised that it necessarily
carries with it the concept of a natural purpose, because this its
specific form is at the same time a product of nature. But this concept
leads necessarily to the Idea of collective nature as a system in
accordance with the rule of purposes, to which Idea all the mechanism
of nature must be subordinated according to principles of Reason (at
least in order to investigate natural phenomena therein). The principle
of Reason belongs to it only as a subjective principle or a maxim: viz.
everything in the World is some way good for something; nothing is vain
in it. By the example that nature gives us in its organic products we
are justified, nay called upon, to expect of it and of its laws nothing
that is not purposive on the whole.

It is plain that this is not a principle for the determinant but
only for the reflective Judgement; that it is regulative and not
constitutive; and that we derive from it a clue by which we consider
natural things in reference to an already given ground of determination
according to a new law-abiding order; and extend our natural science
according to a different principle, viz. that of final causes, but
yet without prejudice to the principle of mechanical causality.
Furthermore, it is in no wise thus decided, whether anything of which
we judge by this principle, is a _designed_ purpose of nature; whether
the grass is for the ox or the sheep, or whether these and the other
things of nature are here for men. It is well also from this side
to consider the things which are unpleasant to us and are contrary
to purpose in particular references. Thus, for example, we can say:
The vermin that torment men in their clothes, their hair, or their
beds, may be, according to a wise appointment of nature, a motive to
cleanliness which is in itself an important means for the preservation
of health. Or again the mosquitoes and other stinging insects that
make the wildernesses of America so oppressive to the savages, may be
so many goads to activity for these primitive men, [inducing them] to
drain the marshes and bring light into the forests which intercept
every breath of air, and in this way, as well as by cultivating the
soil, to make their habitations more healthy. The same thing, which
appears to men contradictory to nature in its inner organisation, if
viewed in this light gives an entertaining, sometimes an instructive,
outlook into a teleological order of things, to which, without such
a principle, mere physical observation would not lead us by itself.
Thus some persons regard the tapeworm as given to the men or animals
in whom it resides, as a kind of set-off for some defect in their
vital organs; now I would ask if dreams (without which we never sleep,
though we seldom remember them) may not be a purposive ordinance of
nature? For during the relaxation of all the moving powers of the body,
they serve to excite internally the vital organs by the medium of the
Imagination and its great activity (which in this state generally rises
to the height of affection). During sleep the Imagination commonly is
more actively at play when the stomach is overloaded, in which case
this excitement is the more necessary. Consequently, then, without this
internal power of motion and this fatiguing unrest, on account of which
we complain about our dreams (though in fact they are rather remedial),
sleep even in a sound state of health would be a complete extinction of
life.

Also the beauty of nature, _i.e._ its connexion with the free play of
our cognitive faculties in apprehending and judging of its appearance,
can be regarded as a kind of objective purposiveness of nature in its
whole [content] as a system of which man is a member; if once the
teleological judging of the same by means of the natural purposes which
organised beings suggest to us, has justified for us the Idea of a
great system of purposes of nature. We can regard it as a favour[110]
which nature has felt for us, that in addition to what is useful it
has so profusely dispensed beauty and charm; and we can therefore love
it, as well as regard it with respect on account of its immensity,
and feel ourselves ennobled by such regard; just as if nature had
established and adorned its splendid theatre precisely with this view.

We shall say only one thing more in this paragraph. If we have once
discovered in nature a faculty of bringing forth products that can
only be thought by us in accordance with the concept of final causes,
we go further still. We venture to judge that things belong to a
system of purposes, which yet do not (either in themselves or in their
purposive relations) necessitate our seeking for any principle of
their possibility beyond the mechanism of causes working blindly. For
the first Idea, as concerns its ground, already brings us beyond the
world of sense; since the unity of the supersensible principle must be
regarded as valid in this way not merely for certain species of natural
beings, but for the whole of nature as a system.


§ 68. _Of the principle of Teleology as internal principle of natural
science_

The principles of a science are either internal to it and are then
called domestic (_principia domestica_), or are based on concepts that
can only find their place outside it and so are _foreign_ principles
(_peregrina_). Sciences that contain the latter, place at the basis of
their doctrines auxiliary propositions (_lemmata_), _i.e._ they borrow
some concept, and with it a ground of arrangement, from another science.

Every science is in itself a system, and it is not enough in it to
build in accordance with principles and thus to employ a technical
procedure, but we must go to work with it architectonically, as a
building subsisting for itself; we must not treat it as an additional
wing or part of another building, but as a whole in itself, although we
may subsequently make a passage from it into that other or conversely.

If then we introduce into the context of natural science the concept of
God in order to explain the purposiveness in nature, and subsequently
use this purposiveness to prove that there is a God, there is no
internal consistency in either science [_i.e._ either in natural
science or theology]; and a delusive circle brings them both into
uncertainty, because they have allowed their boundaries to overlap.

The expression, a purpose of nature, already sufficiently prevents the
confusion of mixing up natural science and the occasion that it gives
for judging _teleologically_ of its objects, with the consideration of
God, and so of a _theological_ derivation of them. We must not regard
it as insignificant, if one interchanges this expression with that of
a divine purpose in the ordering of nature, or gives out the latter
as more suitable and proper for a pious soul, because it must come in
the end to deriving these purposive forms in nature from a wise author
of the world. On the contrary, we must carefully and modestly limit
ourselves to the expression, a purpose of nature, which asserts exactly
as much as we know. Before we ask after the cause of nature itself, we
find in nature, and in the course of its development, products of the
same kind which are developed in it according to known empirical laws,
in accordance with which natural science must judge of its objects,
and, consequently, must seek in nature their causality according to
the rule of purposes. So then it must not transgress its bounds in
order to introduce into itself as a domestic principle that, to whose
concept no experience can be commensurate, upon which we are only
entitled to venture after the completion of natural science.

Natural characteristics which demonstrate themselves _a priori_, and
consequently admit of insight into their possibility from universal
principles without any admixture of experience, although they carry
with them a technical purposiveness, yet cannot, because they are
absolutely necessary, be referred to the Teleology of nature, as to a
method belonging to Physic for solving its problems. Arithmetical or
geometrical analogies, as well as universal mechanical laws,--however
strange and admirable may seem to us the union of different rules,
quite independent of one another according to all appearance, in a
single principle,--possess on that account no claim to be teleological
grounds of explanation in Physic. Even if they deserve to be brought
into consideration in the universal theory of the purposiveness
of things of nature, yet they belong to another [science], _i.e._
Metaphysic, and constitute no internal principle of natural science;
as with the empirical laws of natural purposes in organised beings, it
is not only permissible but unavoidable to use the teleological _mode
of judging_ as a principle of the doctrine of nature in regard to a
particular class of its objects.

So to the end that Physic may keep within its own bounds, it
abstracts itself entirely from the question, whether natural purposes
are _designed_ or _undesigned_; for that would be to meddle in an
extraneous business, in Metaphysic. It is enough that there are
objects, alone _explicable_ according to natural laws which we
can only think by means of the Idea of purposes as principle, and
also alone internally _cognisable_ as concerns their internal form,
in this way. In order, therefore, to remove the suspicion of the
slightest assumption,--as if we wished to mix with our grounds
of cognition something not belonging to Physic at all, viz. a
supernatural cause,--we speak in Teleology, indeed, of nature as if the
purposiveness therein were designed, but in such a way that this design
is ascribed to nature, _i.e._ to matter. Now in this way there can be
no misunderstanding, because no design in the proper meaning of the
word can possibly be ascribed to inanimate matter; we thus give notice
that this word here only expresses a principle of the reflective not of
the determinant Judgement, and so is to introduce no particular ground
of causality; but only adds for the use of the Reason a different kind
of investigation from that according to mechanical laws, in order to
supplement the inadequacy of the latter even for empirical research
into all particular laws of nature. Hence we speak quite correctly
in Teleology, so far as it is referred to Physic, of the wisdom, the
economy, the forethought, the beneficence of Nature, without either
making an intelligent being of it, for that would be preposterous; or
even without presuming to place another intelligent Being above it as
its Architect, for that would be presumptuous.[111] But there should
be only signified thereby a kind of causality of nature after the
analogy of our own in the technical use of Reason, in order to have
before us the rule according to which certain products of nature must
be investigated.

But now why is it that Teleology usually forms no proper part of
theoretical natural science, but is regarded as a propaedeutic or
transition to Theology? This is done in order to restrict the study
of nature, mechanically considered, to that which we can so subject
to observation or experiment that we are able to produce it ourselves
as nature does, or at least by similar laws. For we see into a thing
completely only so far as we can make it in accordance with our
concepts and bring it to completion. But organisation, as an inner
purpose of nature, infinitely surpasses all our faculty of presenting
the like by means of art. And as concerns the external contrivances
of nature regarded as purposive (wind, rain, etc.), Physic, indeed,
considers their mechanism, but it cannot at all present their reference
to purposes, so far as this is a condition necessarily belonging to
cause; for this necessity of connexion has to do altogether with the
combination of our concepts and not with the constitution of things.




SECOND DIVISION

DIALECTIC OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT


§ 69. _What is an antinomy of the Judgement?_

The _determinant_ Judgement has for itself no principles which are
the foundation of _concepts of Objects_. It has no autonomy, for it
_subsumes_ only under given laws or concepts as principles. Hence it
is exposed to no danger of an antinomy of its own or to a conflict of
its principles. So [we saw that] the transcendental Judgement which
contains the conditions of subsuming under categories was for itself
not _nomothetic_, but that it only indicated the conditions of sensuous
intuition, under which reality (application) can be supplied to a given
concept, as law of the Understanding, whereby the Judgement could never
fall into discord with itself (at least as far as its principles are
concerned).

But the _reflective_ Judgement must subsume under a law, which is not
yet given, and is therefore in fact only a principle of reflection
upon objects, for which we are objectively quite in want of a law or
of a concept of an Object that would be adequate as a principle for
the cases that occur. Since now no use of the cognitive faculties
can be permitted without principles, the reflective Judgement must
in such cases serve as a principle for itself. This, because it is
not objective and can supply no ground of cognition of the Object
adequate for design, must serve as a mere subjective principle, for the
purposive employment of our cognitive faculties, _i.e._ for reflecting
upon a class of objects. Therefore in reference to such cases the
reflective Judgement has its maxims--necessary maxims--on behalf of
the cognition of natural laws in experience, in order to attain by
their means to concepts, even concepts of Reason; since it has absolute
need of such in order to learn merely to cognise nature according to
its empirical laws.--Between these necessary maxims of the reflective
Judgement there may be a conflict and consequently an antinomy, upon
which a Dialectic bases itself. If each of two conflicting maxims has
its ground in the nature of the cognitive faculties, this may be called
a natural Dialectic, and an unavoidable illusion which we must expose
and resolve in our Critique, to the end that it may not deceive us.


§ 70. _Representation of this antinomy_

So far as Reason has to do with nature, as the complex of objects
of external sense, it can base itself partly upon laws which the
Understanding itself prescribes _a priori_ to nature, partly upon
laws which it can extend indefinitely by means of the empirical
determinations occurring in experience. To apply the former kind of
laws, _i.e._ the _universal_ laws of material nature in general, the
Judgement needs no special principle of reflection, since it is there
determinant because an objective principle is given to it through
Understanding. But as regards the particular laws that can only be made
known to us through experience, there can be under them such great
manifoldness and diversity, that the Judgement must serve as its own
principle in order to investigate and search into the phenomena of
nature in accordance with a law. Such a guiding thread is needed, if
we are only to hope for a connected empirical cognition according to
a thoroughgoing conformity of nature to law, even its unity according
to empirical laws. In this contingent unity of particular laws it may
very well happen that the Judgement in its reflection proceeds from
two maxims. One of these is suggested to it _a priori_ by the mere
Understanding; but the other is prompted by particular experiences,
which bring the Reason into play in order to form a judgement upon
corporeal nature and its laws in accordance with a particular
principle. Hence it comes about that these two kinds of maxims seem to
be incapable of existing together, and consequently a Dialectic arises
which leads the Judgement into error in the principle of its reflection.

The _first maxim_ of Judgement is the _proposition_: all production of
material things and their forms must be judged to be possible according
to merely mechanical laws.

The _second maxim_ is the _counter-proposition_: some products of
material nature cannot be judged to be possible according to merely
mechanical laws. (To judge them requires quite a different law of
causality, namely, that of final causes.)

If these regulative principles of investigation be converted into
constitutive principles of the possibility of Objects, they will run
thus:

_Proposition_: All production of material things is possible according
to merely mechanical laws.

_Counter-proposition_: Some production of material things is not
possible according to merely mechanical laws.

In this latter aspect, as objective principles for the determinant
Judgement, they would contradict each other; and consequently one of
the two propositions must necessarily be false. We shall then, it is
true, have an antinomy, but not of Judgement; there will be a conflict
in the legislation of Reason. Reason, however, can prove neither the
one nor the other of these fundamental propositions, because we can
have _a priori_ no determinant principle of the possibility of things
according to mere empirical laws of nature.

On the other hand, as regards the first-mentioned maxims of a
reflective Judgement, they involve no contradiction in fact. For if
I say, I must _judge_, according to merely mechanical laws, of the
possibility of all events in material nature, and consequently of all
forms regarded as its products, I do not therefore say: _They are
possible in this way alone_ (apart from any other kind of causality).
All that is implied is: I _must_ always _reflect_ upon them _according
to the principle_ of the mere mechanism of nature, and consequently
investigate this as far as I can; because unless this lies at the
basis of investigation, there can be no proper knowledge of nature at
all. But this does not prevent us, if occasion offers, from following
out the second maxim in the case of certain natural forms (and even
by occasion of these in the whole of nature), in order to reflect
upon them according to the principle of final causes, which is quite
a different thing from explaining them according to the mechanism of
nature. Reflection in accordance with the first maxim is thus not
abrogated; on the contrary, we are told to follow it as far as we can.
Nor is it said that these forms would not be possible in accordance
with the mechanism of nature. It is only asserted that _human Reason_
in following up this maxim and in this way could never find the least
ground for that which constitutes the specific [character] of a natural
purpose, although it would increase its knowledge of natural laws.
Thus it is left undecided whether or not in the unknown inner ground
of nature, physico-mechanical and purposive combination may be united
in the same things in one principle. We only say that our Reason is
not in a position so to unite them; and that therefore the Judgement
(as _reflective_--from subjective grounds, not as determinant, in
consequence of an objective principle of the possibility of things in
themselves) is compelled to think a different principle from that of
natural mechanism as the ground of the possibility of certain forms in
nature.


§ 71. _Preliminary to the solution of the above antinomy_

We can in no way prove the impossibility of the production of organised
natural products by the mere mechanism of nature, because we cannot
see into the first inner ground of the infinite multiplicity of the
particular laws of nature, which are contingent for us since they
are only empirically known; and so we cannot arrive at the inner
all-sufficient principle of the possibility of a nature (a principle
which lies in the supersensible). Whether therefore the productive
faculty of nature is sufficient for that which we judge to be formed
or combined in accordance with the Idea of purposes, as well as
for that which we believe to require merely a mechanical system
[Maschinenwesen] of nature; or whether there lies at the basis of
things which we must necessarily judge as properly natural purposes,
a quite different kind of original causality, which cannot be
contained in material nature or in its intelligible substrate, viz. an
architectonic Understanding--this is a question to which our Reason,
very narrowly limited in respect of the concept of causality if it
is to be specified _a priori_, can give no answer whatever.--But it
is just as certain and beyond doubt that, in regard to our cognitive
faculties, the mere mechanism of nature can furnish no ground of
explanation of the production of organised beings. _For the reflective
Judgement_ it is therefore a quite correct fundamental proposition,
that for that connexion of things according to final causes which is
so plain, there must be thought a causality distinct from that of
mechanism, viz. that of an (intelligent) cause of the world acting in
accordance with purposes; but _for the determinant Judgement_ this
would be a hasty and unprovable proposition. In the first case it is a
mere maxim of the Judgement, wherein the concept of that causality is
a mere Idea, to which we by no means undertake to concede reality, but
which we use as a guide to reflection, which remains thereby always
open to all mechanical grounds of explanation and does not withdraw
out of the world of Sense. In the second case the proposition would be
an objective principle prescribed by Reason, to which the determinant
Judgement must subject itself, whereby however it withdraws beyond the
world of Sense into the transcendent and perhaps is led into error.

All appearance of an antinomy between the maxims of the proper
physical (mechanical) and the teleological (technical) methods of
explanation rests therefore on this; that we confuse a fundamental
proposition of the reflective with one of the determinant Judgement,
and the _autonomy_ of the first (which has mere subjective validity for
our use of Reason in respect of particular empirical laws) with the
_heteronomy_ of the second, which must regulate itself according to
laws (universal or particular) given to it by the Understanding.


§ 72. _Of the different systems which deal with the purposiveness of
nature_

No one has ever doubted the correctness of the proposition that
judgement must be passed upon certain things of nature (organised
beings) and their possibility in accordance with the concept of final
causes, even if we only desire a _guiding thread_ to learn how to
cognise their constitution through observation, without aspiring to an
investigation into their first origin. The question therefore can only
be: whether this fundamental proposition is merely subjectively valid,
_i.e._ is a mere maxim of our Judgement; or whether it is an objective
principle of nature, in accordance with which, apart from its mechanism
(according to the mere laws of motion), quite a different kind of
causality attaches to it, viz. that of final causes, under which these
laws (of moving forces) stand only as intermediate causes.

We could leave this question or problem quite undecided and unsolved
speculatively; because if we content ourselves with speculation
within the bounds of mere natural knowledge, we have enough in these
maxims for the study of nature and for the tracking out of its hidden
secrets, as far as human powers reach. There is then indeed a certain
presentiment of our Reason or a hint as it were given us by nature,
that, by means of this concept of final causes, we go beyond nature,
and could unite it to the highest point in the series of causes, if we
were to abandon or at least to lay aside for a time the investigation
of nature (although we may not have advanced far in it), and seek
thenceforth to find out whither this stranger in natural science, viz.
the concept of natural purposes, would lead us.

But here these undisputed maxims pass over into problems opening out
a wide field for difficulties. Does purposive connexion in nature
_prove_ a particular kind of causality? Or is it not rather, considered
in itself and in accordance with objective principles, similar to the
mechanism of nature, resting on one and the same ground? Only, as
this ground in many natural products is often hidden too deep for our
investigation, we make trial of a subjective principle, that of art,
_i.e._ of causality according to Ideas, and we ascribe it to nature
by analogy. This expedient succeeds in many cases, but seems in some
to mislead, and in no case does it justify us in introducing into
natural science a particular kind of operation quite distinct from the
causality according to the mere mechanical laws of nature. We give
the name of _Technic_ to the procedure (the causality) of nature, on
account of the appearance of purpose that we find in its products; and
we shall divide this into _designed_ (_technica intentionalis_) and
_undesigned_ (_technica naturalis_). The first is meant to signify
that the productive faculty of nature according to final causes must
be taken for a particular kind of causality; the second that it is
at bottom quite similar to the mechanism of nature, and that its
contingent agreement with our artistic concepts and their rules should
be explained as a mere subjective condition of judging it, and not,
falsely, as a particular kind of natural production.

If we now speak of systems explanatory of nature in regard of final
causes, it must be remarked that they all controvert each other
dogmatically, _i.e._ as to objective principles of the possibility of
things, whether there are causes which act designedly or whether they
are quite without design. They do not dispute as to the subjective
maxims, by which we merely judge of the causes of such purposive
products. In this latter case _disparate_ principles could very well
be unified; but in the former, contradictorily opposed laws annul each
other and cannot subsist together.

There are two sorts of systems as to the Technic of nature, _i.e._
its productive power in accordance with the rule of purposes; viz.
_Idealism_ or _Realism_ of natural purposes. The first maintains that
all purposiveness of nature is _undesigned_; the second that some (in
organised beings) is _designed_. From this latter the hypothetical
consequence can be deduced that the Technic of Nature, as concerns
all its other products in reference to the whole of nature, is also
designed, _i.e._ is a purpose.

(1) The _Idealism_ of purposiveness (I always understand here by
this, objective purposiveness) is either that of the _casuality_ or
the _fatality_ of the determination of nature in the purposive form
of its products. The former principle treats of the reference of
matter to the physical basis of its form, viz. the laws of motion;
the second, its reference to the _hyperphysical_ basis of itself and
of the whole of nature. The system of _casuality_ that is ascribed to
_Epicurus_ or _Democritus_ is, taken literally, so plainly absurd
that it need not detain us. Opposed to this is the system of fatality,
of which _Spinoza_ is taken as the author, although it is much
older according to all appearance. This, as it appeals to something
supersensible to which our insight does not extend, is not so easy to
controvert; but that is because its concept of the original Being is
not possible to understand. But so much is clear, that on this theory
the purposive combination in the world must be taken as undesigned;
for although derived from an original Being, it is not derived from
its Understanding or from any design on its part, but rather from
the necessity of its nature and of the world-unity which emanates
therefrom. Consequently the Fatalism of purposiveness is at the same
time an Idealism.

(2) The _Realism_ of the purposiveness of nature is also either
physical or hyperphysical. The _former_ bases the purposes in nature,
by the analogy of a faculty acting with design, on the _life of matter_
(either its own or the life of an inner principle in it, a world-soul)
and is called _Hylozoism_. The _latter_ derives them from the original
ground of the universe, as from an intelligent Being (originally
living), who produces them with design, and is _Theism_.[112]


§ 73. _None of the above systems give what they pretend_

What do all these systems desire? They desire to explain our
teleological judgements about nature, and they go so to work therewith
that some deny their truth and, consequently, explain them as an
Idealism of Nature (represented as Art); others recognise them as true,
and promise to establish the possibility of a nature in accordance with
the Idea of final causes.

(1) The systems which defend the Idealism of final causes in nature
grant, it is true, on the one hand to their principle a causality in
accordance with the laws of motion (through which [causality] natural
things exist purposively); but they deny to it _intentionality_, _i.e._
that it designedly determines itself to this its purposive production;
in other words, they deny that the cause is a purpose. This is
_Epicurus’s_ method of explanation, according to which the distinction
between a Technic of nature and mere mechanism is altogether denied.
Blind chance is taken as the explanatory ground not only of the
agreement of the developed products with our concepts of the purpose,
and consequently of [nature’s] Technic; but also of the determination
of the causes of this production in accordance with the laws of motion,
and consequently of their mechanism. Thus nothing is explained, not
even the illusion in our teleological judgements, and consequently, the
would-be Idealism of these in no way established.

On the other hand, _Spinoza_ wishes to dispense with all inquiries into
the ground of the possibility of purposes of nature, and to take away
all reality from this Idea. He allows their validity in general not as
products but as accidents inhering in an original Being; and to this
Being, as substrate of those natural things, he ascribes not causality
in regard to them but mere subsistence. On account of its unconditioned
necessity, and also that of all natural things as accidents inhering
in it, he secures, it is true, to the forms of nature that unity of
ground which is requisite for all purposiveness; but at the same time
he tears away their contingence, without which no _unity of purpose_
can be thought, and with it all _design_, inasmuch as he takes away all
intelligence from the original ground of natural things.

But Spinozism does not furnish what it desires. It desires to afford
an explanatory ground of the purposive connexion (which it does not
deny) of the things of nature, and it merely speaks of the unity of the
subject in which they all inhere. But even if we concede to it that
the beings of the world exist in this way, such ontological unity is
not therefore a _unity of purpose_, and does not make this in any way
comprehensible. For this latter is a quite particular kind of unity
which does not follow from the connexion of things (the beings of
the world) in a subject (the original Being), but implies in itself
reference to a _cause_ which has Understanding; and even if we unite
all these things in a simple subject, this never exhibits a purposive
reference. For we do not think of them, first, as the inner _effects_
of the substance, as if it were a _cause_; nor, secondly, of this
cause as a cause producing effects _by means of its Understanding_.
Without these formal conditions all unity is mere natural necessity;
and, if it is ascribed as well to things which we represent as
external to one another, blind necessity. But if we wish to give the
name of purposiveness of nature to that which the schoolmen call the
transcendental perfection of things (in reference to their proper
being), according to which everything has in itself that which is
requisite to make it one thing and not another, then we are only like
children playing with words instead of concepts. For if all things
must be thought as purposes, then to be a thing is the same as to be a
purpose, and there is at bottom nothing which specially deserves to be
represented as a purpose.

We hence see at once that Spinoza by his reducing our concepts of
the purposive in nature to our own consciousness of existing in an
all-embracing (though simple) Being, and by his seeking that form
merely in the unity of this Being, must have intended to maintain not
the realism, but the idealism of its purposiveness. Even this he was
not able to accomplish, because the mere representation of the unity of
the substrate cannot bring about the Idea of a purposiveness, even that
which is only undesigned.

(2) Those who not only maintain the _Realism_ of natural purposes, but
also set about explaining it, believe that they can comprehend, at
least as regards its possibility, a practical kind of causality, viz.
that of causes working designedly; otherwise they could not undertake
to supply this explanation. For to authorise even the most daring of
hypotheses, at least the _possibility_ of what we assume as basis must
be _certain_, and we must be able to assure objective reality to its
concept.

But the possibility of living matter cannot even be thought; its
concept involves a contradiction because lifelessness, _inertia_,
constitutes the essential character of matter. The possibility of
matter endowed with life, and of collective nature regarded as an
animal, can only be used in an inadequate way (in the interests of
the hypothesis of purposiveness in the whole of nature), so far as it
is manifested by experience in the organisation of nature on a small
scale; but in no way can we have insight into its possibility _a
priori_. There must then be a circle in the explanation, if we wish to
derive the purposiveness of nature in organised beings from the life
of matter, and yet only know this life in organised beings, and can
form no concept of its possibility without experience of this kind.
Hylozoism, therefore, does not furnish what it promises.

Finally, _Theism_ can just as little establish dogmatically the
possibility of natural purposes as a key to Teleology; although it
certainly is superior to all other grounds of explanation in that,
through the Understanding which it ascribes to the original Being, it
rescues in the best way the purposiveness of nature from Idealism, and
introduces a causality acting with design for its production.

But we must first prove satisfactorily to the determinant Judgement the
impossibility of the unity of purpose in matter resulting from its mere
mechanism, before we are justified in placing the ground of this beyond
nature in a determinate way. We can, however, advance no further than
this. In accordance with the constitution and limits of our cognitive
faculties (whilst we do not comprehend even the first inner ground
of this mechanism) we must in no wise seek in matter a principle of
determinate purposive references; but no other way of judging of the
origination of its products as natural purposes remains to us than
that by means of a supreme Understanding as cause of the world. But
this is only a ground for the reflective, not for the determinant
Judgement, and can justify absolutely no objective assertion.


§ 74. _The reason that we cannot treat the concept of a Technic of
nature dogmatically is the fact that a natural purpose is inexplicable_

We deal with a concept dogmatically (even though it should be
empirically conditioned) if we consider it as contained under another
concept of the Object which constitutes a principle[113] of Reason,
and determine it in conformity with this. But we deal with it merely
critically, if we consider it only in reference to our cognitive
faculties and consequently to the subjective conditions of thinking
it, without undertaking to decide anything about its Object. Dogmatic
procedure with a concept is then that which is conformable to law
for the determinant Judgement, critical procedure for the reflective
Judgement.

Now the concept of a thing as a natural purpose is a concept which
subsumes nature under a causality only thinkable through Reason,
in order to judge in accordance with this principle about that
which is given of the Object in experience. But in order to use it
dogmatically for the determinant Judgement, we must be assured first
of the objective reality of this concept, because otherwise we could
subsume no natural thing under it. Again, the concept of a thing as
a natural purpose is, no doubt, empirically conditioned, _i.e._ only
possible under certain conditions given in experience, though not to be
abstracted therefrom; but it is a concept only possible in accordance
with a rational principle in the judgement about the object. Its
objective reality, therefore (_i.e._ that an object in conformity with
it is possible), cannot be comprehended and dogmatically established as
such a principle; and we do not know whether it is merely a sophistical
and objectively empty concept (_conceptus ratiocinans_), or a rational
concept, establishing a cognition and confirmed by Reason (_conceptus
ratiocinatus_).[114] Therefore it cannot be dogmatically treated for
the determinant Judgement, _i.e._ it is not only impossible to decide
whether or not things of nature considered as natural purposes require
for their production a causality of a quite peculiar kind (that acting
on design); but the question cannot even be put, because the concept of
a natural purpose is simply not susceptible of proof through Reason as
regards its objective reality. That is, it is not constitutive for the
determinant Judgement, but merely regulative for the reflective.

That it is not susceptible of proof is clear because (as concept of
a _natural product_) it embraces in itself natural necessity, and at
the same time (as purpose) a contingency of the form of the Object (in
reference to the mere laws of nature) in the very same thing. Hence,
if there is to be no contradiction here it must contain a ground for
the possibility of the thing in nature, and also a ground of the
possibility of this nature itself and of its reference to something
which, not being empirically cognisable nature (supersensible), is
therefore for us not cognisable at all. [This is requisite] if it is
to be judged according to a different kind of causality from that
of natural mechanism when we wish to establish its possibility. The
concept of a thing, then, as a natural purpose, is transcendent _for
the determinant Judgement_, if we consider the Object through Reason
(although for the reflective Judgement it certainly may be immanent in
respect of the objects of experience). Hence for determinant judgements
objective reality cannot be supplied to it; and so it is intelligible
how all systems that one may project for the dogmatic treatment of
the concept of natural purposes and of nature itself [considered]
as a whole connected together by means of final causes, can decide
nothing either by objective affirmation or by objective denial. For if
things be subsumed under a concept that is merely problematical, its
synthetical predicates (_e.g._ in the question whether the purpose of
nature which we conceive for the production of things is designed or
undesigned) can furnish only problematical judgements of the Object,
whether affirmative or negative; and we do not know whether we are
judging about something or about nothing. The concept of a causality
through purposes (of art) has at all events objective reality, and
also the concept of a causality according to the mechanism of nature.
But the concept of a causality of nature according to the rule of
purposes,--still more of a Being such as cannot be given us in
experience, a Being who is the original cause of nature,--though it
can be thought without contradiction, yet is of no avail for dogmatic
determinations. For, since it cannot be derived from experience,
and also is not requisite for the possibility thereof, its objective
reality can in no way be assured. But even if this could be done, how
can I number among the products of nature things which are definitely
accounted products of divine art, when it is just the incapacity of
nature to produce such things according to its own laws that made it
necessary to invoke a cause different from it?


§ 75. _The concept of an objective purposiveness of nature is a
critical principle of Reason for the reflective Judgement_

It is then one thing to say, “the production of certain things of
nature or that of collective nature is only possible through a cause
which determines itself to action according to design”; and quite
another to say, “I can _according to the peculiar constitution of my
cognitive faculties_ judge concerning the possibility of these things
and their production, in no other fashion than by conceiving for this a
cause working according to design, _i.e._ a Being which is productive
in a way analogous to the causality of an intelligence.” In the former
case I wish to establish something concerning the Object, and am
bound to establish the objective reality of an assumed concept; in
the latter, Reason only determines the use of my cognitive faculties,
conformably to their peculiarities and to the essential conditions
of their range and their limits. Thus the former principle is an
objective proposition for the determinant Judgement, the latter merely
a subjective proposition for the reflective Judgement, _i.e._ a maxim
which Reason prescribes to it.

We are in fact indispensably obliged to ascribe the concept of design
to nature if we wish to investigate it, though only in its organised
products, by continuous observation; and this concept is therefore an
absolutely necessary maxim for the empirical use of our Reason. It
is plain that once such a guiding thread for the study of nature is
admitted and verified, we must at least try the said maxim of Judgement
in nature as a whole; because thereby many of nature’s laws might
discover themselves, which otherwise, on account of the limitation
of our insight into its inner mechanism, would remain hidden. But
though in regard to this latter employment that maxim of Judgement is
certainly useful, it is not indispensable, for nature as a whole is not
given as organised (in the narrow sense of the word above indicated).
On the other hand, in regard to those natural products, which must
be judged of as designed and not formed otherwise (if we are to have
empirical knowledge of their inner constitution), this maxim of the
reflective Judgement is essentially necessary; because the very thought
of them as organised beings is impossible without combining therewith
the thought of their designed production.

Now the concept of a thing whose existence or form we represent to
ourselves as possible under the condition of a purpose is inseparably
bound up with the concept of its contingency (according to natural
laws). Hence the natural things that we find possible only as purposes
supply the best proof of the contingency of the world-whole; to the
common Understanding and to the philosopher alike they are the only
valid ground of proof for its dependence on and origin from a Being
existing outside the world--a Being who must also be intelligent on
account of that purposive form. Teleology then finds the consummation
of its investigations only in Theology.

But what now in the end does the most complete Teleology prove? Does
it prove that there is such an intelligent Being? No. It only proves
that according to the constitution of our cognitive faculties and in
the consequent combination of experience with the highest principles of
Reason, we can form absolutely no concept of the possibility of such a
world [as this] save by thinking a _designedly-working_ supreme cause
thereof. Objectively we cannot therefore lay down the proposition,
there is an intelligent original Being; but only subjectively, for the
use of our Judgement in its reflection upon the purposes in nature,
which can be thought according to no other principle than that of a
designing causality of a highest cause.

If we wished to establish on teleological grounds the above proposition
dogmatically we should be beset with difficulties from which we could
not extricate ourselves. For then the proposition must at bottom be
reduced to the conclusion, that the organised beings in the world
are no otherwise possible than by a designedly-working cause. And we
should unavoidably have to assert that, because we can follow up these
things in their causal combination only under the Idea of purposes, and
cognise them only according to their conformity to law, we are thereby
justified in assuming this as a condition necessary for every thinking
and cognising being--a condition consequently attaching to the Object
and not merely to our subject. But such an assertion we do not succeed
in sustaining. For, since we do not, properly speaking, _observe_ the
purposes in nature as designed, but only in our reflection upon its
products _think_ this concept as a guiding thread for our Judgement,
they are not given to us through the Object. It is quite impossible for
us _a priori_ to vindicate, as capable of assumption, such a concept
according to its objective reality. It remains therefore a proposition
absolutely resting upon subjective conditions alone, viz. of the
Judgement reflecting in conformity with our cognitive faculties. If
we expressed this proposition dogmatically as objectively valid, it
would be: “There is a God.” But for us men there is only permissible
the limited formula: “We cannot otherwise think and make comprehensible
the purposiveness which must lie at the bottom of our cognition of
the internal possibility of many natural things, than by representing
it and the world in general as a product of an intelligent cause, [a
God].”[115]

Now if this proposition, based on an inevitably necessary maxim of our
Judgement, is completely satisfactory from every _human_ point of view
for both the speculative and practical use of our Reason, I should like
to know what we lose by not being able to prove it as also valid for
higher beings, from objective grounds (which unfortunately are beyond
our faculties). It is indeed quite certain that we cannot adequately
cognise, much less explain, organised beings and their internal
possibility, according to mere mechanical principles of nature; and we
can say boldly it is alike certain that it is absurd for men to make
any such attempt or to hope that another _Newton_ will arise in the
future, who shall make comprehensible by us the production of a blade
of grass according to natural laws which no design has ordered.[116]
We must absolutely deny this insight to men. But then how do we know
that in nature, if we could penetrate to the principle by which it
specifies the universal laws known to us, there _cannot_ lie hidden (in
its mere mechanism) a sufficient ground of the possibility of organised
beings without supposing any design in their production? would it
not be judged by us presumptuous to say this? Probabilities here are
of no account when we have to do with judgements of pure Reason.--We
cannot therefore judge objectively, either affirmatively or negatively,
concerning the proposition: “Does a Being acting according to design
lie at the basis of what we rightly call natural purposes, as the cause
of the world (and consequently as its author)?” So much only is sure,
that if we are to judge according to what is permitted us to see by
our own proper nature (the conditions and limitations of our Reason),
we can place at the basis of the possibility of these natural purposes
nothing else than an intelligent Being. This alone is in conformity
with the maxim of our reflective Judgement and therefore with a ground
which, though subjective, is inseparably attached to the human race.


§ 76. _Remark_

This consideration, which very well deserves to be worked out in
detail in Transcendental Philosophy, can come in here only in passing,
by way of elucidation (not as a proof of what is here proposed).

Reason is a faculty of principles and proceeds in its extremest advance
to the unconditioned; on the other hand, the Understanding stands at
its service always only under a certain condition which must be given.
But without concepts of Understanding, to which objective reality
must be given, the Reason cannot form any objective (synthetical)
judgement; and contains in itself, as theoretical Reason, absolutely
no constitutive but merely regulative principles. We soon see that
where the Understanding cannot follow, the Reason is transcendent, and
shows itself in Ideas formerly established (as regulative principles),
but not in objectively valid concepts. But the Understanding which
cannot keep pace with Reason but yet is requisite for the validity of
Objects, limits the validity of these Ideas to the subject, although
[extending it] generally to all [subjects] of this kind. That is, the
Understanding limits their validity to the condition, that according
to the nature of our (human) cognitive faculties, or, generally,
according to the concept which we _ourselves_ can _make_ of the faculty
of a finite intelligent being, nothing else can or must be thought;
though this is not to assert that the ground of such a judgement lies
in the Object. We shall adduce some examples which, though they are
too important and difficult to impose them on the reader as proved
propositions, yet will give him material for thought and may serve to
elucidate what we are here specially concerned with.

It is indispensably necessary for the human Understanding to
distinguish between the possibility and the actuality of things. The
ground for this lies in the subject and in the nature of our cognitive
faculties. Such a distinction (between the possible and the actual)
would not be given were there not requisite for knowledge two quite
different elements, Understanding for concepts and sensible intuition
for Objects corresponding to them. If our Understanding were intuitive
it would have no objects but those which are actual. Concepts (which
merely extend to the possibility of an object) and sensible intuitions
(which give us something without allowing us to cognise it thus as an
object) would both disappear. But now the whole of our distinction
between the merely possible and the actual rests on this, that the
former only signifies the positing of the representation of a thing
in respect of our concept, and, in general, in respect of the faculty
of thought; while the latter signifies the positing of the thing in
itself [outside this concept].[117] The distinction, then, of possible
things from actual is one which has merely subjective validity for the
human Understanding, because we can always have a thing in our thoughts
although it is [really] nothing, or we can represent a thing as given
although we have no concept of it. The propositions therefore--that
things can be possible without being actual, and that consequently no
conclusion can be drawn as to actuality from mere possibility--are
quite valid for human Reason, without thereby proving that this
distinction lies in things themselves. That this does not follow, and
that consequently these propositions, though valid of Objects (in
so far as our cognitive faculty, as sensuously conditioned, busies
itself with Objects of sense), do not hold for things in general,
appears from the irrepressible demand of Reason to assume something
(the original ground) necessarily existing as unconditioned, in which
possibility and actuality should no longer be distinguished, and
for which Idea our Understanding has absolutely no concept; _i.e._
it can find no way of representing such a thing and its manner of
existence. For if the Understanding _thinks_ such a thing (which it
may do at pleasure), the thing is merely represented as possible. If
it is conscious of it as given in intuition, then is it actual; but
nothing as to its possibility is thus thought. Hence the concept of
an absolutely necessary Being is no doubt an indispensable Idea of
Reason, but yet it is a problematical concept unattainable by the human
Understanding. It is indeed valid for the employment of our cognitive
faculties in accordance with their peculiar constitution, but not
valid of the Object. Nor is it valid for every knowing being, because
I cannot presuppose in every such being thought and intuition as two
distinct conditions of the exercise of its cognitive faculties, and
consequently as conditions of the possibility and actuality of things.
An Understanding into which this distinction did not enter, might
say: All Objects that I know _are_, _i.e._ exist; and the possibility
of some, which yet do not exist (_i.e._ the contingency or the
contrasted necessity of those which do exist), might never come into
the representation of such a being at all. But what makes it difficult
for our Understanding to treat its concepts here as Reason does, is
merely that for it, as human Understanding, that is transcendent
(_i.e._ impossible for the subjective conditions of its cognition)
which Reason makes into a principle appertaining to the Object.--Here
the maxim always holds, that all Objects whose cognition surpasses
the faculty of the Understanding are thought by us according to the
subjective conditions of the exercise of that faculty which necessarily
attach to our (human) nature. If judgements laid down in this way (and
there is no other alternative in regard to transcendent concepts)
cannot be constitutive principles determining the Object as it is, they
will remain regulative principles adapted to the human point of view,
immanent in their exercise and sure.

Just as Reason in the theoretical consideration of nature must assume
the Idea of an unconditioned necessity of its original ground, so also
it presupposes in the practical [sphere] its own (in respect of nature)
unconditioned causality, or freedom, in that it is conscious of its
own moral command. Here the objective necessity of the act, as a duty,
is opposed to that necessity which it would have as an event, if its
ground lay in nature and not in freedom (_i.e._ in the causality of
Reason). The morally absolutely necessary act is regarded as physically
quite contingent, since that which _ought_ necessarily to happen often
does not happen. It is clear then that it is owing to the subjective
constitution of our practical faculty that the moral laws must be
represented as commands, and the actions conforming to them as duties;
and that Reason expresses this necessity not by an “_is_” (happens),
but by an “ought to be.” This would not be the case were Reason
considered as in its causality independent of sensibility (as the
subjective condition of its application to objects of nature), and so
as cause in an intelligible world entirely in agreement with the moral
law. For in such a world there would be no distinction between “ought
to do” and “does,” between a practical law of that which is possible
through us, and the theoretical law of that which is actual through
us. Though, therefore, an intelligible world in which everything would
be actual merely because (as something good) it is possible, together
with freedom as its formal condition, is for us a transcendent concept,
not available as a constitutive principle to determine an Object and
its objective reality; yet, because of the constitution of our (in
part sensuous) nature and faculty it is, so far as we can represent
it in accordance with the constitution of our Reason, for us and for
all rational beings that have a connexion with the world of sense, a
universal _regulative principle_. This principle does not objectively
determine the constitution of freedom, as a form of causality, but it
makes the rule of actions according to that Idea a command for every
one, with no less validity than if it did so determine it.

In the same way we may concede thus much as regards the case in hand.
Between natural mechanism and the Technic of nature, _i.e._ its
purposive connexion, we should find no distinction, were it not that
our Understanding is of the kind that must proceed from the universal
to the particular. The Judgement then in respect of the particular can
cognise no purposiveness and, consequently, can form no determinant
judgements, without having a universal law under which to subsume that
particular. Now the particular, as such, contains something contingent
in respect of the universal, while yet Reason requires unity and
conformity to law in the combination of particular laws of nature.
This conformity of the contingent to law is called purposiveness; and
the derivation of particular laws from the universal, as regards their
contingent element, is impossible _a priori_ through a determination
of the concept of the Object. Hence, the concept of the purposiveness
of nature in its products is necessary for human Judgement in respect
of nature, but has not to do with the determination of Objects. It is,
therefore, a subjective principle of Reason for the Judgement, which
as regulative (not constitutive) is just as necessarily valid for our
_human Judgement_ as if it were an objective principle.


§ 77. _Of the peculiarity of the human Understanding, by means of which
the concept of a natural purpose is possible_

We have brought forward in the _Remark_ peculiarities of our cognitive
faculties (even the higher ones) which we are easily led to transfer as
objective predicates to the things themselves. But they concern Ideas,
no object adequate to which can be given in experience, and they could
only serve as regulative principles in the pursuit of experience. This
is the case with the concept of a natural purpose, which concerns the
cause of the possibility of such a predicate, which cause can only lie
in the Idea. But the result corresponding to it (_i.e._ the product)
is given in nature; and the concept of a causality of nature as of a
being acting according to purposes seems to make the Idea of a natural
purpose into a constitutive principle, which Idea has thus something
different from all other Ideas.

This difference consists, however, in the fact that the Idea in
question is not a rational principle for the Understanding but
for the Judgement. It is, therefore, merely the application of an
Understanding in general to possible objects of experience, in cases
where the judgement can only be reflective, not determinant, and where,
consequently, the object, although given in experience, cannot be
_determinately judged_ in conformity with the Idea (not to say with
complete adequacy), but can only be reflected on.

There emerges, therefore, a peculiarity of _our_ (human) Understanding
in respect of the Judgement in its reflection upon things of nature.
But if this be so, the Idea of a possible Understanding different
from the human must be fundamental here. (Just so in the Critique
of Pure Reason we must have in our thoughts another possible [kind
of] intuition, if ours is to be regarded as a particular species
for which objects are only valid as phenomena.) And so we are able
to say: Certain natural products, from the special constitution of
our Understanding, _must be considered by us_, in regard to their
possibility, as if produced designedly and as purposes. But we
do not, therefore, demand that there should be actually given a
particular cause which has the representation of a purpose as its
determining ground; and we do not deny that an Understanding, different
from (_i.e._ higher than) the human, might find the ground of the
possibility of such products of nature in the mechanism of nature,
_i.e._ in a causal combination for which an Understanding is not
explicitly assumed as cause.

We have now to do with the relation of _our_ Understanding to the
Judgement; viz. we seek for a certain contingency in the constitution
of our Understanding, to which we may point as a peculiarity
distinguishing it from other possible Understandings.

This contingency is found, naturally enough, in the _particular_,
which the Judgement is to bring under the _universal_ of the concepts
of Understanding. For the universal of _our_ (human) Understanding does
not determine the particular, and it is contingent in how many ways
different things which agree in a common characteristic may come before
our perception. Our Understanding is a faculty of concepts, _i.e._ a
discursive Understanding, for which it obviously must be contingent
of what kind and how very different the particular may be that can be
given to it in nature and brought under its concepts. But now intuition
also belongs to knowledge, and a faculty of a _complete spontaneity
of intuition_ would be a cognitive faculty distinct from sensibility,
and quite independent of it, in other words, an Understanding in the
most general sense. Thus we can think an _intuitive_ Understanding
[negatively, merely as not discursive[118]], which does not proceed
from the universal to the particular, and so to the individual (through
concepts). For it that contingency of the accordance of nature in its
products according to _particular_ laws with the Understanding would
not be met with; and it is this contingency that makes it so hard for
our Understanding to reduce the manifold of nature to the unity of
knowledge. This reduction our Understanding can only accomplish by
bringing natural characteristics into a very contingent correspondence
with our faculty of concepts, of which an intuitive Understanding would
have no need.

Our Understanding has then this peculiarity as concerns the Judgement,
that in cognition by it the particular is not determined by the
universal and cannot therefore be derived from it; but at the same
time this particular in the manifold of nature must accord with the
universal (by means of concepts and laws) so that it may be capable
of being subsumed under it. This accordance under such circumstances
must be very contingent and without definite principle as concerns the
Judgement.

In order now to be able at least to think the possibility of such an
accordance of things of nature with our Judgement (which accordance
we represent as contingent and consequently as only possible by means
of a purpose directed thereto), we must at the same time think of
another Understanding, by reference to which and apart from any purpose
ascribed to it, we may represent as _necessary_ that accordance of
natural laws with our Judgement, which for our Understanding is only
thinkable through the medium of purposes.

In fact our Understanding has the property of proceeding in
its cognition, _e.g._ of the cause of a product, from the
_analytical-universal_ (concepts) to the particular (the given
empirical intuition). Thus as regards the manifold of the latter it
determines nothing, but must await this determination by the Judgement,
which subsumes the empirical intuition (if the object is a natural
product) under the concept. We can however think an Understanding
which, being, not like ours, discursive, but intuitive, proceeds from
the _synthetical-universal_ (the intuition of a whole as such) to the
particular, _i.e._ from the whole to the parts. The _contingency_
of the combination of the parts, in order that a definite form of
the whole shall be possible, is not implied by such an Understanding
and its representation of the whole. Our Understanding requires this
because it must proceed from the parts as universally conceived
grounds to different forms possible to be subsumed under them, as
consequences. According to the constitution of our Understanding a
real whole of nature is regarded only as the effect of the concurrent
motive powers of the parts. Suppose then that we wish not to represent
the possibility of the whole as dependent on that of the parts (after
the manner of our discursive Understanding), but according to the
standard of the intuitive (original) Understanding to represent
the possibility of the parts (according to their constitution and
combination) as dependent on that of the whole. In accordance with the
above peculiarity of our Understanding it cannot happen that the whole
shall contain the ground of the possibility of the connexion of the
parts (which would be a contradiction in discursive cognition), but
only that the _representation_ of a whole may contain the ground of the
possibility of its form and the connexion of the parts belonging to it.
Now such a whole would be an effect (_product_) the _representation_ of
which is regarded as the _cause_ of its possibility; but the product
of a cause whose determining ground is merely the representation of
its effect is called a purpose. Hence it is merely a consequence of
the particular constitution of our Understanding, that it represents
products of nature as possible, according to a different kind of
causality from that of the natural laws of matter, namely, that of
purposes and final causes. Hence also this principle has not to do
with the possibility of such things themselves (even when considered
as phenomena) according to the manner of their production, but merely
with the judgement upon them which is possible to our Understanding.
Here we see at once why it is that in natural science we are not
long contented with an explanation of the products of nature by a
causality according to purposes. For there we desire to judge of
natural production merely in a manner conformable to our faculty of
judging, _i.e._ to the reflective Judgement, and not in reference to
things themselves on behalf of the determinant Judgement. It is here
not at all requisite to prove that such an _intellectus archetypus_ is
possible, but only that we are led to the Idea of it,--which contains
no contradiction,--in contrast to our discursive Understanding which
has need of images (_intellectus ectypus_) and to the contingency of
its constitution.

If we consider a material whole, according to its form, as a product
of the parts with their powers and faculties of combining with one
another (as well as of bringing in foreign materials), we represent to
ourselves a mechanical mode of producing it. But in this way no concept
emerges of a whole as purpose, whose internal possibility presupposes
throughout the Idea of a whole on which depend the constitution and
mode of action of the parts, as we must represent to ourselves an
organised body. It does not follow indeed, as has been shown, that
the mechanical production of such a body is impossible; for to say so
would be to say that it would be impossible (contradictory) for _any
Understanding_ to represent to itself such a unity in the connexion of
the manifold, without the Idea of the unity being at the same time its
producing cause, _i.e._ without designed production. This, however,
would follow in fact if we were justified in regarding material beings
as things in themselves. For then the unity that constitutes the
ground of the possibility of natural formations would be simply the
unity of space. But space is no real ground of the products, but only
their formal condition, although it has this similarity to the real
ground which we seek that in it no part can be determined except in
relation to the whole (the representation of which therefore lies at
the ground of the possibility of the parts). But now it is at least
possible to consider the material world as mere phenomenon, and to
think as its substrate something like a thing in itself (which is
not phenomenon), and to attach to this a corresponding intellectual
intuition (even though it is not ours). Thus there would be, although
incognisable by us, a supersensible real ground for nature, to which
we ourselves belong. In this we consider according to mechanical laws
what is necessary in nature regarded as an object of Sense; but we
consider according to teleological laws the agreement and unity of its
particular laws and its forms--which in regard to mechanism we must
judge contingent--regarded as objects of Reason (in fact the whole
of nature as a system). Thus we should judge nature according to two
different kinds of principles without the mechanical way of explanation
being shut out by the teleological, as if they contradicted one another.

From this we are enabled to see what otherwise, though we could easily
surmise it, could with difficulty be maintained with certainty and
proved, viz. that the principle of a mechanical derivation of purposive
natural products is consistent with the teleological, but in no way
enables us to dispense with it. In a thing that we must judge as a
natural purpose (an organised being) we can no doubt try all the known
and yet to be discovered laws of mechanical production, and even hope
to make good progress therewith; but we can never get rid of the call
for a quite different ground of production for the possibility of such
a product, viz. causality by means of purposes. Absolutely no human
Reason (in fact no finite Reason like ours in quality, however much it
may surpass it in degree) can hope to understand the production of even
a blade of grass by mere mechanical causes. As regards the possibility
of such an object, the teleological connexion of causes and effects
is quite indispensable for the Judgement, even for studying it by the
clue of experience. For external objects as phenomena an adequate
ground related to purposes cannot be met with; this, although it lies
in nature, must only be sought in the supersensible substrate of
nature, from all possible insight into which we are cut off. Hence it
is absolutely impossible for us to produce from nature itself grounds
of explanation for purposive combinations; and it is necessary by the
constitution of the human cognitive faculties to seek the supreme
ground of these purposive combinations in an original Understanding as
the cause of the world.


§ 78. _Of the union of the principle of the universal mechanism of
matter with the teleological principle in the Technic of nature_

It is infinitely important for Reason not to let slip the mechanism
of nature in its products, and in their explanation not to pass it
by, because without it no insight into the nature of things can be
attained. Suppose it admitted that a supreme Architect immediately
created the forms of nature as they have been from the beginning, or
that He predetermined those which in the course of nature continually
form themselves on the same model. Our knowledge of nature is not thus
in the least furthered, because we cannot know the mode of action of
that Being and the Ideas which are to contain the principles of the
possibility of natural beings, and we cannot by them explain nature
as from above downwards (_a priori_). And if, starting from the forms
of the objects of experience, from below upwards (_a posteriori_),
we wish to explain the purposiveness, which we believe is met with
in experience, by appealing to a cause working in accordance with
purposes, then is our explanation quite tautological and we are only
mocking Reason with words. Indeed when we lose ourselves with this way
of explanation in the transcendent, whither natural knowledge cannot
follow, Reason is seduced into poetical extravagance, which it is its
peculiar destination to avoid.

On the other hand, it is just as necessary a maxim of Reason not
to pass by the principle of purposes in the products of nature.
For, although it does not make their mode of origination any more
comprehensible, yet it is a heuristic principle for investigating the
particular laws of nature; supposing even that we wish to make no use
of it for explaining nature itself,--in which we still always speak
only of natural purposes, although it apparently exhibits a designed
unity of purpose,--_i.e._ without seeking beyond nature the ground of
the possibility of these particular laws. But since we must come in
the end to this latter question, it is just as necessary to think for
nature a particular kind of causality which does not present itself in
it, as the mechanism of natural causes which does. To the receptivity
of several forms, different from those of which matter is susceptible
by mechanism, must be added a spontaneity of a cause (which therefore
cannot be matter), without which no ground can be assigned for those
forms. No doubt Reason, before it takes this step, must proceed with
caution, and not try to explain teleologically every Technic of nature,
_i.e._ every productive faculty of nature which displays in itself (as
in regular bodies) purposiveness of figure to our mere apprehension;
but must always regard such as so far mechanically possible. But on
that account to wish entirely to exclude the teleological principle,
and to follow simple mechanism only--in cases where, in the rational
investigation of the possibility of natural forms through their causes,
purposiveness shows itself quite undeniably as the reference to a
different kind of causality--to do this must make Reason fantastic, and
send it wandering among chimeras of unthinkable natural faculties; just
as a mere teleological mode of explanation which takes no account of
natural mechanism makes it visionary.

In the same natural thing both principles cannot be connected as
fundamental propositions of explanation (deduction) of one by the
other, _i.e._ they do not unite for the determinant Judgement as
dogmatical and constitutive principles of insight into nature. If I
choose, _e.g._ to regard a maggot as the product of the mere mechanism
of nature (of the new formation that it produces of itself, when
its elements are set free by corruption), I cannot derive the same
product from the same matter as from a causality that acts according
to purposes. Conversely, if I regard the same product as a natural
purpose, I cannot count on any mechanical mode of its production and
regard this as the constitutive principle of my judgement upon its
possibility, and so unite both principles. One method of explanation
excludes the other; even supposing that objectively both grounds of
the possibility of such a product rested on a single ground, to which
we did not pay attention. The principle which should render possible
the compatibility of both in judging of nature must be placed in
that which lies outside both (and consequently outside the possible
empirical representation of nature), but yet contains their ground,
_i.e._ in the supersensible; and each of the two methods of explanation
must be referred thereto. Now of this we can have no concept but the
indeterminate concept of a ground, which makes the judging of nature
by empirical laws possible, but which we cannot determine more nearly
by any predicate. Hence the union of both principles cannot rest upon
a ground of _explanation_ of the possibility of a product according to
given laws, for the _determinant_ Judgement, but only upon a ground
of its _exposition_ for the _reflective_ Judgement.--To explain is to
derive from a principle, which therefore we must clearly know and of
which we can give an account. No doubt the principle of the mechanism
of nature and that of its causality in one and the same natural product
must coalesce in a single higher principle, which is their common
source, because otherwise they could not subsist side by side in the
observation of nature. But if this principle, objectively common to
the two, which therefore warrants the association of the maxims of
natural investigation depending on both, be such that, though it
can be pointed to, it cannot be determinately known nor clearly put
forward for use in cases which arise, then from such a principle we
can draw no explanation, _i.e._ no clear and determinate derivation
of the possibility of a natural product in accordance with those
two heterogeneous principles. But now the principle common to the
mechanical and teleological derivations is the _supersensible_, which
we must place at the basis of nature, regarded as phenomenon. And of
this, in a theoretical point of view, we cannot form the smallest
positive determinate concept. It cannot, therefore, in any way be
explained how, according to it as principle, nature (in its particular
laws) constitutes for us one system, which can be cognised as possible
either by the principle of physical development or by that of final
causes. If it happens that objects of nature present themselves which
cannot be thought by us, as regards their possibility, according to
the principle of mechanism (which always has a claim on a natural
being), without relying on teleological propositions, we can only make
an hypothesis. Namely, we suppose that we may hopefully investigate
natural laws with reference to both (according as the possibility of
its product is cognisable by our Understanding by one or the other
principle), without stumbling at the apparent contradiction which comes
into view between the principles by which they are judged. For at least
the possibility is assured that both may be united objectively in one
principle, since they concern phenomena that presuppose a supersensible
ground.

Mechanism, then, and the teleological (designed) Technic of nature,
in respect of the same product and its possibility, may stand under
a common supreme principle of nature in particular laws. But since
this principle is _transcendent_ we cannot, because of the limitation
of our Understanding, unite both principles _in the explanation_ of
the same production of nature even if the inner possibility of this
product is only _intelligible_ [verständlich] through a causality
according to purposes (as is the case with organised matter). We
revert then to the above fundamental proposition of Teleology.
According to the constitution of the human Understanding, no other
than designedly-working causes can be assumed for the possibility of
organised beings in nature; and the mere mechanism of nature cannot
be adequate to the explanation of these its products. But we do not
attempt to decide anything by this fundamental proposition as to the
possibility of such things themselves.

This is only a maxim of the reflective, not of the determinant
Judgement; consequently only subjectively valid for us, not objectively
for the possibility of things themselves of this kind (in which both
kinds of production may well cohere in one and the same ground).
Further, without any concept,--besides the teleologically conceived
method of production,--of a simultaneously presented mechanism of
nature, no judgement can be passed on this kind of production as a
natural product. Hence the above maxim leads to the necessity of
an unification of both principles in judging of things as natural
purposes in themselves, but does not lead us to substitute one for
the other either altogether or in certain parts. For in the place of
what is thought (at least by us) as possible only by design we cannot
set mechanism, and in the place of what is cognised as mechanically
necessary we cannot set contingency, which would need a purpose as its
determining ground; but we can only subordinate the one (Mechanism)
to the other (designed Technic), which may quite well be the case
according to the transcendental principle of the purposiveness of
nature.

For where purposes are thought as grounds of the possibility of certain
things, we must assume also means, whose law of working requires _for
itself_ nothing presupposing a purpose,--a mechanical law--and yet
can be a subordinate cause of designed effects. Thus--in the organic
products of nature, and specially when prompted by their infinite
number, we assume (at least as a permissible hypothesis) design in
the combination of natural causes by particular laws as a _universal
principle_ of the reflective Judgement for the whole of nature (the
world),--we can think a great and indeed universal combination of
mechanical with teleological laws in the productions of nature, without
interchanging the principles by which they are judged or putting one
in the place of the other. For, in a teleological judgement, the
matter, even if the form that it assumes be judged possible only by
design, can also, conformably to the mechanical laws of its nature,
be subordinated as a means to the represented purpose. But, since the
ground of this compatibility lies in that which is neither one nor
the other (neither mechanism nor purposive combination), but is the
supersensible substrate of nature of which we know nothing, the two
ways of representing the possibility of such Objects are not to be
blended together by our (human) Reason. However, we cannot judge of
their possibility otherwise than by judging them as ultimately resting
on a supreme Understanding by the connexion of final causes; and thus
the teleological method of explanation is not eliminated.

Now it is quite indeterminate, and for our Understanding always
indeterminable, how much the mechanism of nature does as a means
towards each final design in nature. However, on account of the
above-mentioned intelligible principle of the possibility of a nature
in general, it may be assumed that it is possible throughout according
to the two kinds of universally accordant laws (the physical and
those of final causes), although we cannot see into the way how this
takes place. Hence we do not know how far the mechanical method of
explanation which is possible for us may extend. So much only is
certain that, so far as we can go in this direction, it must always
be inadequate for things that we once recognise as natural purposes;
and therefore we must, by the constitution of our Understanding,
subordinate these grounds collectively to a teleological principle.

Hereon is based a privilege, and on account of the importance which the
study of nature by the principle of mechanism has for the theoretical
use of our Reason, also an appeal. We should explain all products
and occurrences in nature, even the most purposive, by mechanism as
far as is in our power (the limits of which we cannot specify in
this kind of investigation). But at the same time we are not to lose
sight of the fact that those things which we cannot even state for
investigation except under the concept of a purpose of Reason, must, in
conformity with the essential constitution of our Reason, mechanical
causes notwithstanding, be subordinated by us finally to causality in
accordance with purposes.




METHODOLOGY OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT.[119]


§ 79. _Whether teleology must be treated as if it belonged to the
doctrine of nature_

Every science must have its definite position in the encyclopaedia of
all the sciences. If it is a philosophical science its position must be
either in the theoretical or practical part. If again it has its place
in the former of these, it must be either in the doctrine of nature, so
far as it concerns that which can be an object of experience (in the
doctrine of bodies, the doctrine of the soul, or the universal science
of the world), or in the doctrine of God (the original ground of the
world as the complex of all objects of experience).

Now the question is, what place is due to Teleology? Does it belong
to Natural Science (properly so called) or to Theology? One of the
two it must be; for no science belongs to the transition from one to
the other, because this transition only marks the articulation or
organisation of the system, and not a place in it.

That it does not belong to Theology as a part thereof, although it may
be made of the most important use therein, is self-evident. For it has
as its objects, natural productions, and their cause, and although it
refers at the same time to the latter as to a ground lying outside of
and beyond nature (a Divine Author), yet it does not do this for the
determinant but only for the reflective Judgement in the consideration
of nature (in order to guide our judgement on things in the world by
means of such an Idea as a regulative principle, in conformity with the
human Understanding).

But it appears to belong just as little to Natural Science, which needs
determinant and not merely reflective principles in order to supply
objective grounds for natural effects. In fact, nothing is gained for
the theory of nature or the mechanical explanation of its phenomena
by means of its effective causes, by considering them as connected
according to the relation of purposes. The exhibition of the purposes
of nature in its products, so far as they constitute a system according
to teleological concepts, properly belongs only to a description of
nature which is drawn up in accordance with a particular guiding
thread. Here Reason, no doubt, accomplishes a noble work, instructive
and practically purposive in many points of view; but it gives no
information as to the origin and the inner possibility of these
forms, which is the special business of theoretical Natural Science.
Teleology, therefore, as science, belongs to no Doctrine, but only to
Criticism; and to the criticism of a special cognitive faculty, viz.
Judgement. But so far as it contains principles _a priori_, it can and
must furnish the method by which nature must be judged according to the
principle of final causes. Hence its Methodology has at least negative
influence upon the procedure in theoretical Natural Science, and also
upon the relation which this can have in Metaphysic to Theology as its
propaedeutic.


§ 80. _Of the necessary subordination of the mechanical to the
teleological principle in the explanation of a thing as a natural
purpose_

The _privilege of aiming at_ a merely mechanical method of explanation
of all natural products is in itself quite unlimited; but the _faculty
of attaining_ thereto is by the constitution of our Understanding, so
far as it has to do with things as natural purposes, not only very much
limited but also clearly bounded. For, according to a principle of the
Judgement, by this process alone nothing can be accomplished towards
an explanation of these things; and consequently the judgement upon
such products must always be at the same time subordinated by us to a
teleological principle.

It is therefore rational, even meritorious, to pursue natural
mechanism, in respect of the explanation of natural products, so far
as can be done with probability; and if we give up the attempt it is
not because it is impossible _in itself_ to meet in this path with the
purposiveness of nature, but only because it is impossible _for us_
as men. For there would be required for that an intuition other than
sensuous, and a determinate knowledge of the intelligible substrate
of nature from which a ground could be assigned for the mechanism of
phenomena according to particular laws, which quite surpasses our
faculties.

Hence if the naturalist would not waste his labour he must in judging
of things, the concept of any of which is indubitably established
as a natural purpose (organised beings), always lay down as basis an
original organisation, which uses that very mechanism in order to
produce fresh organised forms or to develop the existing ones into new
shapes (which, however, always result from that purpose and conformably
to it).

It is praiseworthy by the aid of comparative anatomy to go through the
great creation of organised natures, in order to see whether there may
not be in it something similar to a system and also in accordance with
the principle of production. For otherwise we should have to be content
with the mere principle of judgement (which gives no insight into
their production) and, discouraged, to give up all claim to _natural
insight_ in this field. The agreement of so many genera of animals
in a certain common schema, which appears to be fundamental not only
in the structure of their bones but also in the disposition of their
remaining parts,--so that with an admirable simplicity of original
outline, a great variety of species has been produced by the shortening
of one member and the lengthening of another, the involution of this
part and the evolution of that,--allows a ray of hope, however faint,
to penetrate into our minds, that here something may be accomplished
by the aid of the principle of the mechanism of nature (without
which there can be no natural science in general). This analogy of
forms, which with all their differences seem to have been produced
according to a common original type, strengthens our suspicions of an
actual relationship between them in their production from a common
parent, through the gradual approximation of one animal-genus to
another--from those in which the principle of purposes seems to be
best authenticated, _i.e._ from man, down to the polype, and again from
this down to mosses and lichens, and finally to the lowest stage of
nature noticeable by us, viz. to crude matter. And so the whole Technic
of nature, which is so incomprehensible to us in organised beings that
we believe ourselves compelled to think a different principle for it,
seems to be derived from matter and its powers according to mechanical
laws (like those by which it works in the formation of crystals).

Here it is permissible for the _archaeologist_ of nature to derive
from the surviving traces of its oldest revolutions, according to all
its mechanism known or supposed by him, that great family of creatures
(for so we must represent them if the said thoroughgoing relationship
is to have any ground). He can suppose the bosom of mother earth, as
she passed out of her chaotic state (like a great animal), to have
given birth in the beginning to creatures of less purposive form, that
these again gave birth to others which formed themselves with greater
adaptation to their place of birth and their relations to each other;
until this womb becoming torpid and ossified, limited its births to
definite species not further modifiable, and the manifoldness remained
as it was at the end of the operation of that fruitful formative
power.--Only he must still in the end ascribe to this universal mother
an organisation purposive in respect of all these creatures; otherwise
it would not be possible to think the possibility of the purposive form
of the products of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.[120] He has then
only pushed further back the ground of explanation and cannot pretend
to have made the development of those two kingdoms independent of the
condition of final causes.

Even as concerns the variation to which certain individuals of
organised genera are accidentally subjected, if we find that the
character so changed is hereditary and is taken up into the generative
power, then we cannot pertinently judge the variation to be anything
else than an occasional development of purposive capacities originally
present in the species with a view to the preservation of the race.
For in the complete inner purposiveness of an organised being, the
generation of its like is closely bound up with the condition of taking
nothing up into the generative power which does not belong, in such
a system of purposes, to one of its undeveloped original capacities.
Indeed, if we depart from this principle, we cannot know with certainty
whether several parts of the form which is now apparent in a species
have not a contingent and unpurposive origin; and the principle of
Teleology, to judge nothing in an organised being as unpurposive
which maintains it in its propagation, would be very unreliable in its
application and would be valid solely for the original stock (of which
we have no further knowledge).

_Hume_[121] takes exception to those who find it requisite to
assume for all such natural purposes a teleological principle of
judgement, _i.e._ an architectonic Understanding. He says that it may
fairly be asked: how is such an Understanding possible? How can the
manifold faculties and properties that constitute the possibility
of an Understanding, which has at the same time executive force,
be found so purposively together in one Being? But this objection
is without weight. For the whole difficulty which surrounds the
question concerning the first production of a thing containing in
itself purposes and only comprehensible by means of them, rests on
the further question as to the unity of the ground of the combination
in this product of the various elements [des Mannichfaltigen] which
are _external to one another_. For if this ground be placed in the
Understanding of a producing cause as simple substance, the question,
so far as it is teleological, is sufficiently answered; but if the
cause be sought merely in matter as an aggregate of many substances
external to one another, the unity of the principle is quite
wanting for the internally purposive form of its formation, and the
_autocracy_ of matter in productions which can only be conceived by our
Understanding as purposes is a word without meaning.

Hence it comes to pass that those who seek a supreme ground of
possibility for the objectively-purposive forms of matter, without
attributing to it Understanding, either make the world-whole into
a single all-embracing substance (Pantheism), or (which is only a
more determinate explanation of the former) into a complex of many
determinations inhering in a single _simple substance_ (Spinozism);
merely in order to satisfy that condition of all purposiveness--the
_unity_ of ground. Thus they do justice indeed to _one_ condition of
the problem, viz. the unity in the purposive combination, by means
of the mere ontological concept of a simple substance; but they
adduce nothing for the _other_ condition, viz. the relation of this
substance to its result as _purpose_, through which relation that
ontological ground is to be more closely determined in respect of
the question at issue. Hence they answer _the whole_ question in no
way. It remains absolutely unanswerable (for our Reason) if we do
not represent that original ground of things, as simple _substance_;
its property which has reference to the specific constitution of the
forms of nature grounded thereon, viz. its purposive unity, as the
property of an intelligent substance; and the relation of these forms
to this intelligence (on account of the contingency which we ascribe
to everything that we think possible only as a purpose) as that of
_causality_.


§ 81. _Of the association of mechanism with the teleological principle
in the explanation of a natural purpose as a natural product_

According to the preceding paragraphs the mechanism of nature alone
does not enable us to think the possibility of an organised being;
but (at least according to the constitution of our cognitive faculty)
it must be originally subordinated to a cause working designedly.
But, just as little is the mere teleological ground of such a being
sufficient for considering it and judging it as a product of nature,
if the mechanism of the latter be not associated with the former,
like the instrument of a cause working designedly, to whose purposes
nature is subordinated in its mechanical laws. The possibility of such
a unification of two quite different kinds of causality,--of nature
in its universal conformity to law with an Idea which limits it to a
particular form, for which it contains no ground in itself--is not
comprehended by our Reason. It lies in the supersensible substrate
of nature, of which we can determine nothing positively, except that
it is the being in itself of which we merely know the phenomenon.
But the principle, “all that we assume as belonging to this nature
(_phenomenon_) and as its product, must be thought as connected
therewith according to mechanical laws,” has none the less force,
because without this kind of causality organised beings (as purposes of
nature) would not be natural products.

Now if the teleological principle of the production of these beings
be assumed (as is inevitable), we can place at the basis of the
cause of their internally purposive form either _Occasionalism_ or
_Pre-established Harmony_. According to the former the Supreme Cause
of the world would, conformably to its Idea, furnish immediately the
organic formation on the occasion of every union of intermingling
materials. According to the latter it would, in the original products
of its wisdom, only have supplied the capacity by means of which
an organic being produces another of like kind, and the species
perpetually maintains itself; whilst the loss of individuals is
continually replaced by that nature which at the same time works
towards their destruction. If we assume the Occasionalism of the
production of organised beings, all nature is quite lost, and with
it all employment of Reason in judging of the possibility of such
products; hence we may suppose that no one will adopt this system, who
has anything to do with philosophy.

[The theory of] _Pre-established Harmony_ may proceed in two different
ways. It regards every organised being as generated by one of like
kind, either as an _educt_ or a _product_. The system which regards
generations as mere educts is called the theory of _individual
preformation_ or the theory of _evolution_: that which regards them
as products is entitled the system of _epigenesis_. This latter may
also be entitled the system of _generic preformation_, because the
productive faculty of the generator and consequently the specific
form would be _virtually_ performed according to the inner purposive
capacities which are part of its stock. In correspondence with this the
opposite theory of individual preformations would be better entitled
the _theory of involution_.

The advocates of the _theory of evolution_, who remove every
individual from the formative power of nature, in order to make
it come immediately from the hand of the Creator, would, however,
not venture to regard this as happening according to the hypothesis
of Occasionalism. For according to this the copulation is a mere
formality, _à propos_ of which a supreme intelligent Cause of the
world has concluded to form a fruit immediately by his hand, and only
to leave to the mother its development and nourishment. They declare
themselves for preformation; as if it were not all the same, whether
a supernatural origin is assigned to these forms in the beginning
or in the course of the world. On the contrary, a great number of
supernatural arrangements would be spared by occasional creation,
which would be requisite, in order that the embryo formed in the
beginning of the world might not be injured throughout the long period
of its development by the destructive powers of nature, and might keep
itself unharmed; and there would also be requisite an incalculably
greater number of such preformed beings than would ever be developed,
and with them many creations would be made without need and without
purpose. They would, however, be willing to leave at least something
to nature, so as not to fall into a complete Hyperphysic which can
dispense with all natural explanations. It is true, they hold so
fast by their Hyperphysic that they find even in abortions (which
it is quite impossible to take for purposes of nature) an admirable
purposiveness; though it be only directed to the fact that an anatomist
would take exception to it as a purposeless purposiveness, and would
feel a disheartened wonder thereat. But the production of hybrids
could absolutely not be accommodated with the system of preformation;
and to the seeds of the male creature, to which they had attributed
nothing but the mechanical property of serving as the first means of
nourishment for the embryo, they must attribute in addition a purposive
formative power, which in the case of the product of two creatures of
the same genus they would concede to neither parent.

On the other hand, even if we do not recognise the great superiority
which the theory of _Epigenesis_ has over the former as regards the
empirical grounds of its proof, still prior to proof Reason views this
way of explanation with peculiar favour. For in respect of the things
which we can only represent as possible originally according to the
causality of purposes, at least as concerns their propagation, this
theory regards nature as self-producing, not merely as self-evolving:
and so with the least expenditure of the supernatural leaves to nature
all that follows after the first beginning (though without determining
anything about this first beginning by which Physic generally is
thwarted, however it may essay its explanation by a chain of causes).

As regards this theory of Epigenesis, no one has contributed more
either to its proof or to the establishment of the legitimate
principles of its application,--partly by the limitation of a too
presumptuous employment of it,--than Herr Hofr. _Blumenbach_.[122]
In all physical explanations of these formations he starts from
organised matter. That crude matter should have originally formed
itself according to mechanical laws, that life should have sprung from
the nature of what is lifeless, that matter should have been able to
dispose itself into the form of a self-maintaining purposiveness--this
he rightly declares to be contradictory to Reason. But at the same
time he leaves to natural mechanism under this to us indispensable
_principle_ of an original _organisation_, an undeterminable but yet
unmistakeable element, in reference to which the faculty of matter in
an organised body is called by him a _formative impulse_ (in contrast
to, and yet standing under the higher guidance and direction of, that
merely mechanical _formative power_ universally resident in matter).


§ 82. _Of the teleological system in the external relations of
organised beings_

By external purposiveness I mean that by which one thing of nature
serves another as means to a purpose. Now things which have no internal
purposiveness and which presuppose none for their possibility, _e.g._
earth, air, water, etc., may at the same time be very purposive
externally, _i.e._ in relation to other beings. But these latter
must be organised beings, _i.e._ natural purposes, for otherwise the
former could not be judged as means to them. Thus water, air, and
earth cannot be regarded as means to the raising of mountains, because
mountains contain nothing in themselves that requires a ground of their
possibility according to purposes, in reference to which therefore
their cause can never be represented under the predicate of a means (as
useful therefor).

External purposiveness is a quite different concept from that of
internal purposiveness, which is bound up with the possibility of an
object irrespective of its actuality being itself a purpose. We can ask
about an organised being the question: What is it for? But we cannot
easily ask this about things in which we recognise merely the working
of nature’s mechanism. For in the former, as regards their internal
possibility, we represent a causality according to purposes, a creative
Understanding, and we refer this active faculty to its determining
ground, viz. design. There is only one external purposiveness which
is connected with the internal purposiveness of organisation, and yet
serves in the external relation of a means to a purpose, without the
question necessarily arising, as to what end this being so organised
must have existed for. This is the organisation of both sexes in their
mutual relation for the propagation of their kind; since here we can
always ask, as in the case of an individual, why must such a pair
exist? The answer is: This pair first constitutes an _organising_
whole, though not an organised whole in a single body.

If we now ask, wherefore anything is, the answer is either: Its
presence and its production have no reference at all to a cause working
according to design, and so we always refer its origin to the mechanism
of nature, or: There is somewhere a designed ground of its presence
(as a contingent natural being). This thought we can hardly separate
from the concept of an organised thing; for, since we must place at
the basis of its internal possibility a causality of final causes and
an Idea lying at the ground of this, we cannot think the existence
of this product except as a purpose. For the represented effect, the
representation of which is at the same time the determining ground
of the intelligent cause working towards its production, is called a
_purpose_. In this case therefore we can either say: The purpose of
the existence of such a natural being is in itself; _i.e._ it is not
merely a purpose but a _final purpose_, or: This is external to it in
another natural being, _i.e._ it exists purposively not as a final
purpose, but necessarily as a means.

But if we go through the whole of nature we find in it, as nature,
no being which could make claim to the eminence of being the final
purpose of creation; and we can even prove _a priori_ that what might
be for nature an _ultimate purpose_, according to all the thinkable
determinations and properties wherewith one could endow it, could yet
as a natural thing never be a _final purpose_.

If we consider the vegetable kingdom we might at first sight, on
account of the immeasurable fertility with which it spreads itself
almost on every soil, be led to take it for a mere product of that
mechanism which nature displays in the formations of the mineral
kingdom. But a more intimate knowledge of its indescribably wise
organisation does not permit us to hold to this thought, but prompts
the question: What are these things created for? If it is answered:
For the animal kingdom, which is thereby nourished and has thus been
able to spread over the earth in genera so various, then the further
question comes: What are these plant-devouring animals for? The answer
would be something like this: For beasts of prey, which can only be
nourished by that which has life. Finally we have the question: What
are these last, as well as the first-mentioned natural kingdoms, good
for? For man, in reference to the manifold use which his Understanding
teaches him to make of all these creatures. He is the ultimate purpose
of creation here on earth, because he is the only being upon it who
can form a concept of purposes, and who can by his Reason make out of
an aggregate of purposively formed things a system of purposes.

We might also with the chevalier _Linnaeus_[123] go the apparently
opposite way and say: The herbivorous animals are there to moderate
the luxurious growth of the vegetable kingdom, by which many of its
species are choked. The carnivora are to set bounds to the voracity of
the herbivora. Finally man, by his pursuit of these and his diminution
of their numbers, preserves a certain equilibrium between the producing
and the destructive powers of nature. And so man, although in a certain
reference he might be esteemed a purpose, yet in another has only the
rank of a means.

If an objective purposiveness in the variety of the genera of creatures
and their external relations to one another, as purposively constructed
beings, be made a principle, then it is conformable to Reason to
conceive in these relations a certain organisation and a system of all
natural kingdoms according to final causes. Only here experience seems
flatly to contradict the maxims of Reason, especially as concerns an
ultimate purpose of nature, which is indispensable for the possibility
of such a system and which we can put nowhere else but in man. For
regarding him as one of the many animal genera, nature has not in the
least excepted him from its destructive or its productive powers, but
has subjected everything to a mechanism thereof without any purpose.

The first thing that must be designedly prepared in an arrangement
for a purposive complex of natural beings on the earth would be their
place of habitation, the soil and the element on and in which they
are to thrive. But a more exact knowledge of the constitution of
this basis of all organic production indicates no other causes than
those working quite undesignedly, causes which rather destroy than
favour production, order, and purposes. Land and sea not only contain
in themselves memorials of ancient mighty desolations which have
confounded them and all creatures that are in them; but their whole
structure, the strata of the one and the boundaries of the other, have
quite the appearance of being the product of the wild and violent
forces of a nature working in a state of chaos. Although the figure,
the structure, and the slope of the land might seem to be purposively
ordered for the reception of water from the air, for the welling
up of streams between strata of different kinds (for many kinds of
products), and for the course of rivers--yet a closer investigation
shows that they are merely the effects of volcanic eruptions or of
inundations of the ocean, as regards not only the first production of
this figure, but, above all, its subsequent transformation, as well as
the disappearance of its first organic productions.[124] Now if the
place of habitation of all these creatures, the soil (of the land)
or the bosom (of the sea), indicates nothing but a quite undesigned
mechanism of its production, how and with what right can we demand and
maintain a different origin for these latter products? The closest
examination, indeed (in _Camper’s_[125] judgement), of the remains
of the aforesaid devastations of nature seems to show that man was
not comprehended in these revolutions; but yet he is so dependent on
the remaining creatures that, if a universally directing mechanism of
nature be admitted in the case of the others, he must also be regarded
as comprehended under it; even though his Understanding (for the most
part at least) has been able to deliver him from these devastations.

But this argument seems to prove more than was intended by it. It seems
to prove not merely that man cannot be the ultimate purpose of nature,
and that on the same grounds the aggregate of the organised things of
nature on the earth cannot be a system of purposes; but also that the
natural products formerly held to be natural purposes have no other
origin than the mechanism of nature.

But in the solution given above of the Antinomy of the principles
of the mechanical and teleological methods of production of organic
beings of nature, we have seen that they are merely principles of
the reflective Judgement in respect of nature as it produces forms
in accordance with particular laws (for the systematic connexion of
which we have no key). They do not determine the origin of these
beings in themselves; but only say that we, by the constitution of
our Understanding and our Reason, cannot conceive it in this kind of
being except according to final causes. The greatest possible effort,
even audacity, in the attempt to explain them mechanically is not only
permitted, but we are invited to it by Reason; notwithstanding that
we know from the subjective grounds of the particular species and
limitations of our Understanding (not _e.g._ because the mechanism
of production would contradict in itself an origin according to
purposes) that we can never attain thereto. Finally, the compatibility
of both ways of representing the possibility of nature may lie in
the supersensible principle of nature (external to us, as well as in
us); whilst the method of representation according to final causes
may be only a subjective condition of the use of our Reason, when it
not merely wishes to form a judgement upon objects as phenomena, but
desires to refer these phenomena together with their principles to
their supersensible substrate, in order to find certain laws of their
unity possible, which it cannot represent to itself except through
purposes (of which the Reason also has such as are supersensible).


§ 83. _Of the ultimate purpose of nature as a teleological system_

We have shown in the preceding that, though not for the determinant but
for the reflective Judgement, we have sufficient cause for judging man
to be, not merely like all organised beings a _natural purpose_, but
also the _ultimate purpose_ of nature here on earth; in reference to
whom all other natural things constitute a system of purposes according
to fundamental propositions of Reason. If now that must be found in
man himself, which is to be furthered as a purpose by means of his
connexion with nature, this purpose must either be of a kind that
can be satisfied by nature in its beneficence; or it is the aptitude
and skill for all kinds of purposes for which nature (external and
internal) can be used by him. The first purpose of nature would be
man’s _happiness_, the second his _culture_.

The concept of happiness is not one that man derives by abstraction
from his instincts and so deduces from his animal nature; but it is a
mere _Idea_ of a state, that he wishes to make adequate to the Idea
under merely empirical conditions (which is impossible). This Idea he
projects in such different ways on account of the complication of his
Understanding with Imagination and Sense, and changes so often, that
nature, even if it were entirely subjected to his elective will, could
receive absolutely no determinate, universal and fixed law, so as to
harmonise with this vacillating concept and thus with the purpose which
each man arbitrarily sets before himself. And even if we reduce this
to the true natural wants as to which our race is thoroughly agreed,
or on the other hand, raise ever so high man’s skill to accomplish his
imagined purposes; yet, even thus, what man understands by happiness,
and what is in fact his proper, ultimate, natural purpose (not purpose
of freedom), would never be attained by him. For it is not his nature
to rest and be contented with the possession and enjoyment of anything
whatever. On the other side, too, there is something wanting. Nature
has not taken him for her special darling and favoured him with benefit
above all animals. Rather, in her destructive operations,--plague,
hunger, perils of waters, frost, assaults of other animals great and
small, etc.,--in these things has she spared him as little as any other
animal. Further, the inconsistency of his own _natural dispositions_
drives him into self-devised torments, and also reduces others of his
own race to misery, by the oppression of lordship, the barbarism of
war, and so forth; he, himself, as far as in him lies, works for the
destruction of his own race; so that even with the most beneficent
external nature, its purpose, if it were directed to the happiness
of our species, would not be attained in an earthly system, because
our nature is not susceptible of it. Man is then always only a link
in the chain of natural purposes; a principle certainly in respect
of many purposes, for which nature seems to have destined him in her
disposition, and towards which he sets himself, but also a means for
the maintenance of purposiveness in the mechanism of the remaining
links. As the only being on earth which has an Understanding and,
consequently, a faculty of setting arbitrary purposes before itself, he
is certainly entitled to be the lord of nature; and if it be regarded
as a teleological system he is, by his destination, the ultimate
purpose of nature. But this is subject to the condition of his having
an Understanding and the Will to give to it and to himself such a
reference to purposes, as can be self-sufficient independently of
nature, and, consequently, can be a final purpose; which, however, must
not be sought in nature itself.

But in order to find out where in man we have to place that _ultimate
purpose_ of nature, we must seek out what nature can supply to prepare
him for what he must do himself in order to be a final purpose, and
we must separate it from all those purposes whose possibility depends
upon things that one can expect only from nature. Of the latter
kind is earthly happiness, by which is understood the complex of all
man’s purposes possible through nature, whether external nature or
man’s nature; _i.e._ the matter of all his earthly purposes, which,
if he makes it his whole purpose, renders him incapable of positing
his own existence as a final purpose, and being in harmony therewith.
There remains therefore of all his purposes in nature only the formal
subjective condition; viz. the aptitude of setting purposes in
general before himself, and (independent of nature in his purposive
determination) of using nature, conformably to the maxims of his free
purposes in general, as a means. This nature can do in regard to the
final purpose that lies outside it, and it therefore may be regarded
as its ultimate purpose. The production of the aptitude of a rational
being for arbitrary purposes in general (consequently in his freedom)
is _culture_. Therefore, culture alone can be the ultimate purpose
which we have cause for ascribing to nature in respect to the human
race (not man’s earthly happiness or the fact that he is the chief
instrument of instituting order and harmony in irrational nature
external to himself).

But all culture is not adequate to this ultimate purpose of nature. The
culture of _skill_ is indeed the chief subjective condition of aptitude
for furthering one’s purposes in general; but it is not adequate to
furthering the _will_[126] in the determination and choice of purposes,
which yet essentially belongs to the whole extent of an aptitude for
purposes. The latter condition of aptitude, which we might call the
culture of training (discipline), is negative, and consists in the
freeing of the will from the despotism of desires. By these, tied as
we are to certain natural things, we are rendered incapable even of
choosing, while we allow those impulses to serve as fetters, which
Nature has given us as guiding threads that we should not neglect or
violate the destination of our animal nature--we being all the time
free enough to strain or relax, to extend or diminish them, according
as the purposes of Reason require.

Skill cannot be developed in the human race except by means of
inequality among men; for the great majority provide the necessities
of life, as it were, mechanically, without requiring any art in
particular, for the convenience and leisure of others who work at the
less necessary elements of culture, science and art. In an oppressed
condition they have hard work and little enjoyment, although much of
the culture of the higher classes gradually spreads to them. Yet with
the progress of this culture (the height of which is called luxury,
reached when the propensity to what can be done without begins to be
injurious to what is indispensable), their calamities increase equally
in two directions, on the one hand through violence from without, on
the other hand through internal discontent; but still this splendid
misery is bound up with the development of the natural capacities of
the human race, and the purpose of nature itself, although not our
purpose, is thus attained. The formal condition under which nature
can alone attain this its final design, is that arrangement of men’s
relations to one another, by which lawful authority in a whole,
which we call a _civil community_, is opposed to the abuse of their
conflicting freedoms; only in this can the greatest development
of natural capacities take place. For this also there would be
requisite,--if men were clever enough to find it out and wise enough
to submit themselves voluntarily to its constraint,--a _cosmopolitan_
whole, _i.e._ a system of all states that are in danger of acting
injuriously upon each other.[127] Failing this, and with the obstacles
which ambition, lust of dominion, and avarice, especially in those
who have the authority in their hands, oppose even to the possibility
of such a scheme, there is, inevitably, _war_ (by which sometimes
states subdivide and resolve themselves into smaller states, sometimes
a state annexes other smaller states and strives to form a greater
whole). Though war is an undesigned enterprise of men (stirred up by
their unbridled passions), yet is it [perhaps][128] a deep-hidden
and designed enterprise of supreme wisdom for preparing, if not for
establishing, conformity to law amid the freedom of states, and with
this a unity of a morally grounded system of those states. In spite of
the dreadful afflictions with which it visits the human race, and the
perhaps greater afflictions with which the constant preparation for it
in time of peace oppresses them, yet is it (although the hope for a
restful state of popular happiness is ever further off) a motive for
developing all talents serviceable for culture, to the highest possible
pitch.[129]

As concerns the discipline of the inclinations,--for which our
natural capacity in regard of our destination as an animal race is
quite purposive, but which render the development of humanity very
difficult,--there is manifest in respect of this second requirement for
culture a purposive striving of nature to a cultivation which makes us
receptive of higher purposes than nature itself can supply. We cannot
strive against the preponderance of evil, which is poured out upon us
by the refinement of taste pushed to idealisation, and even by the
luxury of science as affording food for pride, through the insatiable
number of inclinations thus aroused. But yet we cannot mistake the
purpose of nature--ever aiming to win us away from the rudeness and
violence of those inclinations (inclinations to enjoyment) which belong
rather to our animality, and for the most part are opposed to the
cultivation of our higher destiny, and to make way for the development
of our humanity. The beautiful arts and the sciences which, by their
universally-communicable pleasure, and by the polish and refinement
of society, make man more civilised, if not morally better, win us in
large measure from the tyranny of sense-propensions, and thus prepare
men for a lordship, in which Reason alone shall have authority;
whilst the evils with which we are visited, partly by nature, partly
by the intolerant selfishness of men, summon, strengthen, and harden
the powers of the soul not to submit to them, and so make us feel an
aptitude for higher purposes, which lies hidden in us.[130]


§ 84. _Of the final purpose of the existence of a world, i.e. of
creation itself_

A _final purpose_ is that purpose which needs no other as condition of
its possibility.

If the mere mechanism of nature be assumed as the ground of explanation
of its purposiveness, we cannot ask: what are things in the world
there for? For according to such an idealistic system it is only the
physical possibility of things (to think which as purposes would be
mere subtlety without any Object) that is under discussion; whether we
refer this form of things to chance or to blind necessity, in either
case the question would be vain. If, however, we assume the purposive
combination in the world to be real and to be [brought about] by a
particular kind of causality, viz. that of a _designedly-working_
cause, we cannot stop at the question: why have things of the world
(organised beings) this or that form? why are they placed by nature
in this or that relation to one another? But once an Understanding
is thought that must be regarded as the cause of the possibility of
such forms as are actually found in things, it must be also asked
on objective grounds: Who could have determined this productive
Understanding to an operation of this kind? This being is then the
final purpose in reference to which such things are there.

I have said above that the final purpose is not a purpose which nature
would be competent to bring about and to produce in conformity with
its Idea, because it is unconditioned. For there is nothing in nature
(regarded as a sensible being) for which the determining ground present
in itself would not be always conditioned; and this holds not merely of
external (material) nature, but also of internal (thinking) nature--it
being of course understood that I only am considering that in myself
which is nature. But a thing that is to exist necessarily, on account
of its objective constitution, as the final purpose of an intelligent
cause, must be of the kind that in the order of purposes it is
dependent on no further condition than merely its Idea.

Now we have in the world only one kind of beings whose causality
is teleological, _i.e._ is directed to purposes and is at the same
time so constituted that the law according to which they have to
determine purposes for themselves is represented as unconditioned and
independent of natural conditions, and yet as in itself necessary. The
being of this kind is man, but man considered as noumenon; the only
natural being in which we can recognise, on the side of its peculiar
constitution, a supersensible faculty (_freedom_) and also the law of
causality, together with its Object, which this faculty may propose to
itself as highest purpose (the highest good in the world).

Now of man (and so of every rational creature in the World) as a moral
being it can no longer be asked: why (_quem in finem_) he exists? His
existence involves the highest purpose to which, as far as is in his
power, he can subject the whole of nature; contrary to which at least
he cannot regard himself as subject to any influence of nature.--If now
things of the world, as beings dependent in their existence, need a
supreme cause acting according to purposes, man is the final purpose of
creation; since without him the chain of mutually subordinated purposes
would not be complete as regards its ground. Only in man, and only in
him as subject of morality, do we meet with unconditioned legislation
in respect of purposes, which therefore alone renders him capable of
being a final purpose, to which the whole of nature is teleologically
subordinated.[131]


§ 85. _Of Physico-theology_

_Physico-theology_ is the endeavour of Reason to infer the Supreme
Cause of nature and its properties from the _purposes_ of nature (which
can only be empirically known). _Moral theology_ (ethico-theology)
would be the endeavour to infer that Cause and its properties from
the moral purpose of rational beings in nature (which can be known _a
priori_).

The former naturally precedes the latter. For if we wish to infer a
World Cause _teleologically_ from the things in the world, purposes
of nature must first be given, for which we afterwards have to seek
a final purpose, and for this the principle of the causality of this
Supreme Cause.

Many investigations of nature can and must be conducted according to
the teleological principle, without our having cause to inquire into
the ground of the possibility of purposive working with which we meet
in various products of nature. But if we wish to have a concept of this
we have absolutely no further insight into it than the maxim of the
reflective Judgement affords: viz. if only a single organic product of
nature were given to us, by the constitution of our cognitive faculty
we could think no other ground for it than that of a cause of nature
itself (whether the whole of nature or only this bit of it) which
contains the causality for it through Understanding. This principle of
judging, though it does not bring us any further in the explanation of
natural things and their origin, yet discloses to us an outlook over
nature, by which perhaps we may be able to determine more closely the
concept, otherwise so unfruitful, of an Original Being.

Now I say that Physico-theology, however far it may be pursued, can
disclose to us nothing of a _final purpose_ of creation; for it does
not even extend to the question as to this. It can, it is true, justify
the concept of an intelligent World Cause, as a subjective concept
(only available for the constitution of our cognitive faculty) of
the possibility of things that we can make intelligible to ourselves
according to purposes; but it cannot determine this concept further,
either in a theoretical or a practical point of view. Its endeavour
does not come up to its design of being the basis of a Theology, but
it always remains only a physical Teleology; because the purposive
reference therein is and must be always considered only as conditioned
in nature, and it consequently cannot inquire into the purpose for
which nature itself exists (for which the ground must be sought outside
nature),--notwithstanding that it is upon the determinate Idea of this
that the determinate concept of that Supreme Intelligent World Cause,
and the consequent possibility of a Theology, depend.

What the things in the world are mutually useful for; what good the
manifold in a thing does for the thing; how we have ground to assume
that nothing in the world is in vain, but that everything _in nature_
is good for something,--the condition being granted that certain things
are to exist (as purposes), whence our Reason has in its power for
the Judgement no other principle of the possibility of the Object,
which it inevitably judges teleologically, than that of subordinating
the mechanism of nature to the Architectonic of an intelligent Author
of the world--all this the teleological consideration of the world
supplies us with excellently and to our extreme admiration. But
because the data, and so the principles, for _determining_ that concept
of an intelligent World Cause (as highest artist) are merely empirical,
they do not enable us to infer any of its properties beyond those which
experience reveals in its effects. Now experience, since it can never
embrace collective nature as a system, must often (apparently) happen
upon this concept (and by mutually conflicting grounds of proof); but
it can never, even if we had the power of surveying empirically the
whole system as far as it concerns mere nature, raise us above nature
to the purpose of its existence, and so to the determinate concept of
that supreme Intelligence.

If we lessen the problem with the solution of which Physico-theology
has to do, its solution appears easy. If we reduce the concept of a
_Deity_ to that of an intelligent being thought by us, of which there
may be one or more, which possesses many and very great properties,
but not all the properties which are requisite for the foundation of a
nature in harmony with the greatest possible purpose; or if we do not
scruple in a theory to supply by arbitrary additions what is deficient
in the grounds of proof, and so, where we have only ground for assuming
_much_ perfection (and what is “much” for us?), consider ourselves
entitled to presuppose _all possible_ perfection; thus indeed physical
Teleology may make weighty claims to the distinction of being the basis
of a Theology. But if we are desired to point out what impels and
moreover authorises us to add these supplements, then we shall seek in
vain for a ground of justification in the principles of the theoretical
use of Reason, which is ever desirous in the explanation of an Object
of experience to ascribe to it no more properties than those for which
empirical data of possibility are to be found. On closer examination
we should see that properly speaking an Idea of a Supreme Being, which
rests on a quite different use of Reason (the practical use), lies in
us fundamentally _a priori_, impelling us to supplement, by the concept
of a Deity, the defective representation, supplied by a physical
Teleology, of the original ground of the purposes in nature; and we
should not falsely imagine that we had worked out this Idea, and with
it a Theology by means of the theoretical use of Reason in the physical
cognition of the world--much less that we had proved its reality.

One cannot blame the ancients much, if they thought of their gods as
differing much from each other both as regards their faculties and as
regards their designs and volitions, but yet thought of all of them,
the Supreme One not excepted, as always limited after human fashion.
For if they considered the arrangement and the course of things in
nature, they certainly found ground enough for assuming something
more than mechanism as its cause, and for conjecturing behind the
machinery of this world designs of certain higher causes, which they
could not think otherwise than superhuman. But because they met with
good and evil, the purposive and the unpurposive, mingled together (at
least as far as our insight goes), and could not permit themselves
to assume nevertheless that wise and benevolent purposes of which
they saw no proof lay hidden at bottom, on behalf of the arbitrary
Idea of a supremely perfect original Author, their judgement upon
the supreme World Cause could hardly have been other than it was, so
long as they proceeded consistently according to maxims of the mere
theoretical use of Reason. Others, who wished to be theologians as
well as physicists, thought to find contentment for the Reason by
providing for the absolute unity of the principle of natural things
which Reason demands, the Idea of a Being of which as sole Substance
the things would be all only inherent determinations. This Substance
would not be Cause of the World by means of intelligence, but in it all
the intelligences of the beings in the world would be comprised. This
Being consequently would produce nothing according to purposes; but in
it all things, on account of the unity of the subject of which they are
mere determinations, must necessarily relate themselves purposively to
one another, though without purpose and design. Thus they introduced
the Idealism of final causes, by changing the unity (so difficult to
explain) of a number of purposively combined substances, from being
the unity of causal dependence _on one_ Substance to be the unity of
inherence _in one_. This system--which in the sequel, considered on the
side of the inherent world beings, becomes _Pantheism_, and (later) on
the side of the Subject subsisting by itself as Original Being, becomes
_Spinozism_,--does not so much resolve as explain away into nothing the
question of the first ground of the purposiveness of nature; because
this latter concept, bereft of all reality, must be taken for a mere
misinterpretation of a universal ontological concept of a thing in
general.

Hence the concept of a Deity, which would be adequate for our
teleological judging of nature, can never be derived from mere
theoretical principles of the use of Reason (on which Physico-theology
alone is based). For as one alternative we may explain all Teleology
as a mere deception of the Judgement in its judging of the causal
combination of things, and fly to the sole principle of a mere
mechanism of nature, which merely seems to us, on account of the unity
of the Substance of whose determinations nature is but the manifold,
to contain a universal reference to purposes. Or if, instead of this
Idealism of final causes, we wish to remain attached to the principle
of the Realism of this particular kind of causality, we may set
beneath natural purposes many intelligent original beings or only a
single one. But so far as we have for the basis of this concept [of
Realism] only empirical principles derived from the actual purposive
combination in the world, we cannot on the one hand find any remedy for
the discordance that nature presents in many examples in respect of
unity of purpose; and on the other hand, as to the concept of a single
intelligent Cause, so far as we are authorised by mere experience, we
can never draw it therefrom in a manner sufficiently determined for any
serviceable Theology whatever (whether theoretical or practical).

Physical Teleology impels us, it is true, to seek a Theology; but it
cannot produce one, however far we may investigate nature by means of
experience and, in reference to the purposive combination apparent in
it, call in Ideas of Reason (which must be theoretical for physical
problems). What is the use, one might well complain, of placing at the
basis of all these arrangements a great Understanding incommensurable
by us, and supposing it to govern the world according to design, if
nature does not and cannot tell us anything of the final design? For
without this we cannot refer all these natural purposes to any common
point, nor can we form any teleological principle, sufficient either
for cognising the purposes collected in a system, or for forming a
concept of the Supreme Understanding, as Cause of such a nature, that
could serve as a standard for our Judgement reflecting teleologically
thereon. I should thus have an _artistic Understanding_ for scattered
purposes, but no _Wisdom_ for a final purpose, in which final purpose
nevertheless must be contained the determining ground of the said
Understanding. But in the absence of a final purpose which pure Reason
alone can supply (because all purposes in the world are empirically
conditioned, and can contain nothing absolutely good but only what is
good for this or that regarded as a contingent design), and which alone
would teach me what properties, what degree, and what relation of the
Supreme Cause to nature I have to think in order to judge of nature as
a teleological system; how and with what right do I dare to extend at
pleasure my very limited concept of that original Understanding (which
I can base on my limited knowledge of the world), of the Might of that
original Being in actualising its Ideas, and of its Will to do so, and
complete this into the Idea of an Allwise, Infinite Being? If this is
to be done theoretically, it would presuppose omniscience in me, in
order to see into the purposes of nature in their whole connexion, and
in addition the power of conceiving all possible plans, in comparison
with which the present plan would be judged on [sufficient] grounds
as the best. For without this complete knowledge of the effect I can
arrive at no determinate concept of the Supreme Cause, which can only
be found in the concept of an Intelligence infinite in every respect,
_i.e._ the concept of a Deity, and so I can supply no foundation for
Theology.

Hence, with every possible extension of physical Teleology, according
to the propositions above laid down we may say: By the constitution
and the principles of our cognitive faculty we can think of nature, in
its purposive arrangements which have become known to us, in no other
way than as the product of an Understanding to which it is subject.
But the theoretical investigation of nature can never reveal to us
whether this Understanding may not also, with the whole of nature and
its production, have had a final design (which would not lie in the
nature of the sensible world). On the contrary, with all our knowledge
of nature it remains undecided whether that Supreme Cause is its
original ground according to a final purpose, or not rather by means
of an Understanding determined by the mere necessity of its nature to
produce certain forms (according to the analogy of what we call the
art-instinct in animals); without it being necessary to ascribe to
it even wisdom, much less the highest wisdom combined with all other
properties requisite for the perfection of its product.

Hence Physico-theology is a misunderstood physical Teleology, only
serviceable as a preparation (propaedeutic) for Theology; and it is
only adequate to this design by the aid of a foreign principle on which
it can rely, and not in itself, as its name would intimate.


§ 86. _Of Ethico-theology_

The commonest Understanding, if it thinks over the presence of things
in the world, and the existence of the world itself, cannot forbear
from the judgement that all the various creatures, no matter how great
the art displayed in their arrangement, and how various their purposive
mutual connexion,--even the complex of their numerous systems (which
we incorrectly call worlds),--would be for nothing, if there were not
also men (rational beings in general). Without men the whole creation
would be a mere waste, in vain, and without final purpose. But it is
not in reference to man’s cognitive faculty (theoretical Reason) that
the being of everything else in the world gets its worth; he is not
there merely that there may be some one to _contemplate_ the world.
For if the contemplation of the world only afforded a representation
of things without any final purpose, no worth could accrue to its
being from the mere fact that it is known; we must presuppose for it
a final purpose, in reference to which its contemplation itself has
worth. Again it is not in reference to the feeling of pleasure, or to
the sum of pleasures, that we think a final purpose of creation as
given; _i.e._ we do not estimate that absolute worth by well-being or
by enjoyment (whether bodily or mental), or in a word, by happiness.
For the fact that man, if he exists, takes this for his final design,
gives us no concept as to why in general he should exist, and as to
what worth he has in himself to make his existence pleasant. He must,
therefore, be supposed to be the final purpose of creation, in order
to have a rational ground for holding that nature must harmonise with
his happiness, if it is considered as an absolute whole according
to principles of purposes.--Hence there remains only the faculty of
desire; not, however, that which makes man dependent (through sensuous
impulses) upon nature, nor that in respect of which the worth of his
being depends upon what he receives and enjoys. But the worth which
he alone can give to himself, and which consists in what he does, how
and according to what principles he acts, and that not as a link in
nature’s chain but in the _freedom_ of his faculty of desire--_i.e._ a
good will--is that whereby alone his being can have an absolute worth,
and in reference to which the being of the world can have a _final
purpose_.

The commonest judgement of healthy human Reason completely accords
with this, that it is only as a moral being that man can be a final
purpose of creation; if we but direct men’s attention to the question
and incite them to investigate it. What does it avail, one will say,
that this man has so much talent, that he is so active therewith, and
that he exerts thereby a useful influence over the community, thus
having a great worth both in relation to his own happy condition and
to the benefit of others, if he does not possess a good will? He is a
contemptible Object considered in respect of his inner self; and if the
creation is not to be without any final purpose at all, he, who as man
belongs to it, must, in a world under moral laws, inasmuch as he is a
bad man, forfeit his subjective purpose (happiness). This is the only
condition under which his existence can accord with the final purpose.

If now we meet with purposive arrangements in the world and, as Reason
inevitably requires, subordinate the purposes that are only conditioned
to an unconditioned, supreme, _i.e._ final, purpose; then we easily see
in the first place that we are thus concerned not with a purpose of
nature (internal to itself), so far as it exists, but with the purpose
of its existence along with all its ordinances, and, consequently, with
the ultimate _purpose of creation_, and specially with the supreme
condition under which can be posited a final purpose (_i.e._ the ground
which determines a supreme Understanding to produce the beings of the
world).

Since now it is only as a moral being that we recognise man as the
purpose of creation, we have in the first place a ground (at least, the
chief condition) for regarding the world as a whole connected according
to purposes, and as a _system_ of final causes. And, more especially,
as regards the reference (necessary for us by the constitution of our
Reason) of natural purposes to an intelligent World Cause, we have _one
principle_ enabling us to think the nature and properties of this First
Cause as supreme ground in the kingdom of purposes, and to determine
its concept. This physical Teleology could not do; it could only lead
to indeterminate concepts thereof, unserviceable alike in theoretical
and in practical use.

From the principle, thus determined, of the causality of the Original
Being we must not think Him merely as Intelligence and as legislative
for nature, but also as legislating supremely in a moral kingdom of
purposes. In reference to the _highest good_, alone possible under
His sovereignty, viz. the existence of rational beings under moral
laws, we shall think this Original Being as _all-knowing_: thus our
inmost dispositions (which constitute the proper moral worth of the
actions of rational beings of the world) will not be hid from Him.
We shall think Him as _all-mighty_: thus He will be able to make the
whole of nature accord with this highest purpose. We shall think Him
as _all-good_, and at the same time as _just_: because these two
properties (which when united constitute _Wisdom_) are the conditions
of the causality of a supreme Cause of the world, as highest good,
under moral laws. So also all the other transcendental properties,
such as _Eternity_, _Omnipresence_, etc. [for goodness and justice are
moral properties[132]], which are presupposed in reference to such a
final purpose, must be thought in Him.--In this way _moral Teleology_
supplies the deficiency in _physical Teleology_, and first establishes
a _Theology_; because the latter, if it did not borrow from the former
without being observed, but were to proceed consistently, could only
found a _Demonology_, which is incapable of any definite concept.

But the principle of the reference of the world to a supreme Cause, as
Deity, on account of the moral purposive destination of certain beings
in it, does not accomplish this by completing the physico-teleological
ground of proof and so taking this necessarily as its basis. It is
sufficient _in itself_ and directs attention to the purposes of
nature and the investigation of that incomprehensible great art lying
hidden behind its forms, in order to confirm incidentally by means of
natural purposes the Ideas that pure practical Reason furnishes. For
the concept of beings of the world under moral laws is a principle
(_a priori_) according to which man must of necessity judge himself.
Further, if there is in general a World Cause acting designedly and
directed towards a purpose, this moral relation must be just as
necessarily the condition of the possibility of a creation, as that
in accordance with physical laws (if, that is, this intelligent Cause
has also a final purpose). This is regarded _a priori_ by Reason as a
necessary fundamental proposition for it in its teleological judging
of the existence of things. It now only comes to this, whether we have
sufficient ground for Reason (either speculative or practical) to
ascribe to the supreme Cause, acting in accordance with purposes, a
_final purpose_. For it may _a priori_ be taken by us as certain that
this, by the subjective constitution of our Reason and even of the
Reason of other beings as far as we can think it, can be nothing else
than _man under moral laws_: since otherwise the purposes of nature in
the physical order could not be known _a priori_, especially as it can
in no way be seen that nature could not exist without such purposes.


_Remark_

Suppose the case of a man at the moment when his mind is disposed to a
moral sensation. If surrounded by the beauties of nature, he is in a
state of restful, serene enjoyment of his being, he feels a want, viz.
to be grateful for this to some being or other. Or if another time he
finds himself in the same state of mind when pressed by duties that he
can and will only adequately discharge by a voluntary sacrifice, he
again feels in himself a want, viz. to have thus executed a command
and obeyed a Supreme Lord. Or, again; if he has in some heedless way
transgressed his duty, but without becoming answerable to men, his
severe self-reproach will speak to him with the voice of a judge to
whom he has to give account. In a word, he needs a moral Intelligence,
in order to have a Being for the purpose of his existence, which may
be, conformably to this purpose, the cause of himself and of the
world. It is vain to assign motives behind these feelings, for they
are immediately connected with the purest moral sentiment, because
_gratitude_, _obedience_, and _humiliation_ (submission to deserved
chastisement) are mental dispositions that make for duty; and the mind
which is inclined towards a widening of its moral sentiment here only
voluntarily conceives an object that is not in the world in order where
possible to render its duty before such an one. It is therefore at
least possible and grounded too in our moral disposition to represent
a pure moral need of the existence of a Being, by which our morality
gains strength or even (at least according to our representation) more
scope, viz. a new object for its exercise. That is, [there is a need]
to assume a morally-legislating Being outside the world, without any
reference to theoretical proofs, still less to self-interest, from pure
moral grounds free from all foreign influence (and consequently only
subjective), on the mere recommendation of a pure practical Reason
legislating by itself alone. And although such a mental disposition
might seldom occur or might not last long, but be transient and without
permanent effect, or might even pass away without any meditation on the
object represented in such shadowy outline, or without care to bring
it under clear concepts--there is yet here unmistakably the ground why
our moral capacity, as a subjective principle, should not be contented
in its contemplation of the world with its purposiveness by means of
natural causes, but should ascribe to it a supreme Cause governing
nature according to moral principles.--In addition, we feel ourselves
constrained by the moral law to strive for a universal highest purpose
which yet we, in common with the rest of nature, are incapable of
attaining; and it is only so far as we strive for it that we can judge
ourselves to be in harmony with the final purpose of an intelligent
World Cause (if such there be). Thus is found a pure moral ground
of practical Reason for assuming this Cause (since it can be done
without contradiction), in order that we may no more regard that effort
of Reason as quite idle, and so run the risk of abandoning it from
weariness.

With all this, so much only is to be said, that though _fear_ first
produces _gods_ (demons), it is _Reason_ by means of its moral
principles that can first produce the concept of _God_ (even when, as
commonly is the case, one is unskilled in the Teleology of nature,
or is very doubtful on account of the difficulty of adjusting by
a sufficiently established principle its mutually contradictory
phenomena). Also, the inner _moral_ purposive destination of man’s
being supplies that in which natural knowledge is deficient, by
directing us to think, for the final purpose of the being of all things
(for which no other principle than an _ethical_ one is satisfactory to
Reason), the supreme Cause [as endowed] with properties, whereby it is
able to subject the whole of nature to that single design (for which
nature is merely the instrument),--_i.e._ to think it as a _Deity_.


§ 87. _Of the moral proof of the Being of God_

There is a _physical Teleology_, which gives sufficient ground of
proof to our theoretical reflective Judgement to assume the being of
an intelligent World-Cause. But we find also in ourselves and still
more in the concept of a rational being in general endowed with freedom
(of his causality) a _moral Teleology_. However, as the purposive
reference, together with its law, is determined _a priori_ in ourselves
and therefore can be cognised as necessary, this internal conformity
to law requires no intelligent cause external to us; any more than we
need look to a highest Understanding as the source of the purposiveness
(for every possible exercise of art) that we find in the geometrical
properties of figures. But this moral Teleology concerns us as beings
of the world, and therefore as beings bound up with other things in the
world; upon which latter, whether as purposes or as objects in respect
of which we ourselves are final purpose, the same moral laws require
us to pass judgement. This moral Teleology, then, has to do with the
reference of our own causality to purposes and even to a final purpose
that we must aim at in the world, as well as with the reciprocal
reference of the world to that moral purpose, and the external
possibility of its accomplishment (to which no physical Teleology can
lead us). Hence the question necessarily arises, whether it compels
our rational judgement to go beyond the world and seek an intelligent
supreme principle for that reference of nature to the moral in us; in
order to represent nature as purposive even in reference to our inner
moral legislation and its possible accomplishment. There is therefore
certainly a moral Teleology, which is connected on the one hand with
the _nomothetic_ of freedom and on the other with that of nature; just
as necessarily as civil legislation is connected with the question
where the executive authority is to be sought, and in general in every
case [with the question] wherein Reason is to furnish a principle
of the actuality of a certain regular order of things only possible
according to Ideas.-- We shall first set forth the progress of Reason
from that moral Teleology and its reference to physical, to _Theology_;
and then make some observations upon the possibility and the validity
of this way of reasoning.

If we assume the being of certain things (or even only certain forms of
things) to be contingent and so to be possible only through something
else which is their cause, we may seek for the unconditioned ground of
this causality of the supreme (and so of the conditioned) either in
the physical or the teleological order (either according to the _nexus
effectivus_ or the _nexus finalis_). That is, we may either ask, what
is the supreme productive cause of these things; or what is their
supreme (absolutely unconditioned) purpose, _i.e._ the final purpose of
that cause in its production of this or all its products generally? In
the second case it is plainly presupposed that this cause is capable
of representing purposes to itself, and consequently is an intelligent
Being; at least it must be thought as acting in accordance with the
laws of such a being.

If we follow the latter order, it is a FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITION to
which even the commonest human Reason is compelled to give immediate
assent, that if there is to be in general a _final purpose_ furnished
_a priori_ by Reason, this can be no other than _man_ (every rational
being of the world) _under moral laws_.[133] For (and so every one
judges) if the world consisted of mere lifeless, or even in part of
living but irrational, beings, its existence would have no worth
because in it there would be no being who would have the least concept
of what worth is. Again, if there were intelligent beings, whose
Reason were only able to place the worth of the existence of things
in the relation of nature to themselves (their well-being), but not
to furnish of itself an original worth (in freedom), then there would
certainly be (relative) purposes in the world, but no (absolute) final
purpose, because the existence of such rational beings would be always
purposeless. But the moral laws have this peculiar characteristic that
they prescribe to Reason something as a purpose without any condition,
and consequently exactly as the concept of a final purpose requires.
The existence of a Reason that can be for itself the supreme law in the
purposive reference, in other words the existence of rational beings
under moral laws, can therefore alone be thought as the final purpose
of the being of a world. If on the contrary this be not so, there would
be either no purpose at all in the cause of its being, or there would
be purposes, but no final purpose.

The moral law as the formal rational condition of the use of our
freedom obliges us by itself alone, without depending on any purpose as
material condition; but it nevertheless determines for us, and indeed
_a priori_, a final purpose towards which it obliges us to strive;
and this purpose is the _highest good in the world_ possible through
freedom.

The subjective condition under which man (and, according to all our
concepts, every rational finite being) can set a final purpose before
himself under the above law is happiness. Consequently, the highest
physical good possible in the world, to be furthered as a final purpose
as far as in us lies, is _happiness_, under the objective condition of
the harmony of man with the law of _morality_ as worthiness to be happy.

But it is impossible for us in accordance with all our rational
faculties to represent these two requirements of the final purpose
proposed to us by the moral law, as _connected_ by merely natural
causes, and yet as conformable to the Idea of that final purpose. Hence
the concept of the _practical necessity_ of such a purpose through
the application of our powers does not harmonise with the theoretical
concept of the _physical possibility_ of working it out, if we connect
with our freedom no other causality (as a means) than that of nature.

Consequently, we must assume a moral World-Cause (an Author of the
world), in order to set before ourselves a final purpose consistently
with the moral law; and in so far as the latter is necessary, so far
(_i.e._ in the same degree and on the same ground) the former also must
be necessarily assumed; _i.e._ we must admit that there is a God.[134]

This proof, to which we can easily give the form of logical precision,
does not say: it is as necessary to assume the Being of God as to
recognise the validity of the moral law; and consequently he who
cannot convince himself of the first, can judge himself free from the
obligations of the second. No! there must in such case only be given
up the _aiming at_ the final purpose in the world, to be brought about
by the pursuit of the second (viz. a happiness of rational beings
in harmony with the pursuit of moral laws, regarded as the highest
good). Every rational being would yet have to cognise himself as
straitly bound by the precepts of morality, for its laws are formal
and command unconditionally without respect to purposes (as the matter
of volition). But the one requisite of the final purpose, as practical
Reason prescribes it to beings of the world, is an irresistible purpose
imposed on them by their nature (as finite beings), which Reason wishes
to know as subject only to the moral law as inviolable _condition_, or
even as universally set up in accordance with it. Thus Reason takes for
final purpose the furthering of happiness in harmony with morality. To
further this so far as is in our power (_i.e._ in respect of happiness)
is commanded us by the moral law; be the issue of this endeavour what
it may. The fulfilling of duty consists in the form of the earnest
will, not in the intermediate causes of success.

Suppose then that partly through the weakness of all the speculative
arguments so highly extolled, and partly through many irregularities
in nature and the world of sense which come before him, a man is
persuaded of the proposition, There is no God; he would nevertheless be
contemptible in his own eyes if on that account he were to imagine the
laws of duty as empty, invalid and inobligatory, and wished to resolve
to transgress them boldly. Such an one, even if he could be convinced
in the sequel of that which he had doubted at the first, would always
be contemptible while having such a disposition, although he should
fulfil his duty as regards its [external] effect as punctiliously
as could be desired, for [he would be acting] from fear or from the
aim at recompense, without the sentiment of reverence for duty. If,
conversely, as a believer [in God] he performs his duty according
to his conscience, uprightly and disinterestedly, and nevertheless
believes that he is free from all moral obligation so soon as he is
convinced that there is no God, this could accord but badly with an
inner moral disposition.

We may then suppose the case of a righteous man [_e.g. Spinoza_],[135]
who holds himself firmly persuaded that there is no God, and also
(because in respect of the Object of morality a similar consequence
results) no future life; how is he to judge of his own inner purposive
destination, by means of the moral law, which he reveres in practice?
He desires no advantage to himself from following it, either in this
or another world; he wishes, rather, disinterestedly to establish
the good to which that holy law directs all his powers. But his
effort is bounded; and from nature, although he may expect here and
there a contingent accordance, he can never expect a regular harmony
agreeing according to constant rules (such as his maxims are and must
be, internally), with the purpose that he yet feels himself obliged
and impelled to accomplish. Deceit, violence, and envy will always
surround him, although he himself be honest, peaceable, and kindly; and
the righteous men with whom he meets will, notwithstanding all their
worthiness of happiness, be yet subjected by nature which regards not
this, to all the evils of want, disease, and untimely death, just like
the beasts of the earth. So it will be until one wide grave engulfs
them together (honest or not, it makes no difference), and throws
them back--who were able to believe themselves the final purpose of
creation--into the abyss of the purposeless chaos of matter from which
they were drawn.-- The purpose, then, which this well-intentioned
person had and ought to have before him in his pursuit of moral laws,
he must certainly give up as impossible. Or else, if he wishes to
remain dependent upon the call of his moral internal destination,
and not to weaken the respect with which the moral law immediately
inspires him, by assuming the nothingness of the single, ideal, final
purpose adequate to its high demand (which cannot be brought about
without a violation of moral sentiment), he must, as he well can--since
there is at least no contradiction from a practical point of view in
forming a concept of the possibility of a morally prescribed final
purpose--assume the being of a _moral_ author of the world, that is, a
God.


§ 88. _Limitation of the validity of the moral proof_

Pure Reason, as a practical faculty, _i.e._ as the faculty of
determining the free use of our causality by Ideas (pure rational
concepts), not only comprises in the moral law a regulative principle
of our actions, but supplies us at the same time with a subjective
constitutive principle in the concept of an Object which Reason
alone can think, and which is to be actualised by our actions in
the world according to that law. The Idea of a final purpose in the
employment of freedom according to moral laws has therefore subjective
_practical_ reality. We are _a priori_ determined by Reason to promote
with all our powers the _summum bonum_ [Weltbeste] which consists in
the combination of the greatest welfare of rational beings with the
highest condition of the good in itself, _i.e._ in universal happiness
conjoined with morality most accordant to law. In this final purpose
the possibility of one part, happiness, is empirically conditioned,
_i.e._ dependent on the constitution of nature (which may or may not
agree with this purpose) and is in a theoretical aspect problematical;
whilst the other part, morality, in respect of which we are free from
the effects of nature, stands fast _a priori_ as to its possibility,
and is dogmatically certain. It is then requisite for the objective
theoretical reality of the concept of the final purpose of rational
beings, that we should not only have _a priori_ presupposed a final
purpose for ourselves, but also that the creation, _i.e._ the world
itself, should have as regards its existence a final purpose, which if
it could be proved _a priori_ would add objectivity to the subjective
reality of the final purpose [of rational beings]. For if the creation
has on the whole a final purpose, we cannot think it otherwise than as
harmonising with the moral purpose (which alone makes the concept of a
purpose possible). Now we find without doubt purposes in the world, and
physical Teleology exhibits them in such abundance, that if we judge
in accordance with Reason, we have ground for assuming as a principle
in the investigation of nature that nothing in nature is without a
purpose; but the final purpose of nature we seek there in vain. This
can and must therefore, as its Idea only lies in Reason, be sought as
regards its objective possibility only in rational beings. And the
practical Reason of these latter not only supplies this final purpose;
it also determines this concept in respect of the conditions under
which alone a final purpose of creation can be thought by us.

The question is now, whether the objective reality of the concept
of a final purpose of creation cannot be exhibited adequately to the
theoretical requirements of pure Reason--if not apodictically for the
determinant Judgement yet adequately for the maxims of the theoretical
reflective Judgement? This is the least one could expect from
theoretical philosophy, which undertakes to combine the moral purpose
with natural purposes by means of the Idea of one single purpose; but
yet this little is far more than it can accomplish.

According to the principle of the theoretical reflective Judgement we
should say: if we have ground for assuming for the purposive products
of nature a supreme Cause of nature--whose causality in respect of the
actuality of creation is of a different kind from that required for
the mechanism of nature, _i.e._ must be thought as the causality of
an Understanding--we have also sufficient ground for thinking in this
original Being not merely the purposes everywhere in nature but also
a final purpose. This is not indeed a final purpose by which we can
explain the presence of such a Being, but one of which we may at least
convince ourselves (as was the case in physical Teleology) that we can
make the possibility of such a world conceivable, not merely according
to purposes, but only through the fact that we ascribe to its existence
a final purpose.

But a final purpose is merely a concept of our practical Reason,
and can be inferred from no data of experience for the theoretical
judging of nature, nor can it be applied to the cognition of nature.
No use of this concept is possible except its use for practical Reason
according to moral laws; and the final purpose of creation is that
constitution of the world which harmonises with that which alone we
can put forward definitely according to laws, viz. the final purpose of
our pure practical Reason, in so far as it is to be practical.-- Now
we have in the moral law, which enjoins on us in a practical point of
view the application of our powers to the accomplishment of this final
purpose, a ground for assuming its possibility and practicability, and
consequently too (because without the concurrence of nature with a
condition not in our power, its accomplishment would be impossible) a
nature of things harmonious with it. Hence we have a moral ground for
thinking in a world also a final purpose of creation.

We have not yet advanced from moral Teleology to a Theology, _i.e._ to
the being of a moral Author of the world, but only to a final purpose
of creation which is determined in this way. But in order to account
for this creation, _i.e._ the existence of things, in accordance with
a _final purpose_, we must assume not only first an intelligent Being
(for the possibility of things of nature which we are compelled to
judge of as _purposes_), but also a _moral_ Being, as author of the
world, _i.e._ a _God_. This second conclusion is of such a character
that we see it holds merely for the Judgement according to concepts
of practical Reason, and as such for the reflective and not the
determinant Judgement. It is true that in us morally practical Reason
is essentially different in its principles from technically practical
Reason. But we cannot assume that it must be so likewise in the supreme
World-Cause, regarded as Intelligence, and that a peculiar mode of
its causality is requisite for the final purpose, different from that
which is requisite merely for purposes of nature. We cannot therefore
assume that in our final purpose we have not merely a _moral ground_
for admitting a final purpose of creation (as an effect), but also
for admitting a _moral Being_ as the original ground of creation. But
we may well say, that, _according to the constitution of our rational
faculty_, we cannot comprehend the possibility of such a purposiveness
_in respect of the moral law_, and its Object, as there is in this
final purpose, apart from an Author and Governor of the world, who is
at the same time its moral Lawgiver.

The actuality of a highest morally-legislating Author is therefore
sufficiently established merely _for the practical use_ of our Reason,
without determining anything theoretically as regards its being. For
Reason requires, in respect of the possibility of its purpose, which
is given to us independently by its own legislation, an Idea through
which the inability to follow up this purpose, according to the mere
natural concepts of the world, is removed (sufficiently for the
reflective Judgement). Thus this Idea gains practical reality, although
all means of creating such for it in a theoretical point of view, for
the explanation of nature and determination of the supreme Cause,
are entirely wanting for speculative cognition. For the theoretical
reflective Judgement physical Teleology sufficiently proves from the
purposes of nature an intelligent World-Cause; for the practical
Judgement moral Teleology establishes it by the concept of a final
purpose, which it is forced to ascribe to creation in a practical
point of view. The objective reality of the Idea of God, as moral
Author of the world, cannot, it is true, be established by physical
purposes _alone_. But nevertheless, if the cognition of these purposes
is combined with that of the moral purpose, they are, by virtue of the
maxim of pure Reason which bids us seek unity of principles so far as
is possible, of great importance for the practical reality of that
Idea, by bringing in the reality which it has for the Judgement in a
theoretical point of view.

To prevent a misunderstanding which may easily arise, it is in the
highest degree needful to remark that, in the first place, we can
_think_ these properties of the highest Being only according to
analogy. How indeed could we explore the nature of that, to which
experience can show us nothing similar? Secondly, in this way we only
think the supreme Being; we cannot thereby _cognise_ Him and ascribe
anything theoretically to Him. It would be needful for the determinant
Judgement in the speculative aspect of our Reason, to consider what
the supreme World-Cause is in Himself. But here we are only concerned
with the question what concept we can form of Him, according to the
constitution of our cognitive faculties; and whether we have to assume
His existence in order merely to furnish practical reality to a
purpose, which pure Reason without any such presupposition enjoins upon
us _a priori_ to bring about with all our powers, _i.e._ in order to
be able to think as possible a designed effect. Although that concept
may be transcendent for the speculative Reason, and the properties
which we ascribe to the Being thereby thought may, objectively used,
conceal an anthropomorphism in themselves; yet the design of its use
is not to determine the nature of that Being which is unattainable by
us, but to determine ourselves and our will accordingly. We may call
a cause after the concept which we have of its effect (though only
in reference to this relation), without thereby meaning to determine
internally its inner constitution, by means of the properties which
can be made known to us solely by similar causes and must be given in
experience. For example, amongst other properties we ascribe to the
soul a _vis locomotiva_ because bodily movements actually arise whose
cause lies in the representation of them; without therefore meaning
to ascribe to it the only mode [of action] that we know in moving
forces (viz. by attraction, pressure, impulse, and consequently motion,
which always presuppose an extended being). Just so we must assume
_something_, which contains the ground of the possibility and practical
reality, _i.e._ the practicability, of a necessary moral final purpose;
but we can think of this, in accordance with the character of the
effect expected of it, as a wise Being governing the world according
to moral laws, and, conformably to the constitution of our cognitive
faculties, as a cause of things distinct from nature, only in order
to express the _relation_ of this Being (which transcends all our
cognitive faculties) to the Objects of _our_ practical Reason. We do
not pretend thus to ascribe to it theoretically the only causality of
this kind known to us, viz. an Understanding and a Will: we do not
even pretend to distinguish objectively the causality thought in this
Being, as regards what is _for us_ final purpose, from the causality
thought in it as regards nature (and its purposive determinations in
general). We can only assume this distinction as subjectively necessary
by the constitution of our cognitive faculties, and as valid for the
reflective, not for the objectively determinant Judgement. But if we
come to practice, then such a _regulative_ principle (of prudence or
wisdom) [commanding us] to act conformably to that as purpose, which
by the constitution of our cognitive faculties can only be thought
as possible in a certain way, is at the same _constitutive_, _i.e._
practically determinant. Nevertheless, as a principle for judging
of the objective possibility of things, it is no way theoretically
determinant (_i.e._ it does not say that the only kind of possibility
which belongs to the Object is that which belongs to our thinking
faculty), but is a mere _regulative_ principle for the reflective
Judgement.


_Remark_

This moral proof is not one newly discovered, although perhaps its
basis is newly set forth; since it has lain in man’s rational faculty
from its earliest germ, and is only continually developed with its
advancing cultivation. So soon as men begin to reflect upon right and
wrong--at a time when, quite indifferent as to the purposiveness of
nature, they avail themselves of it without thinking anything more of
it than that it is the accustomed course of nature--this judgement is
inevitable, viz. that the issue cannot be the same, whether a man has
behaved candidly or falsely, fairly or violently, even though up to his
life’s end, as far as can be seen, he has met with no happiness for
his virtues, no punishment for his vices. It is as if they perceived a
voice within [saying] that the issue must be different. And so there
must lie hidden in them a representation, however obscure, of something
after which they feel themselves bound to strive; with which such a
result would not agree,--with which, if they looked upon the course of
the world as the only order of things, they could not harmonise that
inner purposive determination of their minds. Now they might represent
in various rude fashions the way in which such an irregularity could
be adjusted (an irregularity which must be far more revolting to the
human mind than the blind chance that we are sometimes willing to use
as a principle for judging of nature). But they could never think
any other principle of the possibility of the unification of nature
with its inner ethical laws, than a supreme Cause governing the world
according to moral laws; because a final purpose in them proposed as
duty, and a nature without any final purpose beyond them in which that
purpose might be actualised, would involve a contradiction. As to the
[inner][136] constitution of that World-Cause they could contrive much
nonsense. But that moral relation in the government of the world would
remain always the same, which by the uncultivated Reason, considered
as practical, is universally comprehensible, but with which the
speculative Reason can make far from the like advance.--And in all
probability attention would be directed first by this moral interest to
the beauty and the purposes in nature, which would serve excellently
to strengthen this Idea though they could not be the foundation of it.
Still less could that moral interest be dispensed with, because it is
only in reference to the final purpose that the investigation of the
purposes of nature acquires that immediate interest which displays
itself in such a great degree in the admiration of them without any
reference to the advantage to be derived from them.


§ 89. _Of the use of the moral argument_

The limitation of Reason in respect of all our Ideas of the
supersensible to the conditions of its practical employment has, as
far as the Idea of God is concerned, undeniable uses. For it prevents
_Theology_ from rising into THEOSOPHY (into transcendent concepts which
confound Reason), or from sinking into DEMONOLOGY (an anthropomorphic
way of representing the highest Being). And it also prevents _Religion_
from turning into _Theurgy_ (a fanatical belief that we can have a
feeling of other supersensible beings and can reciprocally influence
them), or into _Idolatry_ (a superstitious belief that we can please
the Supreme Being by other means than by a moral sentiment).[137]

For if we permit the vanity or the presumption of sophistry to
determine the least thing theoretically (in a way that extends our
knowledge) in respect of what lies beyond the world of sense, or
if we allow any pretence to be made of insight into the being and
constitution of the nature of God, of His Understanding and Will, of
the laws of both and of His properties which thus affect the world,
I should like to know where and at what point we will bound these
assumptions of Reason. For wherever such insight can be derived, there
may yet more be expected (if we only strain our reflection, as we have
a mind to do). Bounds must then be put to such claims according to a
certain principle, and not merely because we find that all attempts
of the sort have hitherto failed, for that proves nothing against the
possibility of a better result. But here no principle is possible,
except either to assume that in respect of the supersensible absolutely
nothing can be theoretically determined (except mere negations);
or else that our Reason contains in itself a yet unused mine of
cognitions, reaching no one knows how far, stored up for ourselves and
our posterity.--But as concerns Religion, _i.e._ morals in reference
to God as legislator, if the theoretical cognition of Him is to come
first, morals must be adjusted in accordance with Theology; and not
only is an external arbitrary legislation of a Supreme Being introduced
in place of an internal necessary legislation of Reason, but also
whatever is defective in our insight into the nature of this Being
must extend to ethical precepts, and thus make Religion immoral and
perverted.

As regards the hope of a future life, if instead of the final purpose
we have to accomplish in conformity with the precept of the moral law,
we ask of our theoretical faculty of cognition a clue for the judgement
of Reason upon our destination (which clue is only considered as
necessary or worthy of acceptance in a practical reference), then in
this aspect Psychology, like Theology, gives no more than a negative
concept of our thinking being. That is, none of its actions or of the
phenomena of the internal sense can be explained materialistically; and
hence of its separate nature and of the continuance or non-continuance
of its personality after death absolutely no ampliative determinant
judgement is possible on speculative grounds by means of our whole
theoretical cognitive faculty. Here then everything is handed over to
the teleological judging of our existence in a practically necessary
aspect, and to the assumption of our continuance as a condition
requisite for the final purpose absolutely furnished by Reason. And so
this advantage (which indeed at first glance seems to be a loss) is
apparent; that, as Theology for us can never be Theosophy, or rational
_Psychology_ become _Pneumatology_--an ampliative science--so on the
other hand this latter is assured of never falling into _Materialism_.
Psychology, rather, is a mere anthropology of the internal sense,
_i.e._ is the knowledge of our thinking self _in life_; and, as
theoretical cognition, remains merely empirical. On the other hand,
rational Psychology, as far as it is concerned with questions as to
our eternal existence, is not a theoretical science at all, but rests
on a single conclusion of moral Teleology; as also its whole use is
necessary merely on account of the latter, _i.e._ on account of our
practical destination.


§ 90. _Of the kind of belief in a teleological proof of the Being of
God_

The first requisite for every proof, whether it be derived from the
immediate empirical presentation (as in the proof from observation of
the object or from experiment) of that which is to be proved, or by
Reason _a priori_ from principles, is this. It should not _persuade_,
but _convince_,[138] or at least should tend to conviction. _I.e._ the
ground of proof or the conclusion should not be merely a subjective
(aesthetical) determining ground of assent (mere illusion), but
objectively valid and a logical ground of cognition; for otherwise
the Understanding is ensnared, but not convinced. Such an illusory
proof is that which, perhaps with good intent but yet with wilful
concealment of its weaknesses, is adduced in Natural Theology. In this
we bring in the great number of indications of the origin of natural
things according to the principle of purposes, and take advantage
of the merely subjective basis of human Reason, viz. its special
propensity to think only one principle instead of several, whenever
this can be done without contradiction; and, when in this principle
only one or more requisites for determining a concept are furnished, to
add in our thought these additional [features] so as to complete the
concept of the thing by arbitrarily supplementing it. For, in truth,
when we meet with so many products in nature which are to us marks of
an intelligent cause, why should we not think One cause rather than
many; and in this One, not merely great intelligence, power, etc.,
but rather Omniscience, and Omnipotence--in a word, think it as a
Cause that contains the sufficient ground of such properties in all
possible things? Further, why should we not ascribe to this unique,
all-powerful, original Being not only intelligence for natural laws
and products, but also, as to a moral Cause of the world, supreme,
ethical, practical Reason? For by this completion of the concept a
sufficient principle is furnished both for insight into nature and
for moral wisdom; and no objection grounded in any way can be made
against the possibility of such an Idea. If now at the same time
the moral motives of the mind are aroused, and a lively interest in
the latter is added by the force of eloquence (of which they are
indeed very worthy), then there arises therefrom a persuasion of the
objective adequacy of the proof; and also (in most cases of its use)
a wholesome illusion which quite dispenses with all examination of
its logical strictness, and even on the contrary regards this with
abhorrence and dislike as if an impious doubt lay at its basis.--Now
against this there is indeed nothing to say, so long as we only have
regard to its popular usefulness. But then the division of the proof
into the two dissimilar parts involved in the argument--belonging to
physical and moral Teleology respectively--cannot and must not be
prevented. For the blending of these makes it impossible to discern
where the proper force of the proof lies, and in what part and how it
must be elaborated in order that its validity may be able to stand the
strictest examination (even if we should be compelled to admit in one
part the weakness of our rational insight). Thus it is the duty of
the philosopher (supposing even that he counts as nothing the claims
of sincerity) to expose the above illusion, however wholesome it is,
which such a confusion can produce; and to distinguish what merely
belongs to persuasion from that which leads to conviction (for these
are determinations of assent which differ not merely in degree but in
kind), in order to present plainly the state of the mind in this proof
in its whole clearness, and to be able to subject it frankly to the
closest examination.

But a proof which is intended to convince, can again be of two kinds;
either deciding what the object is _in itself_, or what it is _for us_
(for men in general) according to our necessary rational principles of
judgement (proof κατ’ ἀλήθειαν or κατ’ ἄνθρωπον, the last word being
taken in its universal signification of man in general). In the first
case it is based on adequate principles for the determinant Judgement,
in the second for the reflective Judgement. In the latter case it
can never, when resting on merely theoretical principles, tend to
conviction; but if a practical principle of Reason (which is therefore
universally and necessarily valid) lies at its basis, it may certainly
lay claim to conviction adequate in a pure practical point of view,
_i.e._ to moral conviction. But a proof _tends to conviction_, though
without convincing, if it is [merely][139] brought on the way thereto;
_i.e._ if it contains in itself only objective grounds, which although
not attaining to certainty are yet of such a kind that they do not
serve merely for persuasion as subjective grounds of the judgement.[140]

All theoretical grounds of proof resolve themselves either into: (1)
Proofs by logically strict _Syllogisms of Reason_; or where this is not
the case, (2) _Conclusions_ according to _analogy_; or where this also
has no place, (3) _Probable opinion_; or finally, which has the least
weight, (4) Assumption of a merely possible ground of explanation,
_i.e._ _Hypothesis_.--Now I say that all grounds of proof in general,
which aim at theoretical conviction, can bring about no belief of this
kind from the highest to the lowest degree, if there is to be proved
the proposition of the _existence_ of an original Being, as a God, in
the signification adequate to the whole content of this concept; viz. a
_moral_ Author of the world, by whom the final purpose of creation is
at the same time supplied.

(1.) As to the _logically accurate_ proof proceeding from universal
to particular, we have sufficiently established in the Critique
the following: Since no intuition possible for us corresponds to
the concept of a Being that is to be sought beyond nature--whose
concept therefore, so far as it is to be theoretically determined by
synthetical predicates, remains always problematical for us--there
is absolutely no cognition of it to be had (by which the extent of
our theoretical knowledge is in the least enlarged). The particular
concept of a supersensible Being cannot be subsumed under the universal
principles of the nature of things, in order to conclude from them to
it, because those principles are valid simply for nature, as an object
of sense.

(2.) We can indeed _think_ one of two dissimilar things, even in
the very point of their dissimilarity, in accordance with the
_analogy_[141] of the other; but we cannot, from that wherein they are
dissimilar, _conclude_ from the one to the other by analogy, _i.e._
transfer from the one to the other this sign of specific distinction.
Thus I can, according to the analogy of the law of the equality of
action and reaction in the mutual attraction and repulsion of bodies,
also conceive of the association of the members of a commonwealth
according to rules of right; but I cannot transfer to it those specific
determinations (material attraction or repulsion), and ascribe them
to the citizens in order to constitute a system called a state.--Just
so we can indeed conceive of the causality of the original Being in
respect of the things of the world, as natural purposes, according to
the analogy of an Understanding, as ground of the forms of certain
products which we call works of art (for this only takes place on
behalf of the theoretical or practical use that we have to make by our
cognitive faculty of this concept in respect of the natural things
in the world according to a certain principle). But we can in no way
conclude according to analogy, because in the case of beings of the
world Understanding must be ascribed to the cause of an effect which
is judged artificial, that in respect of nature the same causality
which we perceive in men attaches also to the Being which is quite
distinct from nature. For this concerns the very point of dissimilarity
which is thought between a cause sensibly conditioned in respect of its
effects and the supersensible original Being itself in our concept of
it, and which therefore cannot be transferred from one to the other.--
In the very fact that I must conceive the divine causality only
according to the analogy of an Understanding (which faculty we know in
no other being than in sensibly-conditioned man) lies the prohibition
to ascribe to it this Understanding in its peculiar signification.[142]

(3.) _Opinion_ finds in _a priori_ judgements no place whatever, for
by them we either cognise something as quite certain or else cognise
nothing at all. But if the given grounds of proof from which we start
(as here from the purposes in the world) are empirical, then we cannot
even with their aid form any opinion as to anything beyond the world of
sense, nor can we concede to such venturesome judgements the smallest
claim to probability. For probability is part of a certainty possible
in a certain series of grounds (its grounds compare with the sufficient
ground as parts with a whole), the insufficient ground of which must
be susceptible of completion. But since, as determining grounds of one
and the same judgement, they must be of the same kind, for otherwise
they would not together constitute a whole (such as certainty is), one
part of them cannot lie within the bounds of possible experience and
another outside all possible experience. Consequently, since merely
empirical grounds of proof lead to nothing supersensible, and since
what is lacking in the series of them cannot in any way be completed,
we do not approach in the least nearer in our attempt to attain by
their means to the supersensible and to a cognition thereof. Thus in
any judgement about the latter by means of arguments derived from
experience, probability has no place.

(4.) If an _hypothesis_ is to serve for the explanation of the
possibility of a given phenomenon, at least its possibility must
be completely certain.[143] It is sufficient that in an hypothesis
I disclaim any cognition of actuality (which is claimed in an
opinion given out as probable); more than this I cannot give up. The
possibility of that which I place at the basis of my explanation,
must at least be exposed to no doubt; otherwise there would be no end
of empty chimeras. But to assume the possibility of a supersensible
Being determined according to certain concepts would be a completely
groundless supposition. For here none of the conditions requisite
for cognition, as regards that in it which rests upon intuition, is
given, and so the sole criterion of possibility remaining is the mere
principle of Contradiction (which can only prove the possibility of the
thought, not of the object thought).

The result then is this. For the existence [Dasein] of the original
Being, as a Godhead, or of the soul as an immortal spirit, absolutely
no proof in a theoretical point of view is possible for the human
Reason, which can bring about even the least degree of belief. The
ground of this is quite easy to comprehend. For determining our
Ideas of the supersensible we have no material whatever, and we
must derive this latter from things in the world of sense, which is
absolutely inadequate for such an Object. Thus, in the absence of all
determination of it, nothing remains but the concept of a non-sensible
something which contains the ultimate ground of the world of sense, but
which does not furnish any knowledge (any amplification of the concept)
of its inner constitution.


§ 91. _Of the kind of belief produced by a practical faith_

If we look merely to the way in which anything can be _for us_
(according to the subjective constitution of our representative powers)
an Object of knowledge (_res cognoscibilis_), then our concepts will
not cohere with Objects, but merely with our cognitive faculties and
the use which they can make of a given representation (in a theoretical
or practical point of view). Thus the question whether anything is or
is not a cognisable being is not a question concerning the possibility
of things but of our knowledge of them.

_Cognisable_ things are of three kinds: _things of opinion_
(_opinabile_); _things of fact_ (_scibile_); and _things of faith_
(_mere credibile_).

(1.) Objects of mere rational Ideas, which for theoretical knowledge
cannot be presented in any possible experience, are so far not
_cognisable_ things, and consequently in respect of them we can form
no _opinion_; for to form an opinion _a priori_ is absurd in itself
and the straight road to mere chimeras. Either then our proposition
is certain _a priori_ or it contains nothing for belief. Therefore
_things of opinion_ are always Objects of an empirical cognition at
least possible in itself (objects of the world of sense); but, which,
on account merely of the [low] degree of this faculty that we possess,
is _for us_ impossible. Thus the ether of the new physicists,[144]
an elastic fluid pervading all other matter (mingled intimately with
it) is a mere thing of opinion, yet is such that, if our external
senses were sharpened to the highest degree, it could be perceived;
though it can never be presented in any observation or experiment.
To assume [the existence of] rational inhabitants of other planets
is a thing of opinion; for if we could come closer to them, which is
in itself possible, we should decide by experience whether they did
or did not exist; but as we shall never come so near, it remains in
the region of opinion. But to hold the opinion that there are in the
material universe pure thinking spirits without bodies (viz. if we
dismiss as unworthy of our notice certain phenomena which have been
published as actual[145]) is to be called poetic fiction. This is no
thing of opinion, but a mere Idea which remains over, when we remove
from a thinking being everything material, and only leave thought
to it. Whether then the latter (which we know only in man, that is,
in combination with a body) does survive, we cannot decide. Such a
thing is a _sophistical being_ (_ens rationis ratiocinantis_), not a
_rational being_ (_ens rationis ratiocinatae_)[146]; of which latter it
is possible to show conclusively, the objective reality of its concept;
at least for the practical use of Reason, because this which has its
peculiar and apodictically certain principles _a priori_, demands
(postulates) it.

(2.) Objects for concepts, whose objective reality can be proved
(whether through pure Reason or through experience, and, in the first
case, from its theoretical or practical data, in all cases by means of
a corresponding intuition) are _things of fact_ (_res facti_).[147] Of
this kind are the mathematical properties of magnitudes (in geometry),
because they are susceptible of a _presentation a priori_ for the
theoretical use of Reason. Further, things or their characteristics,
which can be exhibited in experience (either our own or that of others
through the medium of testimony) are likewise things of fact.--And,
what is very remarkable, there is one rational Idea (susceptible in
itself of no presentation in intuition, and consequently, of no
theoretical proof of its possibility) which also comes under things of
fact. This is the Idea of _freedom_, whose reality, regarded as that
of a particular kind of causality (of which the concept, theoretically
considered, would be transcendent), may be exhibited by means of
practical laws of pure Reason, and conformably to this, in actual
actions, and, consequently, in experience.--This is the only one of all
the Ideas of pure Reason, whose object is a thing of fact, and to be
reckoned under the _scibilia_.

(3.) Objects, which in reference to the use of pure practical Reason
that is in conformity with duty must be thought _a priori_ (whether
as consequences or as grounds), but which are transcendent for its
theoretical use, are mere _things of faith_. Of this kind is the
_highest good_ in the world, to be brought about by freedom.[148]
The concept of this cannot be established as regards its objective
reality in any experience possible for us and thus adequately for
the theoretical use of Reason; but its use is commanded by practical
pure Reason [in reference to the best possible working out of that
purpose],[149] and it consequently must be assumed possible. This
commanded effect, _together with the only conditions of its possibility
thinkable by us_, viz. the Being of God and the immortality of the
soul, are _things of faith_ (_res fidei_), and of all objects are the
only ones which can be so called.[150] For though what we learn by
_testimony_ from the experience of others must be believed by us, yet
it is not therefore a thing of faith; for it was the proper experience
of some _one_ witness and so a thing of fact, or is presupposed as
such. Again it must be possible by this path (that of historical faith)
to arrive at knowledge; and the Objects of history and geography,
like everything in general which it is at least possible to know by
the constitution of our cognitive faculties, belong not to things of
faith but to things of fact. It is only objects of pure Reason which
can be things of faith at all, though not as objects of the mere pure
speculative Reason: for then they could not be reckoned with certainty
among things, _i.e._ Objects of that cognition which is possible for
us. They are Ideas, _i.e._ concepts of the objective reality of which
we cannot theoretically be certain. On the other hand, the highest
final purpose to be worked out by us, by which alone we can become
worthy of being ourselves the final purpose of creation, is an Idea
which has in a practical reference objective reality for us, and is
also a thing. But because we cannot furnish such reality to this
concept in a theoretical point of view, it is a mere thing of faith
of the pure Reason, along with God and Immortality, as the conditions
under which alone we, in accordance with the constitution of our
(human) Reason, can conceive the possibility of that effect of the use
of our freedom in conformity with law. But belief in things of faith is
a belief in a pure practical point of view, _i.e._ a moral faith, which
proves nothing for theoretical pure rational cognition, but only for
that which is practical and directed to the fulfilment of its duties;
it in no way extends speculation or the practical rules of prudence in
accordance with the principle of self-love. If the supreme principle
of all moral laws is a postulate, so is also the possibility of its
highest Object; and consequently, too, the condition under which we
can think this possibility is postulated along with it and by it.
Thus the cognition of the latter is neither knowledge nor opinion of
the being and character of these conditions, regarded as theoretical
cognition; but is a mere assumption in a reference which is practical
and commanded for the moral use of our Reason.

If we were able also plausibly to base upon the purposes of nature,
which physical Teleology presents to us in such rich abundance, a
_determinate_ concept of an intelligent World-Cause, then the existence
[Dasein] of this Being would not be a thing of faith. For since this
would not be assumed on behalf of the performance of my duty, but
only in reference to the explanation of nature, it would be merely
the opinion and hypothesis most conformable to our Reason. Now such
Teleology leads in no way to a determinate concept of God; on the
contrary, this can only be found in the concept of a moral Author of
the World, because this alone furnishes the final purpose to which
we can only reckon ourselves [as attached] if we behave conformably
to what the moral law prescribes as final purpose and consequently
obliges us [to do]. Hence it is only by its reference to the Object of
our duty, as the condition of the possibility of attaining the final
purpose of the same, that the concept of God attains the privilege
of counting as a thing of faith, in our belief; but on the other
hand, this same concept cannot make its Object valid as a thing of
fact. For, although the necessity of duty is very plain for practical
Reason, yet the attainment of its final purpose, so far as it is not
altogether in our own power, is only assumed on behalf of the practical
use of Reason, and therefore is not so practically necessary as duty
itself.[151]

_Faith_ (as _habitus_, not as _actus_) is the moral attitude of Reason
as to belief in that which is unattainable by theoretical cognition.
It is therefore the constant principle of the mind, to assume as true,
on account of the obligation in reference to it, that which it is
necessary to presuppose as condition of the possibility of the highest
moral final purpose[152]; although its possibility or impossibility
be alike impossible for us to see into. Faith (absolutely so called)
is trust in the attainment of a design, the promotion of which is a
duty, but the possibility of the fulfilment of which (and consequently
also that of the only conditions of it thinkable by us) is not to be
_comprehended_ by us. Faith, then, that refers to particular objects,
which are not objects of possible knowledge or opinion (in which latter
case it ought to be called, especially in historical matters, credulity
and not faith), is quite moral. It is a free belief, not in that for
which dogmatical proofs for the theoretically determinant Judgement
are to be found, or in that to which we hold ourselves bound, but in
that which we assume on behalf of a design in accordance with laws of
freedom. This, however, is not, like opinion, without any adequate
ground; but, is grounded as in Reason (although only in respect of its
practical employment), and _adequately for its design_. For without
this, the moral attitude of thought in its repudiation of the claim of
the theoretical Reason for proofs (of the possibility of the Objects
of morality) has no permanence; but wavers between practical commands
and theoretical doubts. To be _incredulous_ means to cling to maxims,
and not to believe testimony in general; but he is _unbelieving_,
who denies all validity to rational Ideas, because there is wanting
a _theoretical_ ground of their reality.[154] He judges therefore
dogmatically. A dogmatical _unbelief_ cannot subsist together with a
moral maxim dominant in the mental attitude (for Reason cannot command
one to follow a purpose, which is cognised as nothing more than a
chimera); but a _doubtful faith_ can. To this the absence of conviction
by grounds of speculative Reason is only a hindrance, the influence of
which upon conduct a critical insight into the limits of this faculty
can remove, while it substitutes by way of compensation a paramount
practical belief.


       *       *       *       *       *

If, in place of certain mistaken attempts, we wish to introduce a
different principle into philosophy and to promote its influence, it
makes us highly contented to see how and why those attempts must have
disappointed us.

_God_, _freedom_, and _immortality_, are the problems at the solution
of which all the equipments of Metaphysic aim, as their ultimate and
unique purpose. Now it was believed that the doctrine of freedom is
needed for practical philosophy only as its negative condition; but
that on the other hand the doctrine of God and of the constitution of
the soul, as belonging to theoretical philosophy, must be established
for themselves and separately, in order afterwards to unite both
with that which the moral law (possible only under the condition of
freedom) commands, and so to constitute a religion. But we can easily
see that these attempts must fail. For from mere ontological concepts
of things in general, or of the existence of a necessary Being, it
is possible to form absolutely no determinate concept of an original
Being by means of predicates which can be given in experience and can
therefore serve for cognition. Again a concept based on experience of
the physical purposiveness of nature could furnish no adequate proof
for morality, or consequently for cognition of a Deity. Just as little
could the cognition of the soul by means of experience (which we only
apply in this life) supply us with a concept of its spiritual immortal
nature, a concept which would be adequate for morality. _Theology_ and
_Pneumatology_, regarded as problems of the sciences of a speculative
Reason, can be established by no empirical data and predicates,
because the concept of them is transcendent for our whole cognitive
faculty.--The determination of both concepts, God and the soul (in
respect of its immortality) alike, can only take place by means of
predicates, which, although they are only possible from a supersensible
ground, must yet prove their reality in experience; for thus alone can
they make possible a cognition of a quite supersensible Being.--The
only concept of this kind to be met with in human Reason is that of the
freedom of men under moral laws, along with the final purpose which
Reason prescribes by these laws. Of these two [the moral laws and the
final purpose] the first are useful for ascribing to the Author of
Nature, the second for ascribing to man, those properties which contain
the necessary condition of the possibility of both [God and the soul];
so that from this Idea a conclusion can be drawn as to the existence
and constitution of these beings which are otherwise quite hidden from
us.

Thus the ground of the failure of the attempt to prove God and
immortality by the merely theoretical path lies in this, that no
cognition whatever is possible of the supersensible in this way (of
natural concepts). The ground of its success by the moral way (of the
concept of freedom) is as follows. Here the supersensible (freedom),
which in this case is fundamental, by a determinate law of causality
that springs from it, not only supplies material for cognition of other
supersensibles (the moral final purpose and the conditions of its
attainability), but also establishes its reality in actions as a fact;
though at the same time it can furnish a valid ground of proof in no
other than a practical point of view (the only one, however, of which
Religion has need).

It is thus very remarkable that of the three pure rational Ideas,
_God_, _freedom_, and _immortality_, that of freedom is the only
concept of the supersensible which (by means of the causality that is
thought in it) proves its objective reality in nature by means of the
effects it can produce there; and thus renders possible the connexion
of both the others with nature, and of all three together with
Religion. We have therefore in us a principle capable of determining
the Idea of the supersensible within us, and thus also that of the
supersensible without us, for knowledge, although only in a practical
point of view; a principle this of which mere speculative philosophy
(which could give a merely negative concept of freedom) must despair.
Consequently the concept of freedom (as fundamental concept of all
unconditioned practical laws) can extend Reason beyond those bounds,
within which every natural (theoretical) concept must remain hopelessly
limited.


_General remark on Teleology_

If the question is, what rank the moral argument, which proves the
Being of God only as a thing of faith for the practical pure Reason,
maintains among the other arguments in philosophy, it is easy to set
aside the whole achievement of this last; by which it appears that
there is no choice, but that our theoretical faculty must give up all
its pretensions before an impartial criticism.

All belief must in the first place be grounded upon facts, if it is
not to be completely groundless; and therefore the only distinction
in proofs that there can be is that belief in the consequence derived
therefrom can either be grounded on this fact as _knowledge_ for
theoretical cognition, or merely as _faith_ for practical. All facts
belong either to the _natural concept_ which proves its reality in the
objects of sense, given (or which may possibly be given) before all
natural concepts; or to the _concept of freedom_, which sufficiently
establishes its reality through the causality of Reason in regard of
certain effects in the world of sense, possible through it, which it
incontrovertibly postulates in the moral law. The natural concept
(merely belonging to theoretical cognition) is now either metaphysical
and thinkable completely _a priori_, or physical, _i.e._ thinkable
_a posteriori_ and as necessary only through determinate experience.
The metaphysical natural concept (which presupposes no determinate
experience) is therefore ontological.

The _ontological_ proof of the being of God from the concept of an
original Being is either that which from ontological predicates,
by which alone it can be thought as completely determined, infers
absolutely necessary being; or that which, from the absolute necessity
of the being somewhere of some thing, whatever it be, infers the
predicates of the original Being. For there belongs to the concept of
an original Being, inasmuch as it is not derived from anything, the
unconditioned necessity of its presence, and (in order to represent
this) its complete determination by its [mere][155] concept. It was
believed that both requirements were found in the concept of the
ontological Idea of a _Being the most real of all_; and thus two
metaphysical proofs originated.

The proof (properly called ontological) resting upon a merely
metaphysical natural concept concludes from the concept of the
Being the most real of all, its absolutely necessary existence;
for (it is said), if it did not exist, a reality would be wanting
to it, viz. existence.--The other (which is also called the
metaphysico-_cosmological_ proof) concludes from the necessity of the
existence somewhere of a thing (which must be conceded, for a being
is given to us in self-consciousness), its complete determination as
that of a Being the most real of all; for everything existing must be
completely determined, but the absolutely necessary (_i.e._ that which
_we_ ought to cognise as such and consequently _a priori_) must be
completely determined _by means of its own concept_. But this is only
the case with the concept of a thing the most real of all. It is not
needful to expose here the sophistry in both arguments, which has been
already done elsewhere;[156] it is only needful to remark that neither
proof, even if they could be defended by all manner of dialectical
subtlety, could ever pass from the schools into the world, or have the
slightest influence on the mere sound Understanding.

The proof, which rests on a natural concept that can only be empirical
and yet is to lead us beyond the bounds of nature regarded as the
complex of the objects of sense, can be no other than that derived from
the _purposes_ of nature. The concept of these cannot, it is true,
be given _a priori_ but only through experience; but yet it promises
such a concept of the original ground of nature as alone, among all
those which we can conceive, is suited to the supersensible, viz. that
of a highest Understanding as Cause of the world. This, in fact, it
completely performs in accordance with principles of the reflective
Judgement, _i.e._ in accordance with the constitution of our (human)
faculty of cognition.--But whether or not it is in a position to supply
from the same data this concept of a _supreme_, _i.e._ independent
intelligent Being, in short of a God or Author of a world under moral
laws, and consequently as sufficiently determined for the Idea of a
final purpose of the being of the world--this is the question upon
which everything depends, whether we desire a theoretically adequate
concept of the Original Being on behalf of our whole knowledge of
nature, or a practical concept for religion.

This argument derived from physical Teleology is worthy of respect. It
produces a similar effect in the way of conviction upon the common
Understanding as upon the subtlest thinker; and a _Reimarus_[157] has
acquired immortal honour in his work (not yet superseded), in which he
abundantly develops this ground of proof with his peculiar thoroughness
and lucidity.--But how does this proof acquire such mighty influence
upon the mind? How does a judgement by cold reason (for we might
refer to persuasion the emotion and elevation of reason produced by
the wonders of nature) issue thus in a calm and unreserved assent? It
is not the physical purposes, which all indicate in the World Cause
an unfathomable intelligence; these are inadequate thereto, because
they do not satisfy the need of the inquiring Reason. For, wherefore
(it asks) are all those natural things that exhibit art? Wherefore is
man himself, whom we must regard as the ultimate purpose of nature
thinkable by us? Wherefore is this collective Nature here, and what
is the final purpose of such great and manifold art? Reason cannot
be contented with enjoyment or with contemplation, observation, and
admiration (which, if it stops there, is only enjoyment of a particular
kind) as the ultimate final purpose for the creation of the world and
of man himself; for this presupposes a personal worth, which man alone
can give himself, as the condition under which alone he and his being
can be the final purpose. Failing this (which alone is susceptible
of a definite concept), the purposes of nature do not satisfactorily
answer our questions; especially because they cannot furnish any
_determinate_ concept of the highest Being as an all-sufficient (and
therefore unique and so properly called _highest_) being, and of the
laws according to which an Understanding is Cause of the world.

Hence that the physico-teleological proof convinces, just as if it were
a theological proof, does not arise from our availing ourselves of the
Ideas of purposes of nature as so many empirical grounds of proof of
a _highest_ Understanding. But it mingles itself unnoticed with that
moral ground of proof, which dwells in every man and influences him
secretly, in the conclusion by which we ascribe to the Being, which
manifests itself with such incomprehensible art in the purposes of
nature, a final purpose and consequently wisdom (without however being
justified in doing so by the perception of the former); and by which
therefore we arbitrarily fill up the lacunas of the [design] argument.
In fact it is only the moral ground of proof which produces conviction,
and that only in a moral reference with which every man feels inwardly
his agreement. But the physico-teleological proof has only the merit
of leading the mind, in its consideration of the world, by the way of
purposes and through them to an _intelligent_ Author of the world. The
moral reference to purposes and the Idea of a moral legislator and
Author of the world, as a theological concept, seem to be developed of
themselves out of that ground of proof, although they are in truth pure
additions.

Henceforward we may allow the customary statement to stand. For it
is generally difficult (if the distinction requires much reflection)
for ordinary sound Understanding to distinguish from one another as
heterogeneous the different principles which it confuses, and from
one of which alone it actually draws conclusions with correctness. The
moral ground of proof of the Being of God, properly speaking, does
not merely _complete_ and render perfect the physico-teleological
proof; but it is a special proof that _supplies_ the conviction which
is wanting in the latter. This latter in fact can do nothing more
than guide Reason, in its judgements upon the ground of nature and
that contingent but admirable order of nature only known to us by
experience, to the causality of a Cause containing the ground of the
same in accordance with purposes (which we by the constitution of our
cognitive faculties must think as an intelligent cause); and thus by
arresting the attention of Reason it makes it more susceptible of
the moral proof. For what is requisite to the latter concept is so
essentially different from everything which natural concepts contain
and can teach, that there is need of a particular ground of proof
quite independent of the former, in order to supply the concept of the
original Being adequately for Theology and to infer its existence.--The
moral proof (which it is true only proves the Being of God in a
practical though indispensable aspect of Reason) would preserve all
its force, if we found in the world no material, or only that which
is doubtful, for physical Teleology. It is possible to conceive
rational beings surrounded by a nature which displayed no clear trace
of organisation but only the effects of a mere mechanism of crude
matter; on behalf of which and amid the changeability of some merely
contingent purposive forms and relations there would appear to be no
ground for inferring an intelligent Author. In such case there would
be no occasion for a physical Teleology; and yet Reason, which here
gets no guidance from natural concepts, would find in the concept of
freedom and in the moral Ideas founded thereon a practically sufficient
ground for postulating the concept of the original Being in conformity
with these, _i.e._ as a Deity, and for postulating nature (even the
nature of our own being) as a final purpose in accordance with freedom
and its laws--and all this in reference to the indispensable command of
practical Reason.--However the fact that there is in the actual world
for the rational beings in it abundant material for physical Teleology
(even though this is not necessary) serves as a desirable confirmation
of the moral argument, as far as nature can exhibit anything analogous
to the (moral) rational Ideas. For the concept of a supreme Cause
possessing intelligence (though not reaching far enough for a Theology)
thus acquires sufficient reality for the reflective Judgement, but it
is not required as the basis of the moral proof; nor does this latter
serve to complete as a proof the former, which does not by itself point
to morality at all, by means of an argument developed according to
a single principle. Two such heterogeneous principles as nature and
freedom can only furnish two different kinds of proof; and the attempt
to derive one from the other is found unavailing as regards that which
is to be proved.

If the physico-teleological ground of proof sufficed for the proof
which is sought, it would be very satisfactory for the speculative
Reason; for it would furnish the hope of founding a Theosophy (for
so we must call the theoretical cognition of the divine nature and
its existence which would suffice at once for the explanation of the
constitution of the world and for the determination of moral laws).
In the same way if Psychology enabled us to arrive at a cognition
of the immortality of the soul it would make Pneumatology possible,
which would be just as welcome to the speculative Reason. But neither,
agreeable as they would be to the arrogance of our curiosity, would
satisfy the wish of Reason in respect of a theory which must be based
on a cognition of the nature of things. Whether the first, as Theology,
and the second, as Anthropology, when founded on the moral principle,
_i.e._ the principle of freedom, and consequently in accordance with
the practical use [of Reason] do not better fulfil their objective
final design, is another question which we need not here pursue.

The physico-teleological ground of proof does not reach to Theology,
because it does not and cannot give any determinate concept, sufficient
for this design, of the original Being; but we must derive this from
quite another quarter, or must supply its lacuna by an arbitrary
addition. You infer, from the great purposiveness of natural forms and
their relations, a world-cause endowed with Understanding; but what is
the degree of this Understanding? Without doubt you cannot assume that
it is the highest possible Understanding; because for that it would be
requisite that you should see that a greater Understanding than that
of which you perceive proofs in the world, is not thinkable; and this
would be to ascribe Omniscience to yourself.[158] In the same way,
if you infer from the magnitude of the world the very great might of
its Author, you must be content with this having only a comparative
significance for your faculty of comprehension; for since you do not
know all that is possible, so as to compare it with the magnitude of
the world as far as you know it, you cannot infer the Almightiness
of its Author from so small a standard, and so on. Now you arrive in
this way at no definite concept of an original Being available for a
Theology; for this can only be found in the concept of the totality of
perfections compatible with intelligence, and you cannot help yourself
to this by merely _empirical_ data. But without such a definite concept
you cannot infer a _unique_ intelligent original Being; you can only
assume it (with whatever motive).--Now it may certainly be conceded
that you should arbitrarily add (for Reason has nothing fundamental to
say to the contrary): Where so much perfection is found, we may well
assume that all perfection is united in a unique Cause of the world,
because Reason succeeds better both theoretically and practically with
a principle thus definite. But then you cannot regard this concept
of the original Being as proved by you, for you have only assumed it
on behalf of a better employment of Reason. Hence all lamentation or
impotent anger on account of the alleged mischief of rendering doubtful
the coherency of your chain of reasoning, is vain pretentiousness,
which would fain have us believe that the doubt here freely expressed
as to your argument is a doubting of sacred truth, in order that under
this cover the shallowness of your argument may pass unnoticed.

Moral Teleology, on the other hand, which is not less firmly based
than physical,--which, indeed, rather deserves the preference because
it rests _a priori_ on principles inseparable from our Reason--leads
to that which is requisite for the possibility of a Theology, viz. to
a determinate _concept_ of the supreme Cause, as Cause of the world
according to moral laws, and, consequently, to the concept of such a
cause as satisfies our moral final purpose. For this are required, as
natural properties belonging to it, nothing less than Omniscience,
Omnipotence, Omnipresence, and the like, which must be thought as
bound up with the moral final purpose which is infinite and thus as
adequate to it. Hence moral Teleology alone can furnish the concept of
a _unique_ Author of the world, which is available for a Theology.

In this way Theology leads immediately to _Religion_, _i.e._ _the
recognition of our duties as divine commands_[159]; because it is only
the recognition of our duty and of the final purpose enjoined upon us
by Reason which brings out with definiteness the concept of God. This
concept, therefore, is inseparable in its origin from obligation to
that Being. On the other hand, even if the concept of the original
Being could be also found determinately by the merely theoretical path
(viz. the concept of it as mere Cause of nature), it would afterwards
be very difficult--perhaps impossible without arbitrary interpolation
[of elements]--to ascribe to this Being by well-grounded proofs a
causality in accordance with moral laws; and yet without this that
quasi-theological concept could furnish no foundation for religion.
Even if a religion could be established by this theoretical path, it
would actually, as regards sentiment (wherein its essence lies) be
different from that in which the concept of God and the (practical)
conviction of His Being originate from the fundamental Ideas of
morality. For if we must suppose the Omnipotence, Omniscience, etc., of
an Author of the world as concepts given to us from another quarter,
in order afterwards only to apply our concepts of duties to our
relation to Him, then these latter concepts must bear very markedly
the appearance of compulsion and forced submission. If, instead of
this, the respect for the moral law, quite freely, in virtue of the
precept of our own Reason, represents to us the final purpose of our
destination, we admit among our moral views a Cause harmonising with
this and with its accomplishment, with the sincerest reverence, which
is quite distinct from pathological fear; and we willingly submit
ourselves thereto.[160]

If it be asked why it is incumbent upon us to have any Theology at all,
it appears clear that it is not needed for the extension or correction
of our cognition of nature or in general for any theory, but simply
in a subjective point of view for Religion, _i.e._ the practical or
moral use of our Reason. If it is found that the only argument which
leads to a definite concept of the object of Theology is itself moral,
it is not only not strange, but we miss nothing in respect of its
final purpose as regards the sufficiency of belief from this ground
of proof, provided that it be admitted that such an argument only
establishes the Being of God sufficiently for our moral destination,
_i.e._ in a practical point of view, and that here speculation neither
shows its strength in any way, nor extends by means of it the sphere
of its domain. Our surprise and the alleged contradiction between the
possibility of a Theology asserted here and that which the Critique
of speculative Reason said of the Categories--viz. that they can only
produce knowledge when applied to objects of sense, but in no way when
applied to the supersensible--vanish, if we see that they are here
used for a cognition of God not in a theoretical point of view (in
accordance with what His own nature, inscrutable to us, may be) but
simply in a practical.--In order then at this opportunity to make an
end of the misinterpretation of that very necessary doctrine of the
Critique, which, to the chagrin of the blind dogmatist, refers Reason
to its bounds, I add here the following elucidation.

If I ascribe to a body _motive force_ and thus think it by means of
the category of _causality_, then I at the same time _cognise_ it
by that [category]; _i.e._ I determine the concept of it, as of an
Object in general, by means of what belongs to it by itself (as the
condition of the possibility of that relation) as an object of sense.
If the motive force ascribed to it is repulsive, then there belongs to
it (although I do not place near it any other body upon which it may
exert force) a place in space, and moreover extension, _i.e._ space
in itself, besides the filling up of this by means of the repulsive
forces of its parts. In addition there is the law of this filling up
(that the ground of the repulsion of the parts must decrease in the
same proportion as the extension of the body increases, and as the
space, which it fills with the same parts by means of this force, is
augmented).--On the contrary, if I think a supersensible Being as the
first _mover_, and thus by the category of causality as regards its
determination of the world (motion of matter), I must not think it as
existing in any place in space nor as extended; I must not even think
it as existing in time or simultaneously with other beings. Hence I
have no determinations whatever, which could make intelligible to me
the condition of the possibility of motion by means of this Being as
its ground. Consequently, I do not in the very least cognise it by
means of the predicate of Cause (as first mover), for itself; but I
have only the representation of a something containing the ground
of the motions in the world; and the relation of the latter to it
as their cause, since it does not besides furnish me with anything
belonging to the constitution of the thing which is cause, leaves its
concept quite empty. The reason of this is, that by predicates which
only find their Object in the world of sense I can indeed proceed
to the being of something which must contain their ground, but not
to the determination of its concept as a supersensible being, which
excludes all these predicates. By the category of causality, then,
if I determine it by the concept of a _first mover_, I do not in the
very least cognise what God is. Perhaps, however, I shall have better
success if I start from the order of the world, not merely to _think_
its causality as that of a supreme _Understanding_, but to _cognise_
it by means of this determination of the said concept; because here
the troublesome condition of space and of extension disappears.--At
all events the great purposiveness in the world compels us to _think_
a supreme cause of it, and to _think_ its causality as that of an
Understanding; but we are not therefore entitled to _ascribe_ this to
it. (_E.g._ we think of the eternity of God as presence in all time,
because we can form no other concept of mere being as a quantum, _i.e._
as duration; or we think of the divine Omnipresence as presence in
all places in order to make comprehensible to ourselves His immediate
presence in things which are external to one another; without daring
to ascribe to God any of these determinations, as something cognised
in Him.) If I determine the causality of a man, in respect of certain
products which are only explicable by designed purposiveness, by
thinking it as that of Understanding, I need not stop here, but I can
ascribe to him this predicate as a well-known property and cognise him
accordingly. For I know that intuitions are given to the senses of men
and are brought by the Understanding under a concept and thus under a
rule; that this concept only contains the common characteristic (with
omission of the particular ones) and is thus discursive; and that the
rules for bringing given representations under a consciousness in
general are given by Understanding before those intuitions, etc. I
therefore ascribe this property to man as a property by means of which
I _cognise_ him. However, if I wish to _think_ a supersensible Being
(God) as an intelligence, this is not only permissible in a certain
aspect of my employment of Reason--it is unavoidable; but to ascribe
to Him Understanding and to flatter ourselves that we can _cognise_
Him by means of it as a property of His, is in no way permissible.
For I must omit all those conditions under which alone I know an
Understanding, and thus the predicate which only serves for determining
man cannot be applied at all to a supersensible Object; and therefore
by a causality thus determined, I cannot cognise what God is. And so it
is with all Categories, which can have no significance for cognition in
a theoretical aspect, if they are not applied to objects of possible
experience.--However, according to the analogy of an Understanding I
can in a certain other aspect think a supersensible being, without at
the same time meaning thereby to cognise it theoretically; viz. if this
determination of its causality concerns an effect in the world, which
contains a design morally necessary but unattainable by a sensible
being. For then a cognition of God and of His Being (Theology) is
possible by means of properties and determinations of His causality
merely thought in Him according to analogy, which has all requisite
reality in a practical reference though _only in respect of this_
(as moral).--An Ethical Theology is therefore possible; for though
morality can subsist without theology as regards its rule, it cannot
do so as regards the final design which this proposes, unless Reason
in respect of it is to be renounced. But a Theological Ethic (of pure
Reason) is impossible; for laws which Reason itself does not give and
whose observance it does not bring about as a pure practical faculty,
can not be moral. In the same way a Theological Physic would be a
nonentity, for it would propose no laws of nature but ordinances of a
Highest Will; while on the other hand a physical (properly speaking a
physico-teleological) Theology can serve at least as a propaedeutic
to Theology proper, by giving occasion for the Idea of a final purpose
which nature cannot present by the observation of natural purposes of
which it offers abundant material. It thus makes felt the need of a
Theology which shall determine the concept of God adequately for the
highest practical use of Reason, but it cannot develop this and base it
satisfactorily on its proofs.


THE END


_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




WORKS ON PHILOSOPHY


By IMMANUEL KANT

  KANT’S CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY FOR ENGLISH READERS. By J. P. MAHAFFY,
    D.D., and The Right Rev. J. H. BERNARD, D.D. Two vols. Crown 8vo.

    Vol. I. THE KRITIK OF THE PURE REASON EXPLAINED AND DEFENDED. 7s.
      6d.

    Vol. II. PROLEGOMENA. Translated, with Notes and Appendices. 6s.

  CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON. Translated by F. MAX MÜLLER. Second Edition,
    Revised. Extra Crown 8vo. 15s. net.

  CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON. Translated by F. MAX MÜLLER. Vol. 1.
    Containing Translator’s Preface; Historical Introduction by LUDWIG
    NOIRÉ; and Additions made by KANT in the Second Edition of the
    Critique. 8vo. 16s.


By Professor HENRI BERGSON

  CREATIVE EVOLUTION. Translated by ARTHUR MITCHELL, Ph.D. 8vo. 10s.
    net.

  LAUGHTER: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic. Authorised
    Translation from the Sixth Edition by CLOUDESLEY BRERETON, L. ès L.
    (Paris), M.A. (Cantab.); and FRED ROTHWELL, B.A. (London). Extra
    Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. net.

  AN INTRODUCTION TO METAPHYSICS. Translated by T. E. HULME. Crown 8vo.
    2s. net.

  A CRITICAL EXPOSITION OF BERGSON’S PHILOSOPHY. By J. McKELLAR
    STEWART, B.A., D.Phil. 8vo. 5s. net.


By BENEDETTO CROCE

  PHILOSOPHY OF THE PRACTICAL. Economic and Ethic. Translated by
    DOUGLAS AINSLIE, B.A. 8vo. 12s. net.

  ÆSTHETIC AS SCIENCE OF EXPRESSION AND GENERAL LINGUISTIC. Translated
    by DOUGLAS AINSLIE, B.A. 8vo. 10s. net.

  ENCYCLOPÆDIA OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCES. Edited by WILHELM
    WINDELBAND and ARNOLD RUGE. English Edition under the Editorship of
    Sir HENRY JONES. 8vo.

    Vol. I. LOGIC. By ARNOLD RUGE, WILHELM WINDELBAND, JOSIAH ROYCE,
      LOUIS COUTURAT, BENEDETTO CROCE, FEDERIGO ENRIQUES, and NICOLAJ
      LOSSKIJ. 7s. 6d. net.

LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.




WORKS ON PHILOSOPHY


THE SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY

A HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT

BY VARIOUS WRITERS

EDITED BY

SIR HENRY JONES

PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

  THE EVOLUTION OF EDUCATIONAL THEORY. By Professor JOHN ADAMS, M.A.,
    B.Sc., LL.D. 8vo. 10s. net.

  THE HISTORY OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY. By Professor JOHN BURNET, LL.D. Vol.
    I. From Thales to Plato.                            [_In the Press._

  THE HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY FROM HOBBES TO REID. By Professor
    G. F. STOUT.                                      [_In preparation._

  _Other volumes to follow._

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE PRINCIPLE OF INDIVIDUALITY AND VALUE. The Gifford Lectures for
    1911. By BERNARD BOSANQUET, LL.D., D.C.L. 8vo. 10s. net.

  THE VALUE AND DESTINY OF THE INDIVIDUAL. The Gifford Lectures for
    1912 By BERNARD BOSANQUET, LL.D., D.C.L. 8vo. 10s. net.

  THE CROWNING PHASE OF THE CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY. A Study in Kant’s
    Critique of Judgment. By R. A. C. MACMILLAN, M.A., D.Phil. 8vo.
    10s. net.

  THE HISTORY AND THEORY OF VITALISM. By Prof. HANS DRIESCH, Ph.D.
    Translated by C. K. OGDEN, B.A. Revised throughout and in part
    rewritten by the Author for the English Edition. Crown 8vo.
                                                        [_In the Press._

  THE PROBLEM OF INDIVIDUALITY. Lectures. By Prof. HANS DRIESCH, Ph.D.
    8vo.                                                [_In the Press._

  THE FOUNDATIONS OF CHARACTER. Being a Study of the Emotions and
    Sentiments. By ALEXANDER F. SHAND, M.A. 8vo.        [_In the Press._

  THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY. By L. SILBERSTEIN, Ph.D. 8vo.
                                                        [_In the Press._

  MODERN PHILOSOPHERS. Lectures. By HARALD HÖFFDING. Translated by
    ALFRED C. MASON, M.A. Crown 8vo.                    [_In the Press._


LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.




FOOTNOTES:


[1] Dr. Caird (_Critical Philosophy of Kant_, vol. ii. p. 406) has
given an instructive account of the gradual development in Kant’s mind
of the main idea of the Critique of Judgement.

[2] _Natural Theology and Modern Thought_, p. 158.

[3] I reproduce here in part a paper read before the Victoria Institute
in April 1892.

[4] _Critique of Pure Reason._ Dialectic, Bk. ii. chap. i. near the end.

[5] Cf. Kuno Fischer, _A Critique of Kant_, p. 142.

[6] Quoted by Caird, _Critical Philosophy of Kant_, vol. ii. p. 507,
who reiterates this criticism all through his account of Kant’s
teaching.

[7] _Natural Theology and Modern Thought_, p. 241.

[8] [Reading, with Windelband, _in sicheren alleinigen Besitz_.]

[9] If we have cause for supposing that concepts which we use as
empirical principles stand in relationship with the pure cognitive
faculty _a priori_, it is profitable, because of this reference,
to seek for them a transcendental definition; _i.e._ a definition
through pure categories, so far as these by themselves adequately
furnish the distinction of the concept in question from others. We
here follow the example of the mathematician who leaves undetermined
the empirical data of his problem, and only brings their relation in
their pure synthesis under the concepts of pure Arithmetic, and thus
generalises the solution. Objection has been brought against a similar
procedure of mine (cf. the Preface to the Critique of Practical Reason,
_Abbott’s Translation_, p. 94), and my definition of the faculty
of desire has been found fault with, viz. that it is [the being’s]
_faculty of becoming by means of its representations the cause of the
actuality of the objects of these representations_; for the desires
might be mere _cravings_, and by means of these alone every one is
convinced the Object cannot be produced.--But this proves nothing more
than that there are desires in man, by which he is in contradiction
with himself. For here he strives for the production of the Object
by means of the representation _alone_, from which he can expect no
result, because he is conscious that his mechanical powers (if I may
so call those which are not psychological) which must be determined
by that representation to bring about the Object (mediately) are
either not competent, or even tend towards what is impossible; e.g.
to reverse the past (_O mihi praeteritos_ ... etc.), or to annihilate
in the impatience of expectation the interval before the wished for
moment.--Although in such fantastic desires we are conscious of the
inadequacy (or even the unsuitability) of our representations for
being _causes_ of their objects, yet their reference as causes, and
consequently the representation of their _causality_, is contained in
every _wish_; and this is specially evident if the wish is an affection
or _longing_. For these [longings] by their dilatation and contraction
of the heart and consequent exhaustion of its powers, prove that these
powers are continually kept on the stretch by representations, but that
they perpetually let the mind, having regard to the impossibility [of
the desire], fall back in exhaustion. Even prayers for the aversion
of great and (as far as one can see) unavoidable evils, and many
superstitious means for attaining in a natural way impossible purposes,
point to the causal reference of representations to their Objects; a
reference which cannot at all be checked by the consciousness of the
inadequacy of the effort to produce the effect.--As to why there should
be in our nature this propensity to desires which are consciously vain,
that is an anthropologico-teleological problem. It seems that if we
were not determined to the application of our powers before we were
assured of the adequacy of our faculties to produce an Object, these
powers would remain in great part unused. For we commonly learn to
know our powers only by first making trial of them. This deception in
the case of vain wishes is then only the consequence of a benevolent
ordinance in our nature. [This note was added by Kant in the Second
Edition.]

[10] One of the various pretended contradictions in this whole
distinction of the causality of nature from that of freedom is
this. It is objected that if I speak of _obstacles_ which nature
opposes to causality according to (moral) laws of freedom or of the
_assistance_ it affords, I am admitting an _influence_ of the former
upon the latter. But if we try to understand what has been said, this
misinterpretation is very easy to avoid. The opposition or assistance
is not between nature and freedom, but between the former as phenomenon
and the _effects_ of the latter as phenomena in the world of sense.
The causality of freedom itself (of pure and practical Reason) is
the causality of a natural cause subordinated to freedom (_i.e._
of the subject considered as man and therefore as phenomenon). The
intelligible, which is thought under freedom, contains the ground of
the _determination_ of this [natural cause] in a way not explicable
any further (just as that intelligible does which constitutes the
supersensible substrate of nature).

[11] It has been thought a doubtful point that my divisions in pure
Philosophy should always be threefold. But that lies in the nature of
the thing. If there is to be an _a priori_ division it must be either
_analytical_, according to the law of contradiction, which is always
twofold (_quodlibet ens est aut A aut non A_); or it is _synthetical_.
And if in this latter case it is to be derived from _a priori concepts_
(not as in Mathematic from the intuition corresponding to the concept),
the division must necessarily be trichotomy. For according to what
is requisite for synthetical unity in general there must be (1) a
condition, (2) a conditioned, and (3) the concept which arises from the
union of the conditioned with its condition.

[12] The definition of taste which is laid down here is that it is the
faculty of judging of the beautiful. But the analysis of judgements of
taste must show what is required in order to call an object beautiful.
The moments, to which this Judgement has regard in its reflection, I
have sought in accordance with the guidance of the logical functions of
judgement (for in a judgement of taste a reference to the Understanding
is always involved). I have considered the moment of quality first,
because the aesthetical judgement upon the beautiful first pays
attention to it.

[13] A judgement upon an object of satisfaction may be quite
_disinterested_, but yet very _interesting_, _i.e._ not based upon an
interest, but bringing an interest with it; of this kind are all pure
moral judgements. Judgements of taste, however, do not in themselves
establish any interest. Only in society is it _interesting_ to have
taste: the reason of this will be shown in the sequel.

[14] [Second Edition.]

[15] An obligation to enjoyment is a manifest absurdity. Thus the
obligation to all actions which have merely enjoyment for their aim can
only be a pretended one; however spiritually it may be conceived (or
decked out), even if it is a mystical, or so-called heavenly, enjoyment.

[16] [Second Edition.]

[17] [Second Edition.]

[18] [Ueberweg points out (_Hist. of Phil._, ii. 528, Eng. Trans.)
that Mendelssohn had already called attention to the disinterestedness
of our satisfaction in the Beautiful. “It appears,” says Mendelssohn,
“to be a particular mark of the beautiful, that it is contemplated
with quiet satisfaction, that it pleases, even though it be not in our
possession, and even though we be never so far removed from the desire
to put it to our use.” But, of course, as Ueberweg remarks, Kant’s
conception of disinterestedness extends far beyond the absence of a
desire to possess the object.]

[19] [Reading _besondere_ with Windelband; Hartenstein reads
_bestimmte_.]

[20] [_I.e._ _The Critique of Pure Reason_, Analytic, bk. ii. c. i.]

[21] [Second Edition. Spencer expresses much more concisely what Kant
has in his mind here. “Pleasure ... is a feeling which we seek to
bring into consciousness and retain there; pain is ... a feeling which
we seek to get out of consciousness and to keep out.” _Principles of
Psychology_, § 125.]

[22] [The editions of Hartenstein and Kirchmann omit _ohne_ before
_zweck_, which makes havoc of the sentence. It is correctly printed by
Rosenkranz and Windelband.]

[23] [First Edition.]

[24] [Cf. _Metaphysic of Morals_, Introd. I. “The pleasure which
is necessarily bound up with the desire (of the object whose
representation affects feeling) may be called _practical_ pleasure,
whether it be cause or effect of the desire. On the contrary, the
pleasure which is not necessarily bound up with the desire of the
object, and which, therefore, is at bottom not a pleasure in the
existence of the Object of the representation, but clings to the
representation only, may be called mere contemplative pleasure or
_passive satisfaction_. The feeling of the latter kind of pleasure we
call _taste_.”]

[25] [Second Edition.]

[26] [First Edition has _gleiche_; Second Edition has _solche_.]

[27] [First and Second Editions have _sehr zweifle_; but this was
corrected to _nicht zweifle_ in the Third Edition of 1799.]

[28] [_Belebt machen_; First Edition had _beliebt_.]

[29] [Second Edition.]

[30] [Kant probably alludes here to Baumgarten (1714-1762), who was the
first writer to give the name of Aesthetics to the Philosophy of Taste.
He defined beauty as “perfection apprehended through the senses.” Kant
is said to have used as a text-book at lectures a work by Meier, a
pupil of Baumgarten’s, on this subject.]

[31] [Cf. Preface to the _Metaphysical Elements of Ethics_, v.: “The
word _perfection_ is liable to many misconceptions. It is sometimes
understood as a concept belonging to Transcendental Philosophy; viz.
the concept of the _totality_ of the manifold, which, taken together,
constitutes a Thing; sometimes, again, it is understood as belonging to
_Teleology_, so that it signifies the agreement of the characteristics
of a thing with a _purpose_. Perfection in the former sense might be
called _quantitative_ (material), in the latter _qualitative_ (formal)
perfection.”]

[32] [The words _even if ... general_ were added in the Second Edition.]

[33] [Second Edition.]

[34] Models of taste as regards the arts of speech must be composed
in a dead and learned language. The first, in order that they may not
suffer that change which inevitably comes over living languages, in
which noble expressions become flat, common ones antiquated, and newly
created ones have only a short currency. The second, because learned
languages have a grammar which is subject to no wanton change of
fashion, but the rules of which are preserved unchanged.

[35] [This distinction between an _Idea_ and an _Ideal_, as also
the further contrast between Ideals of the Reason and Ideals of the
Imagination, had already been given by Kant in the _Critique of Pure
Reason_, Dialectic, bk. ii. c. iii. § 1.]

[36] [Polycletus of Argos flourished about 430 B.C. His statue of the
_Spearbearer_ (_Doryphorus_), afterwards became known as the _Canon_;
because in it the artist was supposed to have embodied a perfect
representation of the ideal of the human figure.]

[37] [This was a celebrated statue executed by Myron, a Greek sculptor,
contemporary with Polycletus. It is frequently mentioned in the Greek
Anthology.]

[38] It will be found that a perfectly regular countenance, such
as a painter might wish to have for a model, ordinarily tells us
nothing; because it contains nothing characteristic, and therefore
rather expresses the Idea of the race than the specific [traits] of
a person. The exaggeration of a characteristic of this kind, _i.e._
such as does violence to the normal Idea (the purposiveness of the
race) is called _caricature_. Experience also shows that these quite
regular countenances commonly indicate internally only a mediocre man;
presumably (if it may be assumed that external nature expresses the
proportions of internal) because, if no mental disposition exceeds that
proportion which is requisite in order to constitute a man free from
faults, nothing can be expected of what is called _genius_, in which
nature seems to depart from the ordinary relations of the mental powers
on behalf of some special one.

[39] It might be objected to this explanation that there are things, in
which we see a purposive form without cognising any [definite] purpose
in them, like the stone implements often got from old sepulchral
tumuli with a hole in them as if for a handle. These, although they
plainly indicate by their shape a purposiveness of which we do not
know the purpose, are nevertheless not described as beautiful. But if
we regard a thing as a work of art, that is enough to make us admit
that its shape has reference to some design and definite purpose. And
hence there is no immediate satisfaction in the contemplation of it.
On the other hand a flower, _e.g._ a tulip, is regarded as beautiful;
because in perceiving it we find a certain purposiveness which, in our
judgement, is referred to no purpose at all.

[40] [Cp. p. 170, _infra_.]

[41] [See _The History of Sumatra_, by W. Marsden (London, 1783), p.
113.]

[42] [Cf. § 42, _infra_.]

[43] [Second Edition.]

[44] [Second Edition.]

[45] [_Lettres sur l’Égypte_, par M. Savary, Amsterdam, 1787.]

[46] [Second Edition.]

[47] [With this should be compared the similar discussion in the
_Critique of Pure Reason_, Dialectic, bk. ii. c. ii. § 1, _On the
System of Cosmological Ideas_.]

[48] [Second Edition.]

[49] [Cf. § 83, _infra_.]

[50] [In the _Philosophical Theory of Religion_, pt. i. _sub fin._
(Abbott’s Translation, p. 360), Kant, as here, divides “all religions
into two classes--_favour-seeking_ religion (mere worship) and _moral_
religion, that is, the religion _of a good life_;” and he concludes
that “amongst all the public religions that have ever existed the
Christian alone is moral.”]

[51] [_Voyages dans les Alpes_, par H. B. de Saussure; vol. i. was
published at Neuchatel in 1779; vol. ii. at Geneva in 1786.]

[52] [Second Edition.]

[53] [_Als Vermögen der Independenz der absoluten Totalität_, a curious
phrase.]

[54] [Second Edition.]

[55] _Affections_ are specifically different from _passions_. The
former are related merely to feeling; the latter belong to the faculty
of desire, and are inclinations which render difficult or impossible
all determination of the [elective] will by principles. The former are
stormy and unpremeditated; the latter are steady and deliberate; thus
indignation in the form of wrath is an affection, but in the form of
hatred (revenge) is a passion. The latter can never and in no reference
be called sublime; because while in an affection the freedom of the
mind is _hindered_, in a passion it is abolished. [Cf. Preface to the
_Metaphysical Elements of Ethics_, § xvi., where this distinction is
more fully drawn out. Affection is described as _hasty_; and passion is
defined as the sensible _appetite_ grown into a permanent inclination.]

[56] [In the Preface to the _Metaphysical Elements of Ethics_, § xvii.,
Kant gives the term _moral apathy_ to that freedom from the sway of the
affections, which is distinguished from indifference to them.]

[57] [Reading _weiche_ with Rosenkranz and Windelband; Hartenstein and
Kirchmann have _weise_, which yields no sense.]

[58] [Cf. p. 129, _supra_.]

[59] [Kirchmann has _positiv_; but this is probably a mere misprint.]

[60] [L.c. vol. ii. p. 181.]

[61] [See Burke, _On the Sublime and Beautiful_, Part IV., Sect.
vii. “If the pain and terror are so modified as not to be actually
noxious; if the pain is not carried to violence, and the terror is
not conversant about the present destruction of the person, as these
emotions clear the parts, whether fine or gross, of a dangerous and
troublesome incumbrance, they are capable of producing delight; not
pleasure, but a sort of delightful horror, a sort of tranquillity
tinged with terror; which, as it belongs to self-preservation, is one
of the strongest of all the passions.” Kant quotes from the German
version published at Riga in 1773. This was a free translation made
from Burke’s fifth edition.]

[62] [See Burke, l.c., Part IV., Sect. xix. “Beauty acts by relaxing
the solids of the whole system. There are all the appearances of such
a relaxation; and a relaxation somewhat below the natural tone seems
to me to be the cause of all positive pleasure. Who is a stranger to
that manner of expression so common in all times and in all countries,
of being softened, relaxed, enervated, dissolved, melted away by
pleasure?”]

[63] [Reading _Gebot_; Kirchmann has _Gesetz_.]

[64] [Second Edition.]

[65] [Second Edition.]

[66] [Cf. _Critique of Pure Reason_, Methodology, c. 1, § 1. “The
construction of a concept is the _a priori_ presentation of the
corresponding intuition.”]

[67] [Charles Batteux (1713-1780), author of _Les Beaux Arts reduits à
un même principe_.]

[68] [Essay XVIII, _The Sceptic_. “Critics can reason and dispute
more plausibly than cooks or perfumers. We may observe, however, that
this uniformity among human kind, hinders not, but that there is a
considerable diversity in the sentiments of beauty and worth, and that
education, custom, prejudice, caprice, and humour, frequently vary
our taste of this kind.... Beauty and worth are merely of a relative
nature, and consist in an agreeable sentiment, produced by an object in
a particular mind, according to the peculiar structure and constitution
of that mind.”]

[69] [For the distinction, an important one in Kant, between judgements
of experience and judgements of perception, see his _Prolegomena_, §
18. Cf. _Kant’s Critical Philosophy for English Readers_, vol. i. p.
116.]

[70] [First Edition has “limited.”]

[71] In order to be justified in claiming universal assent for an
aesthetical judgement that rests merely on subjective grounds, it
is sufficient to assume, (1) that the subjective conditions of the
Judgement, as regards the relation of the cognitive powers thus put
into activity to a cognition in general, are the same in all men. This
must be true, because otherwise men would not be able to communicate
their representations or even their knowledge. (2) The judgement must
merely have reference to this relation (consequently to the _formal
condition_ of the Judgement) and be pure, _i.e._ not mingled either
with concepts of the Object or with sensations, as determining grounds.
If there has been any mistake as regards this latter condition, then
there is only an inaccurate application of the privilege, which a law
gives us, to a particular case; but that does not destroy the privilege
itself in general.

[72] [Kant lays down these three maxims in his _Introduction to Logic_,
§ vii., as “general rules and conditions of the avoidance of error.”]

[73] We soon see that although enlightenment is easy _in thesi_, yet
_in hypothesi_ it is difficult and slow of accomplishment. For not to
be passive as regards Reason, but to be always self-legislative, is
indeed quite easy for the man who wishes only to be in accordance with
his essential purpose, and does not desire to know what is beyond his
Understanding. But since we can hardly avoid seeking this, and there
are never wanting others who promise with much confidence that they
are able to satisfy our curiosity, it must be very hard to maintain in
or restore to the mind (especially the mind of the public) that bare
negative which properly constitutes enlightenment.

[74] We may designate Taste as _sensus communis aestheticus_, common
Understanding as _sensus communis logicus_.

[75] [Peter Camper (1722-1789), a celebrated naturalist and comparative
anatomist; for some years professor at Groningen.]

[76] In my country a common man, if you propose to him such a problem
as that of Columbus with his egg, says, _that is not art, it is only
science_. _I.e._ if we _know_ how, we can _do_ it; and he says the same
of all the pretended arts of jugglers. On the other hand, he will not
refuse to apply the term art to the performance of a rope-dancer.

[77] [Kant was accustomed to say that the talk at a dinner table
should always pass through these three stages--narrative, discussion,
and jest; and punctilious in this, as in all else, he is said to have
directed the conversation at his own table accordingly (Wallace’s
_Kant_, p. 39).]

[78] [Second Edition.]

[79] [Cf. Aristotle’s _Poetics_, c. iv. p. 1448 b: ἃ γὰρ αὐτὰ λυπηρῶς
ὁρῶμεν, τούτων τὰς εἰκόνας τὰς μάλιστα ἠκριβωμένας χαίρομεν θεωροῦντες
οἷον θηρίων τε μορφὰς τῶν ἀτιμοτάτων καὶ νεκρῶν. Cf. also _Rhetoric_,
I. 11, p. 1371 b; and Burke on the _Sublime and Beautiful_, Part I. §
16. Boileau (_L’art poétique_, chant 3), makes a similar observation:

    “Il n’est point de serpent ni de monstre odieux
    Qui, par l’art imité, ne puisse plaire aux yeux.
    D’un pinceau délicat l’artifice agréable
    Du plus affreux objet fait un objet aimable.”
]

[80] [Second Edition.]

[81] [Cf. p. 199, _infra_.]

[82] [In English we would rather say “without _soul_”; but I prefer to
translate _Geist_ consistently by _spirit_, to avoid the confusion of
it with _Seele_.]

[83] [These lines occur in one of Frederick the Great’s French poems:
Épître au maréchal Keith XVIII., “sur les vaines terreurs de la mort et
les frayeurs d’une autre vie.” Kant here translates them into German.]

[84] [Withof, whose “Moral Poems” appeared in 1755. This reference was
supplied by H. Krebs in _Notes and Queries_ 5th January 1895.]

[85] Perhaps nothing more sublime was ever said and no sublimer thought
ever expressed than the famous inscription on the Temple of _Isis_
(Mother _Nature_): “I am all that is and that was and that shall be,
and no mortal hath lifted my veil.” _Segner_ availed himself of this
Idea in a _suggestive_ vignette prefixed to his Natural Philosophy, in
order to inspire beforehand the pupil whom he was about to lead into
that temple with a holy awe, which should dispose his mind to serious
attention. [J. A. de Segner (1704-1777) was Professor of Natural
Philosophy at Göttingen, and the author of several scientific works of
repute.]

[86] [Second Edition.]

[87] The three former faculties are _united_ in the first instance by
means of the fourth. Hume gives us to understand in his _History of
England_ that although the English are inferior in their productions
to no people in the world as regards the evidences they display of the
three former properties, _separately_ considered, yet they must be put
after their neighbours the French as regards that which unites these
properties. [In his _Observations on the Beautiful and Sublime_, § iv.
_sub init._, Kant remarks that the English have the keener sense of the
_sublime_, the French of the _beautiful_.]

[88] The reader is not to judge this scheme for a possible division of
the beautiful arts as a deliberate theory. It is only one of various
attempts which we may and ought to devise.

[89] [Second Edition.]

[90] [_I.e._ the case of Plastic art, with its subdivisions of
Architecture and Sculpture, as is explained in the next paragraph.]

[91] That landscape gardening may be regarded as a species of the
art of painting, although it presents its forms corporeally, seems
strange. But since it actually takes its forms from nature (trees,
shrubs, grasses, and flowers from forest and field--at least in the
first instance), and so far is not an art like Plastic; and since it
also has no concept of the object and its purpose (as in Architecture)
conditioning its arrangements, but involves merely the free play of the
Imagination in contemplation, it so far agrees with mere aesthetical
painting which has no definite theme (which arranges sky, land, and
water, so as to entertain us by means of light and shade only).--In
general the reader is only to judge of this as an attempt to combine
the beautiful arts under one principle, viz. that of the expression
of aesthetical Ideas (according to the analogy of speech), and not to
regard it as a definitive analysis of them.

[92] I must admit that a beautiful poem has always given me a pure
gratification; whilst the reading of the best discourse, whether of a
Roman orator or of a modern parliamentary speaker or of a preacher, has
always been mingled with an unpleasant feeling of disapprobation of
a treacherous art, which means to move men in important matters like
machines to a judgement that must lose all weight for them on quiet
reflection. Readiness and accuracy in speaking (which taken together
constitute Rhetoric) belong to beautiful art; but the art of the orator
(_ars oratoria_), the art of availing oneself of the weaknesses of men
for one’s own designs (whether these be well meant or even actually
good does not matter) is worthy of no _respect_. Again, this art only
reached its highest point, both at Athens and at Rome, at a time when
the state was hastening to its ruin and true patriotic sentiment had
disappeared. The man who along with a clear insight into things has in
his power a wealth of pure speech, and who with a fruitful Imagination
capable of presenting his Ideas unites a lively sympathy with what is
truly good, is the _vir bonus discendi peritus_, the orator without
art but of great impressiveness, as _Cicero_ has it; though he may not
always remain true to this ideal.

[93] [From this to the end of the paragraph, and the next note, were
added in the Second Edition.]

[94] Those who recommend the singing of spiritual songs at family
prayers do not consider that they inflict a great hardship upon
the public by such _noisy_ (and therefore in general pharisaical)
devotions; for they force the neighbours either to sing with them
or to abandon their meditations. [Kant suffered himself from such
annoyances, which may account for the asperity of this note. At one
period he was disturbed by the devotional exercises of the prisoners in
the adjoining jail. In a letter to the burgomaster “he suggested the
advantage of closing the windows during these hymn-singings, and added
that the warders of the prison might probably be directed to accept
less sonorous and neighbour-annoying chants as evidence of the penitent
spirit of their captives” (Wallace’s _Kant_, p. 42).]

[95] [Cf. “Parturiunt montes, nascitur _ridiculus_ mus.”]

[96] [The First Edition adds “as in the case of a man who gets the news
of a great commercial success.”]

[97] [The jest may have been taken from Steele’s play, “The Funeral or
Grief _à la mode_,” where it occurs verbatim. This play was published
in 1702.]

[98] [_Henriade_, _Chant 7_, sub init.

    “Du Dieu qui nous créa la clémence infinie,
    Pour adoucir les maux de cette courte vie,
    A placé parmi nous deux êtres bienfaisants,
    De la terre à jamais aimables habitants,
    Soutiens dans les travaux, trésors dans l’indigence:
    L’un est le doux sommeil, et l’autre est l’espérance.”
]

[99] We may describe as a rationalising judgement (_judicium
ratiocinans_) one which proclaims itself as universal, for as such it
can serve as the major premise of a syllogism. On the other hand, we
can only speak of a judgement as rational (_judicium ratiocinatum_)
which is thought as the conclusion of a syllogism, and consequently as
grounded _a priori_.

[100] [Cf. p. 241, _infra_.]

[101] [Second Edition.]

[102] [Antiparos is a small island in the Cyclades, remarkable for a
splendid stalactite cavern near the southern coast.]

[103] The intuitive in cognition must be opposed to the discursive
(not to the symbolical). The former is either _schematical_, by
_demonstration_; or _symbolical_ as a representation in accordance with
a mere _analogy_.

[104] [I read _Geselligkeit_ with Rosenkranz and Windelband;
Hartenstein and Kirchmann have _Glückseligkeit_.]

[105] As in pure mathematics we can never talk of the existence, but
only of the possibility of things, viz. of an intuition corresponding
to a concept, and so never of cause and effect, it follows that all
purposiveness observed there must be considered merely as formal and
never as a natural purpose.

[106] [The allusion is to _Vitruvius de Architectura_, Bk. vi.
Praef. “Aristippus philosophus Socraticus, naufragio cum eiectus ad
Rhodiensium litus animadvertisset geometrica schemata descripta,
exclamavisse ad comites ita dicitur, Bene speremus, hominum enim
vestigia video.”]

[107] [Second Edition.]

[108] We can conversely throw light upon a certain combination, much
more often met with in Idea than in actuality, by means of an analogy
to the so-called immediate natural purposes. In a recent complete
transformation of a great people into a state the word _organisation_
for the regulation of magistracies, etc., and even of the whole
body politic, has often been fitly used. For in such a whole every
member should surely be purpose as well as means, and, whilst all
work together towards the possibility of the whole, each should be
determined as regards place and function by means of the Idea of the
whole. [Kant probably alludes here to the organisation of the United
States of America.]

[109] [These words are inserted by Rosenkranz and Windelband, but
omitted by Hartenstein and Kirchmann.]

[110] In the aesthetical part [§ 58, p. 247] it was said: _We
view beautiful nature with favour_, whilst we have a quite free
(disinterested) satisfaction in its form. For in this mere judgement of
taste no consideration is given to the purpose for which these natural
beauties exist; whether to excite pleasure in us, or as purposes
without any reference to us at all. But in a teleological judgement we
pay attention to this reference, and here we can _regard it as a favour
of nature_ that it has been willing to minister to our culture by the
exhibition of so many beautiful figures.

[111] The German word _vermessen_ is a good word and full of meaning.
A judgement in which we forget to consider the extent of our powers
(our Understanding) may sometimes sound very humble, and yet make great
pretensions, and so be very presumptuous. Of this kind are most of
those by which we pretend to extol the divine wisdom by ascribing to
it designs in the works of creation and preservation which are really
meant to do honour to the private wisdom of the reasoner.

[112] We thus see that in most speculative things of pure Reason, as
regards dogmatic assertions, the philosophical schools have commonly
tried all possible solutions of a given question. To explain the
purposiveness of nature men have tried either _lifeless matter_ or
a _lifeless God_, or again, _living matter_ or a _living God_. It
only remains for us, if the need should arise, to abandon all these
objective _assertions_ and to examine critically our judgement merely
in reference to our cognitive faculties, in order to supply to their
principle a validity which, if not dogmatic, shall at least be that of
a maxim sufficient for the sure employment of Reason.

[113] [That is, the wider concept serves as a universal, under which
the particular may be brought; cognition from principles, in Kant’s
phrase, is the process of knowing the particular in the universal by
means of concepts.]

[114] [This distinction will be familiar to the student of the
_Critique of Pure Reason_. See Dialectic, bk. i., _Of the Concepts of
Pure Reason_.]

[115] [Second Edition.]

[116] [This principle, that for our intellect, the conception of an
organised body is impossible except by the aid of the Idea of design,
is frequently insisted on by Kant. Professor Wallace points out
(_Kant_, p. 110) that as far back as 1755, in his _General Physiogony
and Theory of the Heavens_, Kant classed the origin of animals and
plants with the secrets of Providence and the mystical number 666 “as
one of the topics on which ingenuity and thought are occasionally
wasted.”]

[117] [Second Edition.]

[118] [Second Edition.]

[119] [This is marked as an _Appendix_ in the Second Edition.]

[120] We may call a hypothesis of this kind a daring venture of reason,
and there may be few even of the most acute naturalists through whose
head it has not sometimes passed. For it is not absurd, like that
_generatio aequivoca_ by which is understood the production of an
organised being through the mechanics of crude unorganised matter.
It would always remain _generatio univoca_ in the most universal
sense of the word, for it only considers one organic being as derived
from another organic being, although from one which is specifically
different; _e.g._ certain water-animals transform themselves gradually
into marsh-animals and from these, after some generations, into
land-animals. _A priori_, in the judgement of Reason alone, there is no
contradiction here. Only experience gives no example of it; according
to experience all generation that we know is _generatio homonyma_.
This is not merely _univoca_ in contrast to the generation out of
unorganised material, but in the organisation the product is of like
kind to that which produced it; and _generation heteronyma_, so far as
our empirical knowledge of nature extends, is nowhere found.

[121] [It is probable that Kant alludes here to Hume’s Essay _On a
Providence and a Future State_, § xi of the _Inquiry_. Hume argues that
though the inference from an effect to an intelligent cause may be
valid in the case of human contrivance, it is not legitimate to rise by
a like argument to Supreme Intelligence. “In human nature there is a
certain experienced coherence of designs and inclinations; so that when
from any fact we have discovered one intention of any man, it may often
be reasonable from experience to infer another, and draw a long chain
of conclusions concerning his past or future conduct. But this method
of reasoning can never have place with regard to a being so remote and
incomprehensible, who bears much less analogy to any other being in the
universe than the sun to a waxen taper, and who discovers himself only
by some faint traces or outlines, beyond which we have no authority to
ascribe to him any attribute or perfection.”]

[122] [J. F. Blumenbach (1752-1840), a German naturalist and professor
at Göttingen; the author of _Institutiones Physiologicae_ (1787) and
other works. An interesting account of him is given in Lever’s novel
_Adventures of Arthur O’Leary_, ch. xix.]

[123] [Carl von Linné (1707-1778), Knight of the Polar Star, the
celebrated Swedish botanist.]

[124] If the once adopted name _Natural history_ is to continue for the
description of nature, we may in contrast with art, give the title of
_Archaeology of nature_ to that which the former literally indicates,
viz. a representation of the _old_ condition of the earth, about
which, although we cannot hope for certainty, we have good ground for
conjecture. As sculptured stones, etc., belong to the province of art,
so petrefactions belong to the archaeology of nature. And since work
is actually being done in this [science] (under the name of the Theory
of the Earth), constantly, although of course slowly, this name is not
given to a merely imaginary investigation of nature, but to one to
which nature itself leads and invites us.

[125] [See p. 184 above.]

[126] [First Edition has _freedom_.]

[127] [These views are set forth by Kant more fully in the essay _Zum
ewigen Frieden_ (1795).]

[128] [Second Edition.]

[129] [Cf. _The Philosophical Theory of Religion_, Part i., _On the bad
principle in Human Nature_, III., where Kant remarks that although war
“is not so incurably bad as the deadness of a universal monarchy ...
yet, as an ancient observed, it makes more bad men than it takes away.”]

[130] The value of life for us, if it is estimated by that _which we
enjoy_ (by the natural purpose of the sum of all inclinations, _i.e._
happiness), is easy to decide. It sinks below zero; for who would be
willing to enter upon life anew under the same conditions? who would do
so even according to a new, self-chosen plan (yet in conformity with
the course of nature), if it were merely directed to enjoyment? We
have shown above what value life has in virtue of what it contains in
itself, when lived in accordance with the purpose that nature has along
with us, and which consists in what we do (not merely what we enjoy),
in which, however, we are always but means towards an undetermined
final purpose. There remains then nothing but the value which we
ourselves give our life, through what we can not only do, but do
purposively in such independence of nature that the existence of nature
itself can only be a purpose under this condition.

[131] It would be possible that the happiness of rational beings in
the world should be a purpose of nature, and then also this would be
its _ultimate_ purpose. At least we cannot see _a priori_ why nature
should not be so ordered, because by means of its mechanism this
effect would be certainly possible, at least so far as we see. But
morality, with a causality according to purposes subordinated thereto,
is absolutely impossible by means of natural causes; for the principle
by which it determines to action is supersensible, and is therefore
the only possible principle in the order of purposes that in respect
of nature is absolutely unconditioned. Its subject consequently alone
is qualified to be the _final purpose_ of creation to which the whole
of nature is subordinated.--_Happiness_, on the contrary, as has been
shown in the preceding paragraphs by the testimony of experience, is
not even a _purpose of nature_ in respect of man in preference to
other creatures; much less a _final purpose of creation_. Men may of
course make it their ultimate subjective purpose. But if I ask, in
reference to the final purpose of creation, why must men exist? then
we are speaking of an objective supreme purpose, such as the highest
Reason would require for creation. If we answer: These beings exist
to afford objects for the benevolence of that Supreme Cause; then we
contradict the condition to which the Reason of man subjects even his
inmost wish for happiness (viz. the harmony with his own internal moral
legislation). This proves that happiness can only be a conditioned
purpose, and that it is only as a moral being that man can be the final
purpose of creation; but that as concerns his state happiness is only
connected with it as a consequence, according to the measure of his
harmony with that purpose regarded as the purpose of his being.

[132] [Second Edition.]

[133] I say deliberately under moral laws. It is not man _in accordance
with_ moral laws, _i.e._ a being who behaves himself in conformity
with them, who is the final purpose of creation. For by using the
latter expression we should be asserting more than we know; viz. that
it is in the power of an Author of the world to cause man always to
behave himself in accordance with moral laws. But this presupposes a
concept of freedom and of nature (of which latter we can only think an
external author), which would imply an insight into the supersensible
substrate of nature and its identity with that which causality through
freedom makes possible in the world. And this far surpasses the
insight of our Reason. Only of _man under moral laws_ can we say,
without transgressing the limits of our insight: his being constitutes
the final purpose of the world. This harmonises completely with the
judgement of human Reason reflecting morally upon the course of the
world. We believe that we perceive in the case of the wicked the traces
of a wise purposive reference, if we only see that the wanton criminal
does not die before he has undergone the deserved punishment of his
misdeeds. According to our concepts of free causality, our good or bad
behaviour depends on ourselves; we regard it the highest wisdom in the
government of the world to ordain for the first, opportunity, and for
both, their consequence, in accordance with moral laws. In the latter
properly consists the glory of God, which is hence not unsuitably
described by theologians as the ultimate purpose of creation.-- It
is further to be remarked that when we use the word creation, we
understand nothing more than we have said here, viz. the cause of the
_being_ of the world or of the things in it (substances). This is
what the concept properly belonging to this word involves (_actuatio
substantiae est creatio_); and consequently there is not implied in it
the supposition of a freely working, and therefore intelligent, cause
(whose being we first of all want to prove).

[134] [Note added in Second Edition.] This moral argument does not
supply any _objectively-valid_ proof of the Being of God; it does
not prove to the sceptic that there is a God, but proves that if he
wishes to think in a way consonant with morality, he must admit the
_assumption_ of this proposition under the maxims of his practical
Reason.-- We should therefore not say: it is necessary _for morals_
[Sittlichkeit], to assume the happiness of all rational beings of the
world in proportion to their morality [Moralität]; but rather, this
is necessitated _by_ morality. Accordingly, this is a _subjective_
argument sufficient for moral beings.

[135] [Second Edition.]

[136] [Second Edition.]

[137] In a practical sense that religion is always idolatry which
conceives the Supreme Being with properties, according to which
something else besides morality can be a fit condition for that which
man can do being in accordance with His Will. For however pure and
free from sensible images the concept that we have formed may be in a
theoretical point of view, yet it will be in a practical point of view
still represented as an _idol_, _i.e._ in regard to the character of
His Will, anthropomorphically.

[138] [Cf. _Introd. to Logic_, ix. p. 63, “Conviction is opposed to
Persuasion, which is a belief from inadequate reasons, of which we do
not know whether they are only subjective or are also objective.”]

[139] [Second Edition.]

[140] [_I.e._ _Urtheils_. First Edition had _Urtheilens_, the judging
subject.]

[141] _Analogy_ (in a qualitative signification) is the identity of
the relation between reasons and consequences (causes and effects), so
far as it is to be found, notwithstanding the specific difference of
the things or those properties in them which contain the reason for
like consequences (_i.e._ considered apart from this relation). Thus we
conceive of the artificial constructions of beasts by comparing them
with those of men; by comparing the ground of those effects brought
about by the former, which we do not know, with the ground of similar
effects brought about by men (reason), which we do know; _i.e._ we
regard the ground of the former as an analogon of reason. We then try
at the same time to show that the ground of the artisan faculty of
beasts, which we call instinct, specifically different as it is in fact
from reason, has yet a similar relation to its effect (the buildings of
the beaver as compared with those of men).--But then I cannot therefore
conclude that because man uses _reason_ for his building, the beaver
must have the like, and call this a _conclusion_ according to analogy.
But from the similarity of the mode of operation of beasts (of which
we cannot immediately perceive the ground) to that of men (of which we
are immediately conscious), we can quite rightly conclude _according
to analogy_, that beasts too act in accordance with _representations_
(not as _Descartes_ has it, that they are machines), and that despite
their specific distinction they are yet (as living beings) of the same
genus as man. The principle of our right so to conclude consists in
the sameness of the ground for reckoning beasts in respect of the said
determination in the same genus with men, regarded as men, so far as we
can externally compare them with one another in accordance with their
actions. There is _par ratio_. Just so I can conceive, according to the
analogy of an Understanding, the causality of the supreme World-Cause,
by comparing its purposive products in the world with the artificial
works of men; but I cannot conclude according to analogy to those
properties in it [which are in man], because here the principle of the
possibility of such a method of reasoning entirely fails, viz. the
_paritas rationis_ for counting the Supreme Being in one and the same
genus with man (in respect of the causality of both). The causality
of the beings of the world, which is always sensibly conditioned (as
is causality through Understanding) cannot be transferred to a Being
which has in common with them no generic concept save that of Thing in
general.

[142] We thus miss nothing in the representation of the relations of
this Being to the world, as far as the consequences, theoretical or
practical, of this concept are concerned. To wish to investigate what
it is in itself, is a curiosity as purposeless as it is vain.

[143] [Cf. _Introd. to Logic_, p. 76, where the conditions of a
legitimate hypothesis are laid down. See also _Critique of Pure
Reason_, Methodology, c. i. § 3.]

[144] [This illustration is also given in the _Logic_ (p. 57);
where the three _modi_ of belief, Opinion, Faith, and Knowledge,
are distinguished from each other. Cf. _Critique of Pure Reason_,
Methodology, c. ii. § 3.]

[145] [The speculations of Swedenborg seem to have always had a strange
fascination for Kant. He says of two reported cases of Swedenborg’s
clairvoyance that he knows not how to disprove them (Rosenkranz vii.
5); but in his _Anthropology_ §§ 35, 37, he attacks Swedenborgianism
as folly. So in an early essay, _Dreams of a Visionary explained
by Dreams of Metaphysics_, he avows his scepticism as to the value
of the information which “psychical research” can supply about the
spirit-world, though he is careful not to commit himself to any
dogmatic statement on the subject of ghosts. In the _Critique of Pure
Reason_ (when discussing the Postulates of Empirical Thought) he
gives, as an instance of a concept inconsistent with the canons of
possibility, “a power of being in a community of thought with other
men, however distant from us.”]

[146] [Cf. _supra_, p. 229.]

[147] I here extend, correctly as it seems to me, the concept of a
thing of fact beyond the usual signification of this word. For it is
not needful, not even feasible, to limit this expression merely to
actual experience, if we are talking of the relation of things to
our cognitive faculties; for an experience merely possible is quite
sufficient in order that we may speak of them merely as objects of a
definite kind of cognition.

[148] [Cf. _introduction to Logic_, p. 59 note.]

[149] [Second Edition.]

[150] Things of faith are not therefore _articles of faith_; if we
understand by the latter things of faith to the _confession_ of which
(internal or external) we can be bound. Natural theology contains
nothing like this. For since they, as things of faith (like things of
fact) cannot be based on theoretical proofs, [they are accepted by]
a belief which is free and which only as such is compatible with the
morality of the subject.

[151] The final purpose which the moral law enjoins upon us to further,
is not the ground of duty; since this lies in the moral law, which,
as formal practical principle, leads categorically, independently
of the Objects of the faculty of desire (the material of the will)
and consequently of any purpose whatever. This formal characteristic
of my actions (their subordination under the principle of universal
validity), wherein alone consists their inner moral worth, is quite
in our power; and I can quite well abstract from the possibility or
the unattainableness of purposes which I am obliged to promote in
conformity with that law (because in them consists only the external
worth of my actions) as something which is never completely in my
power, in order only to look to that which is of my doing. But then
the design of promoting the final purpose of all rational beings
(happiness so far as it is possible for it to be accordant with duty)
is even yet prescribed by the law of duty. The speculative Reason,
however, does not see at all the attainableness of this (neither on
the side of our own physical faculty nor on that of the co-operation
of nature). It must rather, so far as we can judge in a rational way,
hold the derivation, by the aid of such causes, of such a consequence
of our good conduct from mere nature (internal and external) without
God and immortality, to be an ungrounded and vain, though well-meant,
expectation; and if it could have complete certainty of this judgement,
it would regard the moral law itself as the mere deception of our
Reason in a practical aspect. But since the speculative Reason fully
convinces itself that the latter can never take place, but that on the
other hand those Ideas whose object lies outside nature can be thought
without contradiction, it must for its own practical law and the
problem prescribed thereby, and therefore in a moral aspect, recognise
those Ideas as real in order not to come into contradiction with itself.

[152] It is a trust in the promise of the moral law; [not however such
as is contained in it, but such as I put into it and that on morally
adequate grounds.[153] For a final purpose cannot be commanded by any
law of Reason without this latter at the same time promising, however
uncertainly, its attainableness; and thus justifying our belief in
the special conditions under which alone our Reason can think it as
attainable. The word _fides_ expresses this; and it can only appear
doubtful, how this expression and this particular Idea came into moral
philosophy, since it first was introduced with Christianity, and the
adoption of it perhaps might seem to be only a flattering imitation
of Christian terminology. But this is not the only case in which this
wonderful religion with its great simplicity of statement has enriched
philosophy with far more definite and purer concepts of morality, than
it had been able to furnish before; but which, once they are there, are
_freely_ assented to by Reason and are assumed as concepts to which
it could well have come of itself and which it could and should have
introduced.]

[153] [Second Edition.]

[154] [Cf. _Introd. to Logic_, ix. p. 60, “That man is morally
_unbelieving_ who does not accept that which though _impossible_ to
know is _morally necessary_ to suppose.”]

[155] [First Edition.]

[156] [In the _Critique of Pure Reason_, Dialectic, bk. II. c. iii. §§
4, 5.]

[157] [H. S. Reimarus (1694-1768), the author of the famous
_Wolfenbüttel Fragments_, published after the death of Reimarus by
Lessing. The book alluded to by Kant is probably the _Abhandlungen von
den vornehmsten Wahrheiten der natürlichen Religion_ (1754), which had
great popularity in its day.]

[158] [These arguments are advanced by Hume, _Inquiry_, § vii. Cf. also
_Pure Reason_, Dialectic, bk. II. c. iii. § 6, and _Practical Reason_,
Dialectic, c. ii. § vii.]

[159] [Cf. _Practical Reason_, Dialectic, c. ii. § v.]

[160] The admiration for beauty, and also the emotion aroused by the
manifold purposes of nature, which a reflective mind is able to feel
even prior to a clear representation of a rational Author of the world,
have something in themselves like _religious_ feeling. They seem in the
first place by a method of judging analogous to moral to produce an
effect upon the moral feeling (gratitude to, and veneration for, the
unknown cause); and thus by exciting moral Ideas to produce an effect
upon the mind, when they inspire that admiration which is bound up with
far more interest than mere theoretical observation can bring about.




Transcriber’s Notes


Punctuation, hyphenation, and spelling were made consistent when a
predominant preference was found in this book; otherwise they were not
changed.

Simple typographical errors were corrected.

Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines were retained.

Text has three occcurrences of “casuality”, which have been retained,
but which may be misprints for “causality”.

These are transliterations of the Greek text for use on devices that
cannot display such text:

  Page xvii: kosmos.

  Page xxii: kalo.

  Page xxiv: sôphrosynê.

  Page xxxiii: nous.

  Page 397: kat’ alêtheian (or) kat’ anthrôpon.

  Footnote 79 (originally on page 195): ha gar auta lypêrôs horômen,
    toutôn tas eikonas tas malista êkribômenas chairomen theôrountes
    hoion thêriôn te morphas tôn atimotatôn kai nekrôn.







End of Project Gutenberg's Kant's Critique of Judgement, by Immanuel Kant

