letter contains the following:

"I have laid down this rule in dealing with those who were brought
before me for being Christians. I asked whether they were Christians;
if they confessed, I asked them a second and a third time, threatening
them with punishment; if they persevered, I ordered them to be
executed.... They assured me that their only crime or error was this,
that they were wont to come together on a certain day before it was
light, and to sing in turn, among themselves, a hymn to Christ, as
to a god, and to bind themselves by an oath--not to do anything that
was wicked, that they would commit no theft, robbery, or adultery,
nor break their word, nor deny that anything had been entrusted to
them when called upon to restore it.... I therefore deemed it the
more necessary to enquire of two servant maids, who were said to be
attendants, what was the real truth, and to apply the torture. But
I found it was nothing but a bad and excessive superstition."

Notwithstanding an alleged reply to this letter from Trajan, cited
by Tertullian and Eusebius, its genuineness may well be questioned,
and for the following reasons:

1. The Roman laws accorded religious liberty to all, and the Roman
government tolerated and protected every religious belief. Renan says:
"Among the Roman laws, anterior to Constantine, there was not a single
ordinance directed against freedom of thought; in the history of the
Pagan emperors not a single persecution on account of mere doctrines
or creeds" (The Apostles). Gibbon says: "The religious tenets of the
Galileans, or Christians, were never made a subject of punishment,
or even of inquiry" (Rome, Vol. II, p. 215).

2. Trajan was one of the most tolerant and benevolent of Roman
emperors.

3. Pliny, the reputed author of the letter, is universally conceded
to have been one of the most humane and philanthropic of men.

4. It represents the distant province of Bithynia as containing,
at this time, a large Christian population, which is improbable.

5. It assumes that the Emperor Trajan was little acquainted with
Christian beliefs and customs, which cannot be harmonized with the
supposed historical fact that the most powerful of primitive churches
flourished in Trajan's capital and had existed for fifty years.

6. Pliny represents the Christians as declaring that they were in
the habit of meeting and singing hymns "to Christ as to a god." The
early Christians did not recognize Christ as a god, and it was not
until after the time of Pliny that he was worshiped as such.

7. "I asked whether they were Christians; if they confessed, I asked
them a second and a third time, threatening them with punishment;
if they persevered I ordered them to be executed." That this wise and
good man rewarded lying with liberty and truthfulness with death is
difficult to believe.

8. "I therefore deemed it more necessary to inquire of two servant
maids, who were said to be attendants, what was the real truth, and
to apply the torture." Never have the person and character of woman
been held more sacred than they were in Pagan Rome. That one of the
noblest of Romans should have put to torture young women guiltless
of crime is incredible.

9. The declaration of the Christians that they took a solemn obligation
"not to do anything that was wicked; that they would commit no theft,
robbery, or adultery, nor break their word," etc., looks like an
ingenious attempt to parade the virtues of primitive Christians.

10. This letter, it is claimed, is to be found in but one ancient
copy of Pliny.

11. It was first quoted by Tertullian, and the age immediately
preceding Tertullian was notorious for Christian forgeries.

12. Some of the best German critics reject it. Gibbon, while not
denying its authenticity, pronounces it a "very curious epistle";
and Dr. Whiston, who considers it too valuable to discard, applies to
its contents such epithets as "amazing doctrine!" "amazing stupidity!"

Josephus, Tacitus, Pliny--these are the disinterested witnesses adduced
by the church to prove the historical existence of Jesus Christ;
the one writing nearly one hundred years, the others one hundred
and ten years after his alleged birth; the testimony of two of them
self-evident forgeries, and that of the third a probable forgery.

But even if the doubtful and hostile letter of Pliny be genuine,
it was not written until the second century, so that there is not to
be found in all the records of profane history prior to the second
century a single allusion to the reputed founder of Christianity.

To these witnesses is sometimes, though rarely, added a fourth,
Suetonius, a Roman historian who, like Tacitus and Pliny, wrote in the
second century. In his "Life of Nero," Suetonius says: "The Christians,
a race of men of a new and villainous superstition, were punished." In
his "Life of Claudius," he says: "He [Claudius] drove the Jews, who at
the instigation of Chrestus were constantly rioting, out of Rome." Of
course no candid Christian will contend that Christ was inciting
Jewish riots at Rome fifteen years after he was crucified at Jerusalem.

Significant is the silence of the forty Jewish and Pagan writers named
in this chapter. This silence alone disproves Christ's existence. Had
this wonderful being really existed the earth would have resounded
with his fame. His mighty deeds would have engrossed every historian's
pen. The pages of other writers would have abounded with references to
him. Think of going through the literature of the nineteenth century
and searching in vain for the name of Napoleon Bonaparte! Yet Napoleon
was a pigmy and his deeds trifles compared with this Christ and the
deeds he is said to have performed.

With withering irony Gibbon notes this ominous silence: "But how shall
we excuse the supine inattention of the Pagan and philosophic world,
to those evidences which were represented by the hand of Omnipotence,
not to their reason, but to their senses? During the age of Christ,
of his apostles, and of their first disciples, the doctrine which they
preached was confirmed by innumerable prodigies. The lame walked, the
blind saw, the sick were healed, the dead were raised, demons were
expelled, and the laws of Nature were frequently suspended for the
benefit of the church. But the sages of Greece and Rome turned aside
from the awful spectacle, and, pursuing the ordinary occupations of
life and study, appeared unconscious of any alterations in the moral
or physical government of the world. Under the reign of Tiberius,
the whole earth, or at least a celebrated province of the Roman
empire, was involved in a preternatural darkness of three hours. Even
this miraculous event, which ought to have excited the wonder, the
curiosity, and the devotion of mankind, passed without notice in
an age of science and history. It happened during the lifetime of
Seneca and the elder Pliny, who must have experienced the immediate
effects, or received the earliest intelligence of the prodigy. Each of
these philosophers, in a laborious work, has recorded all the great
phenomena of Nature, earthquakes, meteors, comets, and eclipses,
which his indefatigable curiosity could collect. Both the one and
the other have omitted to mention the greatest phenomenon to which
the mortal eye has been witness since the creation of the globe"
(Rome, Vol. I, pp. 588-590).

Even conceding, for the sake of argument, both the authenticity and
the credibility of these passages attributed to the Roman historians,
what do they prove? Do they prove that Christ was divine--that he was a
supernatural being, as claimed? No more than do the writings of Paine
and Voltaire, which also contain his name. This evidence is favorable
not to the adherents, but to the opponents, of Christianity. If these
passages be genuine, and their authors have penned historical truths,
it simply confirms what most Rationalists admit, that a religious sect
called Christians, who recognized Christ as their founder, existed
as early as the first century; and confirms what some have charged,
but what the church is loath to admit, that primitive Christians,
who have been declared the highest exemplars of human virtue, were
the most depraved of villains.

An unlettered and credulous enthusiast, named Jones, imagines that he
has had a revelation, and proceeds to found a new religious sect. He
gathers about him a band of "disciples" as ignorant and credulous as
himself. He soon gets into trouble and is killed. But the Jonesists
increase--increase in numbers and in meanness--until at length they
become sufficiently notorious to receive a paragraph from an annalist
who, after holding them up to ridicule and scorn, accounts for their
origin by stating that they take their name from one Jones who,
during the administration of President Roosevelt, was hanged as a
criminal. The world contains two billions of inhabitants--mostly fools,
as Carlyle would say--and as the religion of this sect is a little
more foolish than that of any other sect, it continues to spread until
at the end of two thousand years it covers the globe. Then think of
the adherents of this religion citing the uncomplimentary allusion
of this annalist to prove that Jones was a god!







