CHAPTER II.

SILENCE OF CONTEMPORARY WRITERS.


Another proof that the Christ of Christianity is a fabulous and not
a historical character is the silence of the writers who lived during
and immediately following the time he is said to have existed.

That a man named Jesus, an obscure religious teacher, the basis of
this fabulous Christ, lived in Palestine about nineteen hundred years
ago, may be true. But of this man we know nothing. His biography has
not been written. E. Renan and others have attempted to write it,
but have failed--have failed because no materials for such a work
exist. Contemporary writers have left us not one word concerning
him. For generations afterward, outside of a few theological epistles,
we find no mention of him.

The following is a list of writers who lived and wrote during the time,
or within a century after the time, that Christ is said to have lived
and performed his wonderful works:


        Josephus,                 Statius,
        Philo-Judaeus,            Ptolemy,
        Seneca,                   Hermogones,
        Pliny the Elder,          Valerius Maximus,
        Arrian,                   Appian,
        Petronius,                Theon of Smyrna,
        Dion Pruseus,             Phlegon,
        Paterculus,               Pompon Mela,
        Suetonius,                Quintius Curtius
        Juvenal,                  Lucian,
        Martial,                  Pausanias,
        Persius,                  Valerius Flaccus,
        Plutarch,                 Florus Lucius,
        Justus of Tiberius,       Favorinus,
        Apollonius,               Phaedrus,
        Pliny the Younger,        Damis,
        Tacitus,                  Aulus Gellius,
        Quintilian,               Columella,
        Lucanus,                  Dio Chrysostom,
        Epictetus,                Lysias,
        Silius Italicus,          Appion of Alexandria.


Enough of the writings of the authors named in the foregoing list
remains to form a library. Yet in this mass of Jewish and Pagan
literature, aside from two forged passages in the works of a Jewish
author, and two disputed passages in the works of Roman writers,
there is to be found no mention of Jesus Christ.

Philo was born before the beginning of the Christian era, and lived
until long after the reputed death of Christ. He wrote an account
of the Jews covering the entire time that Christ is said to have
existed on earth. He was living in or near Jerusalem when Christ's
miraculous birth and the Herodian massacre occurred. He was there when
Christ made his triumphal entry into Jerusalem. He was there when the
crucifixion with its attendant earthquake, supernatural darkness, and
resurrection of the dead took place--when Christ himself rose from the
dead, and in the presence of many witnesses ascended into heaven. These
marvelous events which must have filled the world with amazement, had
they really occurred, were unknown to him. It was Philo who developed
the doctrine of the Logos, or Word, and although this Word incarnate
dwelt in that very land and in the presence of multitudes revealed
himself and demonstrated his divine powers, Philo saw it not.

Josephus, the renowned Jewish historian, was a native of Judea. He
was born in 37 A. D., and was a contemporary of the Apostles. He was,
for a time, Governor of Galilee, the province in which Christ lived
and taught. He traversed every part of this province and visited
the places where but a generation before Christ had performed his
prodigies. He resided in Cana, the very city in which Christ is said
to have wrought his first miracle. He mentions every noted personage
of Palestine and describes every important event which occurred there
during the first seventy years of the Christian era. But Christ was
of too little consequence and his deeds too trivial to merit a line
from this historian's pen.

Justus of Tiberius was a native of Christ's own country, Galilee. He
wrote a history covering the time of Christ's reputed existence. This
work has perished, but Photius, a Christian scholar and critic of
the ninth century, who was acquainted with it, says: "He [Justus]
makes not the least mention of the appearance of Christ, of what
things happened to him, or of the wonderful works that he did"
(Photius' Bibliotheca, code 33).

Judea, where occurred the miraculous beginning and marvelous ending of
Christ's earthly career, was a Roman province, and all of Palestine
is intimately associated with Roman history. But the Roman records
of that age contain no mention of Christ and his works. The Greek
writers of Greece and Alexandria who lived not far from Palestine
and who were familiar with its events, are silent also.



Josephus.

Late in the first century Josephus wrote his celebrated work,
"The Antiquities of the Jews," giving a history of his race from
the earliest ages down to his own time. Modern versions of this work
contain the following passage:

"Now, there was about this time Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful
to call him a man, for he was a doer of wonderful works; a teacher
of such men as receive the truth with pleasure. He drew over to him
both many of the Jews, and many of the Gentiles. He was [the] Christ;
and when Pilate, at the suggestion of the principal men amongst us,
had condemned him to the cross, those that loved him at the first
did not forsake him; for he appeared to them alive again the third
day, as the divine prophets had foretold these and ten thousand other
wonderful things concerning him; and the tribe of Christians, so named
from him, are not extinct at this day" (Book XVIII, Chap. iii, sec. 3).

For nearly sixteen hundred years Christians have been citing this
passage as a testimonial, not merely to the historical existence,
but to the divine character of Jesus Christ. And yet a ranker forgery
was never penned.

Its language is Christian. Every line proclaims it the work of a
Christian writer. "If it be lawful to call him a man." "He was the
Christ." "He appeared to them alive again the third day, as the divine
prophets had foretold these and ten thousand other wonderful things
concerning him." These are the words of a Christian, a believer in
the divinity of Christ. Josephus was a Jew, a devout believer in the
Jewish faith--the last man in the world to acknowledge the divinity
of Christ. The inconsistency of this evidence was early recognized,
and Ambrose, writing in the generation succeeding its first appearance
(360 A. D.) offers the following explanation, which only a theologian
could frame: "If the Jews do not believe us, let them, at least,
believe their own writers. Josephus, whom they esteem a very great man,
hath said this, and yet hath he spoken truth after such a manner;
and so far was his mind wandered from the right way, that even he
was not a believer as to what he himself said; but thus he spake,
in order to deliver historical truth, because he thought it not
lawful for him to deceive, while yet he was no believer, because of
the hardness of his heart, and his perfidious intention."

Its brevity disproves its authenticity. Josephus' work is voluminous
and exhaustive. It comprises twenty books. Whole pages are devoted
to petty robbers and obscure seditious leaders. Nearly forty chapters
are devoted to the life of a single king. Yet this remarkable being,
the greatest product of his race, a being of whom the prophets foretold
ten thousand wonderful things, a being greater than any earthly king,
is dismissed with a dozen lines.

It interrupts the narrative. Section 2 of the chapter containing it
gives an account of a Jewish sedition which was suppressed by Pilate
with great slaughter. The account ends as follows: "There were a
great number of them slain by this means, and others of them ran
away wounded; and thus an end was put to this sedition." Section 4,
as now numbered, begins with these words: "About the same time also
another sad calamity put the Jews into disorder." The one section
naturally and logically follows the other. Yet between these two
closely connected paragraphs the one relating to Christ is placed;
thus making the words, "another sad calamity," refer to the advent
of this wise and wonderful being.

The early Christian fathers were not acquainted with it. Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, and Origen all would have quoted
this passage had it existed in their time. The failure of even one
of these fathers to notice it would be sufficient to throw doubt
upon its genuineness; the failure of all of them to notice it proves
conclusively that it is spurious, that it was not in existence during
the second and third centuries.

As this passage first appeared in the writings of the ecclesiastical
historian, Eusebius, as this author openly advocated the use of
fraud and deception in furthering the interests of the church, as
he is known to have mutilated and perverted the text of Josephus in
other instances, and as the manner of its presentation is calculated
to excite suspicion, the forgery has generally been charged to
him. In his "Evangelical Demonstration," written early in the fourth
century, after citing all the known evidences of Christianity, he thus
introduces the Jewish historian: "Certainly the attestations I have
already produced concerning our Savior may be sufficient. However,
it may not be amiss, if, over and above, we make use of Josephus the
Jew for a further witness" (Book III, p. 124).

Chrysostom and Photius both reject this passage. Chrysostom, a reader
of Josephus, who preached and wrote in the latter part of the fourth
century, in his defense of Christianity, needed this evidence, but
was too honest or too wise to use it. Photius, who made a revision
of Josephus, writing five hundred years after the time of Eusebius,
ignores the passage, and admits that Josephus has made no mention
of Christ.

Modern Christian scholars generally concede that the passage is a
forgery. Dr. Lardner, one of the ablest defenders of Christianity,
adduces the following arguments against its genuineness:

"I do not perceive that we at all want the suspected testimony to
Jesus, which was never quoted by any of our Christian ancestors
before Eusebius.

"Nor do I recollect that Josephus has anywhere mentioned the name or
word Christ, in any of his works; except the testimony above mentioned,
and the passage concerning James, the Lord's brother.

"It interrupts the narrative.

"The language is quite Christian.

"It is not quoted by Chrysostom, though he often refers to Josephus,
and could not have omitted quoting it had it been then in the text.

"It is not quoted by Photius, though he has three articles concerning
Josephus.

"Under the article Justus of Tiberias, this author (Photius) expressly
states that the historian [Josephus], being a Jew, has not taken the
least notice of Christ.

"Neither Justin in his dialogue with Trypho the Jew, nor Clemens
Alexandrinus, who made so many extracts from ancient authors, nor
Origen against Celsus, has ever mentioned this testimony.

"But, on the contrary, in chapter xxxv of the first book of that
work, Origen openly affirms that Josephus, who had mentioned John
the Baptist, did not acknowledge Christ" (Answer to Dr. Chandler).

Again Dr. Lardner says: "This passage is not quoted nor referred to by
any Christian writer before Eusebius, who flourished at the beginning
of the fourth century. If it had been originally in the works of
Josephus it would have been highly proper to produce it in their
disputes with Jews and Gentiles. But it is never quoted by Justin
Martyr, or Clement of Alexandria, nor by Tertullian or Origen, men
of great learning, and well acquainted with the works of Josephus. It
was certainly very proper to urge it against the Jews. It might also
have been fitly urged against the Gentiles. A testimony so favorable
to Jesus in the works of Josephus, who lived so soon after our Savior,
who was so well acquainted with the transactions of his own country,
who had received so many favors from Vespasian and Titus, would not be
overlooked or neglected by any Christian apologist" (Lardner's Works,
vol. I, chap. iv).

Bishop Warburton declares it to be a forgery: "If a Jew owned the
truth of Christianity, he must needs embrace it. We, therefore,
certainly conclude that the paragraph where Josephus, who was as much
a Jew as the religion of Moses could make him, is made to acknowledge
Jesus as the Christ, in terms as strong as words could do it, is a
rank forgery, and a very stupid one, too" (Quoted by Lardner, Works,
Vol. I, chap. iv).

The Rev. Dr. Giles, of the Established Church of England, says:

"Those who are best acquainted with the character of Josephus,
and the style of his writings, have no hesitation in condemning
this passage as a forgery, interpolated in the text during the third
century by some pious Christian, who was scandalized that so famous a
writer as Josephus should have taken no notice of the gospels, or of
Christ, their subject. But the zeal of the interpolator has outrun
his discretion, for we might as well expect to gather grapes from
thorns, or figs from thistles, as to find this notice of Christ among
the Judaizing writings of Josephus. It is well known that this author
was a zealous Jew, devoted to the laws of Moses and the traditions of
his countrymen. How, then, could he have written that Jesus was the
Christ? Such an admission would have proved him to be a Christian
himself, in which case the passage under consideration, too long
for a Jew, would have been far too short for a believer in the new
religion, and thus the passage stands forth, like an ill-set jewel,
contrasting most inharmoniously with everything around it. If it had
been genuine, we might be sure that Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and
Chrysostom would have quoted it in their controversies with the Jews,
and that Origen or Photius would have mentioned it. But Eusebius,
the ecclesiastical historian (I, 11), is the first who quotes it,
and our reliance on the judgment or even honesty of this writer is
not so great as to allow our considering everything found in his
works as undoubtedly genuine" (Christian Records, p. 30).

The Rev. S. Baring-Gould, in his "Lost and Hostile Gospels," says:

"This passage is first quoted by Eusebius (fl. A. D. 315) in two
places (Hist. Eccl., lib. i, c. xi; Demonst. Evang., lib. iii);
but it was unknown to Justin Martyr (fl. A. D. 140), Clement of
Alexandria (fl. A. D. 192), Tertullian (fl. A. D. 193), and Origen
(fl. A. D. 230). Such a testimony would certainly have been produced by
Justin in his apology or in his controversy with Trypho the Jew, had it
existed in the copies of Josephus at his time. The silence of Origen
is still more significant. Celsus, in his book against Christianity,
introduces a Jew. Origen attacks the argument of Celsus and his
Jew. He could not have failed to quote the words of Josephus, whose
writings he knew, had the passage existed in the genuine text. He,
indeed, distinctly affirms that Josephus did not believe in Christ
(Contr. Cels. i)."

Dr. Chalmers ignores it, and admits that Josephus is silent regarding
Christ. He says: "The entire silence of Josephus upon the subject of
Christianity, though he wrote after the destruction of Jerusalem, and
gives us the history of that period in which Christ and his Apostles
lived, is certainly a very striking circumstance" (Kneeland's Review,
p. 169).

Referring to this passage, Dean Milman, in his "Gibbon's Rome"
(Vol. II, p. 285, note) says: "It is interpolated with many additional
clauses."

Canon Farrar, who has written the ablest Christian life of Christ
yet penned, repudiates it. He says: "The single passage in which he
[Josephus] alludes to him is interpolated, if not wholly spurious"
(Life of Christ, Vol. I, p. 46).

The following, from Dr. Farrar's pen, is to be found in the
"Encyclopedia Britannica": "That Josephus wrote the whole passage as
it now stands no sane critic can believe."

"There are, however, two reasons which are alone sufficient to prove
that the whole passage is spurious--one that it was unknown to Origen
and the earlier fathers, and the other that its place in the text is
uncertain" (Ibid).

Theodor Keim, a German-Christian writer on Jesus, says: "The passage
cannot be maintained; it has first appeared in this form in the
Catholic church of the Jews and Gentiles, and under the dominion of the
Fourth Gospel, and hardly before the third century, probably before
Eusebius, and after Origen, whose bitter criticisms of Josephus may
have given cause for it" (Jesus of Nazara, p. 25).

Concerning this passage, Hausrath, another German writer, says it
"must have been penned at a peculiarly shameless hour."

The Rev. Dr. Hooykaas, of Holland, says: "Flavius Josephus, the
well known historian of the Jewish people, was born in A. D. 37,
only two years after the death of Jesus; but though his work is of
inestimable value as our chief authority for the circumstances of the
times in which Jesus and his Apostles came forward, yet he does not
seem to have mentioned Jesus himself. At any rate, the passage in his
'Jewish Antiquities' that refers to him is certainly spurious, and
was inserted by a later and a Christian hand" (Bible for Learners,
Vol. III, p. 27). This conclusion of Dr. Hooykaas is endorsed by the
eminent Dutch critic, Dr. Kuenen.

Dr. Alexander Campbell, one of America's ablest Christian apologists,
says: "Josephus, the Jewish historian, was contemporary with the
Apostles, having been born in the year 37. From his situation and
habits, he had every access to know all that took place at the rise
of the Christian religion.

"Respecting the founder of this religion, Josephus has thought fit
to be silent in history. The present copies of his work contain one
passage which speaks very respectfully of Jesus Christ, and ascribes
to him the character of the Messiah. But as Josephus did not embrace
Christianity, and as this passage is not quoted or referred to until
the beginning of the fourth century, it is, for these and other
reasons, generally accounted spurious" (Evidences of Christianity,
from Campbell-Owen Debate, p. 312).

Another passage in Josephus, relating to the younger Ananus, who was
high priest of the Jews in 62 A. D., reads as follows:

"But this younger Ananus, who, as we have told you already, took the
high priesthood, was a bold man in his temper and very insolent; he was
also of the sect of Sadducees, who are very rigid in judging offenders,
above all of the rest of the Jews, as we have already observed; when,
therefore, Ananus was of this disposition, he thought he had now a
proper opportunity. Festus was dead, and Albinus was but upon the
road; so he assembled the Sanhedrim of judges and brought before them
the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, whose name was James,
and some others; and when he had formed an accusation against them
as breakers of the law, he delivered them to be stoned" (Antiquities,
Book XX, chap. ix, sec. 1).

This passage is probably genuine with the exception of the clause,
"who was called Christ," which is undoubtedly an interpolation, and
is generally regarded as such. Nearly all the authorities that I have
quoted reject it. It was originally probably a marginal note. Some
Christian reader of Josephus believing that the James mentioned was the
brother of Jesus made a note of his belief in the manuscript before
him, and this a transcriber afterward incorporated with the text,
a very common practice in that age when purity of text was a matter
of secondary importance.

The fact that the early fathers, who were acquainted with Josephus,
and who would have hailed with joy even this evidence of Christ's
existence, do not cite it, while Origen expressly declares that
Josephus has not mentioned Christ, is conclusive proof that it did
not exist until the middle of the third century or later.

Those who affirm the genuineness of this clause argue that the James
mentioned by Josephus was a person of less prominence than the Jesus
mentioned by him, which would be true of James, the brother of Jesus
Christ. Now some of the most prominent Jews living at this time were
named Jesus. Jesus, the son of Damneus, succeeded Ananus as high
priest that very year; and Jesus, the son of Gamaliel, a little later
succeeded to the same office.

To identify the James of Josephus with James the Just, the brother
of Jesus, is to reject the accepted history of the primitive church
which declares that James the Just died in 69 A. D., seven years
after the James of Josephus was condemned to death by the Sanhedrim.

Whiston himself, the translator of Josephus, referring to the event
narrated by the Jewish historian, admits that James, the brother of
Jesus Christ, "did not die till long afterward."

The brief "Discourse Concerning Hades," appended to the writings of
Josephus, is universally conceded to be the product of some other
writer--"obviously of Christian origin"--says the "Encyclopedia
Britannica."



Tacitus.

In July, 64 A. D., a great conflagration occurred in Rome. There is
a tradition to the effect that this conflagration was the work of an
incendiary and that the Emperor Nero himself was believed to be the
incendiary. Modern editions of the "Annals" of Tacitus contain the
following passage in reference to this:

"Nero, in order to stifle the rumor, ascribed it to those people who
were abhorred for their crimes and commonly called Christians: These
he punished exquisitely. The founder of that name was Christus, who,
in the reign of Tiberius, was punished as a criminal by the procurator,
Pontius Pilate. This pernicious superstition, thus checked for awhile,
broke out again; and spread not only over Judea, the source of this
evil, but reached the city also: whither flow from all quarters
all things vile and shameful, and where they find shelter and
encouragement. At first, only those were apprehended who confessed
themselves of that sect; afterwards, a vast multitude were detected
by them, all of whom were condemned, not so much for the crime of
burning the city, as their hatred of mankind. Their executions were
so contrived as to expose them to derision and contempt. Some were
covered over with the skins of wild beasts, and torn to pieces by dogs;
some were crucified. Others, having been daubed over with combustible
materials, were set up as lights in the night time, and thus burned
to death. Nero made use of his own gardens as a theatre on this
occasion, and also exhibited the diversions of the circus, sometimes
standing in the crowd as a spectator, in the habit of a charioteer;
at other times driving a chariot himself, till at length those men,
though really criminal, and deserving exemplary punishment, began
to be commiserated as people who were destroyed, not out of regard
to the public welfare, but only to gratify the cruelty of one man"
(Annals, Book XV, sec. 44).

This passage, accepted as authentic by many, must be declared doubtful,
if not spurious, for the following reasons:

1. It is not quoted by the Christian fathers.

2. Tertullian was familiar with the writings of Tacitus, and his
arguments demanded the citation of this evidence had it existed.

3. Clement of Alexandria, at the beginning of the third century,
made a compilation of all the recognitions of Christ and Christianity
that had been made by Pagan writers up to his time. The writings of
Tacitus furnished no recognition of them.

4. Origen, in his controversy with Celsus, would undoubtedly have
used it had it existed.

5. The ecclesiastical historian Eusebius, in the fourth century,
cites all the evidences of Christianity obtainable from Jewish and
Pagan sources, but makes no mention of Tacitus.

6. It is not quoted by any Christian writer prior to the fifteenth
century.

7. At this time but one copy of the "Annals" existed, and this copy,
it is claimed, was made in the eighth century--600 years after the
time of Tacitus.

8. As this single copy was in the possession of a Christian the
insertion of a forgery was easy.

9. Its severe criticisms of Christianity do not necessarily disprove
its Christian origin. No ancient witness was more desirable than
Tacitus, but his introduction at so late a period would make rejection
certain unless Christian forgery could be made to appear improbable.

10. It is admitted by Christian writers that the works of Tacitus
have not been preserved with any considerable degree of fidelity. In
the writings ascribed to him are believed to be some of the writings
of Quintilian.

11. The blood-curdling story about the frightful orgies of Nero reads
like some Christian romance of the dark ages, and not like Tacitus.

12. In fact, this story, in nearly the same words, omitting the
reference to Christ, is to be found in the writings of Sulpicius
Severus, a Christian of the fifth century.

13. Suetonius, while mercilessly condemning the reign of Nero, says
that in his public entertainments he took particular care that no human
lives should be sacrificed, "not even those of condemned criminals."

14. At the time that the conflagration occurred, Tacitus himself
declares that Nero was not in Rome, but at Antium.

Many who accept the authenticity of this section of the "Annals"
believe that the sentence which declares that Christ was punished
in the reign of Pontius Pilate, and which I have italicized, is
an interpolation. Whatever may be said of the remainder of this
passage, this sentence bears the unmistakable stamp of Christian
forgery. It interrupts the narrative; it disconnects two closely
related statements. Eliminate this sentence, and there is no break
in the narrative. In all the Roman records there was to be found no
evidence that Christ was put to death by Pontius Pilate. This sentence,
if genuine, is the most important evidence in Pagan literature. That
it existed in the works of the greatest and best known of Roman
historians, and was ignored or overlooked by Christian apologists
for 1,360 years, no intelligent critic can believe. Tacitus did not
write this sentence.



Pliny the Younger.

This Roman author, early in the second century, while serving as a
pro-consul under Trajan in Bithynia, is reputed to have written a
letter to his Emperor concerning his treatment of Christians. This
