CHAPTER IV.

THE INFANCY OF CHRIST.


We have seen that the Four Gospels are not authentic, that they are
anonymous writings which appeared late in the second century. If their
contents seemed credible and their statements harmonized with each
other this want of authenticity would invalidate their authority,
because the testimony of an unknown witness cannot be accepted
as authoritative. On the other hand, if their authenticity could
be established, if it could be shown that they were written by the
authors claimed, the incredible and contradictory character of their
contents would destroy their authority.

As historical documents these books are hardly worthy of credit. The
"Arabian Nights" is almost as worthy of credit as the Four Gospels. In
both are to be found accounts of things possible and of things
impossible. To believe the impossible is gross superstition; to believe
the possible, simply because it is possible, is blind credulity. These
books are adduced as the credentials of Christ. A critical analysis of
these credentials reveals hundreds of errors. A presentation of these
errors will occupy the five succeeding chapters of this work. If it
can be shown that they contain errors, however trivial some of them
may appear, this refutes the claim of inerrancy and divinity. If
it can be shown that they abound with errors, this destroys their
credibility as historical documents. Destroy the credibility of the
Four Gospels and you destroy all proofs of Christ's divinity--all
proofs of his existence.



1

When was Jesus born?

Matthew: "In the days of Herod" (ii, 1).

Luke: "When Cyrenius was governor of Syria" (ii, 1-7).

Nearly every biographer gives the date of his subject's birth. Yet not
one of the Evangelists gives the date of Jesus' birth. Two, Matthew
and Luke, attempt to give the time approximately. But between these two
attempts there is a discrepancy of at least ten years; for Herod died
4 B. C., while Cyrenius did not become governor of Syria until 7 A. D.

A reconciliation of these statements is impossible. Matthew clearly
states that Jesus was born during the reign of Herod. Luke states
that Augustus Caesar issued a decree that the world should be taxed,
that "this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria,"
and that Jesus was born at the time of this taxing.

The following extracts from Josephus, the renowned historian of the
race and country to which Jesus belonged, give the date of this taxing
and the time that elapsed between the death of Herod and the taxing,
and which reckoned backward from this gives the date of Herod's death:

"And now Herod altered his testament upon the alteration of his mind;
for he appointed Antipas, to whom he had before left his kingdom,
to be tetrarch of Galilee and Berea, and granted the kingdom to
Archelaus.... When he had done these things he died" (Antiquities,
B. xvii, ch. 8, sec. 1).

"But in the tenth year of Archelaus's government, both his brethren,
and the principal men of Judea and Samaria, not being able to bear
his barbarous and tyrannical usage of them, accused him before
Caesar.... And when he was come [to Rome], Caesar, upon hearing what
certain accusers of his had to say, and what reply he could make,
both banished him, and appointed Vienna, a city of Gaul, to be the
place of his habitation, and took his money away from him" (Ibid,
ch. 13, sec. 2).

"Archelaus's country was laid to the province of Syria; and Cyrenius,
one that had been consul, was sent by Caesar to take account of
people's effects in Syria, and to sell the house of Archelaus"
(Ib. sec. 5).

"When Cyrenius had now disposed of Archelaus's money, and when
the taxings were come to a conclusion, which were made in the
thirty-seventh of Caesar's victory over Antony at Actium," etc. (Ib.,
B. xviii, ch. 2, sec. 1).

The battle of Actium was fought September 2, B. C. 31. The
thirty-seventh year from this battle comprehended the time elapsing
between September 2, A. D. 6, and September 2, A. D. 7, the mean
of which was March 2, A. D. 7. The mean of the tenth year preceding
this--the year in which Herod died--was September 2, B. C. 4.

It has been suggested by some unacquainted with Roman history that
Cyrenius [Quirinus] may have been twice governor of Syria. Cyrenius
was but once governor of Syria, and this not until 7 A. D. During the
last years of Herod's reign, and during all the years of Archelaus's
reign, Sentius Saturninus and Quintilius Varus held this office. Even
if Cyrenius had previously held the office the events related by Luke
could not have occurred then because Judea prior to 7 A. D. was not
a part of Syria.

The second chapter of Luke which narrates the birth and infancy of
Jesus, conflicts with the first chapter of this book. In this chapter
it is expressly stated that Zacharias, the priest, lived in the time
of Herod and, inferentially, that the conceptions of John and Jesus
occurred at this time.

Christian chronology, by which events are supposed to be reckoned
from the birth of Christ, agrees with neither Matthew nor Luke, but
dates from a point nearly intermediate between the two. According to
Matthew, Christ was born at least five years before the beginning
of the Christian era; according to Luke he was born at least six
years after the beginning of the Christian era. This is 1907: but
according to Matthew Christ was born not later than 1912 years ago;
while according to Luke he was born not earlier than 1901 years ago.

At least ten different opinions regarding the year of Christ's birth
have been advanced by Christian scholars. Dodwell places it in 6 B. C.,
Chrysostom 5 B. C., Usher, whose opinion is most commonly received,
4 B. C., Irenaeus 3 B. C., Jerome 2 B. C., Tertullian 1 B. C. Some
modern authorities place it in 1 A. D., others in 2 A. D., and still
others in 3 A. D.; while those who accept Luke as infallible authority
must place it as late as 7 A. D.



2

It is generally assumed that Jesus was born in the last year of
Herod's reign. How long before the close of Herod's reign was he born?

Matthew: At least two years (ii, 1-16).

Matthew says that when the wise men visited Herod he diligently
inquired of them the time when the star which announced the birth of
Jesus first appeared. When he determined to destroy Jesus and massacred
the infants of Bethlehem and the surrounding country, he slew those
"from two years old and under, according to the time which he had
diligently inquired of the wise men," clearly indicating that Jesus
was nearly or quite two years old at this time.

In attempting to reconcile Matthew's visit of the wise men to Jesus
at Bethlehem with the narrative of Luke, which makes his stay there
less than six weeks, it has been assumed that this visit occurred
immediately after his birth, whereas, according to Matthew, it did
not occur until about two years after his birth.



3

In what month and on what day of the month was he born?

Not one of his biographers is prepared to tell; primitive Christians
did not know; the church has never been able to determine this. A
hundred different opinions regarding it have been expressed by
Christian scholars. Wagenseil places it in February, Paulius in
March, Greswell in April, Lichtenstein in June, Strong in August,
Lightfoot in September, and Newcome in October. Clinton says that he
was born in the Spring; Larchur says that he was born in the Fall. Some
early Christians believed that it occurred on the 5th of January;
others the 19th of April; others still on the 20th of May. The Eastern
church believed that he was born on the 7th of January. The church of
Rome, in the fourth century, selected the 25th of December on which
to celebrate the anniversary of his birth; and this date has been
accepted by the greater portion of the Christian world.



4

What determined the selection of this date?

"There was a double reason for selecting this day. In the first place
it had been observed from a hoary antiquity as a heathen festival,
following the longest night of the winter solstice, and was called
'the Birthday of the Unconquerable Sun.' It was a fine thought
to celebrate on that day the birth of him whom the Gospel called
"the light of the world".... The second reason was, that at Rome the
days from the 17th to the 23d of December were devoted to unbridled
merrymaking. These days were called the Saturnalia.... Now the church
was always anxious to meet the heathen, whom she had converted or
was beginning to convert, half-way, by allowing them to retain the
feasts they were accustomed to, only giving them a Christian dress,
or attaching a new and Christian signification to them" (Bible for
Learners, vol. iii, pp. 66, 67).

Gibbon says: "The Roman Christians, ignorant of the real time of the
birth of Jesus, fixed the solemn festival on the 25th of December,
the winter solstice when the Pagans annually celebrated the birth of
the sun."



5

What precludes the acceptance of this date?

Luke: At the time of his birth "there were in the same country
shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flocks by
night" (ii, 8).

Shepherds did not abide in the field with their flocks at night in
mid-winter. The Rev. Cunningham Geikie, D. D., a leading English
orthodox authority on Christ, says:

"One knows how wretched even Rome is in winter and Palestine is much
worse during hard weather. Nor is it likely that shepherds would
lie out through the night, except during unseasonably fine weather"
(Christmas at Bethlehem, in Deems' Holydays and Holidays, p. 405).

"The nativity of Jesus in December should be given up."--Dr. Adam
Clarke.

In regard to the date of Christ's birth Dr. Farrar says: "It
must be admitted that we cannot demonstrate the exact year of the
nativity.... As to the day and month of the nativity it is certain
that they can never be recovered; they were absolutely unknown to the
early fathers, and there is scarcely one month of the year which has
not been fixed upon as probable by modern critics."

The inability of Christians to determine the date of Christ's birth
is one of the strongest proofs of his non-existence as a historical
character. Were the story of his miraculous birth and marvelous life
true the date of his birth would have been preserved and would be
today, the best authenticated fact in history.



6

Where was Jesus born?

Matthew and Luke: In Bethlehem of Judea (Matt. ii, 1; Luke ii, 1-7).

Aside from these stories in Matthew and Luke concerning the nativity,
which are clearly of later origin than the remaining documents
composing the books and which many Christian scholars reject, there
is not a word in the Four Gospels to confirm the claim that Jesus was
born in Bethlehem. Every statement in Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
as well as Acts, concerning his nativity, is to the effect that he was
born in Nazareth of Galilee. He is never called "Jesus of Bethlehem,"
but always "Jesus of Nazareth." According to modern usage "Jesus of
Nazareth" might merely signify that Nazareth was the place of his
residence and not necessarily the place of his birth. But this usage
was unknown to the Jews. Had he been born at Bethlehem, he would,
according to the Jewish custom, have been called "Jesus of Bethlehem,"
because the place of birth always determined this distinguishing
adjunct, and the fact of his having removed to another place would
not have changed it.

Peter (Acts ii, 22; iii, 6); Paul (Acts xxvi, 9), Philip (John i,
45), Cleopas and his companion (Luke xxiv, 19), Pilate (John xix,
19), Judas and the band sent to arrest Jesus (John xviii, 5, 7), the
High Priest's maid (Mark xiv, 67), blind Bartimaeus (Mark x, 47),
the unclean spirits (Mark i, 24; Luke iv, 34), the multitudes that
attended his meetings (Matt. xxi, 11; Luke xviii, 37), all declared
him to be a native of Nazareth.

To the foregoing may be added the testimony of Jesus himself. When
Paul asked him who he was he answered: "I am Jesus of Nazareth"
(Acts xxii, 8).

Many of the Jews rejected Christ because he was born in Galilee and
not in Bethlehem. "Others said, This is the Christ. But some said,
Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the scriptures said,
That Christ cometh out of the seed of David, and out of the town of
Bethlehem, where David was?" (John vii, 41, 42).

Concerning this subject the "Bible for Learners" says: "The primitive
tradition declared emphatically that Nazareth was the place from
which Jesus came. We may still see this distinctly enough in our
Gospels. Jesus is constantly called the Nazarene, or Jesus of
Nazareth. This was certainly the name by which he was known in his
own time; and of course such local names were given to men from the
place of their birth, and not from the place in which they lived,
which might constantly be changing. Nazareth is called in so many
words his own, that is his native city, and he himself declares it so"
(vol. iii, pp. 39, 40).

That Jesus the man, if such a being existed, was not born at Bethlehem
is affirmed by all critics. That he could not have been born at
Nazareth is urged by many. Nazareth, it is asserted, did not exist
at this time. Christian scholars admit that there is no proof of its
existence at the beginning of the Christian era outside of the New
Testament. The Encyclopedia Biblica, a leading Christian authority,
says: "We cannot perhaps venture to assert positively that there was
a city called Nazareth in Jesus' time."



7

His reputed birth at Bethlehem was in fulfillment of what prophecy?

"And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among
the princes of Juda; for out of thee shall come a governor that shall
rule my people Israel" (Matthew ii, 6).

This is a misquotation of Micah v, 2. The passage as it appears in
our version of the Old Testament is itself a mistranslation. Correctly
rendered it does not mean that this ruler shall come from Bethlehem,
but simply that he shall be a descendant of David whose family belonged
to Bethlehem.

Concerning this prophecy it may be said, 1. That Jesus never became
governor or ruler of Israel; 2. That the ruler referred to was to be
a military leader who should deliver Israel from the Assyrians. "And
this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into the
land ... thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian" (Micah v, 5, 6).



8

Jesus is called the Son of David. Why?

Matthew and Luke: Because Joseph, who was not his father, but merely
his guardian or foster father, was descended from David.

The Jews expected a Messiah. This expectation was realized, it is
claimed, in Jesus Christ. His Messianic marks, however, were not
discernible and the Jews, for the most part, rejected him. This
Messiah must be a son of David. Before Jesus' claims could even be
considered his Davidic descent must be established. This Matthew and
Luke attempt to do. Each gives what purports to be a genealogy of
him. If these genealogies agree they may be false; if they do not
agree one must be false.



9

How many generations were there from David to Jesus?

Matthew: Twenty-eight (i, 6-16).

Luke: Forty-three (iii, 23-31).

Luke makes two more generations from David to Jesus in a period of
one thousand years than Matthew does from Abraham to Jesus in a period
of two thousand years.



10

How many generations were there from Abraham to Jesus?

Matthew: "From Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from
David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations;
and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen
generations"--in all, forty-two generations (i, 17).

Here Matthew contradicts his own record given in the preceding sixteen
verses; for, including both Abraham and Jesus, he names but forty-one
generations: 1. Abraham, 2. Isaac, 3. Jacob, 4. Judas, 5. Phares,
6. Ezrom, 7. Aram, 8. Aminadab, 9. Naason, 10. Salmon, 11. Booz,
12. Obed, 13. Jesse, 14. David, 15. Solomon, 16. Roboam, 17. Abia,
18. Asa, 19. Josaphat, 20. Joram, 21. Ozias, 22. Joatham, 23. Achaz,
24. Ezekias, 25. Manasses, 26. Amon, 27. Josias, 28. Jechonias,
29. Salathiel, 30. Zorobabel, 31. Abiud, 32. Eliakim, 33. Azor,
34. Sadoc, 35. Achim, 36. Eliud, 37. Eleazer, 38. Matthan, 39. Jacob,
40. Joseph, 41. Jesus Christ.



11

Does Luke's genealogy agree with the Old Testament?

It does not. Luke gives twenty generations from Adam to Abraham,
while Genesis (v, 3-32; xi, 10-26) and Chronicles (1 Ch. i, 1-4;
24-27) each gives but nineteen.



12

How many generations were there from Abraham to David?

Matthew: "From Abraham to David are fourteen generations" (i, 17).

From Abraham to David are not fourteen, but thirteen generations;
for David does not belong to this period. The genealogical table of
Matthew naturally and logically comprises three divisions which he
recognizes. The first division comprises the generations preceding
the establishment of the Kingdom of David, beginning with Abraham;
the second comprises the kings of Judah, beginning with David the
first and ending with Jechonias the last; the third comprises the
generations following the kings of Judah, from the Captivity to Christ.



13

How many generations were there from David to the Captivity?

Matthew: "From David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen
generations" (i, 17).

In order to obtain a uniformity of numbers--three periods of double
seven (seven was the sacred number of the Jews) each--Matthew
purposely falsifies the records of the Old Testament. A reference
to the Davidic genealogy (1 Chronicles iii) shows that he omits the
generations of Ahaziah, Joash, Amaziah, and Jehoiakim, four Jewish
kings, lineal descendants of David, whose combined reigns amount to
over eighty years.


                       Matthew.     Chronicles.

                       David,       David,
                       Solomon,     Solomon,
                       Reboam,      Rehoboam,
                       Abia,        Abia,
                       Asa,         Asa,
                       Josaphat,    Jehoshaphat,
                       Joram,       Joram,
                                    Ahaziah,
                                    Joash,
                                    Amaziah,
                       Ozias,       Azariah,
                       Joatham,     Jotham,
                       Achaz,       Ahaz,
                       Ezekias,     Hezekiah,
                       Manasses,    Manasseh,
                       Amon,        Amon,
                       Josias,      Josiah,
                                    Jehoiakim,
                       Jechonias.   Jechoniah.


The first three omissions are thus explained by Augustine: "Ochozias
[Ahaziah], Joash, and Amazias were excluded from the number, because
their wickedness was continuous and without interval."

As if the exclusion of their names from a genealogical list would
expunge their records from history and drain their blood from the veins
of their descendants. But aside from the absurdity of this explanation,
the premises are false. Those whose names are excluded from the list
were not men whose "wickedness was continuous and without interval,"
while some whose names are not excluded were. Ahaziah reigned but one
year. Joash reigned forty years and both Kings and Chronicles affirm
that "He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord" (2 Kings
xii, 2; 2 Chron. xxiv, 2). Amaziah reigned twenty-nine years, and he,
too, "did that which was right in the sight of the Lord" (2 Kings xiv,
3). On the other hand, Rehoboam, Joram and Jechonias, whose names are
retained in Matthew's table, are represented as monsters of wickedness.



14

Name the generations from David to the Captivity.


                         Matthew.     Luke.

                         David,       David,
                         Solomon,     Nathan,
                         Roboam,      Mattatha,
                         Abia,        Menan,
                         Asa,         Melea,
                         Josaphat,    Eliakim,
                         Joram,       Jonan,
                         Ozias,       Joseph,
                         Joatham,     Juda,
                         Achas,       Simeon,
                         Ezekias,     Levi,
                         Manasses,    Matthat,
                         Amon,        Jorim,
                         Josias,      Eliezer,
                         Jechonias.   Jose,
                                      Er,
                                      Elmodam,
                                      Cosam,
                                      Addi,
                                      Melchi,
                                      Neri.



15

How many generations were there from the Captivity to Christ?

Matthew: "From the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen
generations" (i, 17).

Matthew is again guilty of deception. A reference to his table shows
that there were but thirteen generations. In order to carry out his
numerical system of fourteen generations to each period he counts the
generation of Jechonias in this period which he has already counted
in the preceding period; thus performing the mathematical feat of
dividing 27 by 2 and obtaining 14 for a quotient.

Had Matthew given a true summary of this genealogy, assuming the
generations from the close of the Old Testament record to Christ to
be correct, instead of these periods of double seven each, we would
have the following: "So all the generations from Abraham to David
are thirteen generations; and from David until the carrying away
into Babylon are nineteen generations; and from the carrying away
into Babylon unto Christ are thirteen generations."



16

Name the generations from the Captivity to Christ.


      Matthew.     Luke.         Chronicles.

      Salathiel,   Salathiel,    Pediah,
      Zorobabel,   Zorobabel,    Zerubabel,
      Abiud,       Rhesa,        Hananiah,
      Eliakim,     Joanna,       Schecania,
      Azor,        Juda,         Shemaiah,
      Sadoc,       Joseph,       Neariah,
      Achim,       Semei,        Elioenai,
      Eliud,       Mattathias,   Hodaiah,
      Eleazer,     Maath,        (Here the genealogy of Chronicles
                                 ends.)
      Matthan,     Nagge,
      Jacob,       Esli,
      Joseph,      Naum,
      Jesus.       Amos,
                   Mattathias,
                   Joseph,
                   Janna,
                   Melchi,
                   Levi,
                   Heli,
                   Matthat,
                   Joseph,
                   Jesus.



17

According to the accepted chronology, what was the average age of
each generation from David to Jesus?

Luke: Twenty-five years.

Matthew: Forty years.



18

What was the average age from David to the Captivity?

Matthew: Thirty-seven years.

According to Chronicles the average age of the same line for the same
period was but twenty-six years.



19

What was the average age from the Captivity to Jesus?

Luke: Twenty-eight years.

Matthew: Fifty years.

While the average age from David to the Captivity by way of Solomon
was but twenty-six years the average age from the Captivity to Jesus
by the same line, according to Matthew, was fifty years. This proves
the falsity of Matthew's genealogy from the Captivity to Jesus.



20

What was the average length of each generation from Abraham to David?

Matthew and Luke: Seventy years.

Seventy years is said to constitute the natural life of man. According
to these Evangelists Christ's Pre-Davidic ancestors only reached
maturity at seventy. How slow was man's development then--a babe
in his mother's arms at twenty; a playful child at forty; at sixty
an ardent youth wooing a blushing maiden of half a hundred years;
at three score years and ten a fond young father rejoicing at the
birth of his first-born!



21

What was the average length of each generation from Adam to Abraham?

Luke: One hundred years.



22

How many generations were there from Adam to Abraham?

Luke: Twenty (iii, 34-38).

Luke makes less than half as many generations from Adam to Abraham
in a period of two thousand years as he does from David to Jesus in
a period of one thousand years.



23

How many generations were there between Rachab, the mother of Booz,
and David?

Matthew: Three--Booz, Obed and Jesse (i, 5, 6).

Rachab lived at Jericho when it was taken by the Israelites. Jericho
was taken 1451 B. C., the year that Moses died. David was born 1085
B. C.--nearly four centuries later.



24

Assuming the generations following the Captivity in Matthew and
Chronicles to run parallel, how many generations were there between
the last generation named in Chronicles and Jesus?

Matthew: Four.

Yet Chronicles was written, it is claimed, from 458 to 604 years
before Christ.

"If the Chronicles were written by Ezra, the date of their
composition was not far from B. C. 458, the year of the return from
the Captivity. If by Daniel, the earlier period of from 604 to 534
must be adopted."--Rev. Dr. Hitchcock.



25

Name the first ten ancestors of Jesus.

Luke: Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Maleleel, Jared, Enoch, Mathusala,
Lamech, Noe (iii, 36-38).

Archeological researches have shown these to be ten Babylonian kings.



26

Who was Sala?

Luke: "Sala, which was the son of Cainan, which was the son of
Arphaxad" (iii, 35, 36).

"And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years and begat Salah" (Genesis
xi, 12).

According to Luke Sala was the grand-son of Arphaxad; according to
Genesis he was the son of Arphaxad.



27

Who begat Ozias?

Matthew: "Joram begat Ozias" (i, 8).

"Ahaziah his [Joram's] son, Joash his son, Amaziah his son, Azariah
[Ozias] his son" (1 Chronicles iii, 11, 12).

According to the New Testament Ozias was the son of Joram; according
to the Old Testament he was the great great-grandson of Joram.



28

Who was Josiah's successor?

Matthew: Jechonias (i, 11).

"Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz, the son of Josiah, and
made him king in his father's stead" (2 Chronicles xxxvi, 1).

"For thus saith the Lord touching Shallum, the son of Josiah, king
of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah, his father" (Jeremiah
xxii, 11).

"And Pharaoh-nechoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the room
of Josiah, his father, and turned his name to Jehoiakim" (2 Kings
xxiii, 34).

According to Matthew, Josiah's successor was Jechonias; according to
Chronicles, Jehoahaz; according to Jeremiah, Shallum; according to
Kings, Jehoiakim.



29

Who was the father of Jechonias?

Matthew: "Josias begat Jechonias" (i, 11).

Josias was not the father but the grandfather of Jechonias. "And the
sons of Josiah were, ... the second Jehoiakim.... And the sons of
Jehoiakim: Jechoniah, his son" (1 Chron. iii, 15, 16).



30

When did Josias beget Jechonias?

Matthew: "And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time
they were carried away into Babylon" (i, 11).

Josiah became king 641 B. C. and died 610 B. C. Jechonias was carried
to Babylon 588 B. C., 22 years after Josiah died.



31

Did Jechonias have a son?

Matthew: "And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat
Salathiel" (i, 12).

"As I live, saith the Lord, though Coniah [Jechonias], the son
of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, were the signet upon my right hand,
yet would I pluck thee thence.... O earth, earth, earth, hear the
word of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord, Write ye this man childless,
a man that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall
prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling no more in Judah"
(Jeremiah xxii, 24-30).

This curse was pronounced upon Jechonias before he was taken to
Babylon. By this divine oath Jesus is precluded from becoming an heir
to the throne of David. God swears that Jechonias shall be childless,
and that no descendant of his shall ever sit upon the throne. Yet
Matthew, in the face of this oath, declares that Jechonias did not
remain childless, that he begat a son, Salathiel, the progenitor of
Jesus. In attempting to make Jesus an heir to David's throne Matthew
makes God a liar and perjurer.



32

Matthew says that Salathiel was the son of Jechonias. Who does Luke
declare him to be?

"The son of Neri" (iii, 27).



33

Who was the father of Zorobabel?

Matthew: "And Salathiel begat Zorobabel" (i, 12).

Luke: "Zorobabel, which was the son of Salathiel" (iii, 27).

Here both Evangelists agree--agree to disagree with Chronicles
which says that Zorobabel was the son of Pedaiah, the brother of
Salathiel. "And the sons of Pedaiah were Zerubbabel and Shimei"
(1 Chron. iii, 19).



34

Who was the son of Zorobabel?

Matthew: "And Zorobabel begat Abiud" (i, 13).

Luke: "Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel" (iii, 27).

Each contradicts the other, and both contradict the Old Testament
(1 Chron. iii, 19, 20).



35

Who was the father of Joseph?

Matthew: "And Jacob begat Joseph" (i, 16).

Luke: "Joseph, which was the son of Heli" (iii, 23).



36

If Jesus was descended from David, the descent was through one of
David's sons. Which one?

Matthew: Solomon (i, 6-16).

Luke: Nathan (iii, 23-31).

Luke reaches the same person by way of one brother that Matthew does
by way of the other.



37

Many commentators attempt to reconcile these discordant genealogies by
assuming that Matthew gives the genealogy of Joseph, while Luke gives
the genealogy of Mary. What do the Evangelists themselves declare?

Matthew: "And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was
born Jesus, who is called Christ," etc. (i, 16).

Luke: "And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being
(as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli,"
etc. (iii, 23).

Dr. Geikie, in his "Life of Christ" (vol. i, p. 531, note), says:
"The genealogies given by both Matthew and Luke seem unquestionably
to refer to Joseph."

Regarding this the Rev. Dr. McNaught says: "Let the reader bear
in mind how Matthew states that 'Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of
Mary,' and how Luke's words are 'Joseph which was the son of Heli,'
and then let him say whether it is truthful to allege that these
different genealogies belong to different individuals. Is it not
plain that each of them professes to trace the lineal descent of one
and the same man, Joseph?"

William Rathbone Greg says: "The circumstance that any man could
suppose that Matthew when he said, 'Jacob begat Joseph,' or Luke, when
he said, 'Joseph was the son of Heli,' could refer to the wife of the
one, or the daughter-in-law of the other, shows to what desperate
stratagems polemical orthodoxy will resort in order to defend an
untenable position."

Smith's "Bible Dictionary" offers the following explanation:
"They are both the genealogies of Joseph, i. e., of Jesus Christ,
as the reputed and legal son of Joseph and Mary. The genealogy of
St. Matthew is Joseph's genealogy as legal successor to the throne of
David. St. Luke's is Joseph's private genealogy, exhibiting his real
birth, as David's son, and thus showing why he was heir to Solomon's
crown. The simple principle that one Evangelist exhibits that genealogy
which contained the successive heirs to David's and Solomon's throne,
while the other exhibits the paternal stem of him who was the heir,
explains all the anomalies of the two pedigrees."

This "simple principle" necessitates three disagreeable
postulates. 1. That the lineage of Nathan, who is not the recorded
possessor of even one wife, survived, while that of Solomon who had
seven hundred wives became extinct. 2. That Joseph was legal successor
to the throne of David, when Heli, his father, was not. 3. That the
first chapter of Matthew contains more than a score of errors. That
little word "begat" is fatal to the above theory. Matthew declares that
Jacob begat Joseph. If Jacob begat Joseph, then Jacob, and not Heli,
was the father of Joseph. According to Matthew, the royal line descends
from David to Joseph unbroken; each heir begetting the succeeding one,
thus precluding the possibility of a collateral branch inheriting
the throne.

The hypothesis that Jesus was merely the adopted son and legal
heir of Joseph and yet fulfilled the Messianic requirements is
untenable. Strauss says: "Adoption might indeed suffice to secure to
the adopted son the reversion of certain external family rights and
inheritances; but such a relationship could in no wise lend a claim
to the Messianic dignity, which was attached to the true blood and
lineage of David" (Leben Jesu, p. 122).

The Messiah must be a natural and lineal descendant of David, which
Peter expressly declares Jesus to be: "God had sworn with an oath to
him [David], that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh,
he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne" (Acts ii, 30).

It is assumed by some that a Levirate marriage had taken place between
the parents of Joseph, and that the one genealogy belonged to the
natural, the others to the legal father of Joseph. By a Levirate
marriage if a man died without heirs his remaining brother married his
widow and raised up heirs to him. But in this case the brothers would
have the same father, and the genealogies would differ only in the
father of Joseph. It is only by a succession of Levirate marriages
and a juggling of words, which no intelligent critic can seriously
entertain, that such a hypothesis can be considered possible, even
waiving the Old Testament writers, and the Evangelists themselves,
whose language forbids it.

Eusebius advances an explanation characteristic of this ecclesiastical
historian and of the early church whose history he professes
to record. The Jews, it is said, were divided in their opinions
regarding the descent of the Messiah. While some contended that his
descent must be through the royal line, others believed that because
of the excessive wickedness of the kings the descent would be through
another line. Eusebius says: "Matthew gives his opinion, Luke repeats
the common opinion of many, not his own.... This last view Luke takes,
though conscious that Matthew gives the real truth of the genealogy."

Matthew's genealogy is self-evidently false; while Luke's according
to the admission of the historian of the primitive church, is merely
a fabrication of early Christians, designed to influence those who
rejected Matthew's genealogy of the Messiah.



38

If the miraculous conception be true the Davidic descent could only
be through Mary. Was Mary descended from David?

"We are wholly ignorant of the name and occupation of St. Mary's
parents. She was, like Joseph, of the tribe of Judah, and of the
lineage of David (Ps. cxxxii, 11; Luke i, 32; Rom. i, 3)."--Smith's
Bible Dictionary.

Three passages are cited in support of this claim:

1. "The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David; he will not turn from
it. Of the fruit of thy body will I sit upon thy throne. If thy
children will keep my covenant and my testimony that I shall teach
them, their children shall also sit upon thy throne forevermore"
(Ps. cxxxii, 11, 12).

2. "He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the Highest;
and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David"
(Luke i, 32).

3. "Concerning his son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh" (Rom. i, 3).

The second and third passages do not refer to Mary; the first passage
refers neither to Jesus nor Mary. There is no evidence to prove that
Mary was descended from David. On the contrary there is evidence to
prove that she was not descended from him.

1. "The angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city in Galilee, called
Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the
house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary" (Luke i, 27). Joseph,
and not Mary is declared to be of the house of David.

2. It is stated that Joseph went to Bethlehem "to be taxed with Mary,"
not because they, but "because he was of the house and lineage of
David" (Luke ii, 4, 5).

3. Mary was the cousin of Elizabeth (Luke i, 3), and Elizabeth "was
of the daughters of Aaron" (i, 5), i. e., descended from Levi, while
the house of David was descended from Judah.

This desperate, yet ineffectual, effort to establish the Davidic
descent of Mary is virtually an abandonment of the genealogical tables
of Matthew and Luke, and a falling back upon this pitiable argumentum
in circulo: Mary was descended from David because the Messiah was to
be descended from David, and Jesus was the Messiah because Mary was
descended from David.

These genealogies do not give the lineage of Mary who is said to
have been his only earthly parent, but the lineage of Joseph who,
it is claimed, was not his father. But if Joseph was not the father
of Jesus, what is the use of giving his pedigree? If Joseph was not
the father of Jesus how does proving that he was descended from David
prove that Jesus was descended from David? If these genealogies run
through Joseph to Jesus, as stated by Matthew and Luke, then Joseph
must have been the father of Jesus; and if he was the father of Jesus
the story of the miraculous conception is false.

The Synoptics, as we have seen, are for the most part, mere
compilations, made up of preexisting documents. These documents
belonged to different ages of the primitive church. In the first ages
of the church Christians believed that Jesus was simply a man--the
son of Joseph and Mary. The genealogies of Matthew and Luke, which
trace his descent from David through Joseph, belonged to this age. The
story of the miraculous conception was the product of a later age.

If the dogma of the miraculous conception be true, if God, and not
Joseph, was the father of Jesus as taught, these genealogies, being
genealogies of Joseph, fail to prove what they are intended to prove,
the royal descent of Jesus from David. The genealogies of Matthew
and Luke and their accounts of the miraculous conception mutually
exclude each other.



39

Did Jesus believe himself to be descended from David?

Synoptics: He did not (Matt. xxii, 41-46; Mark xii, 35-37; Luke xx,
41-44).

A principal objection to accepting Jesus as the Messiah by the Jews
was the fact that he was not descended from David. He tacitly admitted
that he was not, and the whole burden of his argument was to convince
them that it was not necessary that he should be.



40

The miraculous conception was in fulfillment of what prophecy?

Matthew: "Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be
with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name
Emmanuel" (i, 22, 23).

This is esteemed the "Gem of the Prophecies," and may be found in the
seventh chapter of Isaiah. The facts are these: Rezin, king of Syria,
and Pekah, king of Israel, had declared war against Ahaz, king of
Judah. God assured Ahaz that they should not succeed, but that their
own kingdoms should be destroyed by the Assyrians. To convince him of
the truth of this he requested Ahaz to demand a sign. "But Ahaz said,
I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.... Therefore the Lord
himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and
bear a son, and shall call his name Emmanuel.... Before the child
shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that
thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings."

In the succeeding chapter the fulfillment of this prophecy is recorded:
"And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a
son. Then said the Lord to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz. For
before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother,
the riches of Damascus [the capital of Rezin's kingdom] and the spoils
of Samaria [the capital of Pekah's kingdom] shall be taken away before
the king of Assyria." Rezin and Pekah were overthrown by the Assyrians
about 720 B. C.

One of the most convincing proofs of Christ's divinity, with many,
is the supposed fact that he was born of a virgin and that his
miraculous birth was foretold by a prophet seven hundred years
before the event occurred. Now, there is not a passage in the Jewish
Scriptures declaring that a child should be born of a virgin. The
word translated "virgin" does not mean a virgin in the accepted sense
of the term, but simply a young woman, either married or single. The
whole passage is a mistranslation. The words rendered "a virgin shall
conceive and bear a son" should read, "a young woman is with child and
beareth a son." In this so-called prophecy there is not the remotest
reference to a miraculous conception and a virgin-born child. The
Jews themselves did not regard this passage as a Messianic prophecy;
neither did they believe that the Messiah was to be born of a virgin.

Next to the preceding the following is most frequently cited as
a Messianic prophecy: "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah,
... until Shiloh come" (Genesis xlix, 10).

If Shiloh refers to Christ the prophecy was not fulfilled, for the
sceptre did depart from Judah 600 years before Christ came. But Shiloh
does not refer to a Messiah, nor to any man. Shiloh was the seat of the
national sanctuary before it was removed to Jerusalem. This so-called
prophecy, like the preceding, is a mistranslation. The correct reading
is as follows: "The preeminence shall not depart from Judah so long
as the people resort to Shiloh."

"For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the
government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be declared
Wonderful, Counsellor, The Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace" (Isaiah ix, 6).

Prof. Cheyne, the highest authority on Isaiah, pronounces this a
forgery. Every honest Christian scholar must admit this. It is a
self-evident forgery. No Jewish writer could have written it. To
have declared even the Messiah to be "The mighty God, the everlasting
Father" would have been the rankest blasphemy, a crime the punishment
of which was death.

These alleged Messianic prophecies are, in their present form,
Christian rather than Jewish. Christian translators and exegetists
have altered their language and perverted their meaning to make them
appear to refer to Christ. The following is an example:

"I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign
and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In
his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this
is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS"
(Jeremiah xxiii, 5, 6).

The correct rendering of this passage is as follows:

"I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a king shall reign
and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the land. In
his days Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely; and
this is the name whereby they shall call themselves: The Eternal is
our righteousness."

To make a Messianic prophecy of this passage and give it effect no
less than eight pieces of deception were employed by the editors of
our Authorized Version:

1. The word "branch" is made to begin with a capital letter.

2. The word "king" also begins with a capital.

3. "The name" is rendered "his name."

4. The pronoun "they," relating to the people of Judah and Israel,
is changed to "he."

5. The word "Eternal" is translated "Lord."

6. "The Lord our righteousness" is printed in capitals.

7. In the table of contents, at the head of the chapter, are the words
"Christ shall rule and save them."

8. At the top of the page are the words "Christ promised."

Another example of this Messianic prophecy making is the following:

"Know therefore and understand that from the going forth of the
commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince,
shall be seven weeks, and three score and two weeks" (Daniel ix, 25).

The term "week," it is claimed, means a period of seven years,
and assumed that by Messiah is meant Christ. Seven weeks and three
score and two weeks are sixty-nine weeks, or 483 years, the time that
was to elapse from the command to rebuild Jerusalem to the coming
of Christ, if the prophecy was fulfilled. The decree of Cyrus to
rebuild Jerusalem and the temple was made 536 B. C. According to the
accepted chronology Christ was born 4 B. C. From the decree of Cyrus,
then, to the coming of Christ was 532 years instead of 483 years,
a period of seven weeks, or forty-nine years, longer than that named
by Daniel. Ezra, the priest, went to Jerusalem 457 B. C. This event,
however, had nothing whatever to do with the decree for rebuilding
Jerusalem and the temple. It occurred 79 years after the decree was
issued, and 58 years after the temple was finished. But a searcher
for Messianic prophecies found that from the time of Ezra to the
beginning of Christ's ministry was about 483 years, or sixty-nine
prophetic weeks; and notwithstanding there was a deficiency of 79
years at one end of the period, and an excess of 30 years at the other,
it was declared to fit exactly.

Christian theologians pretend to recognize in the Old Testament two
kinds of Messianic prophecies: 1. Specific predictions concerning
Christ which were literally fulfilled; 2. Passages in which the writer
refers to other persons or events, but which God, without the writer's
knowledge, designed as types of Christ. The fallaciousness of the
former having been exposed--it having been shown that there is not a
text in the Jewish Scriptures predicting the coming of Christ--they
now rely chiefly upon the latter to support their claims. These
"prophecies" are almost limitless; for a firm believer in prophecy
can, with a vivid imagination, take almost any passage and point out
a fancied resemblance between the thing it refers to and the thing he
wants confirmed; apparently oblivious to the fact that the passage
is equally applicable to a thousand other things. Had the Mormons
accepted Joe Smith as a Messiah instead of a prophet they would have
no lack of prophecies to support their claims; and by translating
and revising the Scriptures to suit their views, as Christians did,
these prophecies would fit him as well as they do the Christ.



41

What name was to be given the child mentioned in Isaiah's prophecy?

"They shall call his name Emmanuel" (Matthew i, 23).

What name was to be given Mary's son?

"Thou shalt call his name Jesus" (Matt. i, 21).

In the naming of the Christian Messiah Isaiah's prophecy was not
fulfilled. He was never called Emmanuel, but Jesus.



42

To whom did the angel announcing the miraculous conception appear?

Matthew: To Joseph (i, 20, 21).

Luke: To Mary (i, 26-38).

"An angel did not appear, first to Mary, and also afterwards
to Joseph; he can only have appeared either to the one or to the
other. Consequently, it is only the one or the other relation which
can be regarded as historical. And here different considerations
would conduct to opposite decisions.... Every criticism which might
determine the adoption of the one, and the rejection of the other,
disappears; and we find ourselves, in reference to both accounts,
driven back by necessity to the mythical view."--Strauss.



43

For what purpose was the Annunciation made?

Luke: Simply to acquaint Mary with the heavenly decree that she had
been chosen to become the mother of the coming Messiah (i, 26-33).

Matthew: To allay the suspicions of Joseph respecting Mary's chastity
and prevent him from putting her away (i, 18-20).



44

Did the Annunciation take place before or after Mary's conception?

Luke: Before (i, 26-31).

Matthew: After (i, 18-20).



45

Who was declared to be the father of Jesus?

Matthew: The Holy Ghost (i, 18, 20).

With the Jews the Holy Ghost (Spirit) was of feminine gender; with
the Greeks, of masculine gender. The belief that the Holy Ghost was
the father of Jesus originated, not with the Jewish Christians of
Palestine, as claimed, but with the Greek Christians of Alexandria.



46

What prediction did the angel Gabriel make to Mary concerning Jesus?

"The Lord shall give unto him the throne of his father David" (Luke
i, 32).

Respecting this prediction the Rev. Dr. Hooykaas, of Holland, says:
"If a messenger from Heaven had really come to bring a divine
revelation to Mary, the result must have confirmed his prediction;
and since Jesus never fulfilled these expectations it is obvious that
the revelation was never made."



47

When Mary visited Elizabeth what did she do?

Luke: She uttered a hymn of praise (i, 46-55).

Had Mary uttered such a hymn we would suppose that it would have been
original and inspired by the Almighty Father of her unborn child. Yet
the hymn which Luke puts into her mouth was borrowed from the song
of Hannah.


Hannah.                               Mary.

"My heart rejoiceth in the Lord" (1   "My spirit hath rejoiced in God"
Sam. ii, 1).                          (Luke i, 47).
"If thou wilt indeed look on the      "For he hath regarded the low
affliction of thine handmaid" (i,     estate of his handmaiden" (48).
11).
"Talk no more so exceeding proudly"   "He hath scattered the proud"
(ii, 3).                              (51).
"The bows of the mighty men are       "He hath put down the mighty from
broken, and they that stumbled are    their seats and exalted them of
girded with strength (4).             low degree" (52).
"They that were full hath hired out   "He hath filled the hungry with
themselves for bread; and they that   good things; and the rich he hath
were hungry ceased" (5).              sent empty away" (53).



48

What decree is said to have been issued by Caesar Augustus immediately
preceding the birth of Christ?

Luke: "That all the world should be taxed" (ii, 1).

No such decree was issued by Augustus, nor even one that the Roman
world should be taxed. The taxation of different provinces of the
empire was made at various times, no general decree ever having
been issued and no uniform assessment ever having been attempted by
Augustus. An enrollment of Roman citizens for the purpose of taxation
was made in Syria 7 A. D.



49

Of what king was Joseph a subject when Jesus was born?

Matthew: Of Herod.

If Jesus was born during the reign of Herod, Joseph, whether a resident
of Judea or of Galilee, could not have been taxed by Augustus, for
neither province was then a part of Syria. Both provinces belonged
to Herod's kingdom and Herod's subjects were not taxed by the Roman
government.



50

Of what province was Joseph a resident?

Matthew: Of Judea.

Luke: Of Galilee.

If he was a resident of Galilee he could not have been taxed by
Augustus, even in the time of Cyrenius, for Galilee was not a Roman
province, but an independent state, and had no political connection
with Syria.

Again, this decree could not have applied to Judea prior to the
banishment of Archelaus, ten years after the time of Herod; for Judea
did not become a Roman province until that time; and while Archelaus
had paid tribute to Rome the assessments of the people were made by
him and not by Augustus.



51

Why was Joseph with his wife obliged to leave Galilee and go to
Bethlehem of Judea to be enrolled?

Luke: "Because he was of the house and lineage of David," and Bethlehem
was the "city of David" (ii, 4).

Even if he had been subject to taxation there was no law or custom
requiring him to leave his own country and go to that of his ancestors
to be enrolled. The assessment, according to the Roman custom,
was made at the residence of the person taxed. Nothing surpasses in
absurdity this story of Luke, that a woman, on the eve of confinement,
and the subject of another ruler, was dragged across two provinces
to be enrolled for taxation.

In regard to this taxation Dr. Hooykaas says: "But here again we
are met by overwhelming difficulties. In itself, the Evangelist's
account of the manner in which the census was carried out is entirely
incredible. Only fancy the indescribable confusion that would have
arisen if every one, through the length and breadth of the land of
the Jews, had left his abode to go and enroll himself in the city
or village from which his family originally came, even supposing he
knew where it was. The census under David was conducted after a very
different fashion. But it is still more important to note that the
Evangelist falls into the most extraordinary mistakes throughout. In
the first place history is silent as to a census of the whole (Roman)
world ever having been made at all. In the next place, though Quirinus
[Cyrenius] certainly did make such a register in Judea and Samaria,
it did not extend to Galilee; so that Joseph's household was not
affected by it. Besides it did not take place till ten years after the
death of Herod, when his son Archelaus was deposed by the Emperor,
and the districts of Judea and Samaria were thrown into a Roman
province. Under the reign of Herod nothing of the kind took place,
nor was there any occasion for it. Finally, at the time of the birth
of Jesus the governor of Syria was not Quirinus, but Quintus Sentius
Saturninus" (Bible for Learners, vol. iii, pp. 55, 56).



52

Was Jesus born in a house or in a stable?

Matthew: "And when they were come into the house, they saw the young
child with Mary his mother" (ii, 11).

Luke: "And she brought forth her first born son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger" (ii, 7).

Nothing can be clearer than that the author of Matthew supposes
that Jesus was born in a house. The author of Luke, on the other
hand, expressly declares that he was born in a stable. Luke's story
concerning the place of Mary's accouchement has been received, while
that of Matthew has been ignored.

Christ's birth in a manger and death on the cross are the lodestones
that have attracted the sympathies of the world, and kept him on the
throne of Christendom; for sentiment rather than reason dominates
mankind. Referring to Luke's story, the "Bible for Learners" says:
"Such is the well-known story of the birth of Jesus, one of the
sweetest and most deeply significant of all the legends of the
Bible. That it is a legend, without even the smallest historical
foundation, we must, of course, admit" (vol. iii, p. 54).

Justin Martyr states that Jesus was born in a cave, and this statement
Farrar is disposed to accept: "Justin Martyr, the Apologist, who,
from his birth at Shechem, was familiar with Palestine, and who lived
less than a century after the time of our Lord, places the scene of
the nativity in a cave. This is, indeed, the ancient and constant
tradition both of the Eastern and the Western churches, and it is
one of the few to which, though unrecorded in the Gospel history,
we may attach a reasonable probability" (Life of Christ, p. 3).



53

Why did Joseph and his wife take shelter in a stable?

Luke: "Because there was no room for them in the inn" (ii, 7).

Luke states that there was an inn at Bethlehem. There was no inn in
the place. Dr. Geikie says: "We must not moreover think of Joseph
seeking an inn at Bethlehem, for inns were unknown among the Jews"
(Christmas at Bethlehem).



54

What celestial phenomenon attended Christ's birth?

Matthew: A new star appeared and stood in the heavens above him
(ii, 1-9).

Luke: An angelic choir appeared and sang praises to God (ii, 13, 14).

Matthew's story of the star and the Magi, even to the language itself,
was borrowed from the writings of the Persians; Luke's story of the
celestial visitants was taken from Pagan mythology.



55

Who visited him after his birth?

Matthew: Wise men from the East (ii, 1-11).

Luke: Shepherds from a neighboring field (ii, 8-20).

Matthew makes no mention of the shepherds' visit; Luke is evidently
ignorant of the visit of the wise men.



56

From where did the wise men come?

Matthew: "Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of
Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem,
saying: Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen
his star in the East, and are come to worship him" (ii, 1, 2).

By the "East" was meant Persia or India, and from one of these
countries the Magi are popularly supposed to have come.

Justin Martyr says: "When a star rose in heaven at the time of his
birth, as is recorded in the 'Memoirs' of his Apostles, the Magi
from Arabia, recognizing the sign by this, came and worshiped him"
(Dialogues, cvi).

If they came from Arabia, as this Christian father declares, they
came not from the East, but from the South.



57

What announcement did the angel make to the shepherds?

"For behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to
all people" (Luke ii, 10).

According to Luke the visit of the angels is to proclaim to the
world the birth of the new-born Messiah. Had the celestial phenomenon
reported by this Evangelist really occurred the news of it would have
quickly spread over Palestine. Yet the people of Jerusalem, only
a few miles away, learn nothing of it; for, according to Matthew,
the first intimation that Herod has of Christ's birth is from the
wise men who visit him at a much later period. The inhabitants of
Bethlehem themselves are ignorant of it. Could they have discovered to
Herod this wonderful babe, or the place where his parents abode while
there if they had departed, it would have saved their own children
from the wrath of this monarch. But they knew nothing of him.



58

What effect had the announcement of Christ's birth upon Herod and
the people of Jerusalem?

Matthew: "When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled,
and all Jerusalem with him" (ii, 3).

According to Matthew the announcement filled with alarm the entire
populace, and the most diligent efforts were made to discover and
destroy the babe. In strange contrast to this statement of Matthew is
Luke's narrative (ii, 22-27), which declares that Jesus, when forty
days old, was brought to Jerusalem and publicly exhibited in Herod's
own temple, without exciting any alarm or provoking any hostility.



59

What did his parents do with him?

Matthew: They fled with him into Egypt (ii, 13, 15).

Luke: They remained with him in Palestine (ii, 22-52).

"All attempts to reconcile these two contradictory statements, seem
only elaborate efforts of art."--Dr. Schleiermacher.



60

When unable to discover Jesus what did Herod do?

Matthew: "Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men,
was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that
were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old
and under" (ii, 16).

If this statement be true hundreds of innocent babes (the Greek
Calendar says fourteen thousand) must have perished, a crime the
enormity of which is almost without a parallel in the annals of
history. It is strange that Mark, Luke, and John make no mention of
this frightful tragedy. Luke's silence is especially significant. It
is passing strange that the Roman historians and Rabbinical writers of
that age, who wrote of Herod, should be silent regarding it. Josephus
devotes nearly forty chapters to the life of Herod. He narrates with
much particularity every important event in his life. He detested
this monarch and dwells upon his crimes and errors. Yet Josephus knew
nothing of this massacre.

In this silence of Josephus Dr. Farrar recognizes a difficulty too
damaging to ignore. He says: "Why then, it has been asked, does
Josephus make no mention of so infamous an atrocity? Perhaps because
it was performed so secretly that he did not even know of it. Perhaps
because, in those terrible days, the murder of a score of children,
in consequence of a transient suspicion, would have been regarded as
an item utterly insignificant in the list of Herod's murders. Perhaps
because it was passed over in silence by Nikolaus of Damascus, who,
writing in the true spirit of those Hellenizing courtiers, who wanted
to make a political Messiah out of a corrupt and blood-stained usurper,
magnified all his patron's achievements, and concealed or palliated
all his crimes. But the more probable reason is that Josephus, whom,
in spite of all the immense literary debt which we owe to him, we
can only regard as a renegade and a sycophant, did not choose to
make any allusion to facts which were even remotely connected with
the life of Christ" (Life of Christ, pp. 22, 23).

A more absurd reason than the first advanced by Farrar it is difficult
to conceive. The second, that it was a matter of too little consequence
to record, an explanation which other Christian apologists have
assigned, is as unreasonable as it is heartless. The silence of
Nikolaus, who wrote of Herod after his death, is also significant,
and the excuse offered by Farrar that he omitted it because he was
the friend of Herod, even if admitted, cannot apply to Josephus, who
abhorred the memory of this monarch. The contention that Josephus
purposely ignored the existence of Christ because he saw in him a
menace to his faith is childish. Jesus Christ, admitting his existence,
had made no history to record. His birth was attended by no prodigies,
and there was nothing in his advent to excite the fear or envy of
a king. Josephus mentions no Herodian massacre at Bethlehem because
none occurred. Had Herod slain a single child in the manner stated
the fact would be attested by a score of authors whose writings are
extant. Herod did not slay one babe. This story is false.

Herod's massacre of the infants of Bethlehem and the escape of Jesus
was probably suggested by Kansa's massacre of the infants of Matura
and the escape of Krishna. Pharaoh's slaughter of the first born in
Egypt may also have suggested it.



61

What was the real cause of Herod's massacre?

Matthew: The visit of the wise men and the disclosures made by them
(ii, 1-16).

These wise men, it is claimed, were under divine guidance. In view
of this terrible slaughter their visit must be regarded as a divine
blunder.



62

In the massacre of the innocents what prophecy was fulfilled?

Matthew: "Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the
prophet, saying, In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation,
and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children,
and would not be comforted, because they are not" (ii, 17, 18).

This so-called prophecy is in Jeremiah xxxi, 15. It was written at the
time of the Babylonian captivity and refers to the captive Jews. In
the next verse Jeremiah says: "They shall come again from the land
of the enemy."



63

When Herod died what did the Lord command Joseph to do?

"Arise, and take the young child and his mother and go into the land
of Israel, for they are dead which sought the young child's life"
(Matthew ii, 20).

"And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return to Egypt: for
all the men are dead which sought thy life" (Exodus iv, 19).



64

The sojourn of Joseph and Mary with Jesus in Egypt was in fulfillment
of what prophecy?

Matthew: That "spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of
Egypt have I called my son" (ii, 15).

This may be found in Hosea xi, 1, and clearly refers to the exodus
of the Israelites from Egypt.



65

Jesus was subsequently taken to Nazareth. Why?

Matthew: "That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
He shall be called a Nazarene" (ii, 23).

The Bible contains no such prophecy. Fleetwood admits that "the words
are not to be found" in "the prophetical writings," and Farrar says,
"It is well known that no such passage occurs in any extant prophecy"
(Life of Christ, p. 33). The only passage to which the above can
refer is Judges xiii, 5. Here the child referred to was not to be
called a Nazarene, but a Nazarite, and Matthew knew that "Nazarene"
and "Nazarite" were no more synonymous than "Jew" and "priest." A
Nazarene was a native of Nazareth; a Nazarite was one consecrated
to the service of the Lord. Matthew likewise knew that this Nazarite
referred to in Judges was Samson.



66

Had Joseph and Mary lived in Nazareth previous to the birth of Jesus?

Luke: They had.

Matthew: They had not.

"And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth,
unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, ... to be taxed
with Mary his espoused wife.... And when they had performed all
things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee,
to their own city Nazareth" (Luke ii, 4, 5, 39).

"When he [Joseph] arose, he took the young child and his mother by
night, and departed into Egypt: and was there until the death of
Herod.... But when Herod was dead, ... he arose, and took the young
child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel. And when
he heard that Archelaus did reign in the room of his father Herod,
he was afraid to go thither; notwithstanding, being warned of God in
a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee: and he came and
dwelt in a city called Nazareth" (Matthew ii, 14-23).

According to Luke their home was in Nazareth of Galilee; according to
Matthew their home was in Bethlehem of Judea. Luke states that they
merely visited Bethlehem to be enrolled for taxation and fulfill
a certain Messianic prophecy. Matthew states that after the flight
into Egypt and the death of Herod they were returning to Judea when
fearing Archelaus they turned aside into Galilee to avoid this ruler
and fulfill another Messianic prophecy.



67

How did the parents of Jesus receive the predictions of Simeon
concerning him?

Luke: "And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were
spoken of him" (ii, 33).

Why should they marvel at the predictions of Simeon when long before
they had been apprised of the same thing by the angel Gabriel?



68

Does the name "Joseph" belong in the text quoted above?

It does not. The correct reading is: "And his father and his mother
were marvelling at the things which were spoken concerning him." It
declares Joseph to be the father of Jesus, and as this did not
harmonize with the story of the miraculous conception the makers of
our version substituted "Joseph" for "father."



69

What does Luke say regarding the infancy of John and Jesus?

"And the child [John] grew and waxed strong in spirit" (i, 80).

"And the child [Jesus] grew and waxed strong in spirit" (ii, 40).

Between the growth of the man John and the growth of the God Jesus
there is, according to the Evangelist, no difference, and the growth
of each is identical with that of the demi-god Samson.



70

What custom did Jesus's parents observe?

Luke: "His parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the
passover" (ii, 41).

The preceding verse (40) shows that Luke means every year following
the birth of Jesus. In the succeeding verse (42) it is clearly implied
that Jesus always accompanied them. It is impossible to reconcile
this statement of Luke, who evidently knows nothing of the enmity of
Herod and Archelaus, with the statements of Matthew who declares them
to have been his mortal enemies.



71

On one of these occasions where did they find him?

Luke: "They found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the
doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions" (ii, 46).

Not until the time of Gamaliel, who lived as late as the middle of
the first century, was a child allowed to sit in the presence of
the rabbis. He was always required to stand, and those acquainted
with the Jewish history of that age know that the rabbis were the
most rigid sticklers for ecclesiastical formalities, the slightest
breach of which was never tolerated. The author of the third Gospel
is familiar with the later, but not with the earlier custom.



72

What was the medium of communication through which the will of Heaven
was revealed to the participants in this drama?

Matthew: A dream (i, 20; ii, 12, 13, 19, 22).

Luke: An angel (i, 11, 26; ii, 9).

In Matthew every message respecting the child Jesus is communicated by
means of a dream; in Luke every announcement is made through the agency
of an angel. Yet, after all, these Evangelists differ only in terms;
for Luke's angels are created out of the same stuff that Matthew's
dreams are made of, and the world is fast coming to a realization of
the fact that this whole theological structure, founded on sleepers'
dreams and angels' tales, is but "The baseless fabric of a vision."







