CHAPTER VI.

THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST.


268

When did Jesus first foretell his passion?

Synoptics: Not until late in his ministry (Matt. xvi, 21; Mark viii,
31; Luke ix, 21-27).

According to John (ii, 19-22) he referred to it at the beginning of
his ministry.



269

When did he announce his betrayal?

Matthew and Mark: At the Last Supper, while they were eating. "Now
when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. And as they did
eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me"
(Matt. xxvi, 20, 21; Mark xiv, 18).

Luke and John: Not until after supper (Luke xxii, 20, 21; John xiii,
2-21). John says that after supper he washed his disciples' feet and
delivered a discourse to them, after which he said, "Verily, verily,
I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me."



270

Did Jesus say who should betray him?

Matthew and John: He did (Matt. xxvi, 25; John xiii, 26).

Mark and Luke: He did not.



271

How did he disclose his betrayer?

Matthew: By an implied affirmative answer to Judas' question, "Is
it I?" "Then Judas which betrayed him, answered and said, Master,
is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said" (xxvi, 25).

John: By giving Judas a sop. "Jesus answered, He it is to whom I shall
give a sop, when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped the sop,
he gave it to Judas Iscariot."



272

When did Satan enter into Judas?

Luke: Before the Last Supper (xxii, 3-7).

John: After the Last Supper (xiii, 1-27).



273

How did Judas betray Jesus?

Matthew and Mark: "Now he that betrayed him, gave them a sign, saying,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; hold him fast. And forthwith
he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, Master, and kissed him" (Matt. xxvi,
48, 49; Mark xiv, 44, 45).

According to John, Judas did not betray him with a kiss.



274

What did Jesus say to Judas when he betrayed him?

"Friend, wherefore art thou come?" (Matthew xxvi, 50.)

"Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?" (Luke xxii, 48.)



275

What was Judas, and what office did he hold?

John: "He was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein"
(xii, 6).

Judas was thus the first Christian treasurer. But why did Jesus,
if omniscient, as claimed, select a thief for this office? Was he
unable to conduct his ministry without the aid of one?



276

What did Judas receive for betraying his master?

Matthew: "And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver"
(xxvi, 15).

"It is strange that a man who kept the purse, and knew what he would
lose by the death of his chief, should abandon the profits of his
office for so small a sum."--Renan.



277

What did he do with the money?

Matthew: "Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he
was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces
of silver to the chief priests and elders.... And he cast down the
pieces of silver in the temple and departed" (xxvii, 3-5).

Peter: "Now this man [Judas] purchased a field with the reward of
iniquity" (Acts i, 18).



278

The purchase of the potter's field was in fulfillment of what prophecy?

Matthew: "That which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, And they
took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued,
... and gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me"
(xxvii, 9, 10).

This was not spoken by Jeremiah, but by Zechariah. "And the Lord said
unto me, Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price that I was prized
at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver and cast them to
the potter in the house of the Lord" (xi, 13).

It is evident that the account of the betrayal was inspired,
not by a historical fact, but by a desire to "fulfill" a Messianic
prophecy. Zechariah did not predict an event, but his words did suggest
a fiction. This is the more probable from the fact that Matthew is
the only Evangelist who mentions the thirty pieces of silver.

The story of Christ's last visit to Jerusalem and the story of his
betrayal exclude each other. According to the Evangelists he was
not arrested for any offense he had committed during this visit,
but for offenses he had committed prior to this. Yet during this
visit he is said to have appeared openly with his disciples, making
a triumphal entry into the city, visiting the temple and teaching in
public. In the face of this the story that the Jews were obliged to
bribe one of his disciples in order to apprehend him is absurd. One of
these stories must be false. Regarding them Lord Amberley observes:
"The representation of the Gospels, that Jesus went on teaching in
public to the very end of his career, and yet that Judas received a
bribe for his betrayal, is self-contradictory" (Life of Jesus, p. 214).

To those who believe the accounts of the betrayal of Jesus to be
historical, the ecclesiastical historian, Neander, in his "Life of
Christ," advances a suggestion that is worthy of consideration. The
betrayal of Jesus by Judas, it is suggested, was intended as a
test of his Messiahship. If Jesus was the Messiah, Judas reasoned,
he could save himself; if he was not the Messiah he was an impostor
and deserved death.



279

What became of Judas?

Matthew: He "went and hanged himself" (xxvii, 5).

Peter: "Falling headlong he burst asunder in the midst, and all his
bowels gushed out" (Acts i, 18).

Papias, bishop of Hierapolis, one of the chief Christian authorities
of the second century, and who wrote before the books of Matthew and
Acts were written, gives the following account of the fate of Judas:

"Judas walked about in the world a great example of impiety; for his
body having swollen so that, on an occasion, when a wagon was moving
on its way, he could not pass it, he was crushed by the chariot and
his bowels gushed out."

The German commentator, Dr. Hase, attempts to reconcile his suicide,
as related by Matthew, with his death by accident, as related by
Peter, by supposing that he attempted to hang himself, but that the
rope broke, causing him to fall with such force as to disembowel
himself. This harmonist apparently forgets to note that Peter says
he fell "headlong," which makes it necessary to suppose that he hung
himself by the feet.



280

To whom did Peter deliver his speech describing the fate of Judas?

"Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples" (Acts i, 15).

Is it not reasonable to suppose that the alleged information conveyed
in his speech was as familiar to the disciples whom he addressed as
to himself? Regarding this De Wette aptly says: "In the composition
of this speech the author has not considered historical decorum."



281

What did Peter say in regard to the name of the field?

"And it was known unto all the dwellers of Jerusalem; insomuch as
that field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say,
The field of blood" (Acts i, 19).

Here Peter is represented as interpreting in Greek a Jewish word to
his Jewish brethren.



282

Were there more than one of Jesus' disciples concerned in his betrayal?

John: There were. "For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were [of
his disciples] that believed not, and who should betray him" (vi, 64).



283

When the Jewish council met to plan the arrest of Jesus, to what
conclusion did they come?

Matthew and Mark: Not to arrest him on the feast day (Matt. xxvi,
3-5; Mark xiv, 1, 2).

Yet this was the very day on which Matthew and Mark declare that he
was arrested.



284

Who arrested him?

Matthew and Mark: "A great multitude ... from the chief priests and
elders of the people" (Matt. xxvi, 47; Mark xiv, 43).

Luke: "The chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the elders"
themselves (xxii, 47-52).



285

Who does John say was sent to arrest him?

A "band of soldiers and officers" (xviii, 3, New Ver.).

This contradicts the Synoptics, who declare that it was a mob of
civilians.



286

What is said regarding the multitude sent out to apprehend him?

Synoptics: They were armed "with swords and staves" (Matt. xxvi, 47;
Mark xiv, 43; Luke xxii, 52).

Were the disciples armed?

All: They were, or one of them at least (Matt. xxvi, 51; Mark xiv,
47; Luke xxii, 38, 50; John xviii, 10).

This is incredible, for Jews were never allowed to carry arms on a
holy day.



287

How did they go out to capture him?

John: "With lanterns and torches" (xviii, 3).

His enemies are represented as believing that his arrest could be
secured only by strategy and stealth. Under these circumstances is
it reasonable to suppose that the chief priests would send out a
torchlight procession to apprehend him? Besides, as it was at the
full of the moon, what need had they of lanterns and torches? Again,
lanterns were unknown in Palestine.



288

When the band sent to capture him first came up to him what did
they do?

Matthew and Mark: "They laid hands on him and took him" (Matt. xxvi,
47-50; Mark xiv, 43-46).

John: "They went backward and fell to the ground" (xviii, 3-6).



289

What did Peter do when Jesus was arrested?

John: "Then Simon Peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high
priest's servant, and cut off his right ear" (xviii, 10).

Yet no efforts were made to arrest and punish Peter, notwithstanding he
was recognized and pointed out by the kinsman of the wounded man. It
may be urged that Jesus had healed the servant's ear. This, even if
true, would not have removed the guilt of the militant disciple. Had
Peter really committed the deed, it is not probable that he would have
visited the house of the high priest and remained in the presence of
his enemies.



290

When was Jesus bound?

John: When he was arrested (xviii, 12).

Matthew and Mark: Not until after his trial before the Sanhedrim when
he was taken to Pilate (Matt. xxvii, 2; Mark xv, 1).

According to Luke he was not bound.



291

What did they do with Jesus when he was taken?

Matthew: "Led him away to Caiaphas" (xxvi, 57).

John: "Led him away to Annas first" (xviii, 13).



292

Did he have an examination before his trial?

John: He did (xviii, 13-23).

Our laws provide for what is known as a preliminary examination before
a magistrate. This was forbidden by the Jewish law, and his alleged
examination before a priest could not have taken place.



293

Before whom did his preliminary examination take place?

John: Before Annas (xviii, 13-23).

The Synoptics state that he was examined and tried before Caiaphas.



294

Repeat John xviii, 24.

"Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest"
(Old Ver.).

"Annas therefore sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest"
(New Ver.).

This verse follows the account of Jesus' preliminary examination
and shows clearly that this examination took place before Annas,
and that he was not sent to Caiaphas until its conclusion. The King
James translators, in order to hide the discrepancy, prefixed the word
"now" and changed the tense of the verb, substituting "had sent" for
"sent," so that it might appear that Annas had sent him to Caiaphas
before the examination commenced.

Concerning this corruption of the text, Scott says: "There is no
conjunction 'now,' and an aorist cannot mark a definite time. If
a hiatus is suspected, it may be indicated by an asterisk; but to
insert words and alter the force of a tense in order to get over
a grave historical difficulty is sheer dishonesty" (Life of Jesus,
p. 289, note).



295

Matthew and John state that Caiaphas was high priest at this time. Who
does the author of Acts state was high priest?

"And Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander,
and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest, were gathered
together at Jerusalem" (iv, 6).

Luke (iii, 2), who is declared to be the author of Acts, says that
Annas and Caiaphas were both high priests.

Criticizing John's account of the examination before Annas, the
author of "Supernatural Religion" says: "The Synoptics know nothing
of the preliminary examination before Annas, and the reason given by
the writer of the fourth Gospel why the soldiers first took Jesus to
Annas: 'for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas who was first high priest
that year,' is inadmissible. The assertion is a clear mistake, and it
probably originated in a stranger writing of facts and institutions
with which he was not well acquainted, being misled by an error
equally committed by the author of the third Gospel, and of the Acts
of the Apostles.... Such statements, erroneous in themselves and not
understood by the author of the fourth Gospel, may have led to the
confusion in the narrative. Annas had previously been high priest,
as we know from Josephus, but nothing is more certain than the fact
that the title was not continued after the office was resigned;
and Ishmael, Eleazar, and Simon, who succeeded Annas and separated
his term of office from that of Caiaphas, did not subsequently bear
the title. The narrative is a mistake, and such an error could not
have been committed by a native of Palestine, and much less by an
acquaintance of the high priest" (p. 660).



296

What is said regarding the tenure of Caiaphas' office?

John: He was "high priest that year" (xi, 49).

John's language implies that the high priest was appointed annually,
whereas he held his office for life, or until removed. Caiaphas had
been high priest for many years.



297

What had Caiaphas prophesied concerning Jesus?

John: "He prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; and not
for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one
the children of God that were scattered abroad" (xi, 51, 52).

A high priest did not assume the role of prophet, much less would
he have given utterance to the prophecy ascribed to Caiaphas. The
Roman procurator might have expressed such a sentiment, for according
to Roman law and ethics an individual could be sacrificed for the
welfare of the state. The high priest, on the other hand, could
not have uttered such a sentiment, because it was abhorrent to the
Jewish mind. If all Israel could have been saved, and could have been
saved only by the death of one of its innocent members, that member
could not have been put to death, because, according to Jewish law,
it would have made of every Jew concerned in it a murderer. It was
a fundamental principle of the Jewish code that, "No human life must
be abandoned on account of any other life."



298

Did Jesus have a trial before the Sanhedrim?

Synoptics: He had (Matt. xxvi, 57-75; Mark xiv, 53-72; Luke xxii,
54-71).

It was about this time (30 A. D.), that the Sanhedrim ceased to have
jurisdiction over capital offenses. After its jurisdiction ceased
Jesus could not have been tried before it; and before its jurisdiction
ceased he would not have had a subsequent trial before Pilate.



299

Where was his trial held?

Matthew and Mark: At the palace of the high priest.

No trial was ever held at the residence of the high priest. All
meetings of the Sanhedrim were held in the hall adjoining the temple. A
trial at any other place would have been illegal.



300

What was the charge preferred against him?

All: Blasphemy.

Jesus, it was charged, had declared himself to be the son of
God. This, if true, would not have constituted blasphemy. It was
no offense against the law for a man to claim that he was the son
of God. All men, and especially all good men, were recognized as
the sons of God. Referring to Christ's claim, a Jewish writer says:
"No law, no precedent, and no fictitious case in the Bible or the
rabbinical literature, can be cited to make of this expression a case
of blasphemy." And even if he had been proven guilty of blasphemy,
he could not have been put to death, for blasphemy, at this time,
had ceased to be a capital offense. And is it reasonable to suppose
that the Romans would have condemned a man to death for an offense
against a religion in which they did not themselves believe, but
which they regarded as one of the vilest of superstitions? It may
be urged that in his trial before Pilate the charge was changed to
sedition. This charge was not sustained.



301

What is said regarding witnesses?

Matthew and Mark: "Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the
council, sought false witnesses against Jesus, to put him to death;
but found none; yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they
none" (Matt. xxvi, 59, 60; Mark xiv, 55, 56).

When every step thus far taken by the council had been illegal, why
should it have been so particular in regard to the witnesses? The
fact is the Evangelists were ignorant of Jewish laws. They believed
that while the prosecution of Jesus was unjust it was yet conducted
according to the established rules of Jewish courts. Referring to
Mark, Dr. Wise says: "In his ignorance of Jewish law, he imagined the
trial which he described was lawful among the Jews. He proves this,
in the first place, by the very statement that witnesses were sought
and produced. A court convoked and acting in rebellion to law and
custom can be considered only a band of rebels. What use have such men
of witnesses? Being lawless from the beginning, no legal restraint
makes the presence of witnesses necessary.... He certainly thought
of an honest, lawful trial, in the legal form; an honest and legal
examination of witnesses, a fair consideration of the testimony,
and after mature reflection the rejection thereof on account of
insufficiency" (Martyrdom of Jesus, pp. 69, 70).



302

What did the so-called false witnesses that appeared against him
testify that he had said?

"I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days"
(Matthew xxvi, 61).

"I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three
days I will build another made without hands" (Mark xiv, 58).



303

What had Jesus said?

"Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up" (John
ii, 19).

Passing over the discrepancies of Matthew and Mark, if they have given
the substance of these witnesses' testimony, then they were not false,
but truthful witnesses; for Jesus, it is seen, had given utterance to
such a declaration. If he referred to the temple of his body, as John
affirms, and the Jews misunderstood him, the fault was his, not theirs.

Josephus gives an account of a so-called prophet who, a few years
later, boasted of his supernatural powers in much the same manner
that Jesus is said to have done:

"There came out of Egypt about this time to Jerusalem, one that
said that he was a prophet, and advised the multitude of the common
people to go along to the Mount of Olives, as it was called, which lay
over against the city, and at the distance of five furlongs. He said
further, that he would show them from hence, how, at his command, the
walls of Jerusalem would fall down" (Antiquities, Book xx, chap. viii,
sec. 6).



304

Was he questioned by the Sanhedrim?

Synoptics: He was. They tried to convict him by his own testimony
(Matt. xxvi, 62-64; Mark xiv, 60-63; Luke xxii, 66-71).

A Jewish court did not question a prisoner. A prisoner could not even
plead guilty.



305

To the priest's question, "Art thou the Christ?" what answer did
he give?

Mark: "Jesus said, I am" (xiv, 61, 62).

Luke: "He said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not believe"
(xxii, 67).



306

When did his trial before the Sanhedrim take place?

Matthew and Mark: During the night. After his arrest, which probably
occurred not later than midnight, they at once "led him away to
Caiaphas the high priest, where ... the chief priests, and elders,
and all the council [Sanhedrim]" had assembled, when his trial
immediately began (Matt. xxvi, 57-68; Mark xiv, 58-65).

Luke: Not until the next morning. During the night he was held in
custody at the house of the high priest. "As soon as it was day,
the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes came
together, and led him into the council" (xxii, 66).

This, according to Luke, was his first and only appearance before the
Sanhedrim. Matthew and Mark, in addition to the night trial mentioned
by them, also mention an adjourned session in the morning corresponding
to the meeting of Luke.



307

Could this trial have been held in the night as stated by Matthew
and Mark?

It could not. The Jewish law prohibited the opening of a trial at
night. The Sanhedrim could not hold a session before 6 a. m. or after
3 p. m. Luke was seemingly acquainted with this law; Matthew and Mark
were not.



308

During what religious festivities was his trial held?

Synoptics: During the feast of the Passover.

It could not have been held during the Passover, for no trials were
held by the Jews during this feast.



309

On what day of the week was it held?

Synoptics: On Friday, the day preceding the Sabbath.

No trial for a capital offense was ever allowed to begin on the day
preceding the Sabbath.



310

How long did this trial last?

All: But a few hours.

The Jewish law required at least two days for a capital trial--one
for prosecution, and one for the defense.



311

Did he have a defender or counselor in the Sanhedrim?

Synoptics: He did not.

According to the Synoptics he had no counsel, and the Sanhedrim
were unanimous in their condemnation of him. This was contrary to
Jewish law. The Sanhedrim might be unanimous in their belief that he
was guilty, but it was the duty of at least one of them to defend
him. This was the law: "If none of the judges defend the culprit,
i. e., all pronounce him guilty, having no defender in the court,
the verdict of guilty was invalid and the sentence of death could
not be executed" (Maimonides).

Dr. Geikie admits that the trial of Jesus before the Sanhedrim, as
related in the Gospels, was in nearly every particular contrary to
Jewish law. He says:

"The accused was in all cases to be held innocent, till proved
guilty. It was an axiom, that 'the Sanhedrim was to save, not to
destroy life.' No one could be tried and condemned in his absence, and
when a person accused was brought before the court, it was the duty of
the president, at the outset, to admonish the witnesses to remember
the value of human life, and to take care that they forgot nothing
that would tell in the prisoner's favor. Nor was he left undefended;
a Baal-Rib, or counsel, was appointed, to see that all possible was
done for his acquittal. Whatever evidence tended to aid him was to
be freely admitted, and no member of the court who had once spoken in
favor of acquittal could afterwards vote for condemnation. The votes
of the youngest of the judges were taken first, that they might not be
influenced by their seniors. In capital charges, it required a majority
of at least two to condemn, and while the verdict of acquittal could
be given at once, that of guilty could only be pronounced the next
day. Hence, capital trials could not begin on the day preceding a
Sabbath, or public feast. No criminal trial could be carried through
in the night; the judges who condemned any one to death had to fast
all the day before, and no one could be executed on the same day on
which the sentence was pronounced." (Life of Christ, vol. ii, p. 487.)



312

Had Jesus been tried, convicted and executed by the Jews would he
have been crucified?

He would not. Crucifixion was a mode of punishment never employed by
the Jews. Had the Jews executed him he would have been stoned.

It is impliedly stated in the Synoptics, and expressly stated in
John, that the Sanhedrim's jurisdiction over capital crimes had
ceased. "It is not lawful for us to put any man to death" (xviii,
31). The Sanhedrim's authority ceased in 30 A. D., and it is generally
claimed by Christians that the crucifixion occurred from one to five
years after this time.



313

What does Peter say in regard to the mode of punishment employed in
his execution?

"The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on
a tree" (Acts v, 30).

"And we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land of
the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom ye slew and hanged on a tree" (x, 39).

Concerning this, Mrs. Evans says: "With regard to his death, it
was said that the Jews slew him and hanged him on a tree; and again
that he was taken down from the tree; expressions which do not imply
crucifixion, but rather the legal execution for such crimes as the
one alleged, that is, stoning to death and the exposure of the dead
body upon a stake, or a tree" (Christ Myth, p. 79).



314

How was he treated by the Sanhedrim?

Matthew and Mark: "They spit in his face, and buffeted him; and
others smote him with the palms of their hands" (Matt. xxvi, 67;
Mark xiv, 65).

Every Jew, and every other person acquainted with the Jewish history
of that age, knows that this is false. The Sanhedrim was composed of
the wisest and the best men of that race. Superstitious, bigoted and
fanatical some of them doubtless were, but in that august court law
and dignity and decorum reigned.

These accounts of the trial of Christ before the Sanhedrim afford
overwhelming proof that they were not written by apostles nor by
residents of Palestine. They were written by Gentile Christians,
or by Jewish converts living in foreign lands, and presumably the
former, for even foreign Jews must have possessed a better knowledge
of Jewish laws and customs than the Evangelists display.



315

During the trial Peter denied his master. What had Jesus predicted
concerning his denial?

Matthew, Luke and John: "Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee,
that this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice"
(Matt. xxvi, 34; Luke xxii, 34; John xiii, 38).

Mark: "And Jesus saith unto him, Verily I say unto thee, that this
day, even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny
me thrice" (xiv, 30).



316

Did Peter deny him three times before the cock crew?

Matthew, Luke and John: He did (Matt. xxvi, 69-75; Luke xxii, 54-62;
John xviii, 15-27).

Mark: He did not; he had denied him but once when the cock crew
(xiv, 66-68).



317

Where were they when Jesus foretold Peter's denial?

Matthew and Mark: At the Mount of Olives (Matt. xxvi, 30-35; Mark
xiv, 26-30).

Luke: In Jerusalem, at supper, before they went out to the Mount of
Olives (xxii, 7-39).



318

What did Peter do when he entered the palace?

Luke: "Peter sat down among them" (xxii, 55).

John: "Peter stood with them" (xviii, 18).



319

When was he first accused of being the friend of Jesus?

John: As he entered the room (xviii, 16, 17).

Mark and Luke: As he sat by the fire (Mark xiv, 66, 67; Luke xxii,
54-57).



320

When was he accused the second time?

John: In the house as he "stood and warmed himself" (xviii, 25).

Matthew: "When he was gone out into the porch" (xxvi, 71).



321

By whom was he accused the second time?

Matthew and Mark: By a "maid" (Matt. xxvi, 71; Mark xiv, 69).

Luke: By a "man" (xxii, 59, 60).



322

Who accused him the third time?

Matthew and Mark: "They that stood by" (Matt. xxvi, 73; Mark xiv, 70).

John: "One of the servants of the high priest" (xviii, 26).



323

Was Jesus present when Peter denied him?

Matthew and Mark: He was not.

Luke: He was. "The Lord turned and looked upon Peter" (xxii, 60, 61).



324

Where was Jesus next sent for trial?

Luke: To Herod, tetrarch of Galilee, who was attending the Passover
at Jerusalem (xxiii, 6-11).

In the matter of trials the Evangelists, as in everything else,
have overdone things. Notwithstanding no trial was ever held during
the Passover they give him four trials in one day, and not finding
courts enough in Judea for the purpose, they import one from Galilee.

There is nothing more improbable than this alleged examination of
Jesus by Herod. Imagine the Governor General of Canada sitting in
judgment on a criminal at Washington, because the criminal is a
Canadian, or an Ohio court holding a session in New York because
the prisoner arraigned once lived in Ohio. The offenses with which
Jesus was charged were committed, not in Herod's province, Galilee,
but in Pilate's province, Judea.

It is strange that John, who pretends to relate every important
event connected with the trial of Jesus, should omit his trial
before Herod. Concerning this Strauss says: "The conjecture, that
it may probably have appeared to him [John] too unimportant, loses
all foundation when it is considered that John does not scorn to
mention the leading away to Annas, which nevertheless was equally
indecisive; and in general, the narrative of these events in John is,
as Schleiermacher himself confesses, so consecutive that it nowhere
presents a break in which such an episode could be inserted. Hence even
Schleiermacher at last takes refuge in the conjecture that possibly
the sending to Herod may have escaped the notice of John, because
it happened on an opposite side to that on which the disciple stood,
through a back door; and that it came to the knowledge of Luke because
his informant had an acquaintance in the household of Herod, as John
had in that of Annas; the former conjecture, however, is figuratively
as well as literally nothing more than a back door; the latter, a
fiction which is but the effort of despair" (Leben Jesu, pp. 764, 765).



325

What was the result of Pilate's sending Jesus to Herod?

Luke: "And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together,
for before they were at enmity between themselves" (xxiii, 12).

Pilate and Herod did not become friends. To the day of Pilate's recall
they were enemies. Herod was continually plotting and striving to
unite with his tetrarchy the province of Judea which belonged to his
father's kingdom, and which his father had promised to give him.



326

Did Jesus's trial before Pilate take place in the presence of his
accusers?

Luke: It did (xxiii, 1-4, 13, 14).

John: It did not (xviii, 28).



327

Did Pilate go out of the judgment hall to consult with those who were
prosecuting Jesus?

Luke: He did not (xxiii, 1-25).

John: He did. "Pilate then went out unto them [the Jews], and said,
What accusation bring ye against this man? They answered and said unto
him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up
unto thee.... Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and
called Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus
answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell
it thee of me?" (xxiii, 29, 30, 33, 34.)

The prosecution and the defense are both declared to have returned
insolent answers to the questions of Pilate. The Jewish priests
were too wise for this, and Christians will be loath to admit that
their Savior was so indiscreet and so impolite as to indulge in
such insolence.



328

What was the result of his trial before Pilate?

All: Pilate declared him innocent and sentenced him to death.

"And Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests and the
rulers and the people, said unto them, Ye have brought this man
unto me, as one that perverteth the people; and, behold, I, having
examined him before you, have found no fault in this man touching
those things whereof ye accuse him.... And Pilate gave sentence that
it should be as they required.... He delivered Jesus to their will"
(Luke xxiii, 13, 14, 24, 25).

"Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify him; for I find no
fault in him" (John xix, 6).

It is impossible to believe that the highest court of a country would
pronounce a prisoner innocent and then condemn him to death. Judicial
murders are sometimes committed, but the murderers do not confess
their guilt.

It is declared that Pilate desired to release Jesus but could not. Who
ruled Judea, Pilate or the Sanhedrim? According to the Evangelists,
the Romans ruled Judea, while the Jews ruled the Romans.

Between the Pilate of the New Testament and the Pilate of history there
is nothing in common. The Pilate of the New Testament is subservient to
the Jews, acceding to their every wish, even to murdering an innocent
prisoner. The Pilate of history is noted for his hatred of the Jews
and his cruelties to them. It was these which provoked his recall.



329

When Pilate could not prevail upon the Jews to allow him to release
Jesus, what did he do?

Matthew: "He took water, and washed his hands before the multitude,
saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person" (xxvii, 24).

Matthew does not appear to realize the absurdity of supposing that
a Roman official would adopt a custom peculiar to a people whom he
held in contempt.

"And all the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man
shall wash their hands ... and they shall answer and say, Our hands
have not shed this blood" (Deuteronomy xx, 6, 7).



330

What indignities were heaped upon Jesus during his trial before Pilate?

John: "Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. And the
soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and
they put on him a purple robe, and said, Hail, King of the Jews! and
they smote him with their hands. Pilate therefore went forth again,
and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may
know that I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth, wearing the
crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them,
Behold the man!" (xix, 1-5.)

These indignities Jesus is said to have suffered, not at the hands of
a Jewish mob, but at the hands of a Roman court, from which the Jews
had absented themselves and whose proceedings they could not witness
nor directly influence. Every lawyer knows that for more than two
thousand years the Roman court has been the world's model for dignity
and fairness. That an innocent and defenseless prisoner was subjected
to these insults and brutalities in a Roman court, presided over by
a Roman governor, none but a slave of superstition can believe.



331

When was he scourged?

Matthew and Mark: Before he was executed. "And when he [Pilate] had
scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified" (Matt. xxvii, 26;
Mark xv, 15).

John: Before the termination of his trial (xix, 1-16).

Scourging was frequently inflicted by the Romans before execution,
but never before the prisoner was convicted and sentenced. The
"Bible Dictionary" concedes the illegal and unusual character
of the scourging mentioned by John. "In our Lord's case, however,
this infliction seems neither to have been the legal scourging after
sentence nor yet the examination by torture" (Acts xxii, 24).



332

What custom is said to have been observed at the Passover?

All: The release of a prisoner by the Roman governor (Matt. xxvii,
15; Mark xv, 6; Luke xxiii, 17; John xviii, 39).

"Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people
a prisoner, whom they would."

There is no historical authority whatever for this alleged custom. It
was a custom that the Roman government in Judea could not with
safety adopt. The Jews were a subject people, waiting and hoping
for an opportunity to throw off the Roman yoke. To release to them
"whomsoever they desired" (Mark xv, 6) might be to release a political
prisoner whose liberty would endanger the government itself. This
story was probably suggested by a custom of the Roman emperors who
released a prisoner at their birthday festivals.



333

They demanded and obtained the release of Barrabas. Who was Barrabas?

John: A robber. "Now Barrabas was a robber" (xviii, 40).

Mark and Luke: A murderer. "Barrabas (who for a certain sedition made
in the city, and for murder, was cast into prison)" (Luke xxiii, 18,
19; Mark xv, 7).



334

By whom was Jesus clad in mockery?

Matthew, Mark and John: By Pilate's soldiers (Matt. xxvii, 27, 28;
Mark xv, 16, 17; John xix, 1, 2).

Luke: By Herod and his soldiers. "And Herod with his men of war set
him at nought, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe"
(xxiii, 11).



335

What was the color of the robe they put on him?

Matthew: "They stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe" (xxvii,
28).

Mark and John: "They put on him a purple robe" (John xix, 2; Mark
xv, 17).



336

When did this occur?

John: During his trial (xix, 1, 2, 12-16).

Matthew and Mark: After Pilate had delivered him to be crucified
(Matt. xxvii, 26-28; Mark xv, 15-17).



337

Describe the mocking of Jesus.

Matthew: "Then released he Barrabas unto them; and when he had scourged
Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the
governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him
the whole band of soldiers. And they stripped him, and put on him a
scarlet robe. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put
it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they bowed the
knee before him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!" (xxvii, 26-29.)

The original of this account of the mocking of Jesus is to be found in
Philo's "Adversus Flaccum," written more than one hundred years before
the Gospels made their appearance. Herod Agrippa was on his way from
Rome to Palestine to assume the government of that country. When he
stopped at Alexandria his enemies, to annoy him, instituted a mock
coronation, which Philo relates as follows:

"There was a certain poor wretch named Carrabas, who spent all his
days and nights in the roads, the sport of idle children and wanton
youths; and the multitude, having driven him as far as the public
gymnasium, and having set him up there on high, that he might be
seen of everybody, flattening out a papyrus leaf, put it on his head
instead of a crown, and clothed the rest of his body with a common mat
in place of a robe, and in lieu of a sceptre thrust into his hand a
reed, which they found lying by the wayside. And when he had received
all the insignia of royalty, and had been dressed and adorned like a
king, young men bearing sticks on their shoulders stood on each side
of him in imitation of guards, while others came up, some as if to
salute him, and others pretending to plead their causes before him"
(Philo's Works, vol. iv, pp. 68, 69).



338

Who smote Jesus after his trial?

Mark: "The servants did strike him with the palms of their hands"
(xiv, 65).

John: "One of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm
of his hand" (xviii, 22).

The stories of these mockings, revilings, and brutal assaults cannot
be accepted as historical. They are self-evidently false. Were they
alleged to have been committed by an irresponsible Jewish or Roman
mob they might be credited; but when they are declared to have been
committed by, or while in the custody of the highest Jewish and Roman
officials they must be rejected.



339

To whom did Pilate deliver him to be crucified?

Matthew and Mark: To the Roman soldiers. "And when he had scourged
Jesus he delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the
governor took Jesus.... And when they were come unto a place called
Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull, ... they crucified him"
(Matt. xxvii, 26-35; Mark xv, 15-24).

John: He delivered him to the Jews. "And he saith unto the Jews, Behold
your King! But they cried out, Away with him, crucify him. Pilate saith
unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We
have no king but Caesar. Then delivered he him therefore unto them to
be crucified. And they took Jesus and led him away. And he bearing his
cross went forth into a place called the place of the skulls, which
is called in Hebrew Golgotha; where they crucified him" (xix, 14-18).

Matthew and Mark plainly state that Jesus was delivered to the Roman
soldiers; John just as plainly states that he was delivered to the
Jews. Matthew and Mark declare that he was crucified by the soldiers;
John declares that he was crucified by the Jews. Were it not that
John elsewhere (xix, 23) contradicts himself and states that the
soldiers crucified him, the conclusion would be, after reading John,
that he was crucified by the Jews.

Peter declares that the Jews executed him. Addressing the Sanhedrim,
he says: "The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and
hanged on a tree" (Acts v, 30).



340

Who was compelled to carry the cross?

Synoptics: "And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon
by name; him they compelled to bear his cross" (Matt. xxvii, 32;
Mark xv, 21; Luke xxiii, 26).

John: The cross was borne by Jesus himself (xix, 17).



341

Where was Simon when they compelled him to carry the cross?

Mark: "Coming out of the country" (xv, 21).

The correct reading of this is, "coming from the field," i. e.,
"coming from his work." This is improbable as they did not work on
the Passover.



342

The Synoptics agree in stating that Simon was compelled to carry the
cross. Is this probable?

It is not. In executions of this kind the criminal was always required
to carry it himself as a mark of disgrace.



343

It is inferred from the Synoptics that the cross was too heavy for
Jesus to bear, and Christian writings and paintings represent him
bending with fatigue beneath the burden of the entire cross. What
was the burden he was required to carry?

Simply the patibulum, or cross piece, which was not heavy. The upright
portion of the cross was a permanent fixture.



344

On his way to execution he made a speech to the women of Jerusalem who
bewailed his fate. Alluding, as is alleged, to the coming destruction
of Jerusalem, what did he declare they would say?

"To the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us" (Luke
xxiii, 30).

Luke attempts to put into the mouth of Jesus a quotation from Hosea,
but his memory was defective. What the prophet said was as follows:

"To the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us" (Hosea
x, 8).

Renan pronounces this speech spurious. He says: "The speech to the
women of Jerusalem could scarcely have been conceived except after
the siege of the year 70."



345

Where was he crucified?

Matthew and Mark: At "a place called Golgotha, that is to say,
a place of a skull" (Matt. xxvii, 33; Mark xv, 22).

Luke: At Calvary (xxiii, 33).

Calvary, like Golgotha, means a place of skulls in the vicinity of
Jerusalem. The explanation given by Christian commentators is that
"it was a spot where executions ordinarily took place, and therefore
abounded in skulls." Fleetwood says it "was called Golgotha, or
Place of Skulls, from the criminals' bones which lay scattered there"
(Life of Christ, p. 416). Where Jewish customs prevailed--and it is
admitted that they did prevail in Jerusalem and Judea at this time,
and had for hundreds of years--a human skull or bone was not allowed
to be exposed for even a moment.



346

What was the inscription on the cross?

Mark: "The King of the Jews" (xv, 26).

Luke: "This is the King of the Jews" (xxiii, 38).

Matthew: "This is Jesus the King of the Jews" (xxvii, 37).

John: "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews" (xix, 19).

There was placed on the cross a certain inscription. According to
Luke and John it appeared in Greek, Latin and Hebrew. Four divinely
inspired historians attempt to report in Greek the exact words of
this inscription. Yet no two of their reports agree.



347

Did the name of Jesus appear on the cross?

Matthew and John: It did.

Mark and Luke: It did not.



348

Did the word "Nazareth" appear in the inscription?

John: It did.

Synoptics: It did not.



349

What did they offer him to drink before crucifying him?

Matthew: "Vinegar mingled with gall" (xxvii, 34).

Mark: "Wine mingled with myrrh" (xv, 23).

Luke: "Vinegar" alone (xxiii, 36).

The draughts mentioned by Matthew and Mark refer to a Jewish mixture
intended to produce stupefaction and lessen pain. Had the Romans
crucified him it is not probable that they would have observed this
Jewish custom.



350

How was he fastened on the cross?

Luke and John: His hands and feet were nailed to it (Luke xxiv, 39;
John xx, 25, 27).

The Evangelists do not say that he was nailed to the cross; but it
has been inferred from the texts mentioned in Luke and John that he
was. In crucifixion the victim was usually bound to the cross. Nails
were sometimes driven through the hands, but never through the
feet. The allusions to the supposed wounds on his hands and feet were
evidently inserted in the accounts for the purpose of establishing his
identity after the resurrection. Great prominence has been given them
by Christians in order to make Christ's crucifixion appear especially
cruel and create sympathy for him.



351

At what hour of the day was he crucified?

Mark: "It was the third hour [nine o'clock in the morning]" (xv, 25).

Luke: "It was about the sixth hour [noon]" (xxiii, 44).

John: At the sixth hour he had not been sentenced and delivered to
the executioners; hence he was not crucified until the afternoon
(xix, 14-16).

Dr. Geikie admits that three hours may have elapsed between the
termination of his trial and his crucifixion. Hence, according to
John, the crucifixion may have occurred as late as three o'clock in
the afternoon.

It has been attempted to explain the discrepancy between Mark and
John by supposing that John used a different method of reckoning
time. Concerning this, Prof. Sanday, one of England's highest orthodox
authorities, says: "The writer of this was at one time inclined to
look with favor on these attempts. If the premise could be proved,
the data would work out satisfactorily.... But it must definitely be
said that the major premise cannot be proved, and that the attempt
to reconcile the two statements on this basis breaks down."



352

How did the soldiers divide the garments?

Matthew: "And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting
lots; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They
parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots"
(xxvii, 35).

John: "Then the soldiers when they had crucified Jesus, took
his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and
also his coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top
throughout. They said, therefore, among themselves, Let us not rend it,
but cast lots for it, whose it shall be; that the scripture might be
fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for
my vesture they did cast lots" (xix, 23, 24).

According to Matthew they cast lots for all the garments; according
to John they cast lots for the coat alone. John here makes the same
error in regard to the garments that Matthew does in regard to the
ass on which Jesus made his triumphal entry. In the verse cited from
Psalms garments and vesture are the same thing--the clothing of the
writer. One of the chief characteristics of Hebrew poetry, or much
of it at least, is that each successive thought is stated twice,
but in different words.



353

Who were crucified with Jesus?

Mark and Matthew: "And with him they crucify two thieves" (Mark xv,
27; Matt. xxvii, 38).

Thieves were not crucified. Crucifixion, or death in any form, for
theft was contrary to both Jewish and Roman law. Theft was not a
capital offense.



354

His crucifixion between two thieves fulfilled what prophecy?

Mark: "And the scripture was fulfilled which saith, And he shall be
numbered with the transgressors" (xv, 28).

"The same thing might be said of the thieves."--Paine.

This passage is not to be found in the earlier manuscripts of Mark,
and Westcott declares it to be an interpolation.



355

How long did Jesus survive after being placed upon the cross?

Luke: About three hours (xxiii, 44).

A Jamaica negro slave, crucified in 1760, lived two hundred and
ten hours.

Kitto says: "We may consider thirty-six hours to be the earliest
period at which crucifixion would occasion death in a healthy adult"
(Biblical Cyclopedia, Art. Crucifixion).



356

What were his last words?

Matthew: "Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani, that is to say, My God, my God,
why hast thou forsaken me?" (xxvii, 46).

Mark: "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani, which is, being interpreted,
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (xv, 34.)

Luke: "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit" (xxiii, 46).

John: "It is finished" (xix, 30).

With the Four Gospels before them, Christians do not know what his
last words were. The two most popular English Lives of Christ are
those of Dr. Farrar and Dr. Geikie. These writers were contemporaries
and friends, and both were adherents of the same church. Both, with
these Gospels for their authorities, attempt to portray the closing
scene. I quote from each:

Dr. Farrar: "And now the end was come. Once more, in the words of the
sweet Psalmist of Israel, but adding to them that title of trustful
love which, through Him, is permitted to the use of all mankind,
'Father,' he said, 'into Thy hands I commend my spirit.' Then with one
more great effort he uttered the last cry--the one victorious word,
'It is finished.'"

Dr. Geikie: "A moment more, and all was over. The cloud had passed as
suddenly as it rose. Far and wide, over the vanquished throngs of his
enemies, with a loud voice, as if uttering his shout of eternal victory
before entering into his glory, he cried, 'It is finished!' Then, more
gently, came the words, 'Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit.'"



357

In what language were his last words uttered?

Matthew: In Hebrew.

Mark: In Aramaic and Hebrew.

The language spoken by Jesus and by the people of Palestine at this
time was the Aramaic. Mark attempts to give the words of Jesus in
this language. But while the first two words are Aramaic, the last
two are Hebrew. The words Mark attempts to give are "Elohi, Elohi,
metul mah shabaktani?" This Gospel was written by one ignorant of
the language of Palestine.



358

Matthew interprets the Hebrew words quoted by him to mean, "My God,
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Is this correct?

It is not. The words mean, "My God, my God, why hast thou sacrificed
me?"

The Gospel of Matthew, it is claimed, originally appeared in
Hebrew. But this shows that the author of Matthew did not understand
the Hebrew language.



359

What are the words given by Matthew and Mark?

The first words of the 22d Psalm. In the words of Farrar, "He borrowed
from David's utter agony the expression of his own."

Is it probable that a man in the agonies of a terrible death would
devote his expiring breath to a recital of Hebrew poetry? When even
the dying words of this Christ are borrowed, is it not evident that
the whole story of his life is fabulous?

The accounts of the crucifixion given by the Evangelists are to a
large extent reproductions of the 22d Psalm, even to the language
itself, the poetical allusions of the psalmist being transformed into
alleged historical facts. The devout Christian who is familiar with
this Passion Psalm sees in the Evangelists' account of the crucifixion
a wonderful fulfillment of prophecy. But the critic sees merely the
borrowed embellishments of a legend.



360

What expression did his words, "Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani," provoke?

Matthew: "Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said,
This man calleth for Elias" (xxvii, 47).

This is additional proof of Matthew's ignorance of Hebrew. He
supposes a similarity of sound between the two words, whereas they
were utterly unlike in pronunciation. Eli was pronounced Ali (long
a), while Elias was pronounced Eleeyahu. But even had they been so
much alike in sound that one might have been mistaken for the other,
as Matthew supposes, the alleged incident is disproved by the fact
that the Jews were not allowed to attend the execution, while to the
Romans the words were meaningless.



361

Who was it bade them see whether Elias would come to his rescue?

Mark: The one who gave him the sponge filled with vinegar. "And one
ran and filled a sponge full of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and
gave him to drink, saying, Let alone, let us see whether Elias will
come to take him down" (xv, 36).

Matthew: It was not this person, but those who were with him. "And
straightway one of them ran, and took a sponge and filled it with
vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. The rest said,
Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him" (xxvii,
48, 49).

In regard to these alleged last words of Jesus, Dr. Hooykaas says:
"It seems to us far more probable that these words of the Messianic
passion-psalm were put into the mouth of Jesus by tradition than
that he really uttered them. The sequel, too, throws great suspicion
on the report; for the Jews were not allowed to approach the cross,
and what did the Roman soldiers know about Elijah? Besides, if the
Jews had really heard him cry "Eli!" or "Eloi!" they would hardly
have mistaken the words of the twenty-second Psalm for a cry to the
precursor of the Messianic kingdom--a mistake upon which their raillery
is made to depend. We must, therefore, put aside these words, as in
all probability unhistorical" (Bible for Learners, vol. iii, p. 454).



362

Did the thieves between whom he was crucified both revile him?

Matthew and Mark: They did. "And they that were crucified with him
reviled him" (Mark xv, 32; Matt. xxvii, 44).

Luke: They did not; but one reviled him. "And one of the malefactors
which were hanged railed on him.... But the other answering rebuked
him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation?" (xxiii, 39, 40.)

If these men were crucified with Jesus, as claimed, neither reviled
him. Reason rejects the statement that a dying man, suffering
unutterable agony, reviled a fellow sufferer.



363

What request did the penitent thief make of Jesus?

Luke: "And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest
into thy kingdom" (xxiii, 42).

Here the dying thief is represented as being familiar with a subject
which the disciples themselves did not at this time comprehend.



364

What did Jesus say to the thief?

"Today shalt thou be with me in paradise" (Luke xxiii, 43).

Instead of going to the Christian Heaven above, they went to the
Jewish-Pagan Sheol (Hell) below. Did Jesus recant on the cross? Did
he renounce the Kingdom of God when God deserted him? Concerning this
remarkable passage, Smith's "Bible Dictionary" says:

"The Rabbis in the time of our Savior taught there was a region of
the world of the dead, of Sheol, in the heart of the earth. Gehenna
was on one side, with its flames and torments; Paradise on the other,
the intermediate home of the blessed.... It is significant, indeed,
that the word 'paradise' nowhere occurs in the public teaching of
our Lord, or in his intercourse with his disciples. Connected as it
had been with the thoughts of a sensuous happiness, it was not the
fittest nor the best word for those whom he was training to rise out
of sensuous thoughts to the higher regions of the spiritual life. For
them, accordingly, the Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of God, are the
words most dwelt on. With the thief dying on the cross the case was
different. We can assume nothing in the robber-outlaw but the most
rudimentary forms of the popular belief. The answer to his prayer gave
him what he needed most, the assurance of immediate rest and peace."

The explanation of the apologist is as lame as the story of the
Evangelist. Did Jesus go to Hell with the thief because the thief was
unfit to go to Heaven with him? This apologist says that Jesus used
these words--gave expression to a false doctrine--because the thief
was incapable of comprehending the true doctrine. But this conflicts
with the alleged words of the thief himself which show that he did
comprehend the nature of the kingdom of Heaven. It was this, and not
the peace of the grave, for which he prayed.



365

What were the centurion's words?

Luke: "Certainly this was a righteous man" (xxiii, 47).

Matthew: "Truly this was the Son of God" (xxvii, 54).

We have here the anomaly of a Roman officer--a Pagan--entertaining
a Jewish doctrine of a Messiah, and accepting the Christian claim
that Jesus was the Messiah. If this be true it is strange that he
permitted his soldiers to insult and abuse Jesus.



366

After Jesus expired what did one of the soldiers do?

John: "One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side" (xix, 34).

It is remarkable that the Synoptics, who pretend to relate every
important incident connected with the crucifixion, make no mention
of the spear thrust.



367

What is said to have issued from the wound?

John: "And forthwith came there out blood and water" (xix, 34).

According to a well known physiological fact, if Jesus was still
alive or had but recently expired, not blood and water, but blood
alone would have flowed from the wound. If he was dead, and it is
stated that he was, then neither blood nor water would have flowed
from it. When blood is drawn from a living body it becomes separated
into two parts, a thick substance known as febrine, and a watery
fluid known as serum. John was familiar with this fact and supposed
that this also took place in a corpse, which is not the case.

Dr. Cabanes, a noted physician of Paris, writes as follows regarding
the crucifixion of Jesus:

"It appears that crucifixion alone could not have produced the death
of Jesus, and in reference to the wounds produced by the nails, these
wounds being the result of crushing, the hemorrhage was small. A
burning fever might possibly occur which would be manifested by an
intense thirst, but the flow of blood could not be sufficient to
cause death. Death in this case is preceded by a comatose condition
which would be inconsistent with the cry uttered in a loud voice by
Jesus shortly before his last breath. All the commentators of the
gospels further agree that Jesus did not remain more than three to
six hours on the cross, and death cannot be produced by an exposure
of this duration to this mode of torture.

"The generally accepted version of the lance wound received by Jesus
is that the blow was struck on the left side and that there flowed from
the wound water mingled with blood. It has been correctly remarked that
blood does not flow from a corpse, and therefore if blood followed the
lance stroke, Jesus must have been alive; further, in order that the
blow might have killed the dying man, it must have injured a vital
organ. It must be observed that a lance directed upward and from
right to left could not reach the right-hand cavities of the heart
without first opening the peritoneal cavity, traversing the liver,
the pericardium and perhaps the pleura. We must therefore ask how the
few hundred grams of blood which a right ventricle could contain, could
penetrate to the exterior of the body after such a great wound. Also
with those who die slowly there is found a distended heart in which
the blood has very rapidly coagulated, and it must follow that if a
flood of the liquid appeared on the side of Jesus it could not have
come from the heart. With regard to the vena cava, its situation is
too far back to have allowed it to be touched by the lance. If the
wound had been in the stomach a lesion of the digestive tube would
have been disclosed by an ejection of blood mingled with alimentary
matter, either from the mouth or the opening of the wound, or at
least by a discharge of blood into the abdominal cavity. Had the liver
been touched the symptoms of an internal hemorrhage would have been
observed, as in the case of President Carnot, in whose case the blow of
the poignard, directed downward, perforated the liver and the portal
vein, inducing a state of coma, whereas Jesus, we have been told,
cried out with a loud voice. We thus see that death was not due to
the lance wound or to the torture of crucifixion, as so often stated."



368

Was Christ's suffering foretold by the prophets?

Peter: "But those things, which God before had showed by the mouth
of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled"
(Acts iii, 18).

God had not showed by the mouth of all his prophets, nor by the
mouth of even one of his prophets, that Christ should suffer. The
prophets know nothing of a suffering Messiah. There is not a text in
the Old Testament referring to such a Messiah. The passages relating
to suffering cited by the Evangelists and applied to Christ have no
reference whatever to a Messiah. The Encyclopedia Britannica says:
"That the Jews in the time of Christ believed in a suffering and
atoning Messiah is, to say the least, unproved and highly improbable."



369

What marvelous events occurred at the time of the crucifixion?

Matthew: "There was darkness over all the land" (xxvii, 45). "The
veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and
the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and the graves were opened;
and many bodies of the saints which slept arose" (51, 52).

Mark and Luke: "There was darkness over the whole land" (Mark xv,
33). "And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to
the bottom" (38).

Mark and Luke know nothing of two of the important events related by
Matthew; John is ignorant of all of them. Had these events really
happened, the naturalists and chroniclers of that age would have
recorded them. As they make no mention of them, we know that they
did not occur.

If we accept the claims of their followers, nearly all the gods and
heroes of antiquity expired amid the convulsions of Nature. The soul
of Romulus went out amid the battling of her elements; "the sun was
darkened and the sky rained fire and ashes" when the Hindu Krishna
left his saddened followers; "the earth shook, the rocks were rent,
the graves opened, and in a storm which threatened the dissolution of
the universe," Prometheus closed his earthly career; a pall of darkness
settled over Egypt when her Osiris died; the death of Alexander was
succeeded by six hours of preternatural gloom; and--


                          "Ere the mighty Julius fell,
        The grave stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
        Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets."



370

How long did the darkness last?

Synoptics: From the sixth to the ninth hour (Matt. xxvii, 45; Mark xv,
33; Luke xxiii, 44).

According to Matthew and Luke this darkness lasted from the time that
he was suspended upon the cross until he died. Yet his executioners
are ignorant of it. Luke says: "His acquaintances, and the women that
followed him from Galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things
[the crucifixion]" (xxiii, 49), which they could not have done had
this darkness really occurred.

If this darkness occurred, and began at the sixth hour, as stated by
the Synoptics, then, according to John, the conclusion of the trial,
the sentencing of Jesus, the preparations for his execution, and the
journey to Golgotha, all took place during the darkness, a conclusion
which the nature of the narrative utterly precludes.

Christian apologists have cited Phlegon who notices an eclipse which
occurred about this time. But there is a variance of at least six
years in regard to the time that Jesus was crucified. Besides an
eclipse could not have occurred within two weeks of a Passover, on
the occurrence of which he is declared to have been executed. Farrar
says: "It could have been no darkness of any natural eclipse, for
the Paschal moon was at the full" (Life of Christ, p. 505). Geikie
says: "It is impossible to explain the origin of this darkness. The
Passover moon was then at the full, so that it could not have been an
eclipse. The earlier fathers, relying on a notice of an eclipse that
seemed to coincide in time, though it really did not, fancied that the
darkness was caused by it, but incorrectly" (Life of Christ, Vol. ii,
p. 624, Notes). "The celebrated passage of Phlegon," says Gibbon,
"is now wisely abandoned" (Rome, Vol. i, p. 589, Note).



371

Was the veil of the temple rent, as our Gospel of Matthew declares?

The Gospel of Matthew, it is affirmed, originally appeared in Hebrew,
St. Jerome, who had this original version, says: "In that Gospel which
is written in Hebrew letters, we read, not that the veil of the temple
was rent, but that a lintel (or beam) of a prodigious size fell down."

Commenting on this alleged prodigy, the rending of the veil,
Strauss says: "Now the object of the divine Providence in effecting
such a miracle could only have been this: to produce in the Jewish
contemporaries of Jesus a deep impression of the importance of his
death, and to furnish the first promulgators of the gospel with a
fact to which they might appeal in support of their cause. But, as
Schleiermacher has shown, nowhere else in the New Testament, either
in the apostolic epistles or in Acts, or even in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, in connection with the subject of which it could scarcely
fail to be suggested, is this event mentioned: on the contrary,
with the exception of this bare Synoptical notice, every trace of it
is lost; which could scarcely have been the case if it had really
formed a ground of apostolical argument. Thus the divine purpose
in ordaining this miracle must have totally failed, or, since this
is inconceivable, it cannot have been ordained for this object--in
other words, since neither any other object of the miracle, nor yet
a mode in which the event might happen naturally can be discovered,
it cannot have happened at all" (Leben Jesu, p. 789).



372

Matthew declares that the dead arose on the day of the
crucifixion. When did they come out of their graves?

Not until after Christ's resurrection, which did not occur until the
following week. "And many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and
came out of the graves after his resurrection" (Matt. xxvii, 52, 53).

"They were polite enough to sit in their open graves and wait for
Christ to rise first."--Ingersoll.



373

From what source was Matthew's story regarding these marvelous
events derived?

From Zechariah: "And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount
of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the East, and the Mount
of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof ... and half of the
mountain shall remove toward the North, and half of it toward the
South.... Ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the earthquake
in the days of Uzziah King of Judah; and the Lord my God shall come,
and all the saints with thee. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the light shall not be clear" (xiv, 4-6).

Concerning this Dr. Wise says: "God who comes, according to Zachariah,
to fight for Jerusalem, will stand upon Mount Olivet. Therefore,
Jesus, during his fight against Pharisees, Sadducees and priests, had
to make his principal home on Mount Olivet. But he could not split the
mountain, as Zachariah imagined God would, and move one part North and
the other South; therefore, the curtain of the temple had to be torn in
twain when Jesus died, although none has ever mentioned the fact. The
curtain was there some thirty-five years after the death of Jesus; had
it been torn, somebody must have noticed it. The earthquake mentioned
by Zachariah, of course, was borrowed to embellish Calvary.... Because
Zachariah states God coming to Jerusalem, 'And the Lord my God cometh,
all the saints with thee,' therefore the saints and not the sinners
had to resurrect and visit the city on that particular day. But in
the fertile imagination of Zachariah, the day of that terrible combat
must be dark.... This darkness was transported over to Calvary to
embellish the scene.... So these miracles were not wrought, but the
entire outer embellishment of Calvary is taken from Zachariah; not
because it was believed this prophecy referred to Jesus, but simply
because the evangelical writers were incompetent to invent original
poetry" (Martyrdom of Jesus, p. 116).



374

What request did the Jews make of Pilate concerning Jesus and the
malefactors?

John: They "besought Pilate that their legs might be broken" (xix, 31).

This punishment, known as crurifragium, was a distinct mode of
execution and was never united with crucifixion. Crucifixion, we have
seen, was not employed to punish theft. Neither was crurifragium. Yet
we are asked to believe that both modes of execution, two of
the cruelest forms of punishment, were combined to punish these
offenders. The Synoptics do not mention this punishment.



375

When the soldiers broke the legs of the thieves, why did they spare
those of Jesus?

John: "That the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall
not be broken" (xix, 36).

This refers to Exodus xii, 46, and relates to the disposition to be
made of the lamb used at the Passover. Nearly the entire chapter from
which John quotes is devoted to this subject. Among other things it
states that "They shall eat the flesh in that night, ... his head with
his legs, and with the purtenance thereof. And ye shall let nothing
of it remain until the morning" (8-10). If a part of this prophecy
was fulfilled, may not all of it have been fulfilled? And if all of
it was fulfilled, will not this account for the empty sepulchre?

Regarding the failure of the soldiers to break the legs of Jesus,
as ordered, "Supernatural Religion" says: "An order having been given
to the Roman soldiers, in accordance with the request of the Jews, to
break the legs of the crucified, we are asked to believe that they did
not execute it in the case of Jesus. It is not reasonable to suppose,
however, that Roman soldiers either were in the habit of disregarding
their orders, or could have any motive for doing so in this case,
and subjecting themselves to the severe punishment for disobedience
inflicted by Roman military law. It is argued that they saw that Jesus
was already dead, and, therefore, that it was not necessary to break
his legs; but soldiers are not in the habit of thinking in this way;
they are disciplined to obey" (p. 993).



376

What demand was made by the Jews on the evening of the crucifixion?

John: That their bodies be taken down from the cross (xix, 31).

John was evidently familiar with the Mosaic law (Deut. xxi, 22, 23)
which, in cases of hanging, enjoined the burial of the body on the
day of execution, but seemingly ignorant of the Roman law under which
they were executed, which, in cases of crucifixion, prohibited burial,
requiring the body to remain upon the cross until decayed, or birds
and beasts had devoured it. The Jews esteemed it sinful to allow a
criminal to "remain all night upon the tree;" but the Jewish law was
inapplicable to the Roman mode of punishment which presupposed that
the criminal would remain on the cross several days and nights before
death ensued.



377

What additional reason was there for having the bodies taken down?

Mark: "Because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the
Sabbath" (xv, 42).

The Sabbath began at sunset on the day that he is declared to have
been crucified. The Jewish law would not permit his body, whether dead
or alive, to be exposed on the Sabbath. Crucifixion, as we have seen,
was a lingering death; several days usually elapsing before the victim
expired. Now, is it reasonable to suppose that the Jews would demand,
as claimed, a punishment lasting several days when they knew that he
must be taken down from the cross in a few hours?



378

What did Pilate do when Joseph solicited the body of Jesus?

Mark: "Pilate marveled if he were already dead" (xv, 44).

Why should Pilate marvel if he were already dead when previous to this,
according to John (xix, 31-33), he had, at the request of the Jews,
ordered his soldiers to dispatch him if alive and take his body away?



379

Were the disciples present at the crucifixion?

John: They were, or one, at least (xix, 26).

According to the Synoptics, all were absent; all had forsaken their
Master, all had fled. The Twelve Apostles at this time, unless Judas
had already hung himself, as Matthew declares, numbered one traitor
and eleven cowards.



380

What women followed Jesus and witnessed his execution?

Matthew and Mark: Women of Galilee (Matt. xxvii, 55; Mark xv, 40, 41).

Luke: "Daughters of Jerusalem," that is, women of Judea (xxiii, 28).



381

Where were Mary Magdalene and her companions during the crucifixion?

Matthew and Mark: "Looking on afar off" (Mark xv, 40; Matt. xxvii,
55, 56).

John: They "stood by the cross" (xix, 25).



382

Was Mary, the mother of Jesus, present?

John: She was (xix, 25).

Synoptics: She was not.

The Synoptics do not expressly state that she was absent, but if she
was present, as John affirms, is it possible that they would ignore
the fact when they mention "the strolling Magdalene" no less than
seven times?



383

Who stood by the cross with the mother of Jesus?

John: "Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary, the wife of Cleophas" (xix, 25).

Mary must have been a very popular name to be given to two daughters
of the same family. It is not probable that these sisters were both
named Mary. John never mentions the name of Jesus' mother, and it is
evident that he did not suppose her name was Mary. Were John the only
Gospel, Christians would be ignorant of the Virgin's name. Mariolatry
did not originate in the Johannine church.



384

To whom was entrusted the care of Jesus' mother?

John: "When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing
by whom he loved [John], he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy
son! Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that
hour that disciple took her unto his own house" (xix, 26, 27).

"The teacher who had been to him as a brother leaves to him a brother's
duty. He is to be as a son to the mother who is left desolate."--Bible
Dictionary.

Very touchingly expressed. But why was this duty imposed upon John
when the Apostle James (the Less) was a brother of Jesus and a son
of Mary? Was he a worthless ingrate, unable and unwilling to care
for her? And what of Joses, and Juda, and Simon, and her daughters
who remained at home? Had they turned their mother out of doors?



385

In whose sepulcher was the body of Jesus placed?

Matthew: Joseph "laid it in his own new tomb which he had hewn out
in the rock" (xxvii, 60).

John: "Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and
in the garden a new sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid. There
laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jew's preparation day;
for the sepulcher was nigh at hand" (xix, 41, 42).

It is evident from John that the sepulcher did not belong to Joseph,
but that it was one which happened to be convenient to the place of
crucifixion; for, as Strauss justly argues: "The vicinity of the grave,
when alleged as a motive, excludes the fact of possession."



386

Was his body embalmed when it was laid in the sepulcher?

John: It was. "He [Joseph] came therefore, and took the body of
Jesus. And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to
Jesus by night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an
hundred pound weight. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it
in linen clothes with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury"
(xix, 38-40).

Mark and Luke: It was not embalmed. "The women also, which came with
him from Galilee, followed after, and beheld the sepulcher, and how his
body was laid. And they returned, and prepared spices and ointments"
(Luke xxiii, 55, 56); intending to embalm it "when the Sabbath was
past" (Mark xvi, 1).



387

What is said in regard to wrapping the body of Jesus by Joseph?

Mark: "He bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in
the linen" (xv, 46).

This statement is rejected by critics. A member of the Sanhedrim
would not desecrate the Passover by making a purchase on it.



388

What was the amount of the material used in embalming Jesus?

John: A hundred pounds (xix, 39).

This was sufficient to embalm a dozen bodies. Yet after seeing
his body literally buried in the material, the women, we are told,
procured more.



389

When did the women procure materials for embalming Jesus?

Luke: "They returned, and prepared spices and ointments; and rested
the Sabbath Day" (xxiii, 56).

Mark (New Ver.): "And when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene and
Mary the mother of James, and Salome, bought spices that they might
come and anoint him" (xvi, 1).

According to Luke they prepared the spices before the Sabbath began,
that is, before the end of the sixth day; according to Mark, they
did not procure them until "the Sabbath was past," that is, not until
the beginning of the first day.



390

When did they go to embalm the body?

Mark and Luke: "When the Sabbath was past, ... the first day of the
week" (Mark xvi, 1, 2; Luke xxiv, 1).

Is it reasonable to suppose that in that warm spring climate
(Dr. Geikie speaks of the fierce heat that prevailed at the time),
they would let a wounded body lie two days, until decomposition had
commenced, and then attempt to embalm it?



391

When was the sepulcher closed?

All: When the body was placed in it (Matt. xxvii, 60; Mark xv, 46;
Luke xxiii, 53, xxiv, 1, 2; John xix, 41, 42, xx, 1).

According to the Evangelists, the stone was rolled to the door of
the sepulcher as soon as the body was deposited, and according to
Mark and Luke, the women were troubled as to who should roll away
the stone when they went to embalm the body.

In sepulture of this kind, the tomb was not closed until the third day,
and when once closed it was not to be opened. This deviation from the
customary mode is evidently for the purpose of establishing faith in
the doctrine of the resurrection, by shutting off all means of escape
or removal without supernatural aid. The Evangelists are particular
to state that Joseph "rolled a great stone to the door."

In a single paragraph, Scribner's "Bible Dictionary" concedes no less
than seven Synoptical errors regarding the trial, crucifixion and
burial of Jesus: "The Synoptists make the Sanhedrim say beforehand that
they will not arrest Jesus 'on the feast day,' and then actually arrest
him on that day; that not only the guards, but one of the disciples
carries arms, which on the feast day was not allowed; that the trial
was also held on the feast day, which would be unlawful; that the
feast day would not be called 'Preparation'; that the phrase 'coming
from the field' (Mk. xv, 21) means properly 'coming from work'; that
Joseph of Arimathea is represented as buying a linen cloth (Mk. xv,
46), and the women as preparing spices and ointments (Lk. xxiii, 56),
all of which would be contrary to law and custom."



392

In what year was Jesus crucified?

Not one of the Evangelists knows. They agree that he was crucified
during the time that Pontius Pilate was procurator of Judea, and Joseph
Caiaphas was high priest of the Jews. But this, so far as Matthew,
Mark and John are concerned, may have been any time from 26 to 36 A. D.

Luke, while he does not state the particular year, nor furnish data
for determining it, is more definite. He says that Jesus began his
ministry in "the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar,"
and his narrative clearly implies that he was crucified at the
following Passover. Tiberius commenced his reign in August, 14
A. D. The fifteenth year of his reign, then, extended from August,
28 A. D., to August, 29 A. D. If Jesus began his ministry during the
first months of this year, he might have been crucified as early as
the spring of 29. But it is generally conceded that the time which
this would allow for his ministry was far too brief, and that he
could not have been crucified before 30 A. D.

The Christian Fathers who, for the most part, accepted the tradition
of Luke and affirmed that his ministry lasted but one year, or less,
held that the crucifixion occurred in 29 A. D.

Scribner's "Bible Dictionary" gives preference to 29 A. D. Cuthbert
Hamilton Turner, M.A., Oxford, the New Testament chronologist of
that work, after a lengthy review of the subject, says: "To sum up
briefly, the separate results of five lines of enquiry harmonize with
one another beyond expectation, so that each in turn supplies fresh
security for the rest. The nativity in B. C. 7-6; the age of our
Lord at the baptism, 30 years, more or less; the baptism in A. D. 26
(26-27); the duration of the ministry between two and three years;
the crucifixion in A. D. 29."

This authority states that his ministry lasted two or three years. It
was necessary to do this or reject John. By taking a year or more from
John's ministry of Jesus and adding it to the one year ministry of the
Synoptics--by assuming that the Synoptics omit to mention one or more
Passovers, and that one of the Passovers mentioned by John was some
other feast--it pretends to have reconciled the discrepancy regarding
the length of Christ's ministry. But if his ministry lasted two or
three years, as affirmed, he could not have been crucified in 29 A. D.

With orthodox commentators, a favorite method of reconciling Old
Testament dates, as I have noted in a previous work, is to assume that
a king, concerning the date of whose accession, or length of reign,
a discrepancy appears, reigned in consort with his predecessor for a
number of years sufficient to cover the discrepancy. This dishonest
method of explanation--for it is a dishonest trick, intended to
deceive the reader and hide from him an error--has been employed
to reconcile Luke and John. By assuming that Tiberius divided the
government with Augustus for two years preceding his accession to
the throne, an assumption for which there is no credible authority,
and that Luke accordingly reckons the fifteenth year from 12 A. D.,
instead of 14 A. D., when he really became emperor, it is possible
to give Jesus a ministry of two or three years and still have
him crucified in 29 A. D. But another irreconcilable difficulty
remains. The Synoptics state that he was crucified on the Passover
and on the day preceding the Sabbath, that is, on Friday. If so,
he could not have been crucified in 29 A. D., for the Passover did
not fall on Friday that year.

Dr. Farrar says it is "highly probable that the crucifixion took
place at the passover of March, 30 A. D."

Justice Bradley of the United States Supreme Court, who made an
exhaustive examination of all the evidence and arguments bearing on
the question, decided in favor of 30 A. D. He says: "There were only
three years from A. D. 27 to A. D. 36, inclusive, in which the 1st
of Nisan, and consequently the 15th of Nisan, happened on Friday, and
these were A. D. 27, 30 and 33, the last of which is very doubtful. But
the crucifixion could not have happened before A. D. 28, and probably
not later than A. D. 31. Therefore the year 30 is the only one which
satisfies all the conditions of the problem.... Now, since in A. D. 30,
the 1st of Nisan fell on Friday, the 24th of March, the 15th fell on
Friday, the 7th of April, which was the day of the crucifixion."

Dr. Farrar and Justice Bradley are agreed in regard to the year of
the crucifixion, but they are not agreed in regard to the calendar
month in which it occurred. Dr. Farrar says it occurred in March;
Justice Bradley says it occurred in April.

Justice Bradley says that 30 A. D. satisfies all the conditions. It
does satisfy the conditions of the Synoptics, but it does not satisfy
the conditions of John, as claimed. To satisfy the conditions of John
it is necessary to adopt the untenable hypothesis of 12 A. D. as
the date of Tiberius Caesar's accession. But whatever satisfies
the conditions of John must necessarily conflict with those of the
Synoptics.

Some Christian scholars place the crucifixion in 31 A. D., others in 32
A. D. But neither year can be harmonized with the Synoptics' statement
that he was put to death on the Passover, or with John's that he
suffered on the day of Preparation. Neither can they be harmonized with
either the Synoptics or John in regard to the duration of his ministry.

It is probable that a majority of Christian scholars today believe
that Jesus was crucified in 33. Renan accepted this date. He says:
"According to the calculation we adopt, the death of Jesus happened in
the year 33 of our era. It could not, at all events, be either before
the year 29, the preaching of John and Jesus having commenced in the
year 28, or after 35, since in the year 36, and probably before the
Passover, Pilate and Kaiapha both lost their offices."

The adoption of 33 allows for the four years' ministry ascribed to
Jesus by John, but it cannot be reconciled with the brief ministry
ascribed to him by the Synoptics. As for Renan, who in the first
edition of his "Jesus" accepted the authenticity of John, but
subsequently rejected it and accepted only the Synoptics, he has no
Evangelistic authority for 33.

The Dutch theologians, Kuenen, Oort and Hooykaas, and many other
Rationalists, give 35 A. D. the preference. To accept this year,
however, it is necessary to reject the Passover crucifixion, and to
assign to Jesus a much longer ministry than even John assigns.

Of one hundred Christian authorities who attempt to name the year in
which Christ was crucified, twenty-three say 29, eighteen 30, nine 31,
seven 32, thirty-seven 33, and six 35 A. D.

Thus it will be seen that not a year that can be named can be
harmonized with the accounts of the crucifixion given in the four
gospels. The result is that there is as great a lack of agreement
in regard to the time of Christ's death as there is in regard to the
time of his birth. Christians do not know when he was born, they do
not know when he died, they cannot prove that he lived.



393

On what day of the month was he crucified?

Synoptics: On the 15th of Nisan.

John: On the 14th of Nisan.

This discrepancy is conceded by Scribner's "Bible Dictionary." It says:

"It is the Last Supper which the Synoptics appear to fix by identifying
it with the Passover. They say expressly that on the morning of the
'first day of unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the passover'
(Mk. xiv, 12), the disciples asked where the Passover was to be
eaten. This would be on the morning of Nisan 14. In the evening,
which from twilight onwards would belong to Nisan 15, would follow
the Last Supper, and on the next afternoon (still, on the Jewish
reckoning, Nisan 15) the crucifixion. St. John, on the other hand, by
a number of clear indications (John xiii, 1, xviii, 28, xix, 14, 31)
implies that the Last Supper was eaten before the time of the regular
Passover, and that the Lord suffered on the afternoon of Nisan 14,
about the time of the slaying of the Paschal lamb. We are thus left
with a conflict of testimony."



394

On what day of the week was he crucified?

Synoptics: On Friday.

John: On Thursday.

The Synoptics agree that he was crucified on the day following the
Preparation, that is, on the day of the Passover, and the day preceding
the Sabbath. As the Jewish Sabbath fell on Saturday, he was, therefore,
crucified on Friday.

John repeatedly declares that his trial and crucifixion occurred on
"the preparation of the passover." If the Passover occurred on Friday,
as the Synoptics state, he was crucified on the preceding day, or
Thursday. It is claimed by some, though the claim is disputed, that
the Synoptics are in error, that the Passover was never held on Friday.



395

On what day of the feast did the crucifixion occur?

Synoptics: On the Passover.

John: On the day of Preparation.

It is expressly stated in the Synoptics that he celebrated the
Passover before his death. "Then came the day of unleavened bread,
when the passover must be killed. And he sent Peter and John, saying,
Go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat.... And they made
ready the passover. And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the
twelve apostles with him. And he said unto them, With desire I have
desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer" (Luke xxii,
7-15; Matt. xxvi, 17-20; Mark xiv, 12-18).

The author of the Fourth Gospel declares that the Last Supper was not
the Paschal meal, and that Jesus was crucified on the day preceding
the Passover, that is, on the day of Preparation. He refers to the
events connected with the Last Supper as having taken place "before
the passover" (xiii, 1); after supper, when Jesus bade Judas do quickly
what he proposed to do, he states that the disciples "thought because
Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things that
we have need of against the feast" (xiii, 29); at the trial, he says,
the Jews "themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they might
be defiled, but that they might eat the passover" (xviii, 28); when
Pilate is about to deliver him up to be crucified, he even goes out
of the way to repeat that "It was the preparation of the passover"
(xix, 14).

This discrepancy is not, like many other Bible discrepancies, an
unintentional error. It represents a conflict between two dogmas. The
primitive church was rent with dissensions regarding this question,
some contending that Christ suffered on the 14th Nisan, others that
it was on the 15th. During the second century--the century in which
our gospels appeared--this controversy was especially bitter.

According to John (i, 29, xix, 33, 36) Jesus was the Paschal Lamb, and
as such, must be slain on the day of Preparation. The slaying of the
lambs began at three o'clock in the afternoon, the hour at which Jesus
is said to have expired. The Synoptics, on the other hand, in order to
enable him to partake of the Paschal meal and institute the Eucharist,
which is a survival and perpetuation of the Passover, must prolong
his existence until after this meal, and consequently his crucifixion
cannot take place until the following day. It was impossible for him
to be the Paschal Lamb and at the same time partake of the Paschal
meal. This necessarily produced a schism. The Fourth Gospel was written
in support of the one side, the Synoptics in support of the other.

It is declared by the most eminent fathers of the second century
that the Apostle John, whom some of them had known, was accustomed
to observe the Paschal meal. This is another argument against the
Johannine authorship of the Fourth Gospel.

Referring to the Lord's Supper, as recorded in John, the "Bible for
Learners" says: "It was not the Paschal meal. The Passover did not
begin until the following evening; for he himself who was the true
Paschal Lamb, and as such made an end of all sacrifices, must be
put to death at the very day and hour ordained for the slaughter of
the lamb--not twenty-four hours later as the Synoptic Gospels say"
(Vol. iii, p. 684).

Admitting the discrepancy, but without determining which is correct,
Smith's "Bible Dictionary" says: "The crowning application of the
Paschal rites to the truths of which they were the shadowy promises
appears to be that which is afforded by the fact that our Lord's
death occurred during the festival. According to the Divine purpose,
the true Lamb of God was slain at nearly the same time as 'the Lord's
Passover,' in obedience to the letter of the law."

It was not "according to the Divine purpose" that Jesus was slain at
the Passover, but it was according to a human invention that he is
declared to have been slain at this time. These attempts to connect
the crucifixion with the Passover afford the strongest proof that it
is a myth.



396

What led to the arrest and crucifixion of Jesus?

John: His miracle of raising Lazarus from the dead. On learning of
it the Jewish council met, and "from that day forth they took counsel
together for to put him to death" (xi, 47, 53).

This is more difficult to believe than the miracle itself. It is the
most improbable statement ever penned--the one that does most violence
to human reason. The crudest savages on earth would not have slain
nor even harmed a man who had proved himself the Conqueror and King
of Death.



397

What did Christ say during his ministry concerning the cross?

"He that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me is not worthy
of me" (Matthew x, 38; Luke xiv, 27).

"Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me" (Mark viii, 34).

"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross daily and follow me" (Luke ix, 23).

These utterances are alleged to have been made early in his
ministry. Now, the cross as a Christian symbol is supposed to have
been adopted after, and not until after, the crucifixion. Its
introduction in the passages quoted suggests one of two things:
either that the Synoptics put into the mouth of Jesus words that he
never uttered, or that the cross, as a religious symbol, was used
before the crucifixion, in which case its adoption by the church is
no proof of the crucifixion.



398

The so-called historical books of the New Testament, the Four Gospels
and the Acts of the Apostles, declare that Christ was crucified. Do
the remaining books of the New Testament confirm it?

In the first four Pauline Epistles, known as the genuine Epistles
of Paul, the verb crucify--crucified appears in ten different texts,
as follows:

"Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed" (Romans vi, 6).

"Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you?" (1 Corinthians,
i, 13.)

"But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Greeks foolishness" (23).

"For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ,
and him crucified" (ii, 2).

"For had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory" (8).

"For though he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth by the
power of God" (2 Corinthians xiii, 4).

"I am crucified with Christ" (Galatians ii, 20).

"O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not
obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently
set forth, crucified among you?" (iii, 1.)

"And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts" (v, 24).

"But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world" (vi, 14).

Webster defines this word as follows: "1. To nail to a cross; to put to
death by nailing the hands and feet to a cross or gibbet, sometimes,
anciently, by fastening a criminal to a tree with cords. 2. In
scriptural language, to subdue; to mortify; to destroy the power or
ruling influence of. 3. To reject and despise. 4. To vex or torment."

The first, only, denotes a physical crucifixion, which, it is claimed,
Christ suffered. The word, as used by Paul, in most instances, clearly
denotes a crucifying of the passions and carnal pleasures, and the
exceptions, when taken in connection with Paul's well known teachings,
and allowing for the probable corruption of the original text, do
not confirm the Evangelistic accounts of the crucifixion. Besides
this it is admitted that Paul did not witness the crucifixion, and
that these Epistles, even if authentic, were not written until nearly
thirty years after it is said to have occurred.

In the eighteen books which follow, the word crucify appears but
twice--in Hebrews (vi, 6) and in Revelation (xi, 8). The word
crucifixion does not appear once in the Bible.

Concerning the books we have been considering in this criticism,
Paine writes as follows: "Whether the fourteen epistles ascribed to
Paul were written by him or not, is a matter of indifference; they are
either argumentative or dogmatical; and as the argument is defective
and the dogmatical part is merely presumptive, it signifies not who
wrote them. And the same may be said for the remaining parts of the
Testament. It is not upon the Epistles, but upon what is called the
Gospel, contained in the four books ascribed to Matthew, Mark, Luke,
and John, and upon the pretended prophecies, that the theory of the
church calling itself the Christian Church is founded. The Epistles
are dependent upon those, and must follow their fate; for if the
story of Jesus Christ be fabulous, all reasoning founded upon it as
a supposed truth must fall with it" (Age of Reason).



399

How old was Jesus at the time of his death?

Luke: He was but little more than thirty years old.

John: He was nearly fifty. In a controversy with the Jews, during
his ministry, he said: "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day:
and he saw, and was glad. Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art
not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?" (viii, 56,
57.) This implies that he was nearly fifty at this time.

Discussing the question of Jesus' age, St. Irenaeus, the most renowned
of the early Christian Fathers, and the founder of the New Testament
canon, who lived in the century immediately following Jesus, says:

"He [Christ] came to save all through means of himself--all I say,
who through him are born again to God--infants and children, and
boys, and youths, and old men. He therefore passed through every age;
becoming an infant for infants, thus sanctifying infants; a child
for children, thus sanctifying those who are of this age, being at
the same time made to them an example of piety, righteousness and
submission; a youth for youths, becoming an example to youths, and
thus sanctifying them for the Lord. So likewise, he was an old man
for old men, that he might be a perfect master for all; not merely
as respects the setting forth of the truth, but also as regards age;
sanctifying at the same time, the aged also, and becoming an example
to them likewise. Then, at last, he came on to death itself, that he
might be the first born from the dead, that in all things he might
have the pre-eminence; the Prince of Life, existing before all,
and going before all" (Against Heresies, Book iv, ch. xxii, sec. 4).

Commenting on the passage quoted from John, Irenaeus says: "But besides
this, those very Jews who thus disputed with the Lord Jesus Christ,
have most closely indicated the same thing. For when the Lord said
to them, 'Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it,
and was glad;' they answered him, 'Thou art not yet fifty years old;
and hast thou seen Abraham?' Now, such language is fittingly applied
to one who has already passed the age of forty, without having yet
reached his fiftieth year, yet is not far from this latter period. But
to one who is only thirty years old, it would unquestionably be said,
'Thou art not yet forty years old.' For those who wished to convict
him of falsehood, would certainly not extend the number of his years
far beyond the age which they saw he had attained.... It is altogether
unreasonable to suppose that they were mistaken by twenty years, when
they wished to prove him younger than the times of Abraham.... He
did not then want much of being fifty years old" (Ibid. sec. 6).

Nor did Irenaeus depend upon the Fourth Gospel alone for his
authority. He was the companion of the aged Polycarp, whom Christians
claim to have been the companion of the Apostle John. Concerning
the testimony of Polycarp and others, he writes: "Those who were
conversant in Asia with John, the disciple of the Lord, [testify]
that John conveyed to them that information. And he (John) remained
among them up to the times of Tragan. Some of them, moreover, saw not
only John, but the other apostles also, and heard the same account
from them, and bear testimony to the statement" (Ib., sec. 5).

In regard to this testimony of the "divine Irenaeus," as he is called,
Godfrey Higgins says: "The church has been guilty of the oversight of
letting this passage from Irenaeus escape. One of the earliest, most
respected, and most quoted of its ancient bishops, saints and martyrs,
tells us in distinct words that Jesus was not crucified under Herod
and Pontius Pilate, but that he lived to be turned fifty years of
age. This he tells us on the authority of his master, St. Polycarp,
also a martyr, who had it from St. John himself, and from all the
old people of Asia" (Anacalypsis).

Of this testimony and its consequences, Judge Waite, in his "History of
Christianity" (pp. 329, 330) says: "It must be remembered that Irenaeus
had been a companion of Polycarp and others who had seen John, and
that he was speaking of what had come to his personal knowledge from
the elders in Asia. If, then, Irenaeus tells the truth, the evidence
in favor of the fact is almost overwhelming. If, on the other hand,
he would deliberately falsify in a matter of this importance, what is
his testimony worth as to the origin of the four gospels? Against this
evidence, we have only the silence of the gospels. But if the silence
of the Synoptics is consistent with a ministry of three or four years,
why is not the further silence of all the gospels consistent with a
ministry of twenty years?

"How would such a theory affect the received chronology concerning
Christ? The date of the crucifixion at not later than A. D. 36,
or when Christ was, by the received chronology, forty years old, is
settled by the fact, that in that year, Pontius Pilate was removed
from his government.... If, then, it be accepted as a historical fact
that Christ was about fifty years old at this crucifixion, the date
of his birth would have to be set back at least ten years."

Every line of these accounts of the trial and crucifixion of Christ
bears the ineffaceable stamp of fiction. There was no Christ to
crucify, and Jesus of Nazareth, if he existed, was not crucified
as claimed.

For more than fifteen centuries an inoffensive, industrious and moral
people have been persecuted, robbed and butchered by Christians,
because their forefathers are said to have slain a mythical God.

Supposing that from the myth of Prometheus had sprung a popular
religion, which, in its day, had, like the religions of Osiris,
Bacchus, Krishna and Christ, overspread the earth. Then think of
the devotees of this religion massacring the Hellenists because Zeus
had crucified Prometheus! How long must our mythology, with all its
attendant evils, rule and curse the world? How long must an innocent
people suffer for an alleged crime that was never committed?







