CHAPTER VII.

THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST.


400

How long did Jesus say he would remain in the grave?

"For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly;
so shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart
of the earth" (Matthew xii, 40).

How long did he remain in the grave?

Synoptics: Being buried on Friday evening, and having risen on or
before Sunday morning, he was in the grave, at the most, but two
nights and one day.



401

What occurred on the morning of the resurrection?

Matthew: "There was a great earthquake" (xxviii, 2).

The other Evangelists know nothing of this earthquake. They not
only omit it, but their accounts of the resurrection preclude the
possibility of its occurrence.



402

Who were the first to visit the tomb on the morning of the
resurrection?

John: "Mary Magdalene" (xx, 1).

Matthew: "Mary Magdalene and the other Mary" (xxviii, 1).

Mark: "Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome"
(xvi, 1, 2).

Luke: "Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James,
and other women" (xxiv, 1-10).



403

Who was Salome?

"The wife of Zebedee, as appears from comparing Matt. xxvii, 56,
with Mark xv, 40."--Smith's Bible Dictionary.

Matthew says that the women who witnessed the crucifixion were "Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of
Zebedee's children." Mark says the women were "Mary Magdalene, and
Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome." This is a
discrepancy that can be reconciled only by supposing that the mother
of Zebedee's children (James and John) was Salome. But the Gospel
of the Egyptians, older than either Matthew or Mark, and accepted by
early Christians as authentic, states that Salome was a single woman.



404

At what time in the morning did the women visit the tomb?

Mark: "At the rising of the sun" (xvi, 2).

John: "When it was yet dark" (xx, 1).

If they came "at the rising of the sun," or "when the sun was risen"
(New Ver.), it was not yet dark.



405

When does Matthew say they came?

"In the end of the Sabbath as it began to dawn toward the first day
of the week" (xxviii, 1).

If they came "in the end of the Sabbath," and Jesus had already risen,
then his resurrection took place, not on the first day of the week, as
claimed, but on the seventh day. Matthew was a Jew; yet the author of
this Gospel was seemingly ignorant of the Jewish method of computing
time, according to which the Sabbath began and ended at sunset. He
evidently supposed that the night preceding their visit to the tomb
belonged to the seventh day, whereas it belonged to the first day.



406

Was the tomb open, or closed, when they came?

Luke: "They found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre" (xxiv, 2).

Matthew: The tomb was closed. The stone was not rolled from the door
until after they came (xxviii, 1, 2).

This, in the opinion of most critics, is the meaning of Matthew's
language.



407

Whom did they meet at the tomb?

Matthew: "The angel" (xxviii, 2-5).

Mark: "A young man" (xvi, 5).

Luke: "Two men" (xxiv, 4).

John: "Two angels" (xx, 12).



408

Were these men or angels in the sepulchre or outside of it?

Matthew: Outside of it (xxviii, 2).

Mark, Luke and John: Inside of it (Mark xvi, 5; Luke xxiv, 3, 4;
John xx, 11, 12).



409

Were they sitting or standing?

Luke: Standing (xxiv, 4).

Matthew, Mark and John: Sitting (Matt. xxviii, 2; Mark xvi, 1; John
xx, 12).



410

What were the first words they spoke to the women?

Matthew and Mark: "Be not affrighted" (Mark xvi, 6; Matt. xxviii, 5).

Luke: "Why seek ye the living among the dead?" (xxiv, 5.)

John: "Woman, why weepest thou?" (xx, 13.)



411

Did Mary Magdalene observe the divine messengers when she first came
to the tomb?

Synoptics: She did (Matt. xxviii, 1-5; Mark xvi, 1-5; Luke xxiv, 1-4).

John: She did not (xx, 1, 2, 11, 12).



412

Who became frightened at the messengers?

Matthew: "The keepers did shake, and became as dead men" (xxviii, 4).

Mark and Luke: "They [the women] were affrighted" (Mark xvi, 5;
Luke xxiv, 5).



413

What did the women do when they became frightened?

Mark: "They went out quickly and fled" (xvi, 8).

Luke: "They bowed down their faces to the earth" (xxiv, 5).



414

Did the women see Jesus?

Matthew: They did. "As they went to tell his disciples, behold,
Jesus met them" (xxviii, 9).

Luke: They did not see him (xxiv).



415

Did the women tell the disciples what they had seen?

Luke: They "returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things
unto the eleven, and to all the rest" (xxiv, 9).

Mark: "Neither said they anything to any man; for they were afraid"
(xvi, 8).

With these words the Gospel of Mark ends, the words that follow being
an interpolation. In this appended passage Mary Magdalene is declared
to have seen Jesus and informed them of it, but they "believed not."



416

How many disciples visited the tomb?

Luke: But one, Peter (xxiv, 12).

John: Two, Peter and John (xx, 3).



417

Who looked into the sepulchre and beheld the linen clothes?

Luke: "Then arose Peter, and ran into the sepulchre; and stooping down,
he beheld the linen clothes" (xxiv, 12).

John: "So they ran both together; and the other disciple [John] did
outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre. And he stooping down,
and looking in, saw the linen clothes" (xx, 4, 5).



418

Did Peter enter into the sepulchre?

John: He did. "Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into
the sepulchre" (xx, 6).

Luke: He did not. He looked into the sepulchre "and departed"
(xxiv, 12).



419

State all of the appearances of Jesus mentioned by the Evangelists.

Matthew.

1. To the two Marys (xxviii, 9).
2. To the eleven in Galilee (17).


Mark.

1. To Mary Magdalene (xvi, 9).
2. To two of his disciples (12).
3. To the eleven at meat (14).


The appearances of Jesus mentioned in Mark are all in the apocryphal
supplement. The Gospel of Mark proper does not record a single
appearance of Jesus.


Luke.

1. To Cleopas and his companion (xxiv, 13-31).
2. To Simon (Peter) (34).
3. To the eleven and others (36).


John.

1. To Mary Magdalene (xx, 14-18).
2. To ten (?) disciples (19-24).
3. To the eleven (26-29).
4. To Peter, John and others (xxi).


The last chapter of this Gospel which contains the account of his
fourth appearance, and which ascribes the authorship of the Gospel
to the "beloved disciple" (John), is a forgery.

No two of the Evangelists agree. No two of them are fully agreed in
regard to a single appearance. Each not only omits the appearances
mentioned by the others, but his narrative in nearly every instance
excludes them. As Strauss says, "The designation of the locality in
one excludes the appearances narrated by the rest; the determination
of time in another leaves no space for the narratives of his
fellow-evangelists; the enumeration of a third is given without any
regard to the events reported by his predecessors; lastly, among
several appearances recounted by various narrators, each claims to
be the last, and yet has nothing in common with the others. Hence
nothing but wilful blindness can prevent the perception that no one
of the narrators knew and presupposed what another records."

Referring to the different accounts of the resurrection given by the
Evangelists, Dr. Westcott says: "They contain difficulties which it
is impossible to explain with certainty" (Introduction to Study of
Gospels, p. 329).

Dr. Farrar makes the following admission: "Any one who will attentively
read side by side the narratives of these appearances on the first day
of the resurrection, will see that they have only been preserved for
us in general, interblended, and scattered notices, which, in strict
exactness, render it impossible, without many arbitrary suppositions,
to produce from them a certain narrative of the order of events. The
lacunae, the compressions, the variations, the actual differences,
the subjectivity of the narrators as affected by spiritual revelations,
render all harmonies at the best uncertain" (Life of Christ, vol. ii,
p. 432, note).



420

State the appearances mentioned by Paul.


1. "He was seen of Cephas."
2. "Then of the twelve."
3. "After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once."
4. "After that he was seen of James."
5. "Then of all the apostles."
6. "And last of all he was seen of me also."


Paul says that his first appearance was to Peter. This contradicts
all of the Evangelists. His next appearance, Paul declares, was to
the twelve. But there were no twelve at this time; for Judas had
deserted them and his successor had not been elected. Paul evidently
knew nothing of the betrayal of Jesus by Judas. He says Jesus was seen
by five hundred brethren at once. The Evangelists are all ignorant
of this appearance, while the author of Acts states that there were
but one hundred and twenty "brethren" in all, and even this number is
considered too large by critics. He says that he appeared to James,
an appearance of which the Evangelists know nothing. After this
he states that he was seen of all the apostles. This is the only
appearance mentioned by Paul which can be reconciled with any of the
Evangelists, and this cannot be reconciled with all of them.

"Last of all he was seen of me also." Paul's belief in the resurrection
was based solely upon Jesus' supposed appearance to him; for the other
alleged appearances he had rejected. Not until he imagined that he
had seen Jesus did he believe that the disciples had seen him, and
the appearance of Jesus to him, which occurred several years after the
resurrection and ascension, is represented as an occurrence of exactly
the same character as his appearances to the disciples. Paul's vision
was clearly a delusion, and if so the other appearances, measured by
Paul's criterion, were delusions also. The Rev. John W. Chadwick truly
says: "Paul's witness to the resurrection is the ruin of the argument."



421

To whom did Jesus first appear?

Matthew: To Mary Magdalene and the other Mary (xxviii, 1, 9).

Mark and John: To Mary Magdalene alone (Mark xvi, 9; John xx, 14-18).

Luke: To Cleopas and his companion (xxiv, 13-31).

Paul: To Cephas (Peter) (1 Cor. xv, 5).



422

Where was Mary Magdalene when Jesus first appeared to her?

John: At the sepulchre (xx, 11-14).

Matthew: On her way home from the sepulchre (xxviii, 8, 9).



423

Did Mary know Jesus when he first appeared to her?

Matthew: She did (xxviii, 9).

John: "She ... knew not that it was Jesus" (xx, 14).



424

Was she permitted to touch him?

Matthew: "They [Mary Magdalene and her companion] came and held him
by the feet" (xxviii, 9).

John: "Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not" (xx, 17).



425

Where did he appear to his disciples?

Matthew: In Galilee.

Luke: In Jerusalem.

Matthew says that when Mary Magdalene and the other Mary visited the
tomb an angel appeared to them and said: "Go quickly, and tell his
disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before
you into Galilee; there shall ye see him" (xxviii, 7). As they ran
to convey this intelligence, Jesus himself met them and repeated the
command: "Go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there
shall they see me" (10). "Then the eleven disciples went away into
Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them. And when
they saw him they worshiped him" (16, 17).

Luke (xxiv, 13-35) states that on the day of the resurrection Jesus
journeyed to Emmaus, a village some distance from Jerusalem, with
Cleopas and his companion. They did not recognize him until after
their arrival there, when they returned at once to Jerusalem and
informed the disciples. "As they thus spake Jesus himself stood in the
midst of them" (36). He conversed with them for a time, after which
"he led them out as far as to Bethany" where he took his final leave
of them and ascended to heaven (38-51). Instead of bidding them go
to Galilee, a three days journey from Jerusalem, as Matthew states,
his command was "Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued
with power from on high," which, according to Acts (ii, 1-13), was
not until the day of Pentecost, seven weeks later.

Matthew's narrative forbids the supposition of any meeting in Judea,
while Luke's precludes the possibility of a meeting in Galilee.

Regarding this discrepancy Dean Alford says: "We must be content to
walk by faith, and not by sight" (Greek Testament, p. 905).



426

How far from Jerusalem was Emmaus, where Jesus made his first
appearance?

Luke: "Which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs" (xxiv, 13).

Threescore furlongs was seven and one-half Roman, or about seven
American miles. Emmaus of Judea was about twenty-five miles, or two
hundred furlongs from Jerusalem. There was an Emmaus in Galilee,
about seventy miles from Jerusalem. It is believed by some that the
legend related to the latter place and was subsequently transferred
by Luke to Judea.



427

How many disciples were present when he first appeared to them?

Matthew and Luke: Eleven (Matt. xxviii, 16, 17; Luke xxiv, 33-36).

John: But ten, Thomas being absent (xx, 19-24).

Paul: Twelve (1 Cor. xv, 5).



428

What effect had his presence when he first appeared to them?

Luke: "They were terrified and affrighted" (xxiv, 36, 37).

John: "Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord" (xx, 20).



429

How many of the disciples doubted the reality of his appearance?

Matthew: "Some doubted" (xxviii, 17).

John: But one doubted--Thomas (xx, 24, 25).



430

Were they all finally convinced of his resurrection?

John: They were.

Matthew: They were not.



431

When he appeared to them did they know that he must rise from the dead?

John: "For as yet they knew not that he must rise from the dead"
(xx, 9).

This cannot be reconciled with the Synoptics, who state that during his
ministry he had acquainted them with it. "From that time forth began
Jesus to shew unto his disciples how that he must go unto Jerusalem,
and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes,
and be killed, and be raised again the third day" (Matthew xvi, 21;
Mark viii, 31; Luke ix, 22).



432

Paul says that the last appearance of Jesus was to him. What did his
companions do when they saw the light which attended the appearance?

Acts: "The men which journeyed with him stood speechless" (ix, 7).

Paul: "We were all fallen to the earth" (Acts xxvi, 14).



433

Did Paul's companions see Jesus?

Acts: They did not. "The men which journeyed with him stood speechless,
hearing a voice, but seeing no man" (ix, 7).

This shows that Jesus' alleged appearance to Paul was an imaginary
and not a real appearance.



434

The author of Acts says that his companions heard a voice. Is this
true?

Paul: "They that were with me ... heard not the voice" (Acts xxii, 9).



435

Was Jesus seen by woman after his resurrection?

Matthew, Mark and John: He was.

Luke and Paul: He was not.

According to Luke and Paul his most faithful followers were not honored
by a visit from their Lord, but were neglected and ignored. The
resurrection was not for woman. Nowhere is sex prejudice more
conspicuous than in the accounts of the resurrection written by Paul
and the Pauline Evangelist. To ignore the testimony of Mary Magdalene
is to ignore the testimony of the chief witness for the resurrection.



436

From where did Jesus rise?

All: From the dead. "He is risen from the dead" (Matt. xxviii, 7). "It
behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead" (Luke xxiv,
46). "He was risen from the dead" (John xxi, 14).

According to the Evangelists Jesus rose, not from the grave--not
from the place where the bodies of the dead were deposited--but from
the lower world--from the realm of the dead--where the shades of the
departed were supposed to repose. Regarding this Dr. Hooykaas says:

"Let us begin by considering what that word 'resurrection' really
meant, whether applied to Jesus or to others. Later representations,
down to our own times, have regarded it as equivalent to a rising
from the grave; but the question is, what it meant in the faith
and preaching of the Apostles, in the genuine, original, primitive
tradition that Jesus had risen. Now, 'resurrection' means elsewhere
a return from the realm of shades to the human life on earth; and
Jesus too had left the underworld, but not, in this case, to return
at once to life upon the earth, but to be taken up provisionally
into heaven. Originally the resurrection and ascension of Jesus were
one. It was only later that the conception sprang up of his having
paused upon earth, whether for a single day or for several weeks,
on his journey from the abyss to the height.

"We may, therefore, safely assert that if the friends of Jesus had
thought as we do of the lot of those that die, they would never have
so much as dreamed of their Master's resurrection or ascension. For
to the Christian belief of today it would be, so to speak, a matter
of course that Jesus, like all good and noble souls--and indeed above
all others--would go straight 'to a better world,' 'to heaven,' 'to
God,' at the instant of his death; but in the conception of the Jews,
including the Apostles, this was impossible. Heaven was the abode
of the Lord and his angels only; and if an Enoch or an Elijah had
been caught up there alive, to dwell there for a time, it was certain
that all who died, without exception, even the purest and most holy,
must go down as shades into the realms of the dead in the bowels of
the earth--and thence, of course, they would not issue excepting by
'rising again.' And this is why we are never told that Jesus rose
'from death,' far less 'from the grave,' but always 'from the dead'"
(Bible for Learners, vol. iii, p. 463).



437

Was he readily recognized by his friends?

Matthew, Luke and John: He was not.

Matthew says that when his disciples met him in Galilee, after having
gone there for the express purpose of meeting him, "some doubted"
(xxviii, 17). Luke says that two of his friends journeyed with
him from Jerusalem to Emmaus, conversing with him on the way, and
notwithstanding they had been informed of his resurrection, they did
not recognize him until after they had reached the village. John says
that when Mary Magdalene met him she "knew not that it was Jesus,
... supposing him to be the gardener" (xx, 14, 15); and when he met
his disciples at the Lake of Tiberius they "knew not that it was Jesus"
(xxi, 4).



438

Did his appearances indicate a corporeal, or merely a spiritual
existence?

The Evangelists declare that he was not only seen by his disciples and
others, but that he conversed with them. Matthew says the two Marys
held him by the feet, Luke says he invited the disciples to handle
him, and John says that Thomas examined his wounds; while both Luke
and John state that he partook of nourishment.

On the other hand, Luke says that while he sat at meat with Cleopas
and his companion at Emmaus "He vanished out of their sight" (xxiv,
31). John says that while the disciples were assembled in a room
in Jerusalem, "when the doors were shut," Jesus came "and stood in
the midst" (xx, 19). Eight days later the appearance was repeated:
"Then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst"
(26). Mark says that after he appeared to Mary Magdalene "he appeared
in another form" to two of his disciples (xvi, 12).

While the first named appearances can be reconciled with so-called
spiritual manifestations, the latter cannot be reconciled with a
corporeal existence.

In the preceding chapter we have shown that the alleged crucifixion
of Jesus is unworthy of belief. If he was not crucified the story of
his resurrection is, of course, a fiction. But conceding, for the sake
of argument, that he was crucified; does this make his resurrection
probable, or even possible? The crucifixion of a man is a possible
occurrence; but the corporeal resurrection of a man who has suffered
death is impossible. These reputed appearances of Jesus, if they have
a historical foundation, were evidently mere subjective impressions
or apparitions. Although he is declared to have remained on earth
forty days, he made, at the most, but two or three brief visits to
his disciples, appearing and disappearing like a phantom. Instead of
abiding with them, teaching them the doctrines of his religion--of
which they professed to be ignorant--and preparing them for their
coming ministry he is represented as keeping in seclusion, or
roaming aimlessly along the country highways, like some demented
creature. Referring to his appearance to his disciples, Jerome says:
"The apostles supposed him to be a spirit, or according to the
Gospel which the Nazarenes receive [the Hebrew Gospel of Matthew]
an incorporeal demon."

The possibility, and even prevalency, of apparitions similar to those
related of Jesus are recognized by every student of psychology. Sir
Benjamin Brodie, in his "Psychological Inquiries" (p. 78), says:
"There are abundant proofs that impressions may be made in the brain
by other causes simulating those which are made on it by external
objects through the medium of the organs of sense, thus producing
false perceptions, which may, in the first instance, and before we
have had time to reflect on the subject, be mistaken for realities."

The appearance of Jesus to Mary Magdalene was not believed even by
the disciples. If the disciples believed that Mary was deluded, is it
unreasonable to believe that they were deluded also? Illusions are
contagious and may affect many minds as well as one. Dr. Carpenter,
one of the highest English authorities on mental science, says: "If not
only a single individual, but several persons should be 'possessed'
by one and the same idea or feeling, the same misinterpretation
may be made by all of them; and in such a case the concurrence of
their testimony does not add the least strength to it" (Principles
of Mental Physiology, p. 208). In confirmation of this is cited
the following from a work on "The Philosophy of Apparitions," by
Dr. Hibbert, F.R.S.E.: "A whole ship's company was thrown into the
utmost consternation by the apparition of a cook who had died a few
days before. He was distinctly seen walking ahead of the ship, with
a peculiar gait by which he was distinguished when alive, through
having one of his legs shorter than the other. On steering the ship
towards the object, it was found to be a piece of floating wreck."

These supposed appearances of Jesus were, at the most, only
apparitions, and "Apparitions," to quote Dr. Hibbert again, "are
nothing more than morbid symptoms, which are indicative of an intense
excitement of the renovated feelings of the mind" (Philosophy of
Apparitions, p. 375).

Lord Amberley advances a psychological explanation of the reputed
appearances of Jesus from which I quote the following: "Whatever other
qualities Jesus may have possessed or lacked, there can be no question
that he had one--that of inspiring in others a strong attachment to
himself. He had in his brief career surrounded himself with devoted
disciples; and he was taken from their midst in the full bloom of
his powers by a violent and early death. Now there are some who have
been taught by the bitter experience of their lives how difficult,
nay, how impossible it is to realize in imagination the fact that a
beloved companion is in truth gone from them forever.... We fondly
conceive that in some way the dead must still exist; and if so, can
one, who was so tender before, listen to our cry of pain and refuse
to come? Can one, who soothed us in the lesser troubles of our lives,
look on while we are suffering the greatest agony of all and fail to
comfort? It cannot be. Imagination declines to picture the long future
that lies before us. We cannot understand that we shall never again
listen to the tones of the familiar voice; never feel the touch of
the gentle hand; never be encouraged by the warm embrace that tells
us we are loved, or find a refuge from miserable thoughts and the
vexations of the world in the affectionate and ever-open heart. All
this is too hard for us. We long for a resurrection; we should believe
in it if we could; we do believe in it in sleep, when our feelings
are free to roam at pleasure, unrestrained by the chilling presence
of the material world. In dreams the old life is repeated again and
again. Sometimes the lost one is beside us as of old and we are quite
untroubled by the thought of parting. Sometimes there is a strange and
confusing consciousness that the great calamity has happened, or has
been thought to happen, but that now we are again together, and that
a new life has succeeded upon death.... Granting only a strong emotion
and a lively phantasy, we may comprehend at once how, in many lands, to
many mourners, the images of their dreams may also become the visions
of their waking hours" (Analysis of Religious Belief, pp. 275, 276).

Renan says: "For the historian, the life of Jesus finishes with his
last sigh. But such was the impression he had left in the heart of his
disciples, and of a few devoted women, that during some weeks more
it was as if he were living and consoling them. Had his body been
taken away, or did enthusiasm, always credulous, create afterwards
the group of narratives by which it was sought to establish faith in
the resurrection? In the absence of opposing documents this can never
be ascertained. Let us say, however, that the strong imagination of
Mary Magdalene played an important part in the circumstance. Divine
power of love! Sacred moments in which the passion of one possessed
gave to the world a resuscitated God" (Life of Jesus, p. 296).



439

If Jesus appeared in a material body, was he naked, or clothed?

This is not a vital, but it is a pertinent question. It is stated that
he appeared to Mary Magdalene immediately after the resurrection. Did
he appear to her naked, or was he clothed? As she mistook him for
the gardener, and as the gardener undoubtedly went clad, it may be
presumed that Jesus was clad also. If so, where did he procure his
clothes? His own garments were divided among the soldiers, and his
grave clothes were left in the sepulchre. If it be assumed that he
was taken from the tomb by his friends, as some critics believe,
the difficulty vanishes.



440

What is said of the saints who arose on the day of the crucifixion?

Matthew: They "came out of the graves after the resurrection, and
went into the holy city, and appeared unto many" (xxvii, 53).

Before Matthew's wholesale resurrection of the saints the
resurrection of Jesus pales into insignificance. In the opinion
of many supernaturalists Matthew has mixed too large a dose of the
miraculous for even Christian credulity to swallow, and they would
gladly omit this portion of it. Regarding this story Dr. Farrar says:
"An earthquake shook the earth and split the rocks, and as it rolled
away from their places the great stones which closed and covered the
cavern sepulchres of the Jews, so it seemed to the imaginations of
many to have disimprisoned the spirits of the dead, and to have filled
the air with ghostly visitants, who after Christ had risen appeared
to linger in the Holy City" (Life of Christ, vol. ii, p. 419). Dean
Milman dismisses it in much the same way. Referring to the earthquake,
he says: "The same convulsion would displace the stones which covered
the ancient tombs and lay open many of the innumerable rock-hewn
sepulchres which perforated the hills on every side of the city, and
expose the dead to public view. To the awe-struck and depressed minds
of the followers of Jesus, no doubt, were confined these visionary
appearances of the spirits of their deceased brethren" (History of
Christianity, vol. i, p. 336).

If the minds of the disciples were so greatly affected that they
imagined they beheld the resurrected bodies of strangers whom they
had never met and of whom they had probably never heard--for they
were nearly a hundred miles from the graves of their own kindred--is
it strange that they should imagine they saw the resurrected Master
with whom they had daily associated for months and perhaps years? To
characterize these resurrected saints as "ghostly visitants" and
"visionary appearances," and the resurrected Christ as a real being,
is a distinction without a scintilla of evidence to support it. Both
appearances, if they be historical, belong to the same class of mental
phenomena; and are, indeed, the offspring of the same minds.



441

When did the resurrection take place?

All: In the night.

Who witnessed it?

All: No one.

The author of "Supernatural Religion" says: "The remarkable fact is,
therefore, absolutely undeniable, that there was not, and that it is
not even pretended that there was, a single eye-witness to the actual
Resurrection. The empty grave, coupled with the supposed subsequent
appearances of Jesus, is the only evidence of the Resurrection"
(p. 1004).



442

It is said that a guard was stationed at the tomb. Why was this done?

Matthew: "The chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate,
saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said while he was yet
alive, After three days I will rise again. Command, therefore, that
the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples
come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is
risen from the dead" (xxvii, 62-64).

Is it not strange that his enemies should be cognizant of this when
his disciples "knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from
the dead?" (John xx, 9.)

Regarding this the "Bible for Learners" says: "Was such a foolish
report really circulated among the Jews? In any case this story,
which is worked out elaborately in the Gospel of Nicodemus, is quite
absurd. Is it likely that the enemies of Jesus would have heard a
prophecy of his rising again when his very friends never dreamed of it
for a moment, and when he had never once spoken of his 'resurrection'
in public?" (Vol. iii, p. 480.)



443

On what day did the Sanhedrim visit Pilate for the purpose of obtaining
a guard?

Matthew: On the Sabbath (xxvii, 62).

Matthew, after describing the death and burial of Jesus, says: "Now the
next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the chief priests
and Pharisees came together unto Pilate." It is generally conceded by
Christian commentators that by "the next day" Matthew refers to the
Sabbath, for if Jesus was crucified and buried on Friday, no other
day can be meant. To avoid the disagreeable consequences of such an
admission a few have contended that by "the day of preparation" is
meant the Preparation of the Passover. But this renders the passage
unintelligible. By "preparation" Matthew means, not the Preparation of
the Passover, but the preparation of the Sabbath. This is made clear
by the other Synoptics. After relating the events of the crucifixion,
Mark begins his account of the burial with these words: "And now when
the even was come, because it was the preparation, that is, the day
before the Sabbath" (xv, 42). Luke, after giving an account of the
crucifixion and burial, says: "And that day was the preparation and
the Sabbath drew on" (xxiii, 54).

It is claimed by the Evangelists that the Jewish priests of that
period were such rigid observers of the Sabbath that they sought to
put Jesus to death for simply healing the sick on that day. That the
Sanhedrim desecrated the Sabbath, and especially the Passover Sabbath,
by visiting and transacting business with a heathen ruler cannot be
accepted as possible.



444

When was the guard placed at the tomb?

Matthew: Not until the second night.

It is argued that Jesus must have risen because a guard was placed
at his tomb so that it was impossible for his disciples to "come
by night, and steal him away." But had his body really been left in
the tomb, as claimed, they would have taken it the first night had
they desired it. The passage cited from Matthew in the preceding
criticism declares that a guard was not requested of Pilate until
the day following the crucifixion, so that the tomb was without a
guard the first night. The sepulchre was not opened and examined
when the guard was placed there on the following day. "So they went
and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch"
(Matt. xxvii, 66). Had the seal been found unbroken at the end of
three days it would not have proved that Jesus' body still remained
in the tomb. It would merely have proved that the body had not been
removed after the seal was placed on it.

It may be urged that Jesus had prophesied that he would not rise until
the third day, and that an earlier disappearance of the body could
not be harmonized with a strict fulfillment of the prophecy. But of
this prophecy the disciples, we have seen, were ignorant.



445

What is said in regard to the opening of the tomb?

Matthew: "In the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the
first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see
the sepulchre. And behold there was a great earthquake; for the angel
of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone
from the door, and sat upon it.... And the angel answered and said
unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which
was crucified. He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come,
see the place where the Lord lay" (xxviii, 1-6).

Matthew's story of the guard was evidently inserted for the express
purpose of establishing a belief in the resurrection by making it
appear impossible for his friends to have removed the body from the
sepulchre. Yet this story suggests, if it does not prove, the very
thing that he attempts to prove impossible. The sepulchre was opened
in the presence of witnesses--the guards and the women. Jesus did
not emerge from it, nor did it contain his body. It was empty when
opened. This renders probable, if not certain, one of two things:
either his body was not deposited there, or it was removed before
the watch was set.

Commenting on the empty tomb L. K. Washburn says: "If Jesus got out of
the grave alive, he was put into it alive. If he was put into it dead,
he was taken out dead. A depopulated sepulchre is not proof that its
former tenant has moved to heaven. It is merely proof that somebody
has stolen a dead body."



446

What did the guards do when they left the tomb?

Matthew: "Some of the watch came into the city, and showed unto the
chief priests all the things that were done" (xxviii, 11).

To one acquainted with the discipline of the Roman army this story of
the soldiers leaving their post thirty-six hours before the expiration
of the watch assigned and going into the city and telling the Jews
what had transpired is incredible.



447

What did the chief priests do?

Matthew: "They gave large sums of money unto the soldiers, saying,
Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept"
(12, 13).

The penalty for sleeping while on duty was death, and no bribe could
have induced them to declare that they were guilty of this offense
even if the priests had promised to intercede for them. Again, had
this transaction really occurred it would have been known only by
the parties concerned in it, and when disclosure meant the direst
punishment to both the bribe-givers and the bribe-takers, neither
would have divulged the crime.

Strauss, criticising the alleged action of the Jewish priests, says:
"Their conduct, when the guards returning from the grave apprised them
of the resurrection of Jesus, is truly impossible. They believe the
assertion of the soldiers that Jesus had arisen out of his grave in
a miraculous manner. How could the council, many of whose members
were Sadducees, receive this as credible? Even the Pharisees in
the Sanhedrim, though they held in theory the possibility of a
resurrection, would not, with the mean opinion they entertained
of Jesus, be inclined to believe in his resurrection, especially
as the assertion in the mouth of the guards sounded just like a
falsehood invented to screen a failure in duty. The real Sanhedrists,
on hearing such an assertion from the soldiers, would have replied
with exasperation: You lie! you have slept and allowed him to be
stolen; but you will have to pay dearly for this, when it comes to be
investigated by the procurator. But instead of this, the Sanhedrists
in our gospel speak them fair, and entreat them thus: Tell a lie,
say that you have slept and allowed him to be stolen; moreover,
they pay them richly for the falsehood, and promise to exculpate
them to the procurator. This is evidently spoken entirely on the
Christian presupposition of the reality of the resurrection of Jesus;
a presupposition, however, which is quite incorrectly attributed to
the Sanhedrim" (Leben Jesu, pp. 806, 807).



448

What is said of the resurrection by Peter?

"Him God raised up the third day, and showed him openly; not to all the
people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did
eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead" (Acts x, 40, 41).

If God really wished to convince all the people why did he not show
him to all the people? It is said that more than two millions of Jews
attended the Passover. Had he desired to prove to them that Jesus was
the Christ he would have assembled this multitude at midday and in
their presence raised his crucified and buried Son. Yet not a single
human being witnessed the resurrection, and not a single disinterested
witness is said to have seen him after his death. Like a thief he
escapes from his prison in the night and avoids publicity. This story
of the resurrection is clearly a priestly invention and the composer
of the speech ascribed to Peter was conscious of the fact.



449

What did Paul teach regarding the resurrection of Christ?

"That Christ should suffer and that he should be the first that should
rise from the dead" (Acts xxvi, 23).

If Christ was the first to rise from the dead what becomes of the
miracles of Lazarus, of the widow of Nain's son, and of the daughter
of Jairus? What becomes of Matthew's saints who rose from the dead
on the day of the crucifixion, two days before Christ rose?



450

What did Paul teach regarding the resurrection of the dead in general?

"If the dead rise not, then is Christ not raised" (1 Corinthians
xv, 16).

"He that goeth down to the grave shall come up no more" (Job vii, 9).



451

When did the disciples receive the Holy Ghost?

John: "And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto
them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost" (xx, 22).

This was on the evening of the resurrection. Forty days after this
he said to them: "Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many
days hence" (Acts i, 5).

Acts: "And when the day of Pentecost was fully come ... they were
all filled with the Holy Ghost" (ii, 1-4).

This was seven weeks after the resurrection.



452

On what day of the week did it occur?

John: "The first day of the week" (xx, 19).

John, like the author of the first Gospel, is evidently ignorant of the
Jewish method of reckoning time. He makes the evening (it was night)
following the first day a part of that day instead of the next day
to which it belonged.



453

Did Thomas receive the Holy Ghost?

John: He did not. He was absent when the disciples received it
(xx, 19-25).



454

Who had Jesus said would send the Holy Ghost to his disciples?

"The Comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom the Father will send"
(John xiv, 26).

"I [Jesus] will send him unto you" (xvi, 7).



455

What effect had the Holy Ghost upon them?

Acts: They "began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave
them utterance" (ii, 4).

Concerning this "gift" Greg says: "Ignorance and folly too often became
the arbiters of wisdom--and the ravings of delirium were listened to
as the words of inspiration, and of God. If Jesus could have returned
to earth thirty years after his death, and sat in the midst of an
assembly of his followers, who were listening in hushed and wondering
prostration of mind to a speaker in the 'unknown tongue,' how would
he have wept over the humiliating and disappointing spectacle! how
would he have grieved to think that the incoherent jargon of delirium
or hysteria should be mistaken for the promptings of his Father's
spirit!" (Creed of Christendom, p. 250.)



456

Who heard them speak in new tongues?

Acts: "Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in
Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia
and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene,
and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes, Cretes and Arabians"
(ii, 9-11).

Did representatives of all these nations really assemble to hear
the disciples, or was this merely an imaginary gathering of the
writer? Evidently the latter.



457

To the charge of drunkenness what reply did Peter make?

"These are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third
hour of the day" (Acts ii, 15).

A profane mind, unacquainted with Jewish customs, might infer from
this that the disciples were not in the habit of becoming intoxicated
before nine o'clock in the morning.



458

What inquiry did Paul make of John's disciples?

"Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?"

What did they say in reply?

"We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost"
(Acts xix, 2).

This was many years after the death of Jesus. Either this colloquy
is false, or the story of John the Baptist is false. If John was the
forerunner of Christ, as claimed, his disciples became followers of
Christ; and if they became followers of Christ they were acquainted
with the doctrine of the Holy Ghost--if it existed at this time.



459

When did Jesus' disciples begin to baptize?

Matthew and Mark: Not until after his resurrection (Matt. xxviii,
18, 19; Mark xvi, 15, 16).

John: At the beginning of his ministry. "After these things came Jesus
and his disciples into the land of Judea; and there he tarried with
them, and baptized" (iii, 22). "The Pharisees had heard that Jesus
made and baptized more disciples than John. (Though Jesus himself
baptized not, but his disciples.)" (iv, 1, 2).



460

What form of baptism is Jesus said to have prescribed for the use of
his apostles?

"In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost"
(Matthew xxviii, 19).

The apostles did not baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, but in the name of Christ alone.

"Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ" (Acts ii, 38).

"They were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus" (viii, 16).

"He commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord" (x, 48).

"They were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus" (xix, 5).

Concerning this Greg says: "That this definite form of baptism
proceeded from Jesus, is opposed by the fact that such an allocation
of the Father, Son, and Spirit, does not elsewhere appear, except
as a form of salutation in the epistles; while as a definite form of
baptism it is nowhere met with throughout the New Testament. Moreover,
it was not the form used, and could scarcely, therefore, have been the
form commanded; for in the apostolic epistles, and even in the Acts,
the form always is 'baptizing into Christ Jesus,' or, 'into the name
of the Lord Jesus'" (Creed of Christendom, p. 191).

This ecclesiastical formula was not adopted by the church until late in
the second century, and then, not for baptism, but for admission into
the church. In regard to this the Rev. Dr. Hooykaas says: "Baptism into
the name of God the Father, Jesus Christ the Son of God, and the Holy
Spirit, means baptism into the confession of or faith in these three,
and is a short epitome of Christian doctrine of which Jesus certainly
never dreamed; nay, it is obvious from all accounts that, even in
the apostolic age, it was as yet quite unknown; and the still later
age which drew up the words by no means intended them as a baptismal
formula, but rather as a statement of the conditions of admission
into the community. In making the utterance of these words, instead
of the imposition of these conditions, the first act of admission into
the community of Christ, the Church has confounded words with things"
(Bible for Learners, vol. iii, pp. 472, 473).



461

What was his final command to the apostles?

"Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature"
(Mark xvi, 15).

This is utterly irreconcilable with Acts (xi, 1-18). Eight years
after the death of Jesus, Peter is condemned for preaching to the
Gentiles. "And the apostles and brethren that were in Judea heard that
the Gentiles had also received the word of God. And when Peter was come
to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision contended with him"
(1, 2). How does he meet the accusation and justify his conduct? By
reminding them that it was the express will of their Master? No; he
tells them that while in a trance at Joppa he had a vision instructing
him to carry the gospel to the Gentiles. "When they heard these things,
they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also
to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life" (18).



462

How long did Jesus remain on earth?

Luke: One day (xxiv).

John: At least ten days (xx, xxi).

Acts: He was "seen of them forty days" (i, 3).

The greatest discrepancy is between Luke and Acts, two books which
it is claimed were written by the same author.



463

Where did the ascension take place?

Mark: In Jerusalem (xvi, 14, com. Luke xxiv, 33).

Luke: At Bethany (xxiv, 50, 51).

Acts: At Mount Olivet (i, 9-12).



464

Describe the ascension.

Luke: "And it came to pass while he blessed them he was parted from
them and carried up into heaven" (xxiv, 51).

The ascension of Romulus doubtless suggested the story of the ascension
of Jesus.



465

What occurred at the ascension?

Acts: "While they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up,
behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, Ye
men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus,
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner
as ye have seen him go into heaven" (i, 10, 11).

It is remarkable that the Evangelists who find space to record the
sayings of lunatics and devils, have not room to record the words of
angels, or even note their presence.



466

For what purpose did Jesus ascend to heaven?

"I go to prepare a place for you" (John xiv, 2).

What was the need of this when the place had already been "prepared
... from the foundation of the world" (Matthew xxv, 34)?



467

Did Jesus ascend bodily into heaven?

Luke: He ascended to heaven in a body of flesh and blood (xxiv, 36-43,
50, 51).

Paul: "But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with
what body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened except it die; and that which thou sowest thou sowest not
that body that shall be" (1 Corinthians xv, 35-37).

"It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is
a natural body, and there is a spiritual body" (44).

"Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God" (50).

The whole theology of Paul is opposed to the bodily resurrection
and ascension of Jesus. The "Bible for Learners" says: "In speaking
of the resurrection, he [Paul] does not mean the reanimation of the
body of Jesus; and indeed he expressly excludes such a thought by
ascribing to the Christ a glorified and spiritual body not made of
flesh and blood. It is equally certain that he thinks of the Christ
as having appeared from heaven; and his ranking the appearance to
himself--unquestionably the product of his own fervid imagination--as
parallel with those which preceded it [his appearances to the
disciples], seems to indicate that they were all visions alike"
(Vol. iii, p. 467).



468

Do all the Evangelists record the ascension?

Matthew and John, both of whom are declared to have been apostles,
and the only Evangelists who are supposed to have witnessed the
ascension, know nothing of it. The last twelve verses of Mark, it is
admitted, are spurious; while the words, "carried up into heaven,"
of Luke do not appear in the Sinaitic version, the oldest version of
the New Testament extant. With this forged appendix to Mark and this
interpolated passage in Luke eliminated, the Four Gospels contain no
mention of the ascension.



469

Had any man ever ascended to heaven before Jesus?

Jesus: "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven" (John iii, 13).

Then that story about Elijah is a fiction, is it?

In regard to the resurrection and ascension Thomas Paine says:
"As to the account given of his resurrection and ascension, it was
the necessary counterpart of his birth. His historians having brought
him into the world in a supernatural manner, were obliged to take him
out again in the same manner, or the first part of the story must have
fallen to the ground. The wretched contrivance with which this latter
part is told exceeds every thing that went before it. The first part,
that of the miraculous conception, was not a thing that admitted of
publicity; and therefore the tellers of this part of the story had this
advantage, that though they might not be credited, they could not be
detected.... But the resurrection of a dead person from the grave,
and his ascension through the air, is a thing very different as to
the evidence it admits of, to the invisible conception of a child in
the womb. The resurrection and ascension, supposing them to have taken
place, admitted of public and ocular demonstration, like that of the
ascension of a balloon, or the sun at noon-day, to all Jerusalem at
least. A thing which everybody is required to believe, requires that
the proof and evidence of it should be equal to all, and universal;
and as the public visibility of this last related act was the only
evidence that could give sanction to the former part, the whole of it
falls to the ground, because that evidence never was given.... It is
in vain to attempt to palliate or disguise this matter. The story,
so far as relates to the supernatural part, has every mark of fraud
and imposition stamped upon the face of it. Who were the authors of
it is as impossible for us now to know, as it is for us to be assured
that the books in which the account is related were written by the
persons whose names they bear; the best surviving evidence we now have
respecting this affair is the Jews. They are regularly descended from
the people who lived in the times this resurrection and ascension
is said to have happened, and they say, it is not true. It has long
appeared to me a strange inconsistency to cite the Jews as a proof of
the truth of the story. It is just the same as if a man were to say,
I will prove the truth of what I have told you by producing the people
who say it is false" (Age of Reason, pp. 10, 11).

"The story of Jesus Christ appearing after he was dead is the story of
an apparition, such as timid imaginations can always create in vision,
and credulity believe" (Ibid, 161).

"Supernatural Religion" says: "The whole of the evidence for the
Resurrection reduces itself to an undefined belief on the part of
a few persons, in a notoriously superstitious age, that after Jesus
had died and been buried they had seen him alive. These visions, it is
admitted, occurred at a time of the most intense religious excitement,
and under circumstances of wholly exceptional mental agitation and
distress. The wildest alternations of fear, doubt, hope and indefinite
expectation, added their effects to oriental imaginations already
excited by indignation at the fate of their Master, and sorrow or
despair at such a dissipation of their Messianic dreams. There was
present every element of intellectual and moral disturbance. Now
must we seriously ask again whether this bare and wholly unjustified
belief can be accepted as satisfactory evidence for so astounding
a miracle as the Resurrection? Can the belief of such men, in such
an age, establish the reality of a phenomenon which is contradicted
by universal experience? We have no evidence as to what actually
occurred. We do not even know the facts upon which they based their
inferences. We only know that they thought they had seen Jesus and that
they, therefore, concluded that he had risen from the dead. It comes
to us as bare belief from the Age of Miracles, unsupported by facts,
uncorroborated by evidence, unaccompanied by proof of investigation,
and unprovided with material for examination. What is such belief
worth? We have no hesitation in saying that it is absolutely worth
nothing" (pp. 1048, 1049).

The Rev. Dr. Phillip Schaff, one of the most eminent evangelical
Christian scholars of this country, in his "History of the Christian
Church," makes this candid admission regarding the resurrection and
ascension of Christ:

"Truth compels us to admit that there are serious difficulties
in harmonizing the accounts of the Evangelists, and in forming a
consistent conception of Christ's resurrection body hovering as it
were between heaven and earth, and a supernatural state, of a body
clothed with flesh and blood and bearing the wound prints, and yet
so spiritual as to appear and disappear through closed doors and to
ascend visibly to heaven."







