CHAPTER XII.

SOURCES OF THE CHRIST MYTH--CONCLUSION.


In each of these divinities we find some element or lineament of
Christ. And all of them existed, either as myths or mortals, long
anterior to his time. Plato, the latest of them to appear, was born
in the fifth century B. C. These Pagan divinities and deified sages,
together with the religious systems and doctrines previously noticed,
were the sources from which Christ and Christianity were, for the
most part, derived.

The following religious elements and ideas, nearly all of which
Christians believe to have been divinely revealed, and to belong
exclusively to their religion, are of Pagan origin:


    Son of God,
    Messiah,
    Mediator,
    The Word,
    The Ideal Man,
    Annunciation,
    Immaculate conception,
    Divine incarnation,
    Genealogies showing royal descent,
    Virgin mother,
    Angelic visitants,
    Celestial music,
    Visit of shepherds,
    Visit of Magi,
    Star of Magi,
    Slaughter of innocents,
    Temptation,
    Transfiguration,
    Crucified Redeemer,
    Supernatural darkness,
    Resurrection,
    Ascension,
    Descent into Hell,
    Second advent,
    Unity of God,
    Trinity in Unity,
    Holy Ghost (Spirit),
    Devil,
    Angels,
    Immortality of the soul,
    Last judgment,
    Future rewards and punishments,
    Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory,
    Fatherhood of God,
    Brotherhood of man,
    Freedom of the will,
    Fall of man,
    Vicarious atonement,
    Kingdom of God,
    Binding of Satan,
    Miracles,
    Prophecies,
    Obsession,
    Exorcism,
    The priesthood,
    Pope and bishops,
    Monks and nuns,
    Worship of Virgin,
    Adoration of Virgin and Child,
    Worship of saints,
    Worship of relics,
    Image worship,
    Inspired Scriptures,
    The cross as a religious symbol,
    Crucifix,
    Rosary,
    Holy water,
    Lord's Day (Sunday),
    Christmas,
    Easter,
    Baptism,
    Eucharist,
    Washing of feet,
    Anointing,
    Confirmation,
    Masses for the dead,
    Fasting,
    Prayer,
    Auricular confession,
    Penance,
    Absolution,
    Celibacy,
    Poverty,
    Asceticism,
    Tithes,
    Community of goods,
    Golden Rule and other precepts.


The Old Testament consists largely of borrowed myths. Nearly everything
in Genesis, and much of the so-called history which follows, are but a
recital of Assyrian, Babylonian, Chaldean and other legends. Dr. Draper
says: "From such Assyrian sources, the legends of the creation of the
earth and heaven, the garden of Eden, the making of man from clay,
and of woman from one of his ribs, the temptation by the serpent,
the naming of animals, the cherubim and flaming sword, the Deluge and
the ark, the drying up of the waters by the wind, the building of the
Tower of Babel, and the confusion of tongues, were obtained by Ezra"
(Conflict, p. 223).

The ten antediluvian patriarchs, Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel,
Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah, whom Luke presents as the
first ten progenitors of Christ, are now known to have been a dynasty
of Babylonian kings. Abram, Isaac, Jacob, and Judah, whom both Matthew
and Luke declare to have been ancestors of Christ, and whom Matthew
places at the head of his genealogy, were not persons at all, but
merely tribes of people. In regard to this Rev. Dr. Oort, professor
of Oriental languages at Amsterdam, says: "They do not signify men,
so much as groups of nations or single tribes. Abram, for instance,
represents a great part of the Terachites; Lot, the Moabites and
Ammonites, whose ancestor he is called; Ishmael, certain tribes
of Arabia; Isaac, Israel and Edom together; Jacob, Israel alone;
while his twelve sons stand for the twelve tribes of Israel. * * *
Here and there the writers of the old legend themselves point out,
as it were, that the patriarchs whom they bring upon the scene as
men are personifications of tribes" (Bible for Learners, Vol. I,
pp. 100-102). Moses, the reputed founder of Judaism and archetype of
Christ, doubtless existed; but nearly all the Bible stories concerning
him are myths. David and Solomon, from whose house Christ is said
to have been descended, are historical characters; but the accounts
respecting the greatness of their kingdom and the splendor of their
reigns are fabulous.

Christ and Christianity are partly creations and partly
evolutions. While the elements composing them were mostly derived
from preexisting and contemporary beliefs, they were not formed as a
novelist creates a hero and a convention frames a constitution. Their
growth was gradual. Jesus, if he existed, was a Jew, and his religion,
with a few innovations, was Judaism. With his death, probably, his
apotheosis began. During the first century the transformation was slow;
but during the succeeding centuries rapid. The Judaic elements of his
religion were, in time, nearly all eliminated, and the Pagan elements,
one by one, were incorporated into the new faith.

Regarding the establishment of this religion Lecky says: "Christianity
had become the central intellectual power of the world, but it
triumphed not so much by superseding rival faiths as by absorbing and
transforming them. Old systems, old rites, old images were grafted
into the new belief, retaining much of their ancient character but
assuming new names and a new complexion" (Rationalism, Vol. I. p. 223).

Its origin is thus traced by Mrs. Besant: "From the later Jews comes
the Unity of God; from India and Egypt the Trinity in Unity; from
India and Egypt the crucified Redeemer; from India, Egypt, Greece, and
Rome, the virgin mother and the divine son; from Egypt its priests and
its ritual; from the Essenes and the Therapeuts its asceticism; from
Persia, India, and Egypt, its sacraments; from Persia and Babylonia
its angels and devils; from Alexandria the blending into one of many
lines of thought." (Freethinkers' Text Book, p. 392.)

Concerning this, Judge Strange, another English writer, says: "The
Jewish Scriptures and the traditionary teachings of their doctors,
the Essenes and Therapeuts, the Greek philosophers, the Neo-Platonism
of Alexandria and the Buddhism of the East, gave ample supplies
for the composition of the doctrinal portion of the new faith; the
divinely procreated personages of the Grecian and Roman pantheons,
the tales of the Egyptian Osiris, and of the Indian Rama, Krishna,
and Buddha, furnished the materials for the image of the new Savior
of mankind." (Portraiture and Mission of Jesus, p. 27.)

Dr. G. W. Brown, previously quoted, says: "The Eclectics formed
the nucleus into which were merged all the various religions of
the Orient. Mithra, of the Zoroastrians; Krishna and Buddha, of the
Brahmans; Osiris, of the Egyptians, and Bacchus, of the Greeks and
Romans, all disappeared and were lost in the new God Jesus, each of
the predecessors contributing to the conglomerate religion known as
Christian, Buddha and probably Bacchus contributing the most."

Dr. John W. Draper, recognized on both sides of the Atlantic as one
of the most erudite, one of the most philosophic, and one of the most
impartial of historians, in the following paragraphs tells the story
of the rise and triumph of this ever-changing faith:

"In a political sense, Christianity is the bequest of the Roman Empire
to the world."

"Not only as a token of the conquest she had made, but also as a
gratification to her pride, the conquering republic brought the gods
of the vanquished peoples to Rome. With disdainful toleration, she
permitted the worship of them all. That paramount authority exercised
by each divinity in his original seat disappeared at once in the
crowd of gods and goddesses among whom he had been brought. Already,
as we have seen, through geographical discoveries and philosophical
criticism, faith in the religion of the old days had been profoundly
shaken. It was, by this policy of Rome, brought to an end."

"In one of the Eastern provinces, Syria, some persons in very humble
life had associated themselves together for benevolent and religious
purposes. The doctrines they held were in harmony with that sentiment
of universal brotherhood arising from the coalescence of the conquered
kingdoms. They were doctrines inculcated by Jesus."

"From this germ was developed a new, and as the events proved,
all-powerful society--the Church; new, for nothing of the kind had
existed in antiquity; powerful, for the local churches, at first
isolated, soon began to confederate for their common interest. Through
this organization Christianity achieved all her political triumphs."

"After the abdication of Diocletian (A. D., 305), Constantine, one of
the competitors for the purple, perceiving the advantages that would
accrue to him from such a policy, put himself forth as the head of
the Christian party. This gave him, in every part of the empire,
men and women ready to encounter fire and sword in his behalf; it
gave him unwavering adherents in every legion of the armies. In
a decisive battle, near the Milvian bridge, victory crowned his
schemes. The death of Maximian, and subsequently that of Licinius,
removed all obstacles. He ascended the throne of the Caesars--the
first Christian emperor."

"Place, profit, power--these were in view of whoever now joined the
conquering sect. Crowds of worldly persons, who cared nothing about
its religious ideas, became its warmest supporters. Pagans at heart,
their influence was soon manifested in the paganization of Christianity
that forthwith ensued."

"As years passed on, the faith described by Tertullian was transmuted
into one more fashionable and more debased. It was incorporated with
the old Greek mythology. Olympus was restored, but the divinities
passed under other names. The more powerful provinces insisted on
the adoption of their time-honored conceptions. Views of the Trinity,
in accordance with Egyptian traditions, were established."

"Heathen rites were adopted, a pompous and splendid ritual, gorgeous
robes, mitres, tiaras, wax-tapers, processional services, lustrations,
gold and silver vases, were introduced. The Roman lituns, the chief
ensign of the augurs, became the crozier. Churches were built over
the tombs of martyrs, and consecrated with rites borrowed from the
ancient laws of the Roman pontiffs. Festivals and commemorations
of martyrs multiplied with the numberless fictitious discoveries of
their remains. Fasting became the grand means of repelling the devil
and appeasing God; celibacy the greatest of the virtues. Pilgrimages
were made to Palestine and the tombs of the martyrs. Quantities of
dust and earth were brought from the Holy Land and sold at enormous
prices, as antidotes against devils. The virtues of consecrated water
were upheld. Images and relics were introduced into the churches,
and worshiped after the fashion of the heathen gods.... The apotheosis
of the old Roman times was replaced by canonization; tutelary saints
succeeded to local mythological divinities."

"As centuries passed, the paganization became more and more complete."

"The maxim holds good in the social as well as the mechanical world,
that, when two bodies strike, the form of both is changed. Paganism
was modified by Christianity; Christianity by Paganism" (Conflict,
pp. 34-52).

While affirming the divine origin of Christianity, the church
historian Mosheim admits its early paganization. He says: "The rites
and institutions, by which the Greeks, Romans, and other nations had
formerly testified their religious veneration for fictitious deities,
were now adopted, with some slight alterations, by Christian bishops,
and employed in the service of the true God.... Hence it happened that
in these times the religion of the Greeks and Romans differed very
little in its external appearance from that of the Christians. They
had both a most pompous and splendid ritual. Gorgeous robes, mitres,
tiaras, wax-tapers, crosiers, processions, lustrations, images,
gold and silver vases, and many such circumstances of pageantry, were
equally to be seen in the heathen temples and the Christian churches"
(Ecclesiastical History, p. 105).

The Rev. Dr. R. Heber Newton, in an article which appeared in the
North American Review, says: "There is, in fact, as we now see,
nothing in the externals of the Christian church which is not a
survival from the churches of paganism.... The sacramental use of
water and bread and wine, the very sign of the cross--all are ancient
human institutions, rites and symbols. Scratch a Christian and you come
upon a Pagan. Christianity is a rebaptized paganism." "Christendom,"
says Dr. Lyman Abbott, "is only an imperfectly Christianized paganism."

The creeds of old are dead or dying, and the celestial kings, who
seemed so real to their worshipers, are mostly crownless phantoms
now. Buddha, Laou-tsze, and Confucius, the wise men of the East,
command the reverence of nearly half the world, and the Persian
prophet has a few followers; but from these faiths the supernatural
is vanishing. Millions yet believe that Krishna, the Christ of India,
is the son of God; but this faith, too, is waning. The intellectual
offspring of Plato's brilliant brain survive, but all that remains
of his divine father is a mutilated effigy. The genial Sun still
warms and lights the earth, but centuries have flown since Mithra,
his beloved, received the adoration of mankind. The fire still glows
upon the hearth, but the great Titan who brought it down from Heaven
lives only in a poet's dream. The crimson nectar of the vine moves men
to mirth and madness now as when the swan of Teos sang its praise,
but Bacchus and the ancient mysteries are dead. Above storm-wrapped
Olympus, as of old, is heard the thunder's awful peal, but it is not
the voice of Zeus. The voice of this, the mightiest of all the gods,
is hushed forever. The populous and ever-growing empire of the dead
still flourishes, but in its solemn court Osiris no longer sits as
judge. The mother, as of yore, presses to her loving heart her dimpled
babe and fondly gazes into its azure eyes to woo its artless smile;
but Egypt's star-crowned virgin and her royal child, who once received
the homage of a world, are now but mythic dust. Manly beauty thrills
our daughters' hearts with love's strange ecstasy, and the feigned
suffering of the dying hero on the mimic stage moistens their eyes
with tears; but Adonis sleeps in his Phoenician tomb, his slumbers
undisturbed by woman's sobs. The purple flower, substance of his
dear self, which Venus carried in her bosom, withered long ago. When,
at eve, the summer shower bathes with its cooling drops the verdure
of the fields, across the sun-kissed cloud which veils the Orient
sky may still be seen the gorgeous bridge of Bifrost; but over its
majestic arch the dauntless Odin rides no more.


        "The fair humanities of old religions,
        The power, the beauty, and the majesty,
        That had their haunts in dale, or piny mountain,
        Or forest by slow stream, or pebbly spring,
        Or chasms and watery depths; all these have vanished;
        They live no longer in the faith of reason."

                                                    --Schiller.


What has been the fate of the Pagan gods will be the fate of the
Christian deity. Christianity, which supplanted the ancient faiths,
will, in turn, be supplanted by other religions. On two continents
already the cross has gone down before the crescent. The belief
in Christ as a divine being is passing away. The creeds, as of old,
affirm his divinity, but in the minds of his more enlightened followers
the divine elements are disappearing. What was formerly believed to be
supernatural is now known to be natural. What were once living verities
are now dead formalities. Slowly and painfully, but surely and clearly,
men are becoming convinced that there are no divine beings and no
supernatural religions--that all the gods, including Christ, are myths,
and all the religions, including Christianity, human productions. In
the words of Jules Soury, "Time, which condenses nebulae, lights up
suns, brings life and thought upon planets theretofore steeped in
death, and gives back ephemeral worlds to dissolution and the fertile
chaos of the everlasting universe--time knows nought of gods nor of
the dim and fallacious hopes of ignorant mortals."

With these sublime pictures--a retrospect and a prophecy--from the
gallery of the great master, I close this long-drawn subject:

"When India is supreme, Brahma sits upon the world's throne. When
the sceptre passes to Egypt, Isis and Osiris receive the homage
of mankind. Greece, with her fierce valor, sweeps to empire, and
Zeus puts on the purple of authority. The earth trembles with the
tread of Rome's intrepid sons, and Jove grasps with mailed hand the
thunderbolts of Heaven. Rome falls, and Christians, from her territory,
with the red sword of war, carve out the ruling nations of the world,
and now Christ sits upon the old throne. Who will be his successor?"

"I look again. The popes and priests are gone. The altars and the
thrones have mingled with the dust. The aristocracy of land and
cloud have perished from the earth and air. The gods are dead. A new
religion sheds its glory on mankind.... And as I look Life lengthens,
Joy deepens, Love intensifies, Fear dies--Liberty at last is God,
and Heaven is here."







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Christ, by John Eleazer Remsburg

