CHAPTER VIII.

CHARACTER AND TEACHINGS.


470

Who was Jesus Christ?

Mark: He was the son of man.

Matthew and Luke: He was the Son of God.

John: He was God himself.

In the Four Gospels are presented three entirely different
conceptions of the Christ. In Mark he is represented as the son of
human parents--the Messiah--but simply a man. In Matthew and Luke we
have the story of the miraculous conception--he is represented as the
Son of God. In John he is declared to be God himself. "In the beginning
was the Word [Christ], and the Word was with God, and the Word was God"
(i, 1).

According to Mark Christ is a man; according to Matthew and Luke,
a demi-god; according to John, a God.

Voltaire thus harmonizes these discordant conceptions: "The son of
God is the same as the son of man; the son of man is the same as the
son of God. God, the father, is the same as Christ, the son; Christ,
the son, is the same as God, the father. This language may appear
confused to unbelievers, but Christians will readily understand it."

This is quite as intelligible as the Christian Confession of Faith,
Article II of which reads as follows: "The Son, which is the Word
of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the Father, the very and
eternal God, and of one substance with the Father, took man's nature
in the womb of the blessed Virgin, of her substance: so that two
whole and perfect Natures, that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood,
were joined together in one Person, never to be divided, whereof is
one Christ, very God, and very Man."

"The theological Christ is the impossible union of the human and
divine--man with the attributes of God, and God with the limitations
and weaknesses of man."--Ingersoll.



471

Is God a visible Being?

Jacob: "I have seen God face to face" (Genesis xxxii, 30).

John: "No man hath seen God at any time" (i, 18).



472

How many Gods are there?

Mark: One.

John: Three.

Mark teaches the doctrine of Unitarianism (Monotheism), or one
God. John teaches, not the doctrine of Unitarianism or one God,
nor yet the doctrine of Trinitarianism or three Gods in one, but the
doctrine of Tritheism or three distinct Gods, separate and independent
of each other.



473

Is the doctrine of the Trinity taught in the New Testament?

"For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one" (1 John v, 7).

This is the only passage in the New Testament which clearly teaches
the doctrine of the Trinity, and this passage is admitted by all
Christian scholars to be an interpolation.

When the modern version of the New Testament was first published
by Erasmus it was criticised because it contained no text teaching
the doctrine of the Trinity. Erasmus promised his critics that if
a manuscript could be found containing such a text he would insert
it. The manuscript was "found," and the text quoted appeared in a later
edition. Concerning this interpolation Sir Isaac Newton, in a letter
to a friend, which was afterward published by Bishop Horsley, says:
"When the adversaries of Erasmus had got the Trinity into his edition,
they threw by their manuscript as an old almanac out of date."

Alluding to the doctrine of the Trinity, Thomas Jefferson says: "It is
too late in the day for men of sincerity to pretend they believe in the
Platonic mysticism that three are one and one is three, and yet, that
the one is not three, and the three not one.... But this constitutes
the craft, the power, and profits of the priests. Sweep away their
gossamer fabrics of fictitious religion, and they would catch no more
flies" (Jefferson's Works, vol. iv, p. 205, Randolph's ed.).

Again Jefferson says: "The hocus-pocus phantasm of a God, like another
Cerberus, with one body and three heads, had its birth and growth in
the blood of thousands and thousands of martyrs" (Ibid, p. 360).



474

Was Christ the only begotten Son of God?

John: He was "the only begotten Son of God" (iii, 18).

"There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that,
when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare
children unto them" (Genesis vi, 4).



475

By what agency and when was the Christ begotten?

Matthew and Luke: By the Holy Ghost at the time of his conception by
the Virgin Mary.

According to Justin the Holy Ghost begat the Christ, not at the
conception of Jesus, as claimed by these Evangelists, but at his
baptism. At his baptism the voice from heaven said: "Thou art my son;
this day have I begotten thee" (Dialogues 88).

The correctness of Justin's statement is corroborated by Hebrews:
"Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he
that said unto him, Thou art my Son, today have I begotten thee"
(v, 5). Christ's priesthood began at his baptism.



476

Of what gender is the Holy Ghost?

Matthew (Greek Ver.): Masculine gender.

Matthew (Hebrew Ver.): Feminine gender.

The Holy Ghost (Spirit), as was noted in a previous chapter, was
with the Greeks of masculine gender, with the Jews of feminine
gender. The Gospel According to the Hebrews, which, it is claimed,
was the original Gospel of Matthew, represented Jesus as saying,
"Just now my mother, the Holy Ghost, laid hold on me."

If the Holy Ghost was the mother of Jesus did he have two
mothers? According to our Greek version of Matthew, as well as that
of Luke, he had one mother and three reputed fathers--God, the Holy
Ghost, and Joseph.



477

Christ, it is affirmed, was born of Mary. If so, what relation did
she bear to him?

1. If he was born of Mary she was his mother.

2. She "being with child by the Holy Ghost," and Father, Son and Holy
Ghost being one, she bore to him the relation of wife.

3. God being the Father of all mankind, and God and Christ being one,
she was his daughter.

4. She being the daughter of God, and Christ being the Son of God,
she was therefore his sister.

Consequently Mary bore to him the relation of mother, wife, daughter
and sister.



478

The greater portion of the Christian church affirms the perpetual
virginity of Mary. It is claimed that Jesus was her only child and
that the conception and birth of him did not destroy her virginity. Is
this confirmed by the Evangelists?

It is not. Matthew and Mark say: "Is not his mother called Mary? and
his brethren, James and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? and his sisters,
are they not all with us?" (Matt. xiii, 55, 56; Mark vi, 3). Luke
(viii, 19) and John (vii, 3) both declare that he had brothers.

To maintain this dogma it is affirmed that by "brethren and sisters"
is meant cousins. Dr. Farrar, who in regard to this as in regard
to most disputed points, assumes a non-committal or conciliatory
attitude, concedes that "the natural supposition that, after the
miraculous conception of our Lord, Joseph and Mary lived together in
the married state, and that James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon,
with daughters, whose names are not recorded, were subsequently born
to them," is "in accordance certainly with the prima facie evidence
of the Gospels" (Life of Christ, p. 51).



479

Who did Mary say was the father of Jesus?

Luke: When he remained behind in Jerusalem, and they found him in the
temple, "his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with
us? behold, thy father [Joseph] and I have sought thee sorrowing"
(ii, 48).

To believe that a Jewish virgin was overshadowed by a spirit, and
miraculously conceived and bore a child, requires more convincing
proof than the dream of a credulous lover. We ought at least to have
the testimony of the mother. But we have it not. She testifies that
Joseph is his father.



480

What did Jesus' neighbors say regarding his paternity?

Matthew: They said, "Is not this the carpenter's [Joseph's]
son?" (xiii, 55.)

Luke: "They said, Is not this Joseph's son?" (iv, 22.)

John: "They said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph?" (vi, 42.)

The Rev. Dr. Crapsey, of the Episcopal church, in his work on "Religion
and Politics" (p. 289), makes this significant admission regarding
the divine origin of Jesus: "The fact of his miraculous birth was
unknown to himself, unknown to his mother, and unknown to the whole
Christian community of the first generations."

Thomas Jefferson, in a letter to John Adams, wrote: "The day will come
when the mystical generation of Jesus, by the Supreme Being as his
father, in the womb of a virgin, will be classed with the fable of
the generation of Minerva in the brain of Jupiter" (Jefferson Works,
vol. iv, p. 365, Randolph's ed.).



481

Who did Peter declare him to be?

"Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God" (Acts ii, 22).

Who did Paul declare him to be?

"There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus" (1 Timothy ii, 5).

The Christ of Peter and Paul was not a God, but a man--a man upon
whom had been bestowed divine gifts--but yet a man.



482

What testimony is ascribed to Paul?

"Great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh"
(1 Timothy iii, 16).

This is a gross perversion of Scripture for the purpose of making
Paul a witness to Christ's divinity. Regarding this text and the
Trinitarian text inserted in 1 John, Sir Isaac Newton, in his letter
previously quoted from, says:

"What the Latins have done in this text (1 John v, 7) the Greeks
have done to Paul (1 Tim. iii, 16). They now read, 'Great is the
mystery of godliness; God manifest in the flesh'; whereas all the
churches for the first four or five hundred years, and the authors of
all the ancient versions, Jerome as well as the rest, read, 'Great
is the mystery of godliness, which was manifest in the flesh.' Our
English version makes it yet a little stronger. It reads, 'Great is
the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh.'"

In conclusion Newton says: "If the ancient churches, in debating and
deciding the greatest mysteries of religion, knew nothing of these
two texts, I understand not why we should be so fond of them now the
debate is over."



483

Christ is declared by the Christian creed to be "the very and eternal
God." God, it is claimed, is omnipotent. Was Christ omnipotent?

"The Son can do nothing of himself" (John v, 19).

"I can of mine own self do nothing" (30).



484

God is omniscient. Was Christ omniscient?

Referring to his second advent he says: "Of that day and hour knoweth
no man, ... neither the Son" (Mark xiii, 32).



485

God is omnipresent. Was Christ omnipresent?

"I am glad for your sakes that I was not there" (John xi, 15).

"Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye
cannot come" (vii, 36).

"And now I am no more in the world" (xvii, 11).



486

God is self-existent. Was Christ self-existent?

"I live by the Father" (John vi, 57).

"He liveth by the power of God" (2 Corinthians xiii, 4).



487

Did Christ have a preexistence?

"Before Abraham was, I am" (John viii, 58).

According to the Synoptics his existence began with his life on earth.



488

Was he infinite in wisdom?

Luke: He "increased in wisdom" (ii, 52).

If he increased in wisdom his knowledge was limited, and limitation
of knowledge is not an attribute of an infinite God.



489

Was he infinite in goodness?

"Why callest thou me good? There is none good but one, that is, God"
(Mark x, 18).



490

Was he infinite in mercy?

"He that believeth not shall be damned" (Mark xvi, 16).

"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire" (Matthew xxv, 41).

"Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works
were done, because they repented not: Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe
unto thee, Bethsaida!... It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and
Sidon at the day of Judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum,
which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell"
(Matthew xi, 20-23).



491

His resurrection is adduced as the chief argument in proof of his
divinity. Did he raise himself from the dead?

Peter: He did not. God raised him. "Jesus Christ of Nazareth, ... whom
God raised from the dead" (Acts iv, 10).

If Christ, then, did not rise from the dead by his own volition,
was his resurrection any proof of his divinity? No more than the
resurrection of Lazarus was proof of Lazarus's divinity.



492

His miraculous conception is adduced as another proof of his
divinity. Is this the only miraculous conception claimed in the Bible?

It is not. Isaac, Samson, Samuel and John the Baptist are all claimed
to have been miraculously conceived (Genesis xviii, 10, 11; xxi, 1-3;
Judges xiii, 2, 3, 24; 1 Samuel i, 9-11, 20; Luke i, 7-13).



493

His miracles, it is claimed, attest his divinity. Were he and his
disciples the only ones who performed miracles?

These alleged miracles were performed before his time--the Old
Testament abounds with them--and they have been performed since his
time. They were performed by others in his own time--were performed by
those who ignored and rejected him--were performed by the disciples
of Satan himself (Matthew vii, 22; xii, 27; Mark ix, 38; xiii, 22;
Luke ix, 49).

"Supernatural Religion" says: "The supposed miraculous evidence for the
divine revelation, moreover, is without any special divine character,
being avowedly common also to Satanic agency, but it is not original
either in conception or details. Similar miracles to those which are
supposed to attest it are reported long antecedent to the promulgation
of Christianity, and continued to be performed for centuries after
it. A stream of miraculous pretension, in fact, has flowed through
all human history, deep and broad as it has passed through the
darker ages, but dwindling down to a thread as it has entered days
of enlightenment. The evidence was too hackneyed and commonplace to
make any impression upon those before whom the Christian miracles are
said to have been performed, and it altogether failed to convince the
people to whom the revelation was primarily addressed. The selection
of such evidence, for such a purpose, is much more characteristic of
human weakness than of divine power" (p. 699).

Archbishop Trench says: "Side by side with the miracles which
serve for the furthering of the kingdom of God runs another line of
wonders, the counter-workings of him who is ever the ape of the Most
High.... This fact that the kingdom of lies has its wonders no less
than the kingdom of truth, is itself sufficient evidence that miracles
cannot be appealed to absolutely and finally, in proof of the doctrine
which the worker of them proclaims" (Miracles of Our Lord, p. 22).

The miracles of Christ, like the miracles of Satan, existed only in
the minds of his credulous and deluded followers.


        "Ye shall have miracles, aye, sound ones too,
        Seen, heard, attested, everything but true."

                                            --Thomas Moore.



494

Prophecy is appealed to in support of his divinity. It is claimed
that the writers of the Old Testament predicted his coming. Do such
predictions exist?

In his work on "The Bible," as well as in a previous chapter of this
work, the writer has shown that there is not a single passage in
the Old Testament that, in the original text, refers in the remotest
degree to Jesus Christ.

Greg shows that much of Old Testament history, like Deuteronomy, is
presented in the form of anticipatory narrative. To the Christian
argument that the Messianic predictions, at least, were written
long anterior to the time of Christ, he replies: "This is true,
and the argument would have all the force which is attributed to it,
were the objectors able to lay their fingers on a single Old Testament
prediction clearly referring to Jesus Christ, intended by the utterers
of it to relate to him, prefiguring his character and career, and
manifestly fulfilled in his appearance on earth. This they cannot
do. Most of the passages usually adduced as complying with these
conditions, referred, and were clearly intended to refer, to eminent
individuals in Israelitish history; many are not prophecies at all;
the Messiah, the anointed deliverer, expected by the Jews, hoped
for and called for by their poets and prophets, was of a character
so different, and a career so opposite, to those of the meek, lowly,
long-suffering Jesus, that the passages describing the one never could
have been applied to the other, without a perversion of ingenuity,
and a disloyal treatment of their obvious signification, which, if
employed in any other field than that of theology, would have met with
the prompt discredit and derision they deserve" (Creed of Christendom,
pp. 135, 136).



495

His own prescience is cited in proof of his divinity. The destruction
of the temple by the Romans, it is claimed, was a wonderful instance
of the fulfillment of prophecy. But did his so-called prophecy have
reference to this event?

No one can read this prophecy (Matthew xxiv, 1-3) and then honestly
contend that it did. He clearly refers to his second coming and the
end of the world when the temple, in common with all sublunary things,
shall be destroyed. In the verse immediately following this prediction,
his disciples say: "Tell us, when shall these things be? and what
shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?"

But even if this so-called prophecy had referred to this event it
is rendered nugatory by the fact that the book containing it was not
composed until a hundred years after the destruction of the temple.



496

When was Christ's second coming and the end of terrestrial things to
take place?

"There be some standing here that shall not taste of death till they
see the Son of man coming in his kingdom" (Matthew xvi, 28).

"This generation shall not pass away, till all be fulfilled" (Luke
xxi, 32).

Seventy-five generations have passed, and still the world rolls on,
unmoved by Christ's and Mother Shipton's prophecies.



497

Did the Apostles believe that the second coming of Christ and the
end of the world were at hand?

Peter: "The end of all things is at hand" (1 Peter iv, 7).

James: "The coming of the Lord draweth nigh" (James v, 8).

John: "Ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there
many antichrists: whereby we know that it is the last time" (1 John
ii, 18).

Paul: "For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the
dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive and remain
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord
in the air" (1 Thessalonians iv, 16, 17).

Renan, ever ready to palliate or overlook the errors of his hero,
frankly admits that the predictions concerning his second advent and
the end of the world were a dismal failure. "It is evident, indeed," he
says, "that such a doctrine, taken by itself in a literal manner, had
no future. The world, in continuing to exist, caused it to crumble. One
generation of man at the most was the limit of its endurance. The
faith of the first Christian generation is intelligible, but the faith
of the second generation is no longer so. After the death of John,
or of the last survivor, whoever he might be, of the group which
had seen the master, the word of Jesus was convicted of falsehood"
(Life of Jesus, pp. 203, 204).



498

To what extent was the gospel to be preached before his second coming?

"Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of
man be come" (Matthew x, 23).

"The gospel must first be published among all nations" (Mark xiii, 10).



499

Did Jesus claim to be the Christ or Messiah from the first?

John: He did. Early in his ministry "The woman [of Samaria] saith
unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when
he is come, he will tell us all things. Jesus saith unto her, I that
speak unto thee am he" (iv, 25, 26).

Synoptics: He did not announce his Messiahship until late in his
ministry.



500

Who where the first to recognize his divinity?

Synoptics: Devils and unclean spirits (Matthew viii, 28, 29; Mark iii,
11, 12; Luke iv, 41).



501

What is said of Jesus in Hebrews?

"Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels" (ii, 9).

"Being made so much better than the angels" (i, 4).



502

What did he say respecting his identity with God?

"My Father and I are one" (John x, 30).

"My Father is greater than I" (xiv, 28).



503

How did he attempt to establish his claims?

"It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is
true. I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent
me beareth witness of me" (John viii, 17, 18).

But if "I and my Father are one," how does that fulfill the law?



504

What did he say regarding the truthfulness of his testimony concerning
himself?

"Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true" (John viii,
14).

"If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true" (v. 31).



505

Did Jesus' neighbors believe in his divinity?

Matthew: "When he was come into his own country," and to his own home,
"He did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief" (xiii,
54, 58).



506

What opinion did his friends entertain of him?

Mark: "And when his friends heard of it [his work], they went out to
lay hold on him; for they said, He is beside himself" (iii, 21).



507

Did even his brothers believe in him?

John: "Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand. His brethren
therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judea, that thy
disciples also may see the works that thou doest. For there is no
man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be
known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world. For
neither did his brethren believe in him" (vii, 2-5).

These three passages are fatal to the claim of Christ's divinity. If
he was unable to convince his neighbors, his friends, or even his
own family of his divinity he was not divine. Much less was he the
"very God," as claimed.

According to the Christian scheme, man by his disobedience fell--was
lost. God desired to save him. Christ--God manifest in the flesh--came
on earth for this purpose. What was required of man to secure
salvation? Simply to believe that Jesus was the Christ. In order for
him to believe this what was necessary? That Jesus should convince him
that he was divine. If he was all-powerful he could have done this; if
he was all-just he would have done this. Did he do this? His own race
rejected him. Disbelief in Christ's divinity disproves his divinity.



508

The writings of the New Testament are adduced as the evidences of
Christ's divinity and the divine character of Christianity. Do the
writers of the New Testament claim to be inspired?

With the possible exception of the author of Revelation, they do
not. Paul says, "All scripture is given by inspiration of God." But
the "scripture" of Paul was the scripture of the Old Testament. His
words have no reference whatever to the writings of the New which
did not exist in his time.

If the New Testament is not inspired and infallible, what follows?

"If the New Testament is defective the church itself is in error,
and must be given up as a deception."--Dr. Tischendorf.

"It is not a word too much to say that the New Testament abounds with
errors."--Dean Alford.



509

What is said of the Apocryphal Gospels which appeared in the early
ages of the church?

"Several histories of his [Christ's] life and doctrines, full of
pious frauds and fabulous wonders, were composed by persons whose
intentions perhaps were not bad, but whose writings discovered the
greatest superstition and ignorance. Nor was this all; productions
appeared which were imposed upon the world by fraudulent men, as the
writings of the holy Apostles."--Mosheim.

Is the above less true of the books we are reviewing? Are not these
writings "full of pious frauds and fabulous wonders"? Do not these
writings display "the greatest superstition and ignorance"? Have
not these writings been "imposed upon the world by fraudulent men,
as the writings of the holy (?) Apostles"?

If some of these apocryphal Gospels had been accepted as canonical,
and the canonical Gospels had been rejected as apocryphal, these
canonical Gospels would appear as untruthful and foolish to Christians
as the apocryphal Gospels do.



510

Let us examine the religious teachings ascribed to Christ. For what
purpose was his blood shed?

"This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many"
(Mark xiv, 24).

"This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you"
(Luke xxii, 20).

"This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many FOR
THE REMISSION OF SINS" (Matthew xxvi, 28).

The above is one of the most significant discrepancies in the
Bible. The Atonement is the chief doctrine connected with Christ
and orthodox Christianity. The text quoted from Matthew is the only
text in the Four Gospels which clearly teaches this doctrine. Two
other texts (Matthew xx, 28; John i, 29) are adduced in support of
it, but do not clearly teach it. Now Matthew has falsely ascribed
to Jesus the revelation of the Atonement, or Mark and Luke have
either ignorantly or intentionally omitted this greatest of Christian
doctrines. They contain no mention of the Atonement as understood by
orthodox Christians.



511

For whom did he say his blood was shed?

"This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many
[interpreted by the church to mean all mankind]" (Mark xiv, 24).

"This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you
[addressed to his disciples alone]" (Luke xxii, 20).



512

Was his blood really shed?

The crucifixion was not a bloody death, and aside from the
self-confuted story of John about blood and water flowing from his
corpse, the Evangelists do not state that a drop of blood was shed.



513

Christ, it is affirmed, was both God and man. Was it the human,
or the divine part of him that suffered death?

If only the human, this sacrifice was not an exceptional one, for
thousands have died for their fellow men. If the divine part was
sacrificed does God cease to exist?



514

His death is called an infinite sacrifice. If only the man died can
this be true?

The offering of a finite being, it must be admitted, would not
constitute an infinite sacrifice.



515

If the God was crucified does he suffer endless pain?

If not, then his suffering was not infinite, and the sacrifice in
this case was not an infinite one.



516

If God died, but subsequently rose from the dead, was there not an
interregnum when the universe was without a ruler?

If so, then it must be conceded that the existence of the universe
is not dependent upon the existence of God.



517

Are all mankind to be saved by Christ?

"And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to me"
(John xii, 32).

"Many be called but few chosen" (Matthew xx, 16).



518

What does Paul affirm concerning the Atonement?

"Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures" (1 Corinthians
xv, 3).

By "scriptures" Paul means the Old Testament, and according to the
scriptures of the Old Testament, "Every man shall be put to death
for his own sins" (Deuteronomy xxiv, 16).

Like nearly all the doctrines ascribed to Christ, the atonement is
in the highest degree unjust and absurd. Referring to this doctrine,
Lord Byron says: "The basis of your religion is injustice. The Son of
God, the pure, the immaculate, the innocent, is sacrificed for the
guilty. This proves his heroism, but no more does away with man's
sin than a schoolboy's volunteering to be flogged for another would
exculpate a dunce from negligence."

Greg justly charges Christians with "holding the strangely
inconsistent doctrine that God is so just that he could not let sin
go unpunished, yet so unjust that he could punish it in the person
of the innocent." "It is for orthodox dialectics," he says, "to
explain how Divine Justice can be impugned by pardoning the guilty,
and yet vindicated by punishing the innocent!" (Creed of Christendom,
pp. 338, 339.)



519

It is claimed that the sacrifice of Jesus was necessary for our
salvation. Through whom was this sacrifice secured?

All: Judas Iscariot procured it, and Pilate and the Jews offered it.

Are not Christians, then, in condemning these men, ungrateful to their
greatest benefactors? A man is dangerously ill. The druggist provides a
remedy, the physician administers it and saves his life. When restored
does he show his gratitude by praising the drug and damning the doctor?



520

In permitting the crucifixion of Jesus, who committed the greater sin,
Pilate or God?

John: "Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above: therefore he [God] that delivered
me unto thee hath the greater sin" (xix, 11).

Hon. Allan L. McDermott, in his memorable speech in Congress, in
1906, protesting against the persecution of Jews by Christians, said:
"If an omnipotent God orders anything done, the human instruments
selected to carry out his orders cannot be charged with the acts
commanded. The doctrine of repondeat superior applies. If what
happened could have been prevented by the Romans or by the Jews,
then the New Testament is worthless. Let us assume that the Jews
crucified Christ. Could they have done otherwise? Were they greater
than God? According to the Bible, the crucifixion was arranged for by
the Father. Why blame the Jews or the Romans or any other mortals? They
did not know what they were doing. The Roman soldiers did not believe
that they were crucifying the son of God; they did not know they were
crucifying God himself. Why blame the instruments? Why persecute the
descendants? According to the Synoptic Gospels and according to John,
the arrangements for the crucifixion--every detail--were made by
Almighty God, and were known to Christ."



521

What was the character of his death?

Homicide. "Jesus of Nazareth, a man ... ye have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain" (Acts ii, 22, 23).

Regicide. "The Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father
David" (Luke i, 32). "This is the King of the Jews" (xxiii, 38). "There
they crucified him" (33).

Deicide. "The Word [Christ] was God" (John i, 1). "I and my Father
are one" (x, 30). "They crucified him" (xix, 18).

Suicide. "I [Christ] lay down my life, that I might take it again. No
man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself" (John x, 17, 18).



522

What did Jesus teach respecting the resurrection of the dead and the
doctrine of immortality?

"For the hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth" (John v, 28, 29).

"Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life"
(39).

"As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away, so he that goeth down
to the grave shall come up no more."--Job (vii, 9).

"His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day
his thoughts perish."--Psalms (cxlvi, 4).

"For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts.... As
one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath, so that
man hath no preeminence over a beast."--Ecclesiastes (iii, 19).



523

His resurrection is accepted by Christians as a proof and type of man's
resurrection and immortality. What was the nature of his resurrection?

According to all of the Evangelists it was merely a reanimation of
his undecayed body. Other bodies supposedly dead have been revived,
but neither these resuscitations nor the supposed reanimation of Jesus'
corpse affords proof that bodies which ages ago crumbled into dust and
whose particles subsequently entered into the composition of myriads
of other bodies will be reunited into the original beings. And as
Jesus almost immediately disappeared after his alleged resurrection
and has never since been seen this resurrection did not evince his
own immortality, much less that of mankind in general.



524

Did Christ descend into hell?

Peter: He did (Acts ii, 31; 1 Peter iii, 19).

Peter states that "his soul was not left in hell," which necessitates
the assumption of his having gone there. He also declares that after
his death he "went and preached unto the spirits in prison [hell]."

The Confession of Faith (Art. III) says: "As Christ died for us, and
was buried; so also is it to be believed that he went down into hell."

For what purpose did Christ descend into hell and preach to its
inhabitants? If it was to redeem them his mission was fruitless;
if it was not to redeem them his mission was useless.

Early Christian writers almost uniformly spelled the name of Christ,
not "Christos" (the Anointed), but "Chrestos." Chrestos was a Pagan
name given to the judge of Hades in the lower world.



525

What is taught regarding justification by faith and justification
by works?

Paul: "A man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ, ... for by the works of the law shall no flesh
be justified" (Galatians ii, 16). "If righteousness come by the law
then Christ is dead in vain" (21). "To him that worketh not, but
believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted
for righteousness" (Romans iv, 5). "Therefore, we conclude that a
man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law" (iii, 28).

James: "But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is
dead?" (ii, 20). "Ye see, then, how that by works a man is justified,
and not by faith only" (24).

The church accepts the teachings of Paul and condemns or ignores
the teachings of James. Martin Luther, in his "Table Talk," thus
defines the position of the Protestant church: "He that says the
gospel requires works for salvation, I say flat and plain he is a
liar." "Every doer of the law and every moral worker is accursed,
for he walketh in the presumption of his own righteousness." "If men
only believe enough in Christ they can commit adultery and murder
a thousand times a day without periling their salvation." Luther
rejected and denounced the book of James because it teaches the
efficacy of good works.

The English "Confession of Faith" affirms the following: "That we
are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very
full of comfort" (Art. XI). "Works done before the grace of Christ,
and the inspiration of the Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch
as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ.... Yea rather, for that
they are not done as God hath willed and commanded them to be done,
we doubt not but they have the nature of sin" (Art. XIII).


          "Morality! thou deadly bane,
        Thy tens o' thousands thou hast slain!
        Vain is his hope, whose stay and trust is
        In moral mercy, truth and justice!

          "No--stretch a point to catch a plack;
        Abuse a brother to his back;

        Be to the poor like onie whunstane,
        And haud their noses to the grunstane;
        Ply ev'ry art o' legal thieving:
        No matter, stick to sound believing.

          "Learn three-mile prayers, and half-mile graces,
        Wi weel-spread loaves, and lang wry faces,
        Grunt up a solemn, lengthen'd groan,
        And damn a' parties but your own:
        I'll warrant, then, ye're nae deceiver,
        A steady, sturdy, staunch believer."

                                                --Robert Burns.



526

What does Christ teach regarding salvation?

"Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die" (John xi, 26).

"He that believeth on him is not condemned; but he that believeth
not is condemned already" (iii, 18).

"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that
believeth not on the Son shall not see life" (36).

A demand so preposterous could have been made only in support of claims
that were realized to be untenable. Credulity was appealed to because
convincing evidence could not be adduced. Claims which reason rejects
are manifestly false, and it is only by a renunciation of reason that
they can be accepted as true.

The absurdity of this requirement of Christ is thus exposed by
the poet Shelley: "This is the pivot upon which all religions turn;
they all assume that it is in our power to believe or not to believe:
whereas the mind can only believe that which it thinks true. A human
being can only be supposed accountable for those actions which are
influenced by his will. But belief is utterly distinct from and
unconnected with volition: it is the apprehension of the agreement
or disagreement of the ideas that compose any proposition. Belief
is a passion or involuntary operation of the mind, and, like other
passions, its intensity is precisely proportionate to the degree
of excitement. Volition is essential to merit or demerit. But the
Christian religion attaches the highest possible degree of merit
and demerit to that which is worthy of neither, and which is totally
unconnected with the peculiar faculty of the mind whose presence is
essential to their being" (Notes to Queen Mab).



527

Did Christ abrogate the Mosaic law?

"Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise
pass from the law" (Matthew v, 18).

"The law and the prophets were until John; since that time the Kingdom
of God is preached" (Luke xvi, 16).

Paul: "The law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that
we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come we are
no longer under a schoolmaster" (Galatians iii, 24, 25). "But now we
are delivered from the law" (Romans vii, 6).

"Christ certainly did come to destroy the law and the prophets."--Henry
Ward Beecher.



528

What is taught regarding the forgiveness of sin?

"He [God] is faithful and just to forgive sins" (1 John i, 9).

"The Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins" (Mark ii, 10).

"Today I offer you the pardon of the gospel--full pardon, free
pardon. I do not care what your crime has been. Though you say you
have committed a crime against God, against your own soul, against
your fellow-man, against your family, against the day of judgment,
against the cross of Christ--whatever your crime has been, here
is pardon, full pardon, and the very moment you take that pardon
your heavenly Father throws his arms about you and says: 'My son,
I forgive you. It is all right. You are as much in my favor now as
if you never had sinned.'"--Dr. Talmage.

This doctrine of forgiveness of sin is a premium on crime. "Forgive
us our sins" means "Let us continue in our iniquity." It is one of the
most pernicious of doctrines, and one of the most fruitful sources of
immorality. It has been the chief cause of making Christian nations the
most immoral of nations. In teaching this doctrine Christ committed
a sin for which his death did not atone, and which can never be
forgiven. There is no forgiveness of sin. Every cause has its effect;
every sinner must suffer the consequences of his sins.



529

What is taught regarding future rewards and punishments?

"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned" (Mark xvi, 16).

These words, while appearing in the unauthentic appendix to Mark, yet
express clearly the alleged teachings of Jesus. Above all they have
formed the key note of orthodox Christianity in all ages of the church.

Between the lines of this passage the eye of the unfettered mind
discerns in large capitals the word FRAUD. These words are the words
of an impostor. Had Jesus been divine he would not have been compelled
to resort to bribes and threats to secure the world's adherence. Had
he even been a sincere man he would not have desired converts on
such terms. These words are either the utterance of a false Messiah,
conscious of his impotency, or the invention of priests who intended
them to frighten the ignorant and credulous into an acceptance of
their faith.

Concerning this teaching Col. Ingersoll says: "Redden your hands
with human blood; blast by slander the fair fame of the innocent;
strangle the smiling child upon its mother's knees; deceive, ruin,
and desert the beautiful girl who loves and trusts you, and your
case is not hopeless. For all this, and for all these, you may
be forgiven. For all this, and for all these, that bankrupt court
established by the gospel will give you a discharge; but deny the
existence of these divine ghosts, of these gods, and the sweet and
tearful face of Mercy becomes livid with eternal hate. Heaven's
golden gates are shut, and you, with an infinite curse ringing in
your ears, with the brand of infamy upon your brow, commence your
endless wanderings in the lurid gloom of hell--an immortal vagrant,
an eternal outcast, a deathless convict."

"A gloomy heaven above opening its jealous gates to the
nineteen-thousandth part of the tithe of mankind! And below an
inexorable Hell expanding its leviathan jaws for the vast residue of
mortals! O doctrine comfortable and healing to the weary wounded soul
of man!"--Robert Burns.



530

Did he teach the doctrine of endless punishment?

"And these shall go away into everlasting punishment" (Matthew xxv,
46).

That is the most infamous passage in all literature. It is the
language, not of an incarnate God, but of an incarnate devil. The
being who gave utterance to those words deserves not the worship,
but the execration of mankind. The priests who preach this doctrine
of eternal pain are fiends. There is misery enough in this world
without adding to it the mental anguish of this monstrous lie.

Less than a hundred years ago, when Christ was yet believed to
be divine, in nearly every pulpit, to frighten timid and confiding
mothers, dimpled babes were consigned to the red flames of this eternal
hell. Then came the preachers of humanity--the Ballous, the Channings,
the Parkers and the Beechers--preachers with hearts and brains, who
sought to humanize this heavenly demon, to make of him a decent man,
and civilize his fiendish priests. To these men is due the debt of
everlasting gratitude. With the return of every spring the emancipated
of the race should build above their sacred dust a pyramid of flowers.

Not by the sects known as Universalists and Unitarians, small in
numbers, though in the character of their adherents the greatest of
the Christian sects, must we estimate the importance of the work of
Ballou and Channing and other Liberal ministers. The influence of
their teachings has permeated every Christian sect, and quickened
every humane conscience. In the minds of all intelligent Christians,
largely as the result of their labors, this heartless demon and this
cruel dogma are dead. In their creeds they still survive. They are
ashamed of the dogma; they abhor it. They should abhor its author,
and banish both.


"What! I should call on that Infinite Love that has served us so well?
Infinite cruelty rather, that made everlasting hell,
Made us, foreknew us, foredoom'd us, and does what he will with his own;
Better our dead brute mother who never has heard us groan."

                                                             --Tennyson.



531

Is it possible to fall from grace?

Peter: "If after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through
the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them
than the beginning" (2 Peter ii, 20).

"My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: and
I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand" (John x, 27, 28).

"There is no condemnation for them that believe and are
baptized."--Confession of Faith, Art. IX.



532

Is baptism essential to salvation?

"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved" (Mark xvi, 16).

"Except a man be born of the water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
the Kingdom of God" (John iii, 5).

"Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them" (Matthew
xxviii, 19).

Was the penitent thief baptized?

Paul says: "I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and
Gaius.... For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel"
(1 Corinthians i, 14, 17).



533

What constitutes Christian baptism, immersion or sprinkling?

With millions of Bibles in circulation, the Christian does not
know. If he affirms, as many scholars affirm, that immersion is the
mode authorized by the Bible, then he must admit that the greater
portion of Christendom has rejected this mode and adopted one not
authorized by the Scriptures.

To whom is this rite to be administered, to both adults and infants,
or to adults alone?

After eighteen centuries of controversy; after employing millions of
priests to interpret the Scriptures; after Anabaptists and Pedobaptists
have baptized their swords in each others' blood, the church is not
prepared to answer.



534

Did Christ command his disciples to repeat and perpetuate the
observance of the Eucharist?

Luke: He did. "This do in remembrance of me."

Matthew, Mark and John: He did not.

It is admitted by Dr. Westcott and others that the earlier versions
of Luke did not contain the injunction quoted. Christ, then, according
to the Four Gospels did not institute the Eucharist as a sacrament to
be observed by his disciples and the church. Referring to the Twelve
Apostles, the Rev. Dr. Minot J. Savage says: "They knew nothing about
any sacraments; they had not been instituted" (What is Christianity?).



535

What did he teach in regard to the efficacy of prayer?

"All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
receive" (Matthew xxi, 22).

This is one of the cardinal doctrines of his religion. He is
continually impressing upon the minds of his hearers the necessity
and the efficacy of prayer. Referring to this doctrine, Greg says:

"This doctrine has in all ages been a stumbling block to the
thoughtful. It is obviously irreconcilable with all that reason and
revelation teach us of the divine nature; and the inconsistency has
been felt by the ablest of the Scripture writers themselves. Various
and desperate have been the expedients and suppositions resorted to,
in order to reconcile the conception of an immutable, all-wise,
all-foreseeing God, with that of a father who is turned from his
course by the prayers of his creatures. But all such efforts are,
and are felt to be, hopeless failures. They involve the assertion and
negation of the same proposition in one breath. The problem remains
still insoluble; and we must either be content to leave it so, or we
must abandon one or other of the hostile premises.

"The religious man, who believes that all events, mental as well as
physical, are pre-ordered and arranged according to the decrees of
infinite wisdom, and the philosopher, who knows that, by the wise
and eternal laws of the universe, cause and effect are indissolubly
chained together, and that one follows the other in inevitable
succession--equally feel that this ordination--this chain--cannot be
changed at the cry of man. To suppose that it can is to place the
whole harmonious system of nature at the mercy of the weak reason
and the selfish wishes of humanity. If the purposes of God were not
wise, they would not be formed: if wise, they cannot be changed,
for then they would become unwise. To suppose that an all-wise Being
would alter his designs and modes of proceeding at the entreaty of
an unknowing creature, is to believe that compassion would change
his wisdom into foolishness.... If the universe is governed by fixed
laws, or (which is the same proposition in different language), if all
events are pre-ordained by the foreseeing wisdom of an infinite God,
then the prayers of thousands of years and generations of martyrs and
saints cannot change or modify one iota of our destiny. The proposition
is unassailable by the subtlest logic. The weak, fond affections of
humanity struggle in vain against the unwelcome conclusion" (Creed
of Christendom, pp. 322, 323).



536

Where are we commanded to pray?

"When thou prayest enter into thy closet" (Matthew vi, 6).

How long ought we to continue in prayer?

"Men ought always to pray" (Luke xviii, 1).



537

Did Christ assume for himself the power of answering petitions?

"Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do" (John xiv, 13). But
soon realizing that his capital was too small to conduct a business
of such magnitude, he was compelled to announce that, "Whatsoever ye
shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you" (xv, 16).



538

Does God know our wants?

"Your father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask him"
(Matthew vi, 8).

Then what is the use of prayer? Is God a mischievous urchin taunting
his hungry dog with a morsel of bread, and shouting, "Beg, Tray, beg!"?



539

What portion of their goods did he require the rich to give the poor
to obtain salvation?

Rich Ruler, No. 1: "Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal
life?" (Luke xviii, 18.)

Jesus: "Sell all that thou hast and distribute unto the poor" (22).

Rich Ruler, No. 2: "Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor"
(Luke xix, 8).

Jesus: "This day is salvation come to this house" (9).



540

What did he teach respecting the publicity of good works?

"Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works"
(Matthew v, 16).

"Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men to be seen
of them" (vi, 1, New Ver.).



541

What original rules of table observance did he teach his disciples?

Matthew: To abstain from washing their hands before eating. "They
wash not their hands when they eat bread" (xv, 2).

John: To wash their feet after eating. "He riseth from supper, and laid
aside his garments; and took a towel and girded himself. After that
he poured water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet,
and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded" (xiii, 4, 5).

The proneness of Christ's followers to neglect his ordinances and
precepts which require some sacrifice or effort to obey, and the
readiness with which they observe those which do not, find a fitting
illustration in the reception accorded these teachings. While the
early Christians, many of them, accepted the first as a religious
obligation not to be violated, the second was ignored. Writing
of Christian monks and nuns, Lecky says: "The cleanliness of the
body was regarded as a pollution of the soul, and the saints
who were most admired had become one hideous mass of clotted
filth. St. Athanasius relates with enthusiasm how St. Antony, the
patriarch of monachism, had never, to extreme old age, been guilty of
washing his feet.... St. Abraham the hermit, however, who lived for
fifty years after his conversion, rigidly refused from that date to
wash either his face or feet.... St. Euphraxia joined a convent of one
hundred and thirty nuns, who never washed their feet, and who shuddered
at the mention of a bath" (European Morals, Vol. II, pp. 109, 110).



542

What religious formula is to be found in the New Testament?

"In the name of Jesus."

"In the name of Jesus" the disciples cast out devils and performed
other miracles; "In the name of Jesus" they baptized their converts;
"In the name of Jesus" salvation was secured. This formula, with
various modifications, is in general use in the church today. It
betrays the heathen origin of Christianity. Referring to its use
Prof. Meinhold of Bonn University says: "Name and person were at one
time closely combined, and elementary religious ideas were connected
with the words. He who knew the name of a divinity and could pronounce
it was in this way able to secure a blessing. It was the use of the
name of Jesus in the sacraments that made them effective, in the
spirit of sorcery. This idea came from the lowest type of religious
thought, reflected in religious mysteries in the days of Jesus,
and was embodied in the earliest Christianity."



543

What is taught respecting the use of oaths?

God: "Swear by my name" (Jeremiah xii, 16).

Christ: "Swear not at all" (Matthew v, 34).



544

What opposing rules of proselytism did Christ promulgate?

"He that is not with me is against me" (Luke xi, 23).

"He that is not against us is for us" (Luke ix, 50).



545

What is to befall him that hath nothing?

"Whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath"
(Matthew xiii, 12).

Ex nihilo nihil fit.



546

What did he say would be the fate of those who took up the sword?

"They that take the sword shall perish with the sword" (Matthew
xxvi, 52).

He evidently considered this commendable, for he immediately issued
the following command to his disciples:

"He that hath no sword let him sell his garments and buy one" (Luke
xxii, 36).



547

What did he say regarding the fear of death?

"Be not afraid of them that kill the body" (Luke xii, 4).

"After these things Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk
in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him" (John vii, 1).



548

What is to be the earthly reward of those that follow Christ?

"There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and
the gospel's, but he shall receive a hundred fold now in this time"
(Mark x, 29, 30).

"Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is
good?" (1 Peter iii, 13.)

"For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light" (Matthew xi, 30).

"In the world ye shall have tribulation" (John xvi, 33).

"Ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake" (Luke xxi, 17).

"Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution" (2 Tim. iii, 12).

"For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom
he receiveth" (Hebrews xii, 6).



549

What promise did Christ make to Paul at the commencement of his
ministry?

"I am with thee and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee" (Acts
xviii, 10).

"Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice
was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned" (2 Corinthians xi, 24, 25).



550

How are Christ's true followers to be distinguished from those of
the devil?

"Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin" (1 John iii, 9).

"He that committeth sin is of the devil" (8).

Judged by this standard what is the comparative strength of these
sovereigns' subjects?

"There is no man that sinneth not" (1 Kings viii, 46).

"There is not a just man upon earth" (Ecclesiastes vii, 20).

"There is none righteous, no, not one" (Romans iii, 10).



551

Great stress is placed upon the moral teachings of Jesus. What did
he teach? Did he advocate industry and frugality?

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth" (Matthew vi, 19).

"Take no thought for your life what ye shall eat or what ye shall
drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on" (25).

"Take therefore no thought for the morrow" (34).



552

What were the early Christians?

Acts: They were Communists. "They had all things common.... For as many
as were possessors of land or houses sold them, and brought the prices
of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the apostles' feet;
and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need"
(iv, 32-35).

Most Christians condemn Communism; but was the Communism of nineteen
hundred years ago better than the Communism of today? To condemn
Communism is to condemn primitive Christianity. Yet, Christians profess
to abhor the Communistic ideas of modern teachers, while they worship
as a God the founder of this Communistic sect of Palestine.



553

What did he teach respecting poverty and wealth?

"Blessed be ye poor" (Luke vi, 20).

"Woe unto you that are rich" (24).

Poverty is a curse; wealth honestly acquired and wisely used is a
blessing. "The rich man's wealth is his strong city: the destruction
of the poor is their poverty" (Proverbs x, 15).



554

In the parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, what befell the
representatives of vagrancy and respectability?

"The beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom"
(Luke xvi, 22).

"The rich man also died, ... and in hell he lifted up his eyes"
(22, 23).


            "See the red flames around him twine
            Who did in gold and purple shine!

            "While round the saint so poor below,
            Full rivers of salvation flow.

            "Jesus, my Lord, let me appear
            The meanest of thy creatures here."



555

Why was Dives' request that his brothers be informed of their impending
fate refused?

"They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them" (Luke xvi, 29).

Moses and the prophets do not teach the doctrine of endless punishment,
nor even that of a future existence, much less that the mere possession
of wealth, acquired perhaps by honest industry, is a crime which can
be expiated only by the sufferings of an endless hell.

Christ's Kingdom was a kingdom of vagrants and paupers. "A rich
man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven" (Matthew xix,
23). "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle,
than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God" (24).



556

While at the temple with his disciples what act did he commend?

Mark and Luke: That of the poor widow who threw two mites into the
treasury (Mark xii, 43; Luke xxi, 3).

This widow's offering illustrates the characteristic generosity of the
poor and the heartless greed of the church. This text has enabled a
horde of indolent priests to prey upon widows and orphans; to filch
the scanty earnings of the poor, and live like parasites upon the
weak and sickly calves of humanity.



557

Did he practice the virtue of temperance?

"The Son of Man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a
gluttonous man and a winebibber" (Luke vii, 34).



558

What was his first miracle?

John: "There was a marriage in Cana of Galilee.... And both Jesus
was called, and his disciples, to the marriage. And when they wanted
wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no wine.... And
there were set there six water pots of stone, ... containing two or
three firkins apiece. Jesus saith unto them, Fill the water pots with
water. And they filled them up to the brim" (ii, 1-7). This water he
turned into wine.

Here is Christ supplying a party already "well drunk" with more
than one hundred gallons of wine. As they were intoxicated when he
performed the miracle, would it not have been better for them and
better for the millions who have accepted him as a moral guide,
if at the beginning of the feast he had turned the wine into water?

The morality taught by Jesus suffers in comparison with that taught
by Mohammed. Mohammed prohibited the use of intoxicating drink, and
the Mohammedans are a temperate people; Jesus sanctioned the use of
intoxicating drink, and the Christian world abounds with drunkenness.

Referring to the miracle at Cana, Strauss says: "Not only, however,
has the miracle been impeached in relation to possibility, but also
in relation to utility and fitness. It has been urged both in ancient
and modern times, that it was unworthy of Jesus that he should not only
remain in the society of drunkards, but even further their intemperance
by an exercise of his miraculous power" (Leben Jesu, p. 584).



559

Did he oppose slavery?

All: He did not.

"Slavery was incorporated into the civil institutions of Moses; it was
recognized accordingly by Christ and his apostles."--Rev. Dr. Nathan
Lord, President of Dartmouth College.

"At the time of the advent of Jesus Christ, slavery in its worst
forms prevailed over the world. The Savior found it around him in
Judea; the apostles met with it in Asia, Greece and Italy. How did
they treat it? Not by denunciation of slave-holding as necessarily
sinful."--Prof. Hodge of Princeton.

"I have no doubt if Jesus Christ were now on earth that he would, under
certain circumstances, become a slaveholder."--Rev. Dr. Taylor of Yale.

Rousseau says: "Christ preaches only servitude and dependence.... True
Christians are made to be slaves."



560

What did the apostles teach?

Peter: "Servants [slaves], be subject to your masters with all fear;
not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward" (1 Peter
ii, 18).

Paul: "Let as many servants [slaves] as are under the yoke count
their own masters worthy of all honor" (1 Timothy vi, 1). "Servants,
be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling" (Ephesians vi, 5).

The Rev. Dr. Wilbur Fisk, president of Wesleyan University, says:
"The New Testament enjoins obedience upon the slave as an obligation
due to a present rightful authority."



561

Did he favor marriage?

Matthew: He advocated celibacy, and even self-mutilation as preferable
to marriage (xix, 10-12).

Following this teaching of their Master, Christians, many of them,
have condemned marriage. A Christian pope, Siricius, branded it as "a
pollution of the flesh." St. Jerome taught that the duty of the saint
was to "cut down by the axe of Virginity the wood of Marriage." Pascal
says: "Marriage is the lowest and most dangerous condition of the
Christian."

G. W. Foote of England says: "Jesus appears to have despised the union
of the sexes, therefore marriage, and therefore the home. He taught
that in heaven, where all is perfect, there is neither marrying nor
giving in marriage."

"Monks and nuns innumerable owe to this evil teaching their shriveled
lives and withered hearts."--Mrs. Besant.



562

What did he encourage women to do?

Luke: To leave their husbands and homes, and follow and associate
with him and his roving apostles--"Mary, called Magdalene, out of whom
went seven devils, and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and
Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance"
(viii, 2, 3).



563

What did he say respecting children?

"Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not."

But it was only the children of Jews he welcomed. The afflicted child
of a Gentile he spurned as a dog. When the woman of Canaan desired
him to heal her daughter, he brutally replied: "It is not meet to
take the children's bread and cast it to the dogs" (Matthew xv,
26). The soldiers who spit on Jesus in Pilate's hall did not do a
meaner thing than Jesus did that day. And if he afterwards consented
to cure the child it was not as an act of humanity to the sufferer,
but as a reward for the mother's faith in him.

Concerning this brutal act of Jesus, Helen Gardener says: "Do you think
that was kind? Do you think it was godlike? What would you think of a
physician, if a woman came to him distressed and said, 'Doctor, come
to my daughter; she is very ill. She has lost her reason, and she is
all I have!' What would you think of the doctor who would not reply
at all at first, and then, when she fell at his feet and worshiped
him, answered that he did not spend his time doctoring dogs? Would
you like him as a family physician? Do you think that, even if he
were to cure the child then, he would have done a noble thing? Is
it evidence of a perfect character to accompany a service with an
insult? Do you think that a man who could offer such an indignity to
a sorrowing mother has a perfect character, is an ideal God?"



564

He enjoined the observance of the commandment, "Honor thy father and
thy mother." Did he respect it himself?

More striking examples of filial ingratitude are not to be found than
are exhibited in the Gospel history of Jesus Christ. When visiting
Jerusalem with his parents, he allows them to depart for home without
him, thinking that he is with another part of the company; and when
they return to search for him and find him, he manifests no concern
for the trouble he has caused; when during his ministry his mother and
brothers are announced, he receives them with a sneer; at the marriage
feast, when his mother kindly speaks to him, he brutally exclaims,
"Woman, what have I to do with thee?" Throughout the Four Gospels
not one respectful word to that devoted mother is recorded. Even
in his last hours, when the mental anguish of that mother must have
equaled his own physical suffering, not one word of comfort or farewell
greeting escapes from his lips; but the same studied disrespect that
has characterized him all his life is exhibited here.



565

Did he not promote domestic strife?

"Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay;
but rather division: for from henceforth there shall be five in one
house divided, three against two, and two against three. The father
against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against
the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law
against her daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law" (Luke xii, 51-53).

"Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send
peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law" (Matthew x, 34, 35).



566

What did he require of his disciples?

"If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife,
and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also,
he cannot be my disciple" (Luke xiv, 26).

It is scarcely possible in this age of enlightenment and unbelief
to realize what sorrows and miseries these accursed teachings of
Christ once caused. The eminent historian Lecky, in his "History
of European Morals," has attempted to describe some of their awful
consequences. From his pages I quote the following:

"To break by his ingratitude the heart of the mother who had borne him,
to persuade the wife who adored him that it was her duty to separate
from him forever, to abandon his children, uncared for and beggars,
to the mercies of the world, was regarded by the true hermit as the
most acceptable offering he could make to his God. His business was
to save his own soul. The serenity of his devotion would be impaired
by the discharge of the simplest duties to his family. Evagrius,
when a hermit in the desert, received, after a long interval, letters
from his father and mother. He could not bear that the equable tenor
of his thought should be disturbed by the recollection of those who
loved him, so he cast the letters unread into the fire. A man named
Mutius, accompanied by his only child, a little boy of eight years old,
abandoned his possessions and demanded admission into a monastery. The
monks received him, but they proceeded to discipline his heart. 'He
had already forgotten that he was rich; he must next be taught to
forget that he was a father.' His little child was separated from
him, clothed in rags, subjected to every form of gross and wanton
hardship, beaten, spurned and ill-treated. Day after day the father
was compelled to look upon his boy wasting away with sorrow, his once
happy countenance forever stained with tears, distorted by sobs of
anguish. But yet, says the admiring biographer, 'though he saw this day
by day, such was his love for Christ, and for the virtue of obedience,
that the father's heart was rigid and unmoved' (Vol. ii, 125, 126).

"He [St. Simeon Stylites] had been passionately loved by his parents,
and, if we may believe his eulogist and biographer, he began his
saintly career by breaking the heart of his father, who died of grief
at his flight. His mother, however, lingered on. Twenty-seven years
after his disappearance, at a period when his austerities had made
him famous, she heard for the first time where he was and hastened
to visit him. But all her labor was in vain. No woman was admitted
within the precincts of his dwelling, and he refused to permit her
even to look upon his face. Her entreaties and tears were mingled with
words of bitter and eloquent reproach. 'My son,' she is represented
as having said, 'why have you done this? I bore you in my womb, and
you have wrung my soul with grief. I gave you milk from my breast,
you have filled my eyes with tears. For the kisses I gave you, you
have given me the anguish of a broken heart; for all that I have
done and suffered for you, you have repaid me by the most cruel
wrongs.' At last the saint sent a message to her to tell her that
she would soon see him. Three days and three nights she had wept and
entreated in vain, and now, exhausted with grief and age and privation,
she sank feebly to the ground and breathed her last sigh before that
inhospitable door. Then for the first time the saint, accompanied by
his followers, came out. He shed some pious tears over the corpse of
his murdered mother, and offered up a prayer consigning her soul to
heaven" (Ibid, 130).



567

Did he not indulge in vituperation and abuse?

"Ye fools and blind" (Matthew xxiii, 17).

"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites" (14).

"All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers" (John x, 8).

"Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation
of hell?" (Matthew xxiii, 33.)

Regarding these abusive epithets of Christ, Prof. Newman says: "The
Jewish nation may well complain that they have been cruelly slandered
by the gospels. The invectives have been burnt into the heart of
Christendom, so that the innocent Jews, children of the dispersion,
have felt in millennial misery--yes, and to this day feel--the deadly
sting of these fierce and haughty utterances" (Jesus Christ, p. 25).



568

Relate his treatment of the Pharisee who invited him to dine with him.

Luke: "And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with
him; and he went in, and sat down to meat. And when the Pharisee saw
it, he marveled that he had not first washed before dinner. And the
Lord said unto him, now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of
the cup and the platter; but your inward part is full of ravening
and wickedness. Ye fools ... hypocrites!" (xi, 37-44.)

Was such insolence of manners on the part of Jesus calculated to
promote the interest of the cause he professed to hold so dear at
heart? Supposing a Freethinker were to receive an invitation to dine
with a Christian friend and were to repay the hospitality of his
host with rudeness and abuse, interrupting the ceremony of "grace"
with an oath or a sneer, and showering upon the head of his friend
such epithets as "hypocrite" and "fool." Would such insolent behavior
have a tendency to gain for him the world's esteem or aid the cause
he represents? And are we to approve in a God conduct that we regard
as detestable in a man? It may be urged that God is not subject to
the rules of human conduct. Grant it; but is it necessary for him in
order to exhibit his divine character to assume the manners of a brute?



569

Do the Pharisees deserve the sweeping condemnation heaped upon them
by Christ and his followers?

In marked contrast to the diatribes of Jesus is the testimony of
Josephus: "Now, for the Pharisees, they live meanly [plainly], and
despise delicacies in diet, and they follow the conduct of reason;
and what that prescribes to them as good for them, they do; and they
think they ought earnestly to strive to observe reason's dictates for
practice.... The cities give great attestations to them on account
of their entire virtuous conduct, both in the actions of their lives,
and their discourses also" (Antiquities, Book xviii, chap. i, sec. 3).

Paul, the Christian, when arraigned before Agrippa, believed that no
loftier testimonial to his character could be adduced than the fact
that he had been a Pharisee (Acts xxvi, 4, 5).



570

What is said in regard to his purging the temple?

John: "And the Jews' Passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem, and found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep
and doves, and the changers of money sitting: and when he had made
a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the temple,
and the sheep, and the oxen; and poured out the changers' money,
and overthrew the tables" (ii, 13-15).

No currency but the Jewish was accepted in the temple, while doves,
lambs, and other animals were required for offerings. These persons
performed the very necessary office of supplying the Jews with
offerings and exchanging Jewish coins for the Roman money then in
general circulation. What right he had to interfere with the lawful
business of these men, and especially in the manner in which he did,
it is difficult to understand.



571

Describe the cursing of the fig tree.

Matthew: "Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he
hungered. And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it,
and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no
fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree
withered away" (xxi, 18, 19).

Jesus cursed a living tree and it died; Mohammed blessed a dead tree
and it lived.

The alleged conduct of Jesus on many occasions, notably his harsh
treatment of his mother, his abuse of the Pharisees, his purging the
temple and his cursing the fig tree, is not the conduct of a rational
being, but rather that of a madman. If these stories be historical
they would indicate that he was not wholly responsible for his words
and acts. Dr. Jules Soury, of the University of France, believes that
he was the victim of an incurable mental disorder. In a work on morbid
psychology, entitled "Studies on Jesus and The Gospels," Dr. Soury
cites a long array of seemingly indisputable facts in support of his
theory. From his preface to the work, I quote the following:

"Jesus the God, gone down in his glory, like a star sunk beneath the
horizon but still shedding a few faint rays on the world, threw a halo
round the brow of Jesus the Prophet. In the dull glow of that twilight,
in the melancholy but charming hour when everything seemed wrapped in
vague, ethereal tints, Jesus appeared to Strauss and Renan such as he
had shown himself to his first disciples, the Master par-excellence,
a man truly divine. Then came the night; and as darkness descended
on those flickering gospel beginnings there remained nought to be
descried through the obscurity of dubious history, but dimly looming,
the portentous outline of the gibbet and its victim.

"In the present work Jesus makes his appearance, perhaps for the
first time, as a sufferer from a grave malady, the course of which
we have attempted to trace.

"The nervous, or cerebral disorder, at first congestive and then
inflammatory, under which he labored, was not only deep-seated and
dangerous--it was incurable. Among us at the present time that
affection may be seen daily making kings, millionaires, popes,
prophets, saints, and even divinities of poor fellows who have lost
their balance; it has produced more than one Messiah.

"If we be right in the interpretation of data which has been followed
in the study of morbid psychology, Jesus, at the time of his death,
was in a somewhat advanced stage of this disorder, He was, to all
appearance, cut off opportunely; the gibbet saved him from actual
madness.

"The diagnosis which we have ventured to draw is based on three sets
of facts which are attested by the most ancient and trustworthy of
the witnesses of his career.

"1. Religious excitement, then general in Palestine, drove Jesus to
the wilderness, where he lived some time the life of a recluse, as
those who considered themselves to have the prophetic mission often
did. Carried away with the idea that he was divinely inspired to
proclaim the coming of the Messiah, he left his own people and his
native place, and, attended by a following of fishermen and others
of the same class, went about among the towns and villages of Galilee
announcing the speedy approach of the Kingdom of Heaven.

"2. After having proclaimed the coming of the Messiah, like other
contemporary Jewish prophets, Jesus gradually came to look upon himself
as the Messiah, the Christ. He allowed himself to be called the Son of
David, the Son of God, and had among his followers one, if not more,
of those fanatical Sicarii, so graphically described by Josephus,
who were waiting for the deliverance of Israel from the yoke of
Rome. Progressive obliteration of the consciousness of his personal
identity marks the interval between the somewhat vague revelation
which he made to his disciples at the foot of Mount Hermon and the
day when, before Caiaphas and before Pilate, he openly declared that
he was the Messiah, and by that token the King of the Jews.

"3. The cursing of the fig tree whereon there were no figs, because
'the time of figs was not yet,' the violent conduct toward the dealers
and changers at the temple, were manifestly foolish acts. Jesus had
come to believe that everything was permitted him, that all things
belonged to him, that nothing was too hard for him to do. For a
long time he had given evident signs of perversion of the natural
affections, especially with respect to his mother and brethren. To
the fits of anger against the priests and religious ministers of
his nation, to the ambitious extravagance of his words and acts, to
the wild dream of his Messianic grandeur, there rapidly supervened
a characteristic depression of the mental faculties and strength,
a giving way of the intellectual and muscular powers.

"Each of those periods in the career of Jesus corresponds to a certain
pathological state of his nervous system.

"By reacting on the heart, the religious excitement he labored under
and the attendant functional exacerbations had the immediate effect
of accelerating the circulation, unduly dilating the blood vessels,
and producing cerebral congestion.

"Chronic congestion of the brain, subjectively considered, is always
attended in the initial stage with great increase of the moral
consciousness, extraordinary activity of the imagination, often
leading to hallucinations, and later on with absurdly exaggerated,
frequently delirious ideas of power and greatness. That stage is also
usually characterized by irritability and fits of passion.

"Objectively considered what is observable is hypertrophy of the
cellules and nerve-tubes, excessive cerebral plethora and vascularity
due to the great efflux of blood and superabundant nutrition of
the encephalon. Inflammation of the meningeal covering, and of the
brain itself, is, sooner or later, a further result of the chronic
congestion. The vessels, turgid and loaded with blood, permit the
transudation of the blood globules; the circulation becomes impeded,
then arrested, with the result of depriving the cortical cerebral
substance of arterial blood, which is its life; the histological
elements undergo alteration, degenerate, become softened, and as the
disorganization proceeds are finally reduced to inert detritus.

"The brain may remain capable more or less well of performing its
functions when deprived to a large extent of its necessary food,
but not so when the cerebral cellules are disorganized. Dementia
consequently is the natural sequel of the congestive stage. To the
destruction of the cortical substance supervenes partial or total
loss of consciousness, according to the extent of the lesion. Such
portions of the encephalon as continue capable of performing any duty
being in a state of hyperaemia, there is often delirium more or less
intense up to the last.

"The process of the disorder is irregular; remissions occur during
which the reasoning faculties seem to be recovered. But whether
the duration extends only to a few months or to several years, the
increasing weakness of the patient, the intellectual and muscular
decay, the cachetic state into which he falls, the lesions of other
organs performing essential functions which ensue, bring life to a
close, and frequently without suffering.

"This is how Jesus would have ended had he been spared the violent
death of the cross."

Nearly all the religious founders have been affected, to a greater
or less extent, with insanity. Genius itself is closely allied to
insanity--is indeed, in many cases, a form of insanity. Moreau de
Tours in his "La Psychologie Morbide" (p. 234) says: "The mental
disposition which causes a man to be distinguished from his fellows
by the originality of his mind and conceptions, by his eccentricity,
and the energy of his affective faculties, or by the transcendence of
his intelligence, take their rise in the very same organic conditions
which are the source of the various mental perturbations whereof
insanity and idiocy are the most complete expressions." Buddha,
Mohammed, and probably Jesus, united with certain strong mental and
moral characteristics, a form of insanity which manifested itself in
a sort of religious madness--a madness that was contagious and which
has attacked and afflicted the greater portion of the human race.



572

Did he not teach the doctrine of demoniacal possession and exorcism?

Synoptics: He did.

After alluding to the prevalency of superstition among the Jews of
this period, Renan says: "Jesus on this point differed in no respect
from his companions. He believed in the devil, whom he regarded as
a kind of evil genius, and he imagined, like all the world, that
nervous maladies were produced by demons who possessed the patient
and agitated him" (Life of Jesus, p. 59). Dr. Geikie says: "The New
Testament leaves us in no doubt of the belief, on the part of Jesus
and the Evangelists, in the reality of these demoniacal possessions"
(Life of Christ, vol. ii, p. 573).

Demonology was born of ignorance and superstition. In this debasing
superstition Jesus believed. It was a part of his religion, and has
remained a part of Christianity; for while the more intelligent of
his professed disciples have outgrown this superstition they have to
the same extent outgrown Christianity. The more ignorant, the more
depraved, and, at the same time, the more devout of his followers,
still accept it.

Regarding this superstition, the author of "Supernatural Religion"
says: "The diseases referred to by the gospels, and by the Jews of
that time, to the action of devils, exist now, but they are known to
proceed from purely physical causes. The same superstition and medical
ignorance would enunciate the same diagnosis at the present day. The
superstition and ignorance, however, have passed away, and, with them,
the demoniacal theory. In that day the theory was as baseless as in
this. It is obvious that, with the necessary abandonment of the theory
of 'possession' and demoniacal origin of disease, the largest class
of miracles recorded in the gospels is at once exploded. The asserted
cause of the diseases of this class, said to have been miraculously
healed, must be recognized to be a mere vulgar superstition" (p. 159).

Prof. Huxley, in one of his essays, discussing the Gadarene miracle,
says: "When such a story as that about the Gadarene swine is placed
before us, the importance of the decision, whether it be accepted or
rejected, cannot be overestimated. If the demonological part of it
is to be accepted, the authority of Jesus is unmistakably pledged to
the demonological system current in Judea in the first century. The
belief in devils who possess men and can be transferred from men
to pigs becomes as much a part of Christian dogma as any article of
the creeds."



573

What became of the swine into which Jesus ordered the devils to go?

Matthew: "And behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a
steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters" (viii, 32).

It may be pertinent to inquire what these inoffensive animals had
done that they should merit such cruelty, or what their owner had
done that his property should be thus wantonly destroyed.

In his narrative of this miracle Fleetwood says: "The spectators
beheld, at a distance, the torments these poor creatures suffered;
with what amazing rapidity they ran to the confines of the lake,
leaped from the precipices into the sea, and perished in the waters"
(Life of Christ, p. 121).

In striking contrast to the religion of Buddha, the religion of Christ
has made its adherents cruel and unmerciful. To this Christian writer
the torture and destruction of these domestic animals is no more than
the burning of a field of stubble. In this miracle he sees only a
manifestation of love and kindness on the part of his Savior. Referring
to the request of the inhabitants that he depart from their country,
he says: "The stupid request of the Gadarenes was complied with by
the blessed Jesus, who, entering the ship, returned to the country
from whence he came, leaving them a valuable pledge of his love,
and us a noble pattern of perseverance in well-doing, even when our
kindnesses are condemned or requited with injuries" (Ibid, p. 122).



574

What did Jesus say to the strange Samaritan woman whom he met at
the well?

"Thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy
husband" (John iv, 18).

"Christ here makes himself a wandering gypsy, or Bohemian fortune
teller, and I much wonder that our gypsies do not account themselves
the genuine disciples of Jesus, being endowed with like gifts, and
exercising no worse arts than he himself practiced."--Woolston.



575

Was he not an egotist and given to vulgar boasting?

Speaking of himself, he said: "Behold, a greater than Solomon is here"
(Matthew xii, 41, 42).



576

Did he not practice dissimulation?

John: "And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee
that thou hast heard me. And I know that thou hearest me always,
but because of the people which stand by I said it" (xi, 41, 42).

Luke: After his resurrection when he intended to stop at Emmaus
with his companions, "He made as though he would have gone further"
(xxiv, 28).



577

After performing one of his miraculous cures, what charge did he make
to those who witnessed it?

Mark: "He charged them that they should tell no man: but the more
he charged them, so much the more a great deal they published it"
(vii, 36).

Did he desire them to disregard his commands? If he did he was a
hypocrite; if he did not he was an impotent--in either case a fallible
man instead of an omnipotent God.



578

On the approach of the Passover what did he say to his brethren?

"Go ye up unto this feast; I go not up yet unto this feast" (John
vii, 8).

The correct reading of the last clause is, "I go not up unto the
feast." The American revisers, to their credit, urged the adoption of
this reading; but the Oxford revisers retained the error. In uttering
these words, Jesus, if omniscient, uttered an untruth; for John says:
"But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the
feast, not openly, but as it were in secret" (10).



579

Why did he teach in parables?

"That seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may
hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted,
and their sins should be forgiven them" (Mark iv, 12).

He deceived the people that he might have the pleasure of seeing
them damned.



580

What immoral lesson is inculcated in the parable of the Steward?

He commends as wise and prudent the action of the steward, who,
to provide for his future welfare, causes his master's creditors
to defraud him. "There was a certain rich man, which had a steward;
and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods. And
he called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of
thee? give an account of thy stewardship; for thou mayest be no longer
steward. Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? for
my lord taketh away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg
I am ashamed. I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of
the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses. So he called
every one of his lord's debtors unto him, and said unto the first,
How much owest thou unto my lord? And he said, An hundred measures of
oil. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and
write fifty. Then said he unto another, And how much owest thou? And
he said, An hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy
bill and write fourscore. And the lord commended the unjust steward,
because he had done wisely; for the children of this world are in
their generation wiser than the children of light. And I say unto you,
Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that,
when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations"
(Luke xvi, 1-9).



581

In the parable of the Laborers what unjust doctrine is taught?

The assignment of equal rewards for unequal burdens. He justifies
the dishonest bargaining of the householder who received twelve hours
of labor for a penny, when he paid the same amount for one (Matthew
xx, 1-16).

Regarding the parables of Jesus, W. P. Ball, an English writer, says:

"With one single exception, the parables attributed to Jesus are
thoroughly religious and decidedly inferior in their moral tone,
besides possessing minor faults. The God who is to be the object of our
adoration and imitation is depicted to us as a judge who will grant
vengeance in answer to incessant prayer, as a father who loves and
honors the favorite prodigal and neglects the faithful and obedient
worker, as an employer who pays no more for a life-time than for the
nominal service of a death-bed repentance, as an unreasonable master
who reaps where he has not sown and punishes men because he made them
defective and gave them no instructions, as a harsh despot who delivers
disobedient servants to tormentors and massacres those who object to
his rule, as a judge who is merciful to harlots and relentless towards
unbelievers, as a petulant king who drives beggars and outcasts into
the heaven which is ignored by the wise and worthy, as a ruler of
the universe who freely permits his enemy the devil to sow evil and
then punishes his victims, as a God who plunges men in the flames of
hell and calmly philosophizes over the reward of the blest who from
Abraham's bosom behold the sight and are not permitted to bestow even
so much as a drop of cold water to cool the parched tongues of their
fellow-creatures amidst hopeless and unending agonies, in comparison
with which all earthly sufferings are but momentary dreams."



582

What did he teach regarding submission to theft and robbery?

"Of him that taketh away thy goods ask them not again" (Luke vi, 30).



583

Why was the woman taken in adultery released without punishment?

John: Because those having her in custody were not without sin
themselves (viii, 3-11).

The adoption of this principle would require the liberation of every
criminal, because all men are fallible.

If man cannot punish crime because not free from sin himself, is it
just in God, the author of all sin, to punish man for his sins?



584

Whom did he pronounce blessed?

"Blessed are the poor in spirit" (Matthew v, 3).

"Is poverty of spirit a blessing? Surely not. Manliness of spirit,
honesty of spirit, fulness of rightful purpose, these are virtues;
but poverty of spirit is a crime."--Bradlaugh.



585

Did he teach resistance to wrong?

"Unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the other"
(Luke vi, 29).

"He who courts oppression shares the crime."

Lord Amberley, referring to this teaching of Jesus, says: "A doctrine
more convenient for the purposes of tyrants and malefactors of every
description it would be difficult to invent" (Analysis of Religious
Belief, p. 355).



586

He taught his hearers to return good for evil. Did he do this himself?

"I pray for them [his followers], I pray not for the world" (John
xvii, 9).

"Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father" (Matthew x, 33).



587

The Golden Rule has been ascribed to Christ. Was he its author?

Five hundred years before the time of Christ Confucius taught: "What
you do not like when done to yourself do not to others." Centuries
before the Christian era Pittacus, Thales, Sextus, Isocrates and
Aristotle taught the same.



588

What maxim does Paul attribute to Jesus?

"Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed
to give than to receive" (Acts xx, 35).

These are not "the words of the Lord Jesus," but of the Pagan Epicurus,
a man whose character Christians have for centuries defamed.

Concerning the teachings of Jesus, Col. Thomas W. Higginson says:
"When they tell me that Jesus taught a gospel of love, I say I
believe it. Plato taught a gospel of love before him, and you deny
it. If they say, Jesus taught that it is better to bear an injury
than to retaliate, I say, yes, but so did Aristotle before Jesus was
born. I will accept it as the statement of Jesus if you will admit
that Aristotle said it too. I am willing that any man should come
before us and say, Jesus taught that you must love your enemies, it
is written in the Bible; but, if he will open the old manuscript of
Diogenes Laertus, he may there read in texts that have never been
disputed, that the Greek philosophers, half a dozen of them, said
the same before Jesus was born."

Buckle says: "That the system of morals propounded in the New Testament
contained no maxim which had not been previously enunciated, and that
some of the most beautiful passages in the apostolic writings are
quotations from Pagan authors, is well known to every scholar.... To
assert that Christianity communicated to man moral truths previously
unknown, argues on the part of the asserter either gross ignorance
or wilful fraud" (History of Civilization, vol. i, p. 129).

John Stuart Mill says: "It can do truth no service to blind the fact,
known to all who have the most ordinary acquaintance with literary
history, that a large portion of the noblest and most valuable moral
teaching has been the work not only of men who did not know, but of
men who knew and rejected the Christian faith" (Liberty).



589

We are told that Christ manifested "a strong and enduring courage
which never shrank or quailed before any danger however formidable." Is
this true?

It is not. When he heard that John was imprisoned, he retreated to
the Sea of Galilee (Matthew iv, 12, 13); when John was beheaded, he
took a ship and retired to a desert (xiv, 13); in going from Galilee
to Judea, he went beyond the Jordan to avoid the Samaritans; when his
brethren went up to Jerusalem he refused to accompany them for fear of
the Jews (John vii, 8, 9); when the Jews took up stones to stone him he
"hid himself" (viii, 59); when the Pharisees took council against him
he fled (Matthew xii, 14, 16): at Gethsemane, in the agonies of fear,
he prayed that the cup might pass from him; at Calvary, he frantically
exclaimed, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me!"

Commenting on this dying exclamation of Christ, Dr. Conway says:
"That cry could never be wrung from the lips of a man who saw in his
own death a prearranged plan for the world's salvation, and his own
return to divine glory temporarily renounced for transient misery on
earth. The fictitious theology of a thousand years shrivels beneath
the awful anguish of that cry."



590

What was the character of Christ's male ancestors?

Assuming Matthew's genealogy to be correct, nearly all of those whose
histories are recorded in the Old Testament were guilty of infamous
crimes or gross immoralities. Abraham married his sister and seduced
her handmaid; Jacob, after committing bigamy, seduced two of his
housemaids; Judah committed incest with his daughter-in-law; David
was a polygamist, an adulterer, a robber and a murderer; Solomon had
a thousand wives and concubines; Rehoboam, Abijam, Joram, Ahaziah,
Jotham, Ahaz, Manasseh, Amon and Jehoiachin, are all represented as
monsters of iniquity; while others are declared to have been too vile
to even name in his genealogy.



591

What female ancestors are named in his genealogy?

Matthew: Thamar, Rachab, Ruth and Bathsheba.

Regarding these women the Rev. Dr. Alexander Walker says: "It is
remarkable that in the genealogy of Christ, only four women have been
named: Thamar, who seduced the father of her late husband; Rachab, a
common prostitute; Ruth, who, instead of marrying one of her cousins,
went to bed with another of them; and Bathsheba, an adulteress,
who espoused David, the murderer of her first husband" (Woman, p. 330).

Matthew Henry, a noted Christian commentator, says: "There are
four women, and but four, named in this genealogy, ... Rachab, a
Canaanitess, and a harlot besides, and Ruth, the Moabitess.... The
other two were adulteresses, Tamar and Bathsheba" (Commentary, Vol. v).



592

Who was his favorite female attendant?

Luke: "Mary called Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils" (viii, 2).

Referring to this woman, Dr. Farrar says: "This exorcism is not
elsewhere alluded to, and it would be perfectly in accordance with
the genius of Hebrew phraseology if the expression had been applied to
her in consequence of a passionate nature and an abandoned life. The
Talmudists have much to say respecting her--her wealth, her extreme
beauty, her braided locks, her shameless profligacy, her husband
Pappus, and her paramour, Pandera" (Life of Christ, p. 162).

In a chapter on "Sanctified Prostitution," Dr. Soury writes:
"The Jewess is full of naive immodesty, her lip red with desire,
her eye moist and singularly luminous in the shade. Yearning with
voluptuousness, superb in her triumphs, or merely feline and caressing,
she is ever the 'insatiable,' the woman 'with seven devils' of whom
the scripture speaks, a kind of burning furnace in which the blond
Teuton melts like wax. So far as in her lay, the Syrian woman, with
her supple and nervous arms, drew into the tomb the last exhausted
sons of Greece and Rome. But who can describe the grace and the
soft languor of these daughters of Syria, their large black eyes,
the warm bistre tints of their skin? All the poets of the decadence,
Catullus, Tibullus, Propercius, have sung this wondrous being. With
soft and humble voice, languid and as though crushed by some hidden
ill, dragging her limbs over the tiles of a gynaecium, she might have
been regarded as a stupid slave. Often, her gaze lost in long reveries,
she seemed dead, save that her bosom began to swell, her eye lighted
up, her breath quickened, her cheeks became covered with crimson. The
reverie becoming a reality by a matchless power of invovation and
desire, such is the sacred disease which, thanks to Mary Magdalene,
gave birth to Christianity" (Religion of Israel, pp. 70, 71).



593

Who were his apostles?

"A dozen knaves, as ignorant as owls and as poor as church
mice."--Voltaire.

"Palestine was one of the most backward of countries; the
Galileans were the most ignorant of the inhabitants of Palestine;
and the disciples might be counted among the most simple people of
Galilee."--Renan.

"His followers were 'unlearned and ignorant men,' chosen from the
humblest of the people."--Farrar.



594

What power is Christ said to have bestowed on Peter?

"And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven:
and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven:
and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven"
(Matthew xvi, 19).

On this remarkable bestowal of power, which has exerted such a
mighty influence in the government of the church, but of which Mark,
Luke and John know nothing, Greg comments as follows: "Not only
do we know Peter's utter unfitness to be the depositary of such a
fearful power, from his impetuosity and instability of character,
and Christ's thorough perception of this unfitness, but we find
immediately after it is said to have been conferred upon him, his
Lord addresses him indignantly by the epithet of Satan, and rebukes
him for his presumption and unspirituality; and shortly afterwards
this very man thrice denied his master. Can any one maintain it
to be conceivable that Jesus should have conferred the awful power
of deciding the salvation or damnation of his fellow-men upon one
so frail, so faulty, and so fallible? Does any one believe that he
did?" (Creed of Christendom, p. 189).



595

When Peter discovered that Jesus was the Christ what did he do?

Mark: "And Peter took him [Christ] and began to rebuke him" (viii, 32).

What did Jesus do in turn?

Mark: "He rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me Satan" (33).

What a spectacle! The incarnate God of the universe and his vicegerent
on earth indulging in a petty quarrel!



596

Give an account of Peter's denial of his Master.

Matthew: "Now when Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came
unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. But he denied
before them all, saying, I know not what thou sayest. And when he was
gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said unto them
that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. And
again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man. And after a
while came up to him they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely
thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee. Then began
he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man" (xxvi, 69-74).



597

What did Peter say to Jesus in regard to compensation for his services?

"Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have
therefore?" (Matthew xix, 27).

What request was made by James and John?

Mark: "They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy
right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory" (x, 37).

This shows that self-aggrandizement inspired the actions of his
followers then as it does today.



598

What is said of John in the Gospel of John?

"There was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples whom he loved"
(xiii, 23).

"The disciple standing by whom he [Jesus] loved" (xix, 26).

"The other disciple whom Jesus loved" (xx, 2).

"Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved
following; which also leaned on his breast at supper.... This is the
disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things"
(xxi, 20, 24).

If the Apostle John wrote this Gospel, as claimed by Christians and
as declared in the Gospel, he was a vulgar egotist.



599

What is said regarding the conduct of his Apostles on the evening
preceding the crucifixion?

Luke: "And there was also a strife among them, which of them should
be accounted the greatest" (xxii, 24).

This was immediately after he had announced his speedy betrayal
and death and when his disciples, if sincere, must have manifested
the deepest sadness and humility. If the Evangelist is not a base
calumniator the Apostles were a set of heartless knaves.



600

When the Jews came to arrest Jesus what did the disciples do?

Matthew: "Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled" (xxvi, 56).

Mark: "And they all forsook him, and fled" (xiv, 50).

Justin says: "All his friends [the Apostles] stood aloof from him,
having denied him" (Apology i, 50).

One scarcely knows which to detest the more, the treachery of Judas
in betraying his Master, or the imbecility and cowardice of the other
apostles who took no measures to prevent it and who forsook him in
the hour of danger.



601

What became of the Twelve Apostles?

The New Testament, a portion of which is admitted to have been written
as late as the latter part of the first century and nearly all of
which was really written in the second century, is silent regarding
them. Christian martyrology records their fates as follows:

St. Peter was crucified, at his own request head downward, and buried
in the Vatican at Rome.

St. Andrew, after having been scourged seven times upon his naked body,
was crucified by the proconsul of Achaia.

St. James was beheaded by Herod Antipas in Palestine.

St. John was "thrown into a cauldron of boiling oil" by Domitian,
but God "delivered him."

St. Philip was scourged and crucified or hanged by the magistrates
of Hierapolis.

St. Bartholomew was put to death by a Roman governor in Armenia.

St. Matthew suffered martyrdom at Naddabar in Ethiopia.

St. Thomas was shot to death with arrows by the Brahmans in India.

St. James the Less was thrown from the pinnacle of the temple at
Jerusalem and dispatched with a club where he fell.

St. Simon was "crucified and buried" in Britain.

St. Jude was "cruelly put to death" by the Magi of Persia.

St. Matthias, the successor of Judas Iscariot, if Christian tradition
is to be credited, was put to death three times, crucified, stoned,
and beheaded.

Nothing can be more incredible than these so-called traditions
regarding the martyrdom of the Twelve Apostles, the most of them
occurring in an empire where all religious sects enjoyed as perfect
religious freedom as the different sects do in America today. Whatever
opinion may be entertained respecting the existence of Jesus, the
Twelve Apostles belong to the realm of mythology, and their alleged
martyrdoms are pure inventions. Had these men really existed Christian
history at least would contain some reliable notice of them, yet all
the stories relating to them, like the story of Peter at Rome, and
John at Ephesus, are self-evident fictions. In the significant words of
the eminent Dutch theologians, Dr. Kuenen, Dr. Oort and Dr. Hooykaas,
"All the Apostles disappear without a trace."



602

What are Paul's teachings regarding woman and marriage?

"It is good for a man not to touch a woman" (1 Corinthians vii, 1).

"I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them
if they abide even as I. But if they cannot contain, let them marry;
for it is better to marry than to burn" (8, 9).

"Art thou loose from a wife? seek not a wife" (27).

"He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord,
how he may please the Lord; but he that is married careth for the
things that are of the world, how he may please his wife. There is
difference also between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman
careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy in body and
spirit; but she that is married careth for the things of the world,
how she may please her husband" (32-34).

"So then he that giveth her in marriage doeth well; but he that giveth
not in marriage doeth better" (38).

"This coarse and insulting way of regarding women, as though they
existed merely to be the safety-valves of men's passions, and that
the best men were above the temptation of loving them, has been the
source of unnumbered evils."--Annie Besant.

"Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands" (Colossians iii, 18).

"As the church is subject unto Christ so let the wives be to their
own husbands in everything" (Ephesians v, 24).

"Let your women keep silence in the churches, for it is not permitted
unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience,
as also saith the law. And if they will learn anything, let them ask
their husbands at home; for it is a shame for a woman to speak in
the church" (1 Corinthians xiv, 34, 35).

"Let women learn in silence with all subjection" (1 Timothy ii, 11).

"That she [woman] does not crouch today where St. Paul tried to bind
her, she owes to the men who are grand and brave enough to ignore
St. Paul, and rise superior to his God."--Helen Gardener.



603

Did Paul encourage learning?

"The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God" (1 Corinthians
iii, 19).

"Knowledge puffeth up" (viii, 1).

"If any man be ignorant let him be ignorant" (xiv, 38).

"Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy" (Colossians ii, 8).

"The clergy, with a few honorable exceptions, have in all modern
countries been the avowed enemies of the diffusion of knowledge, the
danger of which to their own profession they, by a certain instinct,
seem always to have perceived."--Buckle.

"We know the clerical party; it is an old party. This it is which
has found for the truth those two marvelous supporters, ignorance and
error. This it is which forbids to science and genius the going beyond
the Missal and which wishes to cloister thought in dogmas. Every step
which the intelligence of Europe has taken has been in spite of it. Its
history is written in the history of human progress, but it is written
on the back of the leaf. It is opposed to it all. This it is which
caused Prinelli to be scourged for having said that the stars would
not fall. This it is which put Campanella seven times to torture for
saying that the number of worlds was infinite and for having caught a
glimpse of the secret of creation. This it is which persecuted Harvey
for having proved the circulation of the blood. In the name of Jesus
it shut up Galileo. In the name of St. Paul it imprisoned Christopher
Columbus. To discover a law of the heavens was an impiety, to find a
world was a heresy. This it is which anathematized Pascal in the name
of religion, Montaigne in the name of morality, Moliere in the name
of both morality and religion. There is not a poet, not an author,
not a thinker, not a philosopher, that you accept. All that has been
written, found, dreamed, deduced, inspired, imagined, invented by
genius, the treasures of civilization, the venerable inheritance of
generations, you reject."--Victor Hugo.

"There is in every village a lighted torch, the schoolmaster; and a
mouth to blow it out, the parson."--Ibid.



604

What admissions are made by Paul regarding his want of candor and
honesty?

"Being crafty, I caught you with guile" (2 Corinthians xii, 16).

"Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews"
(1 Corinthians ix, 20).

"I am made all things to all men" (22).

"For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto his
glory, why yet am I also judged as a sinner?" (Romans iii, 7.)

"I robbed other churches, taking wages of them, to do you service"
(2 Corinthians xi, 8).



605

What is said of the persecutions of Paul?

"And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest, and desired of him
letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of this
way, whether they were men or women he might bring them bound unto
Jerusalem" (Acts ix, 1, 2).

This was Saul the Jew.

"But there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel
of Christ.... If any man preach any other gospel than that ye have
received, let him be accursed" (Galatians i, 7, 9).

"I would they were even cut off which trouble you" (v, 12).

This was Paul the Christian.

The leopard changed his name but did not change his spots.

The alleged cause of Paul's sudden conversion and the transference of
his hatred from Christianity to Judaism may well be questioned. The
story of the apparition will not account for it. A genuine change
of belief is not usually effected suddenly. Men sometimes change
their religion for gain or revenge. It has been charged that Paul
twice changed his, the first time for the hope of gain, the second
from a desire for revenge. The Ebionites, one of the earliest of the
Christian sects, claimed that Paul was originally a Gentile, that
becoming infatuated with the daughter of the high priest he became
a convert to Judaism for the purpose of winning her for a wife, but
being rejected, he renounced the Jewish faith and became a vehement
opponent of the law, the Sabbath, and circumcision (Epiphanius Against
Heresies, chapter xxx, sec. 16).



606

What was Christ's final command to his disciples?

"Love one another" (John xiii, 34).

Christian writers prate about brotherly love, and yet from the very
beginning the church of Christ has been filled with dissensions. Christ
himself quarreled with his apostles. Paul opposed the teachings of
James (Galatians ii, 16-21); James condemned the teachings of Paul
(ii, 20). Paul proclaimed himself the divinely appointed apostle to
the Gentiles: "The gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me"
(Galatians ii, 7). Peter contended that the mission had been assigned
to him: "And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and
said unto them, Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago
God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear
the word of the gospel" (Acts xv, 7).

Paul declared Peter to be a dissembler. "But when Peter was come to
Antioch, I withstood him face to face, because he was to be blamed. For
before that certain came from James, he did eat with Gentiles; but
when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them
which were of the circumcision. And the other Jews dissembled likewise
with him" (Galatians ii, 11-13).

John denounced Paul as a liar. "Thou hast tried them which say they are
apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars" (Revelation ii, 2).

From these seeds of dissension death has reaped a bloody
harvest. Dr. Talmage says: "A red line runs through church history
for nearly nineteen hundred years--a line of blood; not by hundreds,
but by millions we count the slain."

Lord Byron says: "I am no Platonist; I am nothing at all. But I would
sooner be a Paulician, Manichean, Spinozist, Gentile, Pyrrhonian,
Zoroastrian, than one of the seventy-two villainous sects who are
tearing each other to pieces for the love of the Lord and hatred of
each other."



607

Quote Paul's characterization of Christians.

"Not many wise ... not many noble are called" (1 Corinthians i, 26).

"Base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God
chosen" (28).

"We are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of
all things" (iv, 13).

"We are fools for Christ's sake" (10).



608

What did Christ say respecting the intellectual character of his
converts?

"I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them
unto babes" (Matthew xi, 25; Luke x, 21).

Commenting on this expression of thanks, Celsus, who lived at the
time the Four Gospels made their appearance, says: "This is one of
their [the Christians'] rules: Let no man that is learned, wise,
or prudent come among us; but if they be unlearned, or a child,
or an idiot, let him freely come. So they openly declare that none
but the ignorant, and those devoid of understanding, slaves, women,
and children, are fit disciples for the God they worship."

Concerning the Christian teachers of that age Celsus writes as follows:
"You may see weavers, tailors, fullers, and the most illiterate of
rustic fellows, who dare not speak a word before wise men, when they
can get a company of children and silly women together, set up to
teach strange paradoxes among them."



609

Whom did Christ declare to be among the first to enter the Kingdom
of Heaven?

Harlots and thieves.

"The harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you" (Matthew xxi, 31).

"Today shalt thou [the thief] be with me in paradise" (Luke xxiii, 43).



610

What promise did he make to his followers?

"In my Father's house are many mansions.... I go to prepare a place
for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again,
and receive you unto myself" (John xiv, 2, 3).

"Christians believe themselves to be the aristocracy of heaven upon
earth, they are admitted to the spiritual court, while millions of
men in foreign lands have never been presented. They bow their knees
and say they are 'miserable sinners,' and their hearts rankle with
abominable pride. Poor infatuated fools! Their servility is real and
their insolence is real but their king is a phantom and their palace
is a dream."--Winwood Reade.

The Christ is a myth. The Holy Ghost Priestcraft overshadowed the
harlot Superstition; this Christ was born; and the Joseph of humanity,
beguiled by the Gabriel of credulity, was induced to support the
family. But the soldiers of Reason have crucified the illegitimate
impostor; he is dead; and the ignorant disciples and hysterical women
who still linger about the cross should take his body down and bury it.







