CHAPTER III.

CHRISTIAN EVIDENCE.


The Four Gospels.

Farrar, in his "Life of Christ," concedes and deplores the dearth
of evidence concerning the subject of his work. He says: "It is
little short of amazing that neither history nor tradition should
have embalmed for us one certain or precious saying or circumstance
in the life of the Savior of Mankind, except the comparatively few
events recorded in four very brief biographies."

With these four brief biographies, the Four Gospels, Christianity
must stand or fall. These four documents, it is admitted, contain
practically all the evidence which can be adduced in proof of the
existence and divinity of Jesus Christ. Profane history, as we have
seen, affords no proof of this. The so-called apocryphal literature
of the early church has been discarded by the church itself. Even
the remaining canonical books of the New Testament are of little
consequence if the testimony of the Four Evangelists be successfully
impeached. Disprove the authenticity and credibility of these documents
and this Christian deity is removed to the mythical realm of Apollo,
Odin, and Osiris.

In a previous work, "The Bible," I have shown that the books of the
New Testament, with a few exceptions, are not authentic. This evidence
cannot be reproduced here in full. A brief summary of it must suffice.

The Four Gospels, it is claimed, were written by Matthew, Mark, Luke,
and John, two of them apostles, and two companions of the apostles
of Christ. If this claim be true the other writings of the apostles,
the writings of the Apostolic Fathers, and the writings of the early
Christian Fathers, ought to contain some evidences of the fact.

Twenty books--nearly all of the remaining books of the New
Testament--are said to have been written by the three apostles, Peter,
John, and Paul, a portion of them after the first three Gospels were
written; but it is admitted that they contain no evidence whatever
of the existence of these Gospels.

There are extant writings accredited to the Apostolic Fathers,
Clement of Rome, Barnabas, Hermas, Ignatius, and Polycarp; written,
for the most part, early in the second century. These writings contain
no mention of the Four Gospels. This also is admitted by Christian
scholars. Dr. Dodwell says: "We have at this day certain most authentic
ecclesiastical writers of the times, as Clemens Romanus, Barnabas,
Hermas, Ignatius, and Polycarp, who wrote in the order wherein I
have named them, and after all the writers of the New Testament. But
in Hermas you will not find one passage or any mention of the New
Testament, nor in all the rest is any one of the Evangelists named"
(Dissertations upon Irenaeus).

The Four Gospels were unknown to the early Christian Fathers. Justin
Martyr, the most eminent of the early Fathers, wrote about the middle
of the second century. His writings in proof of the divinity of Christ
demanded the use of these Gospels had they existed in his time. He
makes more than three hundred quotations from the books of the Old
Testament, and nearly one hundred from the Apocryphal books of the New
Testament; but none from the Four Gospels. The Rev. Dr. Giles says:
"The very names of the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
are never mentioned by him [Justin]--do not occur once in all his
writings" (Christian Records, p. 71).

Papias, another noted Father, was a contemporary of Justin. He
refers to writings of Matthew and Mark, but his allusions to them
clearly indicate that they were not the Gospels of Matthew and
Mark. Dr. Davidson, the highest English authority on the canon, says:
"He [Papias] neither felt the want nor knew the existence of inspired
Gospels" (Canon of the Bible, p. 123).

Theophilus, who wrote after the middle of the latter half of the second
century, mentions the Gospel of John, and Irenaeus, who wrote a little
later, mentions all of the Gospels, and makes numerous quotations from
them. In the latter half of the second century, then, between the
time of Justin and Papias, and the time of Theophilus and Irenaeus,
the Four Gospels were undoubtedly written or compiled.

These books are anonymous. They do not purport to have been written
by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. Their titles do not affirm it. They
simply imply that they are "according" to the supposed teachings of
these Evangelists. As Renan says, "They merely signify that these were
the traditions proceeding from each of these Apostles, and claiming
their authority." Concerning their authorship the Rev. Dr. Hooykaas
says: "They appeared anonymously. The titles placed above them in
our Bibles owe their origin to a later ecclesiastical tradition which
deserves no confidence whatever" (Bible for Learners, Vol. III, p. 24).

It is claimed that the Gospel of Matthew originally appeared in
Hebrew. Our version is a translation of a Greek work. Regarding this
St. Jerome says: "Who afterwards translated it into Greek is not
sufficiently certain." The consequences of this admission are thus
expressed by Michaelis: "If the original text of Matthew is lost,
and we have nothing but a Greek translation; then, frankly, we cannot
ascribe any divine inspiration to the words."

The contents of these books refute the claim that they were written
by the Evangelists named. They narrate events and contain doctrinal
teachings which belong to a later age. Matthew ascribes to Christ the
following language: "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my church" (xvi, 18). This Gospel is a Roman Catholic Gospel, and was
written after the beginning of the establishment of this hierarchy to
uphold the supremacy of the Petrine Church of Rome. Of this Gospel
Dr. Davidson says: "The author, indeed, must ever remain unknown"
(Introduction to New Testament, p. 72).

The Gospel of Luke is addressed to Theophilus. Theophilus, Bishop of
Antioch, who is believed to be the person addressed, flourished in
the latter half of the second century.

Dr. Schleiermacher, one of Germany's greatest theologians, after a
critical analysis of Luke, concludes that it is merely a compilation,
made up of thirty-three preexisting manuscripts. Bishop Thirlwall's
Schleiermacher says: "He [Luke] is from beginning to end no more than
the compiler and arranger of documents which he found in existence"
(p. 313).

The basis of this Gospel is generally believed to be the Gospel of
Marcion, a Pauline compilation, made about the middle of the second
century. Concerning this Gospel, the Rev. S. Baring-Gould, in his
"Lost and Hostile Gospels," says: "The arrangement is so similar that
we are forced to the conclusion that it was either used by St. Luke or
that it was his original composition. If he used it then his right
to the title of author of the Third Gospel falls to the ground,
as what he added was of small amount."

Mark, according to Renan, is the oldest of the Gospels; but Mark,
according to Strauss, was written after the Gospels of Matthew and
Luke were written. He says: "It is evidently a compilation, whether
made from memory or otherwise, from the first and third Gospels"
(Leben Jesu, p. 51). Judge Waite, in his "History of Christianity,"
says that all but twenty-four verses of this Gospel have their
parallels in Matthew and Luke. Davidson declares it to be an anonymous
work. "The author," he says, "is unknown."

Omitting the last twelve verses of Mark, which all Christian critics
pronounce spurious, the book contains no mention of the two great
miracles which mark the limits of Christ's earthly career, his
miraculous birth and his ascension.

Concerning the first three Gospels, the "Encyclopedia Britannica"
says: "It is certain that the Synoptic Gospels took their present form
only by degrees." Of these books Dr. Westcott says: "Their substance
is evidently much older than their form." Professor Robertson Smith
pronounces them "unapostolic digests of the second century."

The internal evidence against the authenticity of the Fourth Gospel
is conclusive. The Apostle John did not write it. John, the apostle,
was a Jew; the author of the Fourth Gospel was not a Jew. John was
born at Bethsaida; the author of the Fourth Gospel did not know
where Bethsaida was located. John was an uneducated fisherman;
the author of this Gospel was an accomplished scholar. Some of the
most important events in the life of Jesus, the Synoptics declare,
were witnessed by John; the author of this knows nothing of these
events. The Apostle John witnessed the crucifixion; the author of
this Gospel did not. The Apostles, including John, believed Jesus to
be a man; the author of the Fourth Gospel believed him to be a god.

Regarding the authorship of the Fourth Gospel, Dr. Davidson says: "The
Johannine authorship has receded before the tide of modern criticism,
and though this tide is arbitrary at times, it is here irresistible"
(Canon of the Bible, p. 127).

That the authenticity of the Four Gospels cannot be maintained is
conceded by every impartial critic. The author of "Supernatural
Religion," in one of the most profound and exhaustive works on
this subject ever written, expresses the result of his labors in
the following words: "After having exhausted the literature and the
testimony bearing on the point, we have not found a single distinct
trace of any of those Gospels during the first century and a half
after the death of Jesus" (Supernatural Religion, Vol. II, p. 248).

Fifteen hundred years ago, Bishop Faustus, a heretical Christian
theologian, referring to this so-called Gospel history, wrote: "It
is allowed not to have been written by the son himself nor by his
apostles, but long after by some unknown men who, lest they should
be suspected of writing things they knew nothing of, gave to their
books the names of the Apostles."

The following is the verdict of the world's greatest Bible critic,
Baur: "These Gospels are spurious, and were written in the second
century."



Acts, Catholic Epistles, and Revelation.

The Acts of the Apostles is supposed to have been written by the
author of the Third Gospel. Like this book it is anonymous and of late
origin. It contains historical inaccuracies, contradicts the Gospel of
Matthew, and conflicts with the writings of Paul. Concerning the last,
the "Bible for Learners" (Vol. III, p. 25) says: "In the first two
chapters of the Epistle to the Galatians, he [Paul] gives us several
details of his own past life; and no sooner do we place his story
side by side with that of the Acts than we clearly perceive that this
book contains an incorrect account, and that its inaccuracy is not
the result of accident or ignorance, but of a deliberate design."

This book purports to be the product chiefly of three minds: that
of the author who gives a historical sketch of the early church,
and those of Peter and Paul whose discourses are reported. And yet
the three compositions are clearly the products of one mind--that
of the author. The evident purpose of the work is to heal the bitter
dissensions which existed between the Petrine and Pauline churches,
and this points unmistakably to the latter part of the second century
as the date of its appearance, when the work of uniting the various
Christian sects into the Catholic church began. Renan considers this
the most faulty book of the New Testament.

The seven Catholic Epistles, James, First and Second Peter, First,
Second and Third John, and Jude, have never been held in very high
esteem by the church. Many of the Christian Fathers rejected them,
while modern Christian scholars have generally considered them of
doubtful authenticity. The first and last of these were rejected by
Martin Luther. "St. James' Epistle," says Luther, "is truly an epistle
of straw" (Preface to Luther's New Testament, ed. 1524). Jude, he says,
"is an abstract or copy of St. Peter's Second, and allegeth stories
and sayings which have no place in Scripture" (Standing Preface).

The First Epistle of Peter and the First Epistle of John have generally
been accorded a higher degree of authority than the others; but even
these were not written by apostles, nor in the first century. Dr. Soury
says that First Peter "dates, in all probability, from the year 130
A. D., at the earliest" (Jesus and the Gospels, p. 32). Irenaeus, the
founder of the New Testament canon, rejected it. The Dutch critics,
who deny the Johannine authorship of the Fourth Gospel, and assign
its composition to the second century, say: "The First Epistle of
John soon issued from the same school in imitation of the Gospel"
(Bible for Learners, Vol. III, p. 692).

Second Peter is a forgery. Westcott says there is no proof of its
existence prior to 170 A. D. Smith's "Bible Dictionary" says "Many
reject the epistle as altogether spurious." The brief epistles of
Second and Third John are anonymous and of very late origin. They do
not purport to be the writings of John. The superscriptions declare
them to be from an elder, and this precludes the claim that they are
from an apostle. The early Fathers ignored them.

Revelation is the only book in the Bible which claims to be the word of
God. At the same time it is the book of which Christians have always
been the most suspicious. It is addressed to the seven churches
of Asia, but the seven churches of Asia rejected it. Concerning
the attitude of ancient churchmen toward it, Dionysius, Bishop of
Alexandria, says: "Divers of our predecessors have wholly refused and
rejected this book, and by discussing the several parts thereof have
found it obscure and void of reason and the title forged."

"The most learned and intelligent of Protestant divines," says the
Edinburgh Review, "almost all doubted or denied the canonicity
of the book of Revelation." It is a book which, Dr. South said,
"either found a man mad or left him so." Calvin and Beza both forbade
their clergy to attempt an explanation of its contents. Luther says:
"In the Revelation of John much is wanting to let me deem it either
prophetic or apostolical" (Preface to N. T., 1524).

Considered as evidences of Christ's historical existence and divinity
these nine books are of no value. They are all anonymous writings or
forgeries, and, with the possible exception of Revelation, of very
late origin. While they affirm Christ's existence they are almost
entirely silent regarding his life and miracles.



The Epistles of Paul.

Of the fourteen epistles ascribed to Paul, seven--Ephesians,
Colossians, Second Thessalonians, First and Second Timothy, Titus,
and Hebrews--are conceded by nearly all critics to be spurious, while
three others--Philippians, First Thessalonians, and Philemon--are
generally classed as doubtful.

The general verdict concerning the first seven is thus expressed by
the Rev. Dr. Hooykaas: "Fourteen epistles are said to be Paul's;
but we must at once strike off one, namely, that to the Hebrews,
which does not bear his name at all. ... The two letters to Timothy
and the letter to Titus were certainly composed long after the death
of Paul.... It is more than possible that the letters to the Ephesians
and Colossians are also unauthentic, and the same suspicion rests,
perhaps, on the first, but certainly on the second of the Epistles
to the Thessalonians" (Bible for Learners, Vol. III, p. 23).

The author of Second Thessalonians, whose epistle is a self-evident
forgery, declares First Thessalonians to be a forgery. Baur and the
Tubingen school reject both Epistles. Baur also rejects Philippians:
"The Epistles to the Colossians and to the Philippians ... are
spurious, and were written by the Catholic school near the end of the
second century, to heal the strife between the Jew and the Gentile
factions" (Paulus). Dr. Kuenen and the other Dutch critics admit that
Philippians and Philemon, as well as First Thessalonians, are doubtful.

That the Pastoral Epistles are forgeries is now conceded by all
critics. According to the German critics they belong to the second
century. Hebrews does not purport to be a Pauline document. Luther
says: "The Epistle to the Hebrews is not by St. Paul, nor, indeed,
by any apostle" (Standing Preface to Luther's N. T.).

Four Epistles--Romans, First and Second Corinthians, and
Galatians--while rejected by a few critics, are generally admitted
to be the genuine writings of Paul. These books were written, it is
claimed, about a quarter of a century after the death of Christ. They
are the only books of the New Testament whose authenticity can be
maintained.

Admitting the authenticity of these books, however, is not
admitting the historical existence of Christ and the divine origin of
Christianity. Paul was not a witness of the alleged events upon which
Christianity rests. He did not become a convert to Christianity until
many years after the death of Christ. He did not see Christ (save in
a vision); he did not listen to his teachings; he did not learn from
his disciples. "The Gospel which was preached of me is not after man,
for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it" (Gal. i,
11, 12). Paul accepted only to a very small extent the religion
of Christ's disciples. He professed to derive his knowledge from
supernatural sources--from trances and visions. Regarding the value of
such testimony the author of "Supernatural Religion" (p. 970) says:
"No one can deny, and medical and psychological annals prove, that
many men have been subject to visions and hallucinations which have
never been seriously attributed to supernatural causes. There is not
one single valid reason removing the ecstatic visions and trances of
the Apostle Paul from this class."

The corporeal existence of the Christ of the Evangelists receives
slight confirmation in the writings of Paul. His Christ was not the
incarnate Word of John, nor the demi-god of Matthew and Luke. Of the
immaculate conception of Jesus he knew nothing. To him Christ was the
son of God in a spiritual rather than in a physical sense. "His son
Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according
to the flesh; and declared to be the son of God with power, according
to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead" (Rom. i,
3, 4). "God sent forth his son, made of a woman [but not of a virgin],
made under the law" (Gal. iv, 4).

With the Evangelists the proofs of Christ's divinity are his
miracles. Their books teem with accounts of these. But Paul evidently
knows nothing of these miracles. With him the evidences of Christ's
divine mission are his resurrection and the spiritual gifts conferred
on those who accept him.

The Evangelists teach a material resurrection. When the women visited
his tomb "they entered in and found not the body of Jesus" (Luke xxiv,
3). The divine messengers said to them, "He is not here, but is risen"
(6). "He sat at meat" with his disciples; "he took bread, and blessed
it, and brake, and gave to them" (30). "Then he said to Thomas, Reach
hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and
thrust it into my side" (John xx, 27). This is entirely at variance
with the teachings of Paul. "But now is Christ risen from the dead,
and become the first fruits of them that slept. For since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead" (1 Cor. xv, 20,
21). "But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with
what body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened, except it die; and that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that body that shall be" (35-37). "It is sown a natural body;
it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there
is a spiritual body" (44). "Now this I say brethren, that flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God" (50).

The Christ that Paul saw in a vision was a spiritual being--an
apparition; and this appearance he considers of exactly the
same character as the post mortem appearances of Christ to his
disciples. "He was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve; after that
he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; ... after that,
he was seen of James; then of all the Apostles. And last of all,
he was seen of me also" (1 Cor. xv, 5-8).







