CHAPTER IX.

THE CHRIST A MYTH.


The conceptions regarding the nature and character of Christ, and the
value of the Christian Scriptures as historical evidence, are many,
chief of which are the following:

1. Orthodox Christians believe that Christ is a historical character,
supernatural and divine; and that the New Testament narratives,
which purport to give a record of his life and teachings, contain
nothing but infallible truth.

2. Conservative Rationalists, like Renan, and the Unitarians,
believe that Jesus of Nazareth is a historical character and that
these narratives, eliminating the supernatural elements, which they
regard as myths, give a fairly authentic account of his life.

3. Many radical Freethinkers believe that Christ is a myth, of which
Jesus of Nazareth is the basis, but that these narratives are so
legendary and contradictory as to be almost, if not wholly, unworthy
of credit.

4. Other Freethinkers believe that Jesus Christ is a pure myth--that
he never had an existence, except as a Messianic idea, or an imaginary
solar deity.

The first of these conceptions must be rejected because the existence
of such a being is impossible, and because the Bible narratives which
support it are incredible. The second cannot be accepted because,
outside of these incredible narratives, there is no evidence to confirm
it. One of the two last is the only true and rational conception of
the Christ.

Jesus Christ is a myth. But what do we understand by the term
myth? Falsehood, fable, and myth, are usually considered synonymous
terms. But a falsehood, a fable, and a myth, while they may all be
fictions and equally untrue, are not the same. A falsehood is the
expression of an untruth intended to deceive. A fable is an avowed
or implied fiction usually intended to instruct or entertain. A myth
is a falsehood, a fable, or an erroneous opinion, which eventually
becomes an established belief. While a falsehood and a fable are
intentional and immediate expressions of fiction, a myth is, in most
cases, an unconscious and gradual development of one.

Myths are of three kinds: Historical, Philosophical, and Poetical.

A Historical myth according to Strauss, and to some extent I follow
his language, is a real event colored by the light of antiquity, which
confounded the human and divine, the natural and the supernatural. The
event may be but slightly colored and the narrative essentially true,
or it may be distorted and numberless legends attached until but
a small residuum of truth remains and the narrative is essentially
false. A large portion of ancient history, including the Biblical
narratives, are historical myths. The earliest records of all nations
and of all religions are more or less mythical. "Nothing great has been
established," says Renan, "which does not rest on a legend. The only
culprit in such cases is the humanity which is willing to be deceived."

A Philosophical myth is an idea clothed in the dress of historical
narrative. When a mere idea is personified and presented in the form
of a man or a god it is called a pure myth. Many of the gods and
heroes of antiquity are pure myths. John Fiske refers to a myth as
"a piece of unscientific philosophizing," and this is a fairly good
definition of the philosophical myth.

A Poetical myth is a blending of the historical and philosophical,
embellished by the creations of the imagination. The poems of Homer
and Hesiod, which were the religious text books of the ancient Greeks,
and the poetical writings of the Bible, which helped to form and
foster the Semitic faiths of Judaism, Christianity, and Mohammedanism,
belong to this class.

It is often difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish a historical
from a philosophical myth. Hence the non-agreement of Freethinkers in
regard to the nature of the Christ myth. Is Christ a historical or a
philosophical myth? Does an analysis of his alleged history disclose
the deification of a man, or merely the personification of an idea?

The following hypothesis, written by Mrs. Besant, of England, is,
to a considerable extent, an epitome of the views of Strauss, who,
in his masterly "Leben Jesu," adopts the historical myth:

"The mythic theory accepts an historical groundwork for many
of the stories about Jesus, but it does not seek to explain the
miraculous by attenuating it into the natural.... It attributes
the incredible portions of the history to the Messianic theories
current among the Jews. The Messiah would do this and that; Jesus
was the Messiah; therefore, Jesus did this and that--such, argue the
supporters of the mythical theory, was the method in which the mythus
was developed.... Thus, Jesus is descended from David, because the
Messiah was to come of David's lineage; his birth is announced by an
angelic visitant, because the birth of the Messiah must not be less
honored than that of Isaac or of Samson; he is born of a virgin,
because God says of the Messiah, 'this day have I begotten thee,'
implying the direct paternity of God, and because the prophecy in
Is. vii, 14, was applied to the Messiah by the later Jews; born at
Bethlehem, because there the Messiah was to be born (Micah v, 2);
announced to shepherds, because Moses was visited among the flocks,
and David taken from the sheepfolds at Bethlehem; heralded by a star,
because a star should arise out of Jacob (Num. xxiv, 17), and 'the
Gentiles shall come to thy light' (Is. lx, 3); worshiped by Magi,
because the star was seen by Balaam, the magus, and astrologers would
be those who would most notice a star; presented with gifts by these
Eastern sages, because kings of Arabia and Saba shall offer gifts
(Ps. lxxii, 10); saved from the destruction of the infants by a
jealous king, because Moses, one of the great types of the Messiah,
was so saved; flying into Egypt and thence returning, because Israel,
again a type of the Messiah, so fled and returned, and 'out of Egypt
have I called my son' (Hos. xi, 1); at twelve years of age found
in the temple, because the duties of the law devolved on the Jewish
boy at that age, and where should the Messiah then be found save in
his Father's temple? recognized at his baptism by a divine voice,
to fulfil Is. xlii, 1; hovered over by a dove, because the brooding
spirit (Gen. i, 2) was regarded as dove-like, and the spirit was to be
especially poured on the Messiah (Is. xlii, 1); tempted by the devil to
test him, because God tested his greatest servants, and would surely
test the Messiah; fasting forty days in the wilderness, because the
types of the Messiah--Moses and Elijah--thus fasted in the desert;
healing all manner of disease, because Messiah was to heal (Is. xxxv,
5-6); preaching, because Messiah was to preach (Is. lxi, 1-2);
crucified, because the hands and feet of Messiah were to be pierced
(Ps. xxii, 16); mocked, because Messiah was to be mocked (Ib. 6-8);
his garments divided, because thus it was spoken of Messiah (Ib. 18);
silent before his judges, because Messiah was not to open his mouth
(Is. liii, 7); buried by the rich, because Messiah was thus to find
his grave (Ib. 9); rising again, because Messiah could not be left
in hell (Ps. xvi, 10); sitting at God's right hand, because there
Messiah was to sit as king (Ps. cx, 1). Thus the form of the Messiah
was cast, and all that had to be done was to pour in the human metal;
those who alleged that the Messiah had come in the person of Jesus
of Nazareth, adapted his story to the story of the Messiah, pouring
the history of Jesus into the mould already made for the Messiah,
and thus the mythus was transformed into a history."

The foregoing theory, with various modifications, is accepted by a
majority of Freethinkers at the present time.

The hypothesis that Christ is a philosophical myth, based, like
the preceding one, upon the Messianic idea, is thus presented by
T. B. Wakeman:

"Never was there an example of a word becoming a believed person,
under this law of materialization, more plainly and evolutionally
than the 'Messiah' and 'Son of Man' of the Hebrew prophecies.... The
Christ, 'Jesus,' was no man, for the reason that he was prophesied
and visionated into this world and life to do a work that it would
be utterly absurd to suppose a man could ever do. The Romans had
killed, and could easily kill, every man who had tried to resist
their oppression. Now the God Yahweh by his 'eternally begotten son,'
spiritized as the 'Son of Man,' that is the 'Soul of the State,' as
Shakespeare makes Ulysses say it, must, in order to be of any avail
appear with supernatural powers. He was the personified people, Israel;
he had been crucified alive, in their subjection and massacre even to
the death and Hades. But by supernatural power he, the Israel, would
rise again and bring the final judgment backed by the infinite power
of the nation's Father, Yahweh. It was only a Spirit-God who could do
this--nothing less could be originated, or thought of, or provided,
for such a superhuman purpose. A person, a man, a reformer, a weak
edition of Socrates, or Savonarola or Bruno! How absurd! The human
heart in its despair by its imagination, brought a God into the world
to do a God's work. 'No man,' said Napoleon; 'nor a God,' says Science,
except the idea. Such it was that finally united the millions of Asia,
Africa, Europe, and America, in a dream so intoxicating that it dares
not to be awakened though the dawn of Science is here."

Mr. Wakeman argues that the silence of history for one hundred years
after the alleged appearance of Christ can be explained only upon this
hypothesis of an ideal Christ. To this the advocate of the historical
mythus may, I think, very properly reply: History, for the most part,
takes cognizance only of noted men and important events; and while
this silence precludes the existence of the supernatural Christ of
Christians, and even that of the human Jesus of Renan, it does not
necessarily preclude the existence of an obscure religious teacher
and an insignificant sect which subsequently, by a chain of fortuitous
circumstances, became the mightiest among the religions of the world.

Again, this hypothesis presupposes a considerable degree of
intellectuality on the part of those who evolved this ideal Christ,
while tradition represents the founders of the Christian religion
as grossly ignorant. Had this Christ originally sprung from the
Hellenistic Jews of intellectual Alexandria instead of from the Jewish
dregs of illiterate Galilee, Mr. Wakeman's theory would appeal with
surprising force. Still it must be admitted that some of the earliest
Christian sects denied the material existence of Christ.

Another philosophical hypothesis, the astronomical, which regards
Christ as a solar myth, is advanced by Volney.

"These mythological traditions recounted that, 'in the beginning,
a woman and a man had, by their fall, introduced into the world sin
and misery.'

"By this was denoted the astronomical fact that the celestial virgin
and the herdsman (Bootes), by setting heliacally at the autumnal
equinox, delivered the world to the wintry constellations, and seemed,
on falling below the horizon, to introduce into the world the genius
of evil (Ahrimanes), represented by the constellation of the serpent.

"These traditions related that the woman had decoyed and seduced
the man.

"And, in fact, the virgin setting first seems to draw the herdsman
after her.

"That the woman tempted him by offering him fruit fair to the sight,
and good to eat, which gave the knowledge of good and evil.

"And, in fact, the virgin holds in her hand a branch of fruit which
she seems to offer to the herdsman; and the branch, emblem of autumn,
placed in the picture of Mithra between winter and summer seems to
open the door and give knowledge, the key to good and evil.

"That this couple had been driven from the celestial garden, and that
a cherub with a flaming sword had been placed at the gate to guard it.

"And, in fact, when the virgin and the herdsman fall beneath the
western horizon, Perseus rises on the other side; and this genius,
with a sword in his hand, seems to drive them from the summer heaven,
the garden and dominion of fruits and flowers.

"That of the virgin should be born, spring up, an offspring, a child,
who should bruise the head of the serpent, and deliver the world
from sin.

"This denotes the sun, which, at the moment of the winter solstice,
precisely when the Persian magi drew the horoscope of the new year,
was placed on the bosom of the virgin, rising heliacally in the eastern
horizon. On this account he was figured in their astrological pictures
under the form of a child suckled by a chaste virgin, and became
afterward, at the vernal equinox, the ram, or lamb, triumphant over
the constellation of the serpent, which disappeared from the skies.

"That, in his infancy, the restorer of divine and celestial nature
would live abased, humble, obscure and indigent.

"And this, because the winter sun is abased below the horizon and that
this first period of his four ages or seasons is a time of obscurity,
scarcity, fasting and want.

"That being put to death by the wicked, he had risen gloriously; that
he had reascended from hell to heaven, where he would reign forever.

"This is a sketch of the life of the sun, who, finishing his career
at the winter solstice, when Typhon and the rebel angels gain the
dominion, seems to be put to death by them; but who soon after is
born again, and rises into the vault of heaven, where he reigns."

Count Volney's portraiture of the second member of the Christian
godhead is, for the most part, accurate. Numerous other analogies
between him and the ancient sun gods might be named.

It is the belief of many, however, that these solar attributes of
Christ are later accretions borrowed by the Roman Catholic church
from the Pagan religions which it supplanted.

While all Freethinkers are agreed that the Christ of the New
Testament is a myth they are not, as we have seen, and perhaps never
will be, fully agreed as to the nature of this myth. Some believe
that he is a historical myth; others that he is a pure myth. Some
believe that Jesus, a real person, was the germ of this Christ whom
subsequent generations gradually evolved; others contend that the
man Jesus, as well as the Christ, is wholly a creation of the human
imagination. After carefully weighing the evidence and arguments in
support of each hypothesis the writer, while refraining from expressing
a dogmatic affirmation regarding either, is compelled to accept the
former as the more probable.







