BOOK VI.

SCIPIO'S DREAM.


     I. Therefore you rely upon all the prudence of this rule,
     which has derived its very name (_prudentia_) from foreseeing
     (_a providendo_). Wherefore the citizen must so prepare
     himself as to be always armed against those things which
     trouble the constitution of a state. And that dissension of
     the citizens, when one party separates from and attacks
     another, is called sedition.

     And in truth in civil dissensions, as the good are of more
     importance than the many, I think that we should regard the
     weight of the citizens, and not their number.

     For the lusts, being severe mistresses of the thoughts,
     command and compel many an unbridled action. And as they
     cannot be satisfied or appeased by any means, they urge those
     whom they have inflamed with their allurements to every kind
     of atrocity.

     II. Which indeed was so much the greater in him because
     though the cause of the colleagues was identical, not only
     was their unpopularity not equal, but the influence of
     Gracchus was employed in mitigating the hatred borne to
     Claudius.

     Who encountered the number of the chiefs and nobles with
     these words, and left behind him that mournful and dignified
     expression of his gravity and influence.

     That, as he writes, a thousand men might every day descend
     into the forum with cloaks dyed in purple.

          [_The next paragraph is unintelligible._]

     For our ancestors wished marriages to be firmly established.

     There is a speech extant of Laelius with which we are all
     acquainted, expressing how pleasing to the immortal gods are
     the * * * and * * * of the priests.

     III. Cicero, writing about the Commonwealth, in imitation of
     Plato, has related the story of the return of Er the
     Pamphylian to life; who, as he says, had come to life again
     after he had been placed on the funeral pile, and related
     many secrets about the shades below; not speaking, like
     Plato, in a fabulous imitation of truth, but using a certain
     reasonable invention of an ingenious dream, cleverly
     intimating that these things which were uttered about the
     immortality of the soul, and about heaven, are not the
     inventions of dreaming philosophers, nor the incredible
     fables which the Epicureans ridicule, but the conjectures of
     wise men. He insinuates that that Scipio who by the
     subjugation of Carthage obtained Africanus as a surname for
     his family, gave notice to Scipio the son of Paulus of the
     treachery which threatened him from his relations, and the
     course of fate, because by the necessity of numbers he was
     confined in the period of a perfect life, and he says that he
     in the fifty-sixth year of his age * * *

     IV. Some of our religion who love Plato, on account of his
     admirable kind of eloquence, and of some correct opinions
     which he held, say that he had some opinions similar to my
     own touching the resurrection of the dead, which subject
     Tully touches on in his treatise on the Commonwealth, and
     says that he was rather jesting than intending to say that
     was true. For he asserts that a man returned to life, and
     related some stories which harmonized with the discussions of
     the Platonists.

     V. In this point the imitation has especially preserved the
     likeness of the work, because, as Plato, in the conclusion of
     his volume, represents a certain person who had returned to
     life, which he appeared to have quitted, as indicating what
     is the condition of souls when stripped of the body, with the
     addition of a certain not unnecessary description of the
     spheres and stars, an appearance of circumstances indicating
     things of the same kind is related by the Scipio of Cicero,
     as having been brought before him in sleep.

     VI. Tully is found to have preserved this arrangement with no
     less judgment than genius. After, in every condition of the
     Commonwealth, whether of leisure or business, he has given
     the palm to justice, he has placed the sacred abodes of the
     immortal souls, and the secrets of the heavenly regions, on
     the very summit of his completed work, indicating whither
     they must come, or rather return, who have managed the
     republic with prudence, justice, fortitude, and moderation.
     But that Platonic relater of secrets was a man of the name of
     Er, a Pamphylian by nation, a soldier by profession, who,
     after he appeared to have died from wounds received in
     battle, and twelve days afterward was about to receive the
     honors of the funeral pile with the others who were slain at
     the same time, suddenly either recovering his life, or else
     never having lost it, as if he were giving a public
     testimony, related to all men all that he had done or seen in
     the days that he had thus passed between life and death.
     Although Cicero, as if himself conscious of the truth,
     grieves that this story has been ridiculed by the ignorant,
     still, avoiding giving an example of foolish reproach, he
     preferred speaking of the relater as of one awakened from a
     swoon rather than restored to life.

     VII. And before we look at the words of the dream we must
     explain what kind of persons they are by whom Cicero says
     that even the account of Plato was ridiculed, who are not
     apprehensive that the same thing may happen to them. Nor by
     this expression does he wish the ignorant mob to be
     understood, but a kind of men who are ignorant of the truth,
     though pretending to be philosophers with a display of
     learning, who, it was notorious, had read such things, and
     were eager to find faults. We will say, therefore, who they
     are whom he reports as having levelled light reproaches
     against so great a philosopher, and who of them has even left
     an accusation of him committed to writing, etc. The whole
     faction of the Epicureans, always wandering at an equal
     distance from truth, and thinking everything ridiculous which
     they do not understand, has ridiculed the sacred volume, and
     the most venerable mysteries of nature. But Colotes, who is
     somewhat celebrated and remarkable for his loquacity among
     the pupils of Epicurus, has even recorded in a book the
     bitter reproaches which he aims at him. But since the other
     arguments which he foolishly urges have no connection with
     the dream of which we are now talking, we will pass them over
     at present, and attend only to the calumny which will stick
     both to Cicero and Plato, unless it is silenced. He says that
     a fable ought not to have been invented by a philosopher,
     since no kind of falsehood is suitable to professors of
     truth. For why, says he, if you wish to give us a notion of
     heavenly things and to teach us the nature of souls, did you
     not do so by a simple and plain explanation? Why was a
     character invented, and circumstances, and strange events,
     and a scene of cunningly adduced falsehood arranged, to
     pollute the very door of the investigation of truth by a lie?
     Since these things, though they are said of the Platonic Er,
     do also attack the rest of our dreaming Africanus.

     VIII. This occasion incited Scipio to relate his dream, which
     he declares that he had buried in silence for a long time.
     For when Laelius was complaining that there were no statues of
     Nasica erected in any public place, as a reward for his
     having slain the tyrant, Scipio replied in these words: "But
     although the consciousness itself of great deeds is to wise
     men the most ample reward of virtue, yet that divine nature
     ought to have, not statues fixed in lead, nor triumphs with
     withering laurels, but some more stable and lasting kinds of
     rewards." "What are they?" said Laelius. "Then," said Scipio,
     "suffer me, since we have now been keeping holiday for three
     days, * * * etc." By which preface he came to the relation of
     his dream; pointing out that those were the more stable and
     lasting kinds of rewards which he himself had seen in heaven
     reserved for good governors of commonwealths.

IX. When I had arrived in Africa, where I was, as you are aware,
military tribune of the fourth legion under the consul Manilius, there
was nothing of which I was more earnestly desirous than to see King
Masinissa, who, for very just reasons, had been always the especial
friend of our family. When I was introduced to him, the old man
embraced me, shed tears, and then, looking up to heaven, exclaimed--I
thank thee, O supreme Sun, and ye also, ye other celestial beings, that
before I depart from this life I behold in my kingdom, and in this my
palace, Publius Cornelius Scipio, by whose mere name I seem to be
reanimated; so completely and indelibly is the recollection of that
best and most invincible of men, Africanus, imprinted in my mind.

After this, I inquired of him concerning the affairs of his kingdom.
He, on the other hand, questioned me about the condition of our
Commonwealth, and in this mutual interchange of conversation we passed
the whole of that day.

X. In the evening we were entertained in a manner worthy the
magnificence of a king, and carried on our discourse for a considerable
part of the night. And during all this time the old man spoke of
nothing but Africanus, all whose actions, and even remarkable sayings,
he remembered distinctly. At last, when we retired to bed, I fell into
a more profound sleep than usual, both because I was fatigued with my
journey, and because I had sat up the greatest part of the night.

Here I had the following dream, occasioned, as I verily believe, by our
preceding conversation; for it frequently happens that the thoughts and
discourses which have employed us in the daytime produce in our sleep
an effect somewhat similar to that which Ennius writes happened to him
about Homer, of whom, in his waking hours, he used frequently to think
and speak.

Africanus, I thought, appeared to me in that shape, with which I was
better acquainted from his picture than from any personal knowledge of
him. When I perceived it was he, I confess I trembled with
consternation; but he addressed me, saying, Take courage, my Scipio; be
not afraid, and carefully remember what I shall say to you.

XI. Do you see that city Carthage, which, though brought under the
Roman yoke by me, is now renewing former wars, and cannot live in
peace? (and he pointed to Carthage from a lofty spot, full of stars,
and brilliant, and glittering)--to attack which city you are this day
arrived in a station not much superior to that of a private soldier.
Before two years, however, are elapsed, you shall be consul, and
complete its overthrow; and you shall obtain, by your own merit, the
surname of Africanus, which as yet belongs to you no otherwise than as
derived from me. And when you have destroyed Carthage, and received the
honor of a triumph, and been made censor, and, in quality of
ambassador, visited Egypt, Syria, Asia, and Greece, you shall be
elected a second time consul in your absence, and, by utterly
destroying Numantia, put an end to a most dangerous war.

But when you have entered the Capitol in your triumphal car, you shall
find the Roman Commonwealth all in a ferment, through the intrigues of
my grandson Tiberius Gracchus.

XII. It is on this occasion, my dear Africanus, that you show your
country the greatness of your understanding, capacity, and prudence.
But I see that the destiny, however, of that time is, as it were,
uncertain; for when your age shall have accomplished seven times eight
revolutions of the sun, and your fatal hours shall be marked put by the
natural product of these two numbers, each of which is esteemed a
perfect one, but for different reasons, then shall the whole city have
recourse to you alone, and place its hopes in your auspicious name. On
you the senate, all good citizens, the allies, the people of Latium,
shall cast their eyes; on you the preservation of the State shall
entirely depend. In a word, _if you escape the impious machinations of
your relatives_, you will, in quality of dictator, establish order and
tranquillity in the Commonwealth.

When on this Laelius made an exclamation, and the rest of the company
groaned loudly, Scipio, with a gentle smile, said, I entreat you, do
not wake me out of my dream, but have patience, and hear the rest.

XIII. Now, in order to encourage you, my dear Africanus, continued the
shade of my ancestor, to defend the State with the greater
cheerfulness, be assured that, for all those who have in any way
conduced to the preservation, defence, and enlargement of their native
country, there is a certain place in heaven where they shall enjoy an
eternity of happiness. For nothing on earth is more agreeable to God,
the Supreme Governor of the universe, than the assemblies and societies
of men united together by laws, which are called states. It is from
heaven their rulers and preservers came, and thither they return.

XIV. Though at these words I was extremely troubled, not so much at the
fear of death as at the perfidy of my own relations, yet I recollected
myself enough to inquire whether he himself, my father Paulus, and
others whom we look upon as dead, were really living.

Yes, truly, replied he, they all enjoy life who have escaped from the
chains of the body as from a prison. But as to what you call life on
earth, that is no more than one form of death. But see; here comes your
father Paulus towards you! And as soon as I observed him, my eyes burst
out into a flood of tears; but he took me in his arms, embraced me, and
bade me not weep.

XV. When my first transports subsided, and I regained the liberty of
speech, I addressed my father thus: Thou best and most venerable of
parents, since this, as I am informed by Africanus, is the only
substantial life, why do I linger on earth, and not rather haste to
come hither where you are?

That, replied he, is impossible: unless that God, whose temple is all
that vast expanse you behold, shall free you from the fetters of the
body, you can have no admission into this place. Mankind have received
their being on this very condition, that they should labor for the
preservation of that globe which is situated, as you see, in the midst
of this temple, and is called earth.

Men are likewise endowed with a soul, which is a portion of the eternal
fires which you call stars and constellations; and which, being round,
spherical bodies, animated by divine intelligences, perform their
cycles and revolutions with amazing rapidity. It is your duty,
therefore, my Publius, and that of all who have any veneration for the
Gods, to preserve this wonderful union of soul and body; nor without
the express command of Him who gave you a soul should the least thought
be entertained of quitting human life, lest you seem to desert the post
assigned you by God himself.

But rather follow the examples of your grandfather here, and of me,
your father, in paying a strict regard to justice and piety; which is
due in a great degree to parents and relations, but most of all to our
country. Such a life as this is the true way to heaven, and to the
company of those, who, after having lived on earth and escaped from the
body, inhabit the place which you now behold.

XVI. This was the shining circle, or zone, whose remarkable brightness
distinguishes it among the constellations, and which, after the Greeks,
you call the Milky Way.

From thence, as I took a view of the universe, everything appeared
beautiful and admirable; for there those stars are to be seen that are
never visible from our globe, and everything appears of such magnitude
as we could not have imagined. The least of all the stars was that
removed farthest from heaven, and situated next to the earth; I mean
our moon, which shines with a borrowed light. Now, the globes of the
stars far surpass the magnitude of our earth, which at that distance
appeared so exceedingly small that I could not but be sensibly affected
on seeing our whole empire no larger than if we touched the earth, as
it were, at a single point.

XVII. And as I continued to observe the earth with great attention, How
long, I pray you, said Africanus, will your mind be fixed on that
object? why don't you rather take a view of the magnificent temples
among which you have arrived? The universe is composed of nine circles,
or rather spheres, one of which is the heavenly one, and is exterior to
all the rest, which it embraces; being itself the Supreme God, and
bounding and containing the whole. In it are fixed those stars which
revolve with never-varying courses. Below this are seven other spheres,
which revolve in a contrary direction to that of the heavens. One of
these is occupied by the globe which on earth they call Saturn. Next to
that is the star of Jupiter, so benign and salutary to mankind. The
third in order is that fiery and terrible planet called Mars. Below
this, again, almost in the middle region, is the sun--the leader,
governor, and prince of the other luminaries; the soul of the world,
which it regulates and illumines; being of such vast size that it
pervades and gives light to all places. Then follow Venus and Mercury,
which attend, as it were, on the sun. Lastly, the moon, which shines
only in the reflected beams of the sun, moves in the lowest sphere of
all. Below this, if we except that gift of the Gods, the soul, which
has been given by the liberality of the Gods to the human race,
everything is mortal, and tends to dissolution; but above the moon all
is eternal. For the earth, which is the ninth globe, and occupies the
centre, is immovable, and, being the lowest, all others gravitate
towards it.

XVIII. When I had recovered myself from the astonishment occasioned by
such a wonderful prospect, I thus addressed Africanus: Pray what is
this sound that strikes my ears in so loud and agreeable a manner? To
which he replied: It is that which is called the _music of the
spheres_, being produced by their motion and impulse; and being formed
by unequal intervals, but such as are divided according to the justest
proportion, it produces, by duly tempering acute with grave sounds,
various concerts of harmony. For it is impossible that motions so great
should be performed without any noise; and it is agreeable to nature
that the extremes on one side should produce sharp, and on the other
flat sounds. For which reason the sphere of the fixed stars, being the
highest, and being carried with a more rapid velocity, moves with a
shrill and acute sound; whereas that of the moon, being the lowest,
moves with a very flat one. As to the earth, which makes the ninth
sphere, it remains immovably fixed in the middle or lowest part of the
universe. But those eight revolving circles, in which both Mercury and
Venus are moved with the same celerity, give out sounds that are
divided by seven distinct intervals, which is generally the regulating
number of all things.

This celestial harmony has been imitated by learned musicians both on
stringed instruments and with the voice, whereby they have opened to
themselves a way to return to the celestial regions, as have likewise
many others who have employed their sublime genius while on earth in
cultivating the divine sciences.

By the amazing noise of this sound the ears of mankind have been in
some degree deafened; and indeed hearing is the dullest of all the
human senses. Thus, the people who dwell near the cataracts of the
Nile, which are called Catadupa[348], are, by the excessive roar which
that river makes in precipitating itself from those lofty mountains,
entirely deprived of the sense of hearing. And so inconceivably great
is this sound which is produced by the rapid motion of the whole
universe, that the human ear is no more capable of receiving it than
the eye is able to look steadfastly and directly on the sun, whose
beams easily dazzle the strongest sight.

While I was busied in admiring the scene of wonders, I could not help
casting my eyes every now and then on the earth.

XIX. On which Africanus said, I perceive that you are still employed in
contemplating the seat and residence of mankind. But if it appears to
you so small, as in fact it really is, despise its vanities, and fix
your attention forever on these heavenly objects. Is it possible that
you should attain any human applause or glory that is worth the
contending for? The earth, you see, is peopled but in a very few
places, and those, too, of small extent; and they appear like so many
little spots of green scattered through vast, uncultivated deserts. And
those who inhabit the earth are not only so remote from each other as
to be cut off from all mutual correspondence, but their situation being
in oblique or contrary parts of the globe, or perhaps in those
diametrically opposite to yours, all expectation of universal fame must
fall to the ground.

XX. You may likewise observe that the same globe of the earth is girt
and surrounded with certain zones, whereof those two that are most
remote from each other, and lie under the opposite poles of heaven, are
congealed with frost; but that one in the middle, which is far the
largest, is scorched with the intense heat of the sun. The other two
are habitable, one towards the south, the inhabitants of which are your
antipodes, with whom you have no connection; the other, towards the
north, is that which you inhabit, whereof a very small part, as you may
see, falls to your share. For the whole extent of what you see is, as
it were, but a little island, narrow at both ends and wide in the
middle, which is surrounded by the sea which on earth you call the
great Atlantic Ocean, and which, notwithstanding this magnificent name,
you see is very insignificant. And even in these cultivated and
well-known countries, has yours, or any of our names, ever passed the
heights of the Caucasus or the currents of the Ganges? In what other
parts to the north or the south, or where the sun rises and sets, will
your names ever be heard? And if we leave these out of the question,
how small a space is there left for your glory to spread itself abroad;
and how long will it remain in the memory of those whose minds are now
full of it?

XXI. Besides all this, if the progeny of any future generation should
wish to transmit to their posterity the praises of any one of us which
they have heard from their forefathers, yet the deluges and combustions
of the earth, which must necessarily happen at their destined periods,
will prevent our obtaining, not only an eternal, but even a durable
glory. And, after all, what does it signify whether those who shall
hereafter be born talk of you, when those who have lived before you,
whose number was perhaps not less, and whose merit certainly greater,
were not so much as acquainted with your name?

XXII. Especially since not one of those who shall hear of us is able to
retain in his memory the transactions of a single year. The bulk of
mankind, indeed, measure their year by the return of the sun, which is
only one star. But when all the stars shall have returned to the place
whence they set out, and after long periods shall again exhibit the
same aspect of the whole heavens, that is what ought properly to be
called the revolution of a year, though I scarcely dare attempt to
enumerate the vast multitude of ages contained in it. For as the sun in
old time was eclipsed, and seemed to be extinguished, at the time when
the soul of Romulus penetrated into these eternal mansions, so, when
all the constellations and stars shall revert to their primary
position, and the sun shall at the same point and time be again
eclipsed, then you may consider that the grand year is completed. Be
assured, however, that the twentieth part of it is not yet elapsed.

XXIII. Wherefore, if you have no hopes of returning to this place where
great and good men enjoy all that their souls can wish for, of what
value, pray, is all that human glory, which can hardly endure for a
small portion of one year?

If, then, you wish to elevate your views to the contemplation of this
eternal seat of splendor, you will not be satisfied with the praises of
your fellow-mortals, nor with any human rewards that your exploits can
obtain; but Virtue herself must point out to you the true and only
object worthy of your pursuit. Leave to others to speak of you as they
may, for speak they will. Their discourses will be confined to the
narrow limits of the countries you see, nor will their duration be very
extensive; for they will perish like those who utter them, and will be
no more remembered by their posterity.

XXIV. When he had ceased to speak in this manner, I said, O Africanus,
if indeed the door of heaven is open to those who have deserved well of
their country, although, indeed, from my childhood I have always
followed yours and my father's steps, and have not neglected to imitate
your glory, still, I will from henceforth strive to follow them more
closely.

Follow them, then, said he, and consider your body only, not yourself,
as mortal. For it is not your outward form which constitutes your
being, but your mind; not that substance which is palpable to the
senses, but your spiritual nature. _Know, then, that you are a
God_--for a God it must be, which flourishes, and feels, and
recollects, and foresees, and governs, regulates and moves the body
over which it is set, as the Supreme Ruler does the world which is
subject to him. For as that Eternal Being moves whatever is mortal in
this world, so the immortal mind of man moves the frail body with which
it is connected.

XXV. For whatever is always moving must be eternal; but that which
derives its motion from a power which is foreign to itself, when that
motion ceases must itself lose its animation.

That alone, then, which moves itself can never cease to be moved,
because it can never desert itself. Moreover, it must be the source,
and origin, and principle of motion in all the rest. There can be
nothing prior to a principle, for all things must originate from it;
and it cannot itself derive its existence from any other source, for if
it did it would no longer be a principle. And if it had no beginning,
it can have no end; for a beginning that is put an end to will neither
be renewed by any other cause, nor will it produce anything else of
itself. All things, therefore, must originate from one source. Thus it
follows that motion must have its source in something which is moved by
itself, and which can neither have a beginning nor an end. Otherwise
all the heavens and all nature must perish, for it is impossible that
they can of themselves acquire any power of producing motion in
themselves.

XXVI. As, therefore, it is plain that what is moved by itself must be
eternal, who will deny that this is the general condition and nature of
minds? For as everything is inanimate which is moved by an impulse
exterior to itself, so what is animated is moved by an interior impulse
of its own; for this is the peculiar nature and power of mind. And if
that alone has the power of self-motion, it can neither have had a
beginning, nor can it have an end.

Do you, therefore, exercise this mind of yours in the best pursuits.
And the best pursuits are those which consist in promoting the good of
your country. Such employments will speed the flight of your mind to
this its proper abode; and its flight will be still more rapid, if,
even while it is enclosed in the body, it will look abroad, and
disengage itself as much as possible from its bodily dwelling, by the
contemplation of things which are external to itself.

This it should do to the utmost of its power. For the minds of those
who have given themselves up to the pleasures of the body, paying, as
it were, a servile obedience to their lustful impulses, have violated
the laws of God and man; and therefore, when they are separated from
their bodies, flutter continually round the earth on which they lived,
and are not allowed to return to this celestial region till they have
been purified by the revolution of many ages.

Thus saying, he vanished, and I awoke from my dream.


A FRAGMENT.


And although it is most desirable that fortune should remain forever in
the most brilliant possible condition, nevertheless, the equability of
life excites less interest than those changeable conditions wherein
prosperity suddenly revives out of the most desperate and ruinous
circumstances.






THE END.






FOOTNOTES:


[1] Archilochus was a native of Paros, and flourished about 714-676
B.C. His poems were chiefly Iambics of bitter satire. Horace speaks of
him as the inventor of Iambics, and calls himself his pupil.

                  Parios ego primus Iambos
    Ostendi Latio, numeros animosque secutus
    Archilochi, non res et agentia verba Lycamben.
                              Epist. I. xix. 25.

And in another place he says,

    Archilochum proprio rabies armavit Iambo--A.P. 74.

[2] This was Livius Andronicus: he is supposed to have been a native of
Tarentum, and he was made prisoner by the Romans, during their wars in
Southern Italy; owing to which he became the slave of M. Livius
Salinator. He wrote both comedies and tragedies, of which Cicero
(Brutus 18) speaks very contemptuously, as "Livianae fabulae non satis
dignae quae iterum legantur"--not worth reading a second time. He also
wrote a Latin Odyssey, and some hymns, and died probably about 221 B.C.

[3] C. Fabius, surnamed Pictor, painted the temple of Salus, which the
dictator C. Junius Brutus Bubulus dedicated 302 B.C. The temple was
destroyed by fire in the reign of Claudius. The painting is highly
praised by Dionysius, xvi. 6.

[4] For an account of the ancient Greek philosophers, see the sketch at
the end of the Disputations.

[5] Isocrates was born at Athens 436 B.C. He was a pupil of Gorgias,
Prodicus, and Socrates. He opened a school of rhetoric, at Athens, with
great success. He died by his own hand at the age of ninety-eight.

[6] So Horace joins these two classes as inventors of all kinds of
improbable fictions:

                      Pictoribus atque poetis
    Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.--A. P. 9.

Which Roscommon translates:

    Painters and poets have been still allow'd
    Their pencil and their fancies unconfined.

[7] Epicharmus was a native of Cos, but lived at Megara, in Sicily, and
when Megara was destroyed, removed to Syracuse, and lived at the court
of Hiero, where he became the first writer of comedies, so that Horace
ascribes the invention of comedy to him, and so does Theocritus. He
lived to a great age.

[8] Pherecydes was a native of Scyros, one of the Cyclades; and is said
to have obtained his knowledge from the secret books of the
Phoenicians. He is said also to have been a pupil of Pittacus, the
rival of Thales, and the master of Pythagoras. His doctrine was that
there were three principles ([Greek: Zeus], or AEther; [Greek: Chthon],
or Chaos; and [Greek: Chronos], or Time) and four elements (Fire,
Earth, Air, and Water), from which everything that exists was
formed.--_Vide_ Smith's Dict. Gr. and Rom. Biog.

[9] Archytas was a native of Tarentum, and is said to have saved the
life of Plato by his influence with the tyrant Dionysius. He was
especially great as a mathematician and geometrician, so that Horace
calls him

    Maris et terra numeroque carentis arenae
    Mensorem.
                              Od. i. 28.1.

Plato is supposed to have learned some of his views from him, and
Aristotle to have borrowed from him every idea of the Categories.

[10] This was not Timaeus the historian, but a native of Locri, who is
said also in the De Finibus (c. 29) to have been a teacher of Plato.
There is a treatise extant bearing his name, which is, however,
probably spurious, and only an abridgment of Plato's dialogue Timaeus.

[11] Dicaearchus was a native of Messana, in Sicily, though he lived
chiefly in Greece. He was one of the later disciples of Aristotle. He
was a great geographer, politician, historian, and philosopher, and
died about 285 B.C.

[12] Aristoxenus was a native of Tarentum, and also a pupil of
Aristotle. We know nothing of his opinions except that he held the soul
to be a _harmony_ of the body; a doctrine which had been already
discussed by Plato in the Phaedo, and combated by Aristotle. He was a
great musician, and the chief portions of his works which have come
down to us are fragments of some musical treatises.--Smith's Dict. Gr.
and Rom. Biog.; to which source I must acknowledge my obligation for
nearly the whole of these biographical notes.

[13] The Simonides here meant is the celebrated poet of Ceos, the
perfecter of elegiac poetry among the Greeks. He flourished about the
time of the Persian war. Besides his poetry, he is said to have been
the inventor of some method of aiding the memory. He died at the court
of Hiero, 467 B.C.

[14] Theodectes was a native of Phaselis, in Pamphylia, a distinguished
rhetorician and tragic poet, and flourished in the time of Philip of
Macedon. He was a pupil of Isocrates, and lived at Athens, and died
there at the age of forty-one.

[15] Cineas was a Thessalian, and (as is said in the text) came to Rome
as ambassador from Pyrrhus after the battle of Heraclea, 280 B.C., and
his memory is said to have been so great that on the day after his
arrival he was able to address all the senators and knights by name. He
probably died before Pyrrhus returned to Italy, 276 B.C.

[16] Charmadas, called also Charmides, was a fellow-pupil with Philo,
the Larissaean of Clitomachus, the Carthaginian. He is said by some
authors to have founded a fourth academy.

[17] Metrodorus was a minister of Mithridates the Great; and employed
by him as supreme judge in Pontus, and afterward as an ambassador.
Cicero speaks of him in other places (De Orat. ii. 88) as a man of
wonderful memory.

[18] Quintus Hortensius was eight years older than Cicero; and, till
Cicero's fame surpassed his, he was accounted the most eloquent of all
the Romans. He was Verres's counsel in the prosecution conducted
against him by Cicero. Seneca relates that his memory was so great that
he could come out of an auction and repeat the catalogue backward. He
died 50 B.C.

[19] This treatise is one which has not come down to us, but which had
been lately composed by Cicero in order to comfort himself for the loss
of his daughter.

[20] The epigram is,

    [Greek: Eipas Helie chaire, Kleombrotos Hombrakiotes
      helat' aph' hypselou teicheos eis Aiden,
    axion ouden idon thanatou kakon, alla Platonos
      hen to peri psyches gramm' analexamenos.]

Which may be translated, perhaps,

    Farewell, O sun, Cleombrotus exclaim'd,
      Then plunged from off a height beneath the sea;
    Stung by pain, of no disgrace ashamed,
      But moved by Plato's high philosophy.

[21] This is alluded to by Juvenal:

    Provida Pompeio dederat Campania febres
    Optandas: sed multae urbes et publica vota
    Vicerunt. Igitur Fortuna ipsius et Urbis,
    Servatum victo caput abstulit.--Sat. x. 283.

[22] Pompey's second wife was Julia, the daughter of Julius Caesar, she
died the year before the death of Crassus, in Parthia. Virgil speaks of
Caesar and Pompey as relations, using the same expression (socer) as
Cicero:

    Aggeribus socer Alpinis atque arce Monoeci
    Descendens, gener adversis instructus Eois.--AEn. vi. 830.

[23] This idea is beautifully expanded by Byron:

    Yet if, as holiest men have deem'd, there be
    A land of souls beyond that sable shore
    To shame the doctrine of the Sadducee
    And sophist, madly vain or dubious lore,
    How sweet it were in concert to adore
    With those who made our mortal labors light,
    To hear each voice we fear'd to hear no more.
    Behold each mighty shade reveal'd to sight,
    The Bactrian, Samian sage, and all who taught the right!
                              _Childe Harold_, ii.

[24] The epitaph in the original is:

    [Greek: O xein' angeilon Lakedaimoniois hoti tede
      keimetha, tois keinon peithomenoi nomimois.]

[25] This was expressed in the Greek verses,

    [Greek: Arches men me phynai epichthonioisin ariston,
    phynta d' hopos okista pylas Aidyo peresai]

which by some authors are attributed to Homer.

[26] This is the first fragment of the Cresphontes.--Ed. Var. vii., p.
594.

    [Greek: Edei gar hemas syllogon poioumenous
    Ton phynta threnein, eis hos' erchetai kaka.
    Ton d' au thanonta kai ponon pepaumenon
    chairontas euphemointas ekpemein domon]

[27] The Greek verses are quoted by Plutarch:

        [Greek: Epou nepie, elithioi phrenes andron
      Euthynoos keitai moiridio thanato
    Ouk en gar zoein kalon auto oute goneusi.]

[28] This refers to the story that when Eumolpus, the son of Neptune,
whose assistance the Eleusinians had called in against the Athenians,
had been slain by the Athenians, an oracle demanded the sacrifice of
one of the daughters of Erechtheus, the King of Athens. And when one
was drawn by lot, the others voluntarily accompanied her to death.

[29] Menoeceus was son of Creon, and in the war of the Argives against
Thebes, Teresias declared that the Thebans should conquer if Menoeceus
would sacrifice himself for his country; and accordingly he killed
himself outside the gates of Thebes.

[30] The Greek is,

    [Greek: mede moi aklaustos thanatos moloi, alla philoisi
      poiesaimi thanon algea kai stonachas.]

[31] Soph. Trach. 1047.

[32] The lines quoted by Cicero here appear to have come from the Latin
play of Prometheus by Accius; the ideas are borrowed, rather than
translated, from the Prometheus of AEschylus.

[33] From _exerceo_.

[34] Each soldier carried a stake, to help form a palisade in front of
the camp.

[35] Insania--from _in_, a particle of negative force in composition,
and _sanus_, healthy, sound.

[36] The man who first received this surname was L. Calpurnius Piso,
who was consul, 133 B.C., in the Servile War.

[37] The Greek is,

    [Greek: Alla moi oidanetai kradie cholo hoppot' ekeinou
    Mnesomai hos m' asyphelon en Argeioisin erexen.]--Il. ix. 642.

I have given Pope's translation in the text.

[38] This is from the Theseus:

    [Greek: Ego de touto para sophou tinos mathon
    eis phrontidas noun symphoras t' eballomen
    phygas t' emauto prostitheis patras emes.
    thanatous t' aorous, kai kakon allas hodous
    hos, ei ti paschoim' on edoxazon pote
    Me moi neorton prospeson mallon dakoi.]

[39] Ter. Phorm. II. i. 11.

[40] This refers to the speech of Agamemnon in Euripides, in the
Iphigenia in Aulis,

              [Greek: Zelo se, geron,
    zelo d' andron hos akindynon
    bion exeperas', agnos, aklees.]--v. 15.

[41] This is a fragment from the Hypsipyle:

    [Greek: Ephy men oudeis hostis ou ponei broton
    thaptei te tekna chater' au ktatai nea,
    autos te thneskei. kai tad' achthontai brotoi
    eis gen pherontes gen anankaios d' echei
    bion therizein hoste karpimon stachyn.]

[42]
    [Greek: Pollas ek kephales prothelymnous helketo chaitas.]--Il. x. 15.

[43]
    [Greek: Etoi ho kappedion to Aleion oios alato
    hon thymon katedon, paton anthropon aleeinon.]--Il. vi. 201.

[44] This is a translation from Euripides:

    [Greek: Hosth' himeros m' hypelthe ge te k' ourano
    lexai molouse deuro Medeias tychas.]--Med. 57.

[45]
    [Greek: Lien gar polloi kai epetrimoi emata panta
    piptousin, pote ken tis anapneuseie ponoio;
    alla chre ton men katathaptemen, hos ke thanesi,
    nelea thymon echontas, ep' emati dakrysantas.]--
                              Hom. Il. xix. 226.

[46] This is one of the fragments of Euripides which we are unable to
assign to any play in particular; it occurs Var. Ed. Tr. Inc. 167.

    [Greek: Ei men tod' emar proton en kakoumeno
    kai me makran de dia ponon enaustoloun
    eikos sphadazein en an, hos neozyga
    polon, chalinon artios dedegmenon
    nyn d' amblys eimi, kai katertykos kakon.]

[47] This is only a fragment, preserved by Stobaeus:

    [Greek: Tous d' an megistous kai sophotatous phreni
    toiousd' idois an, oios esti nyn hode,
    kalos kakos prassonti symparainesai
    hotan de daimon andros eutychous to prin
    mastig' epise tou biou palintropon,
    ta polla phrouda kai kakos eiremena.]

[48]
    [Greek: Ok. Oukoun Prometheu touto gignoskeis hoti
      orges nosouses eisin iatroi logoi.
    Pr. ean tis en kairo ge malthasse kear
      kai me sphrigonta thymon ischnaine bia.]--
                              AEsch. Prom. v. 378.

[49] Cicero alludes here to Il. vii. 211, which is thus translated by
Pope:

    His massy javelin quivering in his hand,
    He stood the bulwark of the Grecian band;
    Through every Argive heart new transport ran,
    All Troy stood trembling at the mighty man:
    E'en Hector paused, and with new doubt oppress'd,
    Felt his great heart suspended in his breast;
    'Twas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear,
    Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.

But Melmoth (Note on the Familiar Letters of Cicero, book ii. Let. 23)
rightly accuses Cicero of having misunderstood Homer, who "by no means
represents Hector as being thus totally dismayed at the approach of his
adversary; and, indeed, it would have been inconsistent with the
general character of that hero to have described him under such
circumstances of terror."

    [Greek: Ton de kai Argeioi meg' egetheon eisoroontes,
    Troas de tromos ainos hypelythe gyia hekaston,
    Hektori d' auto thymos eni stethessi patassen.]

But there is a great difference, as Dr. Clarke remarks, between [Greek:
thymos eni stethessi patassen] and [Greek: kardee exo stetheon
ethrosken], or [Greek: tromos ainos hypelythe gyia].--_The Trojans_,
says Homer, _trembled_ at the sight of Ajax, and even Hector himself
felt some emotion in his breast.

[50] Cicero means Scipio Nasica, who, in the riots consequent on the
reelection of Tiberius Gracchus to the tribunate, 133 B.C., having
called in vain on the consul, Mucius Scaevola, to save the republic,
attacked Gracchus himself, who was slain in the tumult.

[51] _Morosus_ is evidently derived from _mores_--"_Morosus_, _mos_,
stubbornness, self-will, etc."--Riddle and Arnold, Lat. Dict.

[52] In the original they run thus:

    [Greek: Ouk estin ouden deinon hod' eipein epos,
    Oude pathos, oude xymphora theelatos
    hes ouk an aroit' achthos anthropon physis.]

[53] This passage is from the Eunuch of Terence, act i., sc. 1, 14.

[54] These verses are from the Atreus of Accius.

[55] This was Marcus Atilius Regulus, the story of whose treatment by
the Carthaginians in the first Punic War is well known to everybody.

[56] This was Quintus Servilius Caepio, who, 105 B.C., was destroyed,
with his army, by the Cimbri, it was believed as a judgment for the
covetousness which he had displayed in the plunder of Tolosa.

[57] This was Marcus Aquilius, who, in the year 88 B.C., was sent
against Mithridates as one of the consular legates; and, being
defeated, was delivered up to the king by the inhabitants of Mitylene.
Mithridates put him to death by pouring molten gold down his throat.

[58] This was the elder brother of the triumvir Marcus Crassus, 87 B.C.
He was put to death by Fimbria, who was in command of some of the
troops of Marius.

[59] Lucius Caesar and Caius Caesar were relations (it is uncertain in
what degree) of the great Caesar, and were killed by Fimbria on the same
occasion as Octavius.

[60] M. Antonius was the grandfather of the triumvir; he was murdered
the same year, 87 B.C., by Annius, when Marius and Cinna took Rome.

[61] This story is alluded to by Horace:

    Districtus ensis cui super impia
    Cervice pendet non Siculae dapes
      Dulcem elaborabunt saporem,
        Non avium citharaeve cantus
    Somnum reducent.--iii. 1. 17.

[62] Hieronymus was a Rhodian, and a pupil of Aristotle, flourishing
about 300 B.C. He is frequently mentioned by Cicero.

[63] We know very little of Dinomachus. Some MSS. have Clitomachus.

[64] Callipho was in all probability a pupil of Epicurus, but we have
no certain information about him.

[65] Diodorus was a Syrian, and succeeded Critolaus as the head of the
Peripatetic School at Athens.

[66] Aristo was a native of Ceos, and a pupil of Lycon, who succeeded
Straton as the head of the Peripatetic School, 270 B.C. He afterward
himself succeeded Lycon.

[67] Pyrrho was a native of Elis, and the originator of the sceptical
theories of some of the ancient philosophers. He was a contemporary of
Alexander.

[68] Herillus was a disciple of Zeno of Cittium, and therefore a Stoic.
He did not, however, follow all the opinions of his master: he held
that knowledge was the chief good. Some of the treatises of Cleanthes
were written expressly to confute him.

[69] Anacharsis was (Herod., iv., 76) son of Gnurus and brother of
Saulius, King of Thrace. He came to Athens while Solon was occupied in
framing laws for his people; and by the simplicity of his way of
living, and his acute observations on the manners of the Greeks, he
excited such general admiration that he was reckoned by some writers
among the Seven Wise Men of Greece.

[70] This was Appius Claudius Caecus, who was censor 310 B.C., and who,
according to Livy, was afflicted with blindness by the Gods for
persuading the Potitii to instruct the public servants in the way of
sacrificing to Hercules. He it was who made the Via Appia.

[71] The fact of Homer's blindness rests on a passage in the Hymn to
Apollo, quoted by Thucydides as a genuine work of Homer, and which is
thus spoken of by one of the most accomplished scholars that this
country or this age has ever produced: "They are indeed beautiful
verses; and if none worse had ever been attributed to Homer, the Prince
of Poets would have had little reason to complain.

"He has been describing the Delian festival in honor of Apollo and
Diana, and concludes this part of the poem with an address to the women
of that island, to whom it is to be supposed that he had become
familiarly known by his frequent recitations:

    [Greek: Chairete d' hymeis pasai, emeio de kai metopisthe
    mnesasth', hoppote ken tis epichthonion anthropon
    enthad' aneiretai xeinos talapeirios elthon
    o kourai, tis d' hymmin aner hedistos aoidon
    enthade poleitai kai teo terpesthe malista;
    hymeis d' eu mala pasai hypokrinasthe aph' hemon,
    Typhlos aner, oikei de Chio eni paipaloesse,
    tou pasai metopisthen aristeuousin aoidai.]

    Virgins, farewell--and oh! remember me
    Hereafter, when some stranger from the sea,
    A hapless wanderer, may your isle explore,
    And ask you, 'Maids, of all the bards you boast,
    Who sings the sweetest, and delights you most?'
    Oh! answer all, 'A blind old man, and poor,
    Sweetest he sings, and dwells on Chios' rocky shore.'

                              _Coleridge's Introduction to the Study
                              of the Greek Classic Poets._

[72] Some read _scientiam_ and some _inscientiam;_ the latter of which
is preferred by some of the best editors and commentators.

[73] For a short account of these ancient Greek philosophers, see the
sketch prefixed to the Academics (_Classical Library_).

[74] Cicero wrote his philosophical works in the last three years of
his life. When he wrote this piece, he was in the sixty-third year of
his age, in the year of Rome 709.

[75] The Academic.

[76] Diodorus and Posidonius were Stoics; Philo and Antiochus were
Academics; but the latter afterward inclined to the doctrine of the
Stoics.

[77] Julius Caesar.

[78] Cicero was one of the College of Augurs.

[79] The Latinae Feriae was originally a festival of the Latins, altered
by Tarquinius Superbus into a Roman one. It was held in the Alban
Mount, in honor of Jupiter Latiaris. This holiday lasted six days: it
was not held at any fixed time; but the consul was never allowed to
take the field till he had held them.--_Vide_ Smith, Dict. Gr. and Rom.
Ant., p. 414.

[80] _Exhedra_, the word used by Cicero, means a study, or place where
disputes were held.

[81] M. Piso was a Peripatetic. The four great sects were the Stoics,
the Peripatetics, the Academics, and the Epicureans.

[82] It was a prevailing tenet of the Academics that there is no
certain knowledge.

[83] The five forms of Plato are these: [Greek: ousia, tauton, heteron,
stasis, kinesis.]

[84] The four natures here to be understood are the four
elements--fire, water, air, and earth; which are mentioned as the four
principles of Empedocles by Diogenes Laertius.

[85] These five moving stars are Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, and
Venus. Their revolutions are considered in the next book.

[86] Or, Generation of the Gods.

[87] The [Greek: prolepsis] of Epicurus, before mentioned, is what he
here means.

[88] [Greek: Steremnia] is the word which Epicurus used to distinguish
between those objects which are perceptible to sense, and those which
are imperceptible; as the essence of the Divine Being, and the various
operations of the divine power.

[89] Zeno here mentioned is not the same that Cotta spoke of before.
This was the founder of the Stoics. The other was an Epicurean
philosopher whom he had heard at Athens.

[90] That is, there would be the same uncertainty in heaven as is among
the Academics.

[91] Those nations which were neither Greek nor Roman.

[92] _Sigilla numerantes_ is the common reading; but P. Manucius
proposes _venerantes_, which I choose as the better of the two, and in
which sense I have translated it.

[93] Fundamental doctrines.

[94] That is, the zodiac.

[95] The moon, as well as the sun, is indeed in the zodiac, but she
does not measure the same course in a month. She moves in another line
of the zodiac nearer the earth.

[96] According to the doctrines of Epicurus, none of these bodies
themselves are clearly seen, but _simulacra ex corporibus effluentia_.

[97] Epicurus taught his disciples in a garden.

[98] By the word _Deus_, as often used by our author, we are to
understand all the Gods in that theology then treated of, and not a
single personal Deity.

[99] The best commentators on this passage agree that Cicero does not
mean that Aristotle affirmed that there was no such person as Orpheus,
but that there was no such poet, and that the verse called Orphic was
said to be the invention of another. The passage of Aristotle to which
Cicero here alludes has, as Dr. Davis observes, been long lost.

[100] A just proportion between the different sorts of beings.

[101] Some give _quos non pudeat earum Epicuri vocum;_ but the best
copies have not _non;_ nor would it be consistent with Cotta to say
_quos non pudeat_, for he throughout represents Velleius as a perfect
Epicurean in every article.

[102] His country was Abdera, the natives of which were remarkable for
their stupidity.

[103] This passage will not admit of a translation answerable to the
sense of the original. Cicero says the word _amicitia_ (friendship) is
derived from _amor_ (love or affection).

[104] This manner of speaking of Jupiter frequently occurs in Homer,

    ----[Greek: pater andron te theon te,]

and has been used by Virgil and other poets since Ennius.

[105] Perses, or Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, was taken by
Cnaeus Octavius, the praetor, and brought as prisoner to Paullus AEmilius,
167 B.C.

[106] An exemption from serving in the wars, and from paying public
taxes.

[107] Mopsus. There were two soothsayers of this name: the first was
one of the Lapithae, son of Ampycus and Chloris, called also the son of
Apollo and Hienantis; the other a son of Apollo and Manto, who is said
to have founded Mallus, in Asia Minor, where his oracle existed as late
as the time of Strabo.

[108] Tiresias was the great Theban prophet at the time of the war of
the Seven against Thebes.

[109] Amphiaraus was King of Argos (he had been one of the Argonauts
also). He was killed after the war of the Seven against Thebes, which
he was compelled to join in by the treachery of his wife Eriphyle, by
the earth opening and swallowing him up as he was fleeing from
Periclymenus.

[110] Calchas was the prophet of the Grecian army at the siege of Troy.

[111] Helenus was a son of Priam and Hecuba. He is represented as a
prophet in the Philoctetes of Sophocles. And in the AEneid he is also
represented as king of part of Epirus, and as predicting to AEneas the
dangers and fortunes which awaited him.

[112] This short passage would be very obscure to the reader without an
explanation from another of Cicero's treatises. The expression here,
_ad investigandum suem regiones vineae terminavit_, which is a metaphor
too bold, if it was not a sort of augural language, seems to me to have
been the effect of carelessness in our great author; for Navius did not
divide the regions, as he calls them, of the vine to find his sow, but
to find a grape.

[113] The Peremnia were a sort of auspices performed just before the
passing a river.

[114] The Acumina were a military auspices, and were partly performed
on the point of a spear, from which they were called Acumina.

[115] Those were called _testamenta in procinctu_, which were made by
soldiers just before an engagement, in the presence of men called as
witnesses.

[116] This especially refers to the Decii, one of whom devoted himself
for his country in the war with the Latins, 340 B.C., and his son
imitated the action in the war with the Samnites, 295 B.C. Cicero
(Tusc. i. 37) says that his son did the same thing in the war with
Pyrrhus at the battle of Asculum, though in other places (De Off. iii.
4) he speaks of only two Decii as having signalized themselves in this
manner.

[117] The Rogator, who collected the votes, and pronounced who was the
person chosen. There were two sorts of Rogators; one was the officer
here mentioned, and the other was the Rogator, or speaker of the whole
assembly.

[118] Which was Sardinia, as appears from one of Cicero's epistles to
his brother Quintus.

[119] Their sacred books of ceremonies.

[120] The war between Octavius and Cinna, the consuls.

[121] This, in the original, is a fragment of an old Latin verse,

    _----Terram fumare calentem._

[122] The Latin word is _principatus_, which exactly corresponds with
the Greek word here used by Cicero; by which is to be understood the
superior, the most prevailing excellence in every kind and species of
things through the universe.

[123] The passage of Aristotle to which Cicero here refers is lost.

[124] He means the Epicureans.

[125] Here the Stoic speaks too plain to be misunderstood. His world,
his _mundus_, is the universe, and that universe is his great Deity,
_in quo sit totius naturae principatus_, in which the superior
excellence of universal nature consists.

[126] Athens, the seat of learning and politeness, of which Balbus will
not allow Epicurus to be worthy.

[127] This is Pythagoras's doctrine, as appears in Diogenes Laertius.

[128] He here alludes to mathematical and geometrical instruments.

[129] Balbus here speaks of the fixed stars, and of the motions of the
orbs of the planets. He here alludes, says M. Bonhier, to the different
and diurnal motions of these stars; one sort from east to west, the
other from one tropic to the other: and this is the construction which
our learned and great geometrician and astronomer, Dr. Halley, made of
this passage.

[130] This mensuration of the year into three hundred and sixty-five
days and near six hours (by the odd hours and minutes of which, in
every fifth year, the _dies intercalaris_, or leap-year, is made) could
not but be known, Dr. Halley states, by Hipparchus, as appears from the
remains of that great astronomer of the ancients. We are inclined to
think that Julius Caesar had divided the year, according to what we call
the Julian year, before Cicero wrote this book; for we see, in the
beginning of it, how pathetically he speaks of Caesar's usurpation.

[131] The words of Censorinus, on this occasion, are to the same
effect. The opinions of philosophers concerning this great year are
very different; but the institution of it is ascribed to Democritus.

[132] The zodiac.

[133] Though Mars is said to hold his orbit in the zodiac with the
rest, and to finish his revolution through the same orbit (that is, the
zodiac) with the other two, yet Balbus means in a different line of the
zodiac.

[134] According to late observations, it never goes but a sign and a
half from the sun.

[135] These, Dr. Davis says, are "aerial fires;" concerning which he
refers to the second book of Pliny.

[136] In the Eunuch of Terence.

[137] Bacchus.

[138] The son of Ceres.

[139] The books of Ceremonies.

[140] This Libera is taken for Proserpine, who, with her brother Liber,
was consecrated by the Romans; all which are parts of nature in
prosopopoeias. Cicero, therefore, makes Balbus distinguish between the
person Liber, or Bacchus, and the Liber which is a part of nature in
prosopopoeia.

[141] These allegorical fables are largely related by Hesiod in his
Theogony.

Horace says exactly the same thing:

    Hac arte Pollux et vagus Hercules
    Enisus arces attigit igneas:
      Quos inter Augustus recumbens
        Purpureo bibit ore nectar.
    Hac te merentem, Bacche pater, tuae
    Vexere tigres indocili jugum
      Collo ferentes: hac Quirinus
        Martis equis Acheronta fugit.--Hor. iii. 3. 9.

[142] Cicero means by _conversis casibus_, varying the cases from the
common rule of declension; that is, by departing from the true
grammatical rules of speech; for if we would keep to it, we should
decline the word _Jupiter_, _Jupiteris_ in the second case, etc.

[143] _Pater divumque hominumque._

[144] The common reading is, _planiusque alio loco idem;_ which, as Dr.
Davis observes, is absurd; therefore, in his note, he prefers _planius
quam alia loco idem_, from two copies, in which sense I have translated
it.

[145] From the verb _gero_, to bear.

[146] That is, "mother earth."

[147] Janus is said to be the first who erected temples in Italy, and
instituted religious rites, and from whom the first month in the Roman
calendar is derived.

[148] _Stellae vagantes._

[149] _Noctu quasi diem efficeret._ Ben Jonson says the same thing:

    Thou that mak'st a day of night,
    Goddess excellently bright.--_Ode to the Moon._

[150] Olympias was the mother of Alexander.

[151] Venus is here said to be one of the names of Diana, because _ad
res omnes veniret;_ but she is not supposed to be the same as the
mother of Cupid.

[152] Here is a mistake, as Fulvius Ursinus observes; for the discourse
seems to be continued in one day, as appears from the beginning of this
book. This may be an inadvertency of Cicero.

[153] The senate of Athens was so called from the words [Greek: Areios
Pagos], the Village, some say the Hill, of Mars.

[154] Epicurus.

[155] The Stoics.

[156] By _nulla cohaerendi natura_--if it is the right, as it is the
common reading--Cicero must mean the same as by _nulla crescendi
natura_, or _coalescendi_, either of which Lambinus proposes; for, as
the same learned critic well observes, is there not a cohesion of parts
in a clod, or in a piece of stone? Our learned Walker proposes _sola
cohaerendi natura_, which mends the sense very much; and I wish he had
the authority of any copy for it.

[157] Nasica Scipio, the censor, is said to have been the first who
made a water-clock in Rome.

[158] The Epicureans.

[159] An old Latin poet, commended by Quintilian for the gravity of his
sense and his loftiness of style.

[160] The shepherd is here supposed to take the stem or beak of the
ship for the mouth, from which the roaring voices of the sailors came.
_Rostrum_ is here a lucky word to put in the mouth of one who never saw
a ship before, as it is used for the beak of a bird, the snout of a
beast or fish, and for the stem of a ship.

[161] The Epicureans.

[162] Greek, [Greek: aer]; Latin, _aer_.

[163] The treatise of Aristotle, from whence this is taken, is lost.

[164] To the universe the Stoics certainly annexed the idea of a
limited space, otherwise they could not have talked of a middle; for
there can be no middle but of a limited space: infinite space can have
no middle, there being infinite extension from every part.

[165] These two contrary reversions are from the tropics of Cancer and
Capricorn. They are the extreme bounds of the sun's course. The reader
must observe that the astronomical parts of this book are introduced by
the Stoic as proofs of design and reason in the universe; and,
notwithstanding the errors in his planetary system, his intent is well
answered, because all he means is that the regular motions of the
heavenly bodies, and their dependencies, are demonstrations of a divine
mind. The inference proposed to be drawn from his astronomical
observations is as just as if his system was in every part
unexceptionably right: the same may be said of his anatomical
observations.

[166] In the zodiac.

[167] Ibid.

[168] These verses of Cicero are a translation from a Greek poem of
Aratus, called the Phaenomena.

[169] The fixed stars.

[170] The arctic and antarctic poles.

[171] The two Arctoi are northern constellations. Cynosura is what we
call the Lesser Bear; Helice, the Greater Bear; in Latin, _Ursa Minor_
and _Ursa Major_.

[172] These stars in the Greater Bear are vulgarly called the "Seven
Stars," or the "Northern Wain;" by the Latins, "Septentriones."

[173] The Lesser Bear.

[174] The Greater Bear.

[175] Exactly agreeable to this and the following description of the
Dragon is the same northern constellation described in the map by
Flamsteed in his Atlas Coelestis; and all the figures here described by
Aratus nearly agree with the maps of the same constellations in the
Atlas Coelestis, though they are not all placed precisely alike.

[176] The tail of the Greater Bear.

[177] That is, in Macedon, where Aratus lived.

[178] The true interpretation of this passage is as follows: Here in
Macedon, says Aratus, the head of the Dragon does not entirely immerge
itself in the ocean, but only touches the superficies of it. By _ortus_
and _obitus_ I doubt not but Cicero meant, agreeable to Aratus, those
parts which arise to view, and those which are removed from sight.

[179] These are two northern constellations. Engonasis, in some
catalogues called Hercules, because he is figured kneeling [Greek: en
gonasin] (on his knees). [Greek: Engonasin kaleous'], as Aratus says,
they call Engonasis.

[180] The crown is placed under the feet of Hercules in the Atlas
Coelestis; but Ophiuchus ([Greek: Ophiouchos]), the Snake-holder, is
placed in the map by Flamsteed as described here by Aratus; and their
heads almost meet.

[181] The Scorpion. Ophiuchus, though a northern constellation, is not
far from that part of the zodiac where the Scorpion is, which is one of
the six southern signs.

[182] The Wain of seven stars.

[183] The Wain-driver. This northern constellation is, in our present
maps, figured with a club in his right hand behind the Greater Bear.

[184] In some modern maps Arcturus, a star of the first magnitude, is
placed in the belt that is round the waist of Booetes. Cicero says
_subter praecordia_, which is about the waist; and Aratus says [Greek:
hypo zone], under the belt.

[185] _Sub caput Arcti_, under the head of the Greater Bear.

[186] The Crab is, by the ancients and moderns, placed in the zodiac,
as here, between the Twins and the Lion; and they are all three
northern signs.

[187] The Twins are placed in the zodiac with the side of one to the
northern hemisphere, and the side of the other to the southern
hemisphere. Auriga, the Charioteer, is placed in the northern
hemisphere near the zodiac, by the Twins; and at the head of the
Charioteer is Helice, the Greater Bear, placed; and the Goat is a
bright star of the first magnitude placed on the left shoulder of this
northern constellation, and called _Capra_, the Goat. _Hoedi_, the
Kids, are two more stars of the same constellation.

[188] A constellation; one of the northern signs in the zodiac, in
which the Hyades are placed.

[189] One of the feet of Cepheus, a northern constellation, is under
the tail of the Lesser Bear.

[190] Grotius, and after him Dr. Davis, and other learned men, read
_Cassiepea_, after the Greek [Greek: Kassiepeia], and reject the common
reading, _Cassiopea_.

[191] These northern constellations here mentioned have been always
placed together as one family with Cepheus and Perseus, as they are in
our modern maps.

[192] This alludes to the fable of Perseus and Andromeda.

[193] Pegasus, who is one of Perseus and Andromeda's family.

[194] That is, with wings.

[195] _Aries_, the Ram, is the first northern sign in the zodiac;
_Pisces_, the Fishes, the last southern sign; therefore they must be
near one another, as they are in a circle or belt. In Flamsteed's Atlas
Coelestis one of the Fishes is near the head of the Ram, and the other
near the Urn of Aquarius.

[196] These are called Virgiliae by Cicero; by Aratus, the Pleiades,
[Greek: Pleiades]; and they are placed at the neck of the Bull; and one
of Perseus's feet touches the Bull in the Atlas Coelestis.

[197] This northern constellation is called Fides by Cicero; but it
must be the same with Lyra; because Lyra is placed in our maps as Fides
is here.

[198] This is called Ales Avis by Cicero; and I doubt not but the
northern constellation Cygnus is here to be understood, for the
description and place of the Swan in the Atlas Coelestis are the same
which Ales Avis has here.

[199] Pegasus.

[200] The Water-bearer, one of the six southern signs in the zodiac: he
is described in our maps pouring water out of an urn, and leaning with
one hand on the tail of Capricorn, another southern sign.

[201] When the sun is in Capricorn, the days are at the shortest; and
when in Cancer, at the longest.

[202] One of the six southern signs.

[203] Sagittarius, another southern sign.

[204] A northern constellation.

[205] A northern constellation.

[206] A southern constellation.

[207] This is Canis Major, a southern constellation. Orion and the Dog
are named together by Hesiod, who flourished many hundred years before
Cicero or Aratus.

[208] A southern constellation, placed as here in the Atlas Coelestis.

[209] A southern constellation, so called from the ship Argo, in which
Jason and the rest of the Argonauts sailed on their expedition to
Colchos.

[210] The Ram is the first of the northern signs in the zodiac; and the
last southern sign is the Fishes; which two signs, meeting in the
zodiac, cover the constellation called Argo.

[211] The river Eridanus, a southern constellation.

[212] A southern constellation.

[213] This is called the Scorpion in the original of Aratus.

[214] A southern constellation.

[215] A southern constellation.

[216] The Serpent is not mentioned in Cicero's translation; but it is
in the original of Aratus.

[217] A southern constellation.

[218] The Goblet, or Cup, a southern constellation.

[219] A southern constellation.

[220] Antecanis, a southern constellation, is the Little Dog, and
called _Antecanis_ in Latin, and [Greek: Prokyon] in Greek, because he
rises before the other Dog.

[221] Pansaetius, a Stoic philosopher.

[222] Mercury and Venus.

[223] The proboscis of the elephant is frequently called a hand,
because it is as useful to him as one. "They breathe, drink, and smell,
with what may not be improperly called a hand," says Pliny, bk. viii.
c. 10.--DAVIS.

[224] The passage of Aristotle's works to which Cicero here alludes is
entirely lost; but Plutarch gives a similar account.

[225] Balbus does not tell us the remedy which the panther makes use
of; but Pliny is not quite so delicate: he says, _excrementis hominis
sibi medetur_.

[226] Aristotle says they purge themselves with this herb after they
fawn. Pliny says both before and after.

[227] The cuttle-fish has a bag at its neck, the black blood of which
the Romans used for ink. It was called _atramentum_.

[228] The Euphrates is said to carry into Mesopotamia a large quantity
of citrons, with which it covers the fields.

[229] Q. Curtius, and some other authors, say the Ganges is the largest
river in India; but Ammianus Marcellinus concurs with Cicero in calling
the river Indus the largest of all rivers.

[230] These Etesian winds return periodically once a year, and blow at
certain seasons, and for a certain time.

[231] Some read _mollitur_, and some _molitur;_ the latter of which P.
Manucius justly prefers, from the verb _molo_, _molis;_ from whence,
says he, _molares dentes_, the grinders.

[232] The weasand, or windpipe.

[233] The epiglottis, which is a cartilaginous flap in the shape of a
tongue, and therefore called so.

[234] Cicero is here giving the opinion of the ancients concerning the
passage of the chyle till it is converted to blood.

[235] What Cicero here calls the ventricles of the heart are likewise
called auricles, of which there is the right and left.

[236] The Stoics and Peripatetics said that the nerves, veins, and
arteries come directly from the heart. According to the anatomy of the
moderns, they come from the brain.

[237] The author means all musical instruments, whether string or wind
instruments, which are hollow and tortuous.

[238] The Latin version of Cicero is a translation from the Greek of
Aratus.

[239] Chrysippus's meaning is, that the swine is so inactive and
slothful a beast that life seems to be of no use to it but to keep it
from putrefaction, as salt keeps dead flesh.

[240] _Ales_, in the general signification, is any large bird; and
_oscinis_ is any singing bird. But they here mean those birds which are
used in augury: _alites_ are the birds whose flight was observed by the
augurs, and _oscines_ the birds from whose voices they augured.

[241] As the Academics doubted everything, it was indifferent to them
which side of a question they took.

[242] The keepers and interpreters of the Sibylline oracles were the
Quindecimviri.

[243] The popular name of Jupiter in Rome, being looked upon as
defender of the Capitol (in which he was placed), and stayer of the
State.

[244] Some passages of the original are here wanting. Cotta continues
speaking against the doctrine of the Stoics.

[245] The word _sortes_ is often used for the answers of the oracles,
or, rather, for the rolls in which the answers were written.

[246] Three of this eminent family sacrificed themselves for their
country; the father in the Latin war, the son in the Tuscan war, and
the grandson in the war with Pyrrhus.

[247] The Straits of Gibraltar.

[248] The common reading is, _ex quo anima dicitur;_ but Dr. Davis and
M. Bouhier prefer _animal_, though they keep _anima_ in the text,
because our author says elsewhere, _animum ex anima dictum_, Tusc. I.
1. Cicero is not here to be accused of contradictions, for we are to
consider that he speaks in the characters of other persons; but there
appears to be nothing in these two passages irreconcilable, and
probably _anima_ is the right word here.

[249] He is said to have led a colony from Greece into Caria, in Asia,
and to have built a town, and called it after his own name, for which
his countrymen paid him divine honors after his death.

[250] Our great author is under a mistake here. Homer does not say he
met Hercules himself, but his [Greek: Eidolon], his "visionary
likeness;" and adds that he himself

                   [Greek: met' athanatoisi theoisi
    terpetai en thalies, kai echei kallisphyrou Heben,
    paida Dios megaloio kai Heres chrysopedilou.]

which Pope translates--

    A shadowy form, for high in heaven's abodes
    Himself resides, a God among the Gods;
    There, in the bright assemblies of the skies,
    He nectar quaffs, and Hebe crowns his joys.

[251] They are said to have been the first workers in iron. They were
called Idaei, because they inhabited about Mount Ida in Crete, and
Dactyli, from [Greek: daktyloi] (the fingers), their number being five.

[252] From whom, some say, the city of that name was called.

[253] Capedunculae seem to have been bowls or cups, with handles on each
side, set apart for the use of the altar.--DAVIS.

[254] See Cicero de Divinatione, and Ovid. Fast.

[255] In the consulship of Piso and Gabinius sacrifices to Serapis and
Isis were prohibited in Rome; but the Roman people afterward placed
them again in the number of their gods. See Tertullian's Apol. and his
first book Ad Nationes, and Arnobius, lib. 2.--DAVIS.

[256] In some copies Circe, Pasiphae, and AEa are mentioned together;
but AEa is rejected by the most judicious editors.

[257] They were three, and are said to have averted a plague by
offering themselves a sacrifice.

[258] So called from the Greek word [Greek: thaumazo], to wonder.

[259] She was first called Geres, from _gero_, to bear.

[260] The word is _precatione_, which means the books or forms of
prayers used by the augurs.

[261] Cotta's intent here, as well as in other places, is to show how
unphilosophical their civil theology was, and with what confusions it
was embarrassed; which design of the Academic the reader should
carefully keep in view, or he will lose the chain of argument.

[262] Anactes, [Greek: Anaktes], was a general name for all kings, as
we find in the oldest Greek writers, and particularly in Homer.

[263] The common reading is Aleo; but we follow Lambinus and Davis, who
had the authority of the best manuscript copies.

[264] Some prefer Phthas to Opas (see Dr. Davis's edition); but Opas is
the generally received reading.

[265] The Lipari Isles.

[266] A town in Arcadia.

[267] In Arcadia.

[268] A northern people.

[269] So called from the Greek word [Greek: nomos], _lex_, a law.

[270] He is called [Greek: Opis] in some old Greek fragments, and
[Greek: Oupis] by Callimachus in his hymn on Diana.

[271] [Greek: Sabazios], Sabazius, is one of the names used for
Bacchus.

[272] Here is a wide chasm in the original. What is lost probably may
have contained great part of Cotta's arguments against the providence
of the Stoics.

[273] Here is one expression in the quotation from Caecilius that is not
commonly met with, which is _praestigias praestrinxit;_ Lambinus gives
_praestinxit_, for the sake, I suppose, of playing on words, because it
might then be translated, "He has deluded my delusions, or stratagems;"
but _praestrinxit_ is certainly the right reading.

[274] The ancient Romans had a judicial as well as a military praetor;
and he sat, with inferior judges attending him, like one of our
chief-justices. _Sessum it praetor_, which I doubt not is the right
reading, Lambinus restored from an old copy. The common reading was
_sessum ite precor_.

[275] Picenum was a region of Italy.

[276] The _sex primi_ were general receivers of all taxes and tributes;
and they were obliged to make good, out of their own fortunes, whatever
deficiencies were in the public treasury.

[277] The Laetorian Law was a security for those under age against
extortioners, etc. By this law all debts contracted under twenty-five
years of age were void.

[278] This is from Ennius--

    Utinam ne in nemore Pelio securibus
    Caesa cecidisset abiegna ad terram trabes.

Translated from the beginning of the Medea of Euripides--

    [Greek: Med' en napaisi Pelion pesein pote
    tmetheisa peuke.]

[279] Q. Fabius Maximus, surnamed Cunctator.

[280] Diogenes Laertius says he was pounded to death in a stone mortar
by command of Nicocreon, tyrant of Cyprus.

[281] Elea, a city of Lucania, in Italy. The manner in which Zeno was
put to death is, according to Diogenes Laertius, uncertain.

[282] This great and good man was accused of destroying the divinity of
the Gods of his country. He was condemned, and died by drinking a glass
of poison.

[283] Tyrant of Sicily.

[284] The common reading is, _in tympanidis rogum inlatus est_. This
passage has been the occasion of as many different opinions concerning
both the reading and the sense as any passage in the whole treatise.
_Tympanum_ is used for a timbrel or drum, _tympanidia_ a diminutive of
it. Lambinus says _tympana_ "were sticks with which the tyrant used to
beat the condemned." P. Victorius substitutes _tyrannidis_ for
_tympanidis_.

[285] The original is _de amissa salute;_ which means the sentence of
banishment among the Romans, in which was contained the loss of goods
and estate, and the privileges of a Roman; and in this sense L'Abbe
d'Olivet translates it.

[286] The forty-seventh proposition of the first book of Euclid is
unanimously ascribed to him by the ancients. Dr. Wotton, in his
Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning, says, "It is indeed a
very noble proposition, the foundation of trigonometry, of universal
and various use in those curious speculations about incommensurable
numbers."

[287] These votive tables, or pictures, were hung up in the temples.

[288] This passage is a fragment from a tragedy of Attius.

[289] Hipponax was a poet at Ephesus, and so deformed that Bupalus drew
a picture of him to provoke laughter; for which Hipponax is said to
have written such keen iambics on the painter that he hanged himself.

Lycambes had promised Archilochus the poet to marry his daughter to
him, but afterward retracted his promise, and refused her; upon which
Archilochus is said to have published a satire in iambic verse that
provoked him to hang himself.

[290] Cicero refers here to an oracle approving of his laws, and
promising Sparta prosperity as long as they were obeyed, which Lycurgus
procured from Delphi.

[291] _Pro aris et focis_ is a proverbial expression. The Romans, when
they would say their all was at stake, could not express it stronger
than by saying they contended _pro aris et focis_, for religion and
their firesides, or, as we express it, for religion and property.

[292] Cicero, who was an Academic, gives his opinion according to the
manner of the Academics, who looked upon probability, and a resemblance
of truth, as the utmost they could arrive at.

[293] _I.e._, Regulus.

[294] _I.e._, Fabius.

[295] It is unnecessary to give an account of the other names here
mentioned; but that of Laenas is probably less known. He was Publius
Popillius Laenas, consul 132 B.C., the year after the death of Tiberius
Gracchus, and it became his duty to prosecute the accomplices of
Gracchus, for which he was afterward attacked by Caius Gracchus with
such animosity that he withdrew into voluntary exile. Cicero pays a
tribute to the energy of Opimius in the first Oration against Catiline,
c. iii.

[296] This phenomenon of the parhelion, or mock sun, which so puzzled
Cicero's interlocutors, has been very satisfactorily explained by
modern science. The parhelia are formed by the reflection of the
sunbeams on a cloud properly situated. They usually accompany the
coronae, or luminous circles, and are placed in the same circumference,
and at the same height. Their colors resemble that of the rainbow; the
red and yellow are towards the side of the sun, and the blue and violet
on the other. There are, however, coronae sometimes seen without
parhelia, and _vice versa_. Parhelia are double, triple, etc., and in
1629, a parhelion of five suns was seen at Rome, and another of six
suns at Arles, 1666.

[297] There is a little uncertainty as to what this age was, but it was
probably about twenty-five.

[298] Cicero here gives a very exact and correct account of the
planetarium of Archimedes, which is so often noticed by the ancient
astronomers. It no doubt corresponded in a great measure to our modern
planetarium, or orrery, invented by the earl of that name. This
elaborate machine, whose manufacture requires the most exact and
critical science, is of the greatest service to those who study the
revolutions of the stars, for astronomic, astrologic, or meteorologic
purposes.

[299] The end of the fourteenth chapter and the first words of the
fifteenth are lost; but it is plain that in the fifteenth it is Scipio
who is speaking.

[300] There is evidently some error in the text here, for Ennius was
born 515 A.U.C., was a personal friend of the elder Africanus, and died
about 575 A.U.C., so that it is plain that we ought to read in the text
550, not 350.

[301] Two pages are lost here. Afterward it is again Scipio who is
speaking.

[302] Two pages are lost here.

[303] Both Ennius and Naevius wrote tragedies called "Iphigenia." Mai
thinks the text here corrupt, and expresses some doubt whether there is
a quotation here at all.

[304] He means Scipio himself.

[305] There is again a hiatus. What follows is spoken by Laelius.

[306] Again two pages are lost.

[307] Again two pages are lost. It is evident that Scipio is speaking
again in cap. xxxi.

[308] Again two pages are lost.

[309] Again two pages are lost.

[310] Here four pages are lost.

[311] Here four pages are lost.

[312] Two pages are missing here.

[313] A name of Neptune.

[314] About seven lines are lost here, and there is a great deal of
corruption and imperfection in the next few sentences.

[315] Two pages are lost here.

[316] The _Lex Curiata de Imperio_, so often mentioned here, was the
same as the _Auctoritas Patrum_, and was necessary in order to confer
upon the dictator, consuls, and other magistrates the _imperium_, or
military command: without this they had only a _potestas_, or civil
authority, and could not meddle with military affairs.

[317] Two pages are missing here.

[318] Here two pages are missing.

[319] I have translated this very corrupt passage according to
Niebuhr's emendation.

[320] Assiduus, ab aere dando.

[321] Proletarii, a prole.

[322] Here four pages are missing.

[323] Two pages are missing here.

[324] Two pages are missing here.

[325] Here twelve pages are missing.

[326] Sixteen pages are missing here.

[327] Here eight pages are missing.

[328] A great many pages are missing here.

[329] Several pages are lost here; the passage in brackets is found in
Nonius under the word "exulto."

[330] This and other chapters printed in smaller type are generally
presumed to be of doubtful authenticity.

[331] The beginning of this book is lost. The two first paragraphs
come, the one from St. Augustine, the other from Lactantius.

[332] Eight or nine pages are lost here.

[333] Here six pages are lost.

[334] Here twelve pages are missing.

[335] We have been obliged to insert two or three of these sentences
between brackets, which are not found in the original, for the sake of
showing the drift of the arguments of Philus. He himself was fully
convinced that justice and morality were of eternal and immutable
obligation, and that the best interests of all beings lie in their
perpetual development and application. This eternity of Justice is
beautifully illustrated by Montesquieu. "Long," says he, "before
positive laws were instituted, the moral relations of justice were
absolute and universal. To say that there were no justice or injustice
but that which depends on the injunctions or prohibitions of positive
laws, is to say that the radii which spring from a centre are not equal
till we have formed a circle to illustrate the proposition. We must,
therefore, acknowledge that the relations of equity were antecedent to
the positive laws which corroborated them." But though Philus was fully
convinced of this, in order to give his friends Scipio and Laelius an
opportunity of proving it, he frankly brings forward every argument for
injustice that sophistry had ever cast in the teeth of reason.--_By the
original Translator_.

[336] Here four pages are missing. The following sentence is preserved
in Nonius.

[337] Two pages are missing here.

[338] Several pages are missing here.

[339] He means Alexander the Great.

[340] Six or eight pages are lost here.

[341] A great many pages are missing here.

[342] Six or eight pages are missing here.

[343] Several pages are lost here.

[344] This and the following chapters are not the actual words of
Cicero, but quotations by Lactantius and Augustine of what they affirm
that he said.

[345] Twelve pages are missing here.

[346] Eight pages are missing here.

[347] Six or eight pages are missing here.

[348] Catadupa, from [Greek: kata] and [Greek: doipos], noise.








