CHAPTER III. WE GO TO DANVILLE

Two years went by, two uneventful years for me, two mighty years for
Kentucky. Westward rolled the tide of emigrants to change her character,
but to swell her power. Towns and settlements sprang up in a season and
flourished, and a man could scarce keep pace with the growth of them.
Doctors came, and ministers, and lawyers; generals and majors, and
captains and subalterns of the Revolution, to till their grants and to
found families. There were gentry, too, from the tide-waters, come to
retrieve the fortunes which they had lost by their patriotism. There
were storekeepers like Mr. Scarlett, adventurers and ne’er-do-weels
who hoped to start with a clean slate, and a host of lazy vagrants who
thought to scratch the soil and find abundance.

I must not forget how, at the age of seventeen, I became a landowner,
thanks to my name being on the roll of Colonel Clark’s regiment. For,
in a spirit of munificence, the Assembly of the Commonwealth of Virginia
had awarded to every private in that regiment one hundred and eight
acres of land on the Ohio River, north of the Falls. Sergeant Thomas
McChesney, as a reward for his services in one of the severest campaigns
in history, received a grant of two hundred and sixteen acres! You who
will may look at the plat made by William Clark, Surveyor for the Board
of Commissioners, and find sixteen acres marked for Thomas McChesney in
Section 169, and two hundred more in Section 3. Section 3 fronted the
Ohio some distance above Bear Grass Creek, and was, of course, on the
Illinois shore. As for my own plots, some miles in the interior, I never
saw them. But I own them to this day.

I mention these things as bearing on the story of my life, with which I
must get on. And, therefore, I may not dwell upon this injustice to the
men who won an empire and were flung a bone long afterwards.

It was early autumn once more, and such a busy week we had had at the
mill, that Tom was perforce obliged to remain at home and help, though
he longed to be gone with Cowan and Ray a-hunting to the southwest. Up
rides a man named Jarrott, flings himself from his horse, passes the
time of day as he watches the grinding, helps Tom to tie up a sack or
two, and hands him a paper.

“What’s this?” says Tom, staring at it blankly.

“Ye won’t blame me, Mac,” answers Mr. Jarrott, somewhat ashamed of his
rôle of process-server. “‘Tain’t none of my doin’s.”

“Read it, Davy,” said Tom, giving it to me.

I stopped the mill, and, unfolding the paper, read. I remember not
the quaint wording of it, save that it was ill-spelled and ill-writ
generally. In short, it was a summons for Tom to appear before the court
at Danville on a certain day in the following week, and I made out that
a Mr. Neville Colfax was the plaintiff in the matter, and that the suit
had to do with land.

“Neville Colfax!” I exclaimed, “that’s the man for whom Mr. Potts was
agent.”

“Ay, ay,” said Tom, and sat him down on the meal-bags. “Drat the
varmint, he kin hev the land.”

“Hev the land?” cried Polly Ann, who had come in upon us. “Hev ye no
sperrit, Tom McChesney?”

“There’s no chance ag’in the law,” said Tom, hopelessly. “Thar’s Perkins
had his land tuck away last year, and Terrell’s moved out, and twenty
more I could name. And thar’s Dan’l Boone, himself. Most the rich bottom
he tuck up the critters hev got away from him.”

“Ye’ll go to Danville and take Davy with ye and fight it,” answered
Polly Ann, decidedly. “Davy has a word to say, I reckon. ‘Twas he made
the mill and scar’t that Mr. Potts away. I reckon he’ll git us out of
this fix.”

Mr. Jarrott applauded her courage.

“Ye have the grit, ma’am,” he said, as he mounted his horse again.
“Here’s luck to ye!”

The remembrance of Mr. Potts weighed heavily upon my mind during the
next week. Perchance Tom would have to pay for this prank likewise.
‘Twas indeed a foolish, childish thing to have done, and I might have
known that it would only have put off the evil day of reckoning. Since
then, by reason of the mill site and the business we got by it, the land
had become the most valuable in that part of the country. Had I known
Colonel Clark’s whereabouts, I should have gone to him for advice and
comfort. As it was, we were forced to await the issue without counsel.
Polly Ann and I talked it over many times while Tom sat, morose and
silent, in a corner. He was the pioneer pure and simple, afraid of no
man, red or white, in open combat, but defenceless in such matters as
this.

“‘Tis Davy will save us, Tom,” said Polly Ann, “with the l’arnin’ he’s
got while the corn was grindin’.”

I had, indeed, been reading at the mill while the hopper emptied itself,
such odd books as drifted into Harrodstown. One of these was called
“Bacon’s Abridgment”; it dealt with law and it puzzled me sorely.

“And the children,” Polly Ann continued,--“ye’ll not make me pick up the
four of ‘em, and pack it to Louisiana, because Mr. Colfax wants the land
we’ve made for ourselves.”

There were four of them now, indeed,--the youngest still in the bark
cradle in the corner. He bore a no less illustrious name than that of
the writer of these chronicles.

It would be hard to say which was the more troubled, Tom or I, that
windy morning we set out on the Danville trace. Polly Ann alone had been
serene,--ay, and smiling and hopeful. She had kissed us each good-by
impartially. And we left her, with a future governor of Kentucky on her
shoulder, tripping lightly down to the mill to grind the McGarrys’ corn.

When the forest was cleared at Danville, Justice was housed first.
She was not the serene, inexorable dame whom we have seen in pictures
holding her scales above the jars of earth. Justice at Danville was a
somewhat high-spirited, quarrelsome lady who decided matters oftenest
with the stroke of a sword. There was a certain dignity about her temple
withal,--for instance, if a judge wore linen, that linen must not
be soiled. Nor was it etiquette for a judge to lay his own hands in
chastisement on contemptuous persons, though Justice at Danville
had more compassion than her sisters in older communities upon human
failings.

There was a temple built to her “of hewed or sawed logs nine inches
thick”--so said the specifications. Within the temple was a rude
platform which served as a bar, and since Justice is supposed to carry
a torch in her hand, there were no windows,--nor any windows in the jail
next door, where some dozen offenders languished on the afternoon that
Tom and I rode into town.

There was nothing auspicious in the appearance of Danville, and no man
might have said then that the place was to be the scene of portentous
conventions which were to decide the destiny of a State. Here was a
sprinkling of log cabins, some in the building, and an inn, by courtesy
so called. Tom and I would have preferred to sleep in the woods near by,
with our feet to the blaze; this was partly from motives of economy,
and partly because Tom, in common with other pioneers, held an inn in
contempt. But to come back to our arrival.

It was a sunny and windy afternoon, and the leaves were flying in
the air. Around the court-house was a familiar, buzzing scene,--the
backwoodsmen, lounging against the wall or brawling over their claims,
the sleek agents and attorneys, and half a dozen of a newer type. These
were adventurous young gentlemen of family, some of them lawyers and
some of them late officers in the Continental army who had been rewarded
with grants of land. These were the patrons of the log tavern which
stood near by with the blackened stumps around it, where there was much
card-playing and roistering, ay, and even duelling, of nights.

“Thar’s Mac,” cried a backwoodsman who was sitting on the court-house
steps as we rode up. “Howdy, Mac; be they tryin’ to git your land, too?”

“Howdy, Mac,” said a dozen more, paying a tribute to Tom’s popularity.
And some of them greeted me.

“Is this whar they take a man’s land away?” says Tom, jerking his thumb
at the open door.

Tom had no intention of uttering a witticism, but his words were
followed by loud guffaws from all sides, even the lawyers joining in.

“I reckon this is the place, Tom,” came the answer.

“I reckon I’ll take a peep in thar,” said Tom, leaping off his horse and
shouldering his way to the door. I followed him, curious. The building
was half full. Two elderly gentlemen of grave demeanor sat on stools
behind a puncheon table, and near them a young man was writing. Behind
the young man was a young gentleman who was closing a speech as we
entered, and he had spoken with such vehemence that the perspiration
stood out on his brow. There was a murmur from those listening, and I
saw Tom pressing his way to the front.

“Hev any of ye seen a feller named Colfax?” cries Tom, in a loud voice.
“He says he owns the land I settled, and he ain’t ever seed it.”

There was a roar of laughter, and even the judges smiled.

“Whar is he?” cries Tom; “said he’d be here to-day.”

Another gust of laughter drowned his words, and then one of the judges
got up and rapped on the table. The gentleman who had just made the
speech glared mightily, and I supposed he had lost the effect of it.

“What do you mean by interrupting the court?” cried the judge. “Get out,
sir, or I’ll have you fined for contempt.”

Tom looked dazed. But at that moment a hand was laid on his shoulder,
and Tom turned.

“Why,” says he, “thar’s no devil if it ain’t the Colonel. Polly Ann told
me not to let ‘em scar’ me, Colonel.”

“And quite right, Tom,” Colonel Clark answered, smiling. He turned to
the judges. “If your Honors please,” said he, “this gentleman is an old
soldier of mine, and unused to the ways of court. I beg your Honors to
excuse him.”

The judges smiled back, and the Colonel led us out of the building.

“Now, Tom,” said he, after he had given me a nod and a kind word, “I
know this Mr. Colfax, and if you will come into the tavern this evening
after court, we’ll see what can be done. I have a case of my own at
present.”

Tom was very grateful. He spent the remainder of the daylight hours with
other friends of his, shooting at a mark near by, serenely confident
of the result of his case now that Colonel Clark had a hand in it. Tom
being one of the best shots in Kentucky, he had won two beaver skins
before the early autumn twilight fell. As for me, I had an afternoon of
excitement in the court, fascinated by the marvels of its procedures, by
the impassioned speeches of its advocates, by the gravity of its judges.
Ambition stirred within me.

The big room of the tavern was filled with men in heated talk over the
day’s doings, some calling out for black betty, some for rum, and some
demanding apple toddies. The landlord’s slovenly negro came in with
candles, their feeble rays reënforcing the firelight and revealing the
mud-chinked walls. Tom and I had barely sat ourselves down at a table in
a corner, when in came Colonel Clark. Beside him was a certain swarthy
gentleman whom I had noticed in the court, a man of some thirty-five
years, with a fine, fleshy face and coal-black hair. His expression was
not one to give us the hope of an amicable settlement,--in fact, he had
the scowl of a thundercloud. He was talking quite angrily, and seemed
not to heed those around him.

“Why the devil should I see the man, Clark?” he was saying.

The Colonel did not answer until they had stopped in front of us.

“Major Colfax,” said he, “this is Sergeant Tom McChesney, one of the
best friends I have in Kentucky. I think a vast deal of Tom, Major. He
was one of the few that never failed me in the Illinois campaign. He
is as honest as the day; you will find him plain-spoken if he speaks at
all, and I have great hopes that you will agree. Tom, the Major and
I are boyhood friends, and for the sake of that friendship he has
consented to this meeting.”

“I fear that your kind efforts will be useless, Colonel,” Major Colfax
put in, rather tartly. “Mr. McChesney not only ignores my rights, but
was near to hanging my agent.”

“What?” says Colonel Clark.

I glanced at Tom. However helpless he might be in a court, he could
be counted on to stand up stanchly in a personal argument. His retorts
would certainly not be brilliant, but they surely would be dogged. Major
Colfax had begun wrong.

“I reckon ye’ve got no rights that I know on,” said Tom. “I cleart the
land and settled it, and I have a better right to it nor any man. And
I’ve got a grant fer it.”

“A Henderson grant!” cried the Major; “‘tis so much worthless paper.”

“I reckon it’s good enough fer me,” answered Tom. “It come from those
who blazed their way out here and druv the redskins off. I don’t know
nothin’ about this newfangled law, but ‘tis a queer thing to my thinkin’
if them that fit fer a place ain’t got the fust right to it.”

Major Colfax turned to Colonel Clark with marked impatience.

“I told you it would be useless, Clark,” said he. “I care not a fig for
a few paltry acres, and as God hears me I’m a reasonable man.” (He did
not look it then.) “But I swear by the evangels I’ll let no squatter
have the better of me. I did not serve Virginia for gold or land, but I
lost my fortune in that service, and before I know it these backwoodsmen
will have every acre of my grant. It’s an old story,” said Mr. Colfax,
hotly, “and why the devil did we fight England if it wasn’t that every
man should have his rights? By God, I’ll not be frightened or wheedled
out of mine. I sent an agent to Kentucky to deal politely and reasonably
with these gentry. What did they do to him? Some of them threw him out
neck and crop. And if I am not mistaken,” said Major Colfax, fixing
a piercing eye upon Tom, “if I am not mistaken, it was this worthy
sergeant of yours who came near to hanging him, and made the poor devil
flee Kentucky for his life.”

This remark brought me near to an untimely laugh at the remembrance of
Mr. Potts, and this though I was far too sober over the outcome of the
conference. Colonel Clark seized hold of a chair and pushed it under
Major Colfax.

“Sit down, gentlemen, we are not so far apart,” said the Colonel,
coolly. The slovenly negro lad passing at that time, he caught him by
the sleeve. “Here, boy, a bowl of toddy, quick. And mind you brew it
strong. Now, Tom,” said he, “what is this fine tale about a hanging?”

“‘Twan’t nothin’,” said Tom.

“You tell me you didn’t try to hang Mr. Potts!” cried Major Colfax.

“I tell you nothin’,” said Tom, and his jaw was set more stubbornly than
ever.

Major Colfax glanced at Colonel Clark.

“You see!” he said a little triumphantly.

I could hold my tongue no longer.

“Major Colfax is unjust, sir,” I cried. “‘Twas Tom saved the man from
hanging.”

“Eh?” says Colonel Clark, turning to me sharply. “So you had a hand in
this, Davy. I might have guessed as much.”

“Who the devil is this?” says Mr. Colfax.

“A sort of ward of mine,” answers the Colonel. “Drummer boy, financier,
strategist, in my Illinois campaign. Allow me to present to you, Major,
Mr. David Ritchie. When my men objected to marching through ice-skimmed
water up to their necks, Mr. Ritchie showed them how.”

“God bless my soul!” exclaimed the Major, staring at me from under his
black eyebrows, “he was but a child.”

“With an old head on his shoulders,” said the Colonel, and his banter
made me flush.

The negro boy arriving with the toddy, Colonel Clark served out three
generous gourdfuls, a smaller one for me. “Your health, my friends, and
I drink to a peaceful settlement.”

“You may drink to the devil if you like,” says Major Colfax, glaring at
Tom.

“Come, Davy,” said Colonel Clark, when he had taken half the gourd,
“let’s have the tale. I’ll warrant you’re behind this.”

I flushed again, and began by stammering. For I had a great fear that
Major Colfax’s temper would fly into bits when he heard it.

“Well, sir,” said I, “I was grinding corn at the mill when the man
came. I thought him a smooth-mannered person, and he did not give his
business. He was just for wheedling me. ‘And was this McChesney’s mill?’
said he. ‘Ay,’ said I. ‘Thomas McChesney?’ ‘Ay,’ said I. Then he was all
for praise of Thomas McChesney. ‘Where is he?’ said he. ‘He is at the
far pasture,’ said I, ‘and may be looked for any moment.’ Whereupon
he sits down and tries to worm out of me the business of the mill, the
yield of the land. After that he begins to talk about the great people
he knows, Sevier and Shelby and Robertson and Boone and the like. Ay,
and his intimates, the Randolphs and the Popes and the Colfaxes
in Virginia. ‘Twas then I asked him if he knew Colonel Campbell of
Abingdon.”

“And what deviltry was that?” demanded the Colonel, as he dipped himself
more of the toddy.

“I’ll come to it, sir. Yes, Colonel Campbell was his intimate, and
ranted if he did not tarry a week with him at Abingdon on his journeys.
After that he follows me to the cabin, and sees Polly Ann and Tom
and the children on the floor poking a ‘possum. ‘Ah,’ says he, in his
softest voice, ‘a pleasant family scene. And this is Mr. McChesney?’
‘I’m your man,’ says Tom. Then he praised the mill site and the land all
over again. ‘‘Tis good enough for a farmer,’ says Tom. ‘Who holds under
Henderson’s grant,’ I cried. ‘‘Twas that you wished to say an hour ago,’
and I saw I had caught him fair.”

“By the eternal!” cried Colonel Clark, bringing down his fist upon the
table. “And what then?”

I glanced at Major Colfax, but for the life of me I could make nothing
of his look.

“And what did your man say?” said Colonel Clark.

“He called on the devil to bite me, sir,” I answered. The Colonel put
down his gourd and began to laugh. The Major was looking at me fixedly.

“And what then?” said the Colonel.

“It was then Polly Ann called him a thief to take away the land Tom
had fought for and paid for and tilled. The man was all politeness once
more, said that the matter was unfortunate, and that a new and good
title might be had for a few skins.”

“He said that?” interrupted Major Colfax, half rising in his chair. “He
was a damned scoundrel.”

“So I thought, sir,” I answered.

“The devil you did!” said the Major.

“Tut, Colfax,” said the Colonel, pulling him by the sleeve of his
greatcoat, “sit down and let the lad finish. And then?”

“Mr. Boone had told me of a land agent who had made off with Colonel
Campbell’s silver spoons from Abingdon, and how the Colonel had ridden
east and west after him for a week with a rope hanging on his saddle. I
began to tell this story, and instead of the description of Mr. Boone’s
man, I put in that of Mr. Potts,--in height some five feet nine, spare,
of sallow complexion and a green greatcoat.”

Major Colfax leaped up in his chair.

“Great Jehovah!” he shouted, “you described the wrong man.”

Colonel Clark roared with laughter, thereby spilling some of his toddy.

“I’ll warrant he did so,” he cried; “and I’ll warrant your agent went
white as birch bark. Go on, Davy.”

“There’s not a great deal more, sir,” I answered, looking apprehensively
at Major Colfax, who still stood. “The man vowed I lied, but Tom laid
hold of him and was for hurrying him off to Harrodstown at once.”

“Which would ill have suited your purpose,” put in the Colonel. “And
what did you do with him?”

“We put him in a loft, sir, and then I told Tom that he was not
Campbell’s thief at all. But I had a craving to scare the man out of
Kentucky. So I rode off to the neighbors and gave them the tale, and
bade them come after nightfall as though to hang Campbell’s thief, which
they did, and they were near to smashing the door trying to get in the
cabin. Tom told them the rascal had escaped, but they must needs come
in and have jigs and toddies until midnight. When they were gone, and we
called down the man from the loft, he was in such a state that he could
scarce find the rungs of the ladder with his feet. He rode away into
the night, and that was the last we heard of him. Tom was not to blame,
sir.”

Colonel Clark was speechless. And when for the moment he would conquer
his mirth, a glance at Major Colfax would set him off again in laughter.
I was puzzled. I thought my Colonel more human than of old.

“How now, Colfax?” he cried, giving a poke to the Major’s ribs; “you
hold the sequel to this farce.”

The Major’s face was purple,--with what emotion I could not say.
Suddenly he swung full at me.

“Do you mean to tell me that you were the general of this hoax--you?” he
demanded in a strange voice.

“The thing seemed an injustice to me, sir,” I replied in self-defence,
“and the man a rascal.”

“A rascal!” cried the Major, “a knave, a poltroon, a simpleton! And
he came to me with no tale of having been outwitted by a stripling.”
Whereupon Major Colfax began to shake, gently at first, and presently
he was in such a gale of laughter that I looked on him in amazement,
Colonel Clark joining in again. The Major’s eye rested at length upon
Tom, and gradually he grew calm.

“McChesney,” said he, “we’ll have no bickerings in court among soldiers.
The land is yours, and to-morrow my attorney shall give you a deed of
it. Your hand, McChesney.”

The stubbornness vanished from Tom’s face, and there came instead a
dazed expression as he thrust a great, hard hand into the Major’s.

“‘Twan’t the land, sir,” he stammered; “these varmints of settlers is
gittin’ thick as flies in July. ‘Twas Polly Ann. I reckon I’m obleeged
to ye, Major.”

“There, there,” said the Major, “I thank the Lord I came to Kentucky to
see for myself. Damn the land. I have plenty more,--and little else.” He
turned quizzically to Colonel Clark, revealing a line of strong, white
teeth. “Suppose we drink a health to your drummer boy,” said he, lifting
up his gourd.



