CHAPTER XIV. RETRIBUTION

During the next two days I had more evidence of Monsieur de St. Gré’s
ability, and, thanks to his conduct of my campaign, not the least
suspicion of my mission to New Orleans got abroad. Certain gentlemen
were asked to dine, we called on others, and met still others casually
in their haunts of business or pleasure. I was troubled because of
the inconvenience and discomfort to which my host put himself, for New
Orleans in the dog-days may be likened in climate to the under side of
the lid of a steam kettle. But at length, on the second evening, after
we had supped on jambalaya and rice cakes and other dainties, and the
last guest had gone, my host turned to me.

“The rest of the burrow is the same, Mr. Ritchie, until it comes to the
light again.”

“And the fox has crawled out of the other end,” I said.

“Precisely,” he answered, laughing; “in short, if you were to remain in
New Orleans until New Year’s, you would not learn a whit more. To-morrow
morning I have a little business of my own to transact, and we shall
get to Les Îles in time for dinner. No, don’t thank me,” he protested;
“there’s a certain rough honesty and earnestness ingrained in you
which I like. And besides,” he added, smiling, “you are poor indeed at
thanking, Mr. Ritchie. You could never do it gracefully. But if ever I
were in trouble, I believe that I might safely call on you.”

The next day was a rare one, for a wind from somewhere had blown the
moisture away a little, the shadows were clearer cut, and by noon
Monsieur de St. Gré and I were walking our horses in the shady road
behind the levee. We were followed at a respectful distance by André,
Monsieur’s mulatto body-servant, and as we rode my companion gave me
stories of the owners of the different plantations we passed, and spoke
of many events of interest in the history of the colony. Presently he
ceased to talk, and rode in silence for many minutes. And then he turned
upon me suddenly.

“Mr. Ritchie,” he said, “you have seen my son. It may be that in him
I am paying the price of my sins. I have done everything to set him
straight, but in vain. Monsieur, every son of the St. Grés has awakened
sooner or later to a sense of what becomes him. But Auguste is a fool,”
he cried bitterly,--a statement which I could not deny; “were it not for
my daughter, Antoinette, I should be a miserable man indeed.”

Inasmuch as he was not a person of confidences, I felt the more
flattered that he should speak so plainly to me, and I had a great
sympathy for this strong man who could not help himself.

“You have observed Antoinette, Mr. Ritchie,” he continued; “she is a
strange mixture of wilfulness and caprice and self-sacrifice, and she
has at times a bit of that wit which has made our house for generations
the intimates--I may say--of sovereigns.”

This peculiar pride of race would have amused me in another man. I found
myself listening to Monsieur de St. Gré with gravity, and I did not dare
to reply that I had had evidence of Mademoiselle’s aptness of retort.

“She has been my companion since she was a child, Monsieur. She has
disobeyed me, flaunted me, nursed me in illness, championed me behind my
back. I have a little book which I have kept of her sayings and doings,
which may interest you, Monsieur. I will show it you.”

This indeed was a new side of Monsieur de St. Gré, and I reflected
rather ruefully upon the unvarnished truth of what Mr. Wharton had told
me,--ay, and what Colonel Clark had emphasized long before. It was my
fate never to be treated as a young man. It struck me that Monsieur de
St. Gré had never even considered me in the light of a possible suitor
for his daughter’s hand.

“I should be delighted to see them, Monsieur,” I answered.

“Would you?” he exclaimed, his face lighting up as he glanced at me.
“Alas, Madame de St. Gré and I have promised to go to our neighbors’,
Monsieur and Madame Bertrand’s, for to-night. But, to-morrow, if you
have leisure, we shall look at it together. And not a word of this to my
daughter, Monsieur,” he added apprehensively; “she would never forgive
me. She dislikes my talking of her, but at times I cannot help it. It
was only last year that she was very angry with me, and would not speak
to me for days, because I boasted of her having watched at the bedside
of a poor gentleman who came here and got the fever. You will not tell
her?”

“Indeed I shall not, Monsieur,” I answered.

“It is strange,” he said abruptly, “it is strange that this gentleman
and his wife should likewise have had letters to us from Monsieur
Gratiot. They came from St. Louis, and they were on their way to Paris.”

“To Paris?” I cried; “what was their name?”

He looked at me in surprise.

“Clive,” he said.

“Clive!” I cried, leaning towards him in my saddle. “Clive! And what
became of them?”

This time he gave me one of his searching looks, and it was not unmixed
with astonishment.

“Why do you ask, Monsieur?” he demanded. “Did you know them?”

I must have shown that I was strangely agitated. For the moment I could
not answer.

“Monsieur Gratiot himself spoke of them to me,” I said, after a little;
“he said they were an interesting couple.”

“Pardieu!” exclaimed Monsieur de St. Gré, “he put it mildly.” He gave me
another look. “There was something about them, Monsieur, which I could
not fathom. Why were they drifting? They were people of quality who had
seen the world, who were by no means paupers, who had no cause to travel
save a certain restlessness. And while they were awaiting the sailing
of the packet for France they came to our house--the old one in the
Rue Bourbon that was burned. I would not speak ill of the dead, but Mr.
Clive I did not like. He fell sick of the fever in my house, and it was
there that Antoinette and Madame de St. Gré took turns with his wife in
watching at his bedside. I could do nothing with Antoinette, Monsieur,
and she would not listen to my entreaties, my prayers, my commands. We
buried the poor fellow in the alien ground, for he did not die in the
Church, and after that my daughter clung to Mrs. Clive. She would not
let her go, and the packet sailed without her. I have never seen such
affection. I may say,” he added quickly, “that Madame de St. Gré and I
share in it, for Mrs. Clive is a lovable woman and a strong character.
And into the great sorrow that lies behind her life, we have never
probed.”

“And she is with you now, Monsieur?” I asked.

“She lives with us, Monsieur,” he answered simply, “and I hope for
always. No,” he said quickly, “it is not charity,--she has something of
her own. We love her, and she is the best of companions for my daughter.
For the rest, Monsieur, she seems benumbed, with no desire to go back or
to go farther.”

An entrance drive to the plantation of Les Îles, unknown to Nick and me,
led off from the main road like a green tunnel arched out of the forest.
My feelings as we entered this may be imagined, for I was suddenly
confronted with the situation which I had dreaded since my meeting with
Nick at Jonesboro. I could scarcely allow myself even the faint hope
that Mrs. Clive might not prove to be Mrs. Temple after all. Whilst I
was in this agony of doubt and indecision, the drive suddenly came out
on a shaded lawn dotted with flowering bushes. There was the house with
its gallery, its curved dormer roof and its belvedere; and a white,
girlish figure flitted down the steps. It was Mademoiselle Antoinette,
and no sooner had her father dismounted than she threw herself into his
arms. Forgetful of my presence, he stood murmuring in her ear like a
lover; and as I watched them my trouble slipped from my mind, and gave
place to a vaguer regret that I had been a wanderer throughout my life.
Presently she turned up to him a face on which was written something
which he could not understand. His own stronger features reflected a
vague disquiet.

“What is it, ma chérie?”

What was it indeed? Something was in her eyes which bore a message and
presentiment to me. She dropped them, fastening in the lapel of his
coat a flaunting red flower set against a shining leaf, and there was a
gentle, joyous subterfuge in her answer.

“Thou pardoned Auguste, as I commanded?” she said. They were speaking in
the familiar French.

“Ha, diable! is it that which disquiets thee?” said her father. “We will
not speak of Auguste. Dost thou know Monsieur Ritchie, ‘Toinette?”

She disengaged herself and dropped me a courtesy, her eyes seeking
the ground. But she said not a word. At that instant Madame de St. Gré
herself appeared on the gallery, followed by Nick, who came down the
steps with a careless self-confidence to greet the master. Indeed, a
stranger might have thought that Mr. Temple was the host, and I saw
Antoinette watching him furtively with a gleam of amusement in her eyes.

“I am delighted to see you at last, Monsieur,” said my cousin. “I am
Nicholas Temple, and I have been your guest for three days.”

Had Monsieur de St. Gré been other than the soul of hospitality, it
would have been impossible not to welcome such a guest. Our host had,
in common with his daughter, a sense of humor. There was a quizzical
expression on his fine face as he replied, with the barest glance at
Mademoiselle Antoinette:--

“I trust you have been--well entertained, Mr. Temple. My daughter has
been accustomed only to the society of her brother and cousins.”

“Faith, I should not have supposed it,” said Nick, instantly, a remark
which caused the color to flush deeply into Mademoiselle’s face. I
looked to see Monsieur de St. Gré angry. He tried, indeed, to be grave,
but smiled irresistibly as he mounted the steps to greet his wife, who
stood demurely awaiting his caress. And in this interval Mademoiselle
shot at Nick a swift and withering look as she passed him. He returned a
grimace.

“Messieurs,” said Monsieur de St. Gré, turning to us, “dinner will soon
be ready--if you will be so good as to pardon me until then.”

Nick followed Mademoiselle with his eyes until she had disappeared
beyond the hall. She did not so much as turn. Then he took me by the arm
and led me to a bench under a magnolia a little distance away, where he
seated himself, and looked up at me despairingly.

“Behold,” said he, “what was once your friend and cousin, your
counsellor, sage, and guardian. Behold the clay which conducted you
hither, with the heart neatly but painfully extracted. Look upon a
woman’s work, Davy, and shun the sex. I tell you it is better to go
blindfold through life, to have--pardon me--your own blunt features,
than to be reduced to such a pitiable state. Was ever such a refinement
of cruelty practised before? Never! Was there ever such beauty, such
archness, such coquetry,--such damned elusiveness? Never! If there is a
cargo going up the river, let me be salted and lie at the bottom of it.
I’ll warrant you I’ll not come to life.”

“You appear to have suffered somewhat,” I said, forgetting for the
moment in my laughter the thing that weighed upon my mind.

“Suffered!” he cried; “I have been tossed high in the azure that I might
sink the farther into the depths. I have been put in a grave, the earth
stamped down, resurrected, and flung into the dust-heap. I have been
taken up to the gate of heaven and dropped a hundred and fifty years
through darkness. Since I have seen you I have been the round of all the
bright places and all the bottomless pits in the firmament.”

“It seems to have made you literary,” I remarked judicially.

“I burn up twenty times a day,” he continued, with a wave of the hand to
express the completeness of the process; “there is nothing left. I see
her, I speak to her, and I burn up.”

“Have you had many tête-à-têtes?” I asked.

“Not one,” he retorted fiercely; “do you think there is any sense in the
damnable French custom? I am an honorable man, and, besides, I am not
equipped for an elopement. No priest in Louisiana would marry us. I see
her at dinner, at supper. Sometimes we sew on the gallery,” he went on,
“but I give you my oath that I have not had one word with her alone.”

“An oath is not necessary,” I said. “But you seem to have made some
progress nevertheless.”

“Do you call that progress?” he demanded.

“It is surely not retrogression.”

“God knows what it is,” said Nick, helplessly, “but it’s got to stop. I
have sent her an ultimatum.”

“A what?”

“A summons. Her father and mother are going to the Bertrands’ to-night,
and I have written her a note to meet me in the garden. And you,” he
cried, rising and slapping me between the shoulders, “you are to keep
watch, like the dear, careful, canny, sly rascal you are.”

“And--and has she accepted?” I inquired.

“That’s the deuce of it,” said he; “she has not. But I think she’ll
come.”

I stood for a moment regarding him.

“And you really love Mademoiselle Antoinette?” I asked.

“Have I not exhausted the language?” he answered. “If what I have been
through is not love, then may the Lord shield me from the real disease.”

“It may have been merely a light case of--tropical enthusiasm, let
us say. I have seen others, a little milder because the air was more
temperate.”

“Tropical--balderdash,” he exploded. “If you are not the most
exasperating, unfeeling man alive--”

“I merely wanted to know if you wished to marry Mademoiselle de St.
Gré,” I interrupted.

He gave me a look of infinite tolerance.

“Have I not made it plain that I cannot live without her?” he said; “if
not, I will go over it all again.”

“That will not be necessary,” I said hastily.

“The trouble may be,” he continued, “that they have already made one of
their matrimonial contracts with a Granpré, a Beauséjour, a Bernard.”

“Monsieur de St. Gré is a very sensible man,” I answered. “He loves his
daughter, and I doubt if he would force her to marry against her will.
Tell me, Nick,” I asked, laying my hand upon his shoulder, “do you love
this girl so much that you would let nothing come between you and her?”

“I tell you, I do; and again I tell you, I do,” he replied. He paused
suddenly glancing at my face, and added, “Why do you ask, Davy?”

I stood irresolute, now that the time had come not daring to give voice
to my suspicions. He had not spoken to me of his mother save that once,
and I had no means of knowing whether his feeling for the girl might not
soften his anger against her. I have never lacked the courage to come
to the point, but there was still the chance that I might be mistaken in
this after all. Would it not be best to wait until I had ascertained in
some way the identity of Mrs. Clive? And while I stood debating, Nick
regarding me with a puzzled expression, Monsieur de St. Gré appeared on
the gallery.

“Come, gentlemen,” he cried; “dinner awaits us.”

The dining room at Les Îles was at the corner of the house, and its
windows looked out on the gallery, which was shaded at that place by
dense foliage. The room, like others in the house, seemed to reflect the
decorous character of its owner. Two St. Grés, indifferently painted,
but rigorous and respectable, relieved the whiteness of the wall. They
were the Commissary-general and his wife. The lattices were closed on
one side, and in the deep amber light the family silver shone but dimly.
The dignity of our host, the evident ceremony of the meal,--which was
attended by three servants,--would have awed into a modified silence at
least a less irrepressible person than Nicholas Temple. But Nick was one
to carry by storm a position which another might wait to reconnoitre.
The first sensation of our host was no doubt astonishment, but he was
soon laughing over a vivid account of our adventures on the keel boat.
Nick’s imitation of Xavier, and his description of Benjy’s terrors after
the storm, were so perfect that I laughed quite as heartily; and
Madame de St. Gré wiped her eyes and repeated continually, “Quel
drôle monsieur! it is thus he has entertained us since thou departed,
Philippe.”

As for Mademoiselle, I began to think that Nick was not far wrong in his
diagnosis. Training may have had something to do with it. She would not
laugh, not she, but once or twice she raised her napkin to her face and
coughed slightly. For the rest, she sat demurely, with her eyes on
her plate, a model of propriety. Nick’s sufferings became more
comprehensible.

To give the devil his due, Nick had an innate tact which told him when
to stop, and perhaps at this time Mademoiselle’s superciliousness made
him subside the more quickly. After Monsieur de St. Gré had explained to
me the horrors of the indigo pest and the futility of sugar raising, he
turned to his daughter.

“‘Toinette, where is Madame Clive?” he asked.

The girl looked up, startled into life and interest at once.

“Oh, papa,” she cried in French, “we are so worried about her, mamma and
I. It was the day you went away, the day these gentlemen came, that we
thought she would take an airing. And suddenly she became worse.”

Monsieur de St. Gré turned with concern to his wife.

“I do not know what it is, Philippe,” said that lady; “it seems to be
mental. The loss of her husband weighs upon her, poor lady. But this is
worse than ever, and she will lie for hours with her face turned to the
wall, and not even Antoinette can arouse her.”

“I have always been able to comfort her before,” said Antoinette, with a
catch in her voice.

I took little account of what was said after that, my only notion being
to think the problem out for myself, and alone. As I was going to my
room Nick stopped me.

“Come into the garden, Davy,” he said.

“When I have had my siesta,” I answered.

“When you have had your siesta!” he cried; “since when did you begin to
indulge in siestas?”

“To-day,” I replied, and left him staring after me.

I reached my room, bolted the door, and lay down on my back to think.
Little was needed to convince me now that Mrs. Clive was Mrs. Temple,
and thus the lady’s relapse when she heard that her son was in the house
was accounted for. Instead of forming a plan, my thoughts drifted from
that into pity for her, and my memory ran back many years to the text
of good Mr. Mason’s sermon, “I have refined thee, but not with silver,
I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.” What must Sarah Temple
have suffered since those days! I remembered her in her prime, in her
beauty, in her selfishness, in her cruelty to those whom she might have
helped, and I wondered the more at the change which must have come over
the woman that she had won the affections of this family, that she had
gained the untiring devotion of Mademoiselle Antoinette. Her wit might
not account for it, for that had been cruel. And something of the agony
of the woman’s soul as she lay in torment, facing the wall, thinking
of her son under the same roof, of a life misspent and irrevocable, I
pictured.

A stillness crept into the afternoon like the stillness of night. The
wide house was darkened and silent, and without a sunlight washed with
gold filtered through the leaves. There was a drowsy hum of bees, and in
the distance the occasional languishing note of a bird singing what must
have been a cradle-song. My mind wandered, and shirked the task that was
set to it.

Could anything be gained by meddling? I had begun to convince myself
that nothing could, when suddenly I came face to face with the
consequences of a possible marriage between Nick and Mademoiselle
Antoinette. In that event the disclosure of his mother’s identity would
be inevitable. Not only his happiness was involved, but Mademoiselle’s,
her father’s and her mother’s, and lastly that of this poor hunted woman
herself, who thought at last to have found a refuge.

An hour passed, and it became more and more evident to me that I must
see and talk with Mrs. Temple. But how was I to communicate with her? At
last I took out my portfolio and wrote these words on a sheet:--

“If Mrs. Clive will consent to a meeting with Mr. David Ritchie, he
will deem it a favor. Mr. Ritchie assures Mrs. Clive that he makes this
request in all friendliness.”

I lighted a candle, folded the note and sealed it, addressed it to Mrs.
Clive, and opening the latticed door I stepped out. Walking along the
gallery until I came to the rear part of the house which faced towards
the out-buildings, I spied three figures prone on the grass under a
pecan tree that shaded the kitchen roof. One of these figures was Benjy,
and he was taking his siesta. I descended quietly from the gallery, and
making my way to him, touched him on the shoulder. He awoke and stared
at me with white eyes.

“Marse Dave!” he cried.

“Hush,” I answered, “and follow me.”

He came after me, wondering, a little way into the grove, where I
stopped.

“Benjy,” I said, “do you know any of the servants here?”

“Lawsy, Marse Dave, I reckon I knows ‘em,--some of ‘em,” he answered
with a grin.

“You talk to them?”

“Shucks, no, Marse Dave,” he replied with a fine scorn, “I ain’t no hand
at dat ar nigger French. But I knows some on ‘em, and right well too.”

“How?” I demanded curiously.

Benjy looked down sheepishly at his feet. He was standing pigeon-toed.

“I done c’ressed some on ‘em, Marse Dave,” he said at length, and there
was a note of triumph in his voice.

“You did what?” I asked.

“I done kissed one of dem yaller gals, Marse Dave. Yass’r, I done kissed
M’lisse.”

“Do you think Mélisse would do something for you if you asked her?” I
inquired.

Benjy seemed hurt.

“Marse Dave--” he began reproachfully.

“Very well, then,” I interrupted, taking the letter from my pocket,
“there is a lady who is ill here, Mrs. Clive--”

I paused, for a new look had come into Benjy’s eyes. He began that
peculiar, sympathetic laugh of the negro, which catches and doubles on
itself, and I imagined that a new admiration for me dawned on his face.

“Yass’r, yass, Marse Dave, I reckon M’lisse ‘ll git it to her ‘thout any
one tekin’ notice.”

I bit my lips.

“If Mrs. Clive receives this within an hour, Mélisse shall have one
piastre, and you another. There is an answer.”

Benjy took the note, and departed nimbly to find Mélisse, while I paced
up and down in my uneasiness as to the outcome of the experiment. A
quarter of an hour passed, half an hour, and then I saw Benjy coming
through the trees. He stood before me, chuckling, and drew from his
pocket a folded piece of paper. I gave him the two piastres, warned him
if his master or any one inquired for me that I was taking a walk, and
bade him begone. Then I opened the note.

“I will meet you at the bayou at seven this evening. Take the path that
leads through the garden.”

I read it with a catch of the breath, with a certainty that the
happiness of many people depended upon what I should say at that
meeting. And to think of this and to compose myself a little, I made my
way to the garden in search of the path, that I might know it when the
time came. Entering a gap in the hedge, I caught sight of the shaded
seat under the tree which had been the scene of our first meeting with
Antoinette, and I hurried past it as I crossed the garden. There were
two openings in the opposite hedge, the one through which Nick and I had
come, and another. I took the second, and with little difficulty
found the path of which the note had spoken. It led through a dense,
semi-tropical forest in the direction of the swamp beyond, the way being
well beaten, but here and there jealously crowded by an undergrowth
of brambles and the prickly Spanish bayonet. I know not how far I had
walked, my head bent in thought, before I felt the ground teetering
under my feet, and there was the bayou. It was a narrow lane of murky,
impenetrable water, shaded now by the forest wall. Imaged on its
amber surface were the twisted boughs of the cypresses of the swamp
beyond,--boughs funereally draped, as though to proclaim a warning of
unknown perils in the dark places. On that side where I stood ancient
oaks thrust their gnarled roots into the water, and these knees were
bridged by treacherous platforms of moss. As I sought for a safe
resting-place a dull splash startled me, the pink-and-white water lilies
danced on the ripples, and a long, black snout pushed its way to the
centre of the bayou and floated there motionless.

I sat down on a wide knee that seemed to be fashioned for the purpose,
and reflected. It may have been about half-past five, and I made up my
mind that, rather than return and risk explanations, I would wait where
I was until Mrs. Temple appeared. I had much to think of, and for the
rest the weird beauty of the place, with its changing colors as the
sun fell, held me in fascination. When the blue vapor stole through the
cypress swamp, my trained ear caught the faintest of warning sounds.
Mrs. Temple was coming.

I could not repress the exclamation that rose to my lips when she stood
before me.

“I have changed somewhat,” she began quite calmly; “I have changed since
you were at Temple Bow.”

I stood staring at her, at a loss to know whether by these words she
sought to gain an advantage. I knew not whether to pity or to be angry,
such a strange blending she seemed of former pride and arrogance and
later suffering. There were the features of the beauty still, the
eyes defiant, the lips scornful. Sorrow had set its brand upon this
protesting face in deep, violet marks under the eyes, in lines which no
human power could erase: sorrow had flecked with white the gold of the
hair, had proclaimed her a woman with a history. For she had a new and
remarkable beauty which puzzled and astonished me,--a beauty in which
maternity had no place. The figure, gowned with an innate taste in
black, still kept the rounded lines of the young woman, while about the
shoulders and across the open throat a lace mantilla was thrown. She
stood facing me, undaunted, and I knew that she had come to fight for
what was left her. I knew further that she was no mean antagonist.

“Will you kindly tell me to what circumstance I owe the honor of
this--summons, Mr. Ritchie?” she asked. “You are a travelled person for
one so young. I might almost say,” she added with an indifferent laugh,
“that there is some method and purpose in your travels.”

“Indeed, you do me wrong, Madame,” I replied; “I am here by the merest
chance.”

Again she laughed lightly, and stepping past me took her seat on the
oak from which I had risen. I marvelled that this woman, with all
her self-possession, could be the same as she who had held her room,
cowering, these four days past. Admiration for her courage mingled with
my other feelings, and for the life of me I knew not where to begin. My
experience with women of the world was, after all, distinctly limited.
Mrs. Temple knew, apparently by intuition, the advantage she had gained,
and she smiled.

“The Ritchies were always skilled in dealing with sinners,” she began;
“the first earl had the habit of hunting them like foxes, so it is said.
I take it for granted that, before my sentence is pronounced, I shall
have the pleasure of hearing my wrong-doings in detail. I could not ask
you to forego that satisfaction.”

“You seem to know the characteristics of my family, Mrs. Temple,” I
answered. “There is one trait of the Ritchies concerning which I ask
your honest opinion.”

“And what is that?” she said carelessly.

“I have always understood that they have spoken the truth. Is it not
so?”

She glanced at me curiously.

“I never knew your father to lie,” she answered; “but after all he had
few chances. He so seldom spoke.”

“Your intercourse with me at Temple Bow was quite as limited,” I said.

“Ah,” she interrupted quickly, “you bear me that grudge. It is another
trait of the Ritchies.”

“I bear you no grudge, Madame,” I replied. “I asked you a question
concerning the veracity of my family, and I beg that you will believe
what I say.”

“And what is this momentous statement?” she asked.

I had hard work to keep my temper, but I knew that I must not lose it.

“I declare to you on my honor that my business in New Orleans in no way
concerns you, and that I had not the slightest notion of finding you
here. Will you believe that?”

“And what then?” she asked.

“I also declare to you that, since meeting your son, my chief anxiety
has been lest he should run across you.”

“You are very considerate of others,” she said. “Let us admit for the
sake of argument that you come here by accident.”

It was the opening I had sought for, but despaired of getting.

“Then put yourself for a moment in my place, Madame, and give me credit
for a little kindliness of feeling, and a sincere affection for your
son.”

There was a new expression on her face, and the light of a supreme
effort in her eyes.

“I give you credit at least for a logical mind,” she answered. “In
spite of myself you have put me at the bar and seem to be conducting my
trial.”

“I do not see why there should be any rancor between us,” I answered.
“It is true that I hated you at Temple Bow. When my father was killed
and I was left a homeless orphan you had no pity for me, though your
husband was my mother’s brother. But you did me a good turn after all,
for you drove me out into a world where I learned to rely upon myself.
Furthermore, it was not in your nature to treat me well.”

“Not in my nature?” she repeated.

“You were seeking happiness, as every one must in their own way. That
happiness lay, apparently, with Mr. Riddle.”

“Ah,” she cried, with a catch of her breath, “I thought you would be
judging me.”

“I am stating facts. Your son was a sufficient embarrassment in this
matter, and I should have been an additional one. I blame you not,
Mrs. Temple, for anything you have done to me, but I blame you for
embittering Nick’s life.”

“And he?” she said. It seemed to me that I detected a faltering in her
voice.

“I will hide nothing from you. He blames you, with what justice I leave
you to decide.”

She did not answer this, but turned her head away towards the bayou. Nor
could I determine what was in her mind.

“And now I ask you whether I have acted as your friend in begging you to
meet me.”

She turned to me swiftly at that.

“I am at a loss to see how there can be friendship between us, Mr.
Ritchie,” she said.

“Very good then, Madame; I am sorry,” I answered. “I have done all that
is in my power, and now events will have to take their course.”

I had not gone two steps into the wood before I heard her voice calling
my name. She had risen, and leaned with her hand against the oak.

“Does Nick--know that you are here?” she cried.

“No,” I answered shortly. Then I realized suddenly what I had failed to
grasp before,--she feared that I would pity her.

“David!”

I started violently at the sound of my name, at the new note in her
voice, at the change in the woman as I turned. And then before I
realized what she had done she had come to me swiftly and laid her hand
upon my arm.

“David, does he hate me?”

All the hope remaining in her life was in that question, was in her face
as she searched mine with a terrible scrutiny. And never had I known
such an ordeal. It seemed as if I could not answer, and as I stood
staring back at her a smile was forced to her lips.

“I will pay you one tribute, my friend,” she said; “you are honest.”

But even as she spoke I saw her sway, and though I could not be sure it
were not a dizziness in me, I caught her. I shall always marvel at the
courage there was in her, for she straightened and drew away from me
a little proudly, albeit gently, and sat down on the knee of the oak,
looking across the bayou towards the mist of the swamp. There was the
infinite calmness of resignation in her next speech.

“Tell me about him,” she said.

She was changed indeed. Were it not so I should have heard of her own
sufferings, of her poor, hunted life from place to place, of countless
nights made sleepless by the past. Pride indeed was left, but the fire
had burned away the last vestige of selfishness.

I sat down beside her, knowing full well that I should be judged by
what I said. She listened, motionless, though something of what that
narrative cost her I knew by the current of sympathy that ran now
between us. Unmarked, the day faded, a new light was spread over the
waters, the mist was spangled with silver points, the Spanish moss took
on the whiteness of lace against the black forest swamp, and on the
yellow face of the moon the star-shaped leaves of a gum were printed.

At length I paused. She neither spoke, nor moved--save for the rising
and falling of her shoulders. The hardest thing I had to say I saved for
the last, and I was near lacking the courage to continue.

“There is Mademoiselle Antoinette--” I began, and stopped,--she turned
on me so quickly and laid a hand on mine.

“Nick loves her!” she cried.

“You know it!” I exclaimed, wondering.

“Ah, David,” she answered brokenly, “I foresaw it from the first. I,
too, love the girl. No human being has ever given me such care and such
affection. She--she is all that I have left. Must I give her up? Have I
not paid the price of my sins?”

I did not answer, knowing that she saw the full cruelty of the
predicament. What happiness remained to her now of a battered life stood
squarely in the way of her son’s happiness. That was the issue, and no
advice or aid of mine could change it. There was another silence that
seemed to me an eternity as I watched, a helpless witness, the struggle
going on within her. At last she got to her feet, her face turned to the
shadow.

“I will go, David,” she said. Her voice was low and she spoke with a
steadiness that alarmed me. “I will go.”

Torn with pity, I thought again, but I could see no alternative. And
then, suddenly, she was clinging to me, her courage gone, her breast
shaken with sobs. “Where shall I go?” she cried. “God help me! Are there
no remote places where He will not seek me out? I have tried them all,
David.” And quite as suddenly she disengaged herself, and looked at me
strangely. “You are well revenged for Temple Bow,” she said.

“Hush,” I answered, and held her, fearing I knew not what, “you have not
lacked courage. It is not so bad as you believe. I will devise a plan
and help you. Have you money?”

“Yes,” she answered, with a remnant of her former pride; “and I have an
annuity paid now to Mr. Clark.”

“Then listen to what I say,” I answered. “To-night I will take you to
New Orleans and hide you safely. And I swear to you, whether it be
right or wrong, that I will use every endeavor to change Nick’s feelings
towards you. Come,” I continued, leading her gently into the path, “let
us go while there is yet time.”

“Stop,” she said, and I halted fearfully. “David Ritchie, you are a good
man. I can make no amends to you,”--she did not finish.

Feeling for the path in the blackness of the wood, I led her by the
hand, and she followed me as trustfully as a child. At last, after an
age of groping, the heavy scents of shrubs and flowers stole to us on
the night air, and we came out at the hedge into what seemed a blaze of
light that flooded the rows of color. Here we paused, breathless, and
looked. The bench under the great tree was vacant, and the garden was
empty.

It was she who led the way through the hedge, who halted in the garden
path at the sound of voices. She turned, but there was no time to flee,
for the tall figure of a man came through the opposite hedge, followed
by a lady. One was Nicholas Temple, the other, Mademoiselle de St.
Gré. Mrs. Temple’s face alone was in the shadow, and as I felt her hand
trembling on my arm I summoned all my resources. It was Nick who spoke
first.

“It is Davy!” he cried. “Oh, the sly rascal! And this is the promenade
of which he left us word, the solitary meditation! Speak up, man; you
are forgiven for deserting us.”

He turned, laughing, to Mademoiselle. But she stood with her lips parted
and her hands dropped, staring at my companion. Then she took two steps
forward and stopped with a cry.

“Mrs. Clive!”

The woman beside me turned, and with a supreme courage raised her head
and faced the girl.

“Yes, Antoinette, it is I,” she answered.

And then my eyes sought Nick, for Mrs. Temple had faced her son with a
movement that was a challenge, yet with a look that questioned, yearned,
appealed. He, too, stared, the laughter fading from his eyes, first
astonishment, and then anger, growing in them, slowly, surely. I shall
never forget him as he stood there (for what seemed an age) recalling
one by one the wrongs this woman had done him. She herself had taught
him to brook no restraint, to follow impetuously his loves and hates,
and endurance in these things was moulded in every line of his finely
cut features. And when he spoke it was not to her, but to the girl at
his side.

“Do you know who this is?” he said. “Tell me, do you know this woman?”

Mademoiselle de St. Gré did not answer him. She drew near, gently, to
Mrs. Temple, whose head was bowed, whose agony I could only guess.

“Mrs. Clive,” she said softly, though her voice was shaken by a
prescience, “won’t you tell me what has happened? Won’t you speak to
me--Antoinette?”

The poor lady lifted up her arms, as though to embrace the girl, dropped
them despairingly, and turned away.

“Antoinette,” she murmured, “Antoinette!”

For Nick had seized Antoinette by the hand, restraining her.

“You do not know what you are doing?” he cried angrily. “Listen!”

I had stood bereft of speech, watching the scene breathlessly. And now I
would have spoken had not Mademoiselle astonished me by taking the lead.
I have thought since that I might have pieced together this much of her
character. Her glance at Nick surprised him momentarily into silence.

“I know that she is my dearest friend,” she said, “that she came to us
in misfortune, and that we love her and trust her. I do not know why she
is here with Mr. Ritchie, but I am sure it is for some good reason.” She
laid a hand on Mrs. Temple’s shoulder. “Mrs. Clive, won’t you speak to
me?”

“My God, Antoinette, listen!” cried Nick; “Mrs. Clive is not her name. I
know her, David knows her. She is an--adventuress!”

Mrs. Temple gave a cry, and the girl shot at him a frightened,
bewildered glance, in which a new-born love struggled with an older
affection.

“An adventuress!” she repeated, her hand dropping, “oh, I do not believe
it. I cannot believe it.”

“You shall believe it,” said Nick, fiercely. “Her name is not Clive. Ask
David what her name is.”

Antoinette’s lips moved, but she shirked the question. And Nick seized
me roughly.

“Tell her,” he said, “tell her! My God, how can I do it? Tell her,
David.”

For the life of me I could not frame the speech at once, my pity and
a new-found and surprising respect for her making it doubly hard to
pronounce her sentence. Suddenly she raised her head, not proudly, but
with a dignity seemingly conferred by years of sorrow and of suffering.
Her tones were even, bereft of every vestige of hope.

“Antoinette, I have deceived you, though as God is my witness, I thought
no harm could come of it. I deluded myself into believing that I had
found friends and a refuge at last. I am Mrs. Temple.”

“Mrs. Temple!” The girl repeated the name sorrowfully, but perplexedly,
not grasping its full significance.

“She is my mother,” said Nick, with a bitterness I had not thought in
him, “she is my mother, or I would curse her. For she has ruined my life
and brought shame on a good name.”

He paused, his breath catching for very anger. Mrs. Temple hid her face
in her hands, while the girl shrank back in terror. I grasped him by the
arm.

“Have you no compassion?” I cried. But Mrs. Temple interrupted me.

“He has the right,” she faltered; “it is my just punishment.”

He tore himself away, and took a step to her.

“Where is Riddle?” he cried. “As God lives, I will kill him without
mercy!”

His mother lifted her head again.

“God has judged him,” she said quietly; “he is beyond your vengeance--he
is dead.” A sob shook her, but she conquered it with a marvellous
courage. “Harry Riddle loved me, he was kind to me, and he was a better
man than John Temple.”

Nick recoiled. The fierceness of his anger seemed to go, leaving a more
dangerous humor.

“Then I have been blessed with parents,” he said.

At that she swayed, but when I would have caught her she motioned me
away and turned to Antoinette. Twice Mrs. Temple tried to speak.

“I--I was going away to-night,” she said at length, “and you would never
have seen or heard of me more. My nephew David--Mr. Ritchie--whom I
treated cruelly as a boy, had pity on me. He is a good man, and he was
to have taken me away--I do not attempt to defend myself, my dear, but
I pray that you, who have so much charity, will some day think a little
kindly of one who has sinned deeply, of one who will love and bless you
and yours to her dying day.”

She faltered, and Nick would have spoken had not Antoinette herself
stayed him with a gesture.

“I wish--my son to know the little there is on my side. It is not much.
Yet God may not spare him the sorrow that brings pity. I--I loved Harry
Riddle as a girl. My father was ruined, and I was forced into marriage
with John Temple for his possessions. He was selfish, overbearing,
cruel--unfaithful. During the years I lived with him he never once spoke
kindly to me. I, too, grew wicked and selfish and heedless. My head was
turned by admiration. Mr. Temple escaped to England in a man-of-war; he
left me without a line of warning, of farewell. I--I have wandered
over the earth, haunted by remorse, and I knew no moment of peace, of
happiness, until you brought me here and sheltered and loved me. And
even here I have had many sleepless hours. A hundred times I have
summoned my courage to tell you,--I could not. I am justly punished,
Antoinette.” She moved a little, timidly, towards the girl, who stood
motionless, dazed by what she heard. She held out a hand, appealingly,
and dropped it. “Good-by, my dear; God will bless you for your kindness
to an unfortunate outcast.”

She glanced with a kind of terror in her eyes from the girl to Nick, and
what she meant to say concerning their love I know not, for the flood,
held back so long, burst upon her. She wept as I have never seen a woman
weep. And then, before Nick or I knew what had happened, Antoinette had
taken her swiftly in her arms and was murmuring in her ear:--

“You shall not go. You shall not. You will live with me always.”

Presently the sobs ceased, and Mrs. Temple raised her face, slowly,
wonderingly, as if she had not heard aright. And she tried gently to
push the girl away.

“No, Antoinette,” she said, “I have done you harm enough.”

But the girl clung to her strongly, passionately. “I do not care what
you have done,” she cried, “you are good now. I know that you are good
now. I will not cast you out. I will not.”

I stood looking at them, bewildered and astonished by Mademoiselle’s
loyalty. She seemed to have forgotten Nick, as had I, and then as I
turned to him he came towards them. Almost roughly he took Antoinette by
the arm.

“You do not know what you are saying,” he cried. “Come away, Antoinette,
you do not know what she has done--you cannot realize what she is.”

Antoinette shrank away from him, still clinging to Mrs. Temple. There
was a fearless directness in her look which might have warned him.

“She is your mother,” she said quietly.

“My mother!” he repeated; “yes, I will tell you what a mother she has
been to me--”

“Nick!”

It passes my power to write down the pity of that appeal, the
hopelessness of it, the yearning in it. Freeing herself from the girl,
Mrs. Temple took one step towards him, her arms held up. I had not
thought that his hatred of her was deep enough to resist it. It was
Antoinette whose intuition divined this ere he had turned away.

“You have chosen between me and her,” he said; and before we could get
the poor lady to the seat under the oak, he had left the garden. In my
perturbation I glanced at Antoinette, but there was no other sign in her
face save of tenderness for Mrs. Temple.

Mrs. Temple had mercifully fainted. As I crossed the lawn I saw two
figures in the deep shadow beside the gallery, and I heard Nick’s voice
giving orders to Benjy to pack and saddle. When I reached the garden
again the girl had loosed Mrs. Temple’s gown, and was bending over her,
murmuring in her ear.

Many hours later, when the moon was waning towards the horizon, fearful
of surprise by the coming day, I was riding slowly under the trees on
the road to New Orleans. Beside me, veiled in black, her head bowed, was
Mrs. Temple, and no word had escaped her since she had withdrawn herself
gently from the arms of Antoinette on the gallery at Les Îles. Nick had
gone long before. The hardest task had been to convince the girl that
Mrs. Temple might not stay. After that Antoinette had busied herself,
with a silent fortitude I had not thought was in her, making ready for
the lady’s departure. I shall never forget her as she stood, a slender
figure of sorrow, looking down at us, the tears glistening on her
cheeks. And I could not resist the impulse to mount the steps once more.

“You were right, Antoinette,” I whispered; “whatever happens, you will
remember that I am your friend. And I will bring him back to you if I
can.”

She pressed my hand, and turned and went slowly into the house.




BOOK III. LOUISIANA


