CHAPTER VII. THE DISPOSAL OF THE SIEUR DE ST. GRE


I had met Hélène de St. Gré at last. And what a fool she must think me!
As I hurried along the dark banquettes this thought filled my brain for
a time to the exclusion of all others, so strongly is vanity ingrained
in us. After all, what did it matter what she thought,--Madame la
Vicomtesse d’Ivry-le-Tour? I had never shone, and it was rather late to
begin. But I possessed, at least, average common sense, and I had given
no proof even of this.

I wandered on, not heeding the command which she had given me,--to go
home. The scent of camellias and magnolias floated on the heavy air of
the night from the court-yards, reminding me of her. Laughter and soft
voices came from the galleries. Despite the Terror, despite the Faubourg
Saint-Antoine, despite the Rights of Man and the wars and suffering
arising therefrom, despite the scourge which might come to-morrow, life
went gayly on. The cabarets echoed, and behind the tight blinds lines of
light showed where the Creole gentry gamed at their tables, perchance in
the very clubs Madame la Vicomtesse had mentioned.

The moon, in her first quarter, floated in a haze. Washed by her light,
the quaintly wrought balconies and heavy-tiled roofs of the Spanish
buildings, risen from the charred embers, took on a touch of romance.
I paused once with a twinge of remembrance before the long line of the
Ursuline convent, with its latticed belfry against the sky. There
was the lodge, with its iron gates shut, and the wall which Nick had
threatened to climb. As I passed the great square of the new barracks,
a sereno (so the night watchmen were called) was crying the hour. I
came to the rambling market-stalls, casting black shadows on the river
road,--empty now, to be filled in the morning with shouting marchands.
The promenade under the willows was deserted, the great river stretched
away under the moon towards the forest line of the farther shore,
filmy and indistinct. A black wisp of smoke rose from the gunwale of a
flatboat, and I stopped to listen to the weird song of a negro, which I
have heard many times since.

    CAROLINE. †

  In, dé, tois, Ca-ro-line, Qui ci ça yé, comme
  ça ma chére? In, dé, tois, Ca-ro-line, Quo
  fair t’-apés cri--é ma chére? Mo l’-aimé toé to
  con-né ça, C’est to m’ou--lé, c’est to mo prend, Mo
  l’-aimé toé, to con-né ca -- a c’est to m’oulé c’est 
  to mo prend.

Gaining the promenade, I came presently to the new hotel which had been
built for the Governor, with its balconied windows looking across the
river--the mansion of Monsieur le Baron de Carondelet. Even as I sat on
the bench in the shadow of the willows, watching the sentry who paced
before the arched entrance, I caught sight of a man stealing along the
banquette on the other side of the road. Twice he paused to look behind
him, and when he reached the corner of the street he stopped for some
time to survey the Governor’s house opposite.

Suddenly I was on my feet, every sense alert, staring. In the moonlight,
made milky by the haze, he was indistinct. And yet I could have taken
oath that the square, diminutive figure, with the head set forward on
the shoulders, was Gignoux’s. If this man were not Gignoux, then the
Lord had cast two in a strange mould.

And what was Gignoux doing in New Orleans? As if in answer to the
question two men emerged from the dark archway of the Governor’s house,
passed the sentry, and stood for an instant on the edge of the shadow.
One wore a long Spanish cloak, and the other a uniform that I could not
make out. A word was spoken, and then my man was ambling across to meet
them, and the three walked away up Toulouse Street.

I was in a fire of conjecture. I did not dare to pass the sentry and
follow them, so I made round as fast as I could by the Rue St. Pierre,
which borders the Place d’Armes, and then crossed to Toulouse again by
Chartres. The three were nowhere to be seen. I paused on the corner for
thought, and at length came to a reluctant but prudent conclusion that I
had best go back to my lodging and seek Monsieur early in the morning.

Madame Gravois was awaiting me. Was Monsieur mad to remain out at night?
Had Monsieur not heard of the yellow fever? Madame Gravois even had
prepared some concoction which she poured out of a bottle, and which I
took with the docility of a child. Monsieur Vigo had called, and there
was a note. A note? It was a small note. I glanced stupidly at the seal,
recognized the swan of the St. Gré crest, broke it, and read:--

“Mr. Ritchie will confer a favor upon la Vicomtesse d’Ivry-le-Tour if he
will come to Monsieur de St. Gré’s house at eight to-morrow morning.”

I bade the reluctant Madame Gravois good night, gained my room, threw
off my clothes, and covered myself with the mosquito bar. There was no
question of sleep, for the events of the day and surmises for the morrow
tortured me as I tossed in the heat. Had the man been Gignoux? If so, he
was in league with Carondelet’s police. I believed him fully capable of
this. And if he knew Nick’s whereabouts and St. Gré’s, they would both
be behind the iron gateway of the calabozo in the morning. Monsieur Vigo
had pointed out to me that day the gloomy, heavy-walled prison in
the rear of the Cabildo,--ay, and he had spoken of its instruments of
torture.

What could the Vicomtesse want? Truly (I thought with remorse) she had
been more industrious than I.

I fell at length into a fevered sleep, and awoke, athirst, with the
light trickling through my lattices. Contrary to Madame Gravois’s
orders, I had opened the glass of my window. Glancing at my
watch,--which I had bought in Philadelphia,--I saw that the hands
pointed to half after seven. I had scarcely finished my toilet before
there was a knock at the door, and Madame Gravois entered with a
steaming cup of coffee in one hand and her bottle of medicine in the
other.

“I did not wake Monsieur,” she said, “for he was tired.”

She gave me another dose of the medicine, made me drink two cups of
coffee, and then I started out with all despatch for the House of the
Lions. As I turned into the Rue Chartres I saw ahead of me four horses,
with their bridles bunched and held by a negro lad, waiting in the
street. Yes, they were in front of the house. There it was, with its
solid green gates between the lions, its yellow walls with the fringe
of peeping magnolias and oranges, with its green-latticed gallery
from which Monsieur Auguste had let himself down after stealing the
miniature. I knocked at the wicket, the same gardienne answered the
call, smiled, led me through the cool, paved archway which held in its
frame the green of the court beyond, and up the stairs with the quaint
balustrade which I had mounted five years before to meet Philippe de
St. Gré. As I reached the gallery Madame la Vicomtesse, gowned in brown
linen for riding, rose quickly from her chair and came forward to meet
me.

“You have news?” I asked, as I took her hand.

“I have the kind of news I expected,” she answered, a smile tempering
the gravity of her face; “Auguste is, as usual, in need of money.”

“Then you have found them,” I answered, my voice betraying my admiration
for the feat.

Madame la Vicomtesse shrugged her shoulders slightly.

“I did nothing,” she said. “From what you told me, I suspected that as
soon as Auguste reached Louisiana he would have a strong desire to go
away again. This is undoubtedly what has happened. In any event, I knew
that he would want money, and that he would apply to a source which has
hitherto never failed him.”

“Mademoiselle Antoinette!” I said.

“Precisely,” answered Madame la Vicomtesse. “When I reached home last
night I questioned Antoinette, and I discovered that by a singular
chance a message from Auguste had already reached her.”

“Where is he?” I demanded.

“I do not know,” she replied. “But he will be behind the hedge of the
garden at Les Îles at eleven o’clock--unless he has lost before then his
love of money.”

“Which is to say--”

“He will be there unless he is dead. That is why I sent for you,
Monsieur.” She glanced at me. “Sometimes it is convenient to have a
man.”

I was astounded. Then I smiled, the affair was so ridiculously simple.

“And Monsieur de St. Gré?” I asked.

“Has been gone for a week with Madame to visit the estimable Monsieur
Poydras at Pointe Coupée.” Madame la Vicomtesse, who had better use
for her words than to waste them at such a time, left me, went to
the balcony, and began to give the gardienne in the court below swift
directions in French. Then she turned to me again.

“Are you prepared to ride with Antoinette and me to Les Îles, Monsieur?”
 she asked.

“I am,” I answered.

It must have been my readiness that made her smile. Then her eyes rested
on mine.

“You look tired, Mr. Ritchie,” she said. “You did not obey me and go
home last night.”

“How did you know that?” I asked, with a thrill at her interest.

“Because Madame Gravois told my messenger that you were out.”

I was silent.

“You must take care of yourself,” she said briefly. “Come, there are
some things which I wish to say to you before Antoinette is ready.”

She led me toward the end of the gallery, where a bright screen of
morning-glories shaded us from the sun. But we had scarce reached the
place ere the sound of steps made us turn, and there was Mademoiselle
Antoinette herself facing us. I went forward a few steps, hesitated,
and bowed. She courtesied, my name faltering on her lips. Yes, it was
Antoinette, not the light-hearted girl whom we had heard singing
“Ma luron” in the garden, but a woman now with a strange beauty that
astonished me. Hers was the dignity that comes from unselfish service,
the calm that is far from resignation, though the black veil caught
up on her chapeau de paille gave her the air of a Sister of Mercy.
Antoinette had inherited the energies as well as the features of the St.
Gré’s, yet there was a painful moment as she stood there, striving to
put down the agitation the sight of me gave her. As for me, I was bereft
of speech, not knowing what to say or how far to go. My last thought
was of the remarkable quality in this woman before me which had held her
true to Mrs. Temple, and which sent her so courageously to her duty now.

Madame la Vicomtesse, as I had hoped, relieved the situation. She knew
how to broach a dreaded subject.

“Mr. Ritchie is going with us, Antoinette,” she said. “It is perhaps
best to explain everything to him before we start. I was about to tell
you, Mr. Ritchie,” she continued, turning to me, “that Auguste has given
no hint in his note of Mr. Temple’s presence in Louisiana. And yet you
told me that they were to have come here together.”

“Yes,” I answered, “and I have no reason to think they have separated.”

“I was merely going to suggest,” said the Vicomtesse, firmly, “I was
merely going to suggest the possibility of our meeting Mr. Temple with
Auguste.”

It was Antoinette who answered, with a force that revealed a new side of
her character.

“Mr. Temple will not be there,” she said, flashing a glance upon us. “Do
you think he would come to me--?”

Hélène laid her hand upon the girl’s arm.

“My dear, I think nothing,” she said quietly; “but it is best for us
to be prepared against any surprise. Remember that I do not know Mr.
Temple, and that you have not seen him for five years.”

“It is not like him, you know it is not like him,” exclaimed Antoinette,
looking at me.

“I know it is not like him, Mademoiselle,” I replied.

Madame la Vicomtesse, from behind the girl, gave me a significant look.

“This occurred to me,” she went on in an undisturbed tone, “that Mr.
Temple might come with Auguste to protest against the proceeding,--or
even to defend himself against the imputation that he was to make use
of this money in any way. I wish you to realize, Antoinette, before you
decide to go, that you may meet Mr. Temple. Would it not be better
to let Mr. Ritchie go alone? I am sure that we could find no better
emissary.”

“Auguste is here,” said Antoinette. “I must see him.” Her voice caught.
“I may never see him again. He may be ill, he may be starving--and I
know that he is in trouble. Whether” (her voice caught) “whether Mr.
Temple is with him or not, I mean to go.”

“Then it would be well to start,” said the Vicomtesse.

Deftly dropping her veil, she picked up a riding whip that lay on the
railing and descended the stairs to the courtyard. Antoinette and I
followed. As we came through the archway I saw André, Monsieur de St.
Gré’s mulatto, holding open the wicket for us to pass. He helped the
ladies to mount the ponies, lengthened my own stirrups for me, swung
into the saddle himself, and then the four of us were picking our way
down the Rue Chartres at an easy amble. Turning to the right beyond the
cool garden of the Ursulines, past the yellow barracks, we came to the
river front beside the fortifications. A score of negroes were
sweating there in the sun, swinging into position the long logs for the
palisades, nearly completed. They were like those of Kaskaskia and our
own frontier forts in Kentucky, with a forty-foot ditch in front of
them. Seated on a horse talking to the overseer was a fat little man in
white linen who pulled off his hat and bowed profoundly to the ladies.
His face gave me a start, and then I remembered that I had seen him only
the day before, resplendent, coming out of church. He was the Baron de
Carondelet.

There was a sentry standing under a crape-myrtle where the Royal Road
ran through the gateway. Behind him was a diminutive five-sided brick
fort with a dozen little cannon on top of it. The sentry came forward,
brought his musket to a salute, and halted before my horse.

“You will have to show your passport,” murmured Madame la Vicomtesse.

I drew the document from my pocket. It was signed by De Lemos, and duly
countersigned by the officer of the port. The man bowed, and I passed
on.

It was a strange, silent ride through the stinging heat to Les Îles,
the brown dust hanging behind us like a cloud, to settle slowly on the
wayside shrubbery. Across the levee bank the river was low, listless,
giving off hot breath like a monster in distress. The forest pools were
cracked and dry, the Spanish moss was a haggard gray, and under the sun
was the haze which covered the land like a saffron mantle. At times a
listlessness came over me such as I had never known, to make me forget
the presence of the women at my side, the very errand on which we rode.
From time to time I was roused into admiration of the horsemanship of
Madame la Vicomtesse, for the restive Texas pony which she rode was
stung to madness by the flies. As for Antoinette, she glanced neither
right nor left through her veil, but rode unmindful of the way, heedless
of heat and discomfort, erect, motionless save for the easy gait of her
horse. At length we turned into the avenue through the forest, lined
by wild orange trees, came in sight of the low, belvedered plantation
house, and drew rein at the foot of the steps. Antoinette was the first
to dismount, and passed in silence through the group of surprised house
servants gathering at the door. I assisted the Vicomtesse, who paused
to bid the negroes disperse, and we lingered for a moment on the gallery
together.

“Poor Antoinette!” she said, “I wish we might have saved her this.” She
looked up at me. “How she defended him!” she exclaimed.

“She loves him,” I answered.

Madame la Vicomtesse sighed.

“I suppose there is no help for it,” she said. “But it is very difficult
not to be angry with Mr. Temple. The girl cared for his mother, gave
her a home, clung to her when he and the world would have cast her off,
sacrificed her happiness for them both. If I see him, I believe I shall
shake him. And if he doesn’t fall down on his knees to her, I shall ask
the Baron to hang him. We must bring him to his senses, Mr. Ritchie. He
must not leave Louisiana until he sees her. Then he will marry her.” She
paused, scrutinized me in her quick way, and added: “You see that I take
your estimation of his character. You ought to be flattered.”

“I am flattered by any confidence you repose in me, Madame la
Vicomtesse.”

She laughed. I was not flattered then, but cursed myself for the quaint
awkwardness in my speech that amused her. And she was astonishingly
quick to perceive my moods.

“There, don’t be angry. You will never be a courtier, my honest friend,
and you may thank God for it. How sweet the shrubs are! Your chief
business in life seems to be getting people out of trouble, and I am
going to help you with this case.”

It was my turn to laugh.

“You are going to help!” I exclaimed. “My services have been heavy, so
far.”

“You should not walk around at night,” she replied irrelevantly.

Suddenly I remembered Gignoux, but even as I was about to tell her of
the incident Antoinette appeared in the doorway. She was very pale, but
her lips were set with excitement and her eyes shone strangely. She was
still in her riding gown, in her hand she carried a leather bag, and
behind her stood André with a bundle.

“Quick!” she said; “we are wasting time, and he may be gone.”

Checking an exclamation which could hardly have been complimentary to
Auguste, the Vicomtesse crossed quickly to her and put her arm about
her.

“We will follow you, mignonne,” she said in French.

“Must you come?” said Antoinette, appealingly. “He may not appear if he
sees any one.”

“We shall have to risk that,” said the Vicomtesse, dryly, with a glance
at me. “You shall not go alone, but we will wait a few moments at the
hedge.”

We took the well-remembered way through the golden-green light under the
trees, Antoinette leading, and the sight of the garden brought back to
me poignantly the scene in the moonlight with Mrs. Temple. There was no
sound save the languid morning notes of the birds and the humming of the
bees among the flowers as Antoinette went tremblingly down the path
and paused, listening, under the branches of that oak where I had first
beheld her. Then, with a little cry, we saw her run forward--into the
arms of Auguste de St. Gré. It was a pitiful thing to look upon.

Antoinette had led her brother to the seat under the oak. How long
we waited I know not, but at length we heard their voices raised, and
without more ado Madame la Vicomtesse, beckoning me, passed quickly
through the gap in the hedge and went towards them. I followed with
André. Auguste rose with an oath, and then stood facing his cousin
like a man struck dumb, his hands dropped. He was a sorry sight indeed,
unshaven, unkempt, dark circles under his eyes, clothes torn.

“Hélène! You here--in America!” he cried in French, staring at her.

“Yes, Auguste,” she replied quite simply, “I am here.” He would have
come towards her, but there was a note in her voice which arrested him.

“And Monsieur le Vicomte--Henri?” he said.

I found myself listening tensely for the answer.

“Henri is in Austria, fighting for his King, I hope,” said Madame la
Vicomtesse.

“So Madame la Vicomtesse is a refugee,” he said with a bow and a smile
that made me very angry.

“And Monsieur de St. Gré!” I asked.

At the sound of my voice he started and gave back, for he had not
perceived me. He recovered his balance, such as it was, instantly.

“Monsieur seems to take an extraordinary interest in my affairs,” he
said jauntily.

“Only when they are to the detriment of other persons who are my
friends,” I said.

“Monsieur has intruded in a family matter,” said Auguste, grandly, still
in French.

“By invitation of those most concerned, Monsieur,” I answered, for I
could have throttled him.

Auguste had developed. He had learned well that effrontery is often
the best weapon of an adventurer. He turned from me disdainfully,
petulantly, and addressed the Vicomtesse once more.

“I wish to be alone with Antoinette,” he said.

“No doubt,” said the Vicomtesse.

“I demand it,” said Auguste.

“The demand is not granted,” said the Vicomtesse; “that is why we have
come. Your sister has already made enough sacrifices for you. I know
you, Monsieur Auguste de St. Gré,” she continued with quiet contempt.
“It is not for love of Antoinette that you have sought this meeting.
It is because,” she said, riding down a torrent of words which began to
escape from him, “it is because you are in a predicament, as usual, and
you need money.”

“Hélène!”

It was Antoinette who spoke. She had risen, and was standing behind
Auguste. She still held the leather bag in her hand.

“Perhaps the sum is not enough,” she said; “he has to get to France.
Perhaps we could borrow more until my father comes home.” She looked
questioningly at us.

Madame la Vicomtesse was truly a woman of decision. Without more ado she
took the bag from Antoinette’s unresisting hands and put it into mine. I
was no less astonished than the rest of them.

“Mr. Ritchie will keep this until the negotiations are finished,” said
the Vicomtesse.

“Negotiations!” cried Auguste, beside himself. “This is insolence,
Madame.”

“Be careful, sir,” I said.

“Auguste!” cried Antoinette, putting her hand on his arm.

“Why did you tell them?” he demanded, turning on her.

“Because I trust them, Auguste,” Antoinette answered. She spoke without
anger, as one whose sorrow has put her beyond it. Her speech had
a dignity and force which might have awed a worthier man. His
disappointment and chagrin brought him beyond bounds.

“You trust them!” he cried, “you trust them when they tell you to give
your brother, who is starving and in peril of his life, eight hundred
livres? Eight hundred livres, pardieu, and your brother!”

“It is all I have, Auguste,” said his sister, sadly.

“Ha!” he said dramatically, “I see, they seek my destruction. This
man”--pointing at me--“is a Federalist, and Madame la Vicomtesse”--he
bowed ironically--“is a Royalist.”

“Pish!” said the Vicomtesse, impatiently, “it would be an easy matter to
have you sent to the Morro--a word to Monsieur de Carondelet, Auguste.
Do you believe for a moment that, in your father’s absence, I would have
allowed Antoinette to come here alone? And it was a happy circumstance
that I could call on such a man as Mr. Ritchie to come with us.”

“It seems to me that Mr. Ritchie and his friends have already brought
sufficient misfortune on the family.”

It was a villanous speech. Antoinette turned away, her shoulders
quivering, and I took a step towards him; but Madame la Vicomtesse made
a swift gesture, and I stopped, I know not why. She gave an exclamation
so sharp that he flinched physically, as though he had been struck. But
it was characteristic of her that when she began to speak, her words cut
rather than lashed.

“Auguste de St. Gré,” she said, “I know you. The Tribunal is merciful
compared to you. There is no one on earth whom you would not torture for
your selfish ends, no one whom you would not sell without compunction
for your pleasure. There are things that a woman should not mention, and
yet I would tell them without shame to your face were it not for your
sister. If it were not for her, I would not have you in my presence.
Shall I speak of your career in France? There is Valenciennes, for
example--”

She stopped abruptly. The man was gray, but not on his account did the
Vicomtesse stay her speech. She forgot him as though he did not exist,
and by one of those swift transitions which thrilled me had gone to the
sobbing Antoinette and taken her in her arms, murmuring endearments
of which our language is not capable. I, too, forgot Auguste. But no
rebuke, however stinging, could make him forget himself, and before we
realized it he was talking again. He had changed his tactics.

“This is my home,” he said, “where I might expect shelter and comfort.
You make me an outcast.”

Antoinette disengaged herself from Hélène with a cry, but he turned away
from her and shrugged.

“A stranger would have fared better. Perhaps you will have more
consideration for a stranger. There is a French ship at the Terre aux
Bœufs in the English Turn, which sails to-night. I appeal to you, Mr.
Ritchie,”--he was still talking in French--“I appeal to you, who are
a man of affairs,”--and he swept me a bow,--“if a captain would risk
taking a fugitive to France for eight hundred livres? Pardieu, I could
get no farther than the Balize for that. Monsieur,” he added meaningly,
“you have an interest in this. There are two of us to go.”

The amazing effrontery of this move made me gasp. Yet it was neither the
Vicomtesse nor myself who answered him. We turned by common impulse
to Antoinette, and she was changed. Her breath came quickly, her eyes
flashed, her anger made her magnificent.

“It is not true,” she cried, “you know it is not true.”

He lifted his shoulders and smiled.

“You are my brother, and I am ashamed to acknowledge you. I was willing
to give my last sou, to sell my belongings, to take from the poor to
help you--until you defamed a good man. You cannot make me believe,” she
cried, unheeding the color that surged into her cheeks, “you cannot make
me believe that he would use this money. You cannot make me believe it.”

“Let us do him the credit of thinking that he means to repay it,” said
Auguste.

Antoinette’s eyes filled with tears,--tears of pride, of humiliation,
ay, and of an anger of which I had not thought her capable. She was
indeed a superb creature then, a personage I had not imagined. Gathering
up her gown, she passed Auguste and turned on him swiftly.

“If you were to bring that to him,” she said, pointing to the bag in
my hand, “he would not so much as touch it. To-morrow I shall go to the
Ursulines, and I thank God I shall never see you again. I thank God I
shall no longer be your sister. Give Monsieur the bundle,” she said to
the frightened André, who still stood by the hedge; “he may need food
and clothes for his journey.”

She left us. We stood watching her until her gown had disappeared
amongst the foliage. André came forward and held out the bundle to
Auguste, who took it mechanically. Then Madame La Vicomtesse motioned
to André to leave, and gave me a glance, and it was part of the deep
understanding of her I had that I took its meaning. I had my forebodings
at what this last conversation with Auguste might bring forth, and I
wished heartily that we were rid of him.

“Monsieur de St. Gré,” I said, “I understood you to say that a ship is
lying at the English Turn some five leagues below us, on which you are
to take passage at once.”

He turned and glared at me, some devilish retort on his lips which he
held back. Suddenly he became suave.

“I shall want two thousand livres Monsieur; it was the sum I asked for.”

“It is not a question of what you asked for,” I answered.

“Since when did Monsieur assume this intimate position in my family?” he
said, glancing at the Vicomtesse.

“Monsieur de St. Gré,” I replied with difficulty, “you will confine
yourself to the matter in hand. You are in no situation to demand terms;
you must take or leave what is offered you. Last night the man called
Gignoux, who was of your party, was at the Governor’s house.”

At this he started perceptibly.

“Ha, I thought he was a traitor,” he cried. Strangely enough, he did not
doubt my word in this.

“I am surprised that your father’s house has not been searched this
morning,” I continued, astonished at my own moderation. “The sentiments
of the Baron de Carondelet are no doubt known to you, and you are aware
that your family or your friends cannot save you if you are arrested.
You may have this money on two conditions. The first is that you leave
the province immediately. The second, that you reveal the whereabouts of
Mr. Nicholas Temple.”

“Monsieur is very kind,” he replied, and added the taunt, “and well
versed in the conduct of affairs of money.”

“Does Monsieur de St. Gré accept?” I asked.

He threw out his hands with a gesture of resignation.

“Who am I to accept?” he said, “a fugitive, an outcast. And I should
like to remind Monsieur that time passes.”

“It is a sensible observation,” said I, meaning that it was the first.
His sudden docility made me suspicious. “What preparations have you made
to go?”

“They are not elaborate, Monsieur, but they are complete. When I leave
you I step into a pirogue which is tied to the river bank.”

“Ah,” I replied. “And Mr. Temple?”

Madame la Vicomtesse smiled, for Auguste was fairly caught. He had not
the astuteness to be a rogue; oddly, he had the sense to know that he
could fool us no longer.

“Temple is at Lamarque’s,” he answered sullenly.

I glanced questioningly at the Vicomtesse.

“Lamarque is an old pensioner of Monsieur de St. Gré’s,” said she; “he
has a house and an arpent of land not far below here.”

“Exactly,” said Auguste, “and if Mr. Ritchie believes that he will save
money by keeping Mr. Temple in Louisiana instead of giving him this
opportunity to escape, it is no concern of mine.”

I reflected a moment on this, for it was another sensible remark.

“It is indeed no concern of yours,” said Madame la Vicomtesse.

He shrugged his shoulders.

“And now,” he said, “I take it that there are no further conscientious
scruples against my receiving this paltry sum.”

“I will go with you to your pirogue,” I answered, “when you embark you
shall have it.”

“I, too, will go,” said Madame la Vicomtesse.

“You overwhelm me with civility, Madame,” said the Sieur de St. Gré,
bowing low.

“Lead the way, Monsieur,” I said.

He took his bundle, and started off down the garden path with a grand
air. I looked at the Vicomtesse inquiringly, and there was laughter in
her eyes.

“I must show you the way to Lamarque’s.” And then she whispered, “You
have done well, Mr. Ritchie.”

I did not return her look, but waited until she took the path ahead
of me. In silence we followed Auguste through the depths of the woods,
turning here and there to avoid a fallen tree or a sink-hole where the
water still remained. At length we came out in the glare of the sun and
crossed the dusty road to the levee bank. Some forty yards below us was
the canoe, and we walked to it, still in silence. Auguste flung in his
bundle, and turned to us.

“Perhaps Monsieur is satisfied,” he said.

I handed him the bag, and he took it with an elaborate air of
thankfulness. Nay, the rascal opened it as if to assure himself that he
was not tricked at the last. At the sight of the gold and silver which
Antoinette had hastily collected, he turned to Madame la Vicomtesse.

“Should I have the good fortune to meet Monsieur le Vicomte in France,
I shall assure him that Madame is in good hands” (he swept an exultant
look at me) “and enjoying herself.”

I could have flung him into the river, money-bag and all. But Madame
la Vicomtesse made him a courtesy there on the levee bank, and said
sweetly:--

“That is very good of you, Auguste.”

“As for you, Monsieur,” he said, and now his voice shook with
uncontrolled rage, “I am in no condition to repay your kindnesses. But I
have no doubt that you will not object to keeping the miniature a while
longer.”

I was speechless with anger and shame, and though I felt the eyes of
the Vicomtesse upon me, I dared not look at her. I heard Auguste but
indistinctly as he continued:--

“Should you need the frame, Monsieur, you will doubtless find it still
with Monsieur Isadore, the Jew, in the Rue Toulouse.” With that he
leaped into his boat, seized the paddle, and laughed as he headed into
the current. How long I stood watching him as he drifted lazily in the
sun I know not, but at length the voice of Madame la Vicomtesse aroused
me.

“He is a pleasant person,” she said.


