CHAPTER III. LOUISVILLE CELEBRATES

“They have gran’ time in Louisville to-night, Davy,” said Jake
Landrasse, as he paddled me towards the Kentucky shore; “you hear?”

“I should be stone deaf if I didn’t,” I answered, for the shouting which
came from the town filled me with forebodings.

“They come back from the barbecue full of whiskey,” said Jake, “and a
young man at the tavern come out on the porch and he say, ‘Get ready you
all to go to Louisiana! You been hole back long enough by tyranny.’ Sam
Barker come along and say he a Federalist. They done have a gran’ fight,
he and the young feller, and Sam got licked. He went at Sam just like a
harricane.”

“And then?” I demanded.

“Them four wanted to leave,” said Jake, taking no trouble to disguise
his disgust, “and I had to fetch ‘em over. I’ve got to go back and wait
for ‘em now,” and he swore with sincere disappointment. “I reckon there
ain’t been such a jamboree in town for years.”

Jake had not exaggerated. Gentlemen from Moore’s Settlement, from
Sullivan’s Station on the Bear Grass,--to be brief, the entire male
population of the county seemed to have moved upon Louisville after the
barbecue, and I paused involuntarily at the sight which met my eyes as I
came into the street. A score of sputtering, smoking pine-knots threw
a lurid light on as many hilarious groups, and revealed, fantastically
enough, the boles and lower branches of the big shade trees above them.
Navigation for the individual, difficult enough lower down, in front of
the tavern became positively dangerous. There was a human eddy,--nay, a
maelstrom would better describe it. Fights began, but ended abortively
by reason of the inability of the combatants to keep their feet; one
man whose face I knew passed me with his hat afire, followed by several
companions in gusts of laughter, for the torch-bearers were careless
and burned the ears of their friends in their enthusiasm. Another person
whom I recognized lacked a large portion of the front of his attire, and
seemed sublimely unconscious of the fact. His face was badly scratched.
Several other friends of mine were indulging in brief intervals of
rest on the ground, and I barely avoided stepping on them. Still other
gentlemen were delivering themselves of the first impressive periods of
orations, only to be drowned by the cheers of their auditors. These were
the snatches which I heard as I picked my way onward with exaggerated
fear:--

“Gentlemen, the Mississippi is ours, let the tyrants who forbid its use
beware!” “To hell with the Federal government!” “I tell you, sirs,
this land is ours. We have conquered it with our blood, and I reckon no
Spaniard is goin’ to stop us. We ain’t come this far to stand still.
We settled Kaintuck, fit off the redskins, and we’ll march across the
Mississippi and on and on--” “To Louisiany!” they shouted, and the whole
crowd would take it up, “To Louisiany! Open the river!”

So absorbed was I in my own safety and progress that I did not pause
to think (as I have often thought since) of the full meaning of this,
though I had marked it for many years. The support given to Wilkinson’s
plots, to Clark’s expedition, was merely the outward and visible sign of
the onward sweep of a resistless race. In spite of untold privations and
hardships, of cruel warfare and massacre, these people had toiled over
the mountains into this land, and impatient of check or hindrance would,
even as Clark had predicted, when their numbers were sufficient leap the
Mississippi. Night or day, drunk or sober, they spoke of this thing
with an ever increasing vehemence, and no man of reflection who had read
their history could say that they would be thwarted. One day Louisiana
would be theirs and their children’s for the generations to come. One
day Louisiana would be American.

That I was alive and unscratched when I got as far as the tavern is a
marvel. Amongst all the passion-lit faces which surrounded me I could
get no sight of Nick’s, and I managed to make my way to a momentarily
quiet corner of the porch. As I leaned against the wall there, trying to
think what I should do, there came a great cheering from a little way up
the street, and then I straightened in astonishment. Above the cheering
came the sound of a drum beaten in marching time, and above that there
burst upon the night what purported to be the “Marseillaise,” taken up
and bawled by a hundred drunken throats and without words. Those around
me who were sufficiently nimble began to run towards the noise, and I
ran after them. And there, marching down the middle of the street at the
head of a ragged and most indecorous column of twos, in the centre of
a circle of light cast by a pine-knot which Joe Handy held, was Mr.
Nicholas Temple. His bearing, if a trifle unsteady, was proud, and--if
I could believe my eyes--around his neck was slung the thing which
I prized above all my possessions,--the drum which I had carried to
Kaskaskia and Vincennes! He had taken it from the peg in my room.

I shrink from putting on paper the sentimental side of my nature, and
indeed I could give no adequate idea of my affection for that drum. And
then there was Nick, who had been lost to me for five years! My impulse
was to charge the procession, seize Nick and the drum together, and drag
them back to my room; but the futility and danger of such a course were
apparent, and the caution for which I am noted prevented my undertaking
it. The procession, augmented by all those to whom sufficient power of
motion remained, cheered by the helpless but willing ones on the ground,
swept on down the street and through the town. Even at this late day
I shame to write it! Behold me, David Ritchie, Federalist, execrably
sober, at the head of the column behind the leader. Was it twenty
minutes, or an hour, that we paraded? This I know, that we slighted no
street in the little town of Louisville. What was my bearing,--whether
proud or angry or carelessly indifferent,--I know not. The glare of
Joe Handy’s torch fell on my face, Joe Handy’s arm and that of another
gentleman, the worse for liquor, were linked in mine, and they saw
fit to applaud at every step my conversion to the cause of Liberty. We
passed time and time again the respectable door-yards of my Federalist
friends, and I felt their eyes upon me with that look which the angels
have for the fallen. Once, in front of Mr. Wharton’s house, Mr. Handy
burned my hair, apologized, staggered, and I took the torch! And I used
it to good advantage in saving the drum from capture. For Mr. Temple,
with all the will in the world, had begun to stagger. At length, after
marching seemingly half the night, they halted by common consent before
the house of a prominent Democrat who shall be nameless, and, after some
minutes of vain importuning, Nick, with a tattoo on the drum, marched
boldly up to the gate and into the yard. A desperate cunning came to my
aid. I flung away the torch, leaving the head of the column in darkness,
broke from Mr. Handy’s embrace, and, seizing Nick by the arm, led him
onward through the premises, he drumming with great docility. Followed
by a few stragglers only (some of whom went down in contact with the
trees of the orchard), we came to a gate at the back which I knew well,
which led directly into the little yard that fronted my own rooms behind
Mr. Crede’s store. Pulling Nick through the gate, I slammed it, and he
was only beginning to protest when I had him safe within my door, and
the bolt slipped behind him. As I struck a light something fell to the
floor with a crash, an odor of alcohol filled the air, and as the candle
caught the flame I saw a shattered whiskey bottle at my feet and a room
which had been given over to carousing. In spite of my feelings I could
not but laugh at the perfectly irresistible figure my cousin made, as he
stood before me with the drum slung in front of him. His hat was gone,
his dust-covered clothes awry, but he smiled at me benignly and without
a trace of surprise.

“Sho you’ve come back at lasht, Davy,” he said. “You’re--you’re
very--irregular. You’ll lose--law bishness. Y-you’re worse’n Andy
Jackson--he’s always fightin’.”

I relieved him, unprotesting, of the drum, thanking my stars there
was so much as a stick left of it. He watched me with a silent and
exaggerated interest as I laid it on the table. From a distance without
came the shouts of the survivors making for the tavern.

“‘Sfortunate you had the drum, Davy,” he said gravely, “‘rwe’d had no
procession.”

“It is fortunate I have it now,” I answered, looking ruefully at the
battered rim where Nick had missed the skin in his ardor.

“Davy,” said he, “funny thing--I didn’t know you wash a Jacobite. Sh’ou
hear,” he added relevantly, “th’ Andy Jackson was married?”

“No,” I answered, having no great interest in Mr. Jackson. “Where have
you been seeing him again?”

“Nashville on Cumberland. Jackson’sh county sholicitor,--devil of a
man. I’ll tell you, Davy,” he continued, laying an uncertain hand on
my shoulder and speaking with great earnestness, “I had Chicashaw
horse--Jackson’d Virginia thoroughbred--had a race--‘n’Jackson wanted
to shoot me ‘n’I wanted to shoot Jackson. ‘N’then we all went to the Red
Heifer--”

“What the deuce is the Red Heifer?” I asked.

“‘N’dishtillery over a shpring, ‘n’they blow a horn when the liquor
runsh. ‘N’then we had supper in Major Lewish’s tavern. Major Lewis came
in with roast pig on platter. You know roast pig, Davy?... ‘N’Jackson
pulls out’s hunting knife n’waves it very mashestic.... You know how
mashestic Jackson is when he--wantshtobe?” He let go my shoulder,
brushed back his hair in a fiery manner, and, seizing a knife which
unhappily lay on the table, gave me a graphic illustration of Mr.
Jackson about to carve the pig, I retreating, and he coming on. “N’when
he stuck the pig, Davy,--”

He poised the knife for an instant in the air, and then, before I could
interpose, he brought it down deftly through the head of my precious
drum, and such a frightful, agonized squeal filled the room that even I
shivered involuntarily, and for an instant I had a vivid vision of a pig
struggling in the hands of a butcher. I laughed in spite of myself. But
Nick regarded me soberly.

“Funny thing, Davy,” he said, “they all left the room.” For a moment
he appeared to be ruminating on this singular phenomenon. Then he
continued: “‘N’Jackson was back firsht, ‘n’he was damned impolite...
‘n’he shook his fist in my face” (here Nick illustrated Mr. Jackson’s
gesture), “‘n’he said, ‘Great God, sir, y’have a fine talent, but if
y’ever do that again, I’ll--I’ll kill you.’  That’sh what he said,
Davy.”

“How long have you been in Nashville, Nick?” I asked.

“A year,” he said, “lookin’ after property I won rattle-an’-shnap--you
remember?”

“And why didn’t you let me know you were in Nashville?” I asked, though
I realized the futility of the question.

“Thought you was--mad at me,” he answered, “but you ain’t, Davy. You’ve
been very good-natured t’ let me have your drum.” He straightened. “I am
ver’ much obliged.”

“And where were you before you went to Nashville?” I said.

“Charleston, ‘Napolis... Philadelphia... everywhere,” he answered.

“Now,” said he, “‘mgoin’ t’ bed.”

I applauded this determination, but doubted whether he meant to carry
it out. However, I conducted him to the back room, where he sat himself
down on the edge of my four-poster, and after conversing a little
longer on the subject of Mr. Jackson (who seemed to have gotten upon his
brain), he toppled over and instantly fell asleep with his clothes on.
For a while I stood over him, the old affection welling up so strongly
within me that my eyes were dimmed as I looked upon his face. Spare and
handsome it was, and boyish still, the weaker lines emphasized in its
relaxation. Would that relentless spirit with which he had been born
make him, too, a wanderer forever? And was it not the strangest of fates
which had impelled him to join this madcap expedition of this other man
I loved, George Rogers Clark?

I went out, closed the door, and lighting another candle took from my
portfolio a packet of letters. Two of them I had not read, having found
them only on my return from Philadelphia that morning. They were all
signed simply “Sarah Temple,” they were dated at a certain number in the
Rue Bourbon, New Orleans, and each was a tragedy in that which it had
left unsaid. There was no suspicion of heroics, there was no railing at
fate; the letters breathed but the one hope,--that her son might come
again to that happiness of which she had robbed him. There were in all
but twelve, and they were brief, for some affliction had nearly deprived
the lady of the use of her right hand. I read them twice over, and
then, despite the lateness of the hour, I sat staring at the candles,
reflecting upon my own helplessness. I was startled from this revery by
a knock. Rising hastily, I closed the door of my bedroom, thinking I
had to do with some drunken reveller who might be noisy. The knock was
repeated. I slipped back the bolt and peered out into the night.

“I saw dat light,” said a voice which I recognized; “I think I come in
to say good night.”

I opened the door, and he walked in.

“You are one night owl, Monsieur Reetchie,” he said.

“And you seem to prefer the small hours for your visits, Monsieur de St.
Gré,” I could not refrain from replying.

He swept the room with a glance, and I thought a shade of disappointment
passed over his face. I wondered whether he were looking for Nick. He
sat himself down in my chair, stretched out his legs, and regarded me
with something less than his usual complacency.

“I have much laik for you, Monsieur Reetchie,” he began, and waved aside
my bow of acknowledgment “Before I go away from Louisville I want to
spik with you,--this is a risson why I am here. You listen to what dat
Depeau he say,--dat is not truth. My family knows you, I laik to have
you hear de truth.”

He paused, and while I wondered what revelations he was about to make, I
could not repress my impatience at the preamble.

“You are my frien’, you have prove it,” he continued. “You remember las’
time we meet?” (I smiled involuntarily.) “You was in bed, but you not
need be ashame’ for me. Two days after I went to France, and I not in
New Orleans since.”

“Two days after you saw me?” I repeated.

“Yaas, I run away. That was the mont’ of August, 1789, and we have not
then heard in New Orleans that the Bastille is attack. I lan’ at
La Havre,--it is the en’ of Septembre. I go to the Château de St.
Gré--great iron gates, long avenue of poplar,--big house all ‘round a
court, and Monsieur le Marquis is at Versailles. I borrow three louis
from the concierge, and I go to Versailles to the hotel of Monsieur
le Marquis. There is all dat trouble what you read about going on, and
Monsieur le Marquis he not so glad to see me for dat risson. ‘Mon cher
Auguste,’ he cry, ‘you want to be officier in gardes du corps? You are
not afred?’” (Auguste stiffened.) “‘I am a St. Gré, Monsieur le Marquis.
I am afred of nothings,’ I answered. He tek me to the King, I am made
lieutenant, the mob come and the King and Queen are carry off to Paris.
The King is prisoner, Monsieur le Marquis goes back to the Château de
St. Gré. France is a republic. Monsieur--que voulez-vous?” (The Sieur
de St. Gré shrugged his shoulders.) “I, too, become Republican. I become
officier in the National Guard,--one must move with the time. Is it
not so, Monsieur? I deman’ of you if you ever expec’ to see a St. Gré a
Republican.”

I expressed my astonishment.

“I give up my right, my principle, my family. I come to America--I go to
New Orleans where I have influence and I stir up revolution for France,
for Liberty. Is it not noble cause?”

I had it on the tip of my tongue to ask Monsieur Auguste why he left
France, but the uselessness of it was apparent.

“You see, Monsieur, I am justify before you, before my frien’s,--that
is all I care,” and he gave another shrug in defiance of the world
at large. “What I have done, I have done for principle. If I remain
Royalist, I might have marry my cousin, Mademoiselle de St. Gré. Ha,
Monsieur, you remember--the miniature you were so kin’ as to borrow me
four hundred livres?”

“I remember,” I said.

“It is because I have much confidence in you, Monsieur,” he said, “it is
because I go--peut-être--to dangere, to death, that I come here and ask
you to do me a favor.”

“You honor me too much, Monsieur,” I answered, though I could scarce
refrain from smiling.

“It is because of your charactair,” Monsieur Auguste was good enough to
say. “You are to be repose’ in, you are to be rely on. Sometime I think
you ver’ ole man. And this is why, and sence you laik objects of art,
that I bring this and ask you keep it while I am in dangere.”

I was mystified. He thrust his hand into his coat and drew forth an oval
object wrapped in dirty paper, and then disclosed to my astonished eyes
the miniature of Mademoiselle de St. Gré,--the miniature, I say, for
the gold back and setting were lacking. Auguste had retained only the
ivory,--whether from sentiment or necessity I will not venture. The
sight of it gave me a strange sensation, and I can scarcely write of the
anger and disgust which surged over me, of the longing to snatch it from
his trembling fingers. Suddenly I forgot Auguste in the lady herself.
There was something emblematical in the misfortune which had bereft
the picture of its setting. Even so the Revolution had taken from her
a brilliant life, a king and queen, home and friends. Yet the spirit
remained unquenchable, set above its mean surroundings,--ay, and
untouched by them. I was filled with a painful curiosity to know what
had become of her, which I repressed. Auguste’s voice aroused me.

“Ah, Monsieur, is it not a face to love, to adore?”

“It is a face to obey,” I answered, with some heat, and with more truth
than I knew.

“Mon Dieu, Monsieur, it is so. It is that mek me love--you know not how.
You know not what love is, Monsieur Reetchie, you never love laik me.
You have not sem risson. Monsieur,” he continued, leaning forward and
putting his hand on my knee, “I think she love me--I am not sure. I
should not be surprise’. But Monsieur le Marquis, her father, he trit me
ver’ bad. Monsieur le Marquis is guillotine’ now, I mus’ not spik evil
of him, but he marry her to one ol’ garçon, Le Vicomte d’Ivry-le-Tour.”

“So Mademoiselle is married,” I said after a pause.

“Oui, she is Madame la Vicomtesse now; I fall at her feet jus’ the sem.
I hear of her once at Bel Oeil, the château of Monsieur le Prince
de Ligne in Flander’. After that they go I know not where. They are
exile’,--los’ to me.” He sighed, and held out the miniature to me.
“Monsieur, I esk you favor. Will you be as kin’ and keep it for me
again?”

I have wondered many times since why I did not refuse. Suffice it to say
that I took it. And Auguste’s face lighted up.

“I am a thousan’ times gret’ful,” he cried; and added, as though with
an afterthought, “Monsieur, would you be so kin’ as to borrow me fif’
dollars?”




