Chapter III. Sin, Or Man’s State Of Apostasy.



Section I.—The Law Of God.


As preliminary to a treatment of man’s state of apostasy, it becomes
necessary to consider the nature of that law of God, the transgression of
which is sin. We may best approach the subject by inquiring what is the
true conception of


I. Law in General.


1. Law is an expression of _will_.

The essential idea of law is that of a general expression of will enforced
by power. It implies: (_a_) A lawgiver, or authoritative will. (_b_)
Subjects, or beings upon whom this will terminates. (_c_) A general
command, or expression of this will. (_d_) A power, enforcing the command.

These elements are found even in what we call natural law. The phrase “law
of nature” involves a self-contradiction, when used to denote a mode of
action or an order of sequence behind which there is conceived to be no
intelligent and ordaining will. Physics derives the term “law” from
jurisprudence, instead of jurisprudence deriving it from physics. It is
first used of the relations of voluntary agents. Causation in our own
wills enables us to see something besides mere antecedence and consequence
in the world about us. Physical science, in her very use of the word
“law,” implicitly confesses that a supreme Will has set general rules
which control the processes of the universe.


    Wayland, Moral Science, 1, unwisely defines law as “a mode of
    existence or order of sequence,” thus leaving out of his
    definition all reference to an ordaining will. He subsequently
    says that law presupposes an establisher, but in his definition
    there is nothing to indicate this. We insist, on the other hand,
    that the term “law” itself includes the idea of force and cause.
    The word “law” is from “lay” (German _legen_),—something laid
    down; German _Gesetz_, from _setzen_,—something set or
    established; Greek νόμος, from νέμω,—something assigned or
    apportioned; Latin _lex_, from _lego_,—something said or spoken.

    All these derivations show that man’s original conception of law
    is that of something proceeding from volition. Lewes, in his
    Problems of Life and Mind, says that the term “law” is so
    suggestive of a giver and impresser of law, that it ought to be
    dropped, and the word “method” substituted. The merit of Austin’s
    treatment of the subject is that he “rigorously limits the term
    ‘law’ to the commands of a superior”; see John Austin, Province of
    Jurisprudence, 1:88-93, 220-223. The defects of his treatment we
    shall note further on.

    J. S. Mill: “It is the custom, wherever they [scientific men] can
    trace regularity of any kind, to call the general proposition
    which expresses the nature of that regularity, a law; as when in
    mathematics we speak of the law of the successive terms of a
    converging series. But the expression ‘law of nature’ is generally
    employed by scientific men with a sort of tacit reference to the
    original sense of the word ‘law,’ namely, the expression of the
    will of a superior—the superior in this case being the Ruler of
    the universe.” Paley, Nat. Theology, chap. 1—“It is a perversion
    of language to assign any _law_ as the efficient operative cause
    of anything. A law presupposes an agent; this is only the mode
    according to which an agent proceeds; it implies a power, for it
    is the order according to which that power acts. Without this
    agent, without this power, which are both distinct from itself,
    the law does nothing.” “Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?” “Rules do
    not fulfill themselves, any more than a statute-book can quell a
    riot” (Martineau, Types, 1:367).

    Charles Darwin got the suggestion of natural selection, not from
    the study of lower plants and animals, but from Malthus on
    Population; see his Life and Letters, Vol. I, autobiographical
    chapter. Ward, Naturalism and Agnosticism, 2:248-252—“The
    conception of natural law rests upon the analogy of civil law.”
    Ladd, Philosophy of Knowledge, 333—“Laws are only the more or less
    frequently repeated and uniform modes of the behavior of things”;
    Philosophy of Mind, 122—“To be, to stand in relation, to be
    self-active, to act upon other being, to obey law, to be a cause,
    to be a permanent subject of states, to be the same to-day as
    yesterday, to be identical, to be one,—all these and all similar
    conceptions, together with the proofs that they are valid for real
    beings, are affirmed of physical realities, or projected into
    them, only on a basis of self-knowledge, envisaging and affirming
    the reality of mind. Without psychological insight and
    philosophical training, such terms or their equivalents are
    meaningless in physics. And because writers on physics do not in
    general have this insight and this training, in spite of their
    utmost endeavors to treat physics as an empirical science without
    metaphysics, they flounder and blunder and contradict themselves
    hopelessly whenever they touch upon fundamental matters.” See
    President McGarvey’s Criticism on James Lane Allen’s Reign of Law:
    “It is not in the nature of law to reign. To reign is an act which
    can be literally affirmed only of persons. A man may reign; a God
    may reign; a devil may reign; but a law cannot reign. If a law
    could reign, we should have no gambling in New York and no open
    saloons on Sunday. There would be no false swearing in courts of
    justice, and no dishonesty in politics. It is men who reign in
    these matters—the judges, the grand jury, the sheriff and the
    police. They may reign according to law. Law cannot reign even
    over those who are appointed to execute the law.”


2. Law is a _general_ expression of will.

The characteristic of law is generality. It is addressed to substances or
persons in classes. Special legislation is contrary to the true theory of
law.


    When the Sultan of Zanzibar orders his barber to be beheaded
    because the latter has cut his master, this order is not properly
    a law. To be a law it must read: “Every barber who cuts his
    majesty shall thereupon be decapitated.” _Einmal ist keinmal_ =
    “Once is no custom.” Dr. Schurman suggests that the word _meal_
    (Mahl) means originally _time_ (_mal_ in _einmal_). The
    measurement of time among ourselves is astronomical; among our
    earliest ancestors it was gastronomical, and the reduplication
    _mealtime_ = the ding-dong of the dinner bell. The Shah of Persia
    once asked the Prince of Wales to have a man put to death in order
    that he might see the English method of execution. When the Prince
    told him that this was beyond his power, the Shah wished to know
    what was the use of being a king if he could not kill people at
    his pleasure. Peter the Great suggested a way out of the
    difficulty. He desired to see keelhauling. When informed that
    there was no sailor liable to that penalty, he replied: “That does
    not matter,—take one of my suite.” Amos, Science of Law, 33,
    34—“Law eminently deals in general rules.” It knows not persons or
    personality. It must apply to more than one case. “The
    characteristic of law is generality, as that of morality is
    individual application.” Special legislation is the bane of good
    government; it does not properly fall within the province of the
    law-making power; it savors of the caprice of despotism, which
    gives commands to each subject at will. Hence our more advanced
    political constitutions check lobby influence and bribery, by
    prohibiting special legislation in all cases where general laws
    already exist.


3. Law implies _power to enforce_.

It is essential to the existence of law, that there be power to enforce.
Otherwise law becomes the expression of mere wish or advice. Since
physical substances and forces have no intelligence and no power to
resist, the four elements already mentioned exhaust the implications of
the term “law” as applied to nature. In the case of rational and free
agents, however, law implies in addition: (_e_) Duty or obligation to
obey; and (_f_) Sanctions, or pains and penalties for disobedience.


    “Law that has no penalty is not law but advice, and the government
    in which infliction does not follow transgression is the reign of
    rogues or demons.” On the question whether any of the punishments
    of civil law are legal sanctions, except the punishment of death,
    see N. W. Taylor, Moral Govt., 2:367-387. Rewards are motives, but
    they are not sanctions. Since public opinion may be conceived of
    as inflicting penalties for violation of her will, we speak
    figuratively of the laws of society, of fashion, of etiquette, of
    honor. Only so far as the community of nations can and does by
    sanctions compel obedience, can we with propriety assert the
    existence of international law. Even among nations, however, there
    may be moral as well as physical sanctions. The decision of an
    international tribunal has the same sanction as a treaty, and if
    the former is impotent, the latter also is. Fines and imprisonment
    do not deter decent people from violations of law half so
    effectively as do the social penalties of ostracism and disgrace,
    and it will be the same with the findings of an international
    tribunal. Diplomacy without ships and armies has been said to be
    law without penalty. But exclusion from civilized society is
    penalty. “In the unquestioning obedience to fashion’s decrees, to
    which we all quietly submit, we are simply yielding to the
    pressure of the persons about us. No one adopts a style of dress
    because it is reasonable, for the styles are often most
    unreasonable; but we meekly yield to the most absurd of them
    rather than resist this force and be called eccentric. So what we
    call public opinion is the most mighty power to-day known, whether
    in society or in politics.”


4. Law expresses and demands _nature_.

The will which thus binds its subjects by commands and penalties is an
expression of the nature of the governing power, and reveals the normal
relations of the subjects to that power. Finally, therefore, law (_g_) Is
an expression of the nature of the lawgiver; and (_h_) Sets forth the
condition or conduct in the subjects which is requisite for harmony with
that nature. Any so-called law which fails to represent the nature of the
governing power soon becomes obsolete. All law that is permanent is a
transcript of the facts of being, a discovery of what is and must be, in
order to harmony between the governing and the governed; in short,
positive law is just and lasting only as it is an expression and
republication of the law of nature.


    Diman, Theistic Argument, 106, 107: John Austin, although he
    “rigorously limited the term law to the commands of a superior,”
    yet “rejected Ulpian’s explanation of the law of nature, and
    ridiculed as fustian the celebrated description in Hooker.” This
    we conceive to be the radical defect of Austin’s conception. The
    Will from which natural law proceeds is conceived of after a
    deistic fashion, instead of being immanent in the universe.
    Lightwood, in his Nature of Positive Law, 78-90, criticizes
    Austin’s definition of law as command, and substitutes the idea of
    law as custom. Sir Henry Maine’s Ancient Law has shown us that the
    early village communities had customs which only gradually took
    form as definite laws. But we reply that custom is not the
    ultimate source of anything. Repeated acts of will are necessary
    to constitute custom. The first customs are due to the commanding
    will of the father in the patriarchal family. So Austin’s
    definition is justified. Collective morals (_mores_) come from
    individual duty (_due_); law originates in will; Martineau, Types,
    2:18, 19. Behind this will, however, is something which Austin
    does not take account of, namely, the nature of things as
    constituted by God, as revealing the universal Reason, and as
    furnishing the standard to which all positive law, if it would be
    permanent, must conform.

    See Montesquieu, Spirit of Laws, book 1, sec. 14—“Laws are the
    necessary relations arising from the nature of things.... There is
    a primitive Reason, and laws are the relations subsisting between
    it and different beings, and the relations of these to one
    another.... These rules are a fixed and invariable relation....
    Particular intelligent beings may have laws of their own making,
    but they have some likewise that they never made.... To say that
    there is nothing just or unjust but what is commanded or forbidden
    by positive laws, is the same as saying that before the describing
    of a circle all the radii were not equal. We must therefore
    acknowledge relations antecedent to the positive law by which they
    were established.” Kant, Metaphysic of Ethics, 169-172—“By the
    science of law is meant systematic knowledge of the principles of
    the law of nature—from which positive law takes its rise—which is
    forever the same, and carries its sure and unchanging obligations
    over all nations and throughout all ages.”

    It is true even of a despot’s law, that it reveals his nature, and
    shows what is requisite in the subject to constitute him in
    harmony with that nature. A law which does not represent the
    nature of things, or the real relations of the governor and the
    governed, has only a nominal existence, and cannot be permanent.
    On the definition and nature of law, see also Pomeroy, in
    Johnson’s Encyclopædia, art.: Law; Ahrens, Cours de Droit Naturel,
    book 1, sec. 14; Lorimer, Institutes of Law, 256, who quotes from
    Burke: “All human laws are, properly speaking, only declaratory.
    They may alter the mode and application, but have no power over
    the substance of original justice”; Lord Bacon: “Regula enim legem
    (ut acus nautica polos) indicat, non statuit.” Duke of Argyll,
    Reign of Law, 64; H. C. Carey, Unity of Law.

    Fairbairn, in Contemp. Rev., Apl. 1895:473—“The Roman jurists draw
    a distinction between _jus naturale_ and _jus civile_, and they
    used the former to affect the latter. The _jus civile_ was
    statutory, established and fixed law, as it were, the actual legal
    environment; the _jus naturale_ was ideal, the principle of
    justice and equity immanent in man, yet with the progress of his
    ethical culture growing ever more articulate.” We add the fact
    that _jus_ in Latin and _Recht_ in German have ceased to mean
    merely abstract right, and have come to denote the legal system in
    which that abstract right is embodied and expressed. Here we have
    a proof that Christ is gradually moralizing the world and
    translating law into life. E. G. Robinson: “Never a government on
    earth made its own laws. Even constitutions simply declare laws
    already and actually existing. Where society falls into anarchy,
    the _lex talionis_ becomes the prevailing principle.”


II. The Law of God in Particular.


The law of God is a general expression of the divine will enforced by
power. It has two forms: Elemental Law and Positive Enactment.

1. _Elemental Law_, or law inwrought into the elements, substances, and
forces of the rational and irrational creation. This is twofold:

A. The expression of the divine will in the constitution of the material
universe;—this we call physical, or natural law. Physical law is not
necessary. Another order of things is conceivable. Physical order is not
an end in itself; it exists for the sake of moral order. Physical order
has therefore only a relative constancy, and God supplements it at times
by miracle.


    Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 210—“The laws of nature
    represent no necessity, but are only the orderly forms of
    procedure of some Being back of them.... Cosmic uniformities are
    God’s methods in freedom.” Philos. of Theism, 73—“Any of the
    cosmic laws, from gravitation on, might conceivably have been
    lacking or altogether different.... No trace of necessity can be
    found in the Cosmos or in its laws.” Seth, Hegelianism and
    Personality: “Nature is not necessary. Why put an island where it
    is, and not a mile east or west? Why connect the smell and shape
    of the rose, or the taste and color of the orange? Why do H2O form
    water? No one knows.” William James: “The parts seem shot at us
    out of a pistol.” Rather, we would say, out of a shotgun.
    Martineau, Seat of Authority, 33—“Why undulations in one medium
    should produce sound, and in another light; why one speed of
    vibration should give red color, and another blue, can be
    explained by no reason of necessity. Here is selecting will.”

    Brooks, Foundations of Zoölogy, 126—“So far as the philosophy of
    evolution involves belief that nature is determinate, or due to a
    necessary law of universal progress or evolution, it seems to me
    to be utterly unsupported by evidence and totally unscientific.”
    There is no power to deduce anything whatever from homogeneity.
    Press the button and law does the rest? Yes, but what presses the
    button? The solution crystalises when shaken? Yes, but what shakes
    it? Ladd, Philos. of Knowledge, 310—“The directions and velocities
    of the stars fall under no common principles that astronomy can
    discover. One of the stars—‘1830 Groombridge’—is flying through
    space at a rate many times as great as it could attain if it had
    fallen through infinite space through all eternity toward the
    entire physical universe.... Fluids contract when cooled and
    expand when heated,—yet there is the well known exception of water
    at the degree of freezing.” 263—“Things do not appear to be
    mathematical all the way through. The system of things may be a
    Life, changing its modes of manifestation according to immanent
    ideas, rather than a collection of rigid entities, blindly subject
    in a mechanical way to unchanging laws.”

    Augustine: “Dei voluntas rerum natura est.” Joseph Cook: “The laws
    of nature are the habits of God.” But Campbell, Atonement,
    Introd., xxvi, says there is this difference between the laws of
    the moral universe and those of the physical, namely, that we do
    not trace the existence of the former to an act of will, as we do
    the latter. “To say that God has given existence to goodness, as
    he has to the laws of nature, would be equivalent to saying that
    he has given existence to himself.” Pepper, Outlines of Syst.
    Theol., 91—“Moral law, unlike natural law, is a standard of action
    to be adopted or rejected in the exercise of rational freedom, _i.
    e._, of moral agency.” See also Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:531.

    Mark Hopkins, in Princeton Rev., Sept. 1882:190—“In moral law
    there is enforcement by punishment only—never by power, for this
    would confound moral law with physical, and obedience can never be
    produced or secured by power. In physical law, on the contrary,
    enforcement is wholly by power, and punishment is impossible. So
    far as man is free, he is not subject to law at all, in its
    physical sense. Our wills are free _from_ law, as enforced by
    _power_; but are free _under_ law, as enforced by _punishment_.
    Where law prevails in the same sense as in the material world,
    there can be no freedom. Law does not prevail when we reach the
    region of choice. We hold to a power in the mind of man
    originating a free choice. Two objects or courses of action,
    between which choice is to be made, are presupposed: (1) A
    uniformity or set of uniformities implying a force by which the
    uniformity is produced [physical or natural law]; (2) A command,
    addressed to free and intelligent beings, that can be obeyed or
    disobeyed, and that has connected with it rewards or punishments”
    [moral law]. See also Wm. Arthur, Difference between Physical and
    Moral Law.


B. The expression of the divine will in the constitution of rational and
free agents;—this we call moral law. This elemental law of our moral
nature, with which only we are now concerned, has all the characteristics
mentioned as belonging to law in general. It implies: (_a_) A divine
Law-giver, or ordaining Will. (_b_) Subjects, or moral beings upon whom
the law terminates. (_c_) General command, or expression of this will in
the moral constitution of the subjects. (_d_) Power, enforcing the
command. (_e_) Duty, or obligation to obey. (_f_) Sanctions, or pains and
penalties for disobedience.

All these are of a loftier sort than are found in human law. But we need
especially to emphasize the fact that this law (_g_) Is an expression of
the moral nature of God, and therefore of God’s holiness, the fundamental
attribute of that nature; and that it (_h_) Sets forth absolute conformity
to that holiness, as the normal condition of man. This law is inwrought
into man’s rational and moral being. Man fulfills it, only when in his
moral as well as his rational being he is the image of God.


    Although the will from which the moral law springs is an
    expression of the nature of God, and a necessary expression of
    that nature in view of the existence of moral beings, it is none
    the less a personal will. We should be careful not to attribute to
    law a personality of its own. When Plutarch says: “Law is king
    both of mortal and immortal beings,” and when we say: “The law
    will take hold of you,” “The criminal is in danger of the law,” we
    are simply substituting the name of the agent for that of the
    principal. God is not subject to law; God is the source of law;
    and we may say: “If Jehovah be God, worship him; but if Law,
    worship it.”

    Since moral law merely reflects God, it is not a thing _made_. Men
    _discover_ laws, but they do not _make_ them, any more than the
    chemist makes the laws by which the elements combine. Instance the
    solidification of hydrogen at Geneva. Utility does not constitute
    law, although we test law by utility; see Murphy, Scientific Bases
    of Faith, 58-71. The true nature of the moral law is set forth in
    the noble though rhetorical description of Hooker (Eccl. Pol.,
    1:194)—“Of law there can be no less acknowledged than that her
    seat is in the bosom of God; her voice the harmony of the world;
    all things in heaven and earth do her homage, the very least as
    feeling her care, and the greatest as not exempted from her power;
    both angels and men, and creatures of what condition soever,
    though each in a different sort and manner, yet all with uniform
    consent admiring her as the mother of their peace and joy.” See
    also Martineau, Types, 2:119, and Study, 1:35.

    Curtis, Primitive Semitic Religions, 66, 101—“The Oriental
    believes that God makes right by edict. Saladin demonstrated to
    Henry of Champagne the loyalty of his Assassins, by commanding two
    of them to throw themselves down from a lofty tower to certain and
    violent death.” H. B. Smith, System, 192—“Will implies
    personality, and personality adds to abstract truth and duty the
    element of authority. Law therefore has the force that a person
    has over and above that of an idea.” Human law forbids only those
    offences which constitute a breach of public order or of private
    right. God’s law forbids all that is an offence against the divine
    order, that is, all that is unlike God. The whole law may be
    summed up in the words: “Be like God.” Salter, First Steps in
    Philosophy, 101-126—“The realization of the nature of each being
    is the end to be striven for. Self-realization is an ideal end,
    not of one being, but of each being, with due regard to the value
    of each in the proper scale of worth. The beast can be sacrificed
    for man. All men are sacred as capable of unlimited progress. It
    is our duty to realize the capacities of our nature so far as they
    are consistent with one another and go to make up one whole.” This
    means that man fulfills the law only as he realizes the divine
    idea in his character and life, or, in other words, as he becomes
    a finite image of God’s infinite perfections.

    Bixby, Crisis in Morals, 191, 201, 285, 286—“Morality is rooted in
    the nature of things. There is a universe. We are all parts of an
    infinite organism. Man is inseparably bound to man [and to God].
    All rights and duties arise out of this common life. In the
    solidarity of social life lies the ground of Kant’s law: So will,
    that the maxim of thy conduct may apply to all. The planet cannot
    safely fly away from the sun, and the hand cannot safely separate
    itself from the heart. It is from the fundamental unity of life
    that our duties flow.... The infinite world-organism is the body
    and manifestation of God. And when we recognize the solidarity of
    our vital being with this divine life and embodiment, we begin to
    see into the heart of the mystery, the unquestionable authority
    and supreme sanction of duty. Our moral intuitions are simply the
    unchanging laws of the universe that have emerged to consciousness
    in the human heart.... The inherent principles of the universal
    Reason reflect themselves in the mirror of the moral nature....
    The enlightened conscience is the expression in the human soul of
    the divine Consciousness.... Morality is the victory of the divine
    Life in us.... Solidarity of our life with the universal Life
    gives it unconditional sacredness and transcendental authority....
    The microcosm must bring itself _en rapport_ with the Macrocosm.
    Man must bring his spirit into resemblance to the World-essence,
    and into union with it.”


The law of God, then, is simply an expression of the nature of God in the
form of moral requirement, and a necessary expression of that nature in
view of the existence of moral beings (Ps. 19:7; _cf._ 1). To the
existence of this law all men bear witness. The consciences even of the
heathen testify to it (Rom. 2:14, 15). Those who have the written law
recognize this elemental law as of greater compass and penetration (Rom.
7:14; 8:4). The perfect embodiment and fulfillment of this law is seen
only in Christ (Rom. 10:4; Phil. 3:8, 9).


    _Ps. 19:7_—“_The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul_”;
    _cf._ _verse 1_—“_The heavens declare the glory of God_”—two
    revelations of God—one in nature, the other in the moral law.
    _Rom. 2:14, 15_—“_for when Gentiles that have not the law do by
    nature the things of the law, these, not having the law, are the
    law unto themselves; in that they show the work of the law written
    in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness therewith, and
    their thoughts one with another accusing or else excusing
    them_”—here the “_work of the law_”—, not the ten commandments,
    for of these the heathen were ignorant, but rather the work
    corresponding to them, _i. e._, the substance of them. _Rom.
    7:14_—“_For we know that the law is spiritual_”—this, says Meyer,
    is equivalent to saying “its essence is divine, of like nature
    with the Holy Spirit who gave it, a holy self-revelation of God.”
    _Rom. 8:4_—“_that the ordinance of the law might be fulfilled in
    us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit_”;
    _10:4_—“_For Christ is the end of the law unto righteousness to
    every one that believeth_”; _Phil. 3:8, 9_—“_that I may gain
    Christ, and be found in him, not having a righteousness of mine
    own, even that which is of the law, but that which is through
    faith in Christ, the righteousness which is from God by faith_”;
    _Heb. 10:9_—“_Lo, I am come to do thy will._” In Christ “the law
    appears Drawn out in living characters.” Just such as he was and
    is, we feel that we ought to be. Hence the character of Christ
    convicts us of sin, as does no other manifestation of God. See, on
    the passages from Romans, the Commentary of Philippi.

    Fleming, Vocab. Philos., 286—“Moral laws are derived from the
    nature and will of God, and the character and condition of man.”
    God’s nature is reflected in the laws of our nature. Since law is
    inwrought into man’s nature, man is a law unto himself. To conform
    to his own nature, in which conscience is supreme, is to conform
    to the nature of God. The law is only the revelation of the
    constitutive principles of being, the declaration of what must be,
    so long as man is man and God is God. It says in effect: “Be like
    God, or you cannot be truly man.” So moral law is not simply a
    test of obedience, but is also a revelation of eternal reality.
    Man cannot be lost to God, without being lost to himself. “The
    ‘_hands of the living God_’ (_Heb. 10:31_) into which we fall, are
    the laws of nature.” In the spiritual world “the same wheels
    revolve, only there is no iron” (Drummond, Natural Law in the
    Spiritual World, 27). Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 2:82-92—“The
    totality of created being is to be in harmony with God and with
    itself. The idea of this harmony, as active in God under the form
    of will, is God’s law.” A manuscript of the U. S. Constitution was
    so written that when held at a little distance the shading of the
    letters and their position showed the countenance of George
    Washington. So the law of God is only God’s face disclosed to
    human sight.

    R. W. Emerson, Woodnotes, 57—“Conscious Law is King of kings.” Two
    centuries ago John Norton wrote a book entitled The Orthodox
    Evangelist, “designed for the begetting and establishing of the
    faith which is in Jesus,” in which we find the following: “God
    doth not will things because they are just, but things are
    therefore just because God so willeth them. What reasonable man
    but will yield that the being of the moral law hath no necessary
    connection with the being of God? That the actions of men not
    conformable to this law should be sin, that death should be the
    punishment of sin, these are the constitutions of God, proceeding
    from him not by way of necessity of nature, but freely, as effects
    and products of his eternal good pleasure.” This is to make God an
    arbitrary despot. We should not say that God _makes_ law, nor on
    the other hand that God _is subject to_ law, but rather that God
    _is_ law and _the source_ of law.

    Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 161—“God’s law is organic—inwrought into
    the constitution of men and things. The chart however does not
    make the channel.... A law of nature is never the antecedent but
    the consequence of reality. What right has this consequence of
    reality to be personalized and made the ruler and source of
    reality? Law is only the fixed mode in which reality works. Law
    therefore can explain nothing. Only God, from whom reality
    springs, can explain reality.” In other words, law is never an
    agent but always a method—the method of God, or rather of Christ
    who is the only Revealer of God. Christ’s life in the flesh is the
    clearest manifestation of him who is the principle of law in the
    physical and moral universe. Christ is the Reason of God in
    expression. It was he who gave the law on Mount Sinai as well as
    in the Sermon on the Mount. For fuller treatment of the subject,
    see Bowen, Metaph. and Ethics, 321-344; Talbot, Ethical
    Prolegomena, in Bap. Quar., July, 1877:257-274; Whewell, Elements
    of Morality, 2:35; and especially E. G. Robinson, Principles and
    Practice of Morality, 79-108.


Each of the two last-mentioned characteristics of God’s law is important
in its implications. We treat of these in their order.

First, the law of God as a transcript of the divine nature.—If this be the
nature of the law, then certain common misconceptions of it are excluded.
The law of God is

(_a_) Not arbitrary, or the product of arbitrary will. Since the will from
which the law springs is a revelation of God’s nature, there can be no
rashness or unwisdom in the law itself.


    E. G. Robinson, Christ. Theology, 193—“No law of God seems ever to
    have been arbitrarily enacted, or simply with a view to certain
    ends to be accomplished; it always represented some reality of
    life which it was inexorably necessary that those who were to be
    regulated should carefully observe.” The theory that law
    originates in arbitrary will results in an effeminate type of
    piety, just as the theory that legislation has for its sole end
    the greatest happiness results in all manner of compromises of
    justice. Jones, Robert Browning, 43—“He who cheats his neighbor
    believes in tortuosity, and, as Carlyle says, has the supreme
    Quack for his god.”


(b) Not temporary, or ordained simply to meet an exigency. The law is a
manifestation, not of temporary moods or desires, but of the essential
nature of God.


    The great speech of Sophocles’ Antigone gives us this conception
    of law: “The ordinances of the gods are unwritten, but sure. Not
    one of them is for to-day or for yesterday alone, but they live
    forever.” Moses might break the tables of stone upon which the law
    was inscribed, and Jehoiakim might cut up the scroll and cast it
    into the fire (_Ex. 32:19_; _Jer. 36:23_), but the law remained
    eternal as before in the nature of God and in the constitution of
    man. Prof. Walter Rauschenbusch: “The moral laws are just as
    stable as the law of gravitation. Every fuzzy human chicken that
    is hatched into this world tries to fool with those laws. Some
    grow wiser in the process and some do not. We talk about breaking
    God’s laws. But after those laws have been broken several billion
    times since Adam first tried to play with them, those laws are
    still intact and no seam or fracture is visible in them,—not even
    a scratch on the enamel. But the lawbreakers—that is another
    story. If you want to find their fragments, go to the ruins of
    Egypt, of Babylon, of Jerusalem; study statistics; read faces;
    keep your eyes open; visit Blackwell’s Island; walk through the
    graveyard and read the invisible inscriptions left by the Angel of
    Judgment, for instance: ‘Here lie the fragments of John Smith, who
    contradicted his Maker, played football with the ten commandments,
    and departed this life at the age of thirty-five. His mother and
    wife weep for him. Nobody else does. May he rest in peace!’ ”


(_c_) Not merely negative, or a law of mere prohibition,—since positive
conformity to God is the inmost requisition of law.

The negative form of the commandments in the decalogue merely takes for
granted the evil inclination in men’s hearts and practically opposes its
gratification. In the case of each commandment a whole province of the
moral life is taken into the account, although the act expressly forbidden
is the acme of evil in that one province. So the decalogue makes itself
intelligible: it crosses man’s path just where he most feels inclined to
wander. But back of the negative and specific expression in each case lies
the whole mass of moral requirement: the thin edge of the wedge has the
positive demand of holiness behind it, without obedience to which even the
prohibition cannot in spirit be obeyed. Thus “_the law is spiritual_”
(_Rom. 7:14_), and requires likeness in character and life to the
spiritual God; _John 4:24_—“_God is spirit, and they that worship him must
worship in spirit and truth._”

(_d_) Not partial, or addressed to one part only of man’s being,—since
likeness to God requires purity of substance in man’s soul and body, as
well as purity in all the thoughts and acts that proceed therefrom. As law
proceeds from the nature of God, so it requires conformity to that nature
in the nature of man.


    Whatever God gave to man at the beginning he requires of man with
    interest; _cf._ _Mat. 25:27_—“_thou oughtest therefore to have put
    my money to the bankers, and at my coming I should have received
    back mine own with interest._” Whatever comes short of perfect
    purity in soul or perfect health in body is non-conformity to God
    and contradicts his law, it being understood that only that
    perfection is demanded which answers to the creature’s stage of
    growth and progress, so that of the child there is required only
    the perfection of the child, of the youth only the perfection of
    the youth, of the man only the perfection of the man. See Julius
    Müller, Doctrine of Sin, chapter 1.


(_e_) Not outwardly published,—since all positive enactment is only the
imperfect expression of this underlying and unwritten law of being.


    Much misunderstanding of God’s law results from confounding it
    with published enactment. Paul takes the larger view that the law
    is independent of such expression; see _Rom. 2:14, 15_—“_for when
    Gentiles that have not the law do by nature the things of the law,
    these, not having the law, are the law unto themselves; in that
    they show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
    conscience bearing witness therewith, and their thoughts one with
    another accusing or else excusing them:_” see Expositor’s Greek
    Testament, _in loco_: “ ‘_written on their hearts_,’ when
    contrasted with the law written on the tables of stone, is equal
    to ‘unwritten’; the Apostle refers to what the Greeks called
    ἄγραφος νόμος.”


(_f_) Not inwardly conscious, or limited in its scope by men’s
consciousness of it. Like the laws of our physical being, the moral law
exists whether we recognize it or not.


    Overeating brings its penalty in dyspepsia, whether we are
    conscious of our fault or not. We cannot by ignorance or by vote
    repeal the laws of our physical system. Self-will does not secure
    independence, any more than the stars can by combination abolish
    gravitation. Man cannot get rid of God’s dominion by denying its
    existence, nor by refusing submission to it. _Psalm 2:1-4_—“_Why
    do the nations rage ... against Jehovah ... saying, Let us break
    their bonds asunder.... He that sitteth in the heavens will
    laugh._” Salter, First Steps in Philosophy, 94—“The fact that one
    is not aware of obligation no more affects its reality than
    ignorance of what is at the centre of the earth affects the nature
    of what is really discoverable there. We discover obligation, and
    do not create it by thinking of it, any more than we create the
    sensible world by thinking of it.”


(_g_) Not local, or confined to place,—since no moral creature can escape
from God, from his own being, or from the natural necessity that
unlikeness to God should involve misery and ruin.


    “The Dutch auction” was the public offer of property at a price
    beyond its value, followed by the lowering of the price until some
    one accepted it as a purchaser. There is no such local exception
    to the full validity of God’s demands. The moral law has even more
    necessary and universal sway than the law of gravitation in the
    physical universe. It is inwrought into the very constitution of
    man, and of every other moral being. The man who offended the
    Roman Emperor found the whole empire a prison.


(_h_) Not changeable, or capable of modification. Since law represents the
unchangeable nature of God, it is not a sliding scale of requirements
which adapts itself to the ability of the subjects. God himself cannot
change it without ceasing to be God.


    The law, then, has a deeper foundation than that God merely “said
    so.” God’s word and God’s will are revelations of his inmost
    being; every transgression of the law is a stab at the heart of
    God. Simon, Reconciliation, 141, 142—“God continues to demand
    loyalty even after man has proved disloyal. Sin changes man, and
    man’s change involves a change in God. Man now regards God as a
    ruler and exactor, and God must regard man as a defaulter and a
    rebel.” God’s requirement is not lessened because man is unable to
    meet it. This inability is itself non-conformity to law, and is no
    excuse for sin; see Dr. Bushnell’s sermon on “Duty not measured by
    Ability.” The man with the withered hand would not have been
    justified in refusing to stretch it forth at Jesus’ command (_Mat.
    12:10-13_).

    The obligation to obey this law and to be conformed to God’s
    perfect moral character is based upon man’s original ability and
    the gifts which God bestowed upon him at the beginning. Created in
    the image of God, it is man’s duty to render back to God that
    which God first gave, enlarged and improved by growth and culture
    (_Luke 19:23_—“_wherefore gavest thou not my money into the bank,
    and I at my coming should have required it with interest_”). This
    obligation is not impaired by sin and the weakening of man’s
    powers. To let down the standard would be to misrepresent God.
    Adolphe Monod would not save himself from shame and remorse by
    lowering the claims of the law: “Save first the holy law of my
    God,” he says, “after that you shall save me!”

    Even salvation is not through violation of law. The moral law is
    immutable, because it is a transcript of the nature of the
    immutable God. Shall nature conform to me, or I to nature? If I
    attempt to resist even physical laws, I am crushed. I can use
    nature only by obeying her laws. Lord Bacon: “Natura enim non nisi
    parendo vincitur.” So in the moral realm. We cannot buy off nor
    escape the moral law of God. God will not, and God can not, change
    his law by one hair’s breadth, even to save a universe of sinners.
    Omar Kháyyám, in his Rubáiyát, begs his god to “reconcile the law
    to my desires.” Marie Corelli says well: “As if a gnat should seek
    to build a cathedral, and should ask to have the laws of
    architecture altered to suit its gnat-like capacity.” See
    Martineau, Types, 2:120.


Secondly, the law of God as the ideal of human nature.—A law thus
identical with the eternal and necessary relations of the creature to the
Creator, and demanding of the creature nothing less than perfect holiness,
as the condition of harmony with the infinite holiness of God, is adapted
to man’s finite nature, as needing law; to man’s free nature, as needing
moral law; and to man’s progressive nature, as needing ideal law.


    Man, as finite, needs law, just as railway cars need a track to
    guide them—to leap the track is to find, not freedom, but ruin.
    Railway President: “Our rules are written in blood.” Goethe, Was
    Wir Bringen, 19 Auftritt: “In vain shall spirits that are all
    unbound To the pure heights of perfectness aspire; In limitation
    first the Master shines, And law alone can give us liberty.”—Man,
    as a free being, needs moral law. He is not an automaton, a
    creature of necessity, governed only by physical influences. With
    conscience to command the right, and will to choose or reject it,
    his true dignity and calling are that he should freely realize the
    right.—Man, as a progressive being, needs nothing less than an
    ideal and infinite standard of attainment, a goal which he can
    never overpass, an end which shall ever attract and urge him
    forward. This he finds in the holiness of God.

    The law is a _fence_, not only for ownership, but for care. God
    not only demands, but he protects. Law is the transcript of love
    as well as of holiness. We may reverse the well-known couplet and
    say: “I slept, and dreamed that life was Duty; I woke and found
    that life was Beauty.” “Cui servire regnare est.” Butcher, Aspects
    of Greek Genius, 56—“In Plato’s Crito, the Laws are made to
    present themselves in person to Socrates in prison, not only as
    the guardians of his liberty, but as his lifelong friends, his
    well-wishers, his equals, with whom he had of his own free will
    entered into binding compact.” It does not harm the scholar to
    have before him the ideal of perfect scholarship; nor the teacher
    to have before him the ideal of a perfect school; nor the
    legislator to have before him the ideal of perfect law. Gordon,
    The Christ of To-day, 134—“The moral goal must be a flying goal;
    the standard to which we are to grow must be ever rising; the type
    to which we are to be conformed must have in it inexhaustible
    fulness.”

    John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 2:119—“It is just the
    best, purest, noblest human souls, who are least satisfied with
    themselves and their own spiritual attainments; and the reason is
    that the human is not a nature essentially different from the
    divine, but a nature which, just because it is in essential
    affinity with God, can be satisfied with nothing less than a
    divine perfection.” J. M. Whiton, The Divine Satisfaction: “Law
    requires being, character, likeness to God. It is automatic,
    self-operating. Penalty is untransferable. It cannot admit of any
    other satisfaction than the reëstablishment of the normal relation
    which it requires. Punishment proclaims that the law has not been
    satisfied. There is no cancelling of the curse except through the
    growing up of the normal relation. Blessing and curse ensue upon
    what we are, not upon what we were. Reparation is within the
    spirit itself. The atonement is educational, not governmental.” We
    reply that the atonement is both governmental and educational, and
    that reparation must first be made to the holiness of God before
    conscience, the mirror of God’s holiness, can reflect that
    reparation and be at peace.


The law of God is therefore characterized by:

(_a_) All-comprehensiveness.—It is over us at all times; it respects our
past, our present, our future. It forbids every conceivable sin; it
requires every conceivable virtue; omissions as well as commissions are
condemned by it.


    _Ps. 119:96_—“_I have seen an end of all perfection ... thy
    commandment is exceeding broad_”; _Rom. 3:23_—“_all have sinned,
    and fall short of the glory of God_”; _James 4:17_—“_To him
    therefore that knoweth to do good, and __ doeth it not, to him it
    is sin._” Gravitation holds the mote as well as the world. God’s
    law detects and denounces the least sin, so that without atonement
    it cannot be pardoned. The law of gravitation may be suspended or
    abrogated, for it has no necessary ground in God’s being; but
    God’s moral law cannot be suspended or abrogated, for that would
    contradict God’s holiness. “About right” is not “all right.” “The
    giant hexagonal pillars of basalt in the Scottish Staffa are
    identical in form with the microscopic crystals of the same
    mineral.” So God is our pattern, and goodness is our likeness to
    him.


(_b_) Spirituality.—It demands not only right acts and words, but also
right dispositions and states. Perfect obedience requires not only the
intense and unremitting reign of love toward God and man, but conformity
of the whole inward and outward nature of man to the holiness of God.


    _Mat. 5:22, 28_—the angry word is murder; the sinful look is
    adultery. _Mark 12:30, 31_—“_thou shalt love the Lord thy God with
    all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
    with all thy strength.... Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
    thyself_”; _2 Cor. 10:5_—“_bringing every thought into captivity
    to the obedience of Christ_”; _Eph. 5:1_—“_Be ye therefore
    imitators of God, as beloved children_”; _1 Pet. 1:16_—“_Ye shall
    be holy; for I am holy._” As the brightest electric light, seen
    through a smoked glass against the sun, appears like a black spot,
    so the brightest unregenerate character is dark, when compared
    with the holiness of God. Matheson, Moments on the Mount, 235,
    remarks on _Gal. 6:4_—“_let each man prove his own work, and then
    shall he have his glorying in regard of himself alone, and not of
    his neighbor_”—“I have a small candle and I compare it with my
    brother’s taper and come away rejoicing. Why not compare it with
    the sun? Then I shall lose my pride and uncharitableness.” The
    distance to the sun from the top of an ant-hill and from the top
    of Mount Everest is nearly the same. The African princess praised
    for her beauty had no way to verify the compliments paid her but
    by looking in the glassy surface of the pool. But the trader came
    and sold her a mirror. Then she was so shocked at her own ugliness
    that she broke the mirror in pieces. So we look into the mirror of
    God’s law, compare ourselves with the Christ who is reflected
    there, and hate the mirror which reveals us to ourselves (_James
    1:23, 24_).


(_c_) Solidarity.—It exhibits in all its parts the nature of the one
Lawgiver, and it expresses, in its least command, the one requirement of
harmony with him.


    _Mat. 5:48_—“_Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly
    Father is perfect_”; _Mark 12:29, 30_—“_The Lord our God, the Lord
    is one: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God_”; _James 2:10_—“_For
    whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet stumble in one point,
    he is become guilty of all_”; _4:12_—“_One only is the lawgiver
    and judge._” Even little rattlesnakes are snakes. One link broken
    in the chain, and the bucket falls into the well. The least sin
    separates us from God. The least sin renders us guilty of the
    whole law, because it shows us to lack the love which is required
    in all the commandments. Those who send us to the Sermon on the
    Mount for salvation send us to a tribunal that damns us. The
    Sermon on the Mount is but a republication of the law given on
    Sinai, but now in more spiritual and penetrating form. Thunders
    and lightnings proceed from the N. T., as from the O. T., mount.
    The Sermon on the Mount is only the introductory lecture of Jesus’
    theological course, as _John 14-17_ is the closing lecture. In it
    is announced the law, which prepares the way for the gospel. Those
    who would degrade doctrine by exalting precept will find that they
    have left men without the motive or the power to keep the precept.
    Æschylus, Agamemnon: “For there’s no bulwark in man’s wealth to
    him Who, through a surfeit, kicks—into the dim And
    disappearing—Right’s great altar.”


Only to the first man, then, was the law proposed as a method of
salvation. With the first sin, all hope of obtaining the divine favor by
perfect obedience is lost. To sinners the law remains as a means of
discovering and developing sin in its true nature, and of compelling a
recourse to the mercy provided in Jesus Christ.


    _2 Chron. 34:19_—“_And it came to pass, when the king had heard
    the words of the law, that he rent his clothes_”; _Job 42:5,
    6_—“_I had heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; But now mine
    eye seeth thee; Wherefore I abhor myself, And repent in dust and
    ashes._” The revelation of God in _Is. 6:3, 5_—“_Holy, holy, holy,
    is Jehovah of hosts_”—causes the prophet to cry like the leper:
    “_Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean
    lips._” _Rom. 3:20_—“_by the works of the law shall no flesh be
    justified in his sight; for through the law cometh the __
    knowledge of sin_”; _5:20_—“_the law came in besides, that the
    trespass might abound_”; _7:7, 8_—“_I had not known sin, except
    through the law: for I had not known coveting, except the law had
    said, Thou shalt not covet: but sin, finding occasion, wrought in
    me through the commandment all manner of coveting: for apart from
    the law sin is dead_”; _Gal. 3:24_—“_So that the law is become our
    tutor,_” or attendant-slave, “_to bring us unto Christ, that we
    might be justified by faith_”—the law trains our wayward boyhood
    and leads it to Christ the Master, as in old times the slave
    accompanied children to school. Stevens, Pauline Theology, 177,
    178—“The law increases sin by increasing the knowledge of sin and
    by increasing the activity of sin. The law does not add to the
    inherent energy of the sinful principle which pervades human
    nature, but it does cause this principle to reveal itself more
    energetically in sinful act.” The law inspires fear, but it leads
    to love. The Rabbins said that, if Israel repented but for one
    day, the Messiah would appear.

    No man ever yet drew a straight line or a perfect curve; yet he
    would be a poor architect who contented himself with anything
    less. Since men never come up to their ideals, he who aims to live
    only an _average_ moral life will inevitably fall _below_ the
    average. The law, then, leads to Christ. He who is the _ideal_ is
    also the _way_ to attain the ideal. He who is himself the Word and
    the Law embodied, is also the Spirit of life that makes obedience
    possible to us (_John 14:6_—“_I am the way, and the truth, and the
    life_”; _Rom. 8:2_—“_For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ
    Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death_”). Mrs.
    Browning, Aurora Leigh: “The Christ himself had been no Lawgiver,
    Unless he had given the Life too with the Law.” Christ _for_ us
    upon the Cross, and Christ _in_ us by his Spirit, is the only
    deliverance from the curse of the law; _Gal 3:13_—“_Christ
    redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for
    us._” We must see the claims of the law satisfied and the law
    itself written on our hearts. We are “_reconciled to God through
    the death of his Son_,” but we are also _“__saved by his life__”__
    (Rom. 5:10_).

    Robert Browning, in The Ring and the Book, represents Caponsacchi
    as comparing himself at his best with the new ideal of “perfect as
    Father in heaven is perfect” suggested by Pompilia’s purity, and
    as breaking out into the cry: “O great, just, good God! Miserable
    me!” In the Interpreter’s House of Pilgrim’s Progress, Law only
    stirred up the dust in the foul room,—the Gospel had to sprinkle
    water on the floor before it could be cleansed. E. G. Robinson:
    “It is necessary to smoke a man out, before you can bring a higher
    motive to bear upon him.” Barnabas said that Christ was the answer
    to the riddle of the law. _Rom. 10:4_—“_Christ is the end of the
    law unto righteousness to every one that believeth._” The railroad
    track opposite Detroit on the St. Clair River runs to the edge of
    the dock and seems intended to plunge the train into the abyss.
    But when the ferry boat comes up, rails are seen upon its deck,
    and the boat is the end of the track, to carry passengers over to
    Detroit. So the law, which by itself would bring only destruction,
    finds its end in Christ who ensures our passage to the celestial
    city.

    Law, then, with its picture of spotless innocence, simply reminds
    man of the heights from which he has fallen. “It is a mirror which
    reveals derangement, but does not create or remove it.” With its
    demand of absolute perfection, up to the measure of man’s original
    endowments and possibilities, it drives us, in despair of
    ourselves, to Christ as our only righteousness and our only Savior
    (_Rom. 8:3, 4_—“_For what the law could not do, in that it was
    weak through the flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness
    of sinful flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: that the
    ordinance of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
    the flesh, but after the Spirit_”; _Phil. 3:8, 9_—“_that I may
    gain Christ, and be found in him, not having a righteousness of
    mine own, even that which is of the law, but that which is through
    faith in Christ, the righteousness which is from God by faith_”).
    Thus law must prepare the way for grace, and John the Baptist must
    precede Christ.

    When Sarah Bernhardt was solicited to add an eleventh commandment,
    she declined upon the ground there were already ten too many. It
    was an expression of pagan contempt of law. In heathendom, sin and
    insensibility to sin increased together. In Judaism and
    Christianity, on the contrary, there has been a growing sense of
    sin’s guilt and condemnableness. McLaren, in S. S. Times, Sept.
    23, 1893:600—“Among the Jews there was a far profounder sense of
    sin than in any other ancient nation. The law written on men’s
    hearts evoked a lower consciousness of sin, and there are prayers
    on the Assyrian and Babylonian tablets which may almost stand
    beside the 51st Psalm. But, on the whole, the deep sense of sin
    was the product of the revealed law.” See Fairbairn, Revelation of
    Law and Scripture; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 187-242; Hovey, God
    with Us, 187-210; Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 1:45-50; Murphy,
    Scientific Bases of Faith, 53-71; Martineau, Types, 2:120-125.


2. _Positive Enactment_, or the expression of the will of God in published
ordinances. This is also two-fold:

A. General moral precepts.—These are written summaries of the elemental
law (Mat. 5:48; 22:37-40), or authorized applications of it to special
human conditions (Ex. 20:1-17; Mat. chap. 5-8).


    _Mat. 5:48_—“_Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly
    Father is perfect_”; _22:37-40_—“_Thou shalt love the Lord thy
    God.... Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two
    commandments the whole law hangeth and the prophets_”; _Ex.
    20:1-17_—the Ten Commandments; _Mat., chap. 5-8_—the Sermon on the
    Mount. _Cf._ Augustine, on _Ps. 57:1_.

    Solly, On the Will, 162, gives two illustrations of the fact that
    positive precepts are merely applications of elemental law or the
    law of nature: “ ‘_Thou shalt not steal_,’ is a moral law which
    may be stated thus: _thou shalt not take that for thy own
    property, which is the property of another_. The contradictory of
    this proposition would be: _thou mayest take that for thy own
    property which is the property of another_. But this is a
    contradiction in terms; for it is the very conception of property,
    that the owner stands in a peculiar relation to its subject
    matter; and what is every man’s property is no man’s property, as
    it is _proper_ to no man. Hence the contradictory of the
    commandment contains a simple contradiction directly it is made a
    rule universal; and the commandment itself is established as one
    of the principles for the harmony of individual wills.

    “ ‘_Thou shalt not tell a lie_,’ as a rule of morality, may be
    expressed generally: _thou shall not by thy outward act make
    another to believe thy thought to be other than it is_. The
    contradictory made universal is: _every man may by his outward act
    make another to believe his thought to be other than it is_. Now
    this maxim also contains a contradiction, and is self-destructive.
    It conveys a permission to do that which is rendered impossible by
    the permission itself. Absolute and universal indifference to
    truth, or the entire mutual independence of the thought and
    symbol, makes the symbol cease to be a symbol, and the conveyance
    of thought by its means, an impossibility.”

    Kant, Metaphysic of Ethics, 48, 90—“Fundamental law of reason: So
    act, that thy maxims of will might become laws in a system of
    universal moral legislation.” This is Kant’s categorical
    imperative. He expresses it in yet another form: “Act from maxims
    fit to be regarded as universal laws of nature.” For expositions
    of the Decalogue which bring out its spiritual meaning, see Kurtz,
    Religionslehre, 9-72; Dick, Theology, 2:513-554; Dwight, Theology,
    3:163-560; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 3:259-465.


B. Ceremonial or special injunctions.—These are illustrations of the
elemental law, or approximate revelations of it, suited to lower degrees
of capacity and to earlier stages of spiritual training (Ez. 20:25; Mat.
19:8; Mark 10:5). Though temporary, only God can say when they cease to be
binding upon us in their outward form.

All positive enactments, therefore, whether they be moral or ceremonial,
are republications of elemental law. Their forms may change, but the
substance is eternal. Certain modes of expression, like the Mosaic system,
may be abolished, but the essential demands are unchanging (Mat. 5:17, 18;
cf. Eph. 2:15). From the imperfection of human language, no positive
enactments are able to express in themselves the whole content and meaning
of the elemental law. “It is not the purpose of revelation to disclose the
whole of our duties.” Scripture is not a complete code of rules for
practical action, but an enunciation of principles, with occasional
precepts by way of illustration. Hence we must supplement the positive
enactment by the law of being—the moral ideal found in the nature of God.


    _Ez. 20:25_—“_Moreover also I gave them statutes that were not
    good, and ordinances wherein they should not live_”; _Mat.
    19:8_—“_Moses for your hardness of heart suffered you to put away
    your wives_”; _Mark 10:5_—“_For your hardness of heart he wrote
    you this commandment_”; _Mat. 5:17, 18_—“_Think not that I came to
    destroy the law or the prophets: I came not to destroy, but to
    fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass
    away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from the
    law, till all things be accomplished_”; _cf._ _Eph. 2:15_—“_having
    abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments
    contained in ordinances_”; _Heb. 8:7_—“_if that first covenant had
    been faultless, then would no place have been sought for a
    second._” Fisher, Nature and Method of Revelation, 90—“After the
    coming of the new covenant, the keeping up of the old was as
    needless a burden as winter garments in the mild air of summer, or
    as the attempt of an adult to wear the clothes of a child.”

    Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:5-35—“Jesus repudiates for himself and
    for his disciples absolute subjection to O. T. Sabbath law (_Mark
    2:27_ _sq._); to O. T. law as to external defilements (_Mark
    7:15_); to O. T. divorce law (_Mark 10:2_ _sq._). He would
    ‘_fulfil_’ law and prophets by complete practical performance of
    the revealed will of God. He would bring out their inner meaning,
    not by literal and slavish obedience to every minute requirement
    of the Mosaic law, but by revealing in himself the perfect life
    and work toward which they tended. He would perfect the O. T.
    conceptions of God—not keep them intact in their literal form, but
    in their essential spirit. Not by quantitative extension, but by
    qualitative renewal, he would fulfil the law and the prophets. He
    would bring the imperfect expression in the O. T. to perfection,
    not by servile letter-worship or allegorizing, but through grasp
    of the divine idea.”

    Scripture is not a series of minute injunctions and prohibitions
    such as the Pharisees and the Jesuits laid down. The Koran showed
    its immeasurable inferiority to the Bible by establishing the
    letter instead of the spirit, by giving permanent, definite, and
    specific rules of conduct, instead of leaving room for the growth
    of the free spirit and for the education of conscience. This is
    not true either of O. T. or of N. T. law. In Miss Fowler’s novel
    The Farringdons, Mrs. Herbert wishes “that the Bible had been
    written on the principle of that dreadful little book called
    ‘Don’t,’ which gives a list of the solecisms you should avoid; she
    would have understood it so much better than the present system.”
    Our Savior’s words about giving to him that asketh, and turning
    the cheek to the smiter (_Mat 5:39-42_) must be interpreted by the
    principle of love that lies at the foundation of the law. Giving
    to every tramp and yielding to every marauder is not pleasing our
    neighbor “_for that which is good unto edifying_” (_Rom. 15:2_).
    Only by confounding the divine law with Scripture prohibition
    could one write as in N. Amer. Rev., Feb. 1890:275—“Sin is the
    transgression of a divine law; but there is no divine law against
    suicide; therefore suicide is not sin.”

    The written law was imperfect because God could, at the time, give
    no higher to an unenlightened people. “But to say that the _scope_
    and _design_ were imperfectly moral, is contradicted by the whole
    course of the history. We must ask what is the moral standard in
    which this course of education issues.” And this we find in the
    life and precepts of Christ. Even the law of repentance and faith
    does not take the place of the old law of being, but applies the
    latter to the special conditions of sin. Under the Levitical law,
    the prohibition of the touching of the dry bone (_Num. 19:16_),
    equally with the purifications and sacrifices, the separations and
    penalties of the Mosaic code, expressed God’s holiness and his
    repelling from him all that savored of sin or death. The laws with
    regard to leprosy were symbolic, as well as sanitary. So church
    polity and the ordinances are not arbitrary requirements, but they
    publish to dull sense-environed consciences, better than abstract
    propositions could have done, the fundamental truths of the
    Christian scheme. Hence they are not to be abrogated “_till he
    come_” (_1 Cor. 11:26_).

    The Puritans, however, in reënacting the Mosaic code, made the
    mistake of confounding the eternal law of God with a partial,
    temporary, and obsolete expression of it. So we are not to rest in
    external precepts respecting woman’s hair and dress and speech,
    but to find the underlying principle of modesty and subordination
    which alone is of universal and eternal validity. Robert Browning,
    The Ring and the Book, 1:255—“God breathes, not speaks, his
    verdicts, felt not heard—Passed on successively to each court, I
    call Man’s conscience, custom, manners, all that make More and
    more effort to promulgate, mark God’s verdict in determinable
    words, Till last come human jurists—solidify Fluid results,—what’s
    fixable lies forged, Statute,—the residue escapes in fume, Yet
    hangs aloft a cloud, as palpable To the finer sense as word the
    legist welds. Justinian’s Pandects only make precise What simply
    sparkled in men’s eyes before, Twitched in their brow or quivered
    on their lip, Waited the speech they called, but would not come.”
    See Mozley, Ruling Ideas in Early Ages, 104; Tulloch, Doctrine of
    Sin, 141-144; Finney, Syst. Theol., 1-40, 135-319; Mansel,
    Metaphysics, 378, 379; H. B. Smith, System of Theology, 191-195.

    Paul’s injunction to women to keep silence in the churches (_1
    Cor. 14:35_; _1 Tim. 2:11,12_) is to be interpreted by the larger
    law of gospel equality and privilege (_Col. 3:11_). Modesty and
    subordination once required a seclusion of the female sex which is
    no longer obligatory. Christianity has emancipated woman and has
    restored her to the dignity which belonged to her at the
    beginning. “In the old dispensation Miriam and Deborah and Huldah
    were recognized as leaders of God’s people, and Anna was a notable
    prophetess in the temple courts at the time of the coming of
    Christ. Elizabeth and Mary spoke songs of praise for all
    generations. A prophecy of _Joel 2:28_ was that the daughters of
    the Lord’s people should prophesy, under the guidance of the
    Spirit, in the new dispensation. Philip the evangelist had ‘_four
    virgin daughters, who prophesied_’ (_Acts 21:9_), and Paul
    cautioned Christian women to have their heads covered when they
    prayed or prophesied in public (_1 Cor. 11:5_), but had no words
    against the work of such women. He brought Priscilla with him to
    Ephesus, where she aided in training Apollos into better preaching
    power (_Acts 18:26_). He welcomed and was grateful for the work of
    those women who labored with him in the gospel at Philippi (_Phil.
    4:3_). And it is certainly an inference from the spirit and
    teachings of Paul that we should rejoice in the efficient service
    and sound words of Christian women to-day in the Sunday School and
    in the missionary field.” The command “_And he that heareth let
    him say, Come_” (_Rev. 22:17_) is addressed to women also. See
    Ellen Batelle Dietrick, Women in the Early Christian Ministry;
    _per contra_, see G. F. Wilkin, Prophesying of Women, 183-193.


III. Relation of the Law to the Grace of God.


In human government, while law is an expression of the will of the
governing power, and so of the nature lying behind the will, it is by no
means an exhaustive expression of that will and nature, since it consists
only of general ordinances, and leaves room for particular acts of command
through the executive, as well as for “the institution of equity, the
faculty of discretionary punishment, and the prerogative of pardon.”


    Amos, Science of Law, 29-46, shows how “the institution of equity,
    the faculty of discretionary punishment, and the prerogative of
    pardon” all involve expressions of will above and beyond what is
    contained in mere statute. Century Dictionary, on Equity: “English
    law had once to do only with property in goods, houses and lands.
    A man who had none of these might have an interest in a salary, a
    patent, a contract, a copyright, a security, but a creditor could
    not at common law levy upon these. When the creditor applied to
    the crown for redress, a chancellor or keeper of the king’s
    conscience was appointed, who determined what and how the debtor
    should pay. Often the debtor was required to put his intangible
    property into the hands of a receiver and could regain possession
    of it only when the claim against it was satisfied. These
    chancellors’ courts were called courts of equity, and redressed
    wrongs which the common law did not provide for. In later times
    law and equity are administered for the most part by the same
    courts. The same court sits at one time as a court of law, and at
    another time as a court of equity.” “Summa lex, summa injuria,” is
    sometimes true.


Applying now to the divine law this illustration drawn from human law, we
remark:

(_a_) The law of God is a _general_ expression of God’s will, applicable
to all moral beings. It therefore does not include the possibility of
special injunctions to individuals, and special acts of wisdom and power
in creation and providence. The very specialty of these latter expressions
of will prevents us from classing them under the category of law.


    Lord Bacon, Confession of Faith: “The soul of man was not produced
    by heaven or earth, but was breathed immediately from God; so the
    ways and dealings of God with spirits are not included in nature,
    that is, in the laws of heaven and earth, but are reserved to the
    law of his secret will and grace.”


(_b_) The law of God, accordingly, is a _partial_, not an exhaustive,
expression of God’s nature. It constitutes, indeed, a manifestation of
that attribute of holiness which is fundamental in God, and which man must
possess in order to be in harmony with God. But it does not fully express
God’s nature in its aspects of personality, sovereignty, helpfulness,
mercy.


    The chief error of all pantheistic theology is the assumption that
    law is an exhaustive expression of God: Strauss, Glaubenslehre,
    1:31—“If nature, as the self-realization of the divine essence, is
    equal to this divine essence, then it is infinite, and there can
    be nothing above and beyond it.” This is a denial of the
    transcendence of God (see notes on Pantheism, pages 100-105). Mere
    law is illustrated by the Buddhist proverb: “As the cartwheel
    follows the tread of the ox, so punishment follows sin.” Denovan:
    “Apart from Christ, even if we have never yet broken the law, it
    is only by steady and perfect obedience for the entire future that
    we can remain justified. If we have sinned, we can be justified
    [without Christ] only by suffering and exhausting the whole
    penalty of the law.”


(_c_) Mere law, therefore, leaves God’s nature in these aspects of
personality, sovereignty, helpfulness, mercy, to be expressed toward
sinners in another way, namely, through the atoning, regenerating,
pardoning, sanctifying work of the gospel of Christ. As creation does not
exclude miracles, so law does not exclude grace (Rom. 8:3—“what the law
could not do ... God” did).


    Murphy, Scientific Bases, 303-327, esp. 315—“To impersonal law, it
    is indifferent whether its subjects obey or not. But God desires,
    not the punishment, but the destruction, of sin.” Campbell,
    Atonement, Introd., 28—“There are two regions of the divine
    self-manifestation, one the reign of law, the other the kingdom of
    God.” C. H. M.: “Law is the transcript of the mind of God as to
    what man ought to be. But God is not merely law, but love. There
    is more in his heart than could be wrapped up in the ‘ten words.’
    Not the law, but only Christ, is the perfect image of God” (_John
    1:17_—“_For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came
    through Jesus Christ_”). So there is more in man’s heart toward
    God than exact fulfilment of requirement. The mother who
    sacrifices herself for her sick child does it, not because she
    must, but because she loves. To say that we are saved by grace, is
    to say that we are saved both without merit on our own part, and
    without necessity on the part of God. Grace is made known in
    proclamation, offer, command; but in all these it is gospel, or
    glad-tidings.


(_d_) Grace is to be regarded, however, not as abrogating law, but as
republishing and enforcing it (Rom. 3:31—“we establish the law”). By
removing obstacles to pardon in the mind of God, and by enabling man to
obey, grace secures the perfect fulfilment of law (Rom. 8:4—“that the
ordinance of the law might be fulfilled in us”). Even grace has its law
(Rom. 8:2—“the law of the Spirit of life”); another higher law of grace,
the operation of individualizing mercy, overbears the “law of sin and of
death,”—this last, as in the case of the miracle, not being suspended,
annulled, or violated, but being merged in, while it is transcended by,
the exertion of personal divine will.


    Hooker, Eccl. Polity, 1:155, 185, 194—“Man, having utterly
    disabled his nature unto those [natural] means, hath had other
    revealed by God, and hath received from heaven a law to teach him
    how that which is desired naturally, must now be supernaturally
    attained. Finally, we see that, because those latter exclude not
    the former as unnecessary, therefore the law of grace teaches and
    includes natural duties also, such as are hard to ascertain by the
    law of nature.” The truth is midway between the Pelagian view,
    that there is no obstacle to the forgiveness of sins, and the
    modern rationalistic view, that since law fully expresses God,
    there can be no forgiveness of sins at all. Greg, Creed of
    Christendom, 2:217-228—“God is the only being who cannot forgive
    sins.... Punishment is not the execution of a sentence, but the
    occurrence of an effect.” Robertson, Lect. on Genesis, 100—“Deeds
    are irrevocable,—their consequences are knit up with them
    irrevocably.” So Baden Powell, Law and Gospel, in Noyes’
    Theological Essays, 27. All this is true if God be regarded as
    merely the source of law. But there is such a thing as grace, and
    grace is more than law. There is no forgiveness in nature, but
    grace is above and beyond nature.

    Bradford, Heredity, 233, quotes from Huxley the terrible
    utterance: “Nature always checkmates, without haste and without
    remorse, never overlooking a mistake, or making the slightest
    allowance for ignorance.” Bradford then remarks: “This is
    Calvinism with God left out. Christianity does not deny or
    minimize the law of retribution, but it discloses a Person who is
    able to deliver in spite of it. There is grace, but grace brings
    salvation to those who accept the terms of salvation—terms
    strictly in accord with the laws revealed by science.” God
    revealed himself, we add, not only in law but in life; see _Deut.
    1:6, 7_—“_Ye have dwelt long enough in this mountain_”—the
    mountain of the law; “_turn you and take your journey_”—_i. e._,
    see how God’s law is to be applied to life.


(_e_) Thus the revelation of grace, while it takes up and includes in
itself the revelation of law, adds something different in kind, namely,
the manifestation of the personal love of the Lawgiver. Without grace, law
has only a demanding aspect. Only in connection with grace does it become
“the perfect law, the law of liberty” (James 1:25). In fine, grace is that
larger and completer manifestation of the divine nature, of which law
constitutes the necessary but preparatory stage.


    Law reveals God’s love and mercy, but only in their mandatory
    aspect; it requires in men conformity to the love and mercy of
    God; and as love and mercy in God are conditioned by holiness, so
    law requires that love and mercy should be conditioned by holiness
    in men. Law is therefore chiefly a revelation of holiness: it is
    in grace that we find the chief revelation of love; though even
    love does not save by ignoring holiness, but rather by vicariously
    satisfying its demands. Robert Browning, Saul: “I spoke as I saw.
    I report as man may of God’s work—All’s Love, yet all’s Law.”

    Dorner, Person of Christ, 1:64, 78—“The law was a word (λόγος),
    but it was not a λόγος τέλειος, a plastic word, like the words of
    God that brought forth the world, for it was only imperative, and
    there was no reality nor willing corresponding to the command
    (_dem Sollen fehlte das Seyn, das Wollen_). The Christian λόγος is
    λόγος ἀληθειας—νόμος τέλειος τῆς ἐλευθερίας—an operative and
    effective word, as that of creation.” Chaucer, The Persones Tale:
    “For sothly the lawe of God is the love of God.” S. S. Times,
    Sept. 14, 1901:595—“Until a man ceases to be an outsider to the
    kingdom and knows the liberty of the sons of God, he is apt to
    think of God as the great Exacter, the great Forbidder, who reaps
    where he has not sown and gathers where he has not strewn.”
    Burton, in Bap. Rev., July, 1879:261-273, art.: Law and Divine
    Intervention; Farrar, Science and Theology, 184; Salmon, Reign of
    Law; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 1:31.



Section II.—Nature Of Sin.


I. Definition of Sin.


Sin is lack of conformity to the moral law of God, either in act,
disposition, or state.

In explanation, we remark that (_a_) This definition regards sin as
predicable only of rational and voluntary agents. (_b_) It assumes,
however, that man has a rational nature below consciousness, and a
voluntary nature apart from actual volition. (_c_) It holds that the
divine law requires moral likeness to God in the affections and tendencies
of the nature, as well as in its outward activities. (_d_) It therefore
considers lack of conformity to the divine holiness in disposition or
state as a violation of law, equally with the outward act of
transgression.


    In our discussion of the Will (pages 504-513), we noticed that
    there are permanent states of the will, as well as of the
    intellect and of the sensibilities. It is evident, moreover, that
    these permanent states, unlike man’s deliberate acts, are always
    very imperfectly conscious, and in many cases are not conscious at
    all. Yet it is in these very states that man is most unlike God,
    and so, as law only reflects God (see pages 537-544), most lacking
    in conformity to God’s law.

    One main difference between Old School and New School views of sin
    is that the latter constantly tends to limit sin to mere act,
    while the former finds sin in the states of the soul. We propose
    what we think to be a valid and proper compromise between the two.
    We make sin coëxtensive, not with act, but with activity. The Old
    School and the New School are not so far apart, when we remember
    that the New School “choice” is _elective preference_, exercised
    so soon as the child is born (Park) and reasserting itself in all
    the subordinate choices of life; while the Old School “state” is
    not a dead, passive, mechanical thing, but is a _state of active
    movement_, or of tendency to move, toward evil. As God’s holiness
    is not passive purity but purity willing (pages 268-275), so the
    opposite to this, sin, is not passive impurity but is impurity
    willing.

    The soul may not always be conscious, but it may always be active.
    At his creation man “_became a living soul_” (_Gen. 2:7_), and it
    may be doubted whether the human spirit ever ceases its activity,
    any more than the divine Spirit in whose image it is made. There
    is some reason to believe that even in the deepest sleep the body
    rests rather than the mind. And when we consider how large a
    portion of our activity is automatic and continuous, we see the
    impossibility of limiting the term “sin” to the sphere of
    momentary act, whether conscious or unconscious.

    E. G. Robinson: “Sin is not mere act—something foreign to the
    being. It is a quality of being. There is no such thing as a sin
    apart from a sinner, or an act apart from an actor. God punishes
    sinners, not sins. Sin is a mode of being; as an entity by itself
    it never existed. God punishes sin as a state, not as an act. Man
    is not responsible for the consequences of his crimes, nor for the
    acts themselves, except as they are symptomatic of his personal
    states.” Dorner, Hist. Doct. Person Christ, 5:162—“The knowledge
    of sin has justly been termed the β and ψ of philosophy.”


Our treatment of Holiness, as belonging to the nature of God (pages
268-275); of Will, as not only the faculty of volitions, but also a
permanent state of the soul (pages 504-513); and of Law as requiring the
conformity of man’s nature to God’s holiness (pages 537-544); has prepared
us for the definition of sin as a state. The chief psychological defect of
New School theology, next to its making holiness to be a mere form of
love, is its ignoring of the unconscious and subconscious elements in
human character. To help our understanding of sin as an underlying and
permanent state of the soul, we subjoin references to recent writers of
note upon psychology and its relations to theology.


    We may preface our quotations by remarking that mind is always
    greater than its conscious operations. The man is more than his
    acts. Only the smallest part of the self is manifested in the
    thoughts, feelings, and volitions. In counting, to put myself to
    sleep, I find, when my attention has been diverted by other
    thoughts, that the counting has gone on all the same. Ladd,
    Philosophy of Mind, 176, speaks of the “dramatic sundering of the
    ego.” There are dream-conversations. Dr. Johnson was once greatly
    vexed at being worsted by his opponent in an argument in a dream.
    M. Maury in a dream corrected the bad English of his real self by
    the good English of his other unreal self. Spurgeon preached a
    sermon in his sleep after vainly trying to excogitate one when
    awake, and his wife gave him the substance of it after he woke.
    Hegel said that “Life is divided into two realms—a night-life of
    genius, and a day-life of consciousness.”

    Du Prel, Philosophy of Mysticism, propounds the thesis: “The ego
    is not wholly embraced in self-consciousness,” and claims that
    there is much of psychical activity within us of which our common
    waking conception of ourselves takes no account. Thus when “dream
    dramatizes”—when we engage in a dream-conversation in which our
    interlocutor’s answer comes to us with a shock of surprise—if our
    own mind is assumed to have furnished that answer, it has done so
    by a process of unconscious activity. Dwinell, in Bib. Sac., July,
    1890:369-389—“The soul is only imperfectly in possession of its
    organs, and is able to report only a small part of its activities
    in consciousness.” Thoughts come to us like foundlings laid at our
    door. We slip in a question to the librarian, Memory, and after
    leaving it there awhile the answer appears on the bulletin board.
    Delbœuf, Le Sommeil et les Rêves, 91—“The dreamer is a momentary
    and involuntary dupe of his own imagination, as the poet is the
    momentary and voluntary dupe, and the insane man is the permanent
    and involuntary dupe.” If we are the organs not only of our own
    past thinking, but, as Herbert Spencer suggests, also the organs
    of the past thinking of the race, his doctrine may give
    additional, though unintended, confirmation to a Scriptural view
    of sin.

    William James, Will to Believe, 316, quotes from F. W. H. Myers,
    in Jour. Psych. Research, who likens our ordinary consciousness to
    the visible part of the solar spectrum; the total consciousness is
    like that spectrum prolonged by the inclusion of the ultra-red and
    the ultra-violet rays—1 to 12 and 96. “Each of us,” he says, “is
    an abiding psychical entity far more extensive than he knows—an
    individuality which can never express itself completely through
    any corporeal manifestation. The self manifests itself through the
    organism; but there is always some part of the self unmanifested,
    and always, as it seems, some power of organic expression in
    abeyance or reserve.” William James himself, in Scribner’s
    Monthly, March, 1890:361-373, sketches the hypnotic investigations
    of Janet and Binet. There is a secondary, subconscious self.
    Hysteria is the lack of synthetising power, and consequent
    disintegration of the field of consciousness into mutually
    exclusive parts. According to Janet, the secondary and the primary
    consciousnesses, added together, can never exceed the normally
    total consciousness of the individual. But Prof. James says:
    “There are trances which obey another type. I know a
    non-hysterical woman, who in her trances knows facts which
    altogether transcend her possible normal consciousness, facts
    about the lives of people whom she never saw or heard of before.”

    Our affections are deeper and stronger than we know. We learn how
    deep and strong they are, when their current is resisted by
    affliction or dammed up by death. We know how powerful evil
    passions are, only when we try to subdue them. Our dreams show us
    our naked selves. On the morality of dreams, the London Spectator
    remarks: “Our conscience and power of self-control act as a sort
    of watchdog over our worse selves during the day, but when the
    watchdog is off duty, the primitive or natural man is at liberty
    to act as he pleases; our ‘soul’ has left us at the mercy of our
    own evil nature, and in our dreams we become what, except for the
    grace of God, we would always be.”

    Both in conscience and in will there is a self-diremption. Kant’s
    categorical imperative is only one self laying down the law to the
    other self. The whole Kantian system of ethics is based on this
    doctrine of double consciousness. Ladd, in his Philosophy of Mind,
    169 _sq._, speaks of “psychical automatism.” Yet this automatism
    is possible only to self-conscious and cognitively remembering
    minds. It is always the “I” that puts itself into “that other.” We
    could not conceive of the other self except under the figure of
    the “I.” All our mental operations are ours, and we are
    responsible for them, because the subconscious and even the
    unconscious self is the product of past self-conscious thoughts
    and volitions. The present settled state of our wills is the
    result of former decisions. The will is a storage battery, charged
    by past acts, full of latent power, ready to manifest its energy
    so soon as the force which confines it is withdrawn. On
    unconscious mental action, see Carpenter, Mental Physiology, 139,
    515-543, and criticism of Carpenter, in Ireland, Blot on the
    Brain, 226-238; Bramwell, Hypnotism, its History, Practice and
    Theory, 358-398; Porter, Human Intellect, 333, 334; _versus_ Sir
    Wm. Hamilton, who adopts the maxim: “Non sentimus, nisi sentiamus
    nos sentire” (Philosophy, ed. Wight, 171). Observe also that sin
    may infect the body, as well as the soul, and may bring it into a
    state of non-conformity to God’s law (see H. B. Smith, Syst.
    Theol., 267).


In adducing our Scriptural and rational proof of the definition of sin as
a state, we desire to obviate the objection that this view leaves the soul
wholly given over to the power of evil. While we maintain that this is
true of man apart from God, we also insist that side by side with the evil
bent of the human will there is always an immanent divine power which
greatly counteracts the force of evil, and if not resisted leads the
individual soul—even when resisted leads the race at large—toward truth
and salvation. This immanent divine power is none other than Christ, the
eternal Word, the Light which lighteth every man; see John 1:4, 9.


    _John 1:4, 9_—“_In him was life, and the life was the light of
    men.... There was the true light, even the light which lighteth
    every man._” See a further statement in A. H. Strong, Cleveland
    Sermon, May, 1904, with regard to the old and the new view as to
    sin:—“Our fathers believed in total depravity, and we agree with
    them that man naturally is devoid of love to God and that every
    faculty is weakened, disordered, and corrupted by the selfish bent
    of his will. They held to original sin. The selfish bent of man’s
    will can be traced back to the apostacy of our first parents; and,
    on account of that departure of the race from God, all men are by
    nature children of wrath. And all this is true, if it is regarded
    as a statement of the facts, apart from their relation to Christ.
    But our fathers did not see, as we do, that man’s relation to
    Christ antedated the Fall and constituted an underlying and
    modifying condition of man’s life. Humanity was naturally in
    Christ, in whom all things were created and in whom they all
    consist. Even man’s sin did not prevent Christ from still working
    in him to counteract the evil and to suggest the good. There was
    an internal, as well as an external, preparation for man’s
    redemption. In this sense, of a divine principle in man striving
    against the selfish and godless will, there was a total
    redemption, over against man’s total depravity; and an original
    grace, that was even more powerful than original sin.

    “We have become conscious that total depravity alone is not a
    sufficient or proper expression of the truth; and the phrase has
    been outgrown. It has been felt that the old view of sin did not
    take account of the generous and noble aspirations, the unselfish
    efforts, the strivings after God, of even unregenerate men. For
    this reason there has been less preaching about sin, and less
    conviction as to its guilt and condemnation. The good impulses of
    men outside the Christian pale have been often credited to human
    nature, when they should have been credited to the indwelling
    Spirit of Christ. I make no doubt that one of our radical
    weaknesses at this present time is our more superficial view of
    sin. Without some sense of sin’s guilt and condemnation, we cannot
    feel our need of redemption. John the Baptist must go before
    Christ; the law must prepare the way for the gospel.

    “My belief is that the new apprehension of Christ’s relation to
    the race will enable us to declare, as never before, the lost
    condition of the sinner; while at the same time we show him that
    Christ is with him and in him to save. This presence in every man
    of a power not his own that works for righteousness is a very
    different doctrine from that ’divinity of man’ which is so often
    preached. The divinity is not the divinity of man, but the
    divinity of Christ. And the power that works for righteousness is
    not the power of man, but the power of Christ. It is a power whose
    warning, inviting, persuading influence renders only more marked
    and dreadful the evil will which hampers and resists it. Depravity
    is all the worse, when we recognize in it the constant antagonist
    of an ever-present, all-holy, and all-loving Redeemer.”


1. Proof.


As it is readily admitted that the outward act of transgression is
properly denominated sin, we here attempt to show only that lack of
conformity to the law of God in disposition or state is also and equally
to be so denominated.

A. From Scripture.

(_a_) The words ordinarily translated “sin,” or used as synonyms for it,
are as applicable to dispositions and states as to acts (חטאה and ἁμαρτία
= a missing, failure, coming short [_sc._ of God’s will]).


    See _Num. 15:28_—“_sinneth unwittingly_”; _Ps. 51:2_—“_cleanse me
    from my sin_”; _5_—“_Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity; And
    in sin did my mother conceive me_”; _Rom. 7:17_—“_sin which
    dwelleth in me_”; compare _Judges 20:16_, where the literal
    meaning of the word appears: “_sling stones at a hair-breadth, and
    not miss_” (חטא). In a similar manner, משע [LXX ἀσέβεια] =
    separation from, rebellion against [sc. God]; see _Lev. 16:16,
    21_; _cf._ Delitzsch on _Ps. 32:1_. עון [LXX ἀδικία] = bending,
    perversion [sc. of what is right], iniquity; see _Lev. 5:17_;
    _cf._ _John 7:18_. See also the Hebrew רע, רשע, [= ruin,
    confusion], and the Greek ἀποστασία, ἐπιθυμία, ἔχθρα, κακία,
    πονηρία, σάρξ. None of these designations of sin limits it to mere
    act,—most of them more naturally suggest disposition or state.
    Ἁμαρτία implies that man in sin does not reach what he seeks
    therein; sin is a state of delusion and deception (Julius Müller).
    On the words mentioned, see Girdlestone, O. T. Synonyms; Cremer,
    Lexicon N. T. Greek; Present Day Tracts, 5: no. 28, pp. 43-47;
    Trench, N. T. Synonyms, part 2:61, 73.


(b) The New Testament descriptions of sin bring more distinctly to view
the states and dispositions than the outward acts of the soul (1 John
3:4—ἡ ἁμαρτία ἐστὶν ἡ ἀνομία, where ἀνομία =, not “transgression of the
law,” but, as both context and etymology show, “lack of conformity to law”
or “lawlessness”—Rev. Vers.).


    See _1 John 5:17_—“_All unrighteousness is sin_”; _Rom.
    14:23_—“_whatsoever is not of faith is sin_”; _James 4:17_—“_To
    him therefore that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it
    is sin._” Where the sin is that of _not doing_, sin cannot be said
    to consist in _act_. It must then at least be a _state_.


(_c_) Moral evil is ascribed not only to the thoughts and affections, but
to the heart from which they spring (we read of the “evil thoughts” and of
the “evil heart”—Mat. 15:19 and Heb. 3:12).


    See also _Mat. 5:22_—anger in the heart is murder; _28_—impure
    desire is adultery. _Luke 6:45_—“_the evil man out of the evil
    treasure_ [of his heart] _bringeth forth that which is evil._”
    _Heb. 3:12_—“_an evil heart of unbelief_”; _cf._ _Is. 1:5_—“_the
    whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint_”; _Jer. 17:9_—“_The
    heart is deceitful above all things, and it is exceedingly
    corrupt: who can know it?_”—here the sin that cannot be known is
    not sin of act, but sin of the heart. “Below the surface stream,
    shallow and light, Of what we _say_ we feel; below the stream, As
    light, of what we _think_ we feel, there flows, With silent
    current, strong, obscure and deep, The central stream of what we
    feel _indeed_.”


(_d_) The state or condition of the soul which gives rise to wrong desires
and acts is expressly called sin (Rom. 7:8—“Sin ... wrought in me ... all
manner of coveting”).


    _John 8:34_—“_Every one that committeth sin is the bondservant of
    sin_”; _Rom. 7:11, 13, 14, 17, 20_—“_sin ... beguiled me ...
    working death to me ... I am carnal, sold under sin ... sin which
    dwelleth in me._” These representations of sin as a principle or
    state of the soul are incompatible with the definition of it as a
    mere act. John Byrom, 1691-1763: “Think and be careful what thou
    art within, For there is sin in the desire of sin. Think and be
    thankful in a different case, For there is grace in the desire of
    grace.”

    Alexander, Theories of the Will, 85—“In the person of Paul is
    represented the man who has been already justified by faith and
    who is at peace with God. In the 6th chapter of Romans, the
    question is discussed whether such a man is obliged to keep the
    moral law. But in the 7th chapter the question is not, _must_ man
    keep the moral law? but why is he so _incapable_ of keeping the
    moral law? The struggle is thus, not in the soul of the
    unregenerate man who is dead in sin, but in the soul of the
    regenerate man who has been pardoned and is endeavoring to keep
    the law.... In a state of sin the will is determined toward the
    bad; in a state of grace the will is determined toward
    righteousness; but not wholly so, for the flesh is not at once
    subdued, and there is a war between the good and bad principles of
    action in the soul of him who has been pardoned.”


(_e_) Sin is represented as existing in the soul, prior to the
consciousness of it, and as only discovered and awakened by the law (Rom.
7:9, 10—“when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died”—if sin
“revived,” it must have had previous existence and life, even though it
did not manifest itself in acts of conscious transgression).


    _Rom. 7:8_—“_apart from the law sin is dead_”—here is sin which is
    not yet sin of act. Dead or unconscious sin is still sin. The fire
    in a cave discovers reptiles and stirs them, but they were there
    before; the light and heat do not create them. Let a beam of
    light, says Jean Paul Richter, through your window-shutter into a
    darkened room, and you reveal a thousand motes floating in the air
    whose existence was before unsuspected. So the law of God reveals
    our “_hidden faults_” (_Ps. 19:12_)—infirmities, imperfections,
    evil tendencies and desires—which also cannot all be classed as
    _acts_ of transgression.


(_f_) The allusions to sin as a permanent power or reigning principle, not
only in the individual but in humanity at large, forbid us to define it as
a momentary act, and compel us to regard it as being primarily a settled
depravity of nature, of which individual sins or acts of transgression are
the workings and fruits (Rom. 5:21—“sin reigned in death”; 6:12—“let not
therefore sin reign in your mortal body”).


    In _Rom. 5:21_, the reign of sin is compared to the reign of
    grace. As grace is not an act but a principle, so sin is not an
    act but a principle. As the poisonous exhalations from a well
    indicate that there is corruption and death at the bottom, so the
    ever-recurring thoughts and acts of sin are evidence that there is
    a principle of sin in the heart,—in other words, that sin exists
    as a permanent disposition or state. A momentary act cannot
    “reign” nor “dwell”; a disposition or state can. Maudsley, Sleep,
    its Psychology, makes the damaging confession: “If we were held
    responsible for our dreams, there is no living man who would not
    deserve to be hanged.”


(_g_) The Mosaic sacrifices for sins of ignorance and of omission, and
especially for general sinfulness, are evidence that sin is not to be
limited to mere act, but that it includes something deeper and more
permanent in the heart and the life (Lev. 1:3; 5:11; 12:8; _cf._ Luke
2:24).


    The sin-offering for sins of ignorance (_Lev. 4:14, 20, 31_), the
    trespass-offering for sins of omission (_Lev. 5:5, 6_), and the
    burnt offering to expiate general sinfulness (_Lev. 1:3_; _cf._
    _Luke 2:22-24_), all witness that sin is not confined to mere act.
    _John 1:29_—“_the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin,_” not the
    sins, “_of the world_”. See Oehler, O. T. Theology, 1:233; Schmid,
    Bib. Theol. N. T., 194, 381, 442, 448, 492, 604; Philippi,
    Glaubenslehre, 3:210-217; Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin,
    2:259-306; Edwards, Works. 3:16-18. For the New School definition
    of sin, see Fitch, Nature of Sin, and Park, in Bib. Sac., 7:551.


B. From the common judgment of mankind.

(_a_) Men universally attribute vice as well as virtue not only to
conscious and deliberate acts, but also to dispositions and states. Belief
in something more permanently evil than acts of transgression is indicated
in the common phrases, “hateful temper,” “wicked pride,” “bad character.”


    As the beatitudes (_Mat. 5:1-12_) are pronounced, not upon acts,
    but upon dispositions of the soul, so the curses of the law are
    uttered not so much against single acts of transgression as
    against the evil affections from which they spring. Compare the
    “_works of the flesh_” (_Gal. 5:19_) with the “_fruit of the
    Spirit_” (_5:22_). In both, dispositions and states predominate.


(_b_) Outward acts, indeed, are condemned only when they are regarded as
originating in, and as symptomatic of, evil dispositions. Civil law
proceeds upon this principle in holding crime to consist, not alone in the
external act, but also in the evil motive or intent with which it is
performed.


    The _mens rea_ is essential to the idea of crime. The
    “_idle-word_” (_Mat 12:36_) shall be brought into the judgment,
    not because it is so important in itself, but because it is a
    floating straw that indicates the direction of the whole current
    of the heart and life. Murder differs from homicide, not in any
    outward respect, but simply because of the motive that prompts
    it,—and that motive is always, in the last analysis, an evil
    disposition or state.


(_c_) The stronger an evil disposition, or in other words, the more it
connects itself with, or resolves itself into, a settled state or
condition of the soul, the more blameworthy is it felt to be. This is
shown by the distinction drawn between crimes of passion and crimes of
deliberation.


    Edwards: “Guilt consists in having one’s heart wrong, and in doing
    wrong from the heart.” There is guilt in evil desires, even when
    the will combats them. But there is greater guilt when the will
    consents. The outward act may be in each case the same, but the
    guilt of it is proportioned to the extent to which the evil
    disposition is settled and strong.


(_d_) This condemning sentence remains the same, even although the origin
of the evil disposition or state cannot be traced back to any conscious
act of the individual. Neither the general sense of mankind, nor the civil
law in which this general sense is expressed, goes behind the fact of an
existing evil will. Whether this evil will is the result of personal
transgression or is a hereditary bias derived from generations passed,
this evil will is the man himself, and upon him terminates the blame. We
do not excuse arrogance or sensuality upon the ground that they are family
traits.


    The young murderer in Boston was not excused upon the ground of a
    congenitally cruel disposition. We repent in later years of sins
    of boyhood, which we only now see to be sins; and converted
    cannibals repent, after becoming Christians, of the sins of
    heathendom which they once committed without a thought of their
    wickedness. The peacock cannot escape from his feet by flying, nor
    can we absolve ourselves from blame for an evil state of will by
    tracing its origin to a remote ancestry. We are responsible for
    what we are. How this can be, when we have not personally and
    consciously originated it, is the problem of original sin, which
    we have yet to discuss.


(_e_) When any evil disposition has such strength in itself, or is so
combined with others, as to indicate a settled moral corruption in which
no power to do good remains, this state is regarded with the deepest
disapprobation of all. Sin weakens man’s power of obedience, but the
can-not is a will-not, and is therefore condemnable. The opposite
principle would lead to the conclusion that, the more a man weakened his
powers by transgression, the less guilty he would be, until absolute
depravity became absolute innocence.


    The boy who hates his father cannot change his hatred into love by
    a single act of will; but he is not therefore innocent.
    Spontaneous and uncontrollable profanity is the worst profanity of
    all. It is a sign that the whole will, like a subterranean
    Kentucky river, is moving away from God, and that no recuperative
    power is left in the soul which can reach into the depths to
    reverse its course. See Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:110-114; Shedd,
    Hist. Doct., 2:79-92, 152-157; Richards, Lectures on Theology,
    256-301; Edwards, Works, 2:134; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 243-262;
    Princeton Essays, 2:224-239; Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 394.


C. From the experience of the Christian.

Christian experience is a testing of Scripture truth, and therefore is not
an independent source of knowledge. It may, however, corroborate
conclusions drawn from the word of God. Since the judgment of the
Christian is formed under the influence of the Holy Spirit, we may trust
this more implicitly than the general sense of the world. We affirm, then,
that just in proportion to his spiritual enlightenment and self-knowledge,
the Christian

(_a_) Regards his outward deviations from God’s law, and his evil
inclinations and desires, as outgrowths and revelations of a depravity of
nature which lies below his consciousness; and

(_b_) Repents more deeply for this depravity of nature, which constitutes
his inmost character and is inseparable from himself, than for what he
merely feels or does.

In proof of these statements we appeal to the biographies and writings of
those in all ages who have been by general consent regarded as most
advanced in spiritual culture and discernment.


    “Intelligentia prima est, ut te noris peccatorem.” Compare David’s
    experience, _Ps. 51:6_—“_Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward
    parts: And in the hidden part thou wilt make me to know
    wisdom_”—with Paul’s experience in _Rom. 7:24_—“_Wretched man that
    I am! who shall deliver me out of the body of this death?_”—with
    Isaiah’s experience (_6:5_), when in the presence of God’s glory
    he uses the words of the leper (_Lev. 13:45_) and calls himself
    “_unclean_,” and with Peter’s experience (_Luke 5:8_) when at the
    manifestation of Christ’s miraculous power he “_fell down at
    Jesus’ __ knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O
    Lord._” So the publican cries: _“__God, be thou merciful to me the
    sinner__”__ (Luke 18:13)_, and Paul calls himself the “_chief_” of
    sinners (_1 Tim. 1:15_). It is evident that in none of these cases
    were there merely single acts of transgression in view; the
    humiliation and self-abhorrence were in view of permanent states
    of depravity. Van Oosterzee: “What we do outwardly is only the
    revelation of our inner nature.” The outcropping and visible rock
    is but small in extent compared with the rock that is underlying
    and invisible. The iceberg has eight-ninths of its mass below the
    surface of the sea, yet icebergs have been seen near Cape Horn
    from 700 to 800 feet high above the water.

    It may be doubted whether any repentance is genuine which is not
    repentance for _sin_ rather than for _sins_; compare _John
    16:8_—the Holy Spirit “_will convict the world in respect of
    sin_/” On the difference between conviction of sins and conviction
    of sin, see Hare, Mission of the Comforter. Dr. A. J. Gordon, just
    before his death, desired to be left alone. He was then overheard
    confessing his sins in such seemingly extravagant terms as to
    excite fear that he was in delirium. Martensen, Dogmatics,
    389—Luther during his early experience “often wrote to Staupitz:
    ‘Oh, my sins, my sins!’ and yet in the confessional he could name
    no sins in particular which he had to confess; so that it was
    clearly a sense of the general depravity of his nature which
    filled his soul with deep sorrow and pain.” Luther’s conscience
    would not accept the comfort that he _wished_ to be without sin,
    and therefore had no real sin. When he thought himself too great a
    sinner to be saved, Staupitz replied: “Would you have the
    semblance of a sinner and the semblance of a Savior?”

    After twenty years of religious experience, Jonathan Edwards wrote
    (Works 1:22, 23; also 3:16-18): “Often since I have lived in this
    town I have had very affecting views of my own sinfulness and
    vileness, very frequently to such a degree as to hold me in a kind
    of loud weeping, sometimes for a considerable time together, so
    that I have been often obliged to shut myself up. I have had a
    vastly greater sense of my own wickedness and the badness of my
    heart than ever I had before my conversion. It has often appeared
    to me that if God should mark iniquity against me, I should appear
    the very worst of all mankind, of all that have been since the
    beginning of the world to this time; and that I should have by far
    the lowest place in hell. When others that have come to talk with
    me about their soul’s concerns have expressed the sense they have
    had of their own wickedness, by saying that it seemed to them they
    were as bad as the devil himself; I thought their expressions
    seemed exceeding faint and feeble to represent my wickedness.”

    Edwards continues: “My wickedness, as I am in myself, has long
    appeared to me perfectly ineffable and swallowing up all thought
    and imagination—like an infinite deluge, or mountains over my
    head. I know not how to express better what my sins appear to me
    to be, than by heaping infinite on infinite and multiplying
    infinite by infinite. Very often for these many years, these
    expressions are in my mind and in my mouth: ‘Infinite upon
    infinite—infinite upon infinite!’ When I look into my heart and
    take a view of my wickedness, it looks like an abyss infinitely
    deeper than hell. And it appears to me that were it not for free
    grace, exalted and raised up to the infinite height of all the
    fulness and glory of the great Jehovah, and the arm of his power
    and grace stretched forth in all the majesty of his power and in
    all the glory of his sovereignty, I should appear sunk down in my
    sins below hell itself, far beyond the sight of everything but the
    eye of sovereign grace that can pierce even down to such a depth.
    And yet it seems to me that my conviction of sin is exceeding
    small and faint; it is enough to amaze me that I have no more
    sense of my sin. I know certainly that I have very little sense of
    my sinfulness. When I have had turns of weeping for my sins, I
    thought I knew at the time that my repentance was nothing to my
    sin.... It is affecting to think how ignorant I was, when a young
    Christian, of the bottomless, infinite depths of wickedness,
    pride, hypocrisy, and deceit left in my heart.”

    Jonathan Edwards was not an ungodly man, but the holiest man of
    his time. He was not an enthusiast, but a man of acute,
    philosophic mind. He was not a man who indulged in exaggerated or
    random statements, for with his power of introspection and
    analysis he combined a faculty and habit of exact expression
    unsurpassed among the sons of men. If the maxim “cuique in arte
    sua credendum est” is of any value, Edwards’s statements in a
    matter of religious experience are to be taken as correct
    interpretations of the facts. H. B. Smith (System. Theol., 275)
    quotes Thomasius as saying: “It is a striking fact in Scripture
    that statements of the depth and power of sin are chiefly from the
    regenerate.” Another has said that “a serpent is never seen at its
    whole length until it is dead.” Thomas à Kempis (ed. Gould and
    Lincoln, 142)—“Do not think that thou hast made any progress
    toward perfection, till thou feelest that thou art less than the
    least of all human beings.” Young’s Night Thoughts: “Heaven’s
    Sovereign saves all beings but himself That hideous sight—a naked
    human heart.”

    Law’s Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life: “You may justly
    condemn yourself for being the greatest sinner that you know, 1.
    Because you know more of the folly of your own heart than of other
    people’s, and can charge yourself with various sins which you know
    only of yourself and cannot be sure that others are guilty of
    them. 2. The greatness of our guilt arises from the greatness of
    God’s goodness to us. You know more of these aggravations of your
    sins than you do of the sins of other people. Hence the greatest
    saints have in all ages condemned themselves as the greatest
    sinners.” We may add: 3. That, since each man is a peculiar being,
    each man is guilty of peculiar sins, and in certain particulars
    and aspects may constitute an example of the enormity and
    hatefulness of sin, such as neither earth nor hell can elsewhere
    show.

    Of Cromwell, as a representative of the Puritans, Green says
    (Short History of the English People, 454): “The vivid sense of
    the divine Purity close to such men, made the life of common men
    seem sin.” Dr. Arnold of Rugby (Life and Corresp., App. D.): “In a
    deep sense of moral evil, more perhaps than anything else, abides
    a saving knowledge of God.” Augustine, on his death-bed, had the
    32d Psalm written over against him on the wall. For his
    expressions with regard to sin, see his Confessions, book 10. See
    also Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 284, note.


2. Inferences.


In the light of the preceding discussion, we may properly estimate the
elements of truth and of error in the common definition of sin as “the
voluntary transgression of known law.”

(_a_) Not all sin is voluntary as being a distinct and conscious volition;
for evil disposition and state often precede and occasion evil volition,
and evil disposition and state are themselves sin. All sin, however, is
voluntary as springing either directly from will, or indirectly from those
perverse affections and desires which have themselves originated in will.
“Voluntary” is a term broader then “volitional,” and includes all those
permanent states of intellect and affection which the will has made what
they are. Will, moreover, is not to be regarded as simply the faculty of
volitions, but as primarily the underlying determination of the being to a
supreme end.


    Will, as we have seen, includes preference (θέλημα, _voluntas_,
    _Wille_) as well as volition (βουλή, _arbitrium_, _Willkür_). We
    do not, with Edwards and Hodge, regard the sensibilities as states
    of the will. They are, however, in their character and their
    objects determined by the will, and so they may be called
    voluntary. The permanent state of the will (New School “elective
    preference”) is to be distinguished from the permanent state of
    the sensibilities (dispositions, or desires). But both are
    voluntary because both are due to past decisions of the will, and
    “whatever springs from will we are responsible for” (Shedd,
    Discourses and Essays, 243). Julius Müller, 2:51—“We speak of
    self-consciousness and reason as something which the ego _has_,
    but we identify the will _with_ the ego. No one would say, ‘my
    will has decided this or that,’ although we do say, ‘my reason, my
    conscience teaches me this or that.’ The will is the very man
    himself, as Augustine says: ‘Voluntas est in omnibus; imo omnes
    nihil aliud quam voluntates sunt.’ ”

    For other statements of the relation of disposition to will, see
    Alexander, Moral Science, 151—“In regard to dispositions, we say
    that they are in a sense voluntary. They properly belong to the
    will, taking the word in a large sense. In judging of the morality
    of voluntary acts, the principle from which they proceed is always
    included in our view and comes in for a large part of the blame”;
    see also pages 201, 207, 208. Edwards on the Affections, 3:1-22;
    on the Will, 3:4—“The affections are only certain modes of the
    exercise of the will.” A. A. Hodge, Outlines of Theology, 234—“All
    sin is voluntary, in the sense that all sin has its root in the
    perverted dispositions, desires, and affections which constitute
    the depraved state of the will.” But to Alexander, Edwards, and
    Hodge, we reply that the first sin was not voluntary in this
    sense, for there was no such depraved state of the will from which
    it could spring. We are responsible for dispositions, not upon the
    ground that they are a part of the will, but upon the ground that
    they are effects of will, in other words, that past decisions of
    the will have made them what they are. See pages 504-513.


(_b_) Deliberate intention to sin is an aggravation of transgression, but
it is not essential to constitute any given act or feeling a sin. Those
evil inclinations and impulses which rise unbidden and master the soul
before it is well aware of their nature, are themselves violations of the
divine law, and indications of an inward depravity which in the case of
each descendant of Adam is the chief and fontal transgression.


    Joseph Cook: “Only the surface-water of the sea is penetrated with
    light. Beneath is a half-lit region. Still further down is
    absolute darkness. We are greater than we know.” Weismann,
    Heredity, 2:8—“At the depth of 170 meters, or 552 feet, there is
    about as much light as that of a starlight night when there is no
    moon. Light penetrates as far as 400 meters, or 1,300 feet, but
    animal life exists at a depth of 4,000 meters, or 13,000 feet.
    Below 1,300 feet, all animals are blind.” (_Cf._ _Ps. 51:6;
    19:12_—“_the inward parts ... the hidden parts ... hidden
    faults_”—hidden not only from others, but even from ourselves.)
    The light of consciousness plays only on the surface of the waters
    of man’s soul.


(_c_) Knowledge of the sinfulness of an act or feeling is also an
aggravation of transgression, but it is not essential to constitute it a
sin. Moral blindness is the effect of transgression, and, as inseparable
from corrupt affections and desires, is itself condemned by the divine
law.


    It is our duty to do better than we know. Our duty of knowing is
    as real as our duty of doing. Sin is an opiate. Some of the most
    deadly diseases do not reveal themselves in the patient’s
    countenance, nor has the patient any adequate understanding of his
    malady. There is an ignorance which is indolence. Men are often
    unwilling to take the trouble of rectifying their standards of
    judgment. There is also an ignorance which is intention. Instance
    many students’ ignorance of College laws.

    We cannot excuse disobedience by saying: “I forgot.” God’s
    commandment is: “_Remember_”—as in _Ex. 20:8_; _cf._ _2 Pet.
    3:5_—“_For this they wilfully forget._” “Ignorantia legis neminem
    excusat.” _Rom. 2:12_—“_as many as have sinned without the law
    shall also perish without the law_”; _Luke 12:48_—“_he that knew
    not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten_ [though]
    _with few stripes._” The aim of revelation and of preaching is to
    bring man “_to himself_” (_cf._ _Luke 15:17_)—to show him what he
    has been doing and what he is. Goethe: “We are never deceived: we
    deceive ourselves.” Royce, World and Individual, 2:359—“The sole
    possible free moral action is then a freedom that relates to the
    present fixing of attention upon the ideas of the Ought which are
    already present. To sin is _consciously to choose to forget_,
    through a narrowing of the field of attention, an Ought that one
    already recognizes.”


(_d_) Ability to fulfill the law is not essential to constitute the
non-fulfilment sin. Inability to fulfill the law is a result of
transgression, and, as consisting not in an original deficiency of faculty
but in a settled state of the affections and will, it is itself
condemnable. Since the law presents the holiness of God as the only
standard for the creature, ability to obey can never be the measure of
obligation or the test of sin.


    Not power to the contrary, in the sense of ability to change all
    our permanent states by mere volition, is the basis of obligation
    and responsibility; for surely Satan’s responsibility does not
    depend upon his power at any moment to turn to God and be holy.

    Definitions of sin—Melanchthon: Defectus vel inclinatio vel actio
    pugnans cum lege Dei. Calvin: Illegalitas, seu difformitas a lege.
    Hollaz: Aberratio a lege divina. Hollaz adds: “Voluntariness does
    not enter into the definition of sin, generically considered. Sin
    may be called voluntary, either in respect to its cause, as it
    inheres in the will, or in respect to the act, as it procedes from
    deliberate volition. Here is the antithesis to the Roman Catholics
    and to the Socinians, the latter of whom define sin as a voluntary
    [_i. e._, a volitional] transgression of law”—a view, says Hase
    (Hutterus Redivivus, 11th ed., 162-164), “which is derived from
    the necessary methods of civil tribunals, and which is
    incompatible with the orthodox doctrine of original sin.” On the
    New School definition of sin, see Fairchild, Nature of Sin, in
    Bib. Sac., 25:30-48; Whedon, in Bib. Sac., 19:251, and On the
    Will, 328. _Per contra_, see Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:180-190;
    Lawrence, Old School in N. E. Theol., in Bib. Sac., 20:317-328;
    Julius Müller, Doc. Sin, 1:40-72; Nitzsch, Christ. Doct., 216;
    Luthardt, Compendium der Dogmatik, 124-126.


II. The Essential Principle of Sin.


The definition of sin as lack of conformity to the divine law does not
exclude, but rather necessitates, an inquiry into the characterizing
motive or impelling power which explains its existence and constitutes its
guilt. Only three views require extended examination. Of these the first
two constitute the most common excuses for sin, although not propounded
for this purpose by their authors: Sin is due (1) to the human body, or
(2) to finite weakness. The third, which we regard as the Scriptural view,
considers sin as (3) the supreme choice of self, or selfishness.

In the preceding section on the Definition of Sin, we showed that sin is a
_state_, and a state of the _will_. We now ask: What is the nature of this
state? and we expect to show that it is essentially a _selfish_ state of
the will.


1. Sin as Sensuousness.


This view regards sin as the necessary product of man’s sensuous nature—a
result of the soul’s connection with a physical organism. This is the view
of Schleiermacher and of Rothe. More recent writers, with John Fiske,
regard moral evil as man’s inheritance from a brute ancestry.


    For statement of the view here opposed, see Schleiermacher, Der
    Christliche Glaube, 1:361-364—“Sin is a prevention of the
    determining power of the spirit, caused by the independence
    (Selbständigkeit) of the sensuous functions.” The child lives at
    first a life of sense, in which the bodily appetites are supreme.
    The senses are the avenues of all temptation, the physical
    domineers over the spiritual, and the soul never shakes off the
    body. Sin is, therefore, a malarious exhalation from the low
    grounds of human nature, or, to use the words of Schleiermacher,
    “a positive opposition of the flesh to the spirit.” Pfleiderer,
    Prot. Theol. seit Kant, 113,—says that Schleiermacher here repeats
    Spinoza’s “inability of the spirit to control the sensuous
    affections.” Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:230—“In the
    development of man out of naturality, the lower impulses have
    already won a power of self-assertion and resistance, before the
    reason could yet come to its valid position and authority. As this
    propensity of the self-will is grounded in the specific nature of
    man, it may be designated as inborn, hereditary, or _original_
    sinfulness.”

    Rothe’s view of sin may be found in his Dogmatik, 1:300-302;
    notice the connection of Rothe’s view of sin with his doctrine of
    continuous creation (see page 416 of this Compendium).
    Encyclopædia Britannica, 21:2—“Rothe was a thorough going
    evolutionist who regarded the natural man as the consummation of
    the development of physical nature, and regarded spirit as the
    personal attainment, with divine help, of those beings in whom the
    further creative process of moral development is carried on. This
    process of development necessarily takes an abnormal form and
    passes through the phase of sin. This abnormal condition
    necessitates a fresh creative act, that of salvation, which was
    however from the very first a part of the divine plan of
    development. Rothe, notwithstanding his evolutionary doctrine,
    believed in the supernatural birth of Christ.”

    John Fiske, Destiny of Man, 103—“Original sin is neither more nor
    less than the brute inheritance which every man carries with him,
    and the process of evolution is an advance toward true salvation.”
    Thus man is a sphynx in whom the human has not yet escaped from
    the animal. So Bowne, Atonement, 69, declares that sin is “a relic
    of the animal not yet outgrown, a resultant of the mechanism of
    appetite and impulse and reflex action for which the proper
    inhibitions are not yet developed. Only slowly does it grow into a
    consciousness of itself as evil.... It would be hysteria to regard
    the common life of men as rooting in a conscious choice of
    unrighteousness.”


In refutation of this view, it will be sufficient to urge the following
considerations:

(_a_) It involves an assumption of the inherent evil of matter, at least
so far as regards the substance of man’s body. But this is either a form
of dualism, and may be met with the objections already brought against
that system, or it implies that God, in being the author of man’s physical
organism, is also the responsible originator of human sin.


    This has been called the “caged-eagle theory” of man’s existence;
    it holds that the body is a prison only, or, as Plato expressed
    it, “the tomb of the soul,” so that the soul can be pure only by
    escaping from the body. But matter is not eternal. God made it,
    and made it pure. The body was made to be the servant of the
    spirit. We must not throw the blame of sin upon the senses, but
    upon the spirit that used the senses so wickedly. To attribute sin
    to the body is to make God, the author of the body, to be also the
    author of sin,—which is the greatest of blasphemies. Men cannot
    “justly accuse Their Maker, or their making, or their fate”
    (Milton, Paradise Lost, 3:112). Sin is a contradiction within the
    spirit itself, and not simply between the spirit and the flesh.
    Sensuous activities are not themselves sinful—this is essential
    Manichæanism. Robert Burns was wrong when he laid the blame for
    his delinquencies upon “the passions wild and strong.” And Samuel
    Johnson was wrong when he said that “Every man is a rascal so soon
    as he is sick.” The normal soul has power to rise above both
    passion and sickness and to make them serve its moral development.
    On the development of the body, as the organ of sin, see
    Straffen’s Hulsean Lectures on Sin, 33-50. The essential error of
    this view is its identification of the moral with the physical. If
    it were true, then Jesus, who came in human flesh, must needs be a
    sinner.


(_b_) In explaining sin as an inheritance from the brute, this theory
ignores the fact that man, even though derived from a brute ancestry, is
no longer brute, but man, with power to recognize and to realize moral
ideals, and under no necessity to violate the law of his being.


    See A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 163-180, on The Fall and the
    Redemption of Man, in the Light of Evolution: “Evolution has been
    thought to be incompatible with any proper doctrine of a fall. It
    has been assumed by many that man’s immoral course and conduct are
    simply survivals of his brute inheritance, inevitable remnants of
    his old animal propensities, yieldings of the weak will to fleshly
    appetites and passions. This is to deny that sin is truly sin, but
    it is also to deny that man is truly man.... Sin must be referred
    to freedom, or it is not sin. To explain it as the natural result
    of weak will overmastered by lower impulses is to make the animal
    nature, and not the will, the cause of transgression. And that is
    to say that man at the beginning is not man, but brute.” See also
    D. W. Simon, in Bib. Sac., Jan. 1897:1-20—“The key to the strange
    and dark contrast between man and his animal ancestry is to be
    found in the fact of the Fall. Other species live normally. No
    remnant of the reptile hinders the bird. The bird is a true bird.
    Only man fails to live normally and is a true man only after ages
    of sin and misery.” Marlowe very properly makes his Faustus to be
    tempted by sensual baits only after he has sold himself to Satan
    for power.

    To regard vanity, deceitfulness, malice, and revenge as inherited
    from brute ancestors is to deny man’s original innocence and the
    creatorship of God. B. W. Lockhart: “The animal mind knows not
    God, is not subject to his law, neither indeed can be, just
    because it is animal, and as such is incapable of right or
    wrong.... If man were an animal and nothing more, he could not
    sin. It is by virtue of being something more, that he becomes
    capable of sin. Sin is the yielding of the known higher to the
    known lower. It is the soul’s abdication of its being to the
    brute.... Hence the need of spiritual forces from the spiritual
    world of divine revelation, to heal and build and discipline the
    soul within itself, giving it the victory over the animal passions
    which constitute the body and over the kingdom of blind desire
    which constitutes the world. The final purpose of man is growth of
    the soul into liberty, truth, love, likeness to God. Education is
    the word that covers the movement, and probation is incident to
    education.” We add that reparation for past sin and renewing power
    from above must follow probation, in order to make education
    possible.

    Some recent writers hold to a real fall of man, and yet regard
    that fall as necessary to his moral development. Emma Marie
    Caillard, in Contemp. Rev., Dec. 1893: 879—“Man passed out of a
    state of innocence—unconscious of his own imperfection—into a
    state of consciousness of it. The will became slave instead of
    master. The result would have been the complete stoppage of his
    evolution but for redemption, which restored his will and made the
    continuance of his evolution possible. Incarnation was the method
    of redemption. But even apart from the fall, this incarnation
    would have been necessary to reveal to man the goal of his
    evolution and so to secure his coöperation in it.” Lisle,
    Evolution of Spiritual Man, 39, and in Bib. Sac., July, 1892:
    431-452—“Evolution by catastrophe in the natural world has a
    striking analogue in the spiritual world.... Sin is primarily not
    so much a fall from a higher to a lower, as a failure to rise from
    a lower to a higher; not so much eating of the forbidden tree, as
    failure to partake of the tree of life. The latter represented
    communion and correspondence with God, and had innocent man
    continued to reach out for this, he would not have fallen. Man’s
    refusal to choose the higher preceded and conditioned his fall to
    the lower, and the essence of sin is therefore in this refusal,
    whatever may cause the will to make it.... Man chose the lower of
    his own free will. Then his centripetal force was gone. His
    development was swiftly and endlessly away from God. He reverted
    to his original type of savage animalism; and yet, as a
    self-conscious and free-acting being, he retained a sense of
    responsibility that filled him with fear and suffering.”

    On the development-theory of sin, see W. W. McLane, in New
    Englander, 1891: 180-188; A. B. Bruce, Apologetics, 60-62; Lyman
    Abbott, Evolution of Christianity, 203-208; Le Conte, Evolution,
    330, 365-375; Henry Drummond, Ascent of Man, 1-13, 329, 342; Salem
    Wilder, Life, its Nature, 266-273; Wm. Graham, Creed of Science,
    38-44; Frank H. Foster, Evolution and the Evangelical System;
    Chandler, The Spirit of Man, 45-47.


(_c_) It rests upon an incomplete induction of facts, taking account of
sin solely in its aspect of self-degradation, but ignoring the worst
aspect of it as self-exaltation. Avarice, envy, pride, ambition, malice,
cruelty, revenge, self-righteousness, unbelief, enmity to God, are none of
them fleshly sins, and upon this principle are incapable of explanation.


    Two historical examples may suffice to show the insufficiency of
    the sensuous theory of sin. Goethe was not a markedly sensual man;
    yet the spiritual vivisection which he practised on Friederike
    Brion, his perfidious misrepresentation of his relations with
    Kestner’s wife in the “Sorrows of Werther,” and his flattery of
    Napoleon, when a patriot would have scorned the advances of the
    invader of his country, show Goethe to have been a very
    incarnation of heartlessness and selfishness. The patriot Boerne
    said of him: “Not once has he ever advanced a poor solitary word
    in his country’s cause—he who from the lofty height he has
    attained might speak out what none other but himself would dare
    pronounce.” It has been said that Goethe’s first commandment to
    genius was: “Thou shalt love thy neighbor and thy neighbor’s
    wife.” His biographers count up sixteen women to whom he made love
    and who reciprocated his affection, though it is doubtful whether
    he contented himself with the doctrine of 16 to 1. As Sainte-Beuve
    said of Châteaubriand’s attachments: “They are like the stars in
    the sky,—the longer you look, the more of them you discover.”
    Christiane Vulpius, after being for seventeen years his mistress,
    became at last his wife. But the wife was so slighted that she was
    driven to intemperance, and Goethe’s only son inherited her
    passion and died of drink. Goethe was the great heathen of modern
    Christendom, deriding self-denial, extolling self-confidence,
    attention to the present, the seeking of enjoyment, and the
    submission of one’s self to the decrees of fate. Hutton calls
    Goethe “a Narcissus in love with himself.” Like George Eliot’s
    “Dinah,” in Adam Bede, Goethe’s “Confessions of a Beautiful Soul,”
    in Wilhelm Meister, are the purely artistic delineation of a
    character with which he had no inner sympathy. On Goethe, see
    Hutton, Essays, 2:1-79; Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 1:490; A. H.
    Strong, Great Poets, 279-331; Principal Shairp, Culture and
    Religion, 16—“Goethe, the high priest of culture, loathes Luther,
    the preacher of righteousness”; S. Law Wilson, Theology of Modern
    Literature, 149-156.

    Napoleon was not a markedly sensual man, but “his self-sufficiency
    surpassed the self-sufficiency of common men as the great Sahara
    desert surpasses an ordinary sand patch.” He wantonly divulged his
    amours to Josephine, with all the details of his ill-conduct, and
    when she revolted from them, he only replied: “I have the right to
    meet all your complaints with an eternal I.” When his wars had
    left almost no able-bodied men in France, he called for the boys,
    saying: “A boy can stop a bullet as well as a man,” and so the
    French nation lost two inches of stature. Before the battle of
    Leipzig, when there was prospect of unexampled slaughter, he
    exclaimed: “What are the lives of a million of men, to carry out
    the will of a man like me?” His most truthful epitaph was: “The
    little butchers of Ghent to Napoleon the Great” [butcher]. Heine
    represents Napoleon as saying to the world: “Thou shalt have no
    other gods before me.” Memoirs of Madame de Rémusat, 1:225—“At a
    fête given by the city of Paris to the Emperor, the repertory of
    inscriptions being exhausted, a brilliant device was resorted to.
    Over the throne which he was to occupy, were placed, in letters of
    gold, the following words from the Holy Scriptures: ‘I am the I
    am.’ And no one seemed to be scandalized.” Iago, in Shakespeare’s
    Othello, is the greatest villain of all literature; but Coleridge,
    Works, 4:180, calls attention to his passionless character. His
    sin is, like that of Goethe and of Napoleon, sin not of the flesh
    but of the intellect and will.


(_d_) It leads to absurd conclusions,—as, for example, that asceticism, by
weakening the power of sense, must weaken the power of sin; that man
becomes less sinful as his senses fail with age; that disembodied spirits
are necessarily holy; that death is the only Redeemer.


    Asceticism only turns the current of sin in other directions.
    Spiritual pride and tyranny take the place of fleshly desires. The
    miser clutches his gold more closely as he nears death. Satan has
    no physical organism, yet he is the prince of evil. Not our own
    death, but Christ’s death, saves us. But when Rousseau’s Émile
    comes to die, he calmly declares: “I am delivered from the
    trammels of the body, and am myself without contradiction.” At the
    age of seventy-five Goethe wrote to Eckermann: “I have ever been
    esteemed one of fortune’s favorites, nor can I complain of the
    course my life has taken. Yet truly there has been nothing but
    care and toil, and I may say that I have never had four weeks of
    genuine pleasure.” Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:743—“When the
    authoritative demand of Jesus Christ, to confess sin and beg
    remission through atoning blood, is made to David Hume, or David
    Strauss, or John Stuart Mill, none of whom were sensualists, it
    wakens intense mental hostility.”


(_e_) It interprets Scripture erroneously. In passages like Rom. 7:18—οὐκ
οἰκεῖ ἐν ἐμοί, τοῦτ᾽ ἐστιν ἐν τῇ σαρκί μου, ἀγαθόν—σάρξ, or flesh,
signifies, not man’s body, but man’s whole being when destitute of the
Spirit of God. The Scriptures distinctly recognize the seat of sin as
being in the soul itself, not in its physical organism. God does not tempt
man, nor has he made man’s nature to tempt him (James 1:13, 14).


    In the use of the term “_flesh_,” Scripture puts a stigma upon
    sin, and intimates that human nature without God is as corruptible
    and perishable as the body would be without the soul to inhabit
    it. The “carnal mind,” or _“__mind of the flesh__”__ (Rom. 8:7)_,
    accordingly means, not the sensual mind, but the mind which is not
    under the control of the Holy Spirit, its true life. See Meyer, on
    _1 Cor. 1:26_—σάρξ—“the purely human element in man, as opposed to
    the divine principle”; Pope, Theology, 2:65—σάρξ—“the whole being
    of man, body, soul, and spirit, separated from God and subjected
    to the creature”; Julius Müller, Proof-texts, 19—σάρξ—“human
    nature as living in and for itself, sundered from God and opposed
    to him.” The earliest and best statement of this view of the term
    σάρξ is that of Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 1:295-333,
    especially 321. See also Dickson, St. Paul’s Use of the Terms
    Flesh and Spirit, 270-271—σάρξ—“human nature without the
    πνεῦμα.... man standing by himself, or left to himself, over
    against God.... the natural man, conceived as not having yet
    received grace, or as not yet wholly under its influence.”

    _James 1:14, 15_—“_desire, when it hath conceived, beareth
    sin_”—innocent desire—for it comes in before the sin—innocent
    constitutional propensity, not yet of the nature of depravity, is
    only the _occasion_ of sin. The love of freedom is a part of our
    nature; sin arises only when the will determines to indulge this
    impulse without regard to the restraints of the divine law.
    Luther, Preface to Ep. to Romans: “Thou must not understand
    ‘flesh’ as though that only were ‘flesh’ which is connected with
    unchastity. St. Paul uses ‘flesh’ of the whole man, body and soul,
    reason and all his faculties included, because all that is in him
    longs and strives after the ‘flesh’.” Melanchthon: “Note that
    ‘flesh’ signifies the entire nature of man, sense and reason,
    without the Holy Spirit.” Gould, Bib. Theol. N. T., 76—“The σάρξ
    of Paul corresponds to the κόσμος of John. Paul sees the divine
    economy; John the divine nature. That Paul did not hold sin to
    consist in the possession of a body appears from his doctrine of a
    bodily resurrection (_1 Cor. 15:38-49_). This resurrection of the
    body is an integral part of immortality.” On σάρξ, see Thayer, N.
    T. Lexicon, 571; Kaftan, Dogmatik, 319.


(_f_) Instead of explaining sin, this theory virtually denies its
existence,—for if sin arises from the original constitution of our being,
reason may recognize it as misfortune, but conscience cannot attribute to
it guilt.


    Sin which in its ultimate origin is a necessary thing is no longer
    sin. On the whole theory of the sensuous origin of sin, see
    Neander, Planting and Training, 386, 428; Ernesti, Ursprung der
    Sünde, 1:29-274; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:132-147; Tulloch,
    Doctrine of Sin, 144—“That which is an inherent and necessary
    power in the creation cannot be a contradiction of its highest
    law.” This theory confounds sin with the mere consciousness of
    sin. On Schleiermacher, see Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin,
    1:341-349. On the sense-theory of sin in general, see John Caird,
    Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 2:26-52; N. R. Wood, The Witness of
    Sin, 79-87.


2. Sin as Finiteness.


This view explains sin as a necessary result of the limitations of man’s
finite being. As an incident of imperfect development, the fruit of
ignorance and impotence, sin is not absolutely but only relatively evil—an
element in human education and a means of progress. This is the view of
Leibnitz and of Spinoza. Modern writers, as Schurman and Royce, have
maintained that moral evil is the necessary background and condition of
moral good.


    The theory of Leibnitz may be found in his Théodicée, part 1,
    sections 20 and 31; that of Spinoza in his Ethics, part 4,
    proposition 20. Upon this view sin is the blundering of
    inexperience, the thoughtlessness that takes evil for good, the
    ignorance that puts its fingers into the fire, the stumbling
    without which one cannot learn to walk. It is a fruit which is
    sour and bitter simply because it is immature. It is a means of
    discipline and training for something better,—it is holiness in
    the germ, good in the making—“Erhebung des Menschen zur freien
    Vernunft.” The Fall was a fall up, and not down.

    John Fiske, in addition to his sense-theory of sin already
    mentioned, seems to hold this theory also. In his Mystery of Evil,
    he says: “Its impress upon the human soul is the indispensable
    background against which shall be set hereafter the eternal joys
    of heaven”; in other words, sin is necessary to holiness, as
    darkness is the indispensable contrast and background to light;
    without black, we should never be able to know white. Schurman,
    Belief in God, 251 _sq._—“The possibility of sin is the
    correlative of the free initiative God has vacated on man’s
    behalf.... The essence of sin is the enthronement of self.... Yet,
    without such self-absorption, there could be no sense of union
    with God. For consciousness is possible only through opposition.
    To know A, we must know it through not-A. Alienation from God is
    the necessary condition of communion with God. And this is the
    meaning of the Scripture that ‘where sin abounded, grace shall
    much more abound.’... Modern culture protests against the Puritan
    enthronement of goodness above truth.... For the decalogue it
    would substitute the wider new commandment of Goethe: ‘Live
    resolutely in the Whole, in the Good, in the Beautiful.’ The
    highest religion can be content with nothing short of the
    synthesis demanded by Goethe.... God is the universal life in
    which individual activities are included as movements of a single
    organism.”

    Royce, World and Individual, 2:364-384—“Evil is a discord
    necessary to perfect harmony. In itself it is evil, but in
    relation to the whole it has value by showing us its own
    finiteness and imperfection. It is a sorrow to God as much as to
    us; indeed, all our sorrow is his sorrow. The evil serves the good
    only by being overcome, thwarted, overruled. Every evil deed must
    somewhere and at some time be atoned for, by some other than the
    agent, if not by the agent himself.... All finite life is a
    struggle with evil. Yet from the final point of view the Whole is
    good. The temporal order contains at no moment anything that can
    satisfy. Yet the eternal order is perfect. We have all sinned and
    come short of the glory of God. Yet in just our life, viewed in
    its entirety, the glory of God is completely manifest. These hard
    sayings are the deepest expressions of the essence of true
    religion. They are also the most inevitable outcome of
    philosophy.... Were there no longing in time, there would be no
    peace in eternity. The prayer that God’s will may be done on earth
    as it is in heaven is identical with what philosophy regards as
    simple fact.”


We object to this theory that

(_a_) It rests upon a pantheistic basis, as the sense-theory rests upon
dualism. The moral is confounded with the physical; might is identified
with right. Since sin is a necessary incident of finiteness, and creatures
can never be infinite, it follows that sin must be everlasting, not only
in the universe, but in each individual soul.


    Goethe, Carlyle, and Emerson are representatives of this view in
    literature. Goethe spoke of the “idleness of wishing to jump off
    from one’s own shadow.” He was a disciple of Spinoza, who believed
    in one substance with contradictory attributes of thought and
    extension. Goethe took the pantheistic view of God with the
    personal view of man. He ignored the fact of sin. Hutton calls him
    “the wisest man the world has seen who was without humility and
    faith, and who lacked the wisdom of a child.” Speaking of Goethe’s
    Faust, Hutton says: “The great drama is radically false in its
    fundamental philosophy. Its primary notion is that even a spirit
    of pure evil is an exceedingly useful being, because he stirs into
    activity those whom he leads into sin, and so prevents them from
    rusting away in pure indolence. There are other and better means
    of stimulating the positive affections of men than by tempting
    them to sin.” On Goethe, see Hutton, Essays, 2:1-79; Shedd, Dogm.
    Theol., 1:490; A. H. Strong, Great Poets and their Theology,
    279-331.

    Carlyle was a Scotch Presbyterian _minus_ Christianity. At the age
    of twenty-five, he rejected miraculous and historical religion,
    and thenceforth had no God but natural Law. His worship of
    objective truth became a worship of subjective sincerity, and his
    worship of personal will became a worship of impersonal force. He
    preached truth, service, sacrifice, but all in a mandatory and
    pessimistic way. He saw in England and Wales “twenty-nine
    millions—mostly fools.” He had no love, no remedy, no hope. In our
    civil war, he was upon the side of the slaveholder. He claimed
    that his philosophy made right to be might, but in practice he
    made might to be right. Confounding all moral distinctions, as he
    did in his later writings, he was fit to wear the title which he
    invented for another: “President of the
    Heaven-and-Hell-Amalgamation Society.” Froude calls him “a
    Calvinist without the theology”—a believer in predestination
    without grace. On Carlyle, see S. Law Wilson, Theology of Modern
    Literature, 131-178.

    Emerson also is the worshiper of successful force. His pantheism
    is most manifest in his poems “Cupido” and “Brahma,” and in his
    Essays on “Spirit” and on “The Over-soul.” Cupido: “The solid,
    solid universe Is pervious to Love; With bandaged eyes he never
    errs, Around, below, above. His blinding light He flingeth white
    On God’s and Satan’s brood, And reconciles by mystic wiles The
    evil and the good.” Brahma: “If the red slayer thinks he slays, Or
    if the slain think he is slain, They know not well the subtle ways
    I keep, and pass, and turn again. Far or forgot to me is near;
    Shadow and sunlight are the same; The vanished gods to me appear;
    And one to me are shame or fame. They reckon ill who leave me out;
    When me they fly, I am the wings; I am the doubter and the doubt,
    And I the hymn the Brahmin sings. The strong gods pine for my
    abode, And pine in vain the sacred Seven; But thou, meek lover of
    the good, Find me, and turn thy back on heaven.”

    Emerson taught that man’s imperfection is not sin, and that the
    cure for it lies in education. “He lets God evaporate into
    abstract Ideality. Not a Deity in the concrete, nor a superhuman
    Person, but rather the immanent divinity in things, the
    essentially spiritual structure of the universe, is the object of
    the transcendental cult.” His view of Jesus is found in his
    Essays, 2:263—“Jesus would absorb the race; but Tom Paine, or the
    coarsest blasphemer, helps humanity by resisting this exuberance
    of power.” In his Divinity School Address, he banished the person
    of Jesus from genuine religion. He thought “one could not be a man
    if he must subordinate his nature to Christ’s nature.” He failed
    to see that Jesus not only absorbs but transforms, and that we
    grow only by the impact of nobler souls than our own. Emerson’s
    essay style is devoid of clear and precise theological statement,
    and in this vagueness lies its harmfulness. Fisher, Nature and
    Method of Revelation, xii—“Emerson’s pantheism is not hardened
    into a consistent creed, for to the end he clung to the belief in
    personal immortality, and he pronounced the acceptance of this
    belief ‘the test of mental sanity.’ ” On Emerson, see S. L.
    Wilson, Theology of Modern Literature, 97-123.

    We may call this theory the “green-apple theory” of sin. Sin is a
    green apple, which needs only time and sunshine and growth to
    bring it to ripeness and beauty and usefulness. But we answer that
    sin is not a green apple, but an apple with a worm at its heart.
    The evil of it can never be cured by growth. The fall can never be
    anything else than downward. Upon this theory, sin is an
    inseparable factor in the nature of finite things. The highest
    archangel cannot be without it. Man in moral character is “the
    asymptote of God,”—forever learning, but never able to come to the
    knowledge of the truth. The throne of iniquity is set up forever
    in the universe. If this theory were true, Jesus, in virtue of his
    partaking of our finite humanity, must needs be a sinner. His
    perfect development, without sin, shows that sin was not a
    necessity of finite progress. Matthews, in Christianity and
    Evolution, 137—“It was not necessary for the prodigal to go into
    the far country and become a swineherd, in order to find out the
    father’s love.” E. H. Johnson, Syst. Theol., 141—“It is not the
    privilege of the Infinite alone to be good.” Dorner, System,
    1:119, speaks of the moral career which this theory describes, as
    “a _progressus in infinitum_, where the constant approach to the
    goal has as its reverse side an eternal separation from the goal.”
    In his “Transformation,” Hawthorne hints, though rather
    hesitatingly, that without sin the higher humanity of man could
    not be taken up at all, and that sin may be essential to the first
    conscious awakening of moral freedom and to the possibility of
    progress; see Hutton, Essays, 2:381.


(_b_) So far as this theory regards moral evil as a necessary
presupposition and condition of moral good, it commits the serious error
of confounding the possible with the actual. What is necessary to goodness
is not the actuality of evil, but only the possibility of evil.


    Since we cannot know white except in contrast to black, it is
    claimed that without knowing actual evil we could never know
    actual good. George A. Gordon, New Epoch for Faith, 49, 50, has
    well shown that in that case the elimination of evil would imply
    the elimination of good. Sin would need to have place in God’s
    being in order that he might be holy, and thus he would be
    divinity and devil in one person. Jesus too must needs be evil as
    well as good. Not only would it be true, as intimated above, that
    Christ, since his humanity is finite, must be a sinner, but also
    that we ourselves, who must always be finite, must always be
    sinners. We grant that holiness, in either God or man, must
    involve the abstract possibility of its opposite. But we maintain
    that, as this possibility in God is only abstract and never
    realized, so in man it should be only abstract and never realized.
    Man has power to reject this possible evil. His sin is a turning
    of the merely possible evil, by the decision of his will, into
    actual evil. Robert Browning is not free from the error above
    mentioned; see S. Law Wilson, Theology of Modern Literature,
    207-210; A. H. Strong, Great Poets and their Theology, 433-444.

    This theory of sin dates back to Hegel. To him there is no real
    sin and cannot be. Imperfection there is and must always be,
    because the relative can never become the absolute. Redemption is
    only an evolutionary process, indefinitely prolonged, and evil
    must remain an eternal condition. All finite thought is an element
    in the infinite thought, and all finite will an element in the
    infinite will. As good cannot exist without evil as its
    antithesis, infinite righteousness should have for its counterpart
    an infinite wickedness. Hegel’s guiding principle was that “What
    is rational is real, and what is real is rational.” Seth,
    Hegelianism and Personality, remarks that this principle ignores
    “the riddle of the painful earth.” The disciples of Hegel thought
    that nothing remained for history to accomplish, now that the
    World-spirit had come to know himself in Hegel’s philosophy.

    Biedermann’s Dogmatik is based upon the Hegelian philosophy. At
    page 649 we read: “Evil is the finiteness of the world-being which
    clings to all individual existences by virtue of their belonging
    to the immanent world-order. Evil is therefore a necessary element
    in the divinely willed being of the world.” Bradley follows Hegel
    in making sin to be no reality, but only a relative appearance.
    There is no free will, and no antagonism between the will of God
    and the will of man. Darkness is an evil, a destroying agent. But
    it is not a positive force, as light is. It cannot be attacked and
    overcome as an entity. Bring light, and darkness disappears. So
    evil is not a positive force, as good is. Bring good, and evil
    disappears. Herbert Spencer’s Evolutionary Ethics fits in with
    such a system, for he says: “A perfect man in an imperfect race is
    impossible.” On Hegel’s view of sin, a view which denies holiness
    even to Christ, see J. Müller, Doct. Sin, 1:390-407; Dorner, Hist.
    Doct. Person of Christ, B. 3:131-162; Stearns, Evidence of Christ.
    Experience, 92-96; John Caird, Fund. Ideas, 2:1-25; Forrest,
    Authority of Christ, 13-16.


(_c_) It is inconsistent with known facts,—as for example, the following:
Not all sins are negative sins of ignorance and infirmity; there are acts
of positive malignity, conscious transgressions, wilful and presumptuous
choices of evil. Increased knowledge of the nature of sin does not of
itself give strength to overcome it; but, on the contrary, repeated acts
of conscious transgression harden the heart in evil. Men of greatest
mental powers are not of necessity the greatest saints, nor are the
greatest sinners men of least strength of will and understanding.


    Not the weak but the strong are the greatest sinners. We do not
    pity Nero and Cæsar Borgia for their weakness; we abhor them for
    their crimes. Judas was an able man, a practical administrator;
    and Satan is a being of great natural endowments. Sin is not
    simply a weakness,—it is also a power. A pantheistic philosophy
    should worship Satan most of all; for he is the truest type of
    godless intellect and selfish strength.

    _John 12:6_—Judas, “_having the bag, made away with what was put
    therein_.” Judas was set by Christ to do the work he was best
    fitted for, and that was best fitted to interest and save him.
    Some men may be put into the ministry, because that is the only
    work that will prevent their destruction. Pastors should find for
    their members work suited to the aptitudes of each. Judas was
    tempted, or tried, as all men are, according to his native
    propensity. While his motive in objecting to Mary’s generosity was
    really avarice, his pretext was charity, or regard for the poor.
    Each one of the apostles had his own peculiar gift, and was chosen
    because of it. The sin of Judas was not a sin of weakness, or
    ignorance, or infirmity. It was a sin of disappointed ambition, of
    malice, of hatred for Christ’s self-sacrificing purity.

    E. H. Johnson: “Sins are not men’s limitations, but the active
    expressions of a perverse nature.” M. F. H. Round, Sec. of Nat.
    Prison Association, on examining the record of a thousand
    criminals, found that one quarter of them had an exceptionally
    fine basis of physical life and strength, while the other three
    quarters fell only a little below the average of ordinary
    humanity; see The Forum, Sept. 1893. The theory that sin is only
    holiness in the making reminds us of the view that the most
    objectionable refuse can by ingenious processes be converted into
    butter or at least into oleomargarine. It is not true that “tout
    comprendre est tout pardonner.” Such doctrine obliterates all
    moral distinctions. Gilbert, Bab Ballads, “My Dream”: “I dreamt
    that somehow I had come To dwell in Topsy-Turvydom, Where vice is
    virtue, virtue vice; Where nice is nasty, nasty nice; Where right
    is wrong, and wrong is right; Where white is black and black is
    white.”


(_d_) like the sense-theory of sin, it contradicts both conscience and
Scripture by denying human responsibility and by transferring the blame of
sin from the creature to the Creator. This is to explain sin, again, by
denying its existence.


    Œdipus said that his evil deeds had been suffered, not done.
    Agamemnon, in the Iliad, says the blame belongs, not to himself,
    but to Jupiter and to fate. So sin blames everything and everybody
    but self. _Gen. 3:12_—“_The woman whom thou gavest to be with me,
    she gave me of the tree, and I did eat._” But self-vindicating is
    God-accusing. Made imperfect at the start, man cannot help his
    sin. By the very fact of his creation he is cut loose from God.
    That cannot be sin which is a necessary outgrowth of human nature,
    which is not our act but our fate. To all this, the one answer is
    found in Conscience. Conscience testifies that sin is not “das
    Gewordene,” but “das Gemachte,” and that it was his own act when
    man by transgression fell. The Scriptures refer man’s sin, not to
    the limitations of his being, but to the free will of man himself.
    On the theory here combated, see Müller, Doct. Sin, 1:271-295;
    Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 3:123-131; N. R. Wood, The Witness of
    Sin, 20-42.


3. Sin as Selfishness.


We hold the essential principle of sin to be selfishness. By selfishness
we mean not simply the exaggerated self-love which constitutes the
antithesis of benevolence, but that choice of self as the supreme end
which constitutes the antithesis of supreme love to God. That selfishness
is the essence of sin may be shown as follows:

A. Love to God is the essence of all virtue. The opposite to this, the
choice of self as the supreme end, must therefore be the essence of sin.

We are to remember, however, that the love to God in which virtue consists
is love for that which is most characteristic and fundamental in God,
namely, his holiness. It is not to be confounded with supreme regard for
God’s interests or for the good of being in general. Not mere benevolence,
but love for God as holy, is the principle and source of holiness in man.
Since the love of God required by the law is of this sort, it not only
does not imply that love, in the sense of benevolence, is the essence of
holiness in God,—it implies rather that holiness, or self-loving and
self-affirming purity, is fundamental in the divine nature. From this
self-loving and self-affirming purity, love properly so-called, or the
self-communicating attribute, is to be carefully distinguished (see vol.
1, pages 271-275).


    Bossuet, describing heathendom, says: “Every thing was God but God
    himself.” Sin goes further than this, and says: “I am myself all
    things,”—not simply as Louis XVI: “I am the state,” but: “I am the
    world, the universe, God.” Heinrich Heine: “I am no child. I do
    not want a heavenly Father any more.” A French critic of Fichte’s
    philosophy said that it was a flight toward the infinite which
    began with the ego, and never got beyond it. Kidd, Social
    Evolution, 75—“In Calderon’s tragic story, the unknown figure,
    which throughout life is everywhere in conflict with the
    individual whom it haunts, lifts the mask at last to disclose to
    the opponent his own features.” Caird, Evolution of Religion,
    1:78—“Every self, once awakened, is naturally a despot, and
    ‘bears, like the Turk, no brother near the throne.’ ” Every one
    has, as Hobbes said, “an infinite desire for gain or glory,” and
    can be satisfied with nothing but a whole universe for himself.
    Selfishness—“homo homini lupus.” James Martineau: “We ask Comte to
    lift the veil from the holy of holies and show us the all-perfect
    object of worship,—he produces a looking-glass and shows us
    ourselves.” Comte’s religion is a “synthetic idealization of our
    existence”—a worship, not of God, but of humanity; and “the
    festival of humanity” among Positivists—Walt Whitman’s “I
    celebrate myself.” On Comte, see Martineau, Types, 1:499. The most
    thorough discussion of the essential principle of sin is that of
    Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 1:147-182. He defines sin as “a turning
    away from the love of God to self-seeking.”

    N. W. Taylor holds that self-love is the primary cause of all
    moral action; that selfishness is a different thing, and consists
    not in making our own happiness our ultimate end, which we must do
    if we are moral beings, but in love of the world, and in
    preferring the world to God as our portion or chief good (see N.
    W. Taylor, Moral Govt., 1:24-26; 2:20-24, and Rev. Theol.,
    134-162; Tyler, Letters on the New Haven Theology, 72). We claim,
    on the contrary, that to make our own happiness our ultimate aim
    is itself sin, and the essence of sin. As God makes his holiness
    the central thing, so we are to live for that, loving self only in
    God and for God’s sake. This love for God as holy is the essence
    of virtue. The opposite to this, or supreme love for self, is sin.
    As Richard Lovelace writes: “I could not love thee, dear, so much,
    Loved I not honor more,” so Christian friends can say: “Our loves
    in higher love endure.” The sinner raises some lower object of
    instinct or desire to supremacy, regardless of God and his law,
    and this he does for no other reason than to gratify self. On the
    distinction between mere benevolence and the love required by
    God’s law, see Hovey, God With Us, 187-200; Hopkins, Works, 1:235;
    F. W. Robertson, Sermon I. Emerson: “Your goodness must have some
    edge to it, else it is none.” See Newman Smyth, Christian Ethics,
    327-370, on duties toward self as a moral end.

    Love to God is the essence of all virtue. We are to love God with
    all the heart. But what God? Surely, not the false God, the God
    who is indifferent to moral distinctions and who treats the wicked
    as he treats the righteous. The love which the law requires is
    love for the true God, the God of holiness. Such love aims at the
    reproduction of God’s holiness in ourselves and in others. We are
    to love ourselves only for God’s sake and for the sake of
    realizing the divine idea in us. We are to love others only for
    God’s sake and for the sake of realizing the divine idea in them.
    In our moral progress we, first, love self for our own sake;
    secondly, God for our own sake; thirdly, God for his own sake;
    fourthly, ourselves for God’s sake. The first is our state by
    nature; the second requires prevenient grace; the third,
    regenerating grace; and the fourth, sanctifying grace. Only the
    last is reasonable self-love. Balfour, Foundations of Belief,
    27—“Reasonable self-love is a virtue wholly incompatible with what
    is commonly called selfishness. Society suffers, not from having
    too much of it, but from having too little.” Altruism is not the
    whole of duty. Self-realization is equally important. But to care
    only for self, like Goethe, is to miss the true self-realization,
    which love to God ensures.

    Love desires only _the best_ for its object, and the best is
    _God_. The golden rule bids us give, not what others desire, but
    what they need. _Rom. 15:2_—“_Let each one of us please his
    neighbor for that which is good, unto edifying._” Deutsche Liebe:
    “Nicht Liebe die fragt: Willst du mein sein? Sondern Liebe die
    sagt: Ich muss dein sein.” Sin consists in taking for one’s self
    alone and apart from God that in one’s self and in others to which
    one has a right only in God and for God’s sake. Mrs. Humphrey
    Ward, David Grieve, 403—“How dare a man pluck from the Lord’s
    hand, for his wild and reckless use, a soul and body for which he
    died? How dare he, the Lord’s bondsman, steal his joy, carrying it
    off by himself into the wilderness, like an animal his prey,
    instead of asking it at the hands and under the blessing of the
    Master? How dare he, a member of the Lord’s body, forget the
    whole, in his greed for the one—eternity in his thirst for the
    present?” Wordsworth, Prelude, 546—“Delight how pitiable, Unless
    this love by a still higher love Be hallowed, love that breathes
    not without awe; Love that adores, but on the knees of prayer. By
    heaven inspired.... This spiritual love acts not nor can exist
    Without imagination, which in truth Is but another name for
    absolute power, And clearest insight, amplitude of mind, And
    reason in her most exalted mood.”

    Aristotle says that the wicked have no right to love themselves,
    but that the good may. So, from a Christian point of view, we may
    say: No unregenerate man can properly respect himself.
    Self-respect belongs only to the man who lives in God and who has
    God’s image restored to him thereby. True self-love is not love
    for the _happiness_ of the self, but for the _worth_ of the self
    in God’s sight, and this self-love is the condition of all genuine
    and worthy love for others. But true self-love is in turn
    conditioned by love to God as holy, and it seeks primarily, not
    the happiness, but the holiness, of others. Asquith, Christian
    Conception of Holiness, 98, 145, 154, 207—“Benevolence or love is
    not the same with altruism. Altruism is instinctive, and has not
    its origin in the moral reason. It has utility, and it may even
    furnish material for reflection on the part of the moral reason.
    But so far as it is not deliberate, not indulged for the sake of
    the end, but only for the gratification of the instinct of the
    moment, it is not moral.... Holiness is dedication to God, the
    Good, not as an external Ruler, but as an internal controller and
    transformer of character.... God is a being whose every thought is
    love, of whose thoughts not one is for himself, save so far as
    himself is not himself, that is, so far as there is a distinction
    of persons in the Godhead. Creation is one great unselfish
    thought—the bringing into being of creatures who can know the
    happiness that God knows.... To the spiritual man holiness and
    love are one. Salvation is deliverance from selfishness.” Kaftan,
    Dogmatik, 319, 320, regards the essence of sin as consisting, not
    in selfishness, but in turning away from God and so from the love
    which would cause man to grow in knowledge and likeness to God.
    But this seems to be nothing else than choosing self instead of
    God as our object and end.


B. All the different forms of sin can be shown to have their root in
selfishness, while selfishness itself, considered as the choice of self as
a supreme end, cannot be resolved into any simpler elements.

(_a_) Selfishness may reveal itself in the elevation to supreme dominion
of any one of man’s natural appetites, desires, or affections. Sensuality
is selfishness in the form of inordinate appetite. Selfish desire takes
the forms respectively of avarice, ambition, vanity, pride, according as
it is set upon property, power, esteem, independence. Selfish affection is
falsehood or malice, according as it hopes to make others its voluntary
servants, or regards them as standing in its way; it is unbelief or enmity
to God, according as it simply turns away from the truth and love of God,
or conceives of God’s holiness as positively resisting and punishing it.


    Augustine and Aquinas held the essence of sin to be pride; Luther
    and Calvin regarded its essence to be unbelief. Kreibig
    (Versöhnungslehre) regards it as “world-love”; still others
    consider it as enmity to God. In opposing the view that sensuality
    is the essence of sin, Julius Müller says: “Wherever we find
    sensuality, there we find selfishness, but we do not find that,
    where there is selfishness, there is always sensuality.
    Selfishness may embody itself in fleshly lust or inordinate desire
    for the creature, but this last cannot bring forth spiritual sins
    which have no element of sensuality in them.”

    Covetousness or avarice makes, not sensual gratification itself,
    but the things that may minister thereto, the object of pursuit,
    and in this last chase often loses sight of its original aim.
    Ambition is selfish love of power; vanity is selfish love of
    esteem. Pride is but the self-complacency, self-sufficiency, and
    self-isolation of a selfish spirit that desires nothing so much as
    unrestrained independence. Falsehood originates in selfishness,
    first as self-deception, and then, since man by sin isolates
    himself and yet in a thousand ways needs the fellowship of his
    brethren, as deception of others. Malice, the perversion of
    natural resentment (together with hatred and revenge), is the
    reaction of selfishness against those who stand, or are imagined
    to stand, in its way. Unbelief and enmity to God are effects of
    sin, rather than its essence; selfishness leads us first to doubt,
    and then to hate, the Lawgiver and Judge. Tacitus: “Humani generis
    proprium est odisse quem læseris.” In sin, self-affirmation and
    self-surrender are not coördinate elements, as Dorner holds, but
    the former conditions the latter.

    As love to God is love to God’s holiness, so love to man is love
    for holiness in man and desire to impart it. In other words, true
    love for man is the longing to make man like God. Over against
    this normal desire which should fill the heart and inspire the
    life, there stands a hierarchy of lower desires which may be
    utilized and sanctified by the higher love, but which may assert
    their independence and may thus be the occasions of sin. Physical
    gratification, money, esteem, power, knowledge, family, virtue,
    are proper objects of regard, so long as these are sought for
    God’s sake and within the limitations of his will. Sin consists in
    turning our backs on God and in seeking any one of these objects
    for its own sake; or, which is the same thing, for our own sake.
    Appetite gratified without regard to God’s law is lust; the love
    of money becomes avarice; the desire for esteem becomes vanity;
    the longing for power becomes ambition; the love for knowledge
    becomes a selfish thirst for intellectual satisfaction; parental
    affection degenerates into indulgence and nepotism; the seeking of
    virtue becomes self-righteousness and self-sufficiency. Kaftan,
    Dogmatik, 323—“Jesus grants that even the heathen and sinners love
    those who love them. But family love becomes family pride;
    patriotism comes to stand for country right or wrong; happiness in
    one’s calling leads to class distinctions.”

    Dante, in his Divine Comedy, divides the Inferno into three great
    sections: those in which are punished, respectively, incontinence,
    bestiality, and malice. Incontinence—sin of the heart, the
    emotions, the affections. Lower down is found bestiality—sin of
    the head, the thoughts, the mind, as infidelity and heresy. Lowest
    of all is malice—sin of the will, deliberate rebellion, fraud and
    treachery. So we are taught that the heart carries the intellect
    with it, and that the sin of unbelief gradually deepens into the
    intensity of malice. See A. H. Strong, Great Poets and their
    Theology, 133—“Dante teaches us that sin is the self-perversion of
    the will. If there is any thought fundamental to his system, it is
    the thought of freedom. Man is not a waif swept irresistibly
    downward on the current; he is a being endowed with power to
    resist, and therefore guilty if he yields. Sin is not misfortune,
    or disease, or natural necessity; it is wilfulness, and crime, and
    self-destruction. The Divine Comedy is, beyond all other poems,
    the poem of conscience; and this could not be, if it did not
    recognize man as a free agent, the responsible cause of his own
    evil acts and his own evil state.” See also Harris, in Jour. Spec.
    Philos., 21:350-451; Dinsmore, Atonement in Literature and Life,
    69-86.

    In Greek tragedy, says Prof. Wm. Arnold Stevens, the one sin which
    the gods hated and would not pardon was ὕβρις—obstinate
    self-assertion of mind or will, absence of reverence and
    humility—of which we have an illustration in Ajax. George
    MacDonald: “A man may be possessed of himself, as of a devil.”
    Shakespeare depicts this insolence of infatuation in Shylock,
    Macbeth, and Richard III. Troilus and Cressida, 4:4—“Something may
    be done that we will not; And sometimes we are devils to
    ourselves, When we will tempt the frailty of our powers, Presuming
    on their changeful potency.” Yet Robert G. Ingersoll said that
    Shakespeare holds crime to be the mistake of ignorance! N. P.
    Willis, Parrhasius: “How like a mounting devil in the heart Rules
    unrestrained ambition!”


(_b_) Even in the nobler forms of unregenerate life, the principle of
selfishness is to be regarded as manifesting itself in the preference of
lower ends to that of God’s proposing. Others are loved with idolatrous
affection because these others are regarded as a part of self. That the
selfish element is present even here, is evident upon considering that
such affection does not seek the highest interest of its object, that it
often ceases when unreturned, and that it sacrifices to its own
gratification the claims of God and his law.


    Even in the mother’s idolatry of her child, the explorer’s
    devotion to science, the sailor’s risk of his life to save
    another’s, the gratification sought may be that of a lower
    instinct or desire, and any substitution of a lower for the
    highest object is non-conformity to law, and therefore sin. H. B.
    Smith, System Theology, 277—“Some lower affection is supreme.” And
    the underlying motive which leads to this substitution is
    self-gratification. There is no such thing as disinterested sin,
    for “_every one that loveth is begotten of God_” (_1 John 4:7_).
    Thomas Hughes, The Manliness of Christ: Much of the heroism of
    battle is simply “resolution in the actors to have their way,
    contempt for ease, animal courage which we share with the bulldog
    and the weasel, intense assertion of individual will and force,
    avowal of the rough-handed man that he has that in him which
    enables him to defy pain and danger and death.”

    Mozley on Blanco White, in Essays, 2:143: Truth may be sought in
    order to absorb truth in self, not for the sake of absorbing self
    in truth. So Blanco White, in spite of the pain of separating from
    old views and friends, lived for the selfish pleasure of new
    discovery, till all his early faith vanished, and even immortality
    seemed a dream. He falsely thought that the pain he suffered in
    giving up old beliefs was evidence of self-sacrifice with which
    God must be pleased, whereas it was the inevitable pain which
    attends the victory of selfishness. Robert Browning, Paracelsus,
    81—“I still must hoard, and heap, and class all truths With one
    ulterior purpose: I must know! Would God translate me to his
    throne, believe That I should only listen to his words To further
    my own ends.” F. W. Robertson on Genesis, 57—“He who sacrifices
    his sense of right, his conscience, for another, sacrifices the
    God within him; he is not sacrificing self.... He who prefers his
    dearest friend or his beloved child to the call of duty, will soon
    show that he prefers himself to his dearest friend, and would not
    sacrifice himself for his child.” _Ib._, 91—“In those who love
    little, love [for finite beings] is a primary affection,—a
    secondary, in those who love much.... The only true affection is
    that which is subordinate to a higher.” True love is love for the
    soul and its highest, its eternal, interests; love that seeks to
    make it holy; love for the sake of God and for the accomplishment
    of God’s idea in his creation.

    Although we cannot, with Augustine, call the virtues of the
    heathen “splendid vices”—for they were relatively good and
    useful,—they still, except in possible instances where God’s
    Spirit wrought upon the heart, were illustrations of a morality
    divorced from love to God, were lacking in the most essential
    element demanded by the law, were therefore infected with sin.
    Since the law judges all action by the heart from which it
    springs, no action of the unregenerate can be other than sin. The
    ebony-tree is white in its outer circles of woody fibre; at heart
    it is black as ink. There is no unselfishness in the unregenerate
    heart, apart from the divine enlightenment and energizing.
    Self-sacrifice for the sake of self is selfishness after all.
    Professional burglars and bank-robbers are often carefully
    abstemious in their personal habits, and they deny themselves the
    use of liquor and tobacco while in the active practice of their
    trade. Herron, The Larger Christ, 47—“It is as truly immoral to
    seek truth out of mere love of knowing it, as it is to seek money
    out of love to gain. Truth sought for truth’s sake is an
    intellectual vice; it is spiritual covetousness. It is an
    idolatry, setting up the worship of abstractions and generalities
    in place of the living God.”


(_c_) It must be remembered, however, that side by side with the selfish
will, and striving against it, is the power of Christ, the immanent God,
imparting aspirations and impulses foreign to unregenerate humanity, and
preparing the way for the soul’s surrender to truth and righteousness.


    _Rom. 8:7_—“_the mind of the flesh is enmity against God_”; _Acts
    17:27, 28_—“_he is not far from each one of us: for in him we
    live, and move, and have our being_”; _Rom. 2:4_—“_the goodness of
    God leadeth thee to repentance_”; _John 1:9_—“_the light which
    lighteth every man._” Many generous traits and acts of
    self-sacrifice in the unregenerate must be ascribed to the
    prevenient grace of God and to the enlightening influence of the
    Spirit of Christ. A mother, during the Russian famine, gave to her
    children all the little supply of food that came to her in the
    distribution, and died that they might live. In her decision to
    sacrifice herself for her offspring she may have found her
    probation and may have surrendered herself to God. The impulse to
    make the sacrifice may have been due to the Holy Spirit, and her
    yielding may have been essentially an act of saving faith. In
    _Mark 10:21, 22_—“_And Jesus looking upon him loved him ... he
    went away sorrowful_”—our Lord apparently loved the young man, not
    only for his gifts, his efforts, and his possibilities, but also
    for the manifest working in him of the divine Spirit, even while
    in his natural character he was without God and without love,
    self-ignorant, self-righteous, and self-seeking.

    Paul, in like manner, before his conversion, loved and desired
    righteousness, provided only that this righteousness might be the
    product and achievement of his own will and might reflect honor on
    himself; in short, provided only that self might still be
    uppermost. To be dependent for righteousness upon another was
    abhorrent to him. And yet this very impulse toward righteousness
    may have been due to the divine Spirit within him. On Paul’s
    experience before conversion, see E. D. Burton, Bib. World, Jan.
    1893. Peter objected to the washing of his feet by Jesus (_John
    13:8_), not because it humbled the Master too much in the eyes of
    the disciple, but because it humbled the disciple too much in his
    own eyes. Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:218—“Sin is the
    violation of the God-willed moral order of the world by the
    self-will of the individual.” Tophel on the Holy Spirit, 17—“You
    would deeply wound him [the average sinner] if you told him that
    his heart, full of sin, is an object of horror to the holiness of
    God.” The impulse to repentance, as well as the impulse to
    righteousness, is the product, not of man’s own nature, but of the
    Christ within him who is moving him to seek salvation.

    Elizabeth Barrett wrote to Robert Browning after she had accepted
    his proposal of marriage: “Henceforth I am yours for everything
    but to do you harm.” George Harris, Moral Evolution, 138—“Love
    seeks the true good of the person loved. It will not minister in
    an unworthy way to afford a temporary pleasure. It will not
    approve or tolerate that which is wrong. It will not encourage the
    coarse, base passions of the one loved. It condemns impurity,
    falsehood, selfishness. A parent does not really love his child if
    he tolerates the self-indulgence, and does not correct or punish
    the faults, of the child.” Hutton: “You might as well say that it
    is a fit subject for art to paint the morbid exstasy of cannibals
    over their horrid feasts, as to paint lust without love. If you
    are to delineate man at all, you must delineate him with his human
    nature, and therefore you can never omit from any worthy picture
    that conscience which is its crown.”

    Tennyson, in In Memoriam, speaks of “Fantastic beauty such as
    lurks In some wild poet when he works Without a conscience or an
    aim.” Such work may be due to mere human nature. But the lofty
    work of true creative genius, and the still loftier acts of men
    still unregenerate but conscientious and self-sacrificing, must be
    explained by the working in them of the immanent Christ, the life
    and light of men. James Martineau, Study, 1:20—“Conscience may act
    as human, before it is discovered to be divine.” See J. D. Stoops,
    in Jour. Philos., Psych., and Sci. Meth., 2:512—“If there is a
    divine life over and above the separate streams of individual
    lives, the welling up of this larger life in the experience of the
    individual is precisely the point of contact between the
    individual person and God.” Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity,
    2:122—“It is this divine element in man, this relationship to God,
    which gives to sin its darkest and direst complexion. For such a
    life is the turning of a light brighter than the sun into
    darkness, the squandering or bartering away of a boundless wealth,
    the suicidal abasement, to the things that perish, of a nature
    destined by its very constitution and structure for participation
    in the very being and blessedness of God.”

    On the various forms of sin as manifestations of selfishness, see
    Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 1:147-182; Jonathan Edwards, Works,
    2:268, 269; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 3:5, 6; Baird, Elohim
    Revealed, 243-262; Stewart, Active and Moral Powers, 11-91;
    Hopkins, Moral Science, 86-156. On the Roman Catholic “Seven
    Deadly Sins” (Pride, Envy, Anger, Sloth, Avarice, Gluttony, Lust),
    see Wetzer und Welte, Kirchenlexikon, and Orby Shipley, Theory
    about Sin, preface, xvi-xviii.


C. This view accords best with Scripture.

(_a_) The law requires love to God as its all-embracing requirement. (_b_)
The holiness of Christ consisted in this, that he sought not his own will
or glory, but made God his supreme end. (_c_) The Christian is one who has
ceased to live for self. (_d_) The tempter’s promise is a promise of
selfish independence. (_e_) The prodigal separates himself from his
father, and seeks his own interest and pleasure. (_f_) The “man of sin”
illustrates the nature of sin, in “opposing and exalting himself against
all that is called God.”


    (_a_) _Mat. 22:37-39_—the command of love to God and man; _Rom.
    13:8-10_—“_love therefore is the fulfilment of the law_”; _Gal.
    5:14_—“_the whole law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou
    shalt love thy neighbor as thyself_”; _James 2:8_—“_the royal
    law._” (_b_) _John 5:30_—“_my judgment is righteous; because I
    seek not mine own will, but the will of him that sent me_”;
    _7:18_—“_He that speaketh from himself seeketh his own glory: but
    he that seeketh the glory of him that sent him, the same is true,
    and no unrighteousness is in him_”; _Rom. 15:3_—“_Christ also
    pleased not himself._” (_c_) _Rom. 14:7_—“_none of us liveth to
    himself, and none dieth to himself_”; _2 Cor. 5:15_—“_he died for
    all, that they that live should no longer live unto themselves,
    but unto him who for their sakes died and rose again_”; _Gal.
    2:20_—“_I have been crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I
    that live, but Christ liveth in me._” Contrast _2 Tim.
    3:2_—“_lovers of self._” (_d_) _Gen. 3:5_—“_ye shall be as God,
    knowing good and evil._” (_e_) _Luke 15:12, 13_—“_give me the
    portion of thy substance ... gathered all together and took his
    journey into a far country._” (_f_) _2 Thess. 2:3, 4_—“_the man of
    sin ... the son of perdition, he that opposeth and exalteth
    himself against all that is called God or that is worshipped; so
    that he sitteth in the temple of God, setting himself forth as
    God._”

    Contrast “_the man of sin_” who “_exalteth himself_” (_2 Thess.
    2:3, 4_) with the Son of God who “_emptied himself_” (_Phil.
    2:7_). On “_the man of sin_”, see Wm. Arnold Stevens, in Bap.
    Quar. Rev., July, 1889:328-360. Ritchie, Darwin, and Hegel, 24—“We
    are conscious of sin, because we know that our true self is God,
    from whom we are severed. No ethics is possible unless we
    recognize an ideal for all human effort in the presence of the
    eternal Self which any account of conduct presupposes.” John
    Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 2:53-73—“Here, as in all
    organic life, the individual member or organ has no independent or
    exclusive life, and the attempt to attain to it is fatal to
    itself.” Milton describes man as “affecting Godhead, and so losing
    all.” Of the sinner, we may say with Shakespeare, Coriolanus,
    5:4—“He wants nothing of a god but eternity and a heaven to throne
    in.... There is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male
    tiger.” No one of us, then, can sign too early “the declaration of
    dependence.” Both Old School and New School theologians agree that
    sin is selfishness; see Bellamy, Hopkins, Emmons, the younger
    Edwards, Finney, Taylor. See also A. H. Strong, Christ in
    Creation, 287-292.


Sin, therefore, is not merely a negative thing, or an absence of love to
God. It is a fundamental and positive choice or preference of self instead
of God, as the object of affection and the supreme end of being. Instead
of making God the centre of his life, surrendering himself unconditionally
to God and possessing himself only in subordination to God’s will, the
sinner makes self the centre of his life, sets himself directly against
God, and constitutes his own interest the supreme motive and his own will
the supreme rule.

We may follow Dr. E. G. Robinson in saying that, while sin as a state is
unlikeness to God, as a principle is opposition to God, and as an act is
transgression of God’s law, the essence of it always and everywhere is
selfishness. It is therefore not something external, or the result of
compulsion from without; it is a depravity of the affections and a
perversion of the will, which constitutes man’s inmost character.


    See Harris, in Bib. Sac., 18:148—“Sin is essentially egoism or
    selfism, putting self in God’s place. It has four principal
    characteristics or manifestations: (1) self-sufficiency, instead
    of faith; (2) self-will, instead of submission; (3) self-seeking,
    instead of benevolence; (4) self-righteousness, instead of
    humility and reverence.” All sin is either explicit or implicit
    “_enmity against God_” (_Rom. 8:7_). All true confessions are like
    David’s (_Ps. 51:4_)—“_Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, And
    done that which is evil in thy sight._” Of all sinners it might be
    said that they “_Fight neither with small nor great, save only
    with the king of Israel_” (_1 K. 22:31_).

    Not every sinner is conscious of this enmity. Sin is a principle
    in course of development. It is not yet “_full-grown_” (_James
    1:15_—“_the sin, when it is full-grown, bringeth forth death_”).
    Even now, as James Martineau has said: “If it could be known that
    God was dead, the news would cause but little excitement in the
    streets of London and Paris.” But this indifference easily grows,
    in the presence of threatening and penalty, into violent hatred to
    God and positive defiance of his law. If the sin which is now
    hidden in the sinner’s heart were but permitted to develop itself
    according to its own nature, it would hurl the Almighty from his
    throne, and would set up its own kingdom upon the ruins of the
    moral universe. Sin is world-destroying, as well as
    God-destroying, for it is inconsistent with the conditions which
    make being as a whole possible; see Royce, World and Individual,
    2:366; Dwight, Works, sermon 80.



Section III.—Universality Of Sin.


We have shown that sin is a state, a state of the will, a selfish state of
the will. We now proceed to show that this selfish state of the will is
universal. We divide our proof into two parts. In the first, we regard sin
in its aspect as conscious violation of law; in the second, in its aspect
as a bias of the nature to evil, prior to or underlying consciousness.


I. Every human being who has arrived at moral consciousness has committed
acts, or cherished dispositions, contrary to the divine law.


1. _Proof from Scripture._

The universality of transgression is:

(_a_) Set forth in direct statements of Scripture.


    _1 K. 8:46_—“_there is no man that sinneth not_”; _Ps.
    143:2_—“_enter not into judgment with thy servant; For in thy
    sight no man living is righteous_”; _Prov. 20:9_—“_Who can say, I
    have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?_”; _Eccl.
    7:20_—“_Surely there is not a righteous man upon earth, that doeth
    good, and sinneth not_”; _Luke 11:13_—“_If ye, then, being evil_”;
    _Rom. 3:10, 12_—“_There is none righteous, no, not one.... There
    is none that doeth good, no, not so much as one_”; _19, 20_—“_that
    every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may be brought under
    the judgment of God: because by the works of the law shall no
    flesh be justified in his sight; for through the law cometh the
    knowledge of sin_”; _23_—“_for all have sinned, and fall short of
    the glory of God_”; _Gal. 3:22_—“_the scripture shut up all things
    under sin_”; _James 3:2_—“_For in many things we all stumble_”; _1
    John 1:8_—“_If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves,
    and the truth is not in us._” Compare _Mat. 6:12_—“_forgive us our
    debts_”—given as a prayer for all men; _14_—“_if ye forgive men
    their trespasses_”—the condition of our own forgiveness.


(_b_) Implied in declarations of the universal need of atonement,
regeneration, and repentance.


    Universal need of atonement: _Mark 16:16_—“_He that believeth and
    is baptised shall be saved_” (Mark 16:9-20, though probably not
    written by Mark, is nevertheless of canonical authority); _John
    3:16_—“_God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
    Son, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish_”;
    _6:50_—“_This is the bread which cometh down out of heaven, that a
    man may eat thereof, and not die_”; _12:47_—“_I came not to judge
    the world, but to save the world_”; _Acts 4:12_—“_in none other is
    there salvation: for neither is there any other name under heaven,
    that is given among men, wherein we must be saved._” Universal
    need of regeneration: _John 3:3, 5_—“_Except one be born anew, he
    cannot see the kingdom of God.... Except one be born of water and
    the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God._” Universal
    need of repentance: _Acts 17:30_—“_commandeth men that they should
    all everywhere repent._” Yet Mrs. Mary Baker G. Eddy, in her
    “Unity of Good,” speaks of “the illusion which calls sin real and
    man a sinner needing a Savior.”


(_c_) Shown from the condemnation resting upon all who do not accept
Christ.


    _John 3:18_—“_he that believeth not hath been judged already,
    because he hath not believed on the name of the only begotten Son
    of God_”; _36_—“_he that obeyeth not the Son shall not see life,
    but the wrath of God abideth on him_”; Compare _1 John 5:19_—“_the
    whole world lieth in_ [_i. e._, in union with] _the evil one_”;
    see Annotated Paragraph Bible, _in loco_. Kaftan, Dogmatik,
    318—“Law requires love to God. This implies love to our neighbor,
    not only abstaining from all injury to him, but righteousness in
    all our relations, forgiving instead of requiting, help to enemies
    as well as friends in all salutary ways, self-discipline,
    avoidance of all sensuous immoderation, subjection of all sensuous
    activity as means for spiritual ends in the kingdom of God, and
    all this, not as a matter of outward conduct merely, but from the
    heart and as the satisfaction of one’s own will and desire. This
    is the will of God respecting us, which Jesus has revealed and of
    which he is the example in his life. Instead of this, man
    universally seeks to promote his own life, pleasure, and honor.”


(_d_) Consistent with those passages which at first sight seem to ascribe
to certain men a goodness which renders them acceptable to God, where a
closer examination will show that in each case the goodness supposed is a
merely imperfect and fancied goodness, a goodness of mere aspiration and
impulse due to preliminary workings of God’s Spirit, or a goodness
resulting from the trust of a conscious sinner in God’s method of
salvation.


    In _Mat 9:12_—“_They that are whole have no need of a physician,
    but they that are sick_”—Jesus means those who in their own esteem
    are whole; _cf._ _13_—“_I came not to call the righteous, but
    sinners_”—“if any were truly righteous, they would not need my
    salvation; if they think themselves so, they will not care to seek
    it” (An. Par. Bib.). In _Luke 10:30-37_—the parable of the good
    Samaritan—Jesus intimates, not that the good Samaritan was not a
    sinner, but that there were saved sinners outside of the bounds of
    Israel. In _Acts 10:35_—“_in every nation he that feareth him, and
    worketh righteousness, is acceptable to him_”—Peter declares, not
    that Cornelius was not a sinner, but that God had accepted him
    through Christ; Cornelius was already justified, but he needed to
    know (1) _that_ he was saved, and (2) _how_ he was saved; and
    Peter was sent to tell him of the fact, and of the method, of his
    salvation in Christ. In _Rom. 2:14_—“_for when Gentiles that have
    not the law do by nature the things of the law, these, not having
    the law, are a law unto themselves_”—it is only said that in
    certain respects the obedience of these Gentiles shows that they
    have an unwritten law in their hearts; it is not said that they
    perfectly obey the law and therefore have no sin—for Paul says
    immediately after (_Rom. 3:9_)—“_we before laid to the charge both
    of Jews and Greeks, that they are all under sin._”

    So with regard to the words “_perfect_” and “_upright_,” as
    applied to godly men. We shall see, when we come to consider the
    doctrine of Sanctification, that the word “_perfect_,” as applied
    to spiritual conditions already attained, signifies only a
    relative perfection, equivalent to sincere piety or maturity of
    Christian judgment, in other words, the perfection of a sinner who
    has long trusted in Christ, and in whom Christ has overcome his
    chief defects of character. See _1 Cor. 2:6_—“_we speak wisdom
    among the perfect_” (Am. Rev.: “_among them that are
    full-grown_”); _Phil. 3:15_—“_let us therefore, as many as are
    perfect, be thus minded_”—_i. e._, to press toward the goal—a goal
    expressly said by the apostles to be not yet attained (_v.
    12-14_).

    “Est deus in nobis; agitante calescimus illo.” God is the “spark
    that fires our clay.” S. S. Times, Sept. 21, 1901:609—“Humanity is
    better and worse than men have painted it. There has been a kind
    of theological pessimism in denouncing human sinfulness, which has
    been blind to the abounding love and patience and courage and
    fidelity to duty among men.” A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation,
    287-290—“There is a natural life of Christ, and that life pulses
    and throbs in all men everywhere. All men are created in Christ,
    before they are recreated in him. The whole race lives, moves, and
    has its being in him, for he is the soul of its soul and the life
    of its life.” To Christ then, and not to unaided human nature, we
    attribute the noble impulses of unregenerate men. These impulses
    are drawings of his Spirit, moving men to repentance. But they are
    influences of his grace which, if resisted, leave the soul in more
    than its original darkness.


2. _Proof from history, observation, and the common judgment of mankind._

(_a_) History witnesses to the universality of sin, in its accounts of the
universal prevalence of priesthood and sacrifice.


    See references in Luthardt, Fund. Truths, 161-172, 335-339.
    Baptist Review, 1882:343—“Plutarch speaks of the tear-stained
    eyes, the pallid and woe-begone countenances which he sees at the
    public altars, men rolling themselves in the mire and confessing
    their sins. Among the common people the dull feeling of guilt was
    too real to be shaken off or laughed away.”


(_b_) Every man knows himself to have come short of moral perfection, and,
in proportion to his experience of the world, recognizes the fact that
every other man has come short of it also.


    Chinese proverb: “There are but two good men; one is dead, and the
    other is not yet born.” Idaho proverb: “The only good Indian is a
    dead Indian.” But the proverb applies to the white man also. Dr.
    Jacob Chamberlain, the missionary, said: “I never but once in
    India heard a man deny that he was a sinner. But once a Brahmin
    interrupted me and said: ‘I deny your premisses. I am not a
    sinner. I do not need to do better.’ For a moment I was abashed.
    Then I said: ‘But what do your neighbors say?’ Thereupon one cried
    out: ‘He cheated me in trading horses’; another: ‘He defrauded a
    widow of her inheritance.’ The Brahmin went out of the house, and
    I never saw him again.” A great nephew of Richard Brinsley
    Sheridan, Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu, when a child, wrote in a few
    lines an “Essay on the Life of Man,” which ran as follows: “A
    man’s life naturally divides itself into three distinct parts: the
    first when he is contriving and planning all kinds of villainy and
    rascality,—that is the period of youth and innocence. In the
    second, he is found putting in practice all the villainy and
    rascality he has contrived,—that is the flower of mankind and
    prime of life. The third and last period is that when he is making
    his soul and preparing for another world,—that is the period of
    dotage.”


(_c_) The common judgment of mankind declares that there is an element of
selfishness in every human heart, and that every man is prone to some form
of sin. This common judgment is expressed in the maxims: “No man is
perfect”; “Every man has his weak side”, or “his price”; and every great
name in literature has attested its truth.


    Seneca, De Ira, 3:26—“We are all wicked. What one blames in
    another he will find in his own bosom. We live among the wicked,
    ourselves being wicked”; Ep., 22—“No one has strength of himself
    to emerge [from this wickedness]; some one must needs hold forth a
    hand; some one must draw us out.” Ovid, Met., 7:19—“I see the
    things that are better and I approve them, yet I follow the
    worse.... We strive even after that which is forbidden, and we
    desire the things that are denied.” Cicero: “Nature has given us
    faint sparks of knowledge; we extinguish them by our
    immoralities.”

    Shakespeare, Othello, 3:3—“Where’s that palace whereinto foul
    things Sometimes Intrude not? Who has a breast so pure, But some
    uncleanly apprehensions keep leets [meetings in court] and
    law-days, and in sessions sit With meditations lawful?” Henry VI.,
    II:3:3—“Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.” Hamlet, 2:2,
    compares God’s influence to the sun which “breeds maggots in a
    dead dog, Kissing carrion,”—that is, God is no more responsible
    for the corruption in man’s heart and the evil that comes from it,
    than the sun is responsible for the maggots which its heat breeds
    in a dead dog; 3:1—“We are arrant knaves all.” Timon of Athens,
    1:2—“Who lives that’s not depraved or depraves?”

    Goethe: “I see no fault committed which I too might not have
    committed.” Dr. Johnson: “Every man knows that of himself which he
    dare not tell to his dearest friend.” Thackeray showed himself a
    master in fiction by having no heroes; the paragons of virtue
    belonged to a cruder age of romance. So George Eliot represents
    life correctly by setting before us no perfect characters; all act
    from mixed motives. Carlyle, hero-worshiper as he was inclined to
    be, is said to have become disgusted with each of his heroes
    before he finished his biography. Emerson said that to understand
    any crime, he had only to look into his own heart. Robert Burns:
    “God knows I’m no thing I would be, Nor am I even the thing I
    could be.” Huxley: “The best men of the best epochs are simply
    those who make the fewest blunders and commit the fewest sins.”
    And he speaks of “the infinite wickedness” which has attended the
    course of human history. Matthew Arnold: “What mortal, when he
    saw, Life’s voyage done, his heavenly Friend, Could ever yet dare
    tell him fearlessly:—I have kept uninfringed my nature’s law: The
    inly written chart thou gavest me, to guide me, I have kept by to
    the end?” Walter Besant, Children of Gibeon: “The men of ability
    do not desire a system in which they shall not be able to do good
    to themselves first.” “Ready to offer praise and prayer on Sunday,
    if on Monday they may go into the market place to skin their
    fellows and sell their hides.” Yet Confucius declares that “man is
    born good.” He confounds conscience with will—the _sense_ of right
    with the _love_ of right. Dean Swift’s worthy sought many years
    for a method of extracting sunbeams from cucumbers. Human nature
    of itself is as little able to bear the fruits of God.

    Every man will grant (1) that he is not perfect in moral
    character; (2) that love to God has not been the constant motive
    of his actions, _i. e._, that he has been to some degree selfish;
    (3) that he has committed at least one known violation of
    conscience. Shedd, Sermons to the Natural Man, 86, 87—“Those
    theorists who reject revealed religion, and remand man to the
    first principles of ethics and morality as the only religion that
    he needs, send him to a tribunal that damns him”; for it is simple
    fact that “no human creature, in any country or grade of
    civilization, has ever glorified God to the extent of his
    knowledge of God.”


3. _Proof from Christian experience._

(_a_) In proportion to his spiritual progress does the Christian recognize
evil dispositions within him, which but for divine grace might germinate
and bring forth the most various forms of outward transgression.


    See Goodwin’s experience, in Baird, Elohim Revealed, 409; Goodwin,
    member of the Westminster Assembly of Divines, speaking of his
    conversion, says: “An abundant discovery was made to me of my
    inward lusts and concupiscence, and I was amazed to see with what
    greediness I had sought the gratification of every sin.” Töllner’s
    experience, in Martensen’s Dogmatics: Töllner, though inclined to
    Pelagianism, says: “I look into my own heart and I see with
    penitent sorrow that I must in God’s sight accuse myself of all
    the offences I have named,”—and he had named only deliberate
    transgressions;—“he who does not allow that he is similarly
    guilty, let him look deep into his own heart.” John Newton sees
    the murderer led to execution, and says: “There, but for the grace
    of God, goes John Newton.” Count de Maistre: “I do not know what
    the heart of a villain may be—I only know that of a virtuous man,
    and that is frightful.” Tholuck, on the fiftieth anniversary of
    his professorship at Halle, said to his students: “In review of
    God’s manifold blessings, the thing I seem most to thank him for
    is the conviction of sin.”

    Roper Ascham: “By experience we find out a short way, by a long
    wandering.” _Luke 15:25-32_ is sometimes referred to as indicating
    that there are some of God’s children who never wander from the
    Father’s house. But there were two prodigals in that family. The
    elder was a servant in spirit as well as the younger. J. J.
    Murphy, Nat. Selection and Spir. Freedom, 41, 42—“In the wish of
    the elder son that he might sometimes feast with his own friends
    apart from his father, was contained the germ of that desire to
    escape the wholesome restraints of home which, in its full
    development, had brought his brother first to riotous living, and
    afterwards to the service of the stranger and the herding of
    swine. This root of sin is in us all, but in him it was not so
    full-grown as to bring death. Yet he says: ‘_Lo, these many years
    do I serve thee_’ (δουλεύω—as a bondservant), ‘_and I never
    transgressed a commandment of thine._’ Are the father’s
    commandments grievous? Is service true and sincere, without love
    from the heart? The elder brother was calculating toward his
    father and unsympathetic toward his brother.” Sir J. R. Seelye,
    Ecce Homo: “No virtue can be safe, unless it is enthusiastic.”
    Wordsworth: “Heaven rejects the love Of nicely calculated less or
    more.”


(_b_) Since those most enlightened by the Holy Spirit recognize themselves
as guilty of unnumbered violations of the divine law, the absence of any
consciousness of sin on the part of unregenerate men must be regarded as
proof that they are blinded by persistent transgression.


    It is a remarkable fact that, while those who are enlightened by
    the Holy Spirit and who are actually overcoming their sins see
    more and more of the evil of their hearts and lives, those who are
    the slaves of sin see less and less of that evil, and often deny
    that they are sinners at all. Rousseau, in his Confessions,
    confesses sin in a spirit which itself needs to be confessed. He
    glosses over his vices, and magnifies his virtues. “No man,” he
    says, “can come to the throne of God and say: ‘I am a better man
    than Rousseau.’... Let the trumpet of the last judgment sound when
    it will: I will present myself before the Sovereign Judge with
    this book in my hand, and I will say aloud: ‘Here is what I did,
    what I thought, and what I was.’ ” “Ah,” said he, just before he
    expired, “how happy a thing it is to die, when one has no reason
    for remorse or self-reproach!” And then, addressing himself to the
    Almighty, he said: “Eternal Being, the soul that I am going to
    give thee back is as pure at this moment as it was when it
    proceeded from thee; render it a partaker of thy felicity!” Yet,
    in his boyhood, Rousseau was a petty thief. In his writings, he
    advocated adultery and suicide. He lived for more than twenty
    years in practical licentiousness. His children, most of whom, if
    not all, were illegitimate, he sent off to the foundling hospital
    as soon as they were born, thus casting them upon the charity of
    strangers, yet he inflamed the mothers of France with his eloquent
    appeals to them to nurse their own babies. He was mean,
    vacillating, treacherous, hypocritical, and blasphemous. And in
    his Confessions, he rehearses the exciting scenes of his life in
    the spirit of the bold adventurer. See N. M. Williams, in Bap.
    Review, art.: Rousseau, from which the substance of the above is
    taken.

    Edwin Forrest, when accused of being converted in a religious
    revival, wrote an indignant denial to the public press, saying
    that he had nothing to regret; his sins were those of omission
    rather than commission; he had always acted upon the principle of
    loving his friends and hating his enemies; and trusting in the
    justice as well as the mercy of God, he hoped, when he left this
    earthly sphere, to “wrap the drapery of his couch about him, and
    lie down to pleasant dreams.” And yet no man of his time was more
    arrogant, self-sufficient, licentious, revengeful. John Y. McCane,
    when sentenced to Sing Sing prison for six years for violating the
    election laws by the most highhanded bribery and ballot-stuffing,
    declared that he had never done anything wrong in his life. He was
    a Sunday School Superintendent, moreover. A lady who lived to the
    age of 92, protested that, if she had her whole life to live over
    again, she would not alter a single thing. Lord Nelson, after he
    had received his death wound at Trafalgar, said: “I have never
    been a great sinner.” Yet at that very time he was living in open
    adultery. Tennyson, Sea Dreams: “With all his conscience and one
    eye askew, So false, he partly took himself for true.” Contrast
    the utterance of the apostle Paul: _1 Tim. 1:15_—“_Christ Jesus
    came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief_.” It has
    been well said that “the greatest of sins is to be conscious of
    none.” Rowland Hill: “The devil makes little of sin, that he may
    retain the sinner.”

    The following reasons may be suggested for men’s unconsciousness
    of their sins: 1. We never know the force of any evil passion or
    principle within us, until we begin to resist it. 2. God’s
    providential restraints upon sin have hitherto prevented its full
    development. 3. God’s judgments against sin have not yet been made
    manifest. 4. Sin itself has a blinding influence upon the mind. 5.
    Only he who has been saved from the penalty of sin is willing to
    look into the abyss from which he has been rescued.—That a man is
    unconscious of any sin is therefore only proof that he is a great
    and hardened transgressor. This is also the most hopeless feature
    of his case, since for one who never realizes his sin there is no
    salvation. In the light of this truth, we see the amazing grace of
    God, not only in the gift of Christ to die for sinners, but in the
    gift of the Holy Spirit to convince men of their sins and to lead
    them to accept the Savior. _Ps. 90:8_—“_Thou hast set ... Our
    secret sins in the light of thy countenance_” = man’s inner
    sinfulness is hidden from himself, until it is contrasted with the
    holiness of God. Light = a luminary or sun, which shines down into
    the depths of the heart and brings out its hidden evil into
    painful relief. See Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:248-259;
    Edwards, Works, 2:326; John Caird, Reasons for Men’s
    Unconsciousness of their Sins, in Sermons, 33.


II. Every member of the human race, without exception, possesses a
corrupted nature, which is a source of actual sin, and is itself sin.


1. _Proof from Scripture._

A. The sinful acts and dispositions of men are referred to, and explained
by, a corrupt nature.


    By “nature” we mean that which is _born_ in a man, that which he
    has by birth. That there is an inborn corrupt state, from which
    sinful acts and dispositions flow, is evident from _Luke
    6:43-45_—“_there is no good tree that bringeth forth corrupt
    fruit.... the evil man out of the evil treasure_ [of his heart]
    _bringeth forth that which is evil_”; _Mat. 12:34_—“_Ye offspring
    of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things?_” _Ps.
    58:3_—“_The wicked are estranged from the womb: They go astray as
    soon as they are born, speaking lies._”


This corrupt nature (_a_) belongs to man from the first moment of his
being; (_b_) underlies man’s consciousness; (_c_) cannot be changed by
man’s own power; (_d_) first constitutes him a sinner before God; (_e_) is
the common heritage of the race.


    (_a_) _Ps. 51:5_—“_Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity; And in
    sin did my mother conceive me_”—here David is confessing, not his
    mother’s sin, but his own sin; and he declares that this sin goes
    back to the very moment of his conception. Tholuck, quoted by H.
    B. Smith, System, 281—“David confesses that sin begins with the
    life of man; that not only his works, but the man himself, is
    guilty before God.” Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:94—“David mentions the
    fact that he was born sinful, as an aggravation of his particular
    act of adultery, and not as an excuse for it.” (_b_) _Ps.
    19:12_—“_Who can discern his errors? Clear thou me from hidden
    faults_”; _51:6, 7_—“_Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward
    parts; And in the hidden part thou wilt make me to know wisdom.
    Purify me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: Wash me, and I shall
    be whiter than snow._” (_c_) _Jer. 13:23_—“_Can the Ethiopian
    change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do
    good, that are accustomed to do evil_”; _Rom. 7:24_—“_Wretched man
    that I am! who shall deliver me out of the body of this death?_”
    (_d_) _Ps. 51:6_—“_Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward
    parts_”; _Jer. 17:9_—“_The heart is deceitful above all things and
    it is exceedingly corrupt: who can know it? I, Jehovah, search the
    mind, I try the heart,_”—only God can fully know the native and
    incurable depravity of the human heart; see Annotated Paragraph
    Bible, _in loco_, (_e_) _Job 14:4_—“_Who can bring a clean thing
    out of an unclean? not one_”; _John 3:6_—“_That which is born of
    the flesh is flesh,_” _i. e._, human nature sundered from God.
    Pope, Theology, 2:53—“Christ, who knew what was in man, says: ‘_If
    ye then, being evil_’ (_Mat. 7:11_), and ‘_That which is born of
    the flesh is flesh_’ (_John 3:6_), that is—putting the two
    together—‘men are evil, because they are born evil.’ ”

    Nathaniel Hawthorne’s story of The Minister’s Black Veil portrays
    the isolation of every man’s deepest life, and the awe which any
    visible assertion of that isolation inspires. C. P. Cranch: “We
    are spirits clad in veils; Man by man was never seen; All our deep
    communing fails To remove the shadowy screen.” In the heart of
    every one of us is that fearful “black drop,” which the Koran says
    the angel showed to Mohammed. Sin is like the taint of scrofula in
    the blood, which shows itself in tumors, in consumption, in
    cancer, in manifold forms, but is everywhere the same organic
    evil. Byron spoke truly of “This ineradicable taint of sin, this
    boundless Upas, this all-blasting tree.”

    E. G. Robinson, Christ. Theol., 161, 162—“The objection that
    conscience brings no charge of guilt against inborn depravity,
    however true it may be of the nature in its passive state, is
    seen, when the nature is roused to activity, to be unfounded. This
    faculty, on the contrary, lends support to the doctrine it is
    supposed to overthrow. When the conscience holds intelligent
    inquisition upon single acts, it soon discovers that these are
    mere accessories to crime, while the principal is hidden away
    beyond the reach of consciousness. In following up its
    inquisition, it in due time extorts the exclamation of David: _Ps.
    51:5_—‘_Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity; And in sin did my
    mother conceive me._’ Conscience traces guilt to its seat in the
    inherited nature.”


B. All men are declared to be by nature children of wrath (Eph. 2:3). Here
“nature” signifies something inborn and original, as distinguished from
that which is subsequently acquired. The text implies that: (_a_) Sin is a
nature, in the sense of a congenital depravity of the will. (_b_) This
nature is guilty and condemnable,—since God’s wrath rests only upon that
which deserves it. (_c_) All men participate in this nature and in this
consequent guilt and condemnation.


    _Eph. 2:3_—“_were by nature children of wrath, even as the rest._”
    Shedd: “Nature here is not substance created by God, but
    corruption of that substance, which corruption is created by man.”
    “Nature” (from _nascor_) may denote anything inborn, and the term
    may just as properly designate inborn evil tendencies and state,
    as inborn faculties or substance. “_By nature_” therefore = “by
    birth”; compare _Gal. 2:15_—“_Jews by nature._” E. G. Robinson:
    “Nature = not οὐσία, or essence, but only qualification of
    essence, as something born in us. There is just as much difference
    in babes, from the beginning of their existence, as there is in
    adults. If sin is defined as ‘voluntary transgression of known
    law,’ the definition of course disposes of original sin.” But if
    sin is a selfish state of the will, such a state is demonstrably
    inborn. Aristotle speaks of some men as born to be savages (φύσει
    βάρβαροι), and of others as destined by nature to be slaves (φύσει
    δοῦλοι). Here evidently is a congenital aptitude and disposition.
    Similarly we can interpret Paul’s words as declaring nothing less
    than that men are possessed at birth of an aptitude and
    disposition which is the object of God’s just displeasure.

    The opposite view can be found in Stevens, Pauline Theology,
    152-157. Principal Fairbairn also says that inherited sinfulness
    “is _not_ transgression, and is _without_ guilt.” Ritschl, Just.
    and Recon., 344—“The predicate ‘children of wrath’ refers to the
    former actual transgression of those who now as Christians have
    the right to apply to themselves that divine purpose of grace
    which is the antithesis of wrath.” Meyer interprets the verse; “We
    _become_ children of wrath by following a natural propensity.” He
    claims the doctrine of the apostle to be, that man incurs the
    divine wrath by his _actual_ sin, when he submits his will to the
    inborn sin principle. So N. W. Taylor, Concio ad Clerum, quoted in
    H. B. Smith, System, 281—“We were by nature such that we became
    through our own act children of wrath.” “But,” says Smith, “if the
    apostle had meant this, he could have said so; there is a proper
    Greek word for ‘became’; the word which is used can only be
    rendered ‘were.’ ” So _1 Cor. 7:14_—“_else were your children
    unclean_”—implies that, apart from the operations of grace, all
    men are defiled in virtue of their very birth from a corrupt
    stock. Cloth is first died in the wool, and then dyed again after
    the weaving. Man is a “double-dyed villain.” He is corrupted by
    nature and afterwards by practice. The colored physician in New
    Orleans advertised that his method was “first to remove the
    disease, and then to eradicate the system.” The New School method
    of treating this text is of a similar sort. Beginning with a
    definition of sin which excludes from that category all inborn
    states of the will, it proceeds to vacate of their meaning the
    positive statements of Scripture.

    For the proper interpretation of _Eph. 2:3_, see Julius Müller,
    Doct. of Sin, 2:278, and Commentaries of Harless and Olshausen.
    See also Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 3:212 _sq._; Thomasius, Christi
    Person und Werk, 1:289; and an excellent note in the Expositor’s
    Greek N.T., _in loco_. _Per contra_, see Reuss, Christ. Theol. in
    Apost. Age, 2:29, 79-84; Weiss, Bib. Theol. N.T., 239.


C. Death, the penalty of sin, is visited even upon those who have never
exercised a personal and conscious choice (Rom. 5:12-14). This text
implies that (_a_) Sin exists in the case of infants prior to moral
consciousness, and therefore in the nature, as distinguished from the
personal activity. (_b_) Since infants die, this visitation of the penalty
of sin upon them marks the ill-desert of that nature which contains in
itself, though undeveloped, the germs of actual transgression. (_c_) It is
therefore certain that a sinful, guilty, and condemnable nature belongs to
all mankind.


    _Rom. 5:12-14_—“_Therefore, as through one man sin entered into
    the world, and death through sin; and so death passed unto all
    men, for that all sinned:—for until the law sin was in the world;
    but sin is not imputed when there is no law. Nevertheless death
    reigned from Adam until Moses, even over them that had not sinned
    after the likeness of Adam’s transgression_”—that is, over those
    who, like infants, had never personally and consciously sinned.
    See a more full treatment of these last words in connection with
    an exegesis of the whole passage—_Rom. 5:12-19_—under Imputation
    of Sin, pages 625-627.

    N. W. Taylor maintained that infants, prior to moral agency, are
    not subjects of the moral government of God, any more than are
    animals. In this he disagreed with Edwards, Bellamy, Hopkins,
    Dwight, Smalley, Griffin. See Tyler, Letters on N. E. Theol., 8,
    132-142—“To say that animals die, and therefore death can be no
    proof of sin in infants, is to take infidel ground. The infidel
    has just as good a right to say: Because animals die without being
    sinners, therefore adults may. If death may reign to such an
    alarming extent over the human race and yet be no proof of sin,
    then you adopt the principle that death may reign to any extent
    over the universe, yet never can be made a proof of sin in any
    case.” We reserve our full proof that physical death is the
    penalty of sin to the section on Penalty as one of the
    Consequences of Sin.


2. _Proof from Reason._

Three facts demand explanation: (_a_) The universal existence of sinful
dispositions in every mind, and of sinful acts in every life. (_b_) The
preponderating tendencies to evil, which necessitate the constant
education of good impulses, while the bad grow of themselves. (_c_) The
yielding of the will to temptation, and the actual violation of the divine
law, in the case of every human being so soon as he reaches moral
consciousness.


    The fundamental selfishness of man is seen in childhood, when
    human nature acts itself out spontaneously. It is difficult to
    develop courtesy in children. There can be no true courtesy
    without regard for man as man and willingness to accord to each
    man his place and right as a son of God equal with ourselves. But
    children wish to please themselves without regard to others. The
    mother asks the child: “Why don’t you do right instead of doing
    wrong?” and the child answers: “Because it makes me so tired,” or
    “Because I do wrong without trying.” Nothing runs itself, unless
    it is going down hill. “No other animal does things habitually
    that will injure and destroy it, and does them from the love of
    it. But man does this, and he is born to do it, he does it from
    birth. As the seedlings of the peach-tree are all peaches, not
    apples, and those of thorns are all thorns, not grapes, so all the
    descendants of man are born with evil in their natures. That sin
    continually comes back to us, like a dog or cat that has been
    driven away, proves that our hearts are its home.”

    Mrs. Humphrey Ward’s novel, Robert Elsmere, represents the
    milk-and-water school of philanthropists. “Give man a chance,”
    they say; “give him good example and favorable environment and he
    will turn out well. He is more sinned against than sinning. It is
    the outward presence of evil that drives men to evil courses.” But
    God’s indictment is found in _Rom. 8:7_—“_the mind of the flesh is
    enmity against God._” G. P. Fisher: “Of the ideas of natural
    religion, Plato, Plutarch and Cicero found in the fact that they
    are in man’s _reason_, but not obeyed and realized in man’s
    _will_, the most convincing evidence that humanity is at schism
    with itself, and therefore depraved, fallen, and unable to deliver
    itself. The reason why many moralists fail and grow bitter and
    hateful is that they do not take account of this state of sin.”


Reason seeks an underlying principle which will reduce these multitudinous
phenomena to unity. As we are compelled to refer common physical and
intellectual phenomena to a common physical and intellectual nature, so we
are compelled to refer these common moral phenomena to a common moral
nature, and to find in it the cause of this universal, spontaneous, and
all-controlling opposition to God and his law. The only possible solution
of the problem is this, that the common nature of mankind is corrupt, or,
in other words, that the human will, prior to the single volitions of the
individual, is turned away from God and supremely set upon
self-gratification. This unconscious and fundamental direction of the
will, as the source of actual sin, must itself be sin; and of this sin all
mankind are partakers.


    The greatest thinkers of the world have certified to the
    correctness of this conclusion. See Aristotle’s doctrine of “the
    slope,” described in Chase’s Introduction to Aristotle’s Ethics,
    XXXV and 32—“In regard to moral virtue, man stands on a slope. His
    appetites and passions gravitate downward; his reason attracts him
    upward. Conflict occurs. A step upward, and reason gains what
    passion has lost; but the reverse is the case if he steps
    downward. The tendency in the former case is to the entire
    subjection of passion; in the latter case, to the entire
    suppression of reason. The slope will terminate upwards in a level
    summit where men’s steps will be secure, or downwards in an
    irretrievable plunge over the precipice. Continual self-control
    leads to absolute self-mastery; continual failure, to the utter
    absence of self-control. But _all we can see is the slope_. No man
    is ever at the ἠρεμία of the summit, nor can we say that a man has
    irretrievably fallen into the abyss. How it is that men constantly
    act against their own convictions of what is right, and their
    previous determinations to follow right, is a mystery Which
    Aristotle discusses, but leaves unexplained.

    “Compare the passage in the Ethics, 1:11—‘Clearly there is in them
    [men], besides the Reason, some other Inborn principle (πεφυκός)
    which fights with and strains against the Reason.... There is in
    the soul also somewhat besides the Reason which is opposed to this
    and goes against it.’—Compare this passage with Paul, in _Rom.
    7:23_—‘_I see a different law in my members, warring against the
    law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity under the law of
    sin which is in my members._’ But as Aristotle does not explain
    the cause, so he suggests no cure. Revelation alone can account
    for the disease, or point out the remedy.”

    Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 1:102—“Aristotle makes the significant
    and almost surprising observation, that the character which has
    become evil by guilt can just as little be thrown off again at
    mere volition, as the person who has made himself sick by his own
    fault can become well again at mere volition; once become evil or
    sick, it stands no longer within his discretion to cease to be so;
    a stone, when once cast, cannot be caught back from its flight;
    and so is it with the character that has become evil.” He does not
    tell “how a reformation in character is possible,—moreover, he
    does not concede to evil any other than an individual
    effect,—knows nothing of any natural solidarity of evil in
    self-propagating, morally degenerated races” (Nic. Eth., 3:6, 7;
    5:12; 7:2, 3; 10:10). The good nature, he says, “is evidently not
    within our power, but is by some kind of divine causality
    conferred upon the truly happy.”

    Plato speaks of “that blind, many-headed wild beast of all that is
    evil within thee.” He repudiates the idea that men are naturally
    good, and says that, if this were true, all that would be needed
    to make them holy would be to shut them up, from their earliest
    years, so that they might not be corrupted by others. Republic, 4
    (Jowett’s translation, 11:276)—“There is a rising up of part of
    the soul against the whole of the soul.” Meno, 89—“The cause of
    corruption is from our parents, so that we never relinquish their
    evil way, or escape the blemish of their evil habit.” Horace, Ep.,
    1:10—“Naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret.” Latin
    proverb: “Nemo repente fuit turpissimus.” Pascal: “We are born
    unrighteous; for each one tends to himself, and the bent toward
    self is the beginning of all disorder.” Kant, in his Metaphysical
    Principles of Human Morals, speaks of “the indwelling of an evil
    principle side by side with the good one, or the radical evil of
    human nature,” and of “the contest between the good and the evil
    principles for the control of man.” “Hegel, pantheist as he was,
    declared that original sin is the nature of every man,—every man
    begins with it” (H. B. Smith).

    Shakespeare, Timon of Athens, 4:3—“All is oblique: There’s nothing
    level in our cursed natures, But direct villainy.” All’s Well,
    4:3—“As we are in ourselves, how weak we are! Merely our own
    traitors.” Measure for Measure, 1:2—“Our natures do pursue, Like
    rats that ravin down their proper bane, A thirsty evil, and when
    we drink, we die.” Hamlet, 3:1—“Virtue cannot so inoculate our old
    stock, but we shall relish of it.” Love’s Labor Lost, 1:1—“Every
    man with his affects is born, Not by might mastered, but by
    special grace.” Winter’s Tale, 1:2—“We should have answered Heaven
    boldly, Not guilty; the imposition cleared Hereditary ours”—that
    is, provided our hereditary connection with Adam had not made us
    guilty. On the theology of Shakespeare, see A. H. Strong, Great
    Poets, 196-211—“If any think it irrational to believe in man’s
    depravity, guilt, and need of supernatural redemption, they must
    also be prepared to say that Shakespeare did not understand human
    nature.”

    S. T. Coleridge, Omniana, at the end: “It is a fundamental article
    of Christianity that I am a fallen creature ... that an evil
    ground existed in my will, previously to any act or assignable
    moment of time in my consciousness; I am born a child of wrath.
    This fearful mystery I pretend not to understand. I cannot even
    conceive the possibility of it; but I know that it is so, ... and
    what is real must be possible.” A sceptic who gave his children no
    religious training, with the view of letting them each in mature
    years choose a faith for himself, reproved Coleridge for letting
    his garden run to weeds; but Coleridge replied, that he did not
    think it right to prejudice the soil in favor of roses and
    strawberries. Van Oosterzee: Rain and sunshine make weeds grow
    more quickly, but could not draw them out of the soil if the seeds
    did not lie there already; so evil education and example draw out
    sin, but do not implant it. Tennyson, Two Voices: “He finds a
    baseness in his blood, At such strange war with what is good, He
    cannot do the thing he would.” Robert Browning, Gold Hair: a
    Legend of Pornic: “The faith that launched point-blank her dart At
    the head of a lie—taught Original Sin, The corruption of Man’s
    Heart.” Taine, Ancien Régime: “Savage, brigand and madman each of
    us harbors, in repose or manacled, but always living, in the
    recesses of his own heart.” Alexander Maclaren: “A great mass of
    knotted weeds growing in a stagnant pool is dragged toward you as
    you drag one filament.” Draw out one sin, and it brings with it
    the whole matted nature of sin.

    Chief Justice Thompson, of Pennsylvania: “If those who preach had
    been lawyers previous to entering the ministry, they would know
    and say far more about the depravity of the human heart than they
    do. The old doctrine of total depravity is the only thing that can
    explain the falsehoods, the dishonesties, the licentiousness, and
    the murders which are so rife in the world. Education, refinement,
    and even a high order of talent, cannot overcome the inclination
    to evil which exists in the heart, and has taken possession of the
    very fibres of our nature.” See Edwards, Original Sin, in Works,
    2:309-510; Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:259-307; Hodge, Syst.
    Theol., 2:231-238; Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 226-236.



Section IV.—Origin Of Sin In The Personal Act Of Adam.


With regard to the origin of this sinful nature which is common to the
race, and which is the occasion of all actual transgressions, reason
affords no light. The Scriptures, however, refer the origin of this nature
to that free act of our first parents by which they turned away from God,
corrupted themselves, and brought themselves under the penalties of the
law.


    Chandler, Spirit of Man, 76—“It is vain to attempt to sever the
    moral life of Christianity from the historical fact in which it is
    rooted. We may cordially assent to the assertion that the whole
    value of historical events is in their ideal significance. But in
    many cases, part of that which the idea signifies is the fact that
    it has been exhibited in history. The value and interest of the
    conquest of Greece over Persia lie in the significant idea of
    freedom and intelligence triumphing over despotic force; but
    surely a part, and a very important part, of the idea, is the fact
    that this triumph was won in a historical past, and the
    encouragement for the present which rests upon that fact. So too,
    the value of Christ’s resurrection lies in its immense moral
    significance as a principle of life; but an essential part of that
    very significance is the fact that the principle was actually
    realized by One in whom mankind was summed up and expressed, and
    by whom, therefore, the power of realizing it is conferred on all
    who receive him.”

    As it is important for us to know that redemption is not only
    ideal but actual, so it is important for us to know that sin is
    not an inevitable accompaniment of human nature, but that it had a
    historical beginning. Yet no _a priori_ theory should prejudice
    our examination of the facts. We would preface our consideration
    of the Scriptural account, therefore, by stating that our view of
    inspiration would permit us to regard that account as inspired,
    even if it were mythical or allegorical. As God can use all
    methods of literary composition, so he can use all methods of
    instructing mankind that are consistent with essential truth.
    George Adam Smith observes that the myths and legends of primitive
    folk-lore are the intellectual equivalents of later philosophies
    and theories of the universe, and that “at no time has revelation
    refused to employ such human conceptions for the investiture and
    conveyance of the higher spiritual truths.” Sylvester Burnham:
    “Fiction and myth have not yet lost their value for the moral and
    religious teacher. What a knowledge of his own nature has shown
    man to be good for his own use, God surely may also have found to
    be good for his use. Nor would it of necessity affect the value of
    the Bible if the writer, in using for his purpose myth or fiction,
    supposed that he was using history. Only when the value of the
    truth of the teaching depends upon the historicity of the alleged
    fact, does it become impossible to use myth or fiction for the
    purpose of teaching.” See vol. 1, page 241 of this work, with
    quotations from Denney, Studies in Theology, 218, and Gore, in Lux
    Mundi, 356. Euripides: “Thou God of all! infuse light into the
    souls of men, whereby they may be enabled to know what is the root
    from which all their evils spring, and by what means they may
    avoid them!”


I. The Scriptural Account of the Temptation and Fall in Genesis 3:1-7.


1. Its general, character not mythical or allegorical, but historical.


We adopt this view for the following reasons:—(_a_) There is no intimation
in the account itself that it is not historical. (_b_) As a part of a
historical book, the presumption is that it is itself historical. (_c_)
The later Scripture writers refer to it as a veritable history even in its
details. (_d_) Particular features of the narrative, such as the placing
of our first parents in a garden and the speaking of the tempter through a
serpent-form, are incidents suitable to man’s condition of innocent but
untried childhood. (_e_) This view that the narrative is historical does
not forbid our assuming that the trees of life and of knowledge were
symbols of spiritual truths, while at the same time they were outward
realities.


    See _John 8:44_—“_Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts
    of your father it is your will to do. He was a murderer from the
    beginning, and standeth not in the truth, because there is no
    truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for
    he is a liar and the father thereof_”; _2 Cor. 11:3_—“_the serpent
    beguiled Eve in his craftiness_”; _Rev. 20:2_—“_the dragon, the
    old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan._” H. B. Smith, System,
    261—“If Christ’s temptation and victory over Satan were historical
    events, there seems to be no ground for supposing that the first
    temptation was not a historical event.” We believe in the unity
    and sufficiency of Scripture. We moreover regard the testimony of
    Christ and the apostles as conclusive with regard to the
    historicity of the account in Genesis. We assume a divine
    superintendence in the choice of material by its author, and the
    fulfilment to the apostles of Christ’s promise that they should be
    guided into the truth. Paul’s doctrine of sin is so manifestly
    based upon the historical character of the Genesis story, that the
    denial of the one must naturally lead to the denial of the other.
    John Milton writes, in his Areopagitica: “It was from out of the
    rind of one apple tasted that the knowledge of good and evil, as
    two twins cleaving together, leaped forth into the world. And
    perhaps this is that doom which Adam fell into, that is to say, of
    knowing good by evil.” He should have learned to know evil as God
    knows it—as a thing possible, hateful, and forever rejected. He
    actually learned to know evil as Satan knows it—by making it
    actual and matter of bitter experience.

    Infantile and innocent man found his fit place and work in a
    garden. The language of appearances is doubtless used. Satan might
    enter into a brute-form, and might appear to speak through it. In
    all languages, the stories of brutes speaking show that such a
    temptation is congruous with the condition of early man. Asiatic
    myths agree in representing the serpent as the emblem of the
    spirit of evil. The tree of the knowledge of good and evil was the
    symbol of God’s right of eminent domain, and indicated that all
    belonged to him. It is not necessary to suppose that it was known
    by this name before the Fall. By means of it man came to know
    good, by the loss of it; to know evil, by bitter experience; C. H.
    M.: “To know good, without the power to do it; to know evil,
    without the power to avoid it.” Bible Com., 1:40—The tree of life
    was symbol of the fact that “life is to be sought, not from
    within, from himself, in his own powers or faculties; but from
    that which is without him, even from him who hath life in
    himself.”

    As the water of baptism and the bread of the Lord’s supper, though
    themselves common things, are symbolic of the greatest truths, so
    the tree of knowledge and the tree of life were sacramental.
    McIlvaine, Wisdom of Holy Scripture, 99-141—“The two trees
    represented good and evil. The prohibition of the latter was a
    declaration that man of himself could not distinguish between good
    and evil, and must trust divine guidance. Satan urged man to
    discern between good and evil by his own wisdom, and so become
    independent of God. Sin is the attempt of the creature to exercise
    God’s attribute of discerning and choosing between good and evil
    by his own wisdom. It is therefore self-conceit, self-trust,
    self-assertion, the preference of his own wisdom and will to the
    wisdom and will of God.” McIlvaine refers to Lord Bacon, Works,
    1:82, 162. See also Pope, Theology, 2:10, 11; Boston Lectures for
    1871:80, 81.

    Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 142, on the tree of the
    knowledge of good and evil—“When for the first time man stood face
    to face with definite conscious temptation to do that which he
    knew to be wrong, he held in his hand the fruit of that tree, and
    his destiny as a moral being hung trembling in the balance. And
    when for the first time he succumbed to temptation and faint
    dawnings of remorse visited his heart, at that moment he was
    banished from the Eden of innocence, in which his nature had
    hitherto dwelt, and he was driven forth from the presence of the
    Lord.” With the first sin, was started another and a downward
    course of development. For the mythical or allegorical explanation
    of the narrative, see also Hase, Hutterus Redivivus, 164, 165, and
    Nitzsch, Christian Doctrine, 218.


2. The course of the temptation, and the resulting fall.


The stages of the temptation appear to have been as follows:

(_a_) An appeal on the part of Satan to innocent appetites, together with
an implied suggestion that God was arbitrarily withholding the means of
their gratification (Gen. 3:1). The first sin was in Eve’s isolating
herself and choosing to seek her own pleasure without regard to God’s
will. This initial selfishness it was, which led her to listen to the
tempter instead of rebuking him or flying from him, and to exaggerate the
divine command in her response (Gen. 3:3).


    _Gen. 3:1_—“_Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of any tree of
    the garden?_” Satan emphasizes the _limitation_, but is silent
    with regard to the generous _permission_—“_Of every tree of the
    garden_ [but one] _thou mayest freely eat_” (_2:16_). C. H. M.,
    _in loco_: “To admit the question ‘_hath God said?_’ is already
    positive infidelity. To add to God’s word is as bad as to take
    from it. ‘_Hath God said?_’ is quickly followed by ‘_Ye shall not
    surely die._’ Questioning whether God has spoken, results in open
    contradiction of what God has said. Eve suffered God’s word to be
    contradicted by a creature, only because she had abjured its
    authority over her conscience and heart.” The command was simply:
    “_thou shalt not eat of it_” (_Gen. 2:17_). In her rising dislike
    to the authority she had renounced, she exaggerates the command
    into: “_Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it_” (_Gen.
    3:3_). Here is already self-isolation, instead of love. Matheson,
    Messages of the Old Religions, 318—“Ere ever the human soul
    disobeyed, it had learned to distrust.... Before it violated the
    existing law, it had come to think of the Lawgiver as one who was
    jealous of his creatures.” Dr. C. H. Parkhurst: “The first
    question ever asked in human history was asked by the devil, and
    the interrogation point still has in it the trail of the serpent.”


(_b_) A denial of the veracity of God, on the part of the tempter, with a
charge against the Almighty of jealousy and fraud in keeping his creatures
in a position of ignorance and dependence (Gen. 3:4, 5). This was
followed, on the part of the woman, by positive unbelief, and by a
conscious and presumptuous cherishing of desire for the forbidden fruit,
as a means of independence and knowledge. Thus unbelief, pride, and lust
all sprang from the self-isolating, self-seeking spirit, and fastened upon
the means of gratifying it (Gen. 3:6).


    _Gen. 3:4, 5_—“_And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not
    surely die: for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then
    your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as God, knowing good
    and evil_”; _3:6_—“_And when the woman saw that the tree was good
    for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree
    was to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof,
    and did eat; and she gave also unto her husband with her, and he
    did eat_”—so “taking the word of a Professor of Lying, that he
    does not lie” (John Henry Newman). Hooker, Eccl. Polity, book
    I—“To live by one man’s will became the cause of all men’s
    misery.” Godet on _John 1:4_—“In the words ‘_life_’ and ‘_light_’
    it is natural to see an allusion to the tree of life and to that
    of knowledge. After having eaten of the former, man would have
    been called to feed on the second. John initiates us into the real
    essence of these primordial and mysterious facts and gives us in
    this verse, as it were, the philosophy of Paradise.” Obedience is
    the way to knowledge, and the sin of Paradise was the seeking of
    light without life; _cf._ _John 7:17_—“_If any man willeth to do
    his will, he shall know of the teaching, whether it is of God, or
    whether I speak from myself._”


(_c_) The tempter needed no longer to urge his suit. Having poisoned the
fountain, the stream would naturally be evil. Since the heart and its
desires had become corrupt, the inward disposition manifested itself in
act (Gen. 3:6—“did eat; and she gave also unto her husband with her” = who
had been with her, and had shared her choice and longing). Thus man fell
inwardly, before the outward act of eating the forbidden fruit,—fell in
that one fundamental determination whereby he made supreme choice of self
instead of God. This sin of the inmost nature gave rise to sins of the
desires, and sins of the desires led to the outward act of transgression
(James 1:15).


    _James 1:15_—“_Then the lust, when it hath conceived, beareth
    sin._” Baird, Elohim Revealed, 888—“The law of God had already
    been violated; man was fallen before the fruit had been plucked,
    or the rebellion had been thus signalized. The law required not
    only outward obedience but fealty of the heart, and this was
    withdrawn before any outward token indicated the change.” Would he
    part company with God, or with his wife? When the Indian asked the
    missionary where his ancestors were, and was told that they were
    in hell, he replied that he would go with his ancestors. He
    preferred hell with his tribe to heaven with God. Sapphira, in
    like manner, had opportunity given her to part company with her
    husband, but she preferred him to God; _Acts 5:7-11_.

    Philippi, Glaubenslehre: “So man became like God, a setter of law
    to himself. Man’s self-elevation to godhood was his fall. God’s
    self-humiliation to manhood was man’s restoration and
    elevation.... _Gen. 3:22_—‘_The man has become as one of us_’ in
    his condition of self-centered activity,—thereby losing all real
    likeness to God, which consists in having the same aim with God
    himself. _De te fabula narratur_; it is the condition, not of one
    alone, but of all the race.” Sin once brought into being is
    self-propagating; its seed is in itself: the centuries of misery
    and crime that have followed have only shown what endless
    possibilities of evil were wrapped up in that single sin. Keble:
    “’Twas but a little drop of sin We saw this morning enter in, And
    lo, at eventide a world is drowned!” Farrar, Fall of Man: “The
    guilty wish of one woman has swollen into the irremediable
    corruption of a world.” See Oehler, O.T. Theology, 1:231; Müller,
    Doct. Sin, 2:381-385; Edwards, on Original Sin, part 4, chap. 2;
    Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:168-180.


II. Difficulties connected with the Fall considered as the personal Act of
Adam.


1. How could a holy being fall?


Here we must acknowledge that we cannot understand how the first unholy
emotion could have found lodgment in a mind that was set supremely upon
God, nor how temptation could have overcome a soul in which there were no
unholy propensities to which it could appeal. The mere power of choice
does not explain the fact of an unholy choice. The fact of natural desire
for sensuous and intellectual gratification does not explain how this
desire came to be inordinate. Nor does it throw light upon the matter, to
resolve this fall into a deception of our first parents by Satan. Their
yielding to such deception presupposes distrust of God and alienation from
him. Satan’s fall, moreover, since it must have been uncaused by
temptation from without, is more difficult to explain than Adam’s fall.


    We may distinguish six incorrect explanations of the origin of
    sin: 1. Emmons: Sin is due to God’s efficiency—God wrought the sin
    in man’s heart. This is the “exercise system,” and is essentially
    pantheistic. 2. Edwards: Sin is due to God’s providence—God caused
    the sin indirectly by presenting motives. This explanation has all
    the difficulties of determinism. 3. Augustine: Sin is the result
    of God’s withdrawal from man’s soul. But inevitable sin is not
    sin, and the blame of it rests on God who withdrew the grace
    needed for obedience, 4. Pfleiderer: The fall results from man’s
    already existing sinfulness. The fault then belongs, not to man,
    but to God who made man sinful. 5. Hadley: Sin is due to man’s
    moral insanity. But such concreated ethical defect would render
    sin impossible. Insanity is the effect of sin, but not its cause.
    6. Newman: Sin is due to man’s weakness. It is a negative, not a
    positive, thing, an incident of finiteness. But conscience and
    Scripture testify that it is positive as well as negative,
    opposition to God as well as non-conformity to God.

    Emmons was really a pantheist: “Since God,” he says, “works in all
    men both to will and to do of his good pleasure, it is as easy to
    account for the first offence of Adam as for any other sin....
    There is no difficulty respecting the fall of Adam from his
    original state of perfection and purity into a state of sin and
    guilt, which is in any way peculiar.... It is as consistent with
    the moral rectitude of the Deity to produce sinful as holy
    exercises in the minds of men. He puts forth a positive influence
    to make moral agents act, in every instance of their conduct, as
    he pleases.... There is but one satisfactory answer to the
    question _Whence came evil?_ and that is: It came from the great
    first Cause of all things”; see Nathaniel Emmons, Works, 2:683.

    Jonathan Edwards also denied power to the contrary even in Adam’s
    first sin. God did not immediately cause that sin. But God was
    active in the region of motives though his action was not seen.
    Freedom of the Will, 161—“It was fitting that the transaction
    should so take place that it might not appear to be from God as
    the apparent fountain.” Yet “God may actually in his providence so
    dispose and permit things that the event may be certainly and
    infallibly connected with such disposal and permission”; see
    Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 304. Encyc. Britannica, 7:690—“According
    to Edwards, Adam had two principles,—natural and supernatural.
    When Adam sinned, the supernatural or divine principle was
    withdrawn from him, and thus his nature became corrupt without God
    infusing any evil thing into it. His posterity came into being
    entirely under the government of natural and inferior principles.
    But this solves the difficulty of making God the author of sin
    only at the expense of denying to sin any real existence, and also
    destroys Edwards’s essential distinction between natural and moral
    ability.” Edwards on Trinity, Fisher’s edition, 44—“The sun does
    not cause darkness and cold, when these follow infallibly upon the
    withdrawal of his beams. God’s disposing the result is not a
    positive exertion on his part.” Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:50—“God did
    not withdraw the common supporting grace of his Spirit from Adam
    until after transgression.” To us Adam’s act was irrational, but
    not impossible; to a determinist like Edwards, who held that men
    simply act out their characters, Adam’s act should have been not
    only irrational, but impossible. Edwards nowhere shows how,
    according to his principles, a holy being could possibly fall.

    Pfleiderer, Grundriss, 123—“The account of the fall is the first
    appearance of an already existing sinfulness, and a typical
    example of the way in which every individual becomes sinful.
    Original sin is simply the universality and originality of sin.
    There is no such thing as indeterminism. The will can lift itself
    from natural unfreedom, the unfreedom of the natural impulses, to
    real spiritual freedom, only by distinguishing itself from the law
    which sets before it its true end of being. The opposition of
    nature to the law reveals an original nature power which precedes
    all free self-determination. Sin is the evil bent of lawless
    self-willed selfishness.” Pfleiderer appears to make this
    sinfulness concreated, and guiltless, because proceeding from God.
    Hill, Genetic Philosophy, 288—“The wide discrepancy between
    precept and practice gives rise to the theological conception of
    _sin_, which, in low types of religion, is as often a violation of
    some trivial prescription as it is of an ethical principle. The
    presence of sin, contrasted with a state of innocence, occasions
    the idea of a fall, or lapse from a sinless condition. This is not
    incompatible with man’s derivation from an animal ancestry, which
    prior to the rise of self-consciousness may be regarded as having
    been in a state of moral _innocence_, the sense and reality of sin
    being impossible to the animal.... The existence of sin, both as
    an inherent disposition, and as a perverted form of action, may be
    explained as a survival of animal propensity in human life.... Sin
    is the disturbance of higher life by the intrusion of lower.”

    Professor James Hadley: “Every man is more or less insane.” We
    prefer to say: Every man, so far as he is apart from God, is
    morally insane. But we must not make sin the result of insanity.
    Insanity is the result of sin. Insanity, moreover, is a physical
    disease,—sin is a perversion of the will. John Henry Newman, Idea
    of a University, 60—“Evil has no substance of its own, but is only
    the defect, excess, perversion or corruption of that which has
    substance.” Augustine seems at times to favor this view. He
    maintains that evil has no origin, inasmuch as it is negative, not
    positive; that it is merely defect or failure. He illustrates it
    by the damaged state of a discordant harp; see Moule, Outlines of
    Theology, 171. So too A. A. Hodge, Popular Lectures, 190, tells us
    that Adam’s will was like a violin in tune, which through mere
    inattention and neglect got out of tune at last. But here, too, we
    must say with E. G. Robinson, Christ. Theology, 124—“Sin explained
    is sin defended.” All these explanations fail to explain, and
    throw the blame of sin upon God, as directly or indirectly its
    cause.


But sin is an existing fact. God cannot be its author, either by creating
man’s nature so that sin was a necessary incident of its development, or
by withdrawing a supernatural grace which was necessary to keep man holy.
Reason, therefore, has no other recourse than to accept the Scripture
doctrine that sin originated in man’s free act of revolt from God—the act
of a will which, though inclined toward God, was not yet confirmed in
virtue and was still capable of a contrary choice. The original possession
of such power to the contrary seems to be the necessary condition of
probation and moral development. Yet the exercise of this power in a
sinful direction can never be explained upon grounds of reason, since sin
is essentially unreason. It is an act of wicked arbitrariness, the only
motive of which is the desire to depart from God and to render self
supreme.


    Sin is a “_mystery of lawlessness_” (_2 Thess. 2:7_), at the
    beginning, as well as at the end. Neander, Planting and Training,
    388—“Whoever explains sin nullifies it.” Man’s power at the
    beginning to choose evil does not prove that, now that he has
    fallen, he has equal power of himself permanently to choose good.
    Because man has power to cast himself from the top of a precipice
    to the bottom, it does not follow that he has equal power to
    transport himself from the bottom to the top.

    Man fell by wilful resistance to the inworking God. Christ is in
    all men as he was in Adam, and all good impulses are due to him.
    Since the Holy Spirit is the Christ within, all men are the
    subjects of his striving. He does not withdraw from them except
    upon, and in consequence of, their withdrawing from him. John
    Milton makes the Almighty say of Adam’s sin: “Whose fault? Whose
    but his own? Ingrate, he had of me All he could have; I made him
    just and right, Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
    Such I created all the Etherial Powers, And Spirits, both them who
    stood and them who failed; Freely they stood who stood, and fell
    who failed.” The word “cussedness” has become an apt word here.
    The Standard Dictionary defines it as “1. Cursedness, meanness,
    perverseness; 2. resolute courage, endurance: ‘Jim Bludsoe’s voice
    was heard, And they all had trust in his cussedness And knowed he
    would keep his word.’ ” (John Hay, Jim Bludsoe, stanza 6). Not the
    last, but the first, of these definitions best describes the first
    sin. The most thorough and satisfactory treatment of the fall of
    man in connection with the doctrine of evolution is found in
    Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 73-240.

    Hodge, Essays and Reviews, 30—“There is a broad difference between
    the commencement of holiness and the commencement of sin, and more
    is necessary for the former than for the latter. An act of
    obedience, if it is performed under the mere impulse of self-love,
    is virtually no act of obedience. It is not performed with any
    intention to obey, for that is holy, and cannot, according to the
    theory, precede the act. But an act of disobedience, performed
    from the desire of happiness, is rebellion. The cases are surely
    different. If, to please myself, I do what God commands, it is not
    holiness; but if, to please myself, I do what he forbids, it is
    sin. Besides, no creature is immutable. Though created holy, the
    taste for holy enjoyments may be overcome by a temptation
    sufficiently insidious and powerful, and a selfish motive or
    feeling excited in the mind. Neither is a sinful character
    immutable. By the power of the Holy Spirit, the truth may be
    clearly presented and so effectually applied as to produce that
    change which is called regeneration; that is, to call into
    existence a taste for holiness, so that it is chosen for its own
    sake, and not as a means of happiness.”

    H. B. Smith, System, 262—“The state of the case, as far as we can
    enter into Adam’s experience, is this: Before the command, there
    was the state of love without the thought of the opposite: a
    knowledge of good only, a yet unconscious goodness: there was also
    the knowledge that the eating of the fruit was against the divine
    command. The temptation aroused pride; the yielding to that was
    the sin. The change was there. The change was not in the choice as
    an executive act, nor in the result of that act—the eating; but in
    the choice of supreme love to the world and self, rather than
    supreme devotion to God. It was an immanent preference of the
    world,—not a love of the world following the choice, but a love of
    the world which is the choice itself.”

    263—“We cannot account for Adam’s fall, psychologically. In saying
    this we mean: It is inexplicable by anything outside itself. We
    must receive the fact as ultimate, and rest there. Of course we do
    not mean that it was not in accordance with the laws of moral
    agency—that it was a violation of those laws: but only that we do
    not see the mode, that we cannot construct it for ourselves in a
    rational way. It differs from all other similar cases of ultimate
    preference _which we know_; _viz._, the sinner’s immanent
    preference of the world, where we know there is an antecedent
    ground in the bias to sin, and the Christian’s regeneration, or
    immanent preference of God, where we know there is an influence
    from without, the working of the Holy Spirit.” 264—“We must leave
    the whole question with the immanent preference standing forth as
    the ultimate fact in the case, which is not to be constructed
    philosophically, as far as the processes of Adam’s soul are
    concerned: we must regard that immanent preference as both a
    choice and an affection, not an affection the result of a choice,
    not a choice which is the consequence of an affection, but both
    together.”

    In one particular, however, we must differ with H. B. Smith: Since
    the power of voluntary internal movement is the power of the will,
    we must regard the change from good to evil as primarily a choice,
    and only secondarily a state of affection caused thereby. Only by
    postulating a free and conscious act of transgression on the part
    of Adam, an act which bears to evil affection the relation not of
    effect but of cause, do we reach, at the beginning of human
    development, a proper basis for the responsibility and guilt of
    Adam and the race. See Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:148-167.


2. How could God justly permit Satanic temptation?


We see in this permission not justice but benevolence.

(_a_) Since Satan fell without external temptation, it is probable that
man’s trial would have been substantially the same, even though there had
been no Satan to tempt him.


    Angels had no animal nature to obscure the vision; they could not
    be influenced through sense; yet they were tempted and they fell.
    As Satan and Adam sinned under the best possible circumstances, we
    may conclude that the human race would have sinned with equal
    certainty. The only question at the time of their creation,
    therefore, was how to modify the conditions so as best to pave the
    way for repentance and pardon. These conditions are: 1. a material
    body—which means confinement, limitation, need of self-restraint;
    2. infancy—which means development, deliberation, with no memory
    of the first sin; 3. the parental relation—repressing the
    wilfulness of the child, and teaching submission to authority.


(_b_) In this case, however, man’s fall would perhaps have been without
what now constitutes its single mitigating circumstance. Self-originated
sin would have made man himself a Satan.


    _Mat. 13:28_—“_An enemy hath done this._” “God permitted Satan to
    divide the guilt with man, so that man might be saved from
    despair.” See Trench, Studies in the Gospels, 16-29. Mason, Faith
    of the Gospel, 103—“Why was not the tree made outwardly repulsive?
    Because only the abuse of that which was positively good and
    desirable could have attractiveness for Adam or could constitute a
    real temptation.”


(_c_) As, in the conflict with temptation, it is an advantage to objectify
evil under the image of corruptible flesh, so it is an advantage to meet
it as embodied in a personal and seducing spirit.


    Man’s body, corruptible and perishable as it is, furnishes him
    with an illustration and reminder of the condition of soul to
    which sin has reduced him. The flesh, with its burdens and pains,
    is thus, under God, a help to the distinct recognition and
    overcoming of sin. So it was an advantage to man to have
    temptation confined to a single external voice. We may say of the
    influence of the tempter, as Birks, in his Difficulties of Belief,
    101, says of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil:
    “Temptation did not depend upon the tree. Temptation was certain
    in any event. The tree was a type into which God contracted the
    possibilities of evil, so as to strip them of delusive vastness,
    and connect them with definite and palpable warning,—to show man
    that it was only one of the many possible activities of his spirit
    which was forbidden, that God had right to all and could forbid
    all.” The originality of sin was the most fascinating element in
    it. It afforded boundless range for the imagination. Luther did
    well to throw his inkstand at the devil. It was an advantage to
    localize him. The concentration of the human powers upon a
    definite offer of evil helps our understanding of the evil and
    increases our disposition to resist it.


(_d_) Such temptation has in itself no tendency to lead the soul astray.
If the soul be holy, temptation may only confirm it in virtue. Only the
evil will, self-determined against God, can turn temptation into an
occasion of ruin.


    As the sun’s heat has no tendency to wither the plant rooted in
    deep and moist soil, but only causes it to send down its roots the
    deeper and to fasten itself the more strongly, so temptation has
    in itself no tendency to pervert the soul. It was only the seeds
    that “_fell upon the rocky places, where they had not much earth_”
    (_Mat. 13:5, 6_), that “_were scorched_” when “_the sun was
    risen_”; and our Lord attributes their failure, not to the sun,
    but to their lack of root and of soil: “_because they had no
    root_,” “_because they had no deepness of earth._” The same
    temptation which occasions the ruin of the false disciple
    stimulates to sturdy growth the virtue of the true Christian.
    Contrast with the temptation of Adam the temptation of Christ.
    Adam had everything to plead for God, the garden and its delights,
    while Christ had everything to plead against him, the wilderness
    and its privations. But Adam had confidence in Satan, while Christ
    had confidence in God; and the result was in the former case
    defeat, in the latter victory. See Baird, Elohim Revealed,
    385-396.

    C. H. Spurgeon: “All the sea outside a ship can do it no damage
    till the water enters and fills the hold. Hence, it is clear, our
    greatest danger is within. All the devils in hell and tempters on
    earth could do us no injury, if there were no corruption in our
    own natures. The sparks will fly harmlessly, if there is no
    tinder. Alas, our heart is our greatest enemy; this is the little
    home-born thief. Lord, save me from that evil man, myself!”

    Lyman Abbott: “The scorn of goody-goody is justified; for
    goody-goody is innocence, not virtue; and the boy who never does
    anything wrong because he never does anything at all is of no use
    in the world.... Sin is not a help in development; it is a
    hindrance. But temptation is a help; it is an indispensable
    means.” E. G. Robinson, Christ. Theology, 123—“Temptation in the
    bad sense and a fall from innocence were no more necessary to the
    perfection of the first man, than a marring of any one’s character
    is now necessary to its completeness.” John Milton, Areopagitica:
    “Many there be that complain of divine providence for suffering
    Adam to transgress. Foolish tongues! When God gave him reason, he
    gave him freedom to choose, for reason is but choosing; he had
    been else a mere artificial Adam, such an Adam as he is in the
    motions” (puppet shows). Robert Browning, Ring and the Book, 204
    (Pope, 1183)—“Temptation sharp? Thank God a second time! Why comes
    temptation but for man to meet And master and make crouch beneath
    his foot, And so be pedestaled in triumph? Pray ‘Lead us into no
    such temptations. Lord’? Yea, but, O thou whose servants are the
    bold, Lead such temptations by the head and hair, Reluctant
    dragons, up to who dares fight, That so he may do battle and have
    praise!”


3. How could a penalty so great be justly connected with disobedience to
so slight a command?


To this question we may reply:

(_a_) So slight a command presented the best test of the spirit of
obedience.


    Cicero: “Parva res est, at magna culpa.” The child’s persistent
    disobedience in one single respect to the mother’s command shows
    that in all his other acts of seeming obedience he does nothing
    for his mother’s sake, but all for his own,—shows, in other words,
    that he does not possess the spirit of obedience in a single act.
    S. S. Times: “Trifles are trifles only to triflers. Awake to the
    significance of the insignificant! for you are in a world that
    belongs not alone to the God of the Infinite, but also to the God
    of the infinitesimal.”


(_b_) The external command was not arbitrary or insignificant in its
substance. It was a concrete presentation to the human will of God’s claim
to eminent domain or absolute ownership.


    John Hall, Lectures on the Religious rise of Property, 10—“It
    sometimes happens that owners of land, meaning to give the use of
    it to others, without alienating it, impose a nominal rent—a
    quit-rent, the passing of which acknowledges the recipient as
    owner and the occupier as tenant. This is understood in all lands.
    In many an old English deed, ‘three barley-corns,’ ‘a fat capon,’
    or ‘a shilling,’ is the consideration which permanently recognizes
    the rights of lordship. God taught men by the forbidden tree that
    he was owner, that man was occupier. He selected the matter of
    property to be the test of man’s obedience, the outward and
    sensible sign of a right state of heart toward God; and when man
    put forth his hand and did eat, he denied God’s ownership and
    asserted his own. Nothing remained but to eject him.”


(_c_) The sanction attached to the command shows that man was not left
ignorant of its meaning or importance.


    _Gen. 2:17_—“_in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt
    surely die._” _Cf._ _Gen. 3:3_—“_the tree which is in the midst of
    the garden_”; and see Dodge, Christian Theology, 206, 207—“The
    tree was central, as the commandment was central. The choice was
    between the tree of life and the tree of death,—between self and
    God. Taking the one was rejecting the other.”


(_d_) The act of disobedience was therefore the revelation of a will
thoroughly corrupted and alienated from God—a will given over to
ingratitude, unbelief, ambition, and rebellion.


    The motive to disobedience was not appetite, but the ambition to
    be as God. The outward act of eating the forbidden fruit was only
    the thin edge of the wedge, behind which lay the whole mass—the
    fundamental determination to isolate self and to seek personal
    pleasure regardless of God and his law. So the man under
    conviction for sin commonly clings to some single passion or plan,
    only half-conscious of the fact that opposition to God in one
    thing is opposition in all.


III. Consequences of the Fall, so far as respects Adam.


1. Death.


This death was twofold. It was partly:

A. Physical death, or the separation of the soul from the body.—The seeds
of death, naturally implanted in man’s constitution, began to develop
themselves the moment that access to the tree of life was denied him. Man
from that moment was a dying creature.


    In a true sense death began at once. To it belonged the pains
    which both man and woman should suffer in their appointed
    callings. The fact that man’s earthly existence did not at once
    end, was due to God’s counsel of redemption. “_The law of the
    Spirit of life_” (_Rom. 8:2_) began to work even then, and grace
    began to counteract the effects of the Fall. Christ has now
    “_abolished death_” (_2 Tim. 1:10_) by taking its terrors away,
    and by turning it into the portal of heaven. He will destroy it
    utterly (_1 Cor. 15:26_) when by resurrection from the dead, the
    bodies of the saints shall be made immortal. Dr. William A.
    Hammond, following a French scientist, declares that there is no
    reason in a normal physical system why man should not live
    forever.

    That death is not a physical necessity is evident if we once
    remember that life is, not fuel, but fire. Weismann, Heredity, 8,
    24, 72, 159—“The organism must not be looked upon as a heap of
    combustible material, which is completely reduced to ashes in a
    certain time, the length of which is determined by its size and by
    the rate at which it burns; but it should be compared to a fire,
    to which fresh fuel can be continually added, and which, whether
    it burns quickly or slowly, can be kept burning as long as
    necessity demands.... Death is not a primary necessity, but it has
    been acquired secondarily, as an adaptation.... Unicellular
    organisms, increasing by means of fission, in a certain sense
    possess immortality. No Amœba has ever lost an ancestor by
    death.... Each individual now living is far older than mankind,
    and is almost as old as life itself.... Death is not an essential
    attribute of living matter.”

    If we regard man as primarily spirit, the possibility of life
    without death is plain. God lives on eternally, and the future
    physical organism of the righteous will have in it no seed of
    death. Man might have been created without being mortal. That he
    is mortal is due to anticipated sin. Regard body as simply the
    constant energizing of God, and we see that there is no inherent
    necessity of death. Denney, Studies in Theology, 98—“Man, it is
    said, must die because he is a natural being, and what belongs to
    nature belongs to him. But we assert, on the contrary, that he was
    created a supernatural being, with a primacy over nature, so
    related to God as to be immortal. Death is an intrusion, and it is
    finally to be abolished.” Chandler, The Spirit of Man, 45-47—“The
    first stage in the fall was the disintegration of spirit into body
    and mind; and the second was the enslavement of mind to body.”

    Some recent writers, however, deny that death is a consequence of
    the Fall, except in the sense that man’s fear of death results
    from his sin. Newman Smyth, Place of Death in Evolution, 19-22,
    indeed, asserts the value and propriety of death as an element of
    the normal universe. He would oppose to the doctrine of Weismann
    the conclusions of Maupas, the French biologist, who has followed
    infusoria through 600 generations. Fission, says Maupas,
    reproduces for many generations, but the unicellular germ
    ultimately weakens and dies out. The asexual reproduction must be
    supplemented by a higher conjugation, the meeting and partial
    blending of the contents of two cells. This is only occasional,
    but it is necessary to the permanence of the species. Isolation is
    ultimate death. Newman Smyth adds that death and sex appear
    together. When sex enters to enrich and diversify life, all that
    will not take advantage of it dies out. Survival of the fittest is
    accompanied by death of that which will not improve. Death is a
    secondary thing—a consequence of life. A living form acquired the
    power of giving up its life for another. It died in order that its
    offspring might survive in a higher form. Death helps life on and
    up. It does not put a stop to life. It became an advantage to life
    as a whole that certain primitive forms should be left by the way
    to perish. We owe our human birth to death in nature. The earth
    before us has died that we might live. We are the living children
    of a world that has died for us. Death is a means of life, of
    increasing specialization of function. Some cells are born to give
    up their life sacrificially for the organism to which they belong.

    While we regard Newman Smyth’s view as an ingenious and valuable
    explanation of the incidental results of death, we do not regard
    it as an explanation of death’s origin. God has overruled death
    for good, and we can assent to much of Dr. Smyth’s exposition. But
    that this good could be gained only by death seems to us wholly
    unproved and unprovable. Biology shows us that other methods of
    reproduction are possible, and that death is an incident and not a
    primary requisite to development. We regard Dr. Smyth’s theory as
    incompatible with the Scripture representations of death as the
    consequence of sin, as the sign of God’s displeasure, as a means
    of discipline for the fallen, as destined to complete abolition
    when sin itself has been done away. We reserve, however, the full
    proof that physical death is part of the penalty of sin until we
    discuss the Consequences of Sin to Adam’s Posterity.


But this death was also, and chiefly,

B. Spiritual death, or the separation of the soul from God.—In this are
included: (_a_) Negatively, the loss of man’s moral likeness to God, or
that underlying tendency of his whole nature toward God which constituted
his original righteousness. (_b_) Positively, the depraving of all those
powers which, in their united action with reference to moral and religious
truth, we call man’s moral and religious nature; or, in other words, the
blinding of his intellect, the corruption of his affections, and the
enslavement of his will.


    Seeking to be a god, man became a slave; seeking independence, he
    ceased to be master of himself. Once his intellect was pure,—he
    was supremely conscious of God, and saw all things also in God’s
    light. Now he was supremely conscious of self, and saw all things
    as they affected self. This self-consciousness—how unlike the
    objective life of the first apostles, of Christ and of every
    loving soul! Once man’s affections were pure,—he loved God
    supremely, and other things in subordination to God’s will. Now he
    loved self supremely, and was ruled by inordinate affections
    toward the creatures which could minister to his selfish
    gratification. Now man could do nothing pleasing to God, because
    he lacked the love which is necessary to all true obedience.

    G. F. Wilkin, Control in Evolution, shows that the will may
    initiate a counter-evolution which shall reverse the normal course
    of man’s development. First comes an act, then a habit, of
    surrender to animalism; then subversion of faith in the true and
    the good; then active championship of evil; then transmission of
    evil disposition and tendencies to posterity. This subversion of
    the rational will by an evil choice took place very early, indeed
    in the first man. All human history has been a conflict between
    these two antagonistic evolutions, the upward and the downward.
    Biological rather than moral phenomena predominate. No human being
    escapes transgressing the law of his evolutionary nature. There is
    a moral deadness and torpor resulting. The rational will must be
    restored before man can go right again. Man must commit himself to
    a true life; then to the restoration of other men to that same
    life; then there must be coöperation of society; this work must
    extend to the limits of the human species. But this will be
    practicable and rational only as it is shown that the unfolding
    plan of the universe has destined the righteous to a future
    incomparably more desirable than that of the wicked; in other
    words, immortality is necessary to evolution.

    “If immortality be necessary to evolution, then immortality
    becomes scientific. Jesus has the authority and omnipresence of
    the power behind evolution. He imposes upon his followers the same
    normal evolutionary mission that sent him into the world. He
    organizes them into churches. He teaches a moral evolution of
    society through the united voluntary efforts of his followers.
    They are ‘_the good seed ... the sons of the kingdom_’ (_Mat.
    13:38_). Theism makes a definite attempt to counteract the evil of
    the counter-evolution, and the attempt justifies itself by its
    results. Christianity is scientific (1) in that it satisfies the
    conditions of _knowledge_: the persisting and comprehensive
    harmony of phenomena, and the interpretation of all the facts; (2)
    in its _aim_, the moral regeneration of the world; (3) in its
    _methods_, adapting itself to man as an ethical being, capable of
    endless progress; (4) in its conception of normal _society_, as of
    sinners uniting together to help one another to depend on God and
    conquer self, so recognizing the ethical bond as the most
    essential. This doctrine harmonizes science and religion,
    revealing the new species of control which marks the highest stage
    of evolution; shows that the religion of the N. T. is essentially
    scientific and its truths capable of practical verification; that
    Christianity is not any particular church, but the teachings of
    the Bible; that Christianity is the true system of ethics, and
    should be taught in public institutions; that cosmic evolution
    comes at last to depend on the wisdom and will of man, the
    immanent God working in finite and redeemed humanity.”


In fine, man no longer made God the end of his life, but chose self
instead. While he retained the power of self-determination in subordinate
things, he lost that freedom which consisted in the power of choosing God
as his ultimate aim, and became fettered by a fundamental inclination of
his will toward evil. The intuitions of the reason were abnormally
obscured, since these intuitions, so far as they are concerned with moral
and religious truth, are conditioned upon a right state of the affections;
and—as a necessary result of this obscuring of reason—conscience, which,
as the normal judiciary of the soul, decides upon the basis of the law
given to it by reason, became perverse in its deliverances. Yet this
inability to judge or act aright, since it was a moral inability springing
ultimately from will, was itself hateful and condemnable.


    See Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 3:61-73; Shedd, Sermons to the
    Natural Man, 202-230, esp. 205—“Whatsoever springs from will we
    are responsible for. Man’s inability to love God supremely results
    from his intense self-will and self-love, and therefore his
    impotence is a part and element of his sin, and not an excuse for
    it.” And yet the question “_Adam, where art thou?_” (_Gen. 3:9_),
    says C. J. Baldwin, “was, (1) a question, not as to Adam’s
    physical locality, but as to his moral condition; (2) a question,
    not of justice threatening, but of love inviting to repentance and
    return; (3) a question, not to Adam as an individual only, but to
    the whole humanity of which he was the representative.”

    Dale, Ephesians, 40—“Christ is the eternal Son of God; and it was
    the first, the primeval purpose of the divine grace that his life
    and sonship should be shared by all mankind; that through Christ
    all men should rise to a loftier rank than that which belonged to
    them by their creation; should be ‘_partakers of the divine
    nature_’ (_2 Pet. 1:4_), and share the divine righteousness and
    joy. Or rather, the race was actually created in Christ; and it
    was created that the whole race might in Christ inherit the life
    and glory of God. The divine purpose has been thwarted and
    obstructed and partially defeated by human sin. But it is being
    fulfilled in all who are ‘_in Christ_’ (_Eph. 1:3_).”


2. Positive and formal exclusion from God’s presence.


This included:

(_a_) The cessation of man’s former familiar intercourse with God, and the
setting up of outward barriers between man and his Maker (cherubim and
sacrifice).


    “In die Welt hinausgestossen, Steht der Mensch verlassen da.”
    Though God punished Adam and Eve, he did not curse them as he did
    the serpent. Their exclusion from the tree of life was a matter of
    benevolence as well as of justice, for it prevented the
    immortality of sin.


(_b_) Banishment from the garden, where God had specially manifested his
presence.—Eden was perhaps a spot reserved, as Adam’s body had been, to
show what a _sinless_ world would be. This positive exclusion from God’s
presence, with the sorrow and pain which it involved, may have been
intended to illustrate to man the nature of that eternal death from which
he now needed to seek deliverance.


    At the gates of Eden, there seems to have been a manifestation of
    God’s presence, in the cherubim, which constituted the place a
    sanctuary. Both Cain and Abel brought offerings “_unto the Lord_”
    (_Gen. 4:3, 4_), and when Cain fled, he is said to have gone out
    “_from the presence of the Lord_” (_Gen. 4:16_). On the
    consequences of the Fall to Adam, see Edwards, Works, 2:390-405;
    Hopkins, Works, 1:206-246; Dwight, Theology, 1:393-434; Watson,
    Institutes, 2:19-42; Martensen, Dogmatics, 155-173; Van Oosterzee,
    Dogmatics, 402-412.



Section V.—Imputation Of Adam’s Sin To His Posterity.


We have seen that all mankind are sinners; that all men are by nature
depraved, guilty, and condemnable; and that the transgression of our first
parents, so far as respects the human race, was the first sin. We have
still to consider the connection between Adam’s sin and the depravity,
guilt, and condemnation of the race.

(_a_) The Scriptures teach that the transgression of our first parents
constituted their posterity sinners (Rom. 5:19—“through the one man’s
disobedience the many were made sinners”), so that Adam’s sin is imputed,
reckoned, or charged to every member of the race of which he was the germ
and head (Rom. 5:16—“the judgment came of one [offence] unto
condemnation”). It is because of Adam’s sin that we are born depraved and
subject to God’s penal inflictions (Rom. 5:12—“through one man sin entered
into the world, and death through sin”; Eph. 2:3—“by nature children of
wrath”). Two questions demand answer,—first, how we can be responsible for
a depraved nature which we did not personally and consciously originate;
and, secondly, how God can justly charge to our account the sin of the
first father of the race. These questions are substantially the same, and
the Scriptures intimate the true answer to the problem when they declare
that “in Adam all die” (1 Cor. 15:22) and “that death passed unto all men,
for that all sinned” when “through one man sin entered into the world”
(Rom. 5:12). In other words, Adam’s sin is the cause and ground of the
depravity, guilt, and condemnation of all his posterity, simply because
Adam and his posterity are one, and, by virtue of their organic unity, the
sin of Adam is the sin of the race.


    Amiel says that “the best measure of the profundity of any
    religious doctrine is given by its conception of sin and of the
    cure of sin.” We have seen that sin is a state; a state of the
    will; a selfish state of the will; a selfish state of the will
    inborn and universal; a selfish state of the will inborn and
    universal by reason of man’s free act. Connecting the present
    discussion with the preceding doctrines of theology, the steps of
    our treatment thus far are as follows: 1. God’s holiness is purity
    of nature. 2. God’s law demands purity of nature. 3. Sin is impure
    nature. 4. All men have this impure nature. 5. Adam originated
    this impure nature. In the present section we expect to add: 6.
    Adam and we are one; and, in the succeeding section, to complete
    the doctrine with: 7. The guilt and penalty of Adam’s sin are
    ours.


(_b_) According as we regard this twofold problem from the point of view
of the abnormal human condition, or of the divine treatment of it, we may
call it the problem of original sin, or the problem of imputation. Neither
of these terms is objectionable when its meaning is defined. By imputation
of sin we mean, not the arbitrary and mechanical charging to a man of that
for which he is not naturally responsible, but the reckoning to a man of a
guilt which is properly his own, whether by virtue of his individual acts,
or by virtue of his connection with the race. By original sin we mean that
participation in the common sin of the race with which God charges us, in
virtue of our descent from Adam, its first father and head.


    We should not permit our use of the term “imputation” to be
    hindered or prejudiced by the fact that certain schools of
    theology, notably the Federal school, have attached to it an
    arbitrary, external, and mechanical meaning—holding that God
    imputes sin to men, not because they are sinners, but upon the
    ground of a legal fiction whereby Adam, without their consent, was
    made their representative. We shall see, on the contrary, that (1)
    in the case of Adam’s sin imputed to us, (2) in the case of our
    sins imputed to Christ, and (3) in the case of Christ’s
    righteousness imputed to the believer, there is always a realistic
    basis for the imputation, namely, a real union, (1) between Adam
    and his descendants, (2) between Christ and the race, and (3)
    between believers and Christ, such as gives in each case community
    of life, and enables us to say that God imputes to no man what
    does not properly belong to him.

    Dr. E. G. Robinson used to say that “imputed righteousness and
    imputed sin are as absurd as any notion that ever took possession
    of human nature.” He had in mind, however, only that constructive
    guilt and merit which was advocated by Princeton theologians. He
    did not mean to deny the imputation to men of that which is their
    own. He recognized the fact that all men are sinners by
    inheritance as well as by voluntary act, and he found this taught
    in Scripture, both in the O. T. and in the N. T.; _e. g._, _Neh.
    1:6_—“_I confess the sins of the children of Israel, which we have
    sinned against thee. Yea, I and my father’s house have sinned_”;
    _Jer. 3:25_—“_Let us lie down in our shame, and let our confusion
    cover us; for we have sinned against Jehovah our God, we and our
    fathers_”; _14:20_—“_We acknowledge, O Jehovah, our wickedness,
    and the iniquity of our fathers; for we have sinned against
    thee._” The word “_imputed_” is itself found in the N. T.; _e.
    g._, _2 Tim. 4:16_—“_At my first defence no one took my part: may
    it not be laid to their account,_” or “_imputed to them_”—μὴ
    αὐτοῖς λογισθείη. _Rom. 5:13_—“_sin is not imputed when there is
    no law_”—οὐκ ἐλλογᾶται.

    Not only the saints of Scripture times, but modern saints also,
    have imputed to themselves the sins of others, of their people, of
    their times, of the whole world. Jonathan Edwards, Resolutions,
    quoted by Allen, 28—“I will take it for granted that no one is so
    evil as myself; I will identify myself with all men and act as if
    their evil were my own, as if I had committed the same sins and
    had the same infirmities, so that the knowledge of their failings
    will promote in me nothing but a sense of shame.” Frederick
    Denison Maurice: “I wish to confess the sins of the time as my
    own.” Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 87—“The phrase
    ‘solidarity of humanity’ is growing every day in depth and
    significance. Whatever we do, we do not for ourselves alone. It is
    not as an individual alone that I can be measured or judged.”
    Royce, World and Individual, 2:404—“The problem of evil indeed
    demands the presence of free will in the world; while, on the
    other hand, it is equally true that no moral world whatever can be
    made consistent with the realistic thesis according to which free
    will agents are, in fortune and in penalty, independent of the
    deeds of other moral agents. It follows that, in our moral world,
    the righteous can suffer without individually deserving their
    suffering, just because their lives have no independent being, but
    are linked with all life—God himself also sharing in their
    suffering.”

    The above quotations illustrate the belief in a human
    responsibility that goes beyond the bounds of personal sins. What
    this responsibility is, and what its limits are, we have yet to
    define. The problem is stated, but not solved, by A. H. Bradford,
    Heredity, 198, and The Age of Faith, 235—“Stephen prays: ‘_Lord,
    lay not this sin to their charge_’ (_Acts 7:60_). To whose charge
    then? We all have a share in one another’s sins. We too stood by
    and consented, as Paul did. ‘My sins gave sharpness to the nails,
    And pointed every thorn’ that pierced the brow of Jesus.... Yet in
    England and Wales the severer forms of this teaching [with regard
    to sin] have almost disappeared; not because of more thorough
    study of the Scripture, but because the awful congestion of
    population, with its attendant miseries, has convinced the
    majority of Christian thinkers that the old interpretations were
    too small for the near and terrible facts of human life, such as
    women with babies in their arms at the London gin-shops giving the
    infants sips of liquor out of their glasses, and a tavern keeper
    setting his four or five year old boy upon the counter to drink
    and swear and fight in imitation of his elders.”


(_c_) There are two fundamental principles which the Scriptures already
cited seem clearly to substantiate, and which other Scriptures
corroborate. The first is that man’s relations to moral law extend beyond
the sphere of conscious and actual transgression, and embrace those moral
tendencies and qualities of his being which he has in common with every
other member of the race. The second is, that God’s moral government is a
government which not only takes account of persons and personal acts, but
also recognizes race responsibilities and inflicts race-penalties; or, in
other words, judges mankind, not simply as a collection of separate
individuals, but also as an organic whole, which can collectively revolt
from God and incur the curse of the violated law.


    On race-responsibility, see H. R. Smith, System of Theology,
    288-302—“No one can apprehend the doctrine of original sin, nor
    the doctrine of redemption, who insists that the whole moral
    government of God has respect only to individual desert, who does
    not allow that the moral government of God, _as_ moral, has a
    wider scope and larger relations, so that God may dispense
    suffering and happiness (in his all-wise and inscrutable
    providence) on other grounds than that of personal merit and
    demerit. The dilemma here is: the facts connected with native
    depravity and with the redemption through Christ either belong to
    the moral government of God, or not. If they do, then that
    government has to do with other considerations than those of
    personal merit and demerit (since our disabilities in consequence
    of sin and the grace offered in Christ are not in any sense the
    result of our personal choice, though we do choose in our
    relations to both). If they do not belong to the moral government
    of God, where shall we assign them? To the physical? That
    certainly can not be. To the divine sovereignty? But that does not
    relieve any difficulty; for the question still remains, Is that
    sovereignty, as thus exercised, just or unjust? We must take one
    or the other of these. The whole (of sin and grace) is either a
    mystery of sovereignty—of mere omnipotence—or a proceeding of
    moral government. The question will arise with respect to grace as
    well as to sin: How can the theory that all moral government has
    respect only to the merit or demerit of personal acts be applied
    to our justification? If all sin is in sinning, with a personal
    desert of everlasting death, by parity of reasoning all holiness
    must consist in a holy choice with personal merit of eternal life.
    We say then, generally, that all definitions of sin which mean _a_
    sin are irrelevant here.” Dr. Smith quotes Edwards,
    2:309—“Original sin, the innate sinful depravity of the heart,
    includes not only the depravity of nature but the imputation of
    Adam’s first sin, or, in other words, the liableness or
    exposedness of Adam’s posterity, in the divine judgment, to
    partake of the punishment of that sin.”

    The watchword of a large class of theologians—popularly called
    “New School”—is that “all sin consists in sinning,”—that is, all
    sin is sin of act. But we have seen that the dispositions and
    states in which a man is unlike God and his purity are also sin
    according to the meaning of the law. We have now to add that each
    man is responsible also for that sin of our first father in which
    the human race apostatized from God. In other words, we recognize
    the guilt of race-sin as well as of personal sin. We desire to say
    at the outset, however, that our view, and, as we believe, the
    Scriptural view, requires us also to hold to certain
    qualifications of the doctrine which to some extent alleviate its
    harshness and furnish its proper explanation. These qualifications
    we now proceed to mention.


(_d_) In recognizing the guilt of race-sin, we are to bear in mind: (1)
that actual sin, in which the personal agent reaffirms the underlying
determination of his will, is more guilty than original sin alone; (2)
that no human being is finally condemned solely on account of original
sin; but that all who, like infants, do not commit personal
transgressions, are saved through the application of Christ’s atonement;
(3) that our responsibility for inborn evil dispositions, or for the
depravity common to the race, can be maintained only upon the ground that
this depravity was caused by an original and conscious act of free will,
when the race revolted from God in Adam; (4) that the doctrine of original
sin is only the ethical interpretation of biological facts—the facts of
heredity and of universal congenital ills, which demand an ethical ground
and explanation; and (5) that the idea of original sin has for its
correlate the idea of original grace, or the abiding presence and
operation of Christ, the immanent God, in every member of the race, in
spite of his sin, to counteract the evil and to prepare the way, so far as
man will permit, for individual and collective salvation.


    Over against the maxim: “All sin consists in sinning,” we put the
    more correct statement: Personal sin consists in sinning, but in
    Adam’s first sinning the race also sinned, so that “_in Adam all
    die_” (_1 Cor. 15:22_). Denney, Studies in Theology, 86—“Sin is
    not only personal but social; not only social but organic;
    character and all that is involved in character are capable of
    being attributed not only to individuals but to societies, and
    eventually to the human race itself; in short, there are not only
    isolated sins and individual sinners, but what has been called a
    kingdom of sin upon earth.” Leslie Stephen: “Man not dependent on
    a race is as meaningless a phrase as an apple that does not grow
    on a tree.” “Yet Aaron Burr and Abraham Lincoln show how a man may
    throw away every advantage of the best heredity and environment,
    while another can triumph over the worst. Man does not take his
    character from external causes, but shapes it by his own willing
    submission to influences from beneath or from above.”

    Wm. Adams Brown: “The idea of inherited guilt can be accepted only
    if paralleled by the idea of inherited good. The consequences of
    sin have often been regarded as social, while the consequences of
    good have been regarded as only individual. But heredity transmits
    both good and evil.” Mrs. Lydia Avery Coonley Ward: “Why bowest
    thou, O soul of mine, Crushed by ancestral sin? Thou hast a noble
    heritage, That bids thee victory win. The tainted past may bring
    forth flowers, As blossomed Aaron’s rod: No legacy of sin annuls
    Heredity from God.” For further statements with regard to
    race-responsibility, see Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:29-39 (System
    Doctrine, 2:324-333). For the modern view of the Fall, and its
    reconciliation with the doctrine of evolution, see J. H. Bernard,
    art.: The Fall, in Hastings’ Dict. of Bible; A. H. Strong, Christ
    in Creation, 163-180; Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ.


(_e_) There is a race-sin, therefore, as well as a personal sin; and that
race-sin was committed by the first father of the race, when he comprised
the whole race in himself. All mankind since that time have been born in
the state into which he fell—a state of depravity, guilt, and
condemnation. To vindicate God’s justice in imputing to us the sin of our
first father, many theories have been devised, a part of which must be
regarded as only attempts to evade the problem by denying the facts set
before us in the Scriptures. Among these attempted explanations of the
Scripture statements, we proceed to examine the six theories which seem
most worthy of attention.


    The first three of the theories which we discuss may be said to be
    evasions of the problem of original sin; all, in one form or
    another, deny that God imputes to all men Adam’s sin, in such a
    sense that all are guilty for it. These theories are the Pelagian,
    the Arminian, and the New School. The last three of the theories
    which we are about to treat, namely, the Federal theory, the
    theory of Mediate Imputation, and the theory of Adam’s Natural
    Headship, are all Old School theories, and have for their common
    characteristic that they assert the guilt of inborn depravity. All
    three, moreover, hold that we are in some way responsible for
    Adam’s sin, though they differ as to the precise way in which we
    are related to Adam. We must grant that no one, even of these
    latter theories, is wholly satisfactory. We hope, however, to show
    that the last of them—the Augustinian theory, the theory of Adam’s
    natural headship, the theory that Adam and his descendants are
    naturally and organically one—explains the largest number of
    facts, is least open to objection, and is most accordant with
    Scripture.


I. Theories of Imputation.


1. The Pelagian Theory, or Theory of Man’s natural Innocence.


Pelagius, a British monk, propounded his doctrines at Rome, 409. They were
condemned by the Council of Carthage, 418. Pelagianism, however, as
opposed to Augustinianism, designates a complete scheme of doctrine with
regard to sin, of which Pelagius was the most thorough representative,
although every feature of it cannot be ascribed to his authorship.
Socinians and Unitarians are the more modern advocates of this general
scheme.

According to this theory, every human soul is immediately created by God,
and created as innocent, as free from depraved tendencies, and as
perfectly able to obey God, as Adam was at his creation. The only effect
of Adam’s sin upon his posterity is the effect of evil example; it has in
no way corrupted human nature; the only corruption of human nature is that
habit of sinning which each individual contracts by persistent
transgression of known law.

Adam’s sin therefore injured only himself; the sin of Adam is imputed only
to Adam,—it is imputed in no sense to his descendants; God imputes to each
of Adam’s descendants only those acts of sin which he has personally and
consciously committed. Men can be saved by the law as well as by the
gospel; and some have actually obeyed God perfectly, and have thus been
saved. Physical death is therefore not the penalty of sin, but an original
law of nature; Adam would have died whether he had sinned or not; in Rom.
5:12, “death passed unto all men, for that all sinned,” signifies: “all
incurred eternal death by sinning after Adam’s example.”


    Wiggers, Augustinism and Pelagianism, 59, states the seven points
    of the Pelagian doctrine as follows: (1) Adam was created mortal,
    so that he would have died even if he had not sinned; (2) Adam’s
    sin injured, not the human race, but only himself; (3) new-born
    infants are in the same condition as Adam before the Fall; (4) the
    whole human race neither dies on account of Adam’s sin, nor rises
    on account of Christ’s resurrection; (5) infants, even though not
    baptized, attain eternal life; (6) the law is as good a means of
    salvation as the gospel; (7) even before Christ some men lived who
    did not commit sin.

    In Pelagius’ Com. on _Rom. 5:12_, published in Jerome’s Works,
    vol. xi, we learn who these sinless men were, namely, Abel, Enoch,
    Joseph, Job, and, among the heathen, Socrates, Aristides, Numa.
    The virtues of the heathen entitle them to reward. Their worthies
    were not indeed without evil thoughts and inclinations; but, on
    the view of Pelagius that all sin consists in act, these evil
    thoughts and inclinations were not sin. “Non pleni nascimur”: we
    are born, not full, but vacant, of character. Holiness, Pelagius
    thought, could not be concreated. Adam’s descendants are not
    weaker, but stronger, than he; since they have fulfilled many
    commands, while he did not fulfil so much as one. In every man
    there is a natural conscience; he has an ideal of life; he forms
    right resolves; he recognizes the claims of law; he accuses
    himself when he sins,—all these things Pelagius regards as
    indications of a certain holiness in all men, and
    misinterpretation of these facts gives rise to his system; he
    ought to have seen in them evidences of a divine influence
    opposing man’s bent to evil and leading him to repentance. Grace,
    on the Pelagian theory, is simply the grace of _creation_—God’s
    originally endowing man with his high powers of reason and will.
    While Augustinianism regards human nature as _dead_, and
    Semi-Pelagianism regards it as _sick_, Pelagianism proper declares
    it to be _well_.

    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:43 (Syst. Doct., 2:338)—“Neither the
    body, man’s surroundings, nor the inward operation of God, have
    any determining influence upon the will. God reaches man only
    through external means, such as Christ’s doctrine, example, and
    promise. This clears God of the charge of evil, but also takes
    from him the authorship of good. It is Deism, applied to man’s
    nature. God cannot enter man’s being if he would, and he would not
    if he could. Free will is everything.” _Ib._, 1:626 (Syst. Doct.,
    2:188, 189)—“Pelagianism at one time counts it too great an honor
    that man should be directly moved upon by God, and at another, too
    great a dishonor that man should not be able to do without God. In
    this inconsistent reasoning, it shows its desire to be rid of God
    as much as possible. The true conception of God requires a living
    relation to man, as well as to the external universe. The true
    conception of man requires satisfaction of his longings and powers
    by reception of impulses and strength from God. Pelagianism, in
    seeking for man a development only like that of nature, shows that
    its high estimate of man is only a delusive one; it really
    degrades him, by ignoring his true dignity and destiny.” See
    _Ib._, 1:124, 125 (Syst. Doct., 1:136, 137); 2:43-45 (Syst. Doct.,
    2:338, 339); 2:148 (Syst. Doct., 3:44). Also Schaff, Church
    History, 2:783-856; Doctrines of the Early Socinians, in Princeton
    Essays, 1:194-211; Wörter, Pelagianismus. For substantially
    Pelagian statements, see Sheldon, Sin and Redemption; Ellis, Half
    Century of Unitarian Controversy, 76.


Of the Pelagian theory of sin, we may say:

A. It has never been recognized as Scriptural, nor has it been formulated
in confessions, by any branch of the Christian church. Held only
sporadically and by individuals, it has ever been regarded by the church
at large as heresy. This constitutes at least a presumption against its
truth.


    As slavery was “the sum of all villainy,” so the Pelagian doctrine
    may be called the sum of all false doctrine. Pelagianism is a
    survival of paganism, in its majestic egoism and self-complacency.
    “Cicero, in his Natura Deorum, says that men thank the gods for
    external advantages, but no man ever thanks the gods for his
    virtues—that he is honest or pure or merciful. Pelagius was first
    roused to opposition by hearing a bishop in the public services of
    the church quote Augustine’s prayer: ‘Da quod jubes, et jube quod
    vis’—‘Give what thou commandest, and command what thou wilt.’ From
    this he was led to formulate the gospel according to St. Cicero,
    so perfectly does the Pelagian doctrine reproduce the Pagan
    teaching.” The impulse of the Christian, on the other hand, is to
    refer all gifts and graces to a divine source in Christ and in the
    Holy Spirit. _Eph. 2:10_—“_For we are his workmanship, created in
    Christ Jesus for good works, which God afore prepared that we
    should walk in them_”; _John 15:16_—“_Ye did not choose me, but I
    chose you_”; _1:13_—“_who were born, not of blood, nor of the will
    of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God._” H. Auber: “And
    every virtue we possess, And every victory won, And every thought
    of holiness, Are his alone.”

    Augustine had said that “Man is most free when controlled by God
    alone”—“[Deo] solo dominante, liberrimus” (De Mor. Eccl., xxi).
    Gore, in Lux Mundi, 320—“In Christ humanity is perfect, because in
    him it retains no part of that false independence which, in all
    its manifold forms, is the secret of sin.” Pelagianism, on the
    contrary, is man’s declaration of independence. Harnack, Hist.
    Dogma, 5:200—“The essence of Pelagianism, the key to its whole
    mode of thought, lies in this proposition of Julian: ‘Homo libero
    arbitrio emancipatus a Deo’—man, created free, is in his whole
    being independent of God. He has no longer to do with God, but
    with himself alone. God reënters man’s life only at the end, at
    the judgment,—a doctrine of the orphanage of humanity.”


B. It contradicts Scripture in denying: (_a_) that evil disposition and
state, as well as evil acts, are sin; (_b_) that such evil disposition and
state are inborn in all mankind; (_c_) that men universally are guilty of
overt transgression so soon as they come to moral consciousness; (_d_)
that no man is able without divine help to fulfil the law; (_e_) that all
men, without exception, are dependent for salvation upon God’s atoning,
regenerating, sanctifying grace; (_f_) that man’s present state of
corruption, condemnation, and death, is the direct effect of Adam’s
transgression.


    The Westminster Confession, ch. vi. § 4, declares that “we are
    utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good, and
    wholly inclined to all evil.” To Pelagius, on the contrary, sin is
    a mere incident. He knows only of _sins_, not of _sin_. He holds
    the atomic, or atomistic, theory of sin, which regards it as
    consisting in isolated volitions. Pelegianism, holding, as it
    does, that virtue and vice consist only in single decisions, does
    not account for _character_ at all. There is no such thing as a
    state of sin, or a self-propagating power of sin. And yet upon
    these the Scriptures lay greater emphasis than upon mere acts of
    transgression. _John 3:6_—“_That which is born of the flesh is
    flesh_”—“that which comes of a sinful and guilty stock is itself,
    from the very beginning, sinful and guilty” (Dorner). Witness the
    tendency to degradation in families and nations.

    Amiel says that the great defect of liberal Christianity is its
    superficial conception of sin. The tendency dates far back:
    Tertullian spoke of the soul as naturally Christian—“anima
    naturaliter Christiana.” The tendency has come down to modern
    times: Crane, The Religion of To-morrow, 246—“It is only when
    children grow up, and begin to absorb their environment, that they
    lose their artless loveliness.” A Rochester Unitarian preacher
    publicly declared it to be as much a duty to believe in the
    natural purity of man, as to believe in the natural purity of God.
    Dr. Lyman Abbott speaks of “the shadow which the Manichæan
    theology of Augustine, borrowed by Calvin, cast upon all children,
    in declaring them born to an inheritance of wrath as a viper’s
    brood.” Dr. Abbott forgets that Augustine was the greatest
    opponent of Manichæanism, and that his doctrine of inherited guilt
    may be supplemented by a doctrine of inherited divine influences
    tending to salvation.

    Prof. G. A. Coe tells us that “all children are within the
    household of God”; that “they are already members of his kingdom”;
    that “the adolescent change” is “a step not _into_ the Christian
    life, but _within_ the Christian life.” We are taught that
    salvation is by education. But education is only a way of
    presenting truth. It still remains needful that the soul should
    accept the truth. Pelagianism ignores or denies the presence in
    every child of a congenital selfishness which hinders acceptance
    of the truth, and which, without the working of the divine Spirit,
    will absolutely counteract the influence of the truth. Augustine
    was taught his guilt and helplessness by transgression, while
    Pelagius remained ignorant of the evil of his own heart. Pelagius
    might have said with Wordsworth, Prelude, 534—“I had approached,
    like other youths, the shield Of human nature from the golden
    side; And would have fought, even unto the death, to attest The
    quality of the metal which I saw.”

    Schaff, on the Pelagian controversy, in Bib. Sac., 5:205-243—The
    controversy “resolves itself into the question whether redemption
    and sanctification are the work of man or of God. Pelagianism in
    its whole mode of thinking starts from man and seeks to work
    itself upward gradually, by means of an imaginary good-will, to
    holiness and communion with God. Augustinianism pursues the
    opposite way, deriving from God’s unconditioned and all-working
    grace a new life and all power of working good. The first is led
    from freedom into a legal, self-righteous piety; the other rises
    from the slavery of sin to the glorious liberty of the children of
    God. For the first, revelation is of force only as an outward
    help, or the power of a high example; for the last, it is the
    inmost life, the very marrow and blood of the new man. The first
    involves an Ebionitic view of Christ, as noble man, not
    high-priest or king; the second finds in him one in whom dwells
    all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. The first makes conversion
    a process of gradual moral purification on the ground of original
    nature; with the last, it is a total change, in which the old
    passes away and all becomes new.... Rationalism is simply the form
    in which Pelagianism becomes theoretically complete. The high
    opinion which the Pelagian holds of the natural will is
    transferred with equal right by the Rationalist to the natural
    reason. The one does without grace, as the other does without
    revelation. Pelagian divinity is rationalistic. Rationalistic
    morality is Pelagian.” See this Compendium, page 89.

    Allen, Religious Progress, 98-100—“Most of the mischief of
    religious controversy springs from the desire and determination to
    impute to one’s opponent positions which he does not hold, or to
    draw inferences from his principles, insisting that he shall be
    held responsible for them, even though he declares that he does
    not teach them. We say that he ought to accept them; that he is
    bound logically to do so; that they are necessary deductions from
    his system; that the tendency of his teaching is in these
    directions; and then we denounce and condemn him for what he
    disowns. It was in this way that Augustine filled out for Pelagius
    the gaps in his scheme, which he thought it necessary to do, in
    order to make Pelagius’s teaching consistent and complete; and
    Pelagius, in his turn, drew inferences from the Augustinian
    theology, about which Augustine would have preferred to maintain a
    discreet silence. Neither Augustine nor Calvin was anxious to make
    prominent the doctrine of the reprobation of the wicked to
    damnation, but preferred to dwell on the more attractive, more
    rational tenet of the elect to salvation, as subjects of the
    divine choice and approbation; substituting for the obnoxious word
    reprobation the milder, euphemistic word preterition. It was their
    opponents who were bent on forcing them out of their reserve,
    pushing them into what seemed the consistent sequence of their
    attitude, and then holding it up before the world for execration.
    And the same remark would apply to almost every theological
    contention that has embittered the church’s experience.”


C. It rests upon false philosophical principles; as, for example: (_a_)
that the human will is simply the faculty of volitions; whereas it is
also, and chiefly, the faculty of self-determination to an ultimate end;
(_b_) that the power of a contrary choice is essential to the existence of
will; whereas the will fundamentally determined to self-gratification has
this power only with respect to subordinate choices, and cannot by a
single volition reverse its moral state; (_c_) that ability is the measure
of obligation,—a principle which would diminish the sinner’s
responsibility, just in proportion to his progress in sin; (_d_) that law
consists only in positive enactment; whereas it is the demand of perfect
harmony with God, inwrought into man’s moral nature; (_e_) that each human
soul is immediately created by God, and holds no other relations to moral
law than those which are individual; whereas all human souls are
organically connected with each other, and together have a corporate
relation to God’s law, by virtue of their derivation from one common
stock.

(_a_) Neander, Church History, 2:564-625, holds one of the fundamental
principles of Pelagianism to be “the ability to choose, equally and at any
moment, between good and evil.” There is no recognition of the law by
which acts produce states; the power which repeated acts of evil possess
to give a definite character and tendency to the will itself.—“Volition is
an everlasting ‘tick,’ ‘tick,’ and swinging of the pendulum, but no moving
forward of the hands of the clock follows.” “There is no continuity of
moral life—no _character_, in man, angel, devil, or God.”—(_b_) See art.
on Power of Contrary Choice, in Princeton Essays, 1:212-233; Pelagianism
holds that no confirmation in holiness is possible. Thornwell, Theology:
“The sinner is as free as the saint; the devil as the angel.” Harris,
Philos. Basis of Theism, 399—“The theory that indifference is essential to
freedom implies that will never acquires character; that voluntary action
is atomistic, every act disintegrated from every other; that character, if
acquired, would be incompatible with freedom.” “By mere volition the soul
now a _plenum_ can become a _vacuum_, or now a _vacuum_ can become a
_plenum_.” On the Pelagian view of freedom, see Julius Müller, Doctrine of
Sin, 37-44.


    (_c_) _Ps. 79:8_—“_Remember not against us the iniquities of our
    forefathers_”; _106:6_—“_We have sinned with our fathers._” Notice
    the analogy of individuals who suffer from the effects of parental
    mistakes or of national transgression. Julius Müller, Doct. Sin,
    2:316, 317—“Neither the _atomistic_ nor the _organic_ view of
    human nature is the complete truth.” Each must be complemented by
    the other. For statement of race-responsibility, see Dorner,
    Glaubenslehre, 2:30-39, 51-64, 161, 162 (System of Doctrine,
    2:324-334, 345-359; 3:50-54)—“Among the Scripture proofs of the
    moral connection of the individual with the race are the visiting
    of the sins of the fathers upon the children; the obligation of
    the people to punish the sin of the individual, that the whole
    land may not incur guilt; the offering of sacrifice for a murder,
    the perpetrator of which is unknown. Achan’s crime is charged to
    the whole people. The Jewish race is the better for its parentage,
    and other nations are the worse for theirs. The Hebrew people
    become a legal personality.

    “Is it said that none are punished for the sins of their fathers
    unless they are like their fathers? But to be unlike their fathers
    requires a new heart. They who are not held accountable for the
    sins of their fathers are those who have recognized their
    responsibility for them, and have repented for their likeness to
    their ancestors. Only the self-isolating spirit says: ‘_Am I my
    brother’s keeper?_’ (_Gen. 4:9_), and thinks to construct a
    constant equation between individual misfortune and _individual_
    sin. The calamities of the righteous led to an ethical conception
    of the relation of the individual to the community. Such
    sufferings show that men can love God disinterestedly, that the
    good has unselfish friends. These sufferings are substitutionary,
    when borne as belonging to the sufferer, not foreign to him, the
    guilt of others attaching to him by virtue of his national or
    race-relation to them. So Moses in Ex. 34:9, David in Ps. 51:6,
    Isaiah in Is. 59:9-16, recognize the connection between personal
    sin and race-sin.

    “Christ restores the bond between man and his fellows, turns the
    hearts of the fathers to the children. He is the creator of a new
    race-consciousness. In him as the head we see ourselves bound to,
    and responsible for others. Love finds it morally impossible to
    isolate itself. It restores the consciousness of unity and the
    recognition of common guilt. Does every man stand for himself in
    the N. T.? This would be so, only if each man became a sinner
    solely by free and conscious personal decision, either in the
    present, or in a past state of existence. But this is not
    Scriptural. Something comes before personal transgression: ‘_That
    which is born of the flesh is flesh_’ (_John 3:6_). Personality is
    the stronger for recognizing the race-sin. We have common joy in
    the victories of the good; so in shameful lapses we have sorrow.
    These are not our worst moments, but our best,—there is something
    great in them. Original sin must be displeasing to God; for it
    perverts the reason, destroys likeness to God, excludes from
    communion with God, makes redemption necessary, leads to actual
    sin, influences future generations. But to complain of God for
    permitting its propagation is to complain of his not destroying
    the race,—that is, to complain of one’s own existence.” See Shedd,
    Hist. Doctrine, 2:93-110; Hagenbach, Hist. Doctrine, 1:287,
    296-310; Martensen, Dogmatics, 354-362; Princeton Essays, 1:74-97;
    Dabney, Theology, 296-302, 314, 315.


2. The Arminian Theory, or Theory of voluntarily appropriated Depravity.


Arminius (1560-1609), professor in the University of Leyden, in South
Holland, while formally accepting the doctrine of the Adamic unity of the
race propounded both by Luther and Calvin, gave a very different
interpretation to it—an interpretation which verged toward
Semi-Pelagianism and the anthropology of the Greek Church. The Methodist
body is the modern representative of this view.

According to this theory, all men, as a divinely appointed sequence of
Adam’s transgression, are naturally destitute of original righteousness,
and are exposed to misery and death. By virtue of the infirmity propagated
from Adam to all his descendants, mankind are wholly unable without divine
help perfectly to obey God or to attain eternal life. This inability,
however, is physical and intellectual, but not voluntary. As matter of
justice, therefore, God bestows upon each individual from the first dawn
of consciousness a special influence of the Holy Spirit, which is
sufficient to counteract the effect of the inherited depravity and to make
obedience possible, provided the human will coöperates, which it still has
power to do.

The evil tendency and state may be called sin; but they do not in
themselves involve guilt or punishment; still less are mankind accounted
guilty of Adam’s sin. God imputes to each man his inborn tendencies to
evil, only when he consciously and voluntarily appropriates and ratifies
these in spite of the power to the contrary, which, in justice to man, God
has specially communicated. In Rom. 5:12, “death passed unto all men, for
that all sinned,” signifies that physical and spiritual death is inflicted
upon all men, not as the penalty of a common sin in Adam, but because, by
divine decree, all suffer the consequences of that sin, and because all
personally consent to their inborn sinfulness by acts of transgression.


    See Arminius, Works, 1:252-254, 317-324, 325-327, 523-531,
    575-583. The description given above is a description of
    Arminianism proper. The expressions of Arminius himself are so
    guarded that Moses Stuart (Bib. Repos., 1831) found it possible to
    construct an argument to prove that Arminius was not an Arminian.
    But it is plain that by inherited sin Arminius meant only
    inherited evil, and that it was not of a sort to justify God’s
    condemnation. He denied any inbeing in Adam, such as made us
    justly chargeable with Adam’s sin, except in the sense that we are
    obliged to endure certain consequences of it. This Shedd has shown
    in his History of Doctrine, 2:178-196. The system of Arminius was
    more fully expounded by Limborch and Episcopius. See Limborch,
    Theol. Christ., 3:4:6 (p. 189). The sin with which we are born
    “does not inhere in the soul, for this [soul] is immediately
    created by God, and therefore, if it were infected with sin, that
    sin would be from God.” Many so-called Arminians, such as Whitby
    and John Taylor, were rather Pelagians.

    John Wesley, however, greatly modified and improved the Arminian
    doctrine. Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:329, 330—“Wesleyanism (1) admits
    entire moral depravity; (2) denies that men in this state have any
    power to coöperate with the grace of God; (3) asserts that the
    guilt of all through Adam was removed by the justification of all
    through Christ; (4) ability to coöperate is of the Holy Spirit,
    through the universal influence of the redemption of Christ. The
    order of the decrees is (1) to permit the fall of man; (2) to send
    the Son to be a full satisfaction for the sins of the whole world;
    (3) on that ground to remit all original sin, and to give such
    grace as would enable all to attain eternal life; (4) those who
    improve that grace and persevere to the end are ordained to be
    saved.” We may add that Wesley made the bestowal upon our depraved
    nature of ability to coöperate with God to be a matter of grace,
    while Arminius regarded it as a matter of justice, man without it
    not being accountable.

    Wesleyanism was systematized by Watson, who, in his Institutes,
    2:53-55, 59, 77, although denying the imputation of Adam’s sin in
    any proper sense, yet declares that “Limborch and others
    materially departed from the tenets of Arminius in denying inward
    lusts and tendencies to be sinful till complied with and augmented
    by the will. But men universally choose to ratify these
    tendencies; therefore they are corrupt in heart. If there be a
    universal depravity of will previous to the actual choice, then it
    inevitably follows that though infants do not commit actual sin,
    yet that theirs is a sinful nature....As to infants, they are not
    indeed born justified and regenerate; so that to say original sin
    is taken away, as to infants, by Christ, is not the correct view
    of the case, for the reasons before given; but they are all born
    under ‘the free gift,’ the effects of the ‘righteousness’ of one,
    which is extended to all men; and this free gift is bestowed on
    them in order to justification of life, the adjudging of the
    condemned to live....Justification in adults is connected with
    repentance and faith; in infants, we do not know how. The Holy
    Spirit may be given to children. Divine and effectual influence
    may be exerted on them, to cure the spiritual death and corrupt
    tendency of their nature.”

    It will be observed that Watson’s Wesleyanism is much more near to
    Scripture than what we have described, and properly described, as
    Arminianism proper. Pope, in his Theology, follows Wesley and
    Watson, and (2:70-86) gives a valuable synopsis of the differences
    between Arminius and Wesley. Whedon and Raymond, in America,
    better represent original Arminianism. They hold that God was
    under _obligation_ to restore man’s ability, and yet they
    inconsistently speak of this ability as a _gracious_ ability. Two
    passages from Raymond’s Theology show the inconsistency of calling
    that “grace,” which God is bound in justice to bestow, in order to
    make man responsible: 2:84-86—“The race came into existence under
    grace. Existence and justification are secured for it only through
    Christ; for, apart from Christ, punishment and destruction would
    have followed the first sin. So all gifts of the Spirit necessary
    to qualify him for the putting forth of free moral choices are
    secured for him through Christ. The Spirit of God is not a
    bystander, but a quickening power. So man is by grace, not by his
    fallen nature, a moral being capable of knowing, loving, obeying,
    and enjoying God. Such he ever will be, if he does not frustrate
    the grace of God. Not till the Spirit takes his final flight is he
    in a condition of total depravity.”

    Compare with this the following passage of the same work in which
    this “grace” is called a debt: 2:317—“The relations of the
    posterity of Adam to God are substantially those of newly created
    beings. Each individual person is obligated to God, and God to
    him, precisely the same as if God had created him such as he is.
    Ability must equal obligation. God was not obligated to provide a
    Redeemer for the first transgressors, but having provided
    Redemption for them, and through it having permitted them to
    propagate a degenerate race, an adequate compensation is due. The
    gracious influences of the Spirit are then a debt due to man—a
    compensation for the disabilities of inherited depravity.”
    McClintock and Strong (Cyclopædia, art.: Arminius) endorse
    Whedon’s art. in the Bib. Sac., 19:241, as an exhibition of
    Arminianism, and Whedon himself claims it to be such. See
    Hagenbach, Hist. Doct., 2:214-216.


With regard to the Arminian theory we remark:

A. We grant that there is a universal gift of the Holy Spirit, if by the
Holy Spirit is meant the natural light of reason and conscience, and the
manifold impulses to good which struggle against the evil of man’s nature.
But we regard as wholly unscriptural the assumptions: (_a_) that this gift
of the Holy Spirit of itself removes the depravity or condemnation derived
from Adam’s fall; (_b_) that without this gift man would not be
responsible for being morally imperfect; and (_c_) that at the beginning
of moral life men consciously appropriate their inborn tendencies to evil.


    John Wesley adduced in proof of universal grace the text: _John
    1:9_—“_the light which lighteth every man_”—which refers to the
    natural light of reason and conscience which the preincarnate
    Logos bestowed on all men, though in different degrees, before his
    coming in the flesh. This light can be called the Holy Spirit,
    because it was “_the Spirit of Christ_” (_1 Pet. 1:11_). The
    Arminian view has a large element of truth in its recognition of
    an influence of Christ, the immanent God, which mitigates the
    effects of the Fall and strives to prepare men for salvation. But
    Arminianism does not fully recognize the evil to be removed, and
    it therefore exaggerates the effect of this divine working.
    Universal grace does not remove man’s depravity or man’s
    condemnation; as is evident from a proper interpretation of _Rom.
    5:12-19_ and of _Eph. 2:3_; it only puts side by side with that
    depravity and condemnation influences and impulses which
    counteract the evil and urge the sinner to repentance: _John
    1:5_—“_the light shineth in the darkness; and the darkness
    apprehended it not._” John Wesley also referred to _Rom.
    5:18_—“_through one act of righteousness the free gift came unto
    all men to justification of life_”—but here the “all men” is
    conterminous with “the many” who are “_made righteous_” in _verse
    19_, and with the “_all_” who are “_made alive_” in _1 Cor.
    15:22_; in other words, the “_all_” in this case is “all
    believers”: else the passage teaches, not universal gift of the
    Spirit, but universal salvation.

    Arminianism holds to inherited sin, in the sense of infirmity and
    evil tendency, but not to inherited guilt. John Wesley, however,
    by holding also that the giving of ability is a matter of grace
    and not of justice, seems to imply that there is a common guilt as
    well as a common sin, before consciousness. American Arminians are
    more logical, but less Scriptural. Sheldon, Syst. Christian
    Doctrine, 321, tells us that “guilt cannot possibly be a matter of
    inheritance, and consequently original sin can be affirmed of the
    posterity of Adam only in the sense of hereditary corruption,
    which first becomes an occasion of guilt when it is embraced by
    the will of the individual.” How little the Arminian means by
    “sin,” can be inferred from the saying of Bishop Simpson that
    “Christ inherited sin.” He meant of course only physical and
    intellectual infirmity, without a tinge of guilt. “A child
    inherits its parent’s nature,” it is said, “not as a punishment,
    but by natural law.” But we reply that this natural law is itself
    an expression of God’s moral nature, and the inheritance of evil
    can be justified only upon the ground of a common non-conformity
    to God in both the parent and the child, or a participation of
    each member in the common guilt of the race.

    In the light of our preceding treatment, we can estimate the
    element of good and the element of evil in Pfleiderer, Philos.
    Religion, 1:232—“It is an exaggeration when original sin is
    considered as personally imputable guilt; and it is going too far
    when it is held to be the whole state of the natural man, and yet
    the actually present good, the ‘original grace,’ is
    overlooked....We may say, with Schleiermacher, that original sin
    is the common deed and common guilt of the human race. But the
    individual always participates in this collective guilt in the
    measure in which he takes part with his personal doing in the
    collective act that is directed to the furtherance of the bad.”
    Dabney, Theology, 315, 316—“Arminianism is orthodox as to the
    legal consequences of Adam’s sin to his posterity; but what it
    gives with one hand, it takes back with the other, attributing to
    grace the restoration of this natural ability lost by the Fall. If
    the effects of Adam’s Fall on his posterity are such that they
    would have been unjust if not repaired by a redeeming plan that
    was to follow it, then God’s act in providing a Redeemer was not
    an act of pure grace. He was under obligation to do some such
    thing,—salvation is not grace, but debt.” A. J. Gordon, Ministry
    of the Spirit, 187 _sq._, denies the universal gift of the Spirit,
    quoting _John 14:17_—“_whom the world cannot receive; for it
    beholdeth him not, neither knoweth him_”; _16:7_—“_if I go, I will
    send him unto you_”; _i. e._, Christ’s disciples were to be the
    recipients and distributers of the Holy Spirit, and his church the
    mediator between the Spirit and the world. Therefore _Mark
    16:15_—“_Go ye into all the world, and preach,_” implies that the
    Spirit shall go only with them. Conviction of the Spirit does not
    go beyond the church’s evangelizing. But we reply that _Gen. 6:3_
    implies a wider striving of the Holy Spirit.


B. It contradicts Scripture in maintaining: (_a_) that inherited moral
evil does not involve guilt; (_b_) that the gift of the Spirit, and the
regeneration of infants, are matters of justice; (_c_) that the effect of
grace is simply to restore man’s natural ability, instead of disposing him
to use that ability aright; (_d_) that election is God’s choice of certain
men to be saved upon the ground of their foreseen faith, instead of being
God’s choice to make certain men believers; (_e_) that physical death is
not the just penalty of sin, but is a matter of arbitrary decree.


    (_a_) See Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:58 (System of Doctrine,
    2:352-359)—“With Arminius, original sin is original _evil_ only,
    not _guilt_. He explained the problem of original sin by denying
    the fact, and turning the native sinfulness into a morally
    indifferent thing. No sin without consent; no consent at the
    beginning of human development; therefore, no guilt in evil
    desire. This is the same as the Romanist doctrine of
    concupiscence, and like that leads to blaming God for an
    originally bad constitution of our nature....Original sin is
    merely an enticement to evil addressed to the free will. All
    internal disorder and vitiosity is morally indifferent, and
    becomes sin only through appropriation by free will. But
    involuntary, loveless, proud thoughts are recognized in Scripture
    as sin; yet they spring from the heart without our conscious
    consent. Undeliberate and deliberate sins run into each other, so
    that it is impossible to draw a line between them. The doctrine
    that there is no sin without consent implies power to withhold
    consent. But this contradicts the universal need of redemption and
    our observation that none have ever thus entirely withheld consent
    from sin.”

    (_b_) H. B. Smith’s Review of Whedon on the Will, in Faith and
    Philosophy, 359-399—“A child, upon the old view, needs only growth
    to make him guilty of actual sin; whereas, upon this view, he
    needs growth and grace too.” See Bib. Sac., 20:327, 328. According
    to Whedon, Com. on _Rom. 5:12_, “the condition of an infant apart
    from Christ is that of a sinner, _as one sure to sin_, yet never
    actually condemned before personal apostasy. This _would_ be its
    condition, rather, for in Christ the infant is regenerate and
    justified and endowed with the Holy Spirit. Hence all actual
    sinners are apostates from a state of grace.” But we ask: 1. Why
    then do infants die before they have committed actual sin? Surely
    not on account of Adam’s sin, for they are delivered from all the
    evils of that, through Christ. It must be because they are still
    somehow sinners. 2. How can we account for all infants sinning so
    soon as they begin morally to act, if, before they sin, they are
    in a state of grace and sanctification? It must be because they
    were still somehow sinners. In other words, the universal
    regeneration and justification of infants contradict Scripture and
    observation.

    (_c_) Notice that this “gracious” ability does not involve saving
    grace to the recipient, because it is given equally to all men.
    Nor is it more than a restoring to man of his natural ability lost
    by Adam’s sin. It is not sufficient to explain why one man who has
    the gracious ability chooses God, while another who has the same
    gracious ability chooses self. _1 Cor. 4:7_—“_who maketh thee to
    differ?_” Not God, but thyself. Over against this doctrine of
    Arminians, who hold to universal, resistible grace, restoring
    natural ability, Calvinists and Augustinians hold to particular,
    irresistible grace, giving moral ability, or, in other words,
    bestowing the disposition to use natural ability aright. “Grace”
    is a word much used by Arminians. Methodist Doctrine and
    Discipline, Articles of Religion, viii—“The condition of man after
    the fall of Adam is such that he cannot turn and prepare himself,
    by his own natural strength and works, to faith, and calling upon
    God; wherefore we have no power to do good works, pleasant and
    acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing
    us, that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we
    have that good will.” It is important to understand that, in
    Arminian usage, grace is simply the restoration of man’s natural
    ability to act for himself; it never actually saves him, but only
    enables him to save himself—if he will. Arminian grace is evenly
    bestowed grace of spiritual endowment, as Pelagian grace is evenly
    bestowed grace of creation. It regards redemption as a
    compensation for innate and consequently irresponsible depravity.

    (_d_) In the Arminian system, the order of salvation is, (1)
    faith—by an unrenewed but convicted man; (2) justification; (3)
    regeneration, or a holy heart. God decrees not to _originate_
    faith, but to _reward_ it. Hence Wesleyans make faith a work, and
    regard election as God’s ordaining those who, he foresees, will of
    their own accord believe. The Augustinian order, on the contrary,
    is (1) regeneration; (2) faith; (3) justification. Memoir of
    Adolph Saphir, 255—“My objection to the Arminian or semi-Arminian
    is not that they make the entrance very wide; but that they do not
    give you anything definite, safe and real, when you have
    entered.... Do not believe the devil’s gospel, which is a _chance_
    of salvation: chance of salvation is chance of damnation.” Grace
    is not a _reward_ for good deeds done, but a _power_ enabling us
    to do them. Francis Rous of Truro, in the Parliament of 1629,
    spoke as a man nearly frantic with horror at the increase of that
    “error of Arminianism which makes the grace of God lackey it after
    the will of man”; see Masson, Life of Milton, 1:277. Arminian
    converts say: “I gave my heart to the Lord”; Augustinian converts
    say: “The Holy Spirit convicted me of sin and renewed my heart.”
    Arminianism tends to self-sufficiency; Augustinianism promotes
    dependence upon God.


C. It rests upon false philosophical principles, as for example: (_a_)
That the will is simply the faculty of volitions. (_b_) That the power of
contrary choice, in the sense of power by a single act to reverse one’s
moral state, is essential to will. (_c_) That previous certainty of any
given moral act is incompatible with its freedom. (_d_) That ability is
the measure of obligation. (_e_) That law condemns only volitional
transgression. (_f_) That man has no organic moral connection with the
race.


    (_b_) Raymond says: “Man is responsible for character, but only so
    far as that character is self-imposed. We are not responsible for
    character irrespective of its origin. Freedom _from_ an act is as
    essential to responsibility as freedom _to_ it. If power to the
    contrary is impossible, then freedom does not exist in God or man.
    Sin was a necessity, and God was the author of it.” But this is a
    denial that there is any such thing as character; that the will
    can give itself a bent which no single volition can change; that
    the wicked man can become the slave of sin; that Satan, though
    without power now in himself to turn to God, is yet responsible
    for his sin. The power of contrary choice which Adam had exists no
    longer in its entirety; it is narrowed down to a power to the
    contrary in temporary and subordinate choices; it no longer is
    equal to the work of changing the fundamental determination of the
    being to selfishness as an ultimate end. Yet for this very
    inability, because originated by will, man is responsible.

    Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:28—“Formal freedom leads the way
    to real freedom. The starting-point is a freedom which does not
    yet involve an inner necessity, but the possibility of something
    else; the goal is the freedom which is identical with necessity.
    The first is a means to the last. When the will has fully and
    truly chosen, the power of acting otherwise may still be said to
    exist in a metaphysical sense; but morally, _i. e._, with
    reference to the contrast of good and evil, it is entirely done
    away. Formal freedom is freedom of choice, in the sense of
    volition with the express consciousness of other possibilities.”
    Real freedom is freedom to choose the good only, with no remaining
    possibility that evil will exert a counter attraction. But as the
    will can reach a “moral necessity” of good, so it can through sin
    reach a “moral necessity” of evil.

    (_c_) Park: “The great philosophical objection to Arminianism is
    its denial of the _certainty_ of human action—the idea that a man
    may act either way without certainty how he will act—power of a
    contrary choice in the sense of a moral indifference which can
    choose without motive, or contrary to the strongest motive. The
    New School view is better than this, for that holds to the
    certainty of wrong choice, while yet the soul has power to make a
    right one.... The Arminians believe that it is objectively
    uncertain whether a man shall act in this way or in that, right or
    wrong. There is nothing, antecedently to choice, to decide the
    choice. It was the whole aim of Edwards to refute the idea that
    man would not _certainly_ sin. The old Calvinists believe that
    antecedently to the Fall Adam was in this state of objective
    uncertainty, but that after the Fall it was certain he would sin,
    and his probation therefore was closed. Edwards affirms that no
    such objective uncertainty or power to the contrary ever existed,
    and that man now has all the liberty he ever had or could have.
    The truth in ‘power to the contrary’ is simply the power of the
    will to act contrary to the way it does act. President Edwards
    believed in this, though he is commonly understood as reasoning to
    the contrary. The false ‘power to the contrary’ is _uncertainty_
    how one will act, or a willingness to act otherwise than one does
    act. This is the Arminian power to the contrary, and it is this
    that Edwards opposes.”

    (_e_) Whedon, On the Will, 338-360, 388-395—“Prior to free
    volition, man may be unconformed to law, yet not a subject of
    retribution. The law has two offices, one judicatory and critical,
    the other retributive and penal. Hereditary evil may not be
    visited with retribution, as Adam’s concreated purity was not
    meritorious. Passive, prevolitional holiness is moral rectitude,
    but not moral desert. Passive, prevolitional impurity needs
    concurrence of active will to make it condemnable.”


D. It renders uncertain either the universality of sin or man’s
responsibility for it. If man has full power to refuse consent to inborn
depravity, then the universality of sin and the universal need of a Savior
are merely hypothetical. If sin, however, be universal, there must have
been an absence of free consent; and the objective certainty of man’s
sinning, according to the theory, destroys his responsibility.


    Raymond, Syst. Theol., 2:86-89, holds it “theoretically possible
    that a child may be so trained and educated in the nurture and
    admonition of the Lord, as that he will never knowingly and
    willingly transgress the law of God; in which case he will
    certainly grow up into regeneration and final salvation. But it is
    grace that preserves him from sin—[common grace?]. We do not know,
    either from experience or Scripture, that none have been free from
    known and wilful transgressions.” J. J. Murphy, Nat. Selection and
    Spir. Freedom, 26-33—“It is possible to walk from the cradle to
    the grave, not indeed altogether without sin, but without any
    period of alienation from God, and with the heavenly life
    developing along with the earthly, as it did in Christ, from the
    first.” But, since grace merely restores ability without giving
    the disposition to use that ability aright, Arminianism does not
    logically provide for the certain salvation of any infant.
    Calvinism can provide for the salvation of all dying in infancy,
    for it knows of a divine power to renew the will, but Arminianism
    knows of no such power, and so is furthest from a solution of the
    problem of infant salvation. See Julius Müller, Doct. Sin,
    2:320-326; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 479-494; Bib. Sac. 23:206;
    28:279; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 3:56 _sq._


3. The New School Theory, or Theory of uncondemnable Vitiosity.


This theory is called New School, because of its recession from the old
Puritan anthropology of which Edwards and Bellamy in the last century were
the expounders. The New School theory is a general scheme built up by the
successive labors of Hopkins, Emmons, Dwight, Taylor, and Finney. It is
held at present by New School Presbyterians, and by the larger part of the
Congregational body.

According to this theory, all men are born with a physical and moral
constitution which predisposes them to sin, and all men do actually sin so
soon as they come to moral consciousness. This vitiosity of nature may be
called sinful, because it uniformly leads to sin; but it is not itself
sin, since nothing is to be properly denominated sin but the voluntary act
of transgressing known law.

God imputes to men only their own acts of personal transgression; he does
not impute to them Adam’s sin; neither original vitiosity nor physical
death are penal inflictions; they are simply consequences which God has in
his sovereignty ordained to mark his displeasure at Adam’s transgression,
and subject to which evils God immediately creates each human soul. In
Rom. 5:12, “death passed unto all men, for that all sinned,” signifies:
“spiritual death passed on all men, because all men have actually and
personally sinned.”


    Edwards held that God imputes Adam’s sin to his posterity by
    arbitrarily identifying them with him,—identity, on the theory of
    continuous creation (see pages 415-418), being only what God
    appoints. Since this did not furnish sufficient ground for
    imputation, Edwards joined the Placean doctrine to the other, and
    showed the justice of the condemnation by the fact that man is
    depraved. He adds, moreover, the consideration that man ratifies
    this depravity by his own act. So Edwards tried to combine three
    views. But all were vitiated by his doctrine of continuous
    creation, which logically made God the only cause in the universe,
    and left no freedom, guilt, or responsibility to man. He held that
    preservation is a continuous series of new divine volitions,
    personal identity consisting in consciousness or rather memory,
    with no necessity for identity of substance. He maintained that
    God could give to an absolutely new creation the consciousness of
    one just annihilated, and thereby the two would be identical. He
    maintained this not only as a possibility, but as the actual fact.
    See Lutheran Quarterly, April, 1901:149-169; and H. N. Gardiner,
    in Philos. Rev., Nov. 1900:573-596.

    The idealistic philosophy of Edwards enables us to understand his
    conception of the relation of the race to Adam. He believed in “a
    real union between the root and the branches of the world of
    mankind, established by the author of the whole system of the
    universe ... the full consent of the hearts of Adam’s posterity to
    the first apostasy ... and therefore the sin of the apostasy is
    not theirs merely because God imputes it to them, but it is truly
    and properly theirs, and _on that ground_ God imputes it to them.”
    Hagenbach, Hist. Doct., 2:435-448, esp. 436, quotes from Edwards:
    “The guilt a man has upon his soul at his first existence is one
    and simple, _viz._: the guilt of the original apostasy, the guilt
    of the sin by which the species first rebelled against God.”
    Interpret this by other words of Edwards: “The child and the
    acorn, which come into existence in the course of nature, are
    truly immediately created by God”—_i. e._, continuously created
    (quoted by Dodge, Christian Theology, 188). Allen, Jonathan
    Edwards, 310—“It required but a step from the principle that each
    individual has an identity of consciousness with Adam, to reach
    the conclusion that each individual is Adam and repeats his
    experience. Of every man it might be said that like Adam he comes
    into the world attended by the divine nature, and like him sins
    and falls. In this sense the sin of every man becomes original
    sin.” Adam becomes not the head of humanity but its generic type.
    Hence arises the New School doctrine of exclusively individual sin
    and guilt.

    Shedd, Hist. Doctrine, 2:25, claims Edwards as a Traducianist. But
    Fisher, Discussions, 240, shows that he was not. As we have seen
    (Prolegomena, pages 48, 49), Edwards thought too little of
    _nature_. He tended to Berkeleyanism as applied to mind. Hence the
    chief good was in happiness—a form of _sensibility_. Virtue is
    voluntary _choice_ of this good. Hence union of _acts_ and
    _exercises_ with Adam was sufficient. This God’s will might make
    identity of _being_ with him. Baird, Elohim Revealed, 250 _sq._,
    says well, that “Edwards’s idea that the character of an act was
    to be sought somewhere else than in its cause involves the
    fallacious assumption that acts have a subsistence and moral
    agency of their own apart from that of the actor.” This divergence
    from the truth led to the Exercise-system of Hopkins and Emmons,
    who not only denied moral character prior to individual choices
    (_i. e._, denied sin of nature), but attributed all human acts and
    exercises to the direct efficiency of God. Hopkins declared that
    Adam’s act, in eating the forbidden fruit, was not the act of his
    posterity; therefore they did not sin at the same time that he
    did. The sinfulness of that act could not be transferred to them
    afterwards; because the sinfulness of an act can no more be
    transferred from one person to another than an act itself.
    Therefore, though men became sinners by Adam, according to divine
    constitution, yet they have, and are accountable for, no sins but
    personal. See Woods, History of Andover Theological Seminary, 33.
    So the doctrine of continuous creation led to the Exercise-system,
    and the Exercise-system led to the theology of acts. On Emmons,
    see Works, 4:502-507, and Bib. Sac., 7:479; 20:317; also H. B.
    Smith, in Faith and Philosophy, 215-263.

    N. W. Taylor, of New Haven, agreed with Hopkins and Emmons that
    there is no imputation of Adam’s sin or of inborn depravity. He
    called that depravity physical, not moral. But he repudiated the
    doctrine of divine efficiency in the production of man’s acts and
    exercises, and made all sin to be personal. He held to the power
    of contrary choice. Adam had it, and contrary to the belief of
    Augustinians, he never lost it. Man “not only can if he will, but
    he can if he won’t.” He can, but, without the Spirit, will not. He
    said: “Man can, whatever the Holy Spirit does or does not do”; but
    also: “Man will not, unless the Holy Spirit helps”; “If I were as
    eloquent as the Holy Ghost, I could convert sinners as fast as
    he.” Yet he did not hold to the Arminian liberty of indifference
    or contingence. He believed in the certainty of wrong action, yet
    in power to the contrary. See Moral Government, 2:132—“The error
    of Pelagius was not in asserting that man _can_ obey God without
    grace, but in saying that man does _actually_ obey God without
    grace.” There is a part of the sinner’s nature to which the
    motives of the gospel may appeal—a part of his nature which is
    neither holy nor unholy, _viz._, self-love, or innocent desire for
    happiness. Greatest happiness is the ground of obligation. Under
    the influence of motives appealing to happiness, the sinner can
    suspend his choice of the world as his chief good, and can give
    his heart to God. He can do this, whatever the Holy Spirit does,
    or does not do; but the _moral_ inability can be overcome only by
    the Holy Spirit, who moves the soul, without coercing, by means of
    the truth. On Dr. Taylor’s system, and its connection with prior
    New England theology, see Fisher, Discussions, 285-354.

    This form of New School doctrine suggests the following questions:
    1. Can the sinner suspend his selfishness before he is subdued by
    divine grace? 2. Can his choice of God from mere self-love be a
    holy choice? 3. Since God demands love in every choice, must it
    not be a positively unholy choice? 4. If it is not itself a holy
    choice, how can it be a beginning of holiness? 5. If the sinner
    can become regenerate by preferring God on the ground of
    self-interest, where is the necessity of the Holy Spirit to renew
    the heart? 6. Does not this asserted ability of the sinner to turn
    to God contradict consciousness and Scripture? For Taylor’s Views,
    see his Revealed Theology, 134-309. For criticism of them, see
    Hodge, in Princeton Rev., Jan. 1868:63 sq., and 368-398; also,
    Tyler, Letters on the New Haven Theology. Neither Hopkins and
    Emmons on the one hand, nor Taylor on the other, represent most
    fully the general course of New England theology. Smalley, Dwight,
    Woods, all held to more conservative views than Taylor, or than
    Finney, whose system had much resemblance to Taylor’s. All three
    of these denied the power of contrary choice which Dr. Taylor so
    strenuously maintained, although all agreed with him in denying
    the imputation of Adam’s sin or of our hereditary depravity. These
    are not sinful, except in the sense of being occasions of actual
    sin.

    Dr. Park, of Andover, was understood to teach that the disordered
    state of the sensibilities and faculties with which we are born is
    the _immediate_ occasion of sin, while Adam’s transgression is the
    _remote_ occasion of sin. The will, though influenced by an evil
    tendency, is still free; the evil tendency itself is not free, and
    therefore is not sin. The Statement of New School doctrine given
    in the text is intended to represent the common New England
    doctrine, as taught by Smalley, Dwight, Woods and Park; although
    the historical tendency, even among these theologians, has been to
    emphasize less and less the depraved tendencies prior to actual
    sin, and to maintain that moral character begins only with
    individual choice, most of them, however, holding that this
    individual choice begins at birth. See Bib. Sac., 7:552, 567;
    8:607-647; 20:462-471, 576-593; Van Oosterzee, Christian
    Dogmatics, 407-412; Foster, Hist. N. E. Theology.

    Both Ritschl and Pfleiderer lean toward the New School
    interpretation of sin. Ritschl, Unterricht, 25—“Universal death
    was the consequence of the sin of the first man, and the death of
    his posterity proved that they too had sinned.” Thus death is
    universal, not because of natural generation from Adam, but
    because of the individual sins of Adam’s posterity. Pfleiderer,
    Grundriss, 122—“Sin is a direction of the will which contradicts
    the moral Idea. As preceding personal acts of the will, it is not
    personal guilt but imperfection or evil. When it persists in spite
    of awaking moral consciousness, and by indulgence become habit, it
    is guilty abnormity.”


To the New School theory we object as follows:

A. It contradicts Scripture in maintaining or implying: (_a_) That sin
consists solely in acts, and in the dispositions caused in each case by
man’s individual acts, and that the state which predisposes to acts of sin
is not itself sin. (_b_) That the vitiosity which predisposes to sin is a
part of each man’s nature as it proceeds from the creative hand of God.
(_c_) That physical death in the human race is not a penal consequence of
Adam’s transgression. (_d_) That infants, before moral consciousness, do
not need Christ’s sacrifice to save them. Since they are innocent, no
penalty rests upon them, and none needs to be removed. (_e_) That we are
neither condemned upon the ground of actual inbeing in Adam, nor justified
upon the ground of actual inbeing in Christ.


    If a child may not be unholy before he voluntarily transgresses,
    then, by parity of reasoning, Adam could not have been holy before
    he obeyed the law, nor can a change of heart precede Christian
    action. New School principles would compel us to assert that right
    action precedes change of heart, and that obedience in Adam must
    have preceded his holiness. Emmons held that, if children die
    before they become moral agents, it is most rational to conclude
    that they are annihilated. They are mere animals. The common New
    School doctrine would regard them as saved either on account of
    their innocence, or because the atonement of Christ avails to
    remove the _consequences_ as well as the _penalty_ of sin.

    But to say that infants are pure contradicts _Rom. 5:12_—“_all
    sinned_”; _1 Cor. 7:14_—“_else were your children unclean_”; _Eph.
    2:3_—“_by nature children of wrath._” That Christ’s atonement
    removes natural consequences of sin is nowhere asserted or implied
    in Scripture. See, _per contra_, H. B. Smith, System, 271, where,
    however, it is only maintained that Christ saves from all the
    _just_ consequences of sin. But all _just_ consequences are
    penalty, and should be so called. The exigencies of New School
    doctrine compel it to put the beginning of sin in the infant at
    the very first moment of its separate existence,—in order not to
    contradict those Scriptures which speak of sin as being universal,
    and of the atonement as being needed by all. Dr. Park held that
    infants sin so soon as they are born. He was obliged to hold this,
    or else to say that some members of the human race exist who are
    not sinners. But by putting sin thus early in human experience,
    all meaning is taken out of the New School definition of sin as
    the “voluntary transgression of known law.” It is difficult to
    say, upon this theory, what sort of a _choice_ the infant makes of
    sin, or what sort of a _known law_ it violates.

    The first need in a theory of sin is that of satisfying the
    statements of Scripture. The second need is that it should point
    out an act of man which will justify the infliction of pain,
    suffering, and death upon the whole human race. Our moral sense
    refuses to accept the conclusion that all this is a matter of
    arbitrary sovereignty. We cannot find the act in each man’s
    conscious transgression, nor in sin committed at birth. We do find
    such a voluntary transgression of known law in Adam; and we claim
    that the New School definition of sin is much more consistent with
    this last explanation of sin’s origin than is the theory of a
    multitude of individual transgressions.

    The final test of every theory, however, is its conformity to
    Scripture. We claim that a false philosophy prevents the advocates
    of New School doctrine from understanding the utterances of Paul.
    Their philosophy is a modified survival of atomistic Pelagianism.
    They ignore nature in both God and man, and resolve character into
    transient acts. The unconscious or subconscious state of the will
    they take little or no account of, and the possibility of another
    and higher life interpenetrating and transforming our own life is
    seldom present to their minds. They have no proper idea of the
    union of the believer with Christ, and so they have no proper idea
    of the union of the race with Adam. They need to learn that, as
    all the spiritual life of the race was in Christ, the second Adam,
    so all the natural life of the race was in the first Adam; as we
    derive righteousness from the former, so we derive corruption from
    the latter. Because Christ’s life is in them, Paul can say that
    all believers rose in Christ’s resurrection; because Adam’s life
    is in them, he can say that in Adam all die. We should prefer to
    say with Pfleiderer that Paul teaches this doctrine but that Paul
    is no authority for us, rather than to profess acceptance of
    Paul’s teaching while we ingeniously evade the force of his
    argument. We agree with Stevens, Pauline Theology, 135, 136, that
    all men “sinned in the same sense in which believers were
    crucified to the world and died unto sin when Christ died upon the
    cross.” But we protest that to make Christ’s death the mere
    _occasion_ of the death of the believer, and Adam’s sin the mere
    _occasion_ of the sins of men, is to ignore the central truths of
    Paul’s teaching—the _vital union_ of the believer with Christ, and
    the _vital union_ of the race with Adam.


B. It rests upon false philosophical principles, as for example: (_a_)
That the soul is immediately created by God. (_b_) That the law of God
consists wholly in outward command. (_c_) That present natural ability to
obey the law is the measure of obligation. (_d_) That man’s relations to
moral law are exclusively individual. (_e_) That the will is merely the
faculty of individual and personal choices. (_f_) That the will, at man’s
birth, has no moral state or character.


    See Baird, Elohim Revealed, 250 _sq._—“Personality is inseparable
    from nature. The one duty is love. Unless any given duty is
    performed through the activity of a principle of love springing up
    in the nature, it is not performed at all. _The law addresses the
    nature._ The efficient cause of moral action is the proper subject
    of moral law. It is only in the perversity of unscriptural
    theology that we find the absurdity of separating the moral
    character from the substance of the soul, and tying it to the
    vanishing deeds of life. The idea that responsibility and sin are
    predicable of actions merely is only consistent with an utter
    denial that man’s nature as such owes anything to God, or has an
    office to perform in showing forth his glory. It ignores the fact
    that actions are empty phenomena, which in themselves have no
    possible value. It is the heart, soul, might, mind, strength, with
    which we are to love. Christ conformed to the law, by being ‘_that
    holy thing_’ (_Luke 1:35_, marg.).”

    Erroneous philosophical principles lie at the basis of New School
    interpretations of Scripture. The solidarity of the race is
    ignored, and all moral action is held to be individual. In our
    discussion of the Augustinian theory of sin, we shall hope to show
    that underlying Paul’s doctrine there is quite another philosophy.
    Such a philosophy together with a deeper Christian experience
    would have corrected the following statement of Paul’s view of
    sin, by Orello Cone, in Am. Jour. Theology, April, 1898:241-267.
    On the phrase _Rom. 5:12_—“_for that all sinned,_” he remarks: “If
    under the new order men do not become righteous simply because of
    the righteousness of Christ and without their choice, neither
    under the old order did Paul think them to be subject to death
    without their own acts of sin. Each representative head is
    conceived only as the occasion of the results of his work, on the
    one hand in the tragic order of death, and on the other hand in
    the blessed order of life—the occasion indispensable to all that
    follows in either order.... It may be questioned whether
    Pfleiderer does not state the case too strongly when he says that
    the sin of Adam’s posterity is regarded as ‘the necessary
    consequence’ of the sin of Adam. It does not follow from the
    employment of the aorist ἥμαρτον that the sinning of all is
    contained in that of Adam, although this sense must be considered
    as grammatically possible. It is not however the only
    grammatically defensible sense. In _Rom. 3:23_, ἥμαρτον certainly
    does not denote such a definite past act filling only one point of
    time.” But we reply that the context determines that in _Rom.
    5:12_, ἥμαρτον does denote such a definite past act; see our
    interpretation of the whole passage, under the Augustinian Theory,
    pages 625-627.


C. It impugns the justice of God:

(_a_) By regarding him as the direct creator of a vicious nature which
infallibly leads every human being into actual transgression. To maintain
that, in consequence of Adam’s act, God brings it about that all men
become sinners, and this, not by virtue of inherent laws of propagation,
but by the direct creation in each case of a vicious nature, is to make
God indirectly the author of sin.

(_b_) By representing him as the inflicter of suffering and death upon
millions of human beings who in the present life do not come to moral
consciousness, and who are therefore, according to the theory, perfectly
innocent. This is to make him visit Adam’s sin on his posterity, while at
the same time it denies that moral connection between Adam and his
posterity which alone could make such visitation just.

(_c_) By holding that the probation which God appoints to men is a
separate probation of each soul, when it first comes to moral
consciousness and is least qualified to decide aright. It is much more
consonant with our ideas of the divine justice that the decision should
have been made by the whole race, in one whose nature was pure and who
perfectly understood God’s law, than that heaven and hell should have been
determined for each of us by a decision made in our own inexperienced
childhood, under the influence of a vitiated nature.


    On this theory, God determines, in his mere sovereignty, that
    because one man sinned, all men should be called into existence
    depraved, under a constitution which secures the certainty of
    their sinning. But we claim that it is unjust that any should
    suffer without ill-desert. To say that God thus marks his sense of
    the guilt of Adam’s sin is to contradict the main principle of the
    theory, namely, that men are held responsible only for their own
    sins. We prefer to justify God by holding that there is a reason
    for this infliction, and that this reason is the connection of the
    infant with Adam. If mere tendency to sin is innocent, then Christ
    might have taken it, when he took our nature. But if he had taken
    it, it would not explain the fact of the atonement, for upon this
    theory it would not need to be atoned for. To say that the child
    inherits a sinful nature, not as penalty, but by natural law, is
    to ignore the fact that this natural law is simply the regular
    action of God, the expression of his moral nature, and so is
    itself penalty.

    “Man kills a snake,” says Raymond, “because it is a snake, and not
    because it is to blame for being a snake,”—which seems to us a new
    proof that the advocates of innocent depravity regard infants, not
    as moral beings, but as mere animals. “We must distinguish
    automatic excellence or badness,” says Raymond again, “from moral
    desert, whether good or ill.” This seems to us a doctrine of
    punishment without guilt. Princeton Essays, 1:138, quote
    Coleridge: “It is an outrage on common sense to affirm that it is
    no evil for men to be placed on their probation under such
    circumstances that not one of ten thousand millions ever escapes
    sin and condemnation to eternal death. There is evil inflicted on
    us, as a consequence of Adam’s sin, antecedent to our personal
    transgressions. It matters not what this evil is, whether temporal
    death, corruption of nature, certainty of sin, or death in its
    more extended sense; if the ground of the evil’s coming on us is
    Adam’s sin, the principle is the same.” Baird, Elohim Revealed,
    488—So, it seems, “if a creature is punished, it implies that some
    one has sinned, but does not necessarily intimate the sufferer to
    be the sinner! But this is wholly contrary to the argument of the
    apostle in _Rom. 5:12-19_, which is based upon the opposite
    doctrine, and it is also contrary to the justice of God, who
    punishes only those who deserve it.” See Julius Müller, Doct. Sin.
    2:67-74.


D. Its limitation of responsibility to the evil choices of the individual
and the dispositions caused thereby is inconsistent with the following
facts:

(_a_) The first moral choice of each individual is so undeliberate as not
to be remembered. Put forth at birth, as the chief advocates of the New
School theory maintain, it does not answer to their definition of sin as a
voluntary transgression of known law. Responsibility for such choice does
not differ from responsibility for the inborn evil state of the will which
manifests itself in that choice.

(_b_) The uniformity of sinful action among men cannot be explained by the
existence of a mere faculty of choices. That men should uniformly choose
may be thus explained; but that men should uniformly choose evil requires
us to postulate an evil tendency or state of the will itself, prior to
these separate acts of choice. This evil tendency or inborn determination
to evil, since it is the real cause of actual sins, must itself be sin,
and as such must be guilty and condemnable.

(_c_) Power in the will to prevent the inborn vitiosity from developing
itself is upon this theory a necessary condition of responsibility for
actual sins. But the absolute uniformity of actual transgression is
evidence that the will is practically impotent. If responsibility
diminishes as the difficulties in the way of free decision increase, the
fact that these difficulties are insuperable shows that there can be no
responsibility at all. To deny the guilt of inborn sin is therefore
virtually to deny the guilt of the actual sin which springs therefrom.


    The aim of all the theories is to find a decision of the will
    which will justify God in condemning men. Where shall we find such
    a decision? At the age of fifteen, ten, five? Then all who die
    before this age are not sinners, cannot justly be punished with
    death, do not need a Savior. Is it at birth? But decision at such
    a time is not such a conscious decision against God as, according
    to this theory, would make it the proper determiner of our future
    destiny. We claim that the theory of Augustine—that of a sin of
    the race in Adam—is the only one that shows a conscious
    transgression fit to be the cause and ground of man’s guilt and
    condemnation.

    Wm. Adams Brown: “Who can tell how far his own acts are caused by
    his own will, and how far by the nature he has inherited? Men do
    feel guilty for acts which are largely due to their inherited
    natures, which inherited corruption is guilt, deserving of
    punishment and certain to receive it.” H. B. Smith, System, 350,
    note—“It has been said, in the way of a taunt against the older
    theology, that men are very willing to speculate about sinning in
    Adam, so as to have their attention diverted from the sense of
    personal guilt. But the whole history of theology bears witness
    that those who have believed most fully in our native and strictly
    moral corruption—as Augustine, Calvin, and Edwards—have ever had
    the deepest sense of their personal demerit. We know the full evil
    of sin only when we know its roots as well as its fruits.”

    “Causa causæ est causa causati.” Inborn depravity is the cause of
    the first actual sin. The cause of inborn depravity is the sin of
    Adam. If there be no guilt in original sin, then the actual sin
    that springs therefrom cannot be guilty. There are subsequent
    presumptuous sins in which the personal element overbears the
    element of race and heredity. But this cannot be said of the first
    acts which make man a sinner. These are so naturally and uniformly
    the result of the inborn determination of the will, that they
    cannot be guilty, unless that inborn determination is also guilty.
    In short, not all sin is personal. There must be a sin of nature—a
    race-sin—or the beginnings of actual sin cannot be accounted for
    or regarded as objects of God’s condemnation. Julius Müller,
    Doctrine of Sin, 2:320-328, 341—“If the deep-rooted depravity
    which we bring with us into the world be not our sin, it at once
    becomes an excuse for our actual sins.” Princeton Essays, 1:138,
    139—Alternative: 1. May a man by his own power prevent the
    development of this hereditary depravity? Then we do not know that
    all men are sinners, or that Christ’s salvation is needed by all.
    2. Is actual sin a necessary consequence of hereditary depravity?
    Then it is, on this theory, a free act no longer, and is not
    guilty, since guilt is predicable only of voluntary transgression
    of known law. See Baird, Elohim Revealed, 256 sq.; Hodge, Essays,
    571-638; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:61-73; Edwards on the Will,
    part iii, sec. 4; Bib. Sac., 20:317-320.


4. The Federal Theory, or Theory of Condemnation by Covenant.


The Federal theory, or theory of the Covenants, had its origin with
Cocceius (1608-1669), professor at Leyden, but was more fully elaborated
by Turretin (1623-1687). It has become a tenet of the Reformed as
distinguished from the Lutheran church, and in this country it has its
main advocates in the Princeton school of theologians, of whom Dr. Charles
Hodge was the representative.

According to this view, Adam was constituted by God’s sovereign
appointment the representative of the whole human race. With Adam as their
representative, God entered into covenant, agreeing to bestow upon them
eternal life on condition of his obedience, but making the penalty of his
disobedience to be the corruption and death of all his posterity. In
accordance with the terms of this covenant, since Adam sinned, God
accounts all his descendants as sinners, and condemns them because of
Adam’s transgression.

In execution of this sentence of condemnation, God immediately creates
each soul of Adam’s posterity with a corrupt and depraved nature, which
infallibly leads to sin, and which is itself sin. The theory is therefore
a theory of the immediate imputation of Adam’s sin to his posterity, their
corruption of nature not being the cause of that imputation, but the
effect of it. In Rom. 5:12, “death passed unto all men, for that all
sinned,” signifies: “physical, spiritual, and eternal death came to all,
because all were regarded and treated as sinners.”


    Fisher, Discussions, 355-409, compares the Augustinian and Federal
    theories of Original Sin. His account of the Federal theory and
    its origin is substantially as follows: The Federal theory is a
    theory of the covenants (_fœdus_, a covenant). 1. The covenant is
    a sovereign constitution imposed by God. 2. Federal union is the
    legal ground of imputation, though kinship to Adam is the reason
    why Adam and not another was selected as our representative. 3.
    Our guilt for Adam’s sin is simply a legal responsibility. 4. That
    imputed sin is punished by inborn depravity, and that inborn
    depravity by eternal death. Augustine could not reconcile inherent
    depravity with the justice of God; hence he held that we sinned in
    Adam.

    So Anselm says: “Because the whole human nature was in them (Adam
    and Eve), and outside of them there was nothing of it, the whole
    was weakened and corrupted.” After the first sin “this nature was
    propagated just as it had made itself by sinning.” All sin belongs
    to the will; but this is a part of our inheritance. The
    descendants of Adam were not in him as individuals; yet what he
    did as a person, he did not do _sine natura_, and this nature is
    ours as well as his. So Peter Lombard. Sins of our immediate
    ancestors, because they are qualities which are purely personal,
    are not propagated. After Adam’s first sin, the actual qualities
    of the first parent or of other later parents do not corrupt the
    nature as concerns its qualities, but only as concerns the
    qualities of the _person_.

    Calvin maintained two propositions: 1. We are not condemned for
    Adam’s sin apart from our own inherent depravity which is derived
    from him. The sin for which we are condemned is our own sin. 2.
    This sin is ours, for the reason that our nature is vitiated in
    Adam, and we receive it in the condition in which it was put by
    the first transgression. Melanchthon also held to an imputation of
    the first sin conditioned upon our innate depravity. The impulse
    to Federalism was given by the difficulty, on the pure Augustinian
    theory, of accounting for the non-imputation of Adam’s subsequent
    sins, and those of his posterity.

    Cocceius (Dutch, Coch: English, Cook), the author of the
    covenant-theory, conceived that he had solved this difficulty by
    making Adam’s sin to be imputed to us upon the ground of a
    covenant between God and Adam, according to which Adam was to
    stand as the representative of his posterity. In Cocceius’s use of
    the term, however, the only difference between covenant and
    command is found in the promise attached to the keeping of it.
    Fisher remarks on the mistake, in modern defenders of imputation,
    of ignoring the capital fact of a true and real participation in
    Adam’s sin. The great body of Calvinistic theologians in the 17th
    century were Augustinians as well as Federalists. So Owen and the
    Westminster Confession. Turretin, however, almost merged the
    natural relation to Adam in the federal.

    Edwards fell back on the old doctrine of Aquinas and Augustine. He
    tried to make out a real participation in the first sin. The first
    rising of sinful inclination, by a divinely constituted identity,
    _is_ this participation. But Hopkins and Emmons regarded the
    sinful inclination, not as a _real_ participation, but only as a
    _constructive_ consent to Adam’s first sin. Hence the New School
    theology, in which the imputation of Adam’s sin was given up. On
    the contrary, Calvinists of the Princeton school planted
    themselves on the Federal theory, and taking Turretin as their
    text book, waged war on New England views, not wholly sparing
    Edwards himself. After this review of the origin of the theory,
    for which we are mainly indebted to Fisher, it can be easily seen
    how little show of truth there is in the assumption of the
    Princeton theologians that the Federal theory is “the immemorial
    doctrine of the church of God.”

    Statements of the theory are found in Cocceius, Summa Doctrinæ de
    Fœdere, cap. 1, 5; Turretin, Inst., loc. 9, quæs. 9; Princeton
    Essays, 1:98-185. esp. 120—“In imputation there is, first, an
    ascription of something to those concerned; secondly, a
    determination to deal with them accordingly.” The ground for this
    imputation is “the union between Adam and his posterity, which is
    twofold,—a natural union, as between father and children, and the
    union of representation, _which is the main idea here insisted
    on_.” 123—“As in Christ we are constituted righteous by the
    imputation of righteousness, so in Adam we are made sinners by the
    imputation of his sin.... Guilt is liability or exposedness to
    punishment; it does not in theological usage imply moral turpitude
    or criminality.” 162—Turretin is quoted: “The foundation,
    therefore, of imputation is not merely the _natural_ connection
    which exists between us and Adam—for, were this the case, all his
    sins would be imputed to us, but principally the _moral_ and
    _federal_, on the ground of which God entered into covenant with
    him as our head. Hence in that sin Adam acted not as a private but
    a public person and representative.” The oneness results from
    contract; the natural union is frequently not mentioned at all.
    Marck: All men sinned in Adam, “_eos representante_.” The acts of
    Adam and of Christ are ours “_jure representationis_.”

    G. W. Northrup makes the order of the Federal theory to be: “(1)
    imputation of Adam’s guilt; (2) condemnation on the ground of this
    imputed guilt; (3) corruption of nature consequent upon treatment
    as condemned. So judicial imputation of Adam’s sin is the cause
    and ground of innate corruption.... All the acts, with the single
    exception of the sin of Adam, are divine acts: the appointment of
    Adam, the creation of his descendants, the imputation of his
    guilt, the condemnation of his posterity, their consequent
    corruption. Here we have guilt without sin, exposure to divine
    wrath without ill-desert, God regarding men as being what they are
    not, punishing them on the ground of a sin committed before they
    existed, and visiting them with gratuitous condemnation and
    gratuitous reprobation. Here are arbitrary representation,
    fictitious imputation, constructive guilt, limited atonement.” The
    Presb. Rev., Jan. 1882:30, claims that Kloppenburg (1642) preceded
    Cocceius (1648) in holding to the theory of the Covenants, as did
    also the Canons of Dort. For additional statements of Federalism,
    see Hodge, Essays, 49-86, and Syst. Theol., 2:192-204; Bib. Sac.,
    21:95-107; Cunningham, Historical Theology.


To the Federal theory we object:

A. It is extra-Scriptural, there being no mention of such a covenant with
Adam in the account of man’s trial. The assumed allusion to Adam’s
apostasy in Hosea 6:7, where the word “covenant” is used, is too
precarious and too obviously metaphorical to afford the basis for a scheme
of imputation (see Henderson, Com. on Minor Prophets, _in loco_). In Heb.
8:8—“new covenant”—there is suggested a contrast, not with an Adamic, but
with the Mosaic, covenant (_cf._ verse 9).


    In _Hosea 6:7_—“_they like Adam_ [marg. “_men_”] _have
    transgressed the covenant_” (Rev. Ver.)—the correct translation is
    given by Henderson, Minor Prophets: “_But they, like men that
    break a covenant, there they proved false to me_.” LXX: αὐτοὶ δέ
    εἰσιν ὡς ἄνθρωπος παραβαίνων διαθήκην. De Wette: “Aber sie
    übertreten den Bund nach Menschenart; daselbst sind sie mir
    treulos.” Here the word _adam_, translated “man,” either means “a
    man,” or “man,” _i. e._, generic man. “Israel had as little regard
    to their covenants with God as men of unprincipled character have
    for ordinary contracts.” “Like a man”—as men do. Compare _Ps.
    82:7_—“_ye shall die like men_”; _Hosea 8:1, 2_—“_they have
    transgressed my covenant_”—an allusion to the Abrahamic or Mosaic
    covenant. _Heb. 8:9_—“_Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that
    I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the
    house of Judah; Not according to the covenant that I made with
    their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to lead them
    forth out of the land of Egypt._”


B. It contradicts Scripture, in making the first result of Adam’s sin to
be God’s _regarding and treating_ the race as sinners. The Scripture, on
the contrary, declares that Adam’s offense _constituted_ us sinners (Rom.
5:19). We are not sinners simply because God regards and treats us as
such, but God regards us as sinners because we are sinners. Death is said
to have “passed unto all men,” not because all were regarded and treated
as sinners, but “because all sinned” (Rom. 5:12).


    For a full exegesis of the passage _Rom. 5:12-19_, see note to the
    discussion of the Theory of Adam’s Natural Headship, pages
    625-627. Dr. Park gave great offence by saying that the so-called
    “covenants” of law and of grace, referred in the Westminster
    Confession as made by God with Adam and Christ respectively, were
    really “made in Holland.” The word _fœdus_, in such a connection,
    could properly mean nothing more than “ordinance”; see Vergil,
    Georgics, 1:60-63—“eterna fœdera.” E. G. Robinson, Christ. Theol.,
    185—“God’s ‘covenant’ with men is simply his method of dealing
    with them according to their knowledge and opportunities.”


C. It impugns the justice of God by implying:

(_a_) That God holds men responsible for the violation of a covenant which
they had no part in establishing. The assumed covenant is only a sovereign
decree; the assumed justice, only arbitrary will.


    We not only never authorized Adam to make such a covenant, but
    there is no evidence that he ever made one at all. It is not even
    certain that Adam knew he should have posterity. In the case of
    the imputation of our sins to Christ, Christ covenanted
    voluntarily to bear them, and joined himself to our nature that he
    might bear them. In the case of the imputation of Christ’s
    righteousness to us, we first become one with Christ, and upon the
    ground of our union with him are justified. But upon the Federal
    theory, we are condemned upon the ground of a covenant which we
    neither instituted, nor participated in, nor assented to.


(_b_) That upon the basis of this covenant God accounts men as sinners who
are not sinners. But God judges according to truth. His condemnations do
not proceed upon a basis of legal fiction. He can regard as responsible
for Adam’s transgression only those who in some real sense have been
concerned, and have had part, in that transgression.


    See Baird, Elohim Revealed, 544—“Here is a sin, which is no crime,
    but a mere condition of being regarded and treated as sinners; and
    a guilt, which is devoid of sinfulness, and which does not imply
    moral demerit or turpitude,”—that is, a sin which is no sin, and a
    guilt which is no guilt. Why might not God as justly reckon Adam’s
    sin to the account of the fallen angels, and punish them for it?
    Dorner, System Doct., 2:351; 3:53, 54—“Hollaz held that God treats
    men in accordance with what he foresaw all would do, if they were
    in Adam’s place” (_scientia media_ and _imputatio metaphysica_).
    Birks, Difficulties of Belief, 141—“Immediate imputation is as
    unjust as _imputatio metaphysica_, _i. e._, God’s condemning us
    for what he knew we would have done in Adam’s place. On such a
    theory there is no need of a trial at all. God might condemn half
    the race at once to hell without probation, on the ground that
    they would ultimately sin and come thither at any rate.”
    Justification can be gratuitous, but not condemnation. “Like the
    social-compact theory of government, the covenant-theory of sin is
    a mere legal fiction. It explains, only to belittle. The theory of
    New England theology, which attributes to mere sovereignty God’s
    making us sinners in consequence of Adam’s sin, is more reasonable
    than the Federal theory” (Fisher).

    Professor Moses Stuart characterized this theory as one of
    “fictitious guilt, but veritable damnation.” The divine economy
    admits of no fictitious substitutions nor forensic evasions. No
    legal quibbles can modify eternal justice. Federalism reverses the
    proper order, and puts the effect before the cause, as is the case
    with the social-compact theory of government. Ritchie, Darwin and
    Hegel, 27—“It is illogical to say that society originated in a
    contract; for contract presupposes society.” Unus homo, nullus
    homo—without society, no persons. T. H. Green, Prolegomena to
    Ethics, 351—“No individual can make a conscience for himself. He
    always needs a society to make it for him....” 200—“Only through
    society is personality actualized.” Boyce, Spirit of Modern
    Philosophy, 209, note—“Organic Interrelationship of individuals is
    the condition even of their relatively independent selfhood.” We
    are “_members one of another_” (_Rom. 12:15_). Schurman,
    Agnosticism, 176—“The individual could never have developed into a
    personality but for his training through society and under law.”
    Imagine a theory that the family originated in a compact! We must
    not define the state by its first crude beginnings, any more than
    we define the oak by the acorn. On the theory of a social-compact,
    see Lowell, Essays on Government, 136-188.


(_c_) That, after accounting men to be sinners who are not sinners, God
makes them sinners by immediately creating each human soul with a corrupt
nature such as will correspond to his decree. This is not only to assume a
false view of the origin of the soul, but also to make God directly the
author of sin. Imputation of sin cannot precede and account for
corruption; on the contrary, corruption must precede and account for
imputation.


    By God’s act we became depraved, as a penal consequence of Adam’s
    act imputed to us solely as _peccatum alienum_. Dabney, Theology,
    342, says the theory regards the soul as originally pure until
    imputation. See Hodge on _Rom. 5:13_; Syst. Theol., 2:203, 210;
    Thornwell, Theology, 1:343-349; Chalmers, Institutes, 1:485, 487.
    The Federal theory “makes sin in us to be the penalty of another’s
    sin, instead of being the penalty of our own sin, as on the
    Augustinian scheme, which regards depravity in us as the
    punishment of our own sin in Adam.... It holds to a sin which does
    not bring eternal punishment, but for which we are legally
    responsible as truly as Adam.” It only remains to say that Dr.
    Hodge always persistently refused to admit the one added element
    which might have made his view less arbitrary and mechanical,
    namely, the traducian theory of the origin of the soul. He was a
    creatianist, and to the end maintained that God immediately
    created the soul, and created it depraved. Acceptance of the
    traducian theory would have compelled him to exchange his
    Federalism for Augustinianism. Creatianism was the one remaining
    element of Pelagian atomism in an otherwise Scriptural theory. Yet
    Dr. Hodge regarded this as an essential part of Biblical teaching.
    His unwavering confidence was like that of Fichte, whom Caroline
    Schelling represented as saying: “Zweifle an der Sonne Klarheit,
    Zweifle an der Sterne Licht, Leser, nur an meiner Wahrheit Und an
    deiner Dummheit, nicht.”

    As a corrective to the atomistic spirit of Federalism we may quote
    a view which seems to us far more tenable, though it perhaps goes
    to the opposite extreme. Dr. H. H. Bawden writes: “The self is the
    product of a social environment. An ascetic self is so far forth
    not a self. Selfhood and consciousness are essentially social. We
    are members one of another. The biological view of selfhood
    regards it as a function, activity, process, inseparable from the
    social matrix out of which it has arisen. Consciousness is simply
    the name for the functioning of an organism. Not that the soul is
    a secretion of the brain, as bile is a secretion of the liver; not
    that the mind is a function of the body in any such materialistic
    sense. But that mind or consciousness is only the growing of an
    organism, while, on the other hand, the organism is just that
    which grows. The psychical is not a second, subtle, parallel form
    of energy causally interactive with the physical; much less is it
    a concomitant series, as the parallelists hold. Consciousness is
    not an order of existence or a thing, but rather a function. It is
    the organization of reality, the universe coming to a focus,
    flowering, so to speak, in a finite centre. Society is an organism
    in the same sense as the human body. The separation of the units
    of society is no greater than the separation of the unit factors
    of the body,—in the microscope the molecules are far apart.
    Society is a great sphere with many smaller spheres within it.

    “Each self is not impervious to other selves. Selves are not
    water-tight compartments, each one of which might remain complete
    in itself, even if all the others were destroyed. But there are
    open sluiceways between all the compartments. Society is a vast
    plexus of interweaving personalities. We are members one of
    another. What affects my neighbor affects me, and what affects me
    ultimately affects my neighbor. The individual is not an
    impenetrable atomic unit.... The self is simply the social whole
    coming to consciousness at some particular point. Every self is
    rooted in the social organism of which it is but a local and
    individual expression. A self is a mere cipher apart from its
    social relations. As the old Greek adage has it: ‘He who lives
    quite alone is either a beast or a god.’ ” While we regard this
    exposition of Dr. Bawden as throwing light upon the origin of
    consciousness and so helping our contention against the Federal
    theory of sin, we do not regard it as proving that consciousness,
    once developed, may not become relatively independent and
    immortal. Back of society, as well as back of the individual, lies
    the consciousness and will of God, in whom alone is the guarantee
    of persistence. For objections to the Federal theory, see Fisher,
    Discussions, 401 _sq._; Bib. Sac., 20:455-462, 577; New Englander,
    1868:551-603; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 305-334, 435-450; Julius
    Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:336; Dabney, Theology, 341-351.


5. Theory of Mediate Imputation, or Theory of Condemnation for Depravity.


This theory was first maintained by Placeus (1606-1655), professor of
Theology at Saumur in France. Placeus originally denied that Adam’s sin
was in any sense imputed to his posterity, but after his doctrine was
condemned by the Synod of the French Reformed Church at Charenton in 1644,
he published the view which now bears his name.

According to this view, all men are born physically and morally depraved;
this native depravity is the source of all actual sin, and is itself sin;
in strictness of speech, it is this native depravity, and this only, which
God imputes to men. So far as man’s physical nature is concerned, this
inborn sinfulness has descended by natural laws of propagation from Adam
to all his posterity. The soul is immediately created by God, but it
becomes actively corrupt so soon as it is united to the body. Inborn
sinfulness is the consequence, though not the penalty, of Adam’s
transgression.

There is a sense, therefore, in which Adam’s sin may be said to be imputed
to his descendants,—it is imputed, not immediately, as if they had been in
Adam or were so represented in him that it could be charged directly to
them, corruption not intervening,—but it is imputed mediately, through and
on account of the intervening corruption which resulted from Adam’s sin.
As on the Federal theory imputation is the cause of depravity, so on this
theory depravity is the cause of imputation. In Rom. 5:12, “death passed
unto all men, for that all sinned,” signifies: “death physical, spiritual,
and eternal passed upon all men, because all sinned by possessing a
depraved nature.”


    See Placeus, De Imputatione Primi Peccati Adami, in Opera,
    1:709—“The sensitive soul is produced from the parent; the
    intellectual or rational soul is directly created. The soul, on
    entering the corrupted physical nature, is not passively
    corrupted, but becomes corrupt actively, accommodating itself to
    the other part of human nature in character.” 710—So this soul
    “contracts from the vitiosity of the dispositions of the body a
    corresponding vitiosity, not so much by the action of the body
    upon the soul, as by that essential appetite of the soul by which
    it unites itself to the body in a way accommodated to the
    dispositions of the body, as liquid put into a bowl accommodates
    itself to the figure of a bowl—sicut vinum in vase acetoso. God
    was therefore neither the author of Adam’s fall, nor of the
    propagation of sin.”

    Herzog, Encyclopædia, art.: Placeus—“In the title of his works we
    read ‘Placæus’; he himself, however, wrote ‘Placeus,’ which is the
    more correct Latin form [of the French ‘de la Place’]. In Adam’s
    first sin, Placeus distinguished between the actual sinning and
    the first habitual sin (corrupted disposition). The former was
    transient; the latter clung to his person, and was propagated to
    all. It is truly sin, and it is imputed to all, since it makes all
    condemnable. Placeus believes in the imputation of this corrupted
    disposition, but not in the imputation of the first act of Adam,
    except mediately, through the imputation of the inherited
    depravity.” Fisher, Discussions, 389—“Mere native corruption is
    the whole of original sin. Placeus justifies his use of the term
    ‘imputation’ by _Rom. 2:26_—‘_If therefore the uncircumcision keep
    the ordinances of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be
    reckoned_ [imputed] _for circumcision?_’ Our own depravity is the
    necessary condition of the imputation of Adam’s sin, just as our
    own faith is the necessary condition of the imputation of Christ’s
    righteousness.”

    Advocates of Mediate Imputation are, in Great Britain, G. Payne,
    in his book entitled: Original Sin; John Caird, Fund. Ideas of
    Christianity, 1:196-332; and James S. Candlish, Biblical Doctrine
    of Sin, 111-122; in America, H. B. Smith, in his System of
    Christian Doctrine, 169, 284, 285, 314-323; and E. G. Robinson,
    Christian Theology. The editor of Dr. Smith’s work says: “On the
    whole, he favored the theory of Mediate Imputation. There is a
    note which reads thus: ‘Neither Mediate nor Immediate Imputation
    is wholly satisfactory.’ Understand by ‘Mediate Imputation’ a full
    statement of the facts in the case, and the author accepted it;
    understand by it a theory professing to give the final explanation
    of the facts, and it was ‘not wholly satisfactory.’ ” Dr. Smith
    himself says, 316—“Original sin is a doctrine respecting the moral
    conditions of human nature as from Adam—generic: and it is not a
    doctrine respecting personal liabilities and desert. For the
    latter, we need more and other circumstances. Strictly speaking,
    it is not sin, which is ill-deserving, but only the sinner. The
    ultimate distinction is here: There is a well-grounded difference
    to be made between personal desert, strictly personal character
    and liabilities (of each individual under the divine law, as
    applied specifically, _e. g._, in the last adjudication), and a
    generic moral condition—the antecedent ground of such personal
    character.

    “The distinction, however, is not between what has moral quality
    and what has not, but between the moral state of each as a member
    of the race, and his personal liabilities and desert as an
    individual. This original sin would wear to us only the character
    of evil, and not of sinfulness, were it not for _the fact_ that we
    feel guilty in view of our corruption when it becomes known to us
    in our own acts. Then there is involved in it not merely a sense
    of evil and misery, but also a sense of guilt; moreover,
    redemption is also necessary to remove it, which shows that it is
    a moral state. Here is the point of junction between the two
    extreme positions, that we sinned in Adam, and that all sin
    consists in sinning. The guilt of Adam’s sin is—this exposure,
    this liability on account of such native corruption, our having
    the same nature in the same moral bias. The guilt of Adam’s sin is
    _not to be separated_ from the existence of this evil disposition.
    And this guilt is what is imputed to us.” See art. on H. B. Smith,
    in Presb. Rev., 1881; “He did not fully acquiesce in Placeus’s
    view, which makes the corrupt nature by descent the only ground of
    imputation.”


The theory of Mediate Imputation is exposed to the following objections:

A. It gives no explanation of man’s responsibility for his inborn
depravity. No explanation of this is possible, which does not regard man’s
depravity as having had its origin in a free personal act, either of the
individual, or of collective human nature in its first father and head.
But this participation of all men in Adam’s sin the theory expressly
denies.


    The theory holds that we are responsible for the effect, but not
    for the cause—“post Adamum, non propter Adamum.” But, says Julius
    Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:209, 331—“If this sinful tendency be in us
    solely through the act of others, and not through our own deed,
    they, and not we, are responsible for it,—it is not our guilt, but
    our misfortune. And even as to actual sins which spring from this
    inherent sinful tendency, these are not strictly our own, but the
    acts of our first parents through us. Why impute them to us as
    actual sins, for which we are to be condemned? Thus, if we deny
    the existence of guilt, we destroy the reality of sin, and _vice
    versa_.” Thornwell, Theology, 1:348, 349—This theory “does not
    explain the sense of guilt, as connected with depravity of
    nature,—how the feeling of ill-desert can arise in relation to a
    state of mind of which we have been only passive recipients. The
    child does not reproach himself for the afflictions which a
    father’s follies have brought upon him. But our inward corruption
    we do feel to be our own fault,—it is our crime as well as our
    shame.”


B. Since the origination of this corrupt nature cannot be charged to the
account of man, man’s inheritance of it must be regarded in the light of
an arbitrary divine infliction—a conclusion which reflects upon the
justice of God. Man is not only condemned for a sinfulness of which God is
the author, but is condemned without any real probation, either individual
or collective.


    Dr. Hovey, Outlines of Theology, objects to the theory of Mediate
    Imputation, because: “1. It casts so faint a light on the justice
    of God in the imputation of Adam’s sin to adults who do as he did.
    2. It casts no light on the justice of God in bringing into
    existence a race inclined to sin by the fall of Adam. The
    inherited bias is still unexplained, and the imputation of it is a
    riddle, or a wrong, to the natural understanding.” It is unjust to
    hold us guilty of the effect, if we be not first guilty of the
    cause.


C. It contradicts those passages of Scripture which refer the origin of
human condemnation, as well as of human depravity, to the sin of our first
parents, and which represent universal death, not as a matter of divine
sovereignty, but as a judicial infliction of penalty upon all men for the
sin of the race in Adam (Rom. 5:16, 18). It moreover does violence to the
Scripture in its unnatural interpretation of “all sinned,” in Rom.
5:12—words which imply the oneness of the race with Adam, and the
causative relation of Adam’s sin to our guilt.


    Certain passages which Dr. H. B. Smith, System, 317, quotes from
    Edwards, as favoring the theory of Mediate Imputation, seem to us
    to favor quite a different view. See Edwards, 2:482 _sq._—“The
    first existing of a corrupt disposition in their hearts is not to
    be looked upon as sin belonging to them distinct from their
    participation in Adam’s first sin; it is, as it were, the extended
    pollution of that sin through the whole tree, by virtue of the
    constituted union of the branches with the root.... I am humbly of
    the opinion that, if any have supposed the children of Adam to
    come into the world with a double guilt, one the guilt of Adam’s
    sin, another the guilt arising from their having a corrupt heart,
    they have not so well considered the matter.” And afterwards:
    “Derivation of evil disposition (or rather co-existence) is in
    consequence of the union,”—but “not properly a consequence of the
    imputation of his sin; nay, rather antecedent to it, as it was in
    Adam himself. The first depravity of heart, and the imputation of
    that sin, are both the consequences of that established union; but
    yet in such order, that the evil disposition is first, and the
    charge of guilt consequent, as it was in the case of Adam
    himself.”

    Edwards quotes Stapfer: “The Reformed divines do not hold
    immediate and mediate imputation _separately_, but always
    together.” And still further, 2:493—“And therefore the sin of the
    apostasy is not theirs, merely because God imputes it to them; but
    it is truly and properly theirs, and on that ground God imputes it
    to them.” It seems to us that Dr. Smith mistakes the drift of
    these passages from Edwards, and that in making the identification
    with Adam primary, and imputation of his sin secondary, they favor
    the theory of Adam’s Natural Headship rather than the theory of
    Mediate Imputation. Edwards regards the order as (1) apostasy; (2)
    depravity; (3) guilt;—but in all three, Adam and we are, by divine
    constitution, one. To be guilty of the depravity, therefore, we
    must first be guilty of the apostasy.

    For the reasons above mentioned we regard the theory of Mediate
    Imputation as a half-way house where there is no permanent
    lodgment. The logical mind can find no satisfaction therein, but
    is driven either forward, to the Augustinian doctrine which we are
    next to consider, or backward, to the New School doctrine with its
    atomistic conception of man and its arbitrary sovereignty of God.
    On the theory of Mediate Imputation, see Cunningham, Historical
    Theology, 1:496-639; Princeton Essays, 1:129, 154, 168; Hodge,
    Syst. Theology, 2:205-214; Shedd, History of Doctrine, 2:158;
    Baird, Elohim Revealed, 46, 47, 474-479, 504-507.


6. The Augustinian Theory, or Theory of Adam’s Natural Headship.


This theory was first elaborated by Augustine (354-430), the great
opponent of Pelagius; although its central feature appears in the writings
of Tertullian (died about 220), Hilary (350), and Ambrose (374). It is
frequently designated as the Augustinian view of sin. It was the view held
by the Reformers, Zwingle excepted. Its principal advocates in this
country are Dr. Shedd and Dr. Baird.

It holds that God imputes the sin of Adam immediately to all his
posterity, in virtue of that organic unity of mankind by which the whole
race at the time of Adam’s transgression existed, not individually, but
seminally, in him as its head. The total life of humanity was then in
Adam; the race as yet had its being only in him. Its essence was not yet
individualized; its forces were not yet distributed; the powers which now
exist in separate men were then unified and localized in Adam; Adam’s will
was yet the will of the species. In Adam’s free act, the will of the race
revolted from God and the nature of the race corrupted itself. The nature
which we now possess is the same nature that corrupted itself in Adam—“not
the same in kind merely, but the same as flowing to us continuously from
him.”

Adam’s sin is imputed to us immediately, therefore, not as something
foreign to us, but because it is ours—we and all other men having existed
as one moral person or one moral whole, in him, and, as the result of that
transgression, possessing a nature destitute of love to God and prone to
evil. In Rom. 5:12—“death passed unto all men, for that all sinned,”
signifies: “death physical, spiritual, and eternal passed unto all men,
because all sinned in Adam their natural head.”


    Milton, Par. Lost, 9:414—“Where likeliest he [Satan] might find
    The only two of mankind, but in them The whole included race, his
    purpos’d prey.” Augustine, De Pec. Mer. et Rem., 3:7—“In Adamo
    omnes tune peccaverunt, quando in ejus natura adhuc omnes ille
    unus fuerunt”; De Civ. Dei, 13, 14—“Omnes enim fuimus in illo uno,
    quando omnes fuimus ille unus.... Nondum erat nobis singillatim
    creata et distributa forma in qua singuli viveremus, sed jam
    natura erat seminalis ex qua propagaremur.” On Augustine’s view,
    see Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2; 43-45 (System Doct., 2:338, 339)—In
    opposition to Pelagius who made sin to consist in single acts,
    “Augustine emphasized the sinful state. This was a deprivation of
    original righteousness + inordinate love. Tertullian, Cyprian,
    Hilarius, Ambrose had advocated traducianism, according to which,
    without their personal participation, the sinfulness of all is
    grounded in Adam’s free act. They incur its consequences as an
    evil which is, at the same time, punishment of the inherited
    fault. But Irenæus, Athanasius, Gregory of Nyssa, say Adam was not
    simply a single individual, but the universal man. We were
    comprehended in him, so that in him we sinned. On the first view,
    the posterity were passive; on the second, they were active, in
    Adam’s sin. Augustine represents both views, desiring to unite the
    universal sinfulness involved in traducianism with the universal
    will and guilt involved in cooperation with Adam’s sin. Adam,
    therefore, to him, is a double conception, and = individual +
    race.”

    Mozley on Predestination, 402—“In Augustine, some passages refer
    all wickedness to original sin; some account for different degrees
    of evil by different degrees of original sin (Op. imp. cont.
    Julianum, 4:128—‘Malitia naturalis.... in aliis minor, in aliis
    major est’); in some, the individual seems to add to original sin
    (De Correp. et Gratia, c. 13—‘Per liberum arbitrium alia insuper
    addiderunt, alii majus, alii minus, sed omnes mali.’ De Grat. et
    Lib. Arbit., 2:1—‘Added to the sin of their birth sins of their
    own commission’; 2:4—‘Neither denies our liberty of will, whether
    to choose an evil or a good life, nor attributes to it so much
    power that it can avail anything without God’s grace, or that it
    can change itself from evil to good’).” These passages seem to
    show that, side by side with the race-sin and its development,
    Augustine recognized a domain of free personal decision, by which
    each man could to some extent modify his character, and make
    himself more or less depraved.

    The theory of Augustine was not the mere result of Augustine’s
    temperament or of Augustine’s sins. Many men have sinned like
    Augustine, but their intellects have only been benumbed and have
    been led into all manner of unbelief. It was the Holy Spirit who
    took possession of the temperament, and so overruled the sin as to
    make it a glass through which Augustine saw the depths of his
    nature. Nor was his doctrine one of exclusive divine
    transcendence, which left man a helpless worm at enmity with
    infinite justice. He was also a passionate believer in the
    immanence of God. He writes: “I could not be, O my God, could not
    be at all, wert not thou in me; rather, were not I in thee, of
    whom are all things, by whom are all things, in whom are are all
    things.... O God, thou hast made us for thyself, and our heart is
    restless, till it find rest in thee.—The will of God is the very
    nature of things—Dei voluntas rerum natura est.”

    Allen, Continuity of Christian Thought, Introduction, very
    erroneously declares that “the Augustinian theology rests upon the
    transcendence of Deity as its controlling principle, and at every
    point appears as an inferior rendering of the earlier
    interpretation of the Christian faith.” On the other hand, L. L.
    Paine, Evolution of Trinitarianism, 69, 368-397, shows that, while
    Athanasius held to a dualistic transcendence, Augustine held to a
    theistic immanence: “Thus the Stoic, Neo-Platonic immanence, with
    Augustine, supplants the Platonico-Aristotelian and Athanasian
    transcendence.” Alexander, Theories of the Will, 90—“The theories
    of the early Fathers were indeterministic, and the pronounced
    Augustinianism of Augustine was the result of the rise into
    prominence of the doctrine of original sin.... The early Fathers
    thought of the origin of sin in angels and in Adam as due to free
    will. Augustine thought of the origin of sin in Adam’s posterity
    as due to inherited evil will.” Harnack, Wesen des Christenthums,
    161—“To this day in Catholicism inward and living piety and the
    expression of it is in essence wholly Augustinian.”

    Calvin was essentially Augustinian and realistic; see his
    Institutes, book 2, chap. 1-3; Hagenbach, Hist. Doct., 1:505, 506,
    with the quotations and references. Zwingle was not an
    Augustinian. He held that native vitiosity, although it is the
    uniform occasion of sin, is not itself sin: “It is not a crime,
    but a condition and a disease.” See Hagenbach, Hist. Doct. 2:256,
    with references. Zwingle taught that every new-born child—thanks
    to Christ’s making alive of all those who had died in Adam—is as
    free from any taint of sin as Adam was before the fall. The
    Reformers, however, with the single exception of Zwingle, were
    Augustinians, and accounted for the hereditary guilt of mankind,
    not by the fact that all men were represented in Adam, but that
    all men participated in Adam’s sin. This is still the doctrine of
    the Lutheran church.

    The theory of Adam’s Natural Headship regards humanity at large as
    the outgrowth of one germ. Though the leaves of a tree appear as
    disconnected units when we look down upon them from above, a view
    from beneath will discern the common connection with the twigs,
    branches, trunk, and will finally trace their life to the root,
    and to the seed from which it originally sprang. The race of man
    is one because it sprang from one head. Its members are not to be
    regarded atomistically, as segregated individuals; the deeper
    truth is the truth of organic unity. Yet we are not philosophical
    realists; we do not believe in the separate existence of
    universals. We hold, not to _universalia ante rem_, which is
    extreme realism; nor to _universalia post rem_, which is
    nominalism; but to _universalia in re_, which is moderate realism.
    Extreme realism cannot see the trees for the wood; nominalism
    cannot see the wood for the trees; moderate realism sees the wood
    in the trees. We hold to “_universalia in re_, but insist that the
    universals must be recognized as _realities_, as truly as the
    individuals are” (H. B. Smith, System, 319, note). Three acorns
    have a common life, as three spools have not. Moderate realism is
    true of organic things; nominalism is true only of proper names.
    God has not created any new tree nature since he created the first
    tree; nor has he created any new human nature since he created the
    first man. I am but a branch and outgrowth of the tree of
    humanity.

    Our realism then only asserts the real historical connection of
    each member of the race with its first father and head, and such a
    derivation of each from him as makes us partakers of the character
    which he formed. Adam was once the race; and when he fell, the
    race fell. Shedd: “We all existed in Adam in our elementary
    invisible substance. The _Seyn_ of all was there, though the
    _Daseyn_ was not; the _noumenon_, though not the _phenomenon_, was
    in existence.” On realism, see Koehler, Realismus und
    Nominalismus; Neander, Ch. Hist., 4:356; Dorner, Person Christ,
    2:377; Hase, Anselm, 2:77; F. E. Abbott, Scientific Theism,
    Introd., 1-29, and in Mind, Oct. 1882:476, 477; Raymond, Theology,
    2:30-33; Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:69-74; Bowne, Theory of Thought
    and Knowledge, 129-132; Ten Broeke, in Baptist Quar. Rev., Jan.
    1892:1-26; Baldwin, Psychology, 280, 281; D. J. Hill, Genetic
    Philosophy, 186; Hours with the Mystics, 1:213; Case, Physical
    Realism, 17-19; Fullerton, Sameness and Identity, 88, 89, and
    Concept of the Infinite, 95-114.

    The new conceptions of the reign of law and of the principle of
    heredity which prevail in modern science are working to the
    advantage of Christian theology. The doctrine of Adam’s Natural
    Headship is only a doctrine of the hereditary transmission of
    character from the first father of the race to his descendants.
    Hence we use the word “imputation” in its proper sense—that of a
    reckoning or charging to us of that which is truly and properly
    ours. See Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:259-357, esp. 328—“The
    problem is: We must allow that the depravity, which all Adam’s
    descendants inherit by natural generation, nevertheless involves
    personal guilt; and yet this depravity, so far as it is natural,
    wants the very conditions on which guilt depends. The only
    satisfactory explanation of this difficulty is the Christian
    doctrine of original sin. Here alone, if its inner possibility can
    be maintained, can the apparently contradictory principles be
    harmonized, viz.: the universal and deep-seated depravity of human
    nature, as the source of actual sin, and individual responsibility
    and guilt.” These words, though written by one who advocates a
    different theory, are nevertheless a valuable argument in
    corroboration of the theory of Adam’s Natural Headship.

    Thornwell, Theology, 1:343—“We must contradict every Scripture
    text and every Scripture doctrine which makes hereditary impurity
    hateful to God and punishable in his sight, or we must maintain
    that we sinned in Adam in his first transgression.” Secretan, in
    his Work on Liberty, held to a _collective_ life of the race in
    Adam. He was answered by Naville, Problem of Evil: “We existed in
    Adam, not individually, but seminally. Each of us, as an
    individual, is responsible only for his personal acts, or, to
    speak more exactly, for the personal part of his acts. But each of
    us, as he is man, is jointly and severally (_solidairement_)
    responsible for the fall of the human race.” Bersier, The Oneness
    of the Race, in its Fall and in its Future: “If we are commanded
    to love our neighbor as ourselves, it is because our neighbor is
    ourself.”

    See Edwards, Original Sin, part 4, chap. 3; Shedd, on Original
    Sin, in Discourses and Essays, 218-271, and references, 261-263,
    also Dogm. Theol., 2:181-195; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 410-435,
    451-460, 494; Schaff, in Bib. Sac., 5:220, and in Lange’s Com., on
    Rom. 5:12; Auberlen, Div. Revelation, 175-180; Philippi,
    Glaubenslehre, 3:28-38, 204-236; Thomasius, Christi Person und
    Werk, 1:269-400; Martensen, Dogmatics, 173-183; Murphy, Scientific
    Bases, 262 _sq._, _cf._ 101; Birks, Difficulties of Belief, 135;
    Bp. Reynolds, Sinfulness of Sin, in Works, 1:102-350; Mozley on
    Original Sin, in Lectures, 136-152; Kendall, on Natural Heirship,
    or All the World Akin, in Nineteenth Century, Oct. 1885:614-626.
    _Per contra_, see Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:157-164, 227-257; Haven,
    in Bib. Sac., 20:451-455; Criticism of Baird’s doctrine, in
    Princeton Rev., Apr. 1880:335-376; of Schaff’s doctrine, in
    Princeton Rev., Apr. 1870:239-262.


We regard this theory of the Natural Headship of Adam as the most
satisfactory of the theories mentioned, and as furnishing the most
important help towards the understanding of the great problem of original
sin. In its favor may be urged the following considerations:

A. It puts the most natural interpretation upon Rom. 5:12-21. In verse 12
of this passage—“death passed unto all men, for that all sinned”—the great
majority of commentators regard the word “sinned” as describing a common
transgression of the race in Adam. The death spoken of is, as the whole
context shows, mainly though not exclusively physical. It has passed upon
all—even upon those who have committed no conscious and personal
transgression whereby to explain its infliction (verse 14). The legal
phraseology of the passage shows that this infliction is not a matter of
sovereign decree, but of judicial penalty (verses 13, 14, 15, 16,
18—“law,” “transgression,” “trespass,” “judgment ... of one unto
condemnation,” “act of righteousness,” “justification”). As the
explanation of this universal subjection to penalty, we are referred to
Adam’s sin. By that one act (“so,” verse 12)—the “trespass of the one” man
(v. 15, 17), the “one trespass” (v. 18)—death came to all men, because all
[not “have sinned”, but] sinned (πάντες ἥμαρτον—aorist of instantaneous
past action)—that is, all sinned in “the one trespass” of “the one” man.
Compare 1 Cor. 15:22—“As in Adam all die”—where the contrast with physical
resurrection shows that physical death is meant; 2 Cor. 5:14—“one died for
all, therefore all died.” See Commentaries of Meyer, Bengel, Olshausen,
Philippi, Wordsworth, Lange, Godet, Shedd. This is also recognized as the
correct interpretation of Paul’s words by Beyschlag, Ritschl, and
Pfleiderer, although no one of these three accepts Paul’s doctrine as
authoritative.


    Beyschlag, N. T. Theology, 2:58-60—“To understand the apostle’s
    view, we must follow the exposition of Bengel (which is favored
    also by Meyer and Pfleiderer): ‘_Because they_—viz., in Adam—_all
    have sinned_’; they all, namely, who were included in Adam
    according to the O. T. view which sees the whole race to its
    founder, acted in his action.” Ritschl: “Certainly Paul treated
    the universal destiny of death as due to the sin of Adam.
    Nevertheless it is not yet suited for a theological rule just for
    the reason that the apostle has formed this idea;” in other words,
    Paul’s teaching it does not make it binding upon our faith.
    Philippi, Com. on Rom., 168—Interpret _Rom. 5:12_—“_one sinned for
    all, therefore all sinned_,” by _2 Cor. 5:15_—“_one died for all,
    therefore all died._” Evans, in Presb. Rev., 1883:294—“_by the
    trespass of the one the many died_,” “_by the trespass of the one,
    death reigned __ through the one_,” “_through the one man’s
    disobedience_”—all these phrases, and the phrases with respect to
    salvation which correspond to them, indicate that the fallen race
    and the redeemed race are each regarded as a multitude, a
    totality. So οἱ πάντεσ in 2 Cor. 5:14 indicates a corresponding
    conception of the organic unity of the race.

    Prof. George B. Stevens, Pauline Theology, 32-40, 129-139, denies
    that Paul taught the sinning of all men in Adam: “They sinned in
    the same sense in which believers were crucified to the world and
    died unto sin when Christ died upon the cross. The believer’s
    renewal is conceived as wrought in advance by those acts and
    experiences of Christ in which it has its ground. As the
    consequences of his vicarious sufferings are traced back to their
    cause, so are the consequences which flowed from the beginning of
    sin in Adam traced back to that original fount of evil and
    identified with it; but the latter statement should no more be
    treated as a rigid logical formula than the former, its
    counterpart.... There is a mystical identification of the
    procuring cause with its effect,—both in the case of Adam and of
    Christ.”

    In our treatment of the New School theory of sin we have pointed
    out that the inability to understand the vital union of the
    believer with Christ incapacitates the New School theologian from
    understanding the organic union of the race with Adam. Paul’s
    phrase “_in Christ_” meant more than that Christ is the type and
    beginner of salvation, and sinning in Adam meant more to Paul than
    following the example or acting in the spirit of our first father.
    In _2 Cor. 5:14_ the argument is that since Christ died, all
    believers died to sin and death in him. Their resurrection-life is
    the same life that died and rose again in his death and
    resurrection. So Adam’s sin is ours because the same life which
    transgressed and became corrupt in him has come down to us and is
    our possession. In _Rom. 5:14_, the individual and conscious sins
    to which the New School theory attaches the condemning sentence
    are expressly excluded, and in _verses 15-19_ the judgment is
    declared to be “_of one trespass_.” Prof. Wm. Arnold Stevens, of
    Rochester, says well: “Paul teaches that Adam’s sin is ours, not
    potentially, but actually.” Of ἥμαρτον, he says: “This might
    conceivably be: (1) the historical aorist proper, used in its
    momentary sense; (2) the comprehensive or collective aorist, as in
    διῆλθεν in the same verse; (3) the aorist used in the sense of the
    English perfect, as in _Rom. 3:23_—πάντες γὰρ ἥμαρτον καὶ
    ὑστεροῦνται. In _5:12_, the context determines with great
    probability that the aorist is used in the first of these senses.”
    We may add that interpreters are not wanting who so take ἥμαρτον
    in _3:23_; see also margin of Rev. Version. But since the passage
    _Rom. 5:12-19_ is so important, we reserve to the close of this
    section a treatment of it in greater detail.


B. It permits whatever of truth there may be in the Federal theory and in
the theory of Mediate Imputation to be combined with it, while neither of
these latter theories can be justified to reason unless they are regarded
as corollaries or accessories of the truth of Adam’s Natural Headship.
Only on this supposition of Natural Headship could God justly constitute
Adam our representative, or hold us responsible for the depraved nature we
have received from him. It moreover justifies God’s ways, in postulating a
real and a fair probation of our common nature as preliminary to
imputation of sin—a truth which the theories just mentioned, in common
with that of the New School, virtually deny,—while it rests upon correct
philosophical principles with regard to will, ability, law, and accepts
the Scriptural representations of the nature of sin, the penal character
of death, the origin of the soul, and the oneness of the race in the
transgression.


    John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 1:196-232, favors the
    view that sin consists simply in an inherited bias of our nature
    to evil, and that we are guilty from birth because we are sinful
    from birth. But he recognizes in Augustinianism the truth of the
    organic unity of the race and the implication of every member in
    its past history. He tells us that we must not regard man simply
    as an abstract or isolated individual. The atomistic theory
    regards society as having no existence other than that of the
    individuals who compose it. But it is nearer the truth to say that
    it is society which creates the individual, rather than that the
    individual creates society. Man does not come into existence a
    blank tablet on which external agencies may write whatever record
    they will. The individual is steeped in influences which are due
    to the past history of his kind. The individualistic theory runs
    counter to the most obvious facts of observation and experience.
    As a philosophy of life, Augustinianism has a depth and
    significance which the individualistic theory cannot claim.

    Alvah Hovey, Manual of Christian Theology, 175 (2d ed.)—“Every
    child of Adam is accountable for the degree of sympathy which he
    has for the whole system of evil in the world, and with the primal
    act of disobedience among men. If that sympathy is full, whether
    expressed by deed or thought, if the whole force of his being is
    arrayed against heaven and on the side of hell, it is difficult to
    limit his responsibility.” Schleiermacher held that the guilt of
    original sin attached, not to the individual as an individual, but
    as a member of the race, so that the consciousness of race-union
    carried with it the consciousness of race-guilt. He held all men
    to be equally sinful and to differ only in their different
    reception of or attitude toward grace, sin being the universal
    _malum metaphysicum_ of Spinoza; see Pfleiderer, Prot. Theol. seit
    Kant, 113.


C. While its fundamental presupposition—a determination of the will of
each member of the race prior to his individual consciousness—is an
hypothesis difficult in itself, it is an hypothesis which furnishes the
key to many more difficulties than it suggests. Once allow that the race
was one in its first ancestor and fell in him, and light is thrown on a
problem otherwise insoluble—the problem of our accountability for a sinful
nature which we have not personally and consciously originated. Since we
cannot, with the three theories first mentioned, deny either of the terms
of this problem—inborn depravity or accountability for it,—we accept this
solution as the best attainable.


    Sterrett, Reason and Authority in Religion, 20—“The whole swing of
    the pendulum of thought of to-day is away from the individual and
    towards the social point of view. Theories of society are
    supplementing theories of the individual. The solidarity of man is
    the regnant thought in both the scientific and the historical
    study of man. It is even running into the extreme of a determinism
    that annihilates the individual.” Chapman, Jesus Christ and the
    Present Age, 43—“It was never less possible to deny the truth to
    which theology gives expression in its doctrine of original sin
    than in the present age. It is only one form of the universally
    recognized fact of heredity. There is a collective evil, for which
    the responsibility rests on the whole race of man. Of this common
    evil each man inherits his share; it is organized in his nature;
    it is established in his environment.” E. G. Robinson: “The
    tendency of modern theology [in the last generation] was to
    individualization, to make each man ‘a little Almighty.’ But the
    human race is one in kind, and in a sense is numerically one. The
    race lay potentially in Adam. The entire developing force of the
    race was in him. There is no carrying the race up, except from the
    starting-point of a fallen and guilty humanity.” Goethe said that
    while humanity ever advances, individual man remains the same.

    The true test of a theory is, not that it can itself be explained,
    but that it is capable of explaining. The atomic theory in
    chemistry, the theory of the ether in physics, the theory of
    gravitation, the theory of evolution, are all in themselves
    indemonstrable hypotheses, provisionally accepted simply because,
    if granted, they unify great aggregations of facts. Coleridge said
    that original sin is the one mystery that makes all other things
    clear. In this mystery, however, there is nothing
    self-contradictory or arbitrary. Gladden, What is Left?
    131—“Heredity is God working in us, and environment is God working
    around us.” Whether we adopt the theory of Augustine or not, the
    facts of universal moral obliquity and universal human suffering
    confront us. We are compelled to reconcile these facts with our
    faith in the righteousness and goodness of God. Augustine gives us
    a unifying principle which, better than any other, explains these
    facts and justifies them. On the solidarity of the race, see
    Bruce, The Providential Order, 280-310, and art. on Sin, by
    Bernard, in Hastings’ Bible Dictionary.


D. This theory finds support in the conclusions of modern science: with
regard to the moral law, as requiring right states as well as right acts;
with regard to the human will, as including subconscious and unconscious
bent and determination; with regard to heredity, and the transmission of
evil character; with regard to the unity and solidarity of the human race.
The Augustinian theory may therefore be called an ethical or theological
interpretation of certain incontestable and acknowledged biological facts.


    Ribot, Heredity, 1—“Heredity is that biological law by which all
    beings endowed with life tend to repeat themselves in their
    descendants; it is for the species what personal identity is for
    the individual. By it a groundwork remains unchanged amid
    incessant variations. By it nature ever copies and imitates
    herself.” Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 202-218—“In man’s
    moral condition we find arrested development; reversion to a
    savage type; hypocritical and self-protective mimicry of virtue;
    parasitism; physical and moral abnormality; deep-seated perversion
    of faculty.” Simon, Reconciliation, 154 sq.—“The organism was
    affected before the individuals which are its successive
    differentiations and products were affected.... Humanity as an
    organism received an injury from sin. It received that injury at
    the very beginning.... At the moment when the seed began to
    germinate disease entered and it was smitten with death on account
    of sin.”

    Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 134—“A general notion has
    no actual or possible metaphysical existence. All real existence
    is necessarily singular and individual. The only way to give the
    notion any metaphysical significance is to turn it into a law
    inherent in reality, and this attempt will fail unless we finally
    conceive this law as a rule according to which a basal
    intelligence proceeds in positing individuals.” Sheldon, in the
    Methodist Review, March, 1901:214-227, applies this explanation to
    the doctrine of original sin. Men have a common nature, he says,
    only in the sense that they are resembling personalities. If we
    literally died in Adam, we also literally died in Christ. There is
    no all-inclusive Christ, any more than there is an all-inclusive
    Adam. We regard this argument as proving the precise opposite of
    its intended conclusion. There is an all-inclusive Christ, and the
    fundamental error of most of those who oppose Augustinianism is
    that they misconceive the union of the believer with Christ. “A
    basal intelligence” here “posits individuals.” And so with the
    relation of men to Adam. Here too there is “a law inherent in
    reality”—the regular working of the divine will, according to
    which like produces like, and a sinful germ reproduces itself.


E. We are to remember, however, that while this theory of the method of
our union with Adam is merely a valuable hypothesis, the problem which it
seeks to explain is, in both its terms, presented to us both by conscience
and by Scripture. In connection with this problem a central fact is
announced in Scripture, which we feel compelled to believe upon divine
testimony, even though every attempted explanation should prove
unsatisfactory. That central fact, which constitutes the substance of the
Scripture doctrine of original sin, is simply this: that the sin of Adam
is the immediate cause and ground of inborn depravity, guilt and
condemnation to the whole human race.


    Three things must be received on Scripture testimony: (1) inborn
    depravity; (2) guilt and condemnation therefor; (3) Adam’s sin the
    cause and ground of both. From these three positions of Scripture
    it seems not only natural, but inevitable, to draw the inference
    that we “_all sinned_” in Adam. The Augustinian theory simply puts
    in a link of connection between two sets of facts which otherwise
    would be difficult to reconcile. But, in putting in that link of
    connection, it claims that it is merely bringing out into clear
    light an underlying but implicit assumption of Paul’s reasoning,
    and this it seeks to prove by showing that upon no other
    assumption can Paul’s reasoning be understood at all. Since the
    passage in _Rom. 5:12-19_ is so important, we proceed to examine
    it in greater detail. Our treatment is mainly a reproduction of
    the substance of Shedd’s Commentary, although we have combined
    with it remarks from Meyer, Schaff, Moule, and others.

    _Exposition of Rom. 5:12-19._—_Parallel between the salvation in
    Christ and the ruin that has come through Adam_, in each case
    through no personal act of our own, neither by our earning
    salvation in the case of the life received through Christ, nor by
    our individually sinning in the case of the death received through
    Adam. The statement of the parallel is begun in

    _Verse 12_: “_as through one man sin entered into the world, and
    death through sin, and so death passed unto all men, for that all
    sinned,_” so (as we may complete the interrupted sentence) by one
    man righteousness entered into the world, and life by
    righteousness, and so life passed upon all men, because all became
    partakers of this righteousness. Both physical and spiritual death
    is meant. That it is physical is shown (1) from _verse 14_; (2)
    from the allusion to _Gen. 3:19_; (3) from the universal Jewish
    and Christian assumption that physical death was the result of
    Adam’s sin. See Wisdom 2:23, 24; Sirach 25:24; 2 Esdras 3:7, 21;
    7:11, 46, 48, 118; 9:19; _John 8:44_; _1 Cor. 15:21_. That it is
    spiritual, is evident from _Rom. 5:18, 21_, where ζωή is the
    opposite of θάνατος, and from _2 Tim. 1:10_, where the same
    contrast occurs. The οὔτος in _verse 12_ shows the mode in which
    historically death has come to all, namely, that the _one_ sinned,
    and thereby brought death to all; in other words, death is the
    effect, of which the sin of the one is the cause. By Adam’s act,
    physical and spiritual death passed upon all men, because all
    sinned. ἐφ᾽ ᾦ = because, on the ground of the fact that, for the
    reason that, all sinned. πάντες = all, without exception, infants
    included, as _verse 14_ teaches.

    Ἥμαρτον mentions the particular reason why all men died, _viz._,
    because all men sinned. It is the aorist of momentary past
    action—sinned when, through the one, sin entered into the world.
    It is as much as to say, “because, when Adam sinned, all men
    sinned in and with him.” This is proved by the succeeding
    explanatory context (_verses 15-19_), in which it is reiterated
    five times in succession that one and only one sin is the cause of
    the death that befalls all men. Compare _1 Cor. 15:22_. The senses
    “all were sinful,” “all became sinful,” are inadmissible, for
    ἁμαρτάνειν is not ἁμαρτωλὸν γίγνεσθαι or εἶναι. The sense “death
    passed upon all men, because all have consciously and personally
    sinned,” is contradicted (1) by _verse 14_, in which it is
    asserted that certain persons who are a part of πάντες, the
    subject of ἥμαρτον, and who suffer the death which is the penalty
    of sin, did not commit sins resembling Adam’s first sin, _i. e._,
    individual and conscious transgressions; and (2) by _verses
    15-19_, in which it is asserted repeatedly that only one sin, and
    not millions of transgressions, is the cause of the death of all
    men. This sense would seem to require ἐφ᾽ ᾧ πάντες ἁμαρτάνουσιν.
    Neither can ἥμαρτον have the sense “were accounted and treated as
    sinners”; for (1) there is no other instance in Scripture where
    this active verb has a passive signification; and (2) the passive
    makes ἥμαρτον to denote God’s action, and not man’s. This would
    not furnish the justification of the infliction of death, which
    Paul is seeking,

    _Verse 13_ begins a demonstration of the proposition, in _Verse
    12_, that death comes to all, because all men sinned the one sin
    of the one man. The argument is as follows: Before the law sin
    existed; for there was death, the penalty of sin. But this sin was
    not sin committed against the _Mosaic_ law, because that law was
    not yet in existence. The death in the world prior to that law
    proves that there must have been some other law, against which sin
    had been committed.

    _Verse 14_. Nor could it have been personal and conscious
    violation of an _unwritten_ law, for which death was inflicted;
    for death passed upon multitudes, such as infants and idiots, who
    did not sin in their own persons, as Adam did, by violating some
    known commandment. Infants are not specifically named here,
    because the intention is to include others who, though mature in
    years, have not reached moral consciousness. But since death is
    everywhere and always the penalty of sin, the death of all must
    have been the penalty of the common sin of the race, when πάντες
    ἥμαρτον in Adam. The law which they violated was the Eden statute,
    _Gen. 2:17_. The relation between their sin and Adam’s is not that
    of _resemblance_, but of _identity_. Had the sin by which death
    came upon them been one _like_ Adam’s, there would have been as
    many sins, to be the cause of death and to account for it, as
    there were individuals. Death would have come into the world
    through millions of men, and not “_through one man_” (_verse 12_),
    and judgment would have come upon all men to condemnation through
    millions of trespasses, and not “_through one trespass_” (_v.
    18_). The object, then, of the parenthetical digression in _verses
    13_ and _14_ is to prevent the reader from supposing, from the
    statement that “all men sinned,” that the individual
    transgressions of all men are meant, and to make it clear that
    only the one first sin of the one first man is intended. Those who
    died before Moses must have violated some law. The Mosaic law, and
    the law of conscience, have been ruled out of the case. These
    persons must, therefore, have sinned against the commandment in
    Eden, the probationary statute; and their sin was not _similar_
    (ὁμοίος) to Adam’s, but Adam’s _identical_ sin, the very same sin
    numerically of the “_one man_.” They did not, in their own persons
    and consciously, sin as Adam did; yet in Adam, and in the nature
    common to him and them, they sinned and fell (_versus_ Current
    Discussions in Theology, 5:277, 278). They did not sin _like_
    Adam, but they “sinned _in_ him, and fell _with_ him, in that
    first transgression” (Westminster Larger Catechism, 22).

    _Verses 15-17_ show how the work of grace differs from, and
    surpasses, the work of sin. Over against God’s exact justice in
    punishing all for the first sin which all committed in Adam, is
    set the gratuitous justification of all who are in Christ. Adam’s
    sin is the act of Adam and his posterity together; hence the
    imputation to the posterity is just, and merited. Christ’s
    obedience is the work of Christ alone; hence the imputation of it
    to the elect is gracious and unmerited. Here τοὺς πολλούς is not
    of equal extent with οἱ πολλοί in the first clause, because other
    passages teach that “the many” who die in Adam are not
    conterminous with “_the many_” who live in Christ; see _1 Cor.
    15:22_; _Mat. 25:46_; also, see note on _verse 18_, below. Τοὺς
    πολλούς here refers to the same persons who, in _verse 17_, are
    said to “_receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of
    righteousness_.” _Verse 16_ notices a numerical difference between
    the condemnation and the justification. Condemnation results from
    _one_ offense; justification delivers from _many_ offences. _Verse
    17_ enforces and explains _verse 16_. If the union with Adam in
    his sin was certain to bring destruction, the union with Christ in
    his righteousness is yet more certain to bring salvation.

    _Verse 18_ resumes the parallel between Adam and Christ which was
    commenced in _verse 12_, but was interrupted by the explanatory
    parenthesis in _verses 13-17_. “_As through one trespass ... unto
    all men to condemnation; even so through one act of righteousness
    ... unto all men unto justification of_ [necessary to] _life_.”
    Here the “_all men to condemnation_”—the οἱ πολλοί in _verse 15_;
    and the “_all men unto justification of life_”—the τοὺς πολλούς in
    _verse 15_. There is a totality in each case; but, in the former
    case, it is the “_all men_” who derive their physical life from
    Adam,—in the latter case, it is the “_all men_” who derive their
    spiritual life from Christ (compare _1 Cor. 15:22_—“_For as in
    Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive_”—in which
    last clause Paul is speaking, as the context shows, not of the
    resurrection of all men, both saints and sinners, but only of the
    blessed resurrection of the righteous; in other words, of the
    resurrection of those who are one with Christ).

    _Verse 19._ “_For as through the one man’s disobedience the many
    were constituted sinners, even so through the obedience of the one
    shall the many be constituted righteous._” The many were
    constituted sinners because, according to _verse 12_, they sinned
    in and with Adam in his fall. The verb presupposes the fact of
    natural union between those to whom it relates. All men are
    declared to be sinners on the ground of that “_one trespass_,”
    because, when that one trespass was committed, all men were one
    man—that is, were one common nature in the first human pair. Sin
    is imputed, because it is committed. All men are punished with
    death, because they literally sinned in Adam, and not because they
    are metaphorically reputed to have done so, but in fact did not.
    Οἱ πολλοί is used in contrast with the one forefather, and the
    atonement of Christ is designated as ὑπακοή, in order to contrast
    it with the παρακοή of Adam.

    Κατασταθήσονται has the same signification as in the first part of
    the verse. Δίκαιοι κατασταθήσονται means simply “shall be
    justified,” and is used instead of δικαιωθήσονται, in order to
    make the antithesis of ἁμαρτωλοὶ κατεστάθησαν more perfect. This
    being “_constituted righteous_” presupposes the fact of a union
    between ὁ εἶς and οἱ πολλοί, _i. e._, between Christ and
    believers, just as the being “_constituted sinners_” presupposed
    the fact of a union between ὁ εἶς and οἱ πολλοί, _i. e._, between
    all men and Adam. The future κατασταθήσονται refers to the
    succession of believers; the _justification_ of all was, ideally,
    complete already, but actually, it would await the times of
    individual believing. “_The many_” who shall be “_constituted
    righteous_”—not all mankind, but only “_the many_” to whom, in
    _verse 15_, grace abounded, and who are described, in _verse 17_,
    as “_they that receive abundance of grace and of the gift of
    righteousness_.”

    “But this union differs in several important particulars from that
    between Adam and his posterity. It is not natural and substantial,
    but moral and spiritual; not generic and universal, but individual
    and by election; not caused by the creative act of God, but by his
    regenerating act. All men, without exception, are one with Adam;
    only believing men are one with Christ. The imputation of Adam’s
    sin is not an arbitrary act in the sense that, if God so pleased,
    he could reckon it to the account of any beings in the universe,
    by a volition. The sin of Adam could not be imputed to the fallen
    angels, for example, and punished in them, because they never were
    one with Adam by unity of substance and nature. The fact that they
    have committed actual transgression of their own will not justify
    the imputation of Adam’s sin to them, any more than the fact that
    the posterity of Adam have committed actual transgressions of
    their own would be a sufficient reason for imputing the first sin
    of Adam to them. Nothing but a real union of nature and being can
    justify the imputation of Adam’s sin; and, similarly, the
    obedience of Christ could no more be imputed to an unbelieving man
    than to a lost angel, because neither of these is morally and
    spiritually one with Christ” (Shedd). For a different
    interpretation (ἡμαρτον—sinned personally and individually), see
    Kendrick, in Bap. Rev., 1885:48-72.


No Condemnation Inherited.

                  Pelagian.          Arminian.          New School.

I. Origin of      Immediate          Immediate          Immediate
the soul.         Creation.          creation.          creation.
II. Man’s state   Innocent, and      Depraved, but      Depraved and
at birth.         able to obey       still able to      vicious, but
                  God.               co-operate with    this not sin.
                                     the Spirit.
III. Effects of   Only upon          To corrupt his     To communicate
Adam’s sin.       himself.           posterity          visiosity to the
                                     physically and     whole race.
                                     intellectually.
                                     No guilt of
                                     Adam’s sin
                                     imputed.
IV. How did all   By following       By consciously     By voluntary
sin?              Adam’s example.    ratifying Adam’s   transgression of
                                     own deed, in       known law.
                                     spite of the
                                     Spirit’s aid.
V. What is        Only of evil       Evil tendencies    Uncondemnable,
corruption?       habit, in each     kept in spite of   but evil
                  case.              the Spirit.        tendencies.
VI. What is       Every man’s own    Only man’s own     Man’s individual
imputed?          sins.              sins and           acts of
                                     ratifying of       transgression.
                                     this nature.
VII. What is      Spiritual and      Physical and       Spiritual and
the death         eternal.           spiritual death    eternal death
incurred?                            by decree.         only.
VIII. How are     By following       By co-operating    By accepting
men saved?        Christ’s           with the Spirit    Christ under
                  example.           given to all.      influence of
                                                        truth presented
                                                        by the Spirit.

Condemnation Inherited.

                  Federal.           Placean.           Augustinian.

I. Origin of      Immediate          Immediate          Immediate
the soul.         creation.          creation.          creation.
II. Man’s state   Depraved,          Depraved,          Depraved,
at birth.         unable, and        unable, and        unable, and
                  condemnable.       condemnable.       condemnable.
III. Effects of   To insure          Natural            Guilt of Adam’s
Adam’s sin.       condemnation of    connection of      sin, corruption,
                  his fellows in     depravity in all   and death.
                  covenant, and      his descendants.
                  their creation
                  as depraved.
IV. How did all   By being           By possessing a    By having part
sin?              accounted          depraved nature.   in the sin of
                  sinners in                            Adam, as seminal
                  Adam’s sin.                           head of the
                                                        race.
V. What is        Condemnable,       Condemnable,       Condemnable,
corruption?       evil disposition   evil disposition   evil disposition
                  and state.         and state.         and state.
VI. What is       Adam’s sin,        Only depraved      Adam’s sin, our
imputed?          man’s own          nature and man’s   depravity, and
                  corruption, and    own sin.           our own sins.
                  man’s own sins.
VII. What is      Physical,          Physical,          Physical,
the death         spiritual, and     spiritual, and     spiritual, and
incurred?         eternal.           eternal.           eternal.
VIII. How are     By being           By becoming        By Christ’s
men saved?        accounted          possessors of a    work, with whom
                  righteous          new nature in      we are one.
                  through the act    Christ.
                  of Christ.


II.—Objections to the Augustinian Doctrine of Imputation.


The doctrine of Imputation, to which we have thus arrived, is met by its
opponents with the following objections. In discussing them, we are to
remember that a truth revealed in Scripture may have claims to our belief,
in spite of difficulties to us insoluble. Yet it is hoped that examination
will show the objections in question to rest either upon false
philosophical principles or upon misconception of the doctrine assailed.

A. That there can be no sin apart from and prior to consciousness.

This we deny. The larger part of men’s evil dispositions and acts are
imperfectly conscious, and of many such dispositions and acts the evil
quality is not discerned at all. The objection rests upon the assumption
that law is confined to published statutes or to standards formally
recognized by its subjects. A profounder view of law as identical with the
constituent principles of being, as binding the nature to conformity with
the nature of God, as demanding right volitions only because these are
manifestations of a right state, as having claims upon men in their
corporate capacity, deprives this objection of all its force.


    If our aim is to find a conscious act of transgression upon which
    to base God’s charge of guilt and man’s condemnation, we can find
    this more easily in Adam’s sin than at the beginning of each man’s
    personal history; for no human being can remember his first sin.
    The main question at issue is therefore this: Is all sin personal?
    We claim that both Scripture and reason answer this question in
    the negative. There is such a thing as race-sin and
    race-responsibility.


B. That man cannot be responsible for a sinful nature which he did not
personally originate.

We reply that the objection ignores the testimony of conscience and of
Scripture. These assert that we are responsible for what we are. The
sinful nature is not something external to us, but is our inmost selves.
If man’s original righteousness and the new affection implanted in
regeneration have moral character, then the inborn tendency to evil has
moral character; as the former are commendable, so the latter is
condemnable.


    If it be said that sin is the act of a person, and not of a
    nature, we reply that in Adam the whole human nature once
    subsisted in the form of a single personality, and the act of the
    person could be at the same time the act of the nature. That which
    could not be at any subsequent point of time, could be and was, at
    that time. Human nature could fall _in Adam_, though that fall
    could not be repeated in the case of any one of his descendants.
    Hovey, Outlines, 129—“Shall we say that _will_ is the cause of sin
    in holy beings, while _wrong desire_ is the cause of sin in unholy
    beings? Augustine held this.” Pepper, Outlines, 112—“We do not
    fall each one by himself. We were so on probation in Adam, that
    his fall was our fall.”


C. That Adam’s sin cannot be imputed to us, since we cannot repent of it.

The objection has plausibility only so long as we fail to distinguish
between Adam’s sin as the inward apostasy of the nature from God, and
Adam’s sin as the outward act of transgression which followed and
manifested that apostasy. We cannot indeed repent of Adam’s sin as our
personal act or as Adam’s personal act, but regarding his sin as the
apostasy of our common nature—an apostasy which manifests itself in our
personal transgressions as it did in his, we can repent of it and do
repent of it. In truth it is this nature, as self-corrupted and averse to
God, for which the Christian most deeply repents.


    God, we know, has not made our nature as we find it. We are
    conscious of our depravity and apostasy from God. We know that God
    cannot be responsible for this; we know that our nature is
    responsible. But this it could not be, unless its corruption were
    self-corruption. For this self-corrupted nature we should repent,
    and do repent. Anselm, De Concep. Virg., 23—“Adam sinned in one
    point of view as a person, in another as man (_i. e._, as human
    nature which at that time existed in him alone). But since Adam
    and humanity could not be separated, the sin of the person
    necessarily affected the _nature_. This nature is what Adam
    transmitted to his posterity, and transmitted it such as his sin
    had made it, burdened with a debt which it could not pay, robbed
    of the righteousness with which God had originally invested it;
    and in every one of his descendants this impaired nature makes the
    _persons_ sinners. Yet not in the same degree sinners as Adam was,
    for the latter sinned both as human nature and as a person, while
    new-born infants sin only as they possess the nature.”—more
    briefly, in Adam a person made nature sinful; in his posterity,
    nature makes persons sinful.


D. That, if we be responsible for Adam’s first sin, we must also be
responsible not only for every other sin of Adam, but for the sins of our
immediate ancestors.

We reply that the apostasy of human nature could occur but once. It
occurred in Adam before the eating of the forbidden fruit, and revealed
itself in that eating. The subsequent sins of Adam and of our immediate
ancestors are no longer acts which determine or change the nature,—they
only show what the nature is. Here is the truth and the limitation of the
Scripture declaration that “the son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father” (Ez. 18:20; _cf._ Luke 13:2, 3; John 9:2, 3). Man is not
responsible for the specifically evil tendencies communicated to him from
his immediate ancestors, as distinct from the nature he possesses; nor is
he responsible for the sins of those ancestors which originated these
tendencies. But he is responsible for that original apostasy which
constituted the one and final revolt of the race from God, and for the
personal depravity and disobedience which in his own case has resulted
therefrom.


    Augustine, Encheiridion, 46, 47, leans toward an imputing of the
    sins of immediate ancestors, but intimates that, as a matter of
    grace, this may be limited to “_the third and fourth generation_”
    (_Ex. 20:5_). Aquinas thinks this last is said by God, because
    fathers live to see the third and fourth generation of their
    descendants, and influence them by their example to become
    voluntarily like themselves. Burgesse, Original Sin, 397, adds the
    covenant-idea to that of natural generation, in order to prevent
    imputation of the sins of immediate ancestors as well as those of
    Adam. So also Shedd. But Baird, Elohim Revealed, 508, gives a
    better explanation, when he distinguishes between the first sin of
    nature when it apostatized, and those subsequent personal actions
    which merely manifest the nature but do not change it. Imagine
    Adam to have remained innocent, but one of his posterity to have
    fallen. Then the descendants of that one would have been guilty
    for the change of nature in him, but not guilty for the sins of
    ancestors intervening between him and them.

    We add that man may direct the course of a lava-stream, already
    flowing downward, into some particular channel, and may even dig a
    new channel for it down the mountain. But the stream is constant
    in its quantity and quality, and is under the same influence of
    gravitation in all stages of its progress. I am responsible for
    the downward tendency which my nature gave itself at the
    beginning; but I am not responsible for inherited and specifically
    evil tendencies as something apart from the nature,—for they are
    not apart from it,—they are forms or manifestations of it. These
    tendencies run out after a time,—not so with sin of nature. The
    declaration of Ezekiel (_18:20_), “_the son shall not bear the
    iniquity of the father,_” like Christ’s denial that blindness was
    due to the blind man’s individual sins or those of his parents
    (_John 9:2, 3_), simply shows that God does not impute to us the
    sins of our immediate ancestors; it is not inconsistent with the
    doctrine that all the physical and moral evil of the world is the
    result of a sin of Adam with which the whole race is chargeable.

    Peculiar tendencies to avarice or sensuality inherited from one’s
    immediate ancestry are merely wrinkles in native depravity which
    add nothing to its amount or its guilt. Shedd, Dogm. Theol.,
    2:88-94—“To inherit a temperament is to inherit a secondary
    trait.” H. B. Smith, System, 296—“Ezekiel 18 does not deny that
    descendants are involved in the evil results of ancestral sins,
    under God’s moral government; but simply shows that there is
    opportunity for extrication, in personal repentance and
    obedience.” Mozley on Predestination, 179—“Augustine says that
    Ezekiel’s declarations that the son shall not bear the iniquity of
    the father are not a universal law of the divine dealings, but
    only a special prophetical one, as alluding to the divine mercy
    under the gospel dispensation and the covenant of grace, under
    which the effect of original sin and the punishment of mankind for
    the sin of their first parent was removed.” See also Dorner,
    Glaubenslehre, 2:31 (Syst. Doct., 2:326, 327), where God’s
    visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children (Ex. 20:5) is
    explained by the fact that the children repeat the sins of the
    parents. German proverb: “The apple does not fall far from the
    tree.”


E. That if Adam’s sin and condemnation can be ours by propagation, the
righteousness and faith of the believer should be propagable also.

We reply that no merely personal qualities, whether of sin or
righteousness, are communicated by propagation. Ordinary generation does
not transmit _personal_ guilt, but only that guilt which belongs to the
whole _species_. So personal faith and righteousness are not propagable.
“Original sin is the consequent of man’s _nature_, whereas the parents’
grace is a _personal_ excellence, and cannot be transmitted” (Burgesse).


    Thornwell, Selected Writings, 1:543, says the Augustinian doctrine
    would imply that Adam, penitent and believing, must have begotten
    penitent and believing children, seeing that the nature as it is
    in the parent always flows from parent to child. But see Fisher,
    Discussions, 370, where Aquinas holds that no quality or guilt
    that is _personal_ is propagated (Thomas Aquinas, 2:629). Anselm
    (De Concept. Virg. et Origin. Peccato, 98) will not decide the
    question. “The original nature of the tree is propagated—not the
    nature of the graft”—when seed from the graft is planted.
    Burgesse: “Learned parents do not convey learning to their
    children, but they are born in ignorance as others.” Augustine: “A
    Jew that was circumcised begat children not circumcised, but
    uncircumcised; and the seed that was sown without husks, yet
    produced corn with husks.”

    The recent modification of Darwinism by Weismann has confirmed the
    doctrine of the text. Lamarck’s view was that development of each
    race has taken place through the _effort_ of the individuals,—the
    giraffe has a long neck because successive giraffes have reached
    for food on high trees. Darwin held that development has taken
    place not because of effort, but because of _environment_, which
    kills the unfit and permits the fit to survive,—the giraffe has a
    long neck because among the children of giraffes only the
    long-necked ones could reach the fruit, and of successive
    generations of giraffes only the long-necked ones lived to
    propagate. But Weismann now tells us that even then there would be
    no development unless there were a spontaneous _innate tendency_
    in giraffes to become long-necked,—nothing is of avail after the
    giraffe is born; all depends upon the germs in the parents. Darwin
    held to the transmission of acquired characters, so that
    individual men are _affluents_ of the stream of humanity; Weismann
    holds, on the contrary, that acquired characters are not
    transmitted, and that individual men are only _effluents_ of the
    stream of humanity: the stream gives its characteristics to the
    individuals, but the individuals do not give their characteristics
    to the stream: see Howard Ernest Cushman, in The Outlook, Jan. 10,
    1897.

    Weismann, Heredity, 2:14, 266-270, 482—“Characters only acquired
    by the operation of external circumstances, acting during the life
    of the individual, cannot be transmitted.... The loss of a finger
    is not inherited; increase of an organ by exercise is a purely
    personal acquirement and is not transmitted; no child of reading
    parents ever read without being taught; children do not even learn
    to speak untaught.” Horses with docked tails, Chinese women with
    cramped feet, do not transmit their peculiarities. The rupture of
    the hymen in women is not transmitted. Weismann cut off the tails
    of 66 white mice in five successive generations, but of 901
    offspring none were tailless. G. J. Romanes, Life and Letters,
    300—“Three additional cases of cats which have lost their tails
    having tailless kittens afterwards.” In his Weismannism, Romanes
    writes: “The truly scientific attitude of mind with regard to the
    problem of heredity is to say with Galton: ‘We might almost
    reserve our belief that the structural cells can react on the
    sexual elements at all, and we may be confident that at most they
    do so in a very faint degree; in other words, that acquired
    modifications are barely if at all _inherited_, in the correct
    sense of that word.’ ” This seems to class both Romanes and Galton
    on the side of Weismann in the controversy. Burbank, however, says
    that “acquired characters are transmitted, or I know nothing of
    plant life.”

    A. H. Bradford, Heredity, 19, 20, illustrates the opposing views:
    “Human life is not a clear stream flowing from the mountains,
    receiving in its varied course something from a thousand rills and
    rivulets on the surface and in the soil, so that it is no longer
    pure as at the first. To this view of Darwin and Spencer, Weismann
    and Haeckel oppose the view that human life is rather a stream
    flowing underground from the mountains to the sea, and rising now
    and then in fountains, some of which are saline, some sulphuric,
    and some tinctured with iron; and that the differences are due
    entirely to the soil passed through in breaking forth to the
    surface, the mother-stream down and beneath all the salt, sulphur
    and iron, flowing on toward the sea substantially unchanged. If
    Darwin is correct, then we must change individuals in order to
    change their posterity. If Weismann is correct, then we must
    change environment in order that better individuals may be born.
    That which is born of the Spirit is spirit; but that which is born
    of spirit tainted by corruptions of the flesh is still tainted.”

    The conclusion best warranted by science seems to be that of
    Wallace, in the Forum, August, 1890, namely, that there is always
    a _tendency_ to transmit acquired characters, but that only those
    which affect the blood and nervous system, like drunkenness and
    syphilis, overcome the fixed habit of the organism and make
    themselves permanent. Applying this principle now to the
    connection of Adam with the race, we regard the sin of Adam as a
    radical one, comparable only to the act of faith which merges the
    soul in Christ. It was a turning away of the whole being from the
    light and love of God, and a setting of the face toward darkness
    and death. Every subsequent act was an act in the same direction,
    but an act which manifested, not altered, the nature. This first
    act of sin deprived the nature of all moral sustenance and growth,
    except so far as the still immanent God counteracted the inherent
    tendencies to evil. Adam’s posterity inherited his corrupt nature,
    but they do not inherit any subsequently acquired characters,
    either those of their first father or of their immediate
    ancestors.

    Bascom, Comparative Psychology, chap. VII—“Modifications, however
    great, like artificial disablement, that do not work into
    physiological structure, do not transmit themselves. The more
    conscious and voluntary our acquisitions are, the less are they
    transmitted by inheritance.” Shaler, Interpretation of Nature,
    88—“Heredity and individual action may combine their forces and so
    intensify one or more of the inherited motives that the form is
    affected by it and the effect may be transmitted to the offspring.
    So conflict of inheritances may lead to the institution of
    variety. Accumulation of impulses may lead to sudden revolution,
    and the species may be changed, not by environment, but by contest
    between the host of inheritances.” Visiting the sins of the
    fathers upon the children was thought to be outrageous doctrine,
    so long as it was taught only in Scripture. It is now vigorously
    applauded, since it takes the name of heredity. _Dale, Ephesians,
    189_—“When we were young, we fought with certain sins and killed
    them; they trouble us no more; but their ghosts seem to rise from
    their graves in the distant years and to clothe themselves in the
    flesh and blood of our children.” See A. M. Marshall, Biological
    Lectures, 273; Mivart, in Harper’s Magazine, March, 1895:682;
    Bixby, Crisis in Morals, 176.


F. That, if all moral consequences are properly penalties, sin, considered
as a sinful nature, must be the punishment of sin, considered as the act
of our first parents.

But we reply that the impropriety of punishing sin with sin vanishes when
we consider that the sin which is punished is our own, equally with the
sin with which we are punished. The objection is valid as against the
Federal theory or the theory of Mediate Imputation, but not as against the
theory of Adam’s Natural Headship. To deny that God, through the operation
of second causes, may punish the act of transgression by the habit and
tendency which result from it, is to ignore the facts of every-day life,
as well as the statements of Scripture in which sin is represented as ever
reproducing itself, and with each reproduction increasing its guilt and
punishment (Rom. 6:19; James 1:15.)


    _Rom. 6:19_—“_as ye presented your members as servants to
    uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now present
    your members as servants to righteousness unto sanctification_”;
    _Eph. 4:22_—“_waxeth corrupt after the lusts of deceit_”; _James
    1:15_—“_Then the lust, when it hath conceived, beareth sin: and
    the sin, when it is full-grown, bringeth forth death_”; _2 Tim.
    3:13_—“_evil men and impostors shall wax worse and worse,
    deceiving and being deceived._” See Meyer on _Rom.
    1:24_—“_Wherefore God gave them up in the lusts of their hearts
    unto uncleanness._” All effects become in their turn causes.
    Schiller: “This is the very curse of evil deed, That of new evil
    it becomes the seed.” Tennyson, Vision of Sin: “Behold it was a
    crime Of sense, avenged by sense that wore with time. Another
    said: The crime of sense became The crime of malice, and is equal
    blame.” Whiton, Is Eternal Punishment Endless, 52—“The punishment
    of sin essentially consists in the wider spread and stronger hold
    of the malady of the soul. _Prov. 5:22_—‘_His own iniquities shall
    take the wicked._’ The habit of sinning holds the wicked ‘_with
    the cords of his sin_.’ Sin is self-perpetuating. The sinner
    gravitates from worse to worse, in an ever-deepening fall.” The
    least of our sins has in it a power of infinite expansion,—left to
    itself it would flood a world with misery and destruction.

    Wisdom, 11:16—“Wherewithal a man sinneth, by the same also he
    shall be punished.” Shakespeare, Richard II, 5:5—“I wasted time,
    and now doth time waste me”; Richard III, 4:2—“I am in so far in
    blood, that sin will pluck on sin”; Pericles, 1:1—“One sin I know
    another doth provoke; Murder’s as near to lust as flame to smoke;”
    King Lear, 5:3—“The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices Make
    instruments to scourge us.” “Marlowe’s Faustus typifies the
    continuous degradation of a soul that has renounced its ideal, and
    the drawing on of one vice by another, for they go hand in hand
    like the Hours” (James Russell Lowell). Mrs. Humphrey Ward, David
    Grieve, 410—“After all, there’s not much hope when the craving
    returns on a man of his age, especially after some years’
    interval.”


G. That the doctrine excludes all separate probation of individuals since
Adam, by making their moral life a mere manifestation of tendencies
received from him.

We reply that the objection takes into view only our connection with the
race, and ignores the complementary and equally important fact of each
man’s personal will. That personal will does more than simply express the
nature; it may to a certain extent curb the nature, or it may, on the
other hand, add a sinful character and influence of its own. There is, in
other words, a remainder of freedom, which leaves room for personal
probation, in addition to the race-probation in Adam.


    Kreibig, Versöhnungslehre, objects to the Augustinian view that if
    personal sin proceeds from original, the only thing men are guilty
    for is Adam’s sin; all subsequent sin is a spontaneous
    development; the individual will can only manifest its inborn
    character. But we reply that this is a misrepresentation of
    Augustine. He does not thus lose sight of the remainders of
    freedom in man (see references on page 620, in the statement of
    Augustine’s view, and in the section following this, on Ability,
    640-644). He says that the corrupt tree may produce the wild fruit
    of morality, though not the divine fruit of grace. It is not true
    that the will is absolutely as the character. Though character is
    the surest index as to what the decisions of the will may be, it
    is not an infallible one. Adam’s first sin, and the sins of men
    after regeneration, prove this. Irregular, spontaneous,
    exceptional though these decisions are, they are still acts of the
    will, and they show that the agent is not _bound_ by motives nor
    by character.

    Here is our answer to the question whether it be not a sin to
    propagate the race and produce offspring. Each child has a
    personal will which may have a probation of its own and a chance
    for deliverance. Denney, Studies in Theology, 87-99—“What we
    inherit may be said to fix our trial, but not our fate. We belong
    to God as well as to the past.” “_All souls are mine_” (_Ez.
    18:4_); “_Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice_” (_John
    18:37_). Thomas Fuller: “1. Roboam begat Abia; that is, a bad
    father begat a bad son; 2. Abia begat Asa; that is, a bad father
    begat a good son; & Asa begat Josaphat; that is, a good father a
    good son; 4. Josaphat begat Joram; that is, a good father a bad
    son. I see, Lord, from hence, that my father’s piety cannot be
    entailed; that is bad news for me. But I see that actual impiety
    is not always hereditary; that is good news for my son.” Butcher,
    Aspects of Greek Genius, 121—Among the Greeks, “The popular view
    was that guilt is inherited; that is, that the children are
    punished for their fathers’ sins. The view of Æschylus, and of
    Sophocles also, was that a tendency towards guilt was inherited,
    but that this tendency does not annihilate man’s free will. If
    therefore the children are punished, they are punished for their
    own sins. But Sophocles saw the further truth that innocent
    children may suffer for their fathers’ sins.”

    Julius Müller, Doc. Sin, 2:316—“The merely organic theory of sin
    leads to naturalism, which endangers not only the doctrine of a
    final judgment, but that of personal immortality generally.” In
    preaching, therefore, we should begin with the known and
    acknowledged sins of men. We should lay the same stress upon our
    connection with Adam that the Scripture does, to explain the
    problem of universal and inveterate sinful tendencies, to enforce
    our need of salvation from this common ruin, and to illustrate our
    connection with Christ. Scripture does not, and we need not, make
    our responsibility for Adam’s sin the great theme of preaching.
    See A. H. Strong, on Christian Individualism, and on The New
    Theology, in Philosophy and Religion, 156-163, 164-179.


H. That the organic unity of the race in the transgression is a thing so
remote from common experience that the preaching of it neutralizes all
appeals to the conscience.

But whatever of truth there is in this objection is due to the
self-isolating nature of sin. Men feel the unity of the family, the
profession, the nation to which they belong, and, just in proportion to
the breadth of their sympathies and their experience of divine grace, do
they enter into Christ’s feeling of unity with the race (_cf._ Is. 6:5;
Lam. 3:39-45; Ezra 9:6; Neh. 1:6). The fact that the self-contained and
self-seeking recognize themselves as responsible only for their personal
acts should not prevent our pressing upon men’s attention the more
searching standards of the Scriptures. Only thus can the Christian find a
solution for the dark problem of a corruption which is inborn yet
condemnable; only thus can the unregenerate man be led to a full knowledge
of the depth of his ruin and of his absolute dependence upon God for
salvation.


    Identification of the individual with the nation or the race: _Is.
    6:5_—“_Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean
    lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips_”;
    _Lam. 3:42_—“_We have transgressed and have rebelled_”; _Ezra
    9:6_—“_I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God;
    for our iniquities are increased over our head_”; _Neh. 1:6_—“_I
    confess the sins of the children of Israel.... Yea, I and my
    father’s house have sinned._” So God punishes all Israel for
    David’s sin of pride; so the sins of Reuben, Canaan, Achan,
    Gehazi, are visited on their children or descendants.

    H. B. Smith, System, 296, 297—“Under the moral government of God
    one man may justly suffer on account of the sins of another. An
    organic relation of men is regarded in the great judgment of God
    in history.... There is evil which comes upon individuals, not as
    punishment for their personal sins, but still as suffering which
    comes under a moral government.... _Jer. 32:18_ reasserts the
    declaration of the second commandment, that God visits the
    iniquity of the fathers upon their children. It may be said that
    all these are merely ‘consequences’ of family or tribal or
    national or race relations,—‘Evil becomes cosmical by reason of
    fastening on relations which were originally adapted to making
    good cosmical:’ but then God’s _plan_ must be in the
    consequences—a plan administered by a moral being, over moral
    beings, according to moral considerations, and for moral ends;
    and, if that be fully taken into view, the dispute as to
    ’consequences’ or ’punishment’ becomes a merely verbal one.”

    There is a common conscience over and above the private
    conscience, and it controls individuals, as appears in great
    crises like those at which the fall of Fort Sumter summoned men to
    defend the Union and the Proclamation of Emancipation sounded the
    death-knell of slavery. Coleridge said that original sin is the
    one mystery that makes all things clear; see Fisher, Nature and
    Method of Revelation, 151-157. Bradford, Heredity, 34, quotes from
    Elam, A Physician’s Problems, 5—“An acquired and habitual vice
    will rarely fail to leave its trace upon one or more of the
    offspring, either in its original form, or one closely allied. The
    habit of the parent becomes the all but irresistible impulse of
    the child; ... the organic tendency is excited to the uttermost,
    and the power of will and of conscience is proportionally
    weakened.... So the sins of the parents are visited upon the
    children.”

    Pascal: “It is astonishing that the mystery which is furthest
    removed from our knowledge—I mean the transmission of original
    sin—should be that without which we have no true knowledge of
    ourselves. It is in this abyss that the clue to our condition
    takes its turnings and windings, insomuch that man is more
    incomprehensible without the mystery than this mystery is
    incomprehensible to man.” Yet Pascal’s perplexity was largely due
    to his holding the Augustinian position that inherited sin is
    damning and brings eternal death, while not holding to the
    coördinate Augustinian position of a primary existence and act of
    the species in Adam; see Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:18. Atomism is
    egotistic. The purest and noblest feel most strongly that humanity
    is not like a heap of sand-grains or a row of bricks set on end,
    but that it is an organic unity. So the Christian feels for the
    family and for the church. So Christ, in Gethsemane, felt for the
    race. If it be said that the tendency of the Augustinian view is
    to diminish the sense of guilt for personal sins, we reply that
    only those who recognize _sins_ as rooted in _sin_ can properly
    recognize the evil of them. To such they are _symptoms_ of an
    apostasy from God so deep-seated and universal that nothing but
    infinite grace can deliver us from it.


I. That a constitution by which the sin of one individual involves in
guilt and condemnation the nature of all men who descend from him is
contrary to God’s justice.

We acknowledge that no human theory can fully solve the mystery of
imputation. But we prefer to attribute God’s dealings to justice rather
than to sovereignty. The following considerations, though partly
hypothetical, may throw light upon the subject: (_a_) A probation of our
common nature in Adam, sinless as he was and with full knowledge of God’s
law, is more consistent with divine justice than a separate probation of
each individual, with inexperience, inborn depravity, and evil example,
all favoring a decision against God. (_b_) A constitution which made a
common fall possible may have been indispensable to any provision of a
common salvation. (_c_) Our chance for salvation as sinners under grace
may be better than it would have been as sinless Adams under law. (_d_) A
constitution which permitted oneness with the first Adam in the
transgression cannot be unjust, since a like principle of oneness with
Christ, the second Adam, secures our salvation. (_e_) There is also a
_physical_ and _natural_ union with Christ which antedates the fall and
which is incident to man’s creation. The immanence of Christ in humanity
guarantees a continuous divine effort to remedy the disaster caused by
man’s free will, and to restore the _moral_ union with God which the race
has lost by the fall.

Thus our ruin and our redemption were alike wrought out without personal
act of ours. As all the natural life of humanity was in Adam, so all the
spiritual life of humanity was in Christ. As our old nature was corrupted
in Adam and propagated to us by physical generation, so our new nature was
restored in Christ and communicated to us by the regenerating work of the
Holy Spirit. If then we are justified upon the ground of our inbeing in
Christ, we may in like manner be condemned on the ground of our inbeing in
Adam.


    Stearns, in N. Eng., Jan. 1882:95—“The silence of Scripture
    respecting the precise connection between the first great sin and
    the sins of the millions of individuals who have lived since then
    is a silence that neither science nor philosophy has been, or is,
    able to break with a satisfactory explanation. Separate the
    twofold nature of man, corporate and individual. Recognize in the
    one the region of necessity; in the other the region of freedom.
    The scientific law of heredity has brought into new currency the
    doctrine which the old theologians sought to express under the
    name of original sin,—a term which had a meaning as it was at
    first used by Augustine, but which is an awkward misnomer if we
    accept any other theory but his.”

    Dr. Hovey claims that the Augustinian view breaks down when
    applied to the connection between the justification of believers
    and the righteousness of Christ; for believers were not in Christ,
    as to the substance of their souls, when he wrought out redemption
    for them. But we reply that the life of Christ which makes us
    Christians is the same life which made atonement upon the cross
    and which rose from the grave for our justification. The parallel
    between Adam and Christ is of the nature of analogy, not of
    identity. With Adam, we have a connection of physical life; with
    Christ, a connection of spiritual life.

    Stahl, Philosophie des Rechts, quoted in Olshausen’s Com. on _Rom.
    5:12-21_—“Adam is the original _matter_ of humanity; Christ is its
    original _idea_ in God; both personally living. Mankind is one in
    them. Therefore Adam’s sin became the sin of all; Christ’s
    sacrifice the atonement for all. Every leaf of a tree may be green
    or wither by itself; but each suffers by the disease of the root,
    and recovers only by its healing. The shallower the man, so much
    more isolated will everything appear to him; for upon the surface
    all lies apart. He will see in mankind, in the nation, nay, even
    in the family, mere individuals, where the act of the one has no
    connection with that of the other. The profounder the man, the
    more do these inward relations of unity, proceeding from the very
    centre, force themselves upon him. Yea, the love of our neighbor
    is itself nothing but the deep feeling of this unity; for we love
    him only, with whom we feel and acknowledge ourselves to be one.
    What the Christian love of our neighbor is for the heart, that
    unity of race is for the understanding. If sin through one, and
    redemption through one, is not possible, the command to love our
    neighbor is also unintelligible. Christian ethics and Christian
    faith are therefore in truth indissolubly united. Christianity
    effects in history an advance like that from the animal kingdom to
    man, by its revealing the essential unity of men, the
    consciousness of which in the ancient world had vanished when the
    nations were separated.”

    If the sins of the parents were not visited upon the children,
    neither could their virtues be; the possibility of the one
    involves the possibility of the other. If the guilt of our first
    father could not be transmitted to all who derive their life from
    him, then the justification of Christ could not be transmitted to
    all who derive their life from him. We do not, however, see any
    Scripture warrant for the theory that all men are justified from
    original sin by virtue of their natural connection with Christ. He
    who is the life of all men bestows manifold temporal blessings
    upon the ground of his atonement. But justification from sin is
    conditioned upon conscious surrender of the human will and trust
    in the divine mercy. The immanent Christ is ever urging man
    individually and collectively toward such decision. But the
    acceptance or rejection of the offered grace is left to man’s free
    will. This principle enables us properly to estimate the view of
    Dr. Henry E. Robins which follows.

    H. E. Robins, Harmony of Ethics with Theology, 51—“All men born of
    Adam stand in such a relation to Christ that salvation is their
    birthright under promise—a birthright which can only be forfeited
    by their intelligent, personal, moral action, as was Esau’s.” Dr.
    Robins holds to an inchoate justification of all—a justification
    which becomes actual and complete only when the soul closes with
    Christ’s offer to the sinner. We prefer to say that humanity in
    Christ is ideally justified because Christ himself is justified,
    but that individual men are justified only when they consciously
    appropriate his offered grace or surrender themselves to his
    renewing Spirit. Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 312—“The grace of God is
    as organic in its relation to man as is the evil in his nature.
    Grace also reigns wherever justice reigns.” William Ashmore, on
    the New Trial of the Sinner, in Christian Review,
    26:245-264—“There is a gospel of nature commensurate with the law
    of nature; _Rom. 3:22_—‘_unto all, and upon all them that
    believe_’; the first ‘_all_’ is unlimited; the second ‘_all_’ is
    limited to those who believe.”

    R. W. Dale, Ephesians, 180—“Our fortunes were identified with the
    fortunes of Christ; in the divine thought and purpose we were
    inseparable from him. Had we been true and loyal to the divine
    idea, the energy of Christ’s righteousness would have drawn us
    upward to height after height of goodness and joy, until we
    ascended from this earthly life to the larger powers and loftier
    services and richer delights of other and diviner worlds; and
    still, through one golden age of intellectual and ethical and
    spiritual growth after another, we should have continued to rise
    towards Christ’s transcendent and infinite perfection. But we
    sinned; and as the union between Christ and us could not be broken
    without the final and irrevocable defeat of the divine purpose,
    Christ was drawn down from the serene heavens to the confused and
    troubled life of our race, to pain, to temptation, to anguish, to
    the cross and to the grave, and so the mystery of his atonement
    for our sin was consummated.”

    For replies to the foregoing and other objections, see Schaff, in
    Bib. Sac., 5:230; Shedd, Sermons to the Nat. Man, 266-284; Baird,
    Elohim Revealed, 507-509, 529-544; Birks, Difficulties of Belief,
    134-188; Edwards, Original Sin, in Works, 2:473-510; Atwater, on
    Calvinism in Doctrine and Life, in Princeton Review, 1875:73;
    Stearns, Evidence of Christian Experience, 96-100. _Per contra_,
    see Moxom, in Bap. Rev., 1881:273-287; Park, Discourses, 210-233;
    Bradford, Heredity, 237.



Section VI.—Consequences Of Sin To Adam’s Posterity.


As the result of Adam’s transgression, all his posterity are born in the
same state into which he fell. But since law is the all-comprehending
demand of harmony with God, all moral consequences flowing from
transgression are to be regarded as sanctions of law, or expressions of
the divine displeasure through the constitution of things which he has
established. Certain of these consequences, however, are earlier
recognized than others and are of minor scope; it will therefore be useful
to consider them under the three aspects of depravity, guilt, and penalty.


I. Depravity.


By this we mean, on the one hand, the lack of original righteousness or of
holy affection toward God, and, on the other hand, the corruption of the
moral nature, or bias toward evil. That such depravity exists has been
abundantly shown, both from Scripture and from reason, in our
consideration of the universality of sin.


    Salvation is twofold: deliverance from the evil—the penalty and
    the power of sin; and accomplishment of the good—likeness to God
    and realization of the true idea of humanity. It includes all
    these for the race as well as for the individual: removal of the
    barriers that keep men from each other; and the perfecting of
    society in communion with God; or, in other words, the kingdom of
    God on earth. It was the nature of man, when he first came from
    the hand of God, to fear, love, and trust God above all things.
    This tendency toward God has been lost; sin has altered and
    corrupted man’s innermost nature. In place of this bent toward God
    there is a fearful bent toward evil. Depravity is both
    negative—absence of love and of moral likeness to God—and
    positive—presence of manifold tendencies to evil. Two questions
    only need detain us:


1. Depravity partial or total?


The Scriptures represent human nature as totally depraved. The phrase
“total depravity,” however, is liable to misinterpretation, and should not
be used without explanation. By the total depravity of universal humanity
we mean:

A. Negatively,—not that every sinner is: (_a_) Destitute of
conscience,—for the existence of strong impulses to right, and of remorse
for wrong-doing, show that conscience is often keen; (_b_) devoid of all
qualities pleasing to men, and useful when judged by a human standard,—for
the existence of such qualities is recognized by Christ; (_c_) prone to
every form of sin,—for certain forms of sin exclude certain others; (_d_)
intense as he can be in his selfishness and opposition to God,—for he
becomes worse every day.


    (_a_) _John 8:9_—“_And they, when they heard it, went out one by
    one, beginning from the eldest, even unto the last_” (_John
    7:53-8:11_, though not written by John, is a perfectly true
    narrative, descended from the apostolic age). The muscles of a
    dead frog’s leg will contract when a current of electricity is
    sent into them. So the dead soul will thrill at touch of the
    divine law. Natural conscience, combined with the principle of
    self-love, may even prompt choice of the good, though no love for
    God is in the choice. Bengel: “We have lost our likeness to God;
    but there remains notwithstanding an indelible nobility which we
    ought to revere both in ourselves and in others. We still have
    remained men, to be conformed to that likeness, through the divine
    blessing to which man’s will should subscribe. This they forget
    who speak evil of human nature. Absalom fell out of his father’s
    favor; but the people, for all that, recognized in him the son of
    the king.”

    (_b_) _Mark 10:21_—“_And Jesus looking upon him loved him._” These
    very qualities, however, may show that their possessors are
    sinning against great light and are the more guilty; _cf._ _Mal.
    1:6_—“_A son honoreth his father, and a servant his master: if
    then I am a father, where is mine honor? and if I am a master,
    where is my fear?_” John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity,
    2:75—“The assertor of the total depravity of human nature, of its
    absolute blindness and incapacity, presupposes in himself and in
    others the presence of a criterion or principle of good, in virtue
    of which he discerns himself to be wholly evil; yet the very
    proposition that human nature is wholly evil would be
    unintelligible unless it were false.... Consciousness of sin is a
    negative sign of the possibility of restoration. But it is not in
    itself proof that the possibility will become actuality.” A ruined
    temple may have beautiful fragments of fluted columns, but it is
    no proper habitation for the god for whose worship it was built.

    (_c_) _Mat. 23:23_—“_ye tithe mint and anise and cummin, and have
    left undone the weightier matters of the law, justice and mercy,
    and faith: but these ye ought to have done, and not to have left
    the other undone_”; _Rom. 2:14_—“_when Gentiles that have not the
    law do by nature the things of the law, these, not having the law,
    are the law unto themselves; in that they show the work of the law
    written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness
    therewith._” The sin of miserliness may exclude the sin of luxury;
    the sin of pride may exclude the sin of sensuality. Shakespeare,
    Othello, 2:3—“It hath pleased the devil Drunkenness to give place
    to the devil Wrath.” Franklin Carter, Life of Mark Hopkins,
    321-323—Dr. Hopkins did not think that the sons of God should
    describe themselves as once worms or swine or vipers. Yet he held
    that man could sink to a degradation below the brute: “No brute is
    any more capable of rebelling against God than of serving him; is
    any more capable of sinking below the level of its own nature than
    of rising to the level of man. No brute can be either a fool or a
    fiend.... In the way that sin and corruption came into the
    spiritual realm we find one of those analogies to what takes place
    in the lower forms of being that show the unity of the system
    throughout. All disintegration and corruption of matter is from
    the domination of a lower over a higher law. The body begins to
    return to its original elements as the lower chemical and physical
    forces begin to gain ascendancy over the higher force of life. In
    the same way all sin and corruption in man is from his yielding to
    a lower law or principle of action in opposition to the demands of
    one that is higher.”

    (_d_) _Gen. 15:16_—“_the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet
    full_”; _2 Tim. 3:13_—“_evil men and impostors shall wax worse and
    worse._” Depravity is not simply being deprived of good.
    Depravation (_de_, and _pravus_, crooked, perverse) is more than
    deprivation. Left to himself man tends downward, and his sin
    increases day by day. But there is a divine influence within which
    quickens conscience and kindles aspiration for better things. The
    immanent Christ is “_the light which lighteth every man_” (_John
    1:9_). Prof. Wm. Adams Brown: “In so far as God’s Spirit is at
    work among men and they receive ‘_the Light which lighteth every
    man_,’ we must qualify our statement of total depravity. Depravity
    is not so much a state as a tendency. With growing complexity of
    life, sin becomes more complex. Adam’s sin was not the worst. ‘_It
    shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of
    judgment, than for thee_’ (_Mat. 11:24_).”

    Men are not yet in the condition of demons. Only here and there
    have they attained to “a disinterested love of evil.” Such men are
    few, and they were not born so. There are degrees in depravity. E.
    G. Robinson: “There is a good streak left in the devil yet.” Even
    Satan will become worse than he now is. The phrase “total
    depravity” has respect only to relations to God, and it means
    incapability of doing anything which in the sight of God is a good
    act. No act is perfectly good that does not proceed from a true
    heart and constitute an expression of that heart. Yet we have no
    right to say that every act of an unregenerate man is displeasing
    to God. Right acts from right motives are good, whether performed
    by a Christian or by one who is unrenewed in heart. Such acts,
    however, are always prompted by God, and thanks for them are due
    to God and not to him who performed them.


B. Positively,—that every sinner is: (_a_) totally destitute of that love
to God which constitutes the fundamental and all-inclusive demand of the
law; (_b_) chargeable with elevating some lower affection or desire above
regard for God and his law; (_c_) supremely determined, in his whole
inward and outward life, by a preference of self to God; (_d_) possessed
of an aversion to God which, though sometimes latent, becomes active
enmity, so soon as God’s will comes into manifest conflict with his own;
(_e_) disordered and corrupted in every faculty, through this substitution
of selfishness for supreme affection toward God; (_f_) credited with no
thought, emotion, or act of which divine holiness can fully approve; (_g_)
subject to a law of constant progress in depravity, which he has no
recuperative energy to enable him successfully to resist.


    (_a_) _John 5:42_—“_But I know you, that ye have not the love of
    God in yourselves._” (_b_) _2 Tim. 3:4_—“_lovers of pleasure
    rather than lovers of God_”; _cf._ _Mal 1:6_—“_A son honoreth his
    father, and a servant his master: if then I am a father, where is
    mine honor? and if I am a master, where is my fear?_” (_c_) _2
    Tim. 3:2_—“_lovers of self_”; (_d_) _Rom. 8:7_—“_the mind of the
    flesh is enmity against God._” (_e_) _Eph. 4:18_—“_darkened in
    their understanding.... hardening of their heart_”; _Tit.
    1:15_—“_both their mind and their conscience are defiled_”; _2
    Cor. 7:1_—“_defilement of flesh and spirit_”; _Heb. 3:12_—“_an
    evil heart of unbelief_”; (_f_) _Rom. 3:9_—“_they are all under
    sin_”; _7:18_—“_in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good
    thing._” (_g_) _Rom. 7:18_—“_to will is present with me, but to do
    that which is good is not_”; _23_—“_law in my members, warring
    against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity under
    the law of sin which is in my members._”

    Every sinner would prefer a milder law and a different
    administration. But whoever does not love God’s law does not truly
    love God. The sinner seeks to secure his own interests rather than
    God’s. Even so-called religious acts he performs with preference
    of his own good to God’s glory. He disobeys, and always has
    disobeyed, the fundamental law of love. He is like a railway train
    on a down grade, and the brakes must be applied by God or
    destruction is sure. There are latent passions in every heart
    which if let loose would curse the world. Many a man who escaped
    from the burning Iroquois Theatre in Chicago, proved himself a
    brute and a demon, by trampling down fugitives who cried for
    mercy. Denney, Studies in Theology, 83—“The depravity which sin
    has produced in human nature extends to the whole of it. There is
    no part of man’s nature which is unaffected by it. Man’s nature is
    all of a piece, and what affects it at all affects it altogether.
    When the conscience is violated by disobedience to the will of
    God, the moral understanding is darkened, and the will is
    enfeebled. We are not constructed in water-tight compartments, one
    of which might be ruined while the others remained intact.” Yet
    over against total depravity, we must set total redemption; over
    against original sin, original grace. Christ is in every human
    heart mitigating the affects of sin, urging to repentance, and
    “_able to save to the uttermost them that draw near unto God
    through him_” (_Heb. 7:25_). Even the unregenerate heathen may
    “_put away ... the old man_” and “_put on the new man_” (_Eph.
    4:23, 24_), being delivered “_out of the body of this death ...
    through Jesus Christ our Lord_” (_Rom. 7:24, 25_).

    H. B. Smith, System, 277—“By total depravity is never meant that
    men are as bad as they can be; nor that they have not, in their
    natural condition, certain amiable qualities; nor that they may
    not have virtues in a limited sense (_justitia civilis_). But it
    is meant (1) that depravity, or the sinful condition of man,
    infects the whole man: intellect, feeling, heart and will; (2)
    that in each unrenewed person some lower affection is supreme; and
    (3) that each such is destitute of love to God. On these
    positions: as to (1) the power of depravity over the _whole_ man,
    we have given proof from Scripture; as to (2) the fact that in
    every unrenewed man some lower affection is supreme, experience
    may be always appealed to; men know that their supreme affection
    is fixed on some lower good—intellect, heart, and will going
    together in it; or that some form of selfishness is
    predominant—using selfish in a general sense—self seeks its
    happiness in some inferior object, giving to that its supreme
    affection; as to (3) that every unrenewed person is without
    supreme love to God, it is the point which is of greatest force,
    and is to be urged with the strongest effect, in setting forth the
    depth and ‘totality’ of man’s sinfulness: unrenewed men have not
    that supreme love of God which is the substance of the first and
    great command.” See also Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 248; Baird,
    Elohim Revealed, 510-522; Chalmers, Institutes, 1:519-542;
    Cunningham, Hist. Theology, 1:516-531; Princeton Review, 1877:470.


2. Ability or inability?


In opposition to the plenary ability taught by the Pelagians, the gracious
ability of the Arminians, and the natural ability of the New School
theologians, the Scriptures declare the total inability of the sinner to
turn himself to God or to do that which is truly good in God’s sight (see
Scripture proof below). A proper conception also of the law, as reflecting
the holiness of God and as expressing the ideal of human nature, leads us
to the conclusion that no man whose powers are weakened by either original
or actual sin can of himself come up to that perfect standard. Yet there
is a certain remnant of freedom left to man. The sinner _can_ (_a_) avoid
the sin against the Holy Ghost; (_b_) choose the less sin rather than the
greater; (_c_) refuse altogether to yield to certain temptations; (_d_) do
outwardly good acts, though with imperfect motives; (_e_) seek God from
motives of self-interest.

But on the other hand the sinner _cannot_ (_a_) by a single volition bring
his character and life into complete conformity to God’s law; (_b_) change
his fundamental preference for self and sin to supreme love for God; nor
(_c_) do any act, however insignificant, which shall meet with God’s
approval or answer fully to the demands of law.


    So long, then, as there are states of intellect, affection and
    will which man cannot, by any power of volition or of contrary
    choice remaining to him, bring into subjection to God, it cannot
    be said that he possesses any sufficient ability of himself to do
    God’s will; and if a basis for man’s responsibility and guilt be
    sought, it must be found, if at all, not in his plenary ability,
    his gracious ability, or his natural ability, but in his
    _original_ ability, when he came, in Adam, from the hands of his
    Maker.

    Man’s present inability is natural, in the sense of being
    inborn,—it is not acquired by our personal act, but is congenital.
    It is not natural, however, as resulting from the original
    limitations of human nature, or from the subsequent loss of any
    essential faculty of that nature. Human nature, at its first
    creation, was endowed with ability perfectly to keep the law of
    God. Man has not, even by his sin, lost his essential faculties of
    intellect, affection, or will. He has weakened those faculties,
    however, so that they are now unable to work up to the normal
    measure of their powers. But more especially has man given to
    every faculty a bent away from God which renders him morally
    unable to render spiritual obedience. The inability to good which
    now characterizes human nature is an inability that results from
    sin, and is itself sin.

    We hold, therefore, to an inability which is both natural and
    moral,—moral, as having its source in the self-corruption of man’s
    moral nature and the fundamental aversion of his will to
    God;—natural, as being inborn, and as affecting with partial
    paralysis all his natural powers of intellect, affection,
    conscience, and will. For his inability, in both these aspects of
    it, man is responsible.

    The sinner can do one very important thing, _viz._: give attention
    to divine truth. _Ps. 119:59_—“_I thought on my ways, And turned
    my feet unto thy testimonies._” G. W. Northrup: “The sinner can
    seek God from: (_a_) self-love, regard for his own interest; (_b_)
    feeling of duty, sense of obligation, awakened conscience; (_c_)
    gratitude for blessings already received; (_d_) aspiration after
    the infinite and satisfying.” Denney, Studies in Theology, 85—“A
    witty French moralist has said that God does not need to grudge to
    his enemies even what they call their virtues; and neither do
    God’s ministers.... But there is _one_ thing which man cannot do
    _alone_,—he cannot bring his state into harmony with his nature.
    When a man has been discovered who has been able, without Christ,
    to reconcile himself to God and to obtain dominion over the world
    and over sin, _then_ the doctrine of inability, or of the bondage
    due to sin, may be denied; _then_, but _not till then_.” The Free
    Church of Scotland, in the Declaratory Act of 1892, says “that, in
    holding and teaching, according to the Confession of Faith, the
    corruption of man’s whole nature as fallen, this church also
    maintains that there remain tokens of his greatness as created in
    the image of God; that he possesses a knowledge of God and of
    duty; that he is responsible for compliance with the moral law and
    with the gospel; and that, although unable without the aid of the
    Holy Spirit to return to God, he is yet capable of affections and
    actions which in themselves are virtuous and praiseworthy.”


To the use of the term “natural ability” to designate merely the sinner’s
possession of all the constituent faculties of human nature, we object
upon the following grounds:

A. Quantitative lack.—The phrase “natural ability” is misleading, since it
seems to imply that the existence of the mere powers of intellect,
affection, and will is a sufficient quantitative qualification for
obedience to God’s law, whereas these powers have been weakened by sin,
and are naturally unable, instead of naturally able, to render back to God
with interest the talent first bestowed. Even if the moral direction of
man’s faculties were a normal one, the effect of hereditary and of
personal sin would render naturally impossible that large likeness to God
which the law of absolute perfection demands. Man has not therefore the
natural ability perfectly to obey God. He had it once, but he lost it with
the first sin.


    When Jean Paul Richter says of himself: “I have made of myself all
    that could be made out of the stuff,” he evinces a
    self-complacency which is due to self-ignorance and lack of moral
    insight. When a man realizes the extent of the law’s demands, he
    sees that without divine help obedience is impossible. John B.
    Gough represented the confirmed drunkard’s efforts at reformation
    as a man’s walking up Mount Etna knee-deep in burning lava, or as
    one’s rowing against the rapids of Niagara.


B. Qualitative lack.—Since the law of God requires of men not so much
right single volitions as conformity to God in the whole inward state of
the affections and will, the power of contrary choice in single volitions
does not constitute a natural ability to obey God, unless man can by those
single volitions change the underlying state of the affections and will.
But this power man does not possess. Since God judges all moral action in
connection with the general state of the heart and life, natural ability
to good involves not only a full complement of faculties but also a bias
of the affections and will toward God. Without this bias there is no
possibility of right moral action, and where there is no such possibility,
there can be no ability either natural or moral.


    Wilkinson, Epic of Paul, 21—“Hatred is like love Herein, that it,
    by only being, grows. Until at last usurping quite the man, It
    overgrows him like a polypus.” John Caird, Fund. Ideas, 1:53—“The
    ideal is the revelation in me of a power that is mightier than my
    own. The supreme command ‘Thou oughtest’ is the utterance, only
    different in form, of the same voice in my spirit which says ‘Thou
    canst’; and my highest spiritual attainments are achieved, not by
    self-assertion, but by self-renunciation and self-surrender to the
    infinite life of truth and righteousness that is living and
    reigning within me.” This conscious inability in one’s self,
    together with reception of “_the strength which God supplieth_”
    (_1 Pet. 4:11_), is the secret of Paul’s courage; _2 Cor.
    12:10_—“_when I am weak, then am I strong_”; _Phil. 2:12,
    13_—“_work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; for it
    is God who worketh in you both to will and to work, for his good
    pleasure._”


C. No such ability known.—In addition to the psychological argument just
mentioned, we may urge another from experience and observation. These
testify that man is cognizant of no such ability. Since no man has ever
yet, by the exercise of his natural powers, turned himself to God or done
an act truly good in God’s sight, the existence of a natural ability to do
good is a pure assumption. There is no scientific warrant for inferring
the existence of an ability which has never manifested itself in a single
instance since history began.


    “Solomon could not keep the Proverbs,—so he wrote them.” The book
    of Proverbs needs for its complement the New Testament explanation
    of helplessness and offer of help: _John 15:5_—“_apart from me ye
    can do nothing_”; _6:37_—“_him that cometh to me I will in no wise
    cast out._” The palsied man’s inability to walk is very different
    from his indisposition to accept a remedy. The paralytic cannot
    climb the cliff, but by a rope let down to him he may be lifted
    up, provided he will permit himself to be tied to it. Darling, in
    Presb. and Ref. Rev., July, 1901:505—“If bidden, we can stretch
    out a withered arm; but God does not require this of one born
    armless. We may ‘_hear the voice of the Son of God_’ and ‘_live_’
    (_John 5:25_), but we shall not bring out of the tomb faculties
    not possessed before death.”


D. Practical evil of the belief.—The practical evil attending the
preaching of natural ability furnishes a strong argument against it. The
Scriptures, in their declarations of the sinner’s inability and
helplessness, aim to shut him up to sole dependence upon God for
salvation. The doctrine of natural ability, assuring him that he is able
at once to repent and turn to God, encourages delay by putting salvation
at all times within his reach. If a single volition will secure it, he may
be saved as easily to-morrow as to-day. The doctrine of inability presses
men to immediate acceptance of God’s offers, lest the day of grace for
them pass by.


    Those who care most for self are those in whom self becomes
    thoroughly subjected and enslaved to external influences. _Mat.
    16:25_—“_whosoever would save his life shall lose it._” The
    selfish man is a straw on the surface of a rushing stream. He
    becomes more and more a victim of circumstance, until at last he
    has no more freedom than the brute. _Ps. 49:20_—“_Man that is in
    honor, and understandeth not, Is like the beasts that perish_;”
    see R. T. Smith, Man’s Knowledge of Man and of God, 121. Robert
    Browning, unpublished poem: “ ‘Would a man ’scape the rod?’ Rabbi
    Ben Karshook saith, ‘See that he turn to God The day before his
    death.’ ‘Aye, could a man inquire When it shall come?’ I say. The
    Rabbi’s eye shoots fire—‘Then let him turn to-day.’ ”


Let us repeat, however, that the denial to man of all ability, whether
natural or moral, to turn himself to God or to do that which is truly good
in God’s sight, does not imply a denial of man’s power to order his
external life in many particulars conformably to moral rules, or even to
attain the praise of men for virtue. Man has still a range of freedom in
acting out his nature, and he may to a certain limited extent act down
upon that nature, and modify it, by isolated volitions externally
conformed to God’s law. He may choose higher or lower forms of selfish
action, and may pursue these chosen courses with various degrees of
selfish energy. Freedom of choice, within this limit, is by no means
incompatible with complete bondage of the will in spiritual things.


    _John 1:13_—“_born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
    nor of the will of man, but of God_”; _3:5_—“_Except one be born
    of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
    God_”; _6:44_—“_No man can come to me, except the Father that sent
    me draw him_”; _8:34_—“_Every one that committeth sin is the
    bondservant of sin_”; _15:4, 5_—“_the branch cannot bear fruit of
    itself ... apart from me ye can do nothing_”; _Rom. 7:18_—“_in me,
    that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing; for to will is
    present with me, but to do that which it good is not_”;
    _24_—“_Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of the
    body of this death?_” _8:7, 8_—“_the mind of the flesh is enmity
    against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
    indeed can it be: and they that are is the flesh cannot please
    God_”; _1 Cor. 2:14_—“_the natural man receiveth not the things of
    the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him; __ and he
    cannot know them, because they are spiritually judged_”; _2 Cor.
    3:5_—“_not that we are sufficient of ourselves, to account
    anything as from ourselves_”; _Eph. 2:1_—“_dead through your
    trespasses and sins_”; _8-10_—“_by grace have ye been saved
    through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God;
    not of works, that no man should glory. For we are his
    workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works_”; _Heb.
    11:6_—“_without faith it is impossible to be well-pleasing unto
    him._”

    Kant’s “I ought, therefore I can” is the relic of man’s original
    consciousness of freedom—the freedom with which man was endowed at
    his creation—a freedom, now, alas! destroyed by sin. Or it may be
    the courage of the soul in which God is working anew by his
    Spirit. For Kant’s “Ich soll, also Ich kann,” Julius Müller would
    substitute: “Ich sollte freilich können, aber Ich kann nicht”—“I
    ought indeed to be able, but I am not able.” Man truly repents
    only when he learns that his sin has made him unable to repent
    without the renewing grace of God. Emerson, in his poem entitled
    “Voluntariness,” says: “So near is grandeur to our dust, So near
    is God to man, When duty whispers low, _Thou must_, The youth
    replies, _I can_.” But, apart from special grace, all the ability
    which man at present possesses comes far short of fulfilling the
    spiritual demands of God’s law. Parental and civil law implies a
    certain kind of power. Puritan theology called man “_free among
    the dead_” (_Ps. 88:5_, A. V.). There was a range of freedom
    inside of slavery,—the will was “a drop of water imprisoned in a
    solid crystal” (Oliver Wendell Holmes). The man who kills himself
    is as dead as if he had been killed by another (Shedd, Dogm.
    Theol., 2:106).

    Westminster Confession, 9:3—“Man by his fall into a state of sin
    hath wholly lost all ability of will to any spiritual good
    accompanying salvation; so, as a natural man, being altogether
    averse from that good and dead in sin, he is not able by his own
    strength to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto.”
    Hopkins, Works, 1:233-235—“So long as the sinner’s opposition of
    heart and will continues, he cannot come to Christ. It is
    impossible, and will continue so, until his unwillingness and
    opposition be removed by a change and renovation of his heart by
    divine grace, and he be made willing in the day of God’s power.”
    Hopkins speaks of “utter inability to obey the law of God, yea,
    utter impossibility.”

    Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:257-277—“Inability consists, not in the
    loss of any faculty of the soul, nor in the loss of free agency,
    for the sinner determines his own acts, nor in mere disinclination
    to what is good. It arises from want of spiritual discernment, and
    hence want of proper affections. Inability belongs only to the
    things of the Spirit. What man cannot do is to repent, believe,
    regenerate himself. He cannot put forth any act which merits the
    approbation of God. Sin cleaves to all he does, and from its
    dominion he cannot free himself. The distinction between natural
    and moral ability is of no value. Shall we say that the uneducated
    man can understand and appreciate the Iliad, because he has all
    the faculties that the scholar has? Shall we say that man can love
    God, if he will? This is false, if will means volition. It is a
    truism, if will means affection. The Scriptures never thus address
    men and tell them that they have power to do all that God
    requires. It is dangerous to teach a man this, for until a man
    feels that he can do nothing, God never saves him. Inability is
    involved in the doctrine of original sin; in the necessity of the
    Spirit’s influence in regeneration. Inability is consistent with
    obligation, when inability arises from sin and is removed by the
    removal of sin.”

    Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:213-257, and in South Church Sermons,
    33-59—“The origin of this helplessness lies, not in creation, but
    in sin. God can command the ten talents or the five which he
    originally committed to us, together with a diligent and faithful
    improvement of them. Because the servant has lost the talents, is
    he discharged from obligation to return them with interest? Sin
    contains in itself the element of servitude. In the very act of
    transgressing the law of God, there is a reflex action of the
    human will upon itself, whereby it becomes less able than before
    to keep that law. Sin is the suicidal action of the human will. To
    do wrong destroys the power to do right. Total depravity carries
    with it total impotence. The voluntary faculty may be ruined from
    within; may be made impotent to holiness, by its own action; may
    surrender itself to appetite and selfishness with such an
    intensity and earnestness, that it becomes unable to convert
    itself and overcome its wrong inclination.” See Stevenson, Dr.
    Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,—noticed in Andover Rev., June, 1886:664. We
    can merge ourselves in the life of another—either bad or good; can
    almost transform ourselves into Satan or into Christ, so as to say
    with Paul, in _Gal 2:20_—“_it is no longer I that live, but Christ
    liveth in me_”; or be minions of “_the spirit that now worketh in
    the sons of disobedience_” (_Eph. 2:2_). But if we yield ourselves
    to the influence of Satan, the recovery of our true personality
    becomes increasingly difficult, and at last impossible.

    There is nothing in literature sadder or more significant than the
    self-bewailing of Charles Lamb, the gentle Elia, who writes in his
    Last Essays, 214—“Could the youth to whom the flavor of the first
    wine is delicious as the opening scenes of life or the entering of
    some newly discovered paradise, look into my desolation, and be
    made to understand what a dreary thing it is when he shall feel
    himself going down a precipice with open eyes and a passive will;
    to see his destruction, and have no power to stop it; to see all
    goodness emptied out of him, and yet not be able to forget a time
    when it was otherwise; to bear about the piteous spectacle of his
    own ruin,—could he see my fevered eye, fevered with the last
    night’s drinking, and feverishly looking for to-night’s repetition
    of the folly; could he but feel the body of this death out of
    which I cry hourly, with feebler outcry, to be delivered, it were
    enough to make him dash the sparkling beverage to the earth, in
    all the pride of its mantling temptation.”

    For the Arminian “gracious ability,” see Raymond, Syst. Theol.,
    2:130; McClintock & Strong, Cyclopædia, 10:990. _Per contra_, see
    Calvin, Institutes, bk. 2, chap. 2 (1:282); Edwards, Works, 2:464
    (Orig. Sin, 3:1); Bennet Tyler, Works, 73; Baird, Elohim Revealed,
    523-528; Cunningham, Hist. Theology, 1:567-639; Turretin, 10:4:19;
    A. A. Hodge, Outlines of Theology, 260-269; Thornwell, Theology,
    1:394-399; Alexander, Moral Science, 89-208; Princeton Essays,
    1:224-239; Richards, Lectures on Theology. On real as
    distinguished from formal freedom, see Julius Müller, Doct. Sin,
    2:1-225. On Augustine’s _lineamenta extrema_ (of the divine image
    in man), see Wiggers, Augustinism and Pelagianism, 119, note. See
    also art. by A. H. Strong, on Modified Calvinism, or Remainders of
    Freedom in Man, in Bap. Rev., 1883:219-242; and reprinted in the
    author’s Philosophy and Religion, 114-128.


II. Guilt.


1. Nature of guilt.


By guilt we mean desert of punishment, or obligation to render
satisfaction to God’s justice for self-determined violation of law. There
is a reaction of holiness against sin, which the Scripture denominates
“the wrath of God” (Rom. 1:18). Sin is in us, either as act or state;
God’s punitive righteousness is over against the sinner, as something to
be feared; guilt is a relation of the sinner to that righteousness,
namely, the sinner’s desert of punishment.


    Guilt is related to sin as the burnt spot to the blaze. Schiller,
    Die Braut von Messina: “Das Leben ist der Güter höchstes nicht;
    Der Uebel grösstes aber ist die Schuld”—“Life is not the highest
    of possessions; the greatest of ills, however, is guilt.”
    Delitzsch: “Die Schamröthe ist die Abendröthe der untergegangenen
    Sonne der ursprünglichen Gerechtigkeit”—“The blush of shame is the
    evening red after the sun of original righteousness has gone
    down.” E. G. Robinson: “Pangs of conscience do not arise from the
    fear of penalty,—they are the penalty itself.” See chapter on
    Fig-leaves, in McIlvaine, Wisdom of Holy Scripture,
    142-154—“Spiritual shame for sin sought an outward symbol, and
    found it in the nakedness of the lower parts of the body.”


The following remarks may serve both for proof and for explanation:

A. Guilt is incurred only through self-determined transgression either on
the part of man’s nature or person. We are guilty only of that sin which
we have originated or have had part in originating. Guilt is not,
therefore, mere liability to punishment, without participation in the
transgression for which the punishment is inflicted,—in other words, there
is no such thing as constructive guilt under the divine government. We are
accounted guilty only for what we have done, either personally or in our
first parents, and for what we are, in consequence of such doing.


    _Ez. 18:20_—“_the son shall not bear the iniquity of the
    father_”—, as Calvin says (Com. _in loco_): “The son shall not
    bear the father’s iniquity, since he shall receive the reward due
    to himself, and shall bear his own burden.... All are guilty
    through their own fault.... Every one perishes through his own
    iniquity.” In other words, the whole race fell in Adam, and is
    punished for its own sin in him, not for the sins of immediate
    ancestors, nor for the sin of Adam as a person foreign to us.
    _John 9:3_—“_Neither did this man sin, nor his parents_” (that he
    should be born blind)—Do not attribute to any special later sin
    what is a consequence of the sin of the race—the first sin which
    “brought death into the world, and all our woe.” Shedd, Dogm.
    Theol., 2:195-213.


B. Guilt is an objective result of sin, and is not to be confounded with
subjective pollution, or depravity. Every sin, whether of nature or
person, is an offense against God (Ps. 51:4-6), an act or state of
opposition to his will, which has for its effect God’s personal wrath (Ps.
7:11; John 3:18, 36), and which must be expiated either by punishment or
by atonement (Heb. 9:22). Not only does sin, as unlikeness to the divine
purity, involve _pollution_,—it also, as antagonism to God’s holy will,
involves _guilt_. This guilt, or obligation to satisfy the outraged
holiness of God, is explained in the New Testament by the terms “debtor”
and “debt” (Mat. 6:12; Luke 13:4; Mat. 5:21; Rom. 3:19; 6:23; Eph. 2:3).
Since guilt, the objective result of sin, is entirely distinct from
depravity, the subjective result, human nature may, as in Christ, have the
guilt without the depravity (2 Cor. 5:21), or may, as in the Christian,
have the depravity without the guilt (1 John 1:7, 8).


    _Ps. 51:4-6_—“_Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, And done
    that which is evil in thy sight; That thou mayest be justified
    when thou speakest, And be clear when thou judgest_”; _7:11_—“_God
    is a righteous judge, Yea, a God that hath indignation every
    day_”; _John 3:18_—“_he that believeth not hath been judged
    already_”; _36_—“_he that obeyeth not the Son shall not see life,
    but the wrath of God abideth on him_”; _Heb. 9:22_—“_apart from
    shedding of blood there is no remission_”; _Mat. 6:12_—“_debts_”;
    _Luke 13:4_—“_offenders_” (marg. “_debtors_”); _Mat. 5:21_—“_shall
    be in danger of_ [exposed to] _the judgment_”; _Rom. 3:19_—“_that
    ... all the world may be brought under the judgment of God_”;
    _6:23_—“_the wages of sin is death_”—death is sin’s desert; _Eph.
    2:3_—“_by nature children of wrath_”; _2 Cor. 5:21_—“_Him who knew
    no sin he made to be sin on our behalf_”; _1 John 1:7, 8_—“_the
    blood of Jesus his Son cleanseth us from all sin._ [Yet] _If we
    say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is
    not in us._”

    Sin brings in its train not only depravity but guilt, not only
    _macula_ but _reatus_. Scripture sets forth the _pollution_ of sin
    by its similies of “a cage of unclean birds” and of “wounds,
    bruises, and putrefying sores”; by leprosy and Levitical
    uncleanness, under the old dispensation; by death and the
    corruption of the grave, under both the old and the new. But
    Scripture sets forth the _guilt_ of sin, with equal vividness, in
    the fear of Cain and in the remorse of Judas. The revulsion of
    God’s holiness from sin, and its demand for satisfaction, are
    reflected in the shame and remorse of every awakened conscience.
    There is an instinctive feeling in the sinner’s heart that sin
    will be punished, and ought to be punished. But the Holy Spirit
    makes this need of reparation so deeply felt that the soul has no
    rest until its debt is paid. The offending church member who is
    truly penitent loves the law and the church which excludes him,
    and would not think it faithful if it did not. So Jesus, when
    laden with the guilt of the race, pressed forward to the cross,
    saying: “_I have a baptism to be baptised with; and how am I
    straitened till it be accomplished!_” (_Luke 12:50; Mark 10:32_).

    All sin involves guilt, and the sinful soul itself demands
    penalty, so that all will ultimately go where they most desire to
    be. All the great masters in literature have recognized this. The
    inextinguishable thirst for reparation constitutes the very
    essence of tragedy. The Greek tragedians are full of it, and
    Shakespeare is its most impressive teacher: Measure for Measure,
    5:1—“I am sorry that such sorrow I procure, And so deep sticks it
    in my penitent heart That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
    ’Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it”; Cymbeline, 5:4—“and so,
    great Powers, If you will take this audit, take this life, And
    cancel these cold bonds!... Desired, more than constrained, to
    satisfy, ... take No stricter render of me than my all”; that is,
    settle the account with me by taking my life, for nothing less
    than that will pay my debt. And later writers follow Shakespeare.
    Marguerite, in Goethe’s Faust, fainting in the great cathedral
    under the solemn reverberations of the Dies Iræ; Dimmesdale, in
    Hawthorne’s Scarlet Letter, putting himself side by side with
    Hester Prynne, his victim, in her place of obloquy; Bulwer’s
    Eugene Aram, coming forward, though unsuspected, to confess the
    murder he had committed, all these are illustrations of the inner
    impulse that moves even a sinful soul to satisfy the claims of
    justice upon it. See A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 215,
    216. On Hawthorne, see Hutton, Essays, 2:370-416—“In the Scarlet
    Letter, the minister gains fresh reverence and popularity as the
    very fruit of the passionate anguish with which his heart is
    consumed. Frantic with the stings of unacknowledged guilt, he is
    yet taught by these very stings to understand the hearts and stir
    the consciences of others.” See also Dinsmore, Atonement in
    Literature and Life.

    Nor are such scenes confined to the pages of romance. In a recent
    trial at Syracuse, Earl, the wife-murderer, thanked the jury that
    had convicted him; declared the verdict just; begged that no one
    would interfere to stay the course of justice; said that the
    greatest blessing that could be conferred on him would be to let
    him suffer the penalty of his crime. In Plattsburg, at the close
    of another trial in which the accused was a life-convict who had
    struck down a fellow-convict with an axe, the jury, after being
    out two hours, came in to ask the Judge to explain the difference
    between murder in the first and second degree. Suddenly the
    prisoner rose and said: “This was not a murder in the second
    degree. It was a deliberate and premeditated murder. I know that I
    have done wrong, that I ought to confess the truth, and that I
    ought to be hanged.” This left the jury nothing to do but render
    their verdict, and the Judge sentenced the murderer to be hanged,
    as he confessed he deserved to be. In 1891, Lars Ostendahl, the
    most famous preacher of Norway, startled his hearers by publicly
    confessing that he had been guilty of immorality, and that he
    could no longer retain his pastorate. He begged his people for the
    sake of Christ to forgive him and not to desert the poor in his
    asylums. He was not only preacher, but also head of a great
    philanthropic work.

    Such is the movement and demand of the enlightened conscience. The
    lack of conviction that crime ought to be punished is one of the
    most certain signs of moral decay in either the individual or the
    nation (_Ps. 97:10_—“_Ye that love the Lord, hate evil_”;
    _149:6_—“_Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, And a
    two-edged sword in their hand_”—to execute God’s judgment upon
    iniquity).

    This relation of sin to God shows us how Christ is “_made sin on
    our behalf_” (_2 Cor. 5:21_). Since Christ is the immanent God, he
    is also essential humanity, the universal man, the life of the
    race. All the nerves and sensibilities of humanity meet in him. He
    is the central brain to which and through which all ideas must
    pass. He is the central heart to which and through which all pains
    must be communicated. You cannot telephone to your friend across
    the town without first ringing up the central office. You cannot
    injure your neighbor without first injuring Christ. Each one of us
    can say of him: “_Against thee, thee only, have I sinned_” (_Ps.
    51:4_). Because of his central and all-inclusive humanity, Christ
    can feel all the pangs of shame and suffering which rightfully
    belong to sinners, but which they cannot feel, because their sin
    has stupefied and deadened them. The Messiah, if he be truly man,
    must be a suffering Messiah. For the very reason of his humanity
    he must bear in his own person all the guilt of humanity and must
    be “_the Lamb of God who_” takes, and so “_takes away the sin of
    the world_” (_John 1:29_).

    Guilt and depravity are not only distinguishable in thought,—they
    are also separable in fact. The convicted murderer might repent
    and become pure, yet he might still be under obligation to suffer
    the punishment of his crime. The Christian is freed from guilt
    (_Rom. 8:1_), but he is not yet freed from depravity (_Rom.
    7:23_). Christ, on the other hand, was under obligation to suffer
    (_Luke 24:26_; _Acts 3:18_; _26:23_), while yet he was without sin
    (_Heb. 7:26_). In the book entitled Modern Religious Thought,
    3-29, R. J. Campbell has an essay on The Atonement, with which,
    apart from its view as to the origin of moral evil in God, we are
    in substantial agreement. He holds that “to relieve men from their
    sense of guilt, objective atonement is necessary,”—we would say:
    to relieve men from guilt itself—the obligation to suffer. “If
    Christ be the eternal Son of God, that side of the divine nature
    which has gone forth in creation, if he contains humanity and is
    present in every article and act of human experience, then he is
    associated with the existence of the primordial evil.... He and
    only he can sever the entail between man and his responsibility
    for personal sin. Christ has not _sinned_ in man, but he takes
    responsibility for that experience of evil into which humanity is
    born, and the yielding to which constitutes sin. He goes forth to
    suffer, and actually does suffer, in man. The eternal Son in whom
    humanity is contained is therefore a sufferer since creation
    began. This mysterious passion of Deity must continue until
    redemption is consummated and humanity restored to God. Thus every
    consequence of human ill is felt in the experience of Christ. Thus
    Christ not only assumes the guilt but bears the punishment of
    every human soul.” We claim however that the necessity of this
    suffering lies, not in the needs of man, but in the holiness of
    God.


C. Guilt, moreover, as an objective result of sin, is not to be confounded
with the subjective consciousness of guilt (Lev. 5:17). In the
condemnation of conscience, God’s condemnation partially and prophetically
manifests itself (1 John 3:20). But guilt is primarily a relation to God,
and only secondarily a relation to conscience. Progress in sin is marked
by diminished sensitiveness of moral insight and feeling. As “the greatest
of sins is to be conscious of none,” so guilt may be great, just in
proportion to the absence of consciousness of it (Ps. 19:12; 51:6; Eph.
4:18, 19—ἀπηλγηκότες). There is no evidence, however, that the voice of
conscience can be completely or finally silenced. The time for repentance
may pass, but not the time for remorse. Progress in holiness, on the other
hand, is marked by increasing apprehension of the depth and extent of our
sinfulness, while with this apprehension is combined, in a normal
Christian experience, the assurance that the guilt of our sin has been
taken, and taken away, by Christ (John 1:29).


    _Lev. 5:17_—“_And if any one sin, and do any of the things which
    Jehovah hath commanded not to be done; though he knew it not, yet
    is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity_”; _1 John
    3:20_—“_because if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our
    heart, and knoweth all things_”; _Ps. 19:12_—“_Who can discern his
    errors? Clear thou me from hidden faults_”; _51:6_—“_Behold, thou
    desirest truth in the inward parts; And in the hidden part thou
    wilt make me to know wisdom_”; _Eph. 4:18, 19_—“_darkened in their
    understanding ... being past feeling_”; _John 1:29_—“_Behold, the
    Lamb of God, that taketh away_ [marg. “_beareth_”] _the sin of the
    world._”

    Plato, Republic, 1:330—“When death approaches, cares and alarms
    awake, especially the fear of hell and its punishments.” Cicero,
    De Divin., 1:30—“Then comes remorse for evil deeds.” Persius,
    Satire 3—“His vice benumbs him; his fibre has become fat; he is
    conscious of no fault; he knows not the loss he suffers; he is so
    far sunk, that there is not even a bubble on the surface of the
    deep.” Shakespeare, Hamlet, 3:1—“Thus conscience doth make cowards
    of us all”; 4:5—“To my sick soul, as sin’s true nature is, Each
    toy seems prologue to some great amiss; So full of artless
    jealousy is guilt, It spills itself in fearing to be spilt”;
    Richard III, 5:3—“O coward conscience, how thou dost afflict
    me!... My conscience hath a thousand several tongues, and every
    tongue brings in a several tale, And every tale condemns me for a
    villain”; Tempest, 3:3—“All three of them are desperate; their
    great guilt, Like poison given to work a great time after, Now
    ’gins to bite the spirits”; Ant. and Cleop., 3:9—“When we in our
    viciousness grow hard (O misery on’t!) the wise gods seel our
    eyes; In our own filth drop our clear judgments; make us Adore our
    errors; laugh at us, while we strut To our confusion.”

    Dr. Shedd said once to a graduating class of young theologians:
    “Would that upon the naked, palpitating heart of each one of you
    might be laid one redhot coal of God Almighty’s wrath!” Yes, we
    add, if only that redhot coal might be quenched by one red drop of
    Christ’s atoning blood. Dr. H. E. Robins: “To the convicted sinner
    a merely external hell would be a cooling flame, compared with the
    agony of his remorse.” John Milton represents Satan as saying:
    “Which way I fly is hell; myself am hell.” James Martineau, Life
    by Jackson, 190—“It is of the essence of guilty declension to
    administer its own anæsthetics.” But this deadening of conscience
    cannot last always. Conscience is a mirror of God’s holiness. We
    may cover the mirror with the veil of this world’s diversions and
    deceits. When the veil is removed, and conscience again reflects
    the sunlike purity of God’s demands, we are visited with
    self-loathing and self-contempt. John Caird, Fund. Ideas,
    2:25—“Though it may cast off every other vestige of its divine
    origin, our nature retains at least this one terrible prerogative
    of it, the capacity of preying on itself.” Lyttelton in Lux Mundi,
    277—“The common fallacy that a self-indulgent sinner is no one’s
    enemy but his own would, were it true, involve the further
    inference that such a sinner would not feel himself guilty.” If
    any dislike the doctrine of guilt, let them remember that without
    wrath there is no pardon, without guilt no forgiveness. See, on
    the nature of guilt, Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 1:193-267;
    Martensen, Christian Dogmatics, 208-209; Thomasius, Christi Person
    und Werk, 1:346; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 461-473; Delitzsch, Bib.
    Psychologie, 121-148; Thornwell, Theology, 1:400-424.


2. Degrees of guilt.


The Scriptures recognize different degrees of guilt as attaching to
different kinds of sin. The variety of sacrifices under the Mosaic law,
and the variety of awards in the judgment, are to be explained upon this
principle.


    _Luke 12:47, 48_—“_shall be beaten with many stripes ... shall be
    beaten with few stripes_”; _Rom. 2:6_—“_who will render to every
    man according to his works._” See also _John 19:11_—“_he that
    delivered me unto thee hath greater sin_”; _Heb. 2:2, 3_—if
    “_every transgression ... received a just recompense of reward;
    how shall we escape, if we neglect so great a salvation?_” _10:28,
    29_—“_A man that hath set at nought Moses’ law dieth without
    compassion on the word of two or three witnesses: of how much
    sorer punishment, think ye, shall he be judged worthy, who hath
    trodden under foot the Son of God?_”


Casuistry, however, has drawn many distinctions which lack Scriptural
foundation. Such is the distinction between venial sins and mortal sins in
the Roman Catholic Church,—every sin unpardoned being mortal, and all sins
being venial, since Christ has died for all. Nor is the common distinction
between sins of omission and sins of commission more valid, since the very
omission is an act of commission.


    _Mat. 25:45_—“_Inasmuch as ye did it not unto one of these
    least_”; _James 4:17_—“_To him therefore that knoweth to do good,
    and doeth it not, to him it is sin._” John Ruskin: “The
    condemnation given from the Judgment Throne—most solemnly
    described—is for all the ‘undones’ and not the ‘dones.’ People are
    perpetually afraid of doing wrong; but unless they are doing its
    reverse energetically, they _do it all day long_, and the degree
    does not matter.” The Roman Catholic Church proceeds upon the
    supposition that she can determine the precise malignity of every
    offence, and assign its proper penance at the confessional.
    Thornwell, Theology, 1:424-441, says that “all sins are venial but
    one—for there is a sin against the Holy Ghost,” yet “not one is
    venial in itself—for the least proceeds from an apostate state and
    nature.” We shall see, however, that the hindrance to pardon, in
    the case of the sin against the Holy Spirit, is subjective rather
    than objective.

    J. Spencer Kennard: “Roman Catholicism in Italy presents the
    spectacle of the authoritative representatives and teachers of
    morals and religion themselves living in all forms of deceit,
    corruption, and tyranny; and, on the other hand, discriminating
    between venial and mortal sin, classing as venial sins lying,
    fraud, fornication, marital infidelity, and even murder, all of
    which may be atoned for and forgiven or even permitted by the mere
    payment of money; and at the same time classing as mortal sins
    disrespect and disobedience to the church.”


The following distinctions are indicated in Scripture as involving
different degrees of guilt:

A. Sin of nature, and personal transgression.

Sin of nature involves guilt, yet there is greater guilt when this sin of
nature reasserts itself in personal transgression; for, while this latter
includes in itself the former, it also adds to the former a new element,
namely, the conscious exercise of the individual and personal will, by
virtue of which a new decision is made against God, special evil habit is
induced, and the total condition of the soul is made more depraved.
Although we have emphasized the guilt of inborn sin, because this truth is
most contested, it is to be remembered that men reach a conviction of
their native depravity only through a conviction of their personal
transgressions. For this reason, by far the larger part of our preaching
upon sin should consist in applications of the law of God to the acts and
dispositions of men’s lives.


    _Mat. 19:14_—“_to such belongeth the kingdom of heaven_”—relative
    innocence of childhood; _23:32_—“_Fill ye up then the measure of
    your fathers_”—personal transgression added to inherited
    depravity. In preaching, we should first treat individual
    transgressions, and thence proceed to heart-sin, and race-sin. Man
    is not wholly a spontaneous development of inborn tendencies, a
    manifestation of original sin. Motives do not _determine_ but they
    _persuade_ the will, and every man is guilty of conscious personal
    transgressions which may, with the help of the Holy Spirit, be
    brought under the condemning judgment of conscience. Birks,
    Difficulties of Belief, 169-174—“Original sin does not do away
    with the significance of personal transgression. Adam was
    pardoned: but some of his descendants are unpardonable. The second
    death is referred, in Scripture, to our own personal guilt.”

    This is not to say that original sin does not involve as great sin
    as that of Adam in the first transgression, for original sin _is_
    the sin of the first transgression; it is only to say that
    personal transgression is original sin _plus_ the conscious
    ratification of Adam’s act by the individual. “We are guilty for
    what we _are_, as much as for what we _do_. Our _sin_ is not
    simply the sum total of all our _sins_. There is a _sinfulness_
    which is the common denominator of all our sins.” It is customary
    to speak lightly of original sin, as if personal sins were all for
    which man is accountable. But it is only in the light of original
    sin that personal sins can be explained. _Prov. 14:9,
    marg._—“_Fools make a mock at sin._” Simon, Reconciliation,
    122—“The sinfulness of individual men varies; the sinfulness of
    humanity is a constant quantity.” Robert Browning, Ferishtah’s
    Fancies: “Man lumps his kind i’ the mass. God singles thence unit
    by unit. Thou and God exist—So think! for certain: Think the
    mass—mankind—Disparts, disperses, leaves thyself alone! Ask thy
    lone soul what laws are plain to thee,—Thou and no other, stand or
    fall by them! That is the part for thee.”


B. Sins of ignorance, and sins of knowledge.

Here guilt is measured by the degree of light possessed, or in other
words, by the opportunities of knowledge men have enjoyed, and the powers
with which they have been naturally endowed. Genius and privilege increase
responsibility. The heathen are guilty, but those to whom the oracles of
God have been committed are more guilty than they.


    _Mat 10:15_—“_more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in
    the day of judgment, than for that city_”; _Luke 12:47, 48_—“_that
    servant, who knew his Lord’s will ... shall be beaten with many
    stripes; but he that knew not ... shall be beaten with few
    stripes_”; _23:34_—“_Father, forgive them; for they know not what
    they do_”—complete knowledge would put them beyond the reach of
    forgiveness. _John 19:11_—“_he that delivered me unto thee hath
    greater sin_”; _Acts 17:30_—“_The times of ignorance therefore God
    overlooked_”; _Rom. 1:32_—“_who, knowing the ordinance of God,
    that they that practise such things are worthy of death, not only
    do the same, but also consent with them that practise them_”;
    _2:12_—“_For as many as have sinned without the law shall also
    perish without the law: and as many as have sinned under the law
    shall be judged by the law_”; _1 Tim. 1:13, 15, 16_—“_I obtained
    mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief._”

    _Is. 42:19_—“_Who is blind ... as Jehovah’s servant?_” It was the
    Pharisees whom Jesus warned of the sin against the Holy Spirit.
    The guilt of the crucifixion rested on Jews rather than on
    Gentiles. Apostate Israel was more guilty than the pagans. The
    greatest sinners of the present day may be in Christendom, not in
    heathendom. Satan was an archangel; Judas was an apostle;
    Alexander Borgia was a pope. Jackson, James Martineau,
    362—“Corruptio optimi pessima est, as seen in a drunken Webster, a
    treacherous Bacon, a licentious Goethe.” Sir Roger de Coverley
    observed that none but men of fine parts deserve to be hanged.
    Kaftan, Dogmatik, 317—“The greater sin often involves the lesser
    guilt; the lesser sin the greater guilt.” Robert Browning, The
    Ring and the Book, 227 (Pope, 1975)—“There’s a new tribunal now
    Higher than God’s,—the educated man’s! Nice sense of honor in the
    human breast Supersedes here the old coarse oracle!” Dr. H. E.
    Robins holds that “palliation of guilt according to light is not
    possible under a system of pure law, and is possible only because
    the probation of the sinner is a probation of grace.”


C. Sins of infirmity, and sins of presumption.

Here the guilt is measured by the energy of the evil will. Sin may be
known to be sin, yet may be committed in haste or weakness. Though haste
and weakness constitute a palliation of the offence which springs
therefrom, yet they are themselves sins, as revealing an unbelieving and
disordered heart. But of far greater guilt are those presumptuous choices
of evil in which not weakness, but strength of will, is manifest.


    _Ps. 19:12, 13_—“_Clear thou me from hidden faults. Keep back thy
    servant also from presumptuous sins_”; _Is. 5:18_—“_Woe unto them
    that draw iniquity with cords of falsehood, and sin as it were
    with a cart-rope_”—not led away insensibly by sin, but earnestly,
    perseveringly, and wilfully working away at it; _Gal.
    6:1_—“_overtaken in any trespass_”; _1 Tim. 5:24_—“_Some men’s
    sins are evident, going before unto judgment; and some men also
    they follow after_”—some men’s sins are so open, that they act as
    officers to bring to justice those who commit them; whilst others
    require after-proof (An. Par. Bible). Luther represents one of the
    former class as saying to himself: “Esto peccator, et pecca
    fortiter.” On sins of passion and of reflection, see Bittinger, in
    Princeton Rev., 1873:219.

    _Micah 7:3_, marg.—“_Both hands are put forth for evil, to do it
    diligently._” So we ought to do good. “My art is my life,” said
    Grisi, the prima donna of the opera, “I save myself all day for
    that one bound upon the stage.” H. Bonar: “Sin worketh,—Let me
    work too. Busy as sin, my work I ply, Till I rest in the rest of
    eternity.” German criminal law distinguishes between intentional
    homicide without deliberation, and intentional homicide with
    deliberation. There are three grades of sin: 1. Sins of ignorance,
    like Paul’s persecuting; 2. sins of infirmity, like Peter’s
    denial; 3. sins of presumption, like David’s murder of Uriah. Sins
    of presumption were unpardonable under the Jewish law; they are
    not unpardonable under Christ.


D. Sin of incomplete, and sin of final, obduracy.

Here the guilt is measured, not by the objective sufficiency or
insufficiency of divine grace, but by the degree of unreceptiveness into
which sin has brought the soul. As the only sin unto death which is
described in Scripture is the sin against the Holy Spirit, we here
consider the nature of that sin.


    _Mat 12:31_—“_Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men;
    but the blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven_”;
    _32_—“_And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it
    shall be forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the Holy
    Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor
    in that which is to come_”; _Mark 3:29_—“_whosoever shall
    blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath never forgiveness, but is
    guilty of an eternal sin_”; _1 John 5:16, 17_—“_If any man see his
    brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and God will
    give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin
    into death: not concerning this do I say that he should make
    request. All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto
    death_”; _Heb. 10:26_—“_if we sin wilfully after that we have
    received the knowledge of the truth, then remaineth no more a
    sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful expectation of judgment,
    and a fierceness of fire which shall devour the adversaries._”

    Ritschl holds all sin that comes short of definitive rejection of
    Christ to be ignorance rather than sin, and to be the object of no
    condemning sentence. This is to make the sin against the Holy
    Spirit the only real sin. Conscience and Scripture alike
    contradict this view. There is much incipient hardening of the
    heart that precedes the sin of final obduracy. See Denney, Studies
    in Theology, 80. The composure of the criminal is not always a
    sign of innocence. S. S. Times, April 12, 1902:200—“Sensitiveness
    of conscience and of feeling, and responsiveness of countenance
    and bearing, are to be retained by purity of life and freedom from
    transgression. On the other hand composure of countenance and
    calmness under suspicion and accusation are likely to be a result
    of continuance in wrong doing, with consequent hardening of the
    whole moral nature.”

    Weismann, Heredity, 2:8—“As soon as any organ falls into disuse,
    it degenerates, and finally is lost altogether.... In parasites
    the organs of sense degenerate.” Marconi’s wireless telegraphy
    requires an attuned “receiver.” The “transmitter” sends out
    countless rays into space: only one capable of corresponding
    vibrations can understand them. The sinner may so destroy his
    receptivity, that the whole universe may be uttering God’s truth,
    yet he be unable to hear a word of it. The Outlook: “If a man
    should put out his eyes, he could not see—nothing could make him
    see. So if a man should by obstinate wickedness destroy his power
    to believe in God’s forgiveness, he would be in a hopeless state.
    Though God would still be gracious, the man could not see it, and
    so could not take God’s forgiveness to himself.”


The sin against the Holy Spirit is not to be regarded simply as an
isolated act, but also as the external symptom of a heart so radically and
finally set against God that no power which God can consistently use will
ever save it. This sin, therefore, can be only the culmination of a long
course of self-hardening and self-depraving. He who has committed it must
be either profoundly indifferent to his own condition, or actively and
bitterly hostile to God; so that anxiety or fear on account of one’s
condition is evidence that it has not been committed. The sin against the
Holy Spirit cannot be forgiven, simply because the soul that has committed
it has ceased to be receptive of divine influences, even when those
influences are exerted in the utmost strength which God has seen fit to
employ in his spiritual administration.


    The commission of this sin is marked by a loss of spiritual sight;
    the blind fish of the Mammoth Cave left light for darkness, and so
    in time lost their eyes. It is marked by a loss of religious
    sensibility; the sensitive-plant loses Its sensitiveness, in
    proportion to the frequency with which it is touched. It is marked
    by a loss of power to will the good; “the lava hardens after it
    has broken from the crater, and in that state cannot return to its
    source” (Van Oosterzee). The same writer also remarks (Dogmatics,
    2:438): “Herod Antipas, after earlier doubt and slavishness,
    reached such deadness as to be able to mock the Savior, at the
    mention of whose name he had not long before trembled.” Julius
    Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:425—“It is not that divine grace is
    absolutely refused to any one who in true penitence asks
    forgiveness of this sin; but he who commits it never fulfills the
    subjective conditions upon which forgiveness is possible, because
    the aggravation of sin to this ultimatum destroys in him all
    susceptibility of repentance. The way of return to God is closed
    against no one who does not close it against himself.” Drummond,
    Natural Law in the Spiritual World, 97-120, illustrates the
    downward progress of the sinner by the law of degeneration in the
    vegetable and animal world: pigeons, roses, strawberries, all tend
    to revert to the primitive and wild type. “_How shall we escape,
    if we neglect so great a salvation?_” (_Heb.2:3_).

    Shakespeare, Macbeth, 3:5—“You all know security Is mortals’
    chiefest enemy.” Moulton, Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist,
    90-124—“Richard III is the ideal villain. Villainy has become an
    end in itself. Richard is an artist in villainy. He lacks the
    emotions naturally attending crime. He regards villainy with the
    intellectual enthusiasm of the artist. His villainy is ideal in
    its success. There is a fascination of irresistibility in him. He
    is imperturbable in his crime. There is no effort, but rather
    humor, in it; a recklessness which suggests boundless resources;
    an inspiration which excludes calculation. Shakespeare relieves
    the representation from the charge of monstrosity by turning all
    this villainous history into the unconscious development of
    Nemesis.” See also A. H. Strong, Great Poets, 188-193. Robert
    Browning’s Guido, in The Ring and the Book, is an example of pure
    hatred of the good. Guido hates Pompilia for her goodness, and
    declares that, if he catches her in the next world, he will murder
    her there, as he murdered her here.

    Alexander VI, the father of Cæsar and Lucrezia Borgia, the pope of
    cruelty and lust, wore yet to the day of his death the look of
    unfailing joyousness and geniality, yes, of even retiring
    sensitiveness and modesty. No fear or reproach of conscience
    seemed to throw gloom over his life, as in the cases of Tiberius
    and Louis XI. He believed himself under the special protection of
    the Virgin, although he had her painted with the features of his
    paramour, Julia Farnese. He never scrupled at false witness,
    adultery, or murder. See Gregorovius, Lucrezia Borgia, 294, 295.
    Jeremy Taylor thus describes the progress of sin in the sinner:
    “First it startles him, then it becomes pleasing, then delightful,
    then frequent, then habitual, then confirmed; then the man is
    impenitent, then obstinate, then resolved never to repent, then
    damned.”

    There is a state of utter insensibility to emotions of love or
    fear, and man by his sin may reach that state. The act of
    blasphemy is only the expression of a hardened or a hateful heart.
    B. H. Payne: “The calcium flame will char the steel wire so that
    it is no longer affected by the magnet.... As the blazing cinders
    and black curling smoke which the volcano spews from its rumbling
    throat are the accumulation of months and years, so the sin
    against the Holy Spirit is not a thoughtless expression in a
    moment of passion or rage, but the giving vent to a state of heart
    and mind abounding in the accumulations of weeks and months of
    opposition to the gospel.”

    Dr. J. P. Thompson: “The unpardonable sin is the knowing, wilful,
    persistent, contemptuous, malignant spurning of divine truth and
    grace, as manifested to the soul by the convincing and
    illuminating power of the Holy Ghost.” Dorner says that “therefore
    this sin does not belong to Old Testament times, or to the mere
    revelation of law. It implies the full revelation of the grace in
    Christ, and the conscious rejection of it by a soul to which the
    Spirit has made it manifest (_Acts 17:30_—‘_The times of
    ignorance, therefore, God overlooked_’; _Rom. 3:25_—‘_the passing
    over of the sins done aforetime_’).” But was it not under the Old
    Testament that God said: “_My Spirit shall not strive with man
    forever_” (_Gen. 6:3_), and “_Ephraim is joined to idols; let him
    alone_” (_Hosea 4:17_)? The sin against the Holy Ghost is a sin
    against grace, but it does not appear to be limited to New
    Testament times.

    It is still true that the unpardonable sin is a sin committed
    against the Holy Spirit rather than against Christ: _Mat.
    12:32_—“_whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it
    shall be forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the Holy
    Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor
    in that which is to come._” Jesus warns the Jews against it,—he
    does not say they had already committed it. They would seem to
    have committed it when, after Pentecost, they added to their
    rejection of Christ the rejection of the Holy Spirit’s witness to
    Christ’s resurrection. See Schaff, Sin against the Holy Ghost;
    Lemme, Sünde wider den Heiligen Geist; Davis, in Bap. Rev.,
    1862:317-326; Nitzsch, Christian Doctrine, 283-289. On the general
    subject of kinds of sin and degrees of guilt, see Kahnis,
    Dogmatik, 3:284, 298.


III. Penalty.


1. Idea of penalty.


By penalty, we mean that pain or loss which is directly or indirectly
inflicted by the Lawgiver, in vindication of his justice outraged by the
violation of law.


    Turretin, 1:213—“Justice necessarily demands that all sin be
    punished, but it does not equally demand that it be punished in
    the very person that sinned, or in just such time and degree.” So
    far as this statement of the great Federal theologian is intended
    to explain our guilt in Adam and our justification in Christ, we
    can assent to his words; but we must add that the reason, in each
    case, why we suffer the penalty of Adam’s sin, and Christ suffers
    the penalty of our sins, is not to be found in any
    covenant-relation, but rather in the fact that the sinner is one
    with Adam, and Christ is one with the believer,—in other words,
    not covenant-unity, but life-unity. The word “penalty,” like
    “pain,” is derived from pœna, ποινή, and it implies the
    correlative notion of desert. As under the divine government there
    can be no constructive _guilt_, so there can be no _penalty_
    inflicted by legal fiction. Christ’s sufferings were penalty, not
    arbitrarily inflicted, nor yet borne to expiate personal guilt,
    but as the just due of the human nature with which he had united
    himself, and a part of which he was. Prof. Wm. Adams Brown: “Loss,
    not suffering, is the supreme penalty for Christians. The real
    penalty is separation from God. If such separation involves
    suffering, that is a sign of God’s mercy, for where there is life,
    there is hope. Suffering is always to be interpreted as an appeal
    from God to man.”


In this definition it is implied that:

A. The natural consequences of transgression, although they constitute a
part of the penalty of sin, do not exhaust that penalty. In all penalty
there is a personal element—the holy wrath of the Lawgiver,—which natural
consequences but partially express.


    We do not deny, but rather assert, that the natural consequences
    of transgression are a part of the penalty of sin. Sensual sins
    are punished, in the deterioration and corruption of the body;
    mental and spiritual sins, in the deterioration and corruption of
    the soul. _Prov. 5:22_—“_His own iniquities shall take the wicked,
    And he shall be holden with the cords of his sin_”—as the hunter
    is caught in the toils which he has devised for the wild beast.
    Sin is self-detecting and self-tormenting. But this is only half
    the truth. Those who would confine all penalty to the reaction of
    natural laws are in danger of forgetting that God is not simply
    immanent in the universe, but is also transcendent, and that “_to
    fall into the hands of the living God_” (_Heb. 10:31_) is to fall
    into the hands, not simply of the law, but also of the Lawgiver.
    Natural law is only the regular expression of God’s mind and will.
    We abhor a person who is foul in body and in speech. There is no
    penalty of sin more dreadful than its being an object of
    abhorrence to God. _Jer. 44:4_—“_Oh, do not this abominable thing
    that I hate!_” Add to this the law of continuity which makes sin
    reproduce itself, and the law of conscience which makes sin its
    own detecter, judge, and tormentor, and we have sufficient
    evidence of God’s wrath against it, apart from any external
    inflictions. The divine feeling toward sin is seen in Jesus’
    scourging the traffickers in the temple, his denunciation of the
    Pharisees, his weeping over Jerusalem, his agony in Gethsemane.
    Imagine the feeling of a father toward his daughter’s betrayer,
    and God’s feeling toward sin may be faintly understood.

    The deed returns to the doer, and character determines
    destiny—this law is a revelation of the righteousness of God.
    Penalty will vindicate the divine character in the long run,
    though not always in time. This is recognized in all religions.
    Buddhist priest in Japan: “The evil doer weaves a web around
    himself, as the silkworm weaves its cocoon.” Socrates made Circe’s
    turning of men into swine a mere parable of the self-brutalizing
    influence of sin. In Dante’s Inferno, the punishments are all of
    them the sins themselves; hence men are in hell before they die.
    Hegel: “Penalty is the other half of crime.” R. W. Emerson:
    “Punishment not follows, but accompanies, crime.” Sagebeer, The
    Bible in Court, 59—“Corruption is destruction, and the sinner is a
    suicide; penalty corresponds with transgression and is the outcome
    of it; sin is death in the making; death is sin in the final
    infliction.” J. B. Thomas, Baptist Congress, 1901:110—“What
    matters it whether I wait by night for the poacher and
    deliberately shoot him, or whether I set the pistol so that he
    shall be shot by it when he commits the depredation?” Tennyson,
    Sea Dreams: “His gain is loss; for he that wrongs his friend
    Wrongs himself more, and ever bears about A silent court of
    justice in his breast, Himself the judge and jury, and himself The
    prisoner at the bar, ever condemn’d: And that drags down his life:
    then comes what comes Hereafter.”


B. The object of penalty is not the reformation of the offender or the
ensuring of social or governmental safety. These ends may be incidentally
secured through its infliction, but the great end of penalty is the
vindication of the character of the Lawgiver. Penalty is essentially a
necessary reaction of the divine holiness against sin. Inasmuch, however,
as wrong views of the object of penalty have so important a bearing upon
our future studies of doctrine, we make fuller mention of the two
erroneous theories which have greatest currency.

(_a_) Penalty is not essentially reformatory.—By this we mean that the
reformation of the offender is not its primary design,—as penalty, it is
not intended to reform. Penalty, in itself, proceeds not from the love and
mercy of the Lawgiver, but from his justice. Whatever reforming influences
may in any given instance be connected with it are not parts of the
penalty, but are mitigations of it, and they are added not in justice but
in grace. If reformation follows the infliction of penalty, it is not the
effect of the penalty, but the effect of certain benevolent agencies which
have been provided to turn into a means of good what naturally would be to
the offender only a source of harm.

That the object of penalty is not reformation appears from Scripture,
where punishment is often referred to God’s justice, but never to God’s
love; from the intrinsic ill-desert of sin, to which penalty is
correlative; from the fact that punishment must be vindicative, in order
to be disciplinary, and just, in order to be reformatory; from the fact
that upon this theory punishment would not be just when the sinner was
already reformed or could not be reformed, so that the greater the sin the
less the punishment must be.


    Punishment is essentially different from chastisement. The latter
    proceeds from love (_Jer. 10:24_—“_correct me, but in measure; not
    in thine anger_”; _Heb. 12:6_—“_Whom the Lord loveth he
    chasteneth_”). Punishment proceeds not from love but from
    justice—see _Ez. 28:22_—“_I shall have executed judgments in her,
    and shall be sanctified in her_”; _36:21, 22_—in judgment, “_I do
    not this for your sake, but for my holy name_”; _Heb. 12:29_—“_our
    God is a consuming fire_”; _Rev. 15:1, 4_—“_wrath of God ... thou
    only art holy ... thy righteous acts have been made manifest_”;
    _16:5_—“_Righteous art thou, ... thou Holy One, because thou didst
    thus judge_”; _19:2_—“_true and righteous are his judgments; for
    he hath judged the great harlot._” So untrue is the saying of Sir
    Thomas More’s Utopia: “The end of all punishment is the
    destruction of vice, and the saving of men.” Luther: “God has two
    rods: one of mercy and goodness; another of anger and fury.”
    Chastisement is the former; penalty the latter.

    If the reform-theory of penalty is correct, then to punish crime,
    without asking about reformation, makes the state the
    transgressor; its punishments should be proportioned, not to the
    greatness of the crime, but to the sinner’s state; the
    death-penalty should be abolished, upon the ground that it will
    preclude all hope of reformation. But the same theory would
    abolish any final judgment, or eternal punishment; for, when the
    soul becomes so wicked that there is no more hope of reform, there
    is no longer any justice in punishing it. The greater the sin, the
    less the punishment; and Satan, the greatest sinner, should have
    no punishment at all.

    Modern denunciations of capital punishment are often based upon
    wrong conceptions of the object of penalty. Opposition to the
    doctrine of future punishment would give way, if the opposers
    realized what penalty is ordained to secure. Harris, God the
    Creator, 2:447, 451—“Punishment is not primarily reformatory; it
    educates conscience and vindicates the authority of law.” R. W.
    Dale: “It is not necessary to prove that hanging is beneficial to
    the person hanged. The theory that society has no right to send a
    man to jail, to feed him on bread and water, to make him pick hemp
    or work a treadmill, except to reform him, is utterly rotten. He
    must deserve to be punished, or else the law has no right to
    punish him.” A House of Refuge or a State Industrial School is
    primarily a penal institution, for it deprives persons of their
    liberty and compels them against their will to labor. This loss
    and deprivation on their part cannot be justified except upon the
    ground that it is the desert of their wrong doing. Whatever
    gracious and philanthropic influences may accompany this
    confinement and compulsion, they cannot of themselves explain the
    penal element in the institution. If they could, a _habeas corpus_
    decree could be sought, and obtained, from any competent court.

    God’s treatment of men in this world also combines the elements of
    penalty and of chastisement. Suffering is first of all deserved,
    and this justifies its infliction. But it is at the beginning
    accompanied with all manner of alleviating influences which tend
    to draw men back to God. As these gracious influences are
    resisted, the punitive element becomes preponderating, and penalty
    reflects God’s holiness rather than his love. Moberly, Atonement
    and Personality, 1-25—“Pain is not the immediate object of
    punishment. It must be a means to an end, a moral end, namely,
    penitence. But where the depraved man becomes a human tiger, there
    punishment must reach its culmination. There is a punishment which
    is not restorative. According to the spirit in which punishment is
    received, it may be internal or external. All punishment begins as
    discipline. It tends to repentance. Its triumph would be the
    triumph within. It becomes retributive only as the sinner refuses
    to repent. Punishment is only the development of sin. The ideal
    penitent condemns himself, identifies himself with righteousness
    by accepting penalty. In proportion as penalty fails in its
    purpose to produce penitence, it acquires more and more a
    retributive character, whose climax is not Calvary but Hell.”

    Alexander, Moral Order and Progress, 327-333 (quoted in Ritchie,
    Darwin, and Hegel, 67)—“Punishment has three characters: It is
    retributive, in so far as it falls under the general law that
    resistance to the dominant type recoils on the guilty or resistant
    creature; it is preventive, in so far as, being a statutory
    enactment, it aims at securing the maintenance of the law
    irrespective of the individual’s character. But this latter
    characteristic is secondary, and the former is comprehended in the
    third idea, that of reformation, which is the superior form in
    which retribution appears when the type is a mental ideal and is
    affected by conscious persons.” Hyslop on Freedom, Responsibility,
    and Punishment, in Mind, April, 1894:167-189—“In the Elmira
    Reformatory, out of 2295 persons paroled between 1876 and 1889,
    1907 or 83 per cent. represent a probably complete reformation.
    Determinists say that this class of persons cannot do otherwise.
    Something is wrong with their theory. We conclude that 1. Causal
    responsibility justifies preventive punishment; 2. Potential moral
    responsibility justifies corrective punishment; 3. Actual moral
    responsibility justifies retributive punishment.” Here we need
    only to point out the incorrect use of the word “punishment,”
    which belongs only to the last class. In the two former cases the
    word “chastisement” should have been used. See Julius Müller,
    Lehre von der Sünde, 1:334; Thornton, Old Fashioned Ethics, 70-73;
    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:238, 239 (Syst. Doct., 3:134,135);
    Robertson’s Sermons, 4th Series, no. 18 (Harper’s ed., 752); see
    also this Compendium, references on Holiness, A. (_d_), page 273.


(_b_) Penalty is not essentially deterrent and preventive.—By this we mean
that its primary design is not to protect society, by deterring men from
the commission of like offences. We grant that this end is often secured
in connection with punishment, both in family and civil government and
under the government of God. But we claim that this is a merely incidental
result, which God’s wisdom and goodness have connected with the infliction
of penalty,—it cannot be the reason and ground for penalty itself. Some of
the objections to the preceding theory apply also to this. But in addition
to what has been said, we urge:

Penalty cannot be primarily designed to secure social and governmental
safety, for the reason that it is never right to punish the individual
simply for the good of society. No punishment, moreover, will or can do
good to others that is not just and right in itself. Punishment does good,
only when the person punished deserves punishment; and that _desert_ of
punishment, and not the good effects that will follow it, must be the
ground and reason why it is inflicted. The contrary theory would imply
that the criminal might go free but for the effect of his punishment on
others, and that man might rightly commit crime if only he were willing to
bear the penalty.


    Kant, Praktische Vernunft, 151 (ed. Rosenkranz)—“The notion of
    ill-desert and punishableness is necessarily implied in the idea
    of voluntary transgression; and the idea of punishment excludes
    that of happiness in all its forms. For though he who inflicts
    punishment may, it is true, also have a benevolent purpose to
    produce by the punishment some good effect upon the criminal, yet
    the punishment must be justified first of all as pure and simple
    requital and retribution.... In every punishment as such, justice
    is the very first thing and constitutes the essence of it. A
    benevolent purpose, it is true, may be conjoined with punishment;
    but the criminal cannot claim this as his due, and he has no right
    to reckon on it.” These utterances of Kant apply to the deterrent
    theory as well as to the reformatory theory of penalty. The
    element of desert or retribution is the basis of the other
    elements in punishment. See James Seth, Ethical Principles,
    333-338; Shedd, Dogm. Theology, 2:717; Hodge, Essays, 133.

    A certain English judge, in sentencing a criminal, said that he
    punished him, not for stealing sheep, but that sheep might not be
    stolen. But it is the greatest injustice to punish a man for the
    mere sake of example. Society cannot be benefited by such
    injustice. The theory can give no reason why one should be
    punished rather than another, nor why a second offence should be
    punished more heavily than the first. On this theory, moreover, if
    there were but one creature in the universe, and none existed
    beside himself to be affected by his suffering, he could not
    justly be punished, however great might be his sin. The only
    principle that can explain punishment is the principle of
    _desert_. See Martineau, Types of Ethical Theory, 2:348.

    “Crime is most prevented by the conviction that crime deserves
    punishment; the greatest deterrent agency is conscience.” So in
    the government of God “there is no hint that future punishment
    works good to the lost or to the universe. The integrity of the
    redeemed is not to be maintained by subjecting the lost to a
    punishment they do not deserve. The wrong merits punishment, and
    God is bound to punish it, whether good comes of it or not. Sin is
    intrinsically ill-deserving. Impurity must be banished from God.
    God must vindicate himself, or cease to be holy” (see art. on the
    Philosophy of Punishment, by F. L. Patton, in Brit. and For.
    Evang. Rev., Jan. 1878:126-139).

    Bowne, Principles of Ethics, 186, 274—Those who maintain
    punishment to be essentially deterrent and preventive “ignore the
    metaphysics of responsibility and treat the problem ‘positively
    and objectively’ on the basis of physiology, sociology, etc., and
    in the interests of public safety. The question of guilt or
    innocence is as irrelevant as the question concerning the guilt or
    innocence of wasps and hornets. An ancient holder of this view set
    forth the opinion that ‘_it was expedient that one man should die
    for the people_’ (_John 18:14_), and so Jesus was put to death....
    A mob in eastern Europe might be persuaded that a Jew had
    slaughtered a Christian child as a sacrifice. The authorities
    might be perfectly sure of the man’s innocence, and yet proceed to
    punish him because of the mob’s clamor, and the danger of an
    outbreak.” Men high up in the French government thought it was
    better that Dreyfus should suffer for the sake of France, than
    that a scandal affecting the honor of the French army should be
    made public. In perfect consistency with this principle, McKim,
    Heredity and Human Progress, 192, advocates infliction of painless
    death upon idiots, imbeciles, epileptics, habitual drunkards,
    insane criminals, murderers, nocturnal house breakers, and all
    dangerous and incorrigible persons. He would change the place of
    slaughter from our streets and homes to our penal institutions; in
    other words, he would abandon punishment, but protect society.

    Failure to recognize holiness as the fundamental attribute of God,
    and the affirmation of that holiness as conditioning the exercise
    of love, vitiates the discussion of penalty by A. H. Bradford, Age
    of Faith, 243-250—“What is penal suffering designed to accomplish?
    Is it to manifest the holiness of God? Is it to express the
    sanctity of the moral law? Is it simply a natural consequence?
    Does it manifest the divine Fatherhood? God does not inflict
    penalty simply to satisfy himself or to manifest his holiness, any
    more than an earthly father inflicts suffering on his child to
    show his wrath against the wrongdoer or to manifest his own
    goodness. The idea of punishment is essentially barbaric and
    foreign to all that is known of the Deity. Penalty that is not
    reformatory or protective is barbarism. In the home, punishment is
    always discipline. Its object is the welfare of the child and the
    family. Punishment as an expression of wrath or enmity, with no
    remedial purpose beyond, is a relic of barbarism. It carries with
    it the content of vengeance. It is the expression of anger, of
    passion, or at best of cold justice. Penal suffering is
    undoubtedly the divine holiness expressing its hatred of sin. But,
    if it stops with such expression, it is not holiness, but
    selfishness. If on the other hand that expression of holiness is
    used or permitted in order that the sinner may be made to hate his
    sin, then it is no more punishment, but chastisement. On any other
    hypothesis, penal suffering has no justification except the
    arbitrary will of the Almighty, and such a hypothesis is an
    impeachment both of his justice and his love.” This view seems to
    us to ignore the necessary reaction of divine holiness against
    sin; to make holiness a mere form of love; a means to an end and
    that end utilitarian; and so to deny to holiness any independent,
    or even real, existence in the divine nature.

    The wrath of God is calm and judicial, devoid of all passion or
    caprice, but it is the expression of eternal and unchangeable
    righteousness. It is vindicative but not vindictive. Without it
    there could be no government, and God would not be God. F. W.
    Robertson: “Does not the element of vengeance exist in all
    punishment, and does not the feeling exist, not as a sinful, but
    as an essential, part of human nature? If so, there must be wrath
    in God.” Lord Bacon: “Revenge is a wild sort of justice.” Stephen:
    “Criminal law provides legitimate satisfaction of the passions of
    revenge.” Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 1:287. _Per contra_, see Bib.
    Sac., Apr. 1881:286-302; H. B. Smith, System of Theology, 46, 47;
    Chitty’s ed. of Blackstone’s Commentaries, 4:7; Wharton, Criminal
    Law, vol. 1, bk. 1, chap. 1.


2. The actual penalty of sin.


The one word in Scripture which designates the total penalty of sin is
“death.” Death, however, is twofold:

A. Physical death,—or the separation of the soul from the body, including
all those temporal evils and sufferings which result from disturbance of
the original harmony between body and soul, and which are the working of
death in us. That physical death is a part of the penalty of sin, appears:

(_a_) From Scripture.

This is the most obvious import of the threatening in Gen. 2:17—“thou
shalt surely die”; _cf._ 3:19—“unto dust shalt thou return.” Allusions to
this threat in the O. T. confirm this interpretation: Num. 16:29—“visited
after the visitation of all men,” where פקד = judicial visitation, or
punishment; 27:3 (LXX.—δι᾽ ἁμαρτίαν αὐτοῦ). The prayer of Moses in Ps. 90:
7-9, 11, and the prayer of Hezekiah in Is. 38:17, 18, recognize plainly
the penal nature of death. The same doctrine is taught in the N. T., as
for example, John 8:44; Rom. 5:12, 14, 16, 17, where the judicial
phraseology is to be noted (_cf._ 1:32); see 6:23 also. In 1 Pet. 4:6,
physical death is spoken of as God’s judgment against sin. In 1 Cor.
15:21, 22, the bodily resurrection of all believers, in Christ, is
contrasted with the bodily death of all men, in Adam. Rom. 4:24, 25; 6:9,
10; 8:3, 10, 11; Gal. 3:13, show that Christ submitted to physical death
as the penalty of sin, and by his resurrection from the grave gave proof
that the penalty of sin was exhausted and that humanity in him was
justified. “As the resurrection of the body is a part of the redemption,
so the death of the body is a part of the penalty.”


    _Ps. 90:7, 9_—“_we are consumed in thine anger ... all our days
    are passed away in thy wrath_”; _Is. 38:17, 18_—“_thou hast in
    love to my soul delivered it from the pit ... thou hast cast all
    my sins behind thy back. For Sheol cannot praise thee_”; _John
    8:44_—“_He_ [Satan] _was a murderer from the beginning_”;
    _11:33_—Jesus “_groaned in the spirit_” = was moved with
    indignation at what sin had wrought; _Rom. 5:12, 14, 16,
    17_—“_death through sin ... death passed unto all men, for that
    all sinned ... death reigned ... even over them that had not
    sinned after the likeness of Adam’s transgression ... the judgment
    came of one_ [trespass] _unto condemnation ... by the trespass of
    the one, death reigned through the one_”; _cf._ the legal
    phraseology in _1:32_—“_who, knowing the ordinance of God, that
    they that practise such things are worthy of death._” _Rom.
    6:23_—“_the wages of sin is death_” = death is sin’s just due. _1
    Pet. 4:6_—“_that they might be judged indeed according to men in
    the flesh_” = that they might suffer physical death, which to men
    in general is the penalty of sin. _1 Cor. 15:21, 22_—“_as in Adam
    all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive_”; _Rom. 4:24,
    25_—“_raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered up
    for our trespasses, and was raised for our justification_”; _6:9,
    10_—“_Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death no
    more hath dominion over him. For the death that he died, he died
    unto sin once: but the life that he liveth, he liveth unto God_”;
    _8:3, 10, 11_—“_God, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
    flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh ... the body is dead
    because of sin_” (= a corpse, on account of sin—Meyer; so Julius
    Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:291) ... “_he that raised up Christ Jesus
    from the dead shall give life also to your mortal bodies_”; _Gal.
    3:13_—“_Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having
    become a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that
    hangeth on a tree._”

    On the relation between death and sin, see Griffith-Jones, Ascent
    through Christ, 169-185—“They are not antagonistic, but
    complementary to each other—the one spiritual and the other
    biological. The natural fact is fitted to a moral use.” Savage,
    Life after Death, 33—“Men did not at first believe in natural
    death. If a man died, it was because some one had killed him. No
    ethical reason was desired or needed. At last however they sought
    some moral explanation, and came to look upon death as a
    punishment for human sin.” If this has been the course of human
    evolution, we should conclude that the later belief represents the
    truth rather than the earlier. Scripture certainly affirms the
    doctrine that death itself, and not the mere accompaniments of
    death, is the consequence and penalty of sin. For this reason we
    cannot accept the very attractive and plausible theory which we
    have now to mention:

    Newman Smyth, Place of Death in Evolution, holds that as the bow
    in the cloud was appointed for a moral use, so death, which before
    had been simply the natural law of the creation, was on occasion
    of man’s sin appointed for a moral use. It is this _acquired_
    moral character of death with which Biblical Genesis has to do.
    Death becomes a curse, by being a fear and a torment. Animals have
    not this fear. But in man death stirs up conscience. Redemption
    takes away the fear, and death drops back into its natural aspect,
    or even becomes a gateway to life. Death is a curse to no animal
    but man. The retributive element to death is the effect of sin.
    When man has become perfected, death will cease to be of use, and
    will, as the last enemy, be destroyed. Death here is Nature’s
    method of securing always fresh, young, thrifty life, and the
    greatest possible exuberance and joy of it. It is God’s way of
    securing the greatest possible number and variety of immortal
    beings. There are many schoolrooms for eternity in God’s universe,
    and a ceaseless succession of scholars through them. There are
    many folds, but one flock. The reaper Death keeps making room.
    Four or five generations are as many as we can individually love,
    and get moral stimulus from.

    Methuselahs too many would hold back the new generations. Bagehot
    says that civilization needs first to form a cake of custom, and
    secondly to break it up. Death, says Martineau, Study, 1:372-374,
    is the provision for taking us abroad, before we have stayed too
    long at home to lose our receptivity. Death is the liberator of
    souls. The death of successive generations gives variety to
    heaven. Death perfects love, reveals it to itself, unites as life
    could not. As for Christ, so for us, it is expedient that we
    should go away.

    While we welcome this reasoning as showing how God has overruled
    evil for good, we regard the explanation as unscriptural and
    unsatisfactory, for the reason that it takes no account of the
    ethics of natural law. The law of death is an expression of the
    nature of God, and specially of his holy wrath against sin. Other
    methods of propagating the race and reinforcing its life could
    have been adopted than that which involves pain and suffering and
    death. These do not exist in the future life,—they would not exist
    here, if it were not for the fact of sin. Dr. Smyth shows how the
    evil of death has been overruled,—he has not shown the reason for
    the original existence of the evil. The Scriptures explain this as
    the penalty and stigma which God has attached to sin: _Psalm 90:7,
    8_ makes this plain: “_For we are consumed in thine anger, And in
    thy wrath are we troubled. Thou hast set our iniquities before
    thee, Our secret sins in the light of thy countenance._” The whole
    psalm has for its theme: Death as the wages of sin. And this is
    the teaching of Paul, in _Rom. 5:12_—“_through one man sin entered
    into the world, and death through sin._”


(_b_) From reason.

The universal prevalence of suffering and death among rational creatures
cannot be reconciled with the divine justice, except upon the supposition
that it is a judicial infliction on account of a common sinfulness of
nature belonging even to those who have not reached moral consciousness.

The objection that death existed in the animal creation before the Fall
may be answered by saying that, but for the fact of man’s sin, it would
not have existed. We may believe that God arranged even the geologic
history to correspond with the foreseen fact of human apostasy (_cf._ Rom.
8:20-23—where the creation is said to have been made subject to vanity by
reason of man’s sin).


    On _Rom. 8:20-23_—“_the creation was subjected to vanity, not of
    its own will_”—see Meyer’s Com., and Bap. Quar., 1:143; also _Gen.
    3:17-19_—“_cursed is the ground for thy sake._” See also note on
    the Relation of Creation to the Holiness and Benevolence of God,
    and references, pages 402, 403. As the vertebral structure of the
    first fish was an “anticipative consequence” of man, so the
    suffering and death of fish pursued and devoured by other fish
    were an “anticipative consequence” of man’s foreseen war with God
    and with himself.


The translation of Enoch and Elijah, and of the saints that remain at
Christ’s second coming, seems intended to teach us that death is not a
necessary law of organized being, and to show what would have happened to
Adam if he had been obedient. He was created a “natural,” “earthly” body,
but might have attained a higher being, the “spiritual,” “heavenly” body,
without the intervention of death. Sin, however, has turned the normal
condition of things into the rare exception (_cf._ 1 Cor. 15:42-50). Since
Christ endured death as the penalty of sin, death to the Christian becomes
the gateway through which he enters into full communion with his Lord (see
references below).


    Through physical death all Christians will pass, except those few
    who like Enoch and Elijah were translated, and those many who
    shall be alive at Christ’s second coming. Enoch and Elijah were
    possible types of those surviving saints. On _1 Cor. 15:51_—“_We
    shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,_” see Edward
    Irving, Works, 5:135. The apocryphal Assumption of Moses, verse 9,
    tells us that Joshua, being carried in vision to the spot at the
    moment of Moses’ decease, beheld a double Moses, one dropped into
    the grave as belonging to the earth, the other mingling with the
    angels. The belief in Moses’ immortality was not conditioned upon
    any resuscitation of the earthly corpse; see Martineau, Seat of
    Authority, 364. When Paul was caught up to the third heaven, it
    may have been a temporary translation of the disembodied spirit.
    Set free for a brief space from the prison house which confined
    it, it may have passed within the veil and have seen and heard
    what mortal tongue could not describe; see Luckock, Intermediate
    State, 4. So Lazarus probably could not tell what he saw: “He told
    it not; or something sealed The lips of that Evangelist”; see
    Tennyson, In Memoriam, xxxi.

    Nicoll, Life of Christ: “We have every one of us to face the last
    enemy, death. Ever since the world began, all who have entered it
    sooner or later have had this struggle, and the battle has always
    ended in one way. Two indeed escaped, but they did not escape by
    meeting and mastering their foe; they escaped by being taken away
    from the battle.” But this physical death, for the Christian, has
    been turned by Christ into a blessing. A pardoned prisoner may be
    still kept in prison, as the best possible benefit to an exhausted
    body; so the external fact of physical death may remain, although
    it has ceased to be penalty. Macaulay: “The aged prisoner’s chains
    are needed to support him; the darkness that has weakened his
    sight is necessary to preserve it.” So spiritual death is not
    wholly removed from the Christian; a part of it, namely,
    depravity, still remains; yet it has ceased to be punishment,—it
    is only chastisement. When the finger unties the ligature that
    bound it, the body which previously had only chastised begins to
    cure the trouble. There is still pain, but the pain is no longer
    punitive,—it is now remedial. In the midst of the whipping, when
    the boy repents, his punishment is changed to chastisement.

    _John 14:3_—“_And if I go and prepare a place for you, I come
    again, and will receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye
    may be also_”; _1 Cor. 15:54-57_—“_Death is swallowed up in
    victory ... O death, where is thy sting? The sting of death is
    sin; and the power of sin is the law_”—_i. e._, the law’s
    condemnation, its penal infliction; _2 Cor. 5:1-9_—“_For we know
    that if the earthly house of our tabernacle be dissolved we have a
    building from God ... we are of good courage, I say, and are
    willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be at home with
    the Lord_”; _Phil. 1:21, 23_—“_to die is gain ... having the
    desire to depart and be with Christ; for it is very far better._”
    In Christ and his bearing the penalty of sin, the Christian has
    broken through the circle of natural race-connection, and is saved
    from corporate evil so far as it is punishment. The Christian may
    be chastised, but he is never punished: _Rom. 8:1_—“_There is
    therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus._”
    At the house of Jairus Jesus said: “_Why make ye a tumult, and
    weep?_” and having reproved the doleful clamorists, “_he put them
    all forth_” (_Mark 5:39, 40_). The wakes and requiems and masses
    and vigils of the churches of Rome and of Russia are all heathen
    relics, entirely foreign to Christianity.

    Palmer, Theological Definition, 57—“Death feared and fought
    against is terrible; but a welcome to death is the death of death
    and the way to life.” The idea that punishment yet remains for the
    Christian is “the bridge to the papal doctrine of purgatorial
    fires.” Browning’s words, in The Ring and the Book, 2:60—“In His
    face is light, but in his shadow healing too,” are applicable to
    God’s fatherly chastenings, but not to his penal retributions. On
    _Acts 7:60_—“_he fell asleep_”—Arnot remarks: “When death becomes
    the property of the believer, it receives a new name, and is
    called sleep.” Another has said: “Christ did not send, but came
    himself to save; The ransom-price he did not lend, but gave;
    Christ _died_, the shepherd for the sheep; We only _fall asleep_.”
    _Per contra_, see Kreibig, Versöhnungslehre, 375, and
    Hengstenberg, Ev. K.-Z., 1864:1065—“All suffering is punishment.”


B. Spiritual death,—or the separation of the soul from God, including all
that pain of conscience, loss of peace, and sorrow of spirit, which result
from disturbance of the normal relation between the soul and God.

(_a_) Although physical death is a part of the penalty of sin, it is by no
means the chief part. The term “death” is frequently used in Scripture in
a moral and spiritual sense, as denoting the absence of that which
constitutes the true life of the soul, namely, the presence and favor of
God.


    _Mat. 8:22_—“_Follow me; and leave the_ [spiritually] _dead to
    bury their own_ [physically] _dead_”; _Luke 15:32_—“_this thy
    brother was dead, and is alive again_”; _John 5:24_—“_He that
    heareth my word, and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal
    life, and cometh not into judgment, but hath passed out of death
    into life_”; _8:51_—“_If a man keep my word, he shall never see
    death_”; _Rom. 8:13_—“_if ye live after the flesh, ye must die;
    but if by the Spirit ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye
    shall live_”; _Eph. 2:1_—“_when ye were dead through your
    trespasses and sins_”; _5:14_—“_Awake, thou that sleepest, and
    arise from the dead_”; _1 Tim. 5:6_—“_she that giveth herself to
    pleasure is dead while __ she liveth_”; _James 5:20_—“_he who
    converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul
    from death_”; _1 John 3:14_—“_He that loveth not abideth in
    death_”; _Rev. 3:1_—“_thou hast a name that thou livest, and thou
    art dead._”


(_b_) It cannot be doubted that the penalty denounced in the garden and
fallen upon the race is primarily and mainly that death of the soul which
consists in its separation from God. In this sense only, death was fully
visited upon Adam in the day on which he ate the forbidden fruit (Gen.
2:17). In this sense only, death is escaped by the Christian (John 11:26).
For this reason, in the parallel between Adam and Christ (Rom. 5:12-21),
the apostle passes from the thought of mere physical death in the early
part of the passage to that of both physical and spiritual death at its
close (verse 21—“as sin reigned in death, even so might grace reign
through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord”—where “eternal life” is more than endless physical existence, and
“death” is more than death of the body).


    _Gen. 2:17_—“_in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt
    surely die_”; _John 11:26_—“_whosoever liveth and believeth on me
    shall never die_”; _Rom. 5:14, 18, 21_—“_justification of life ...
    eternal life_”; contrast these with “_death reigned ... sin
    reigned in death._”


(_c_) Eternal death may be regarded as the culmination and completion of
spiritual death, and as essentially consisting in the correspondence of
the outward condition with the inward state of the evil soul (Acts 1:25).
It would seem to be inaugurated by some peculiar repellent energy of the
divine holiness (Mat. 25:41; 2 Thess. 1:9), and to involve positive
retribution visited by a personal God upon both the body and the soul of
the evil-doer (Mat. 10:28; Heb. 10:31; Rev. 14:11).


    _Acts 1:25_—“_Judas fell away, that he might go to his own
    place_”; _Mat. 25:41_—“_Depart from me, ye cursed, into the
    eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels_”; _2
    Thess. 1:9_—“_who shall suffer punishment, even eternal
    destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his
    might_”; _Mat. 10:28_—“_fear him who is able to destroy both soul
    and body in hell_”; _Heb. 10:31_—“_It is a fearful thing to fall
    into the hands of the living God_”; _Rev. 14:11_—“_the smoke of
    their torment goeth up for ever and ever._”

    Kurtz, Religionslehre, 67—“So long as God is holy, he must
    maintain the order of the world, and where this is destroyed,
    restore it. This however can happen in no other way than this: the
    injury by which the sinner has destroyed the order of the world
    falls back upon himself,—and this is penalty. Sin is the negation
    of the law. Penalty is the negation of that negation, that is, the
    reëstablishment of the law. Sin is a thrust of the sinner against
    the law. Penalty is the adverse thrust of the elastic because
    living law, which encounters the sinner.”

    Plato, Gorgias, 472 E; 509 B; 511 A; 515 B—“Impunity is a more
    dreadful curse than any punishment, and nothing so good can befall
    the criminal as his retribution, the failure of which would make a
    double disorder in the universe. The offender himself may spend
    his arts in devices of escape and think himself happy if he is not
    found out. But all this plotting is but part of the delusion of
    his sin; and when he comes to himself and sees his transgression
    as it really is, he will yield himself up the prisoner of eternal
    justice and know that it is good for him to be afflicted, and so
    for the first time to be set at one with truth.”

    On the general subject of the penalty of sin, see Julius Müller,
    Doct. Sin, 1:245 _sq._; 2:286-397; Baird, Elohim Revealed,
    263-279; Bushnell, Nature and the Supernatural, 194-219; Krabbe,
    Lehre von der Sünde und vom Tode; Weisse, in Studien und Kritiken,
    1836:371; S. R. Mason, Truth Unfolded, 369-384; Bartlett, in New
    Englander, Oct. 1871:677, 678.



Section VII.—The Salvation Of Infants.


The views which have been presented with regard to inborn depravity and
the reaction of divine holiness against it suggest the question whether
infants dying before arriving at moral consciousness are saved, and if so,
in what way. To this question we reply as follows:

(_a_) Infants are in a state of sin, need to be regenerated, and can be
saved only through Christ.


    _Job 14:4_—“_Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not
    one_”; _Ps. 51:5_—“_Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity; And
    in sin did my mother conceive me_”; _John 3:6_—“_That which is
    born of the flesh is flesh_”; _Rom. 5:14_—“_Nevertheless death
    reigned from Adam until Moses, even over them that had not sinned
    after the likeness of Adam’s transgression_”; _Eph. 2:3_—“_by
    nature children of wrath_”; _1 Cor. 7:14_—“_else were your
    children unclean_”—clearly intimate the naturally impure state of
    infants; and _Mat. 19:14_—“_Suffer the little children, and forbid
    them not, to come unto me_”—is not only consistent with this
    doctrine, but strongly confirms it; for the meaning is: “_forbid
    them not to come unto me_”—whom they need as a Savior. “Coming to
    Christ” is always the coming of a sinner, to him who is the
    sacrifice for sin; _cf._ _Mat. 11:28_—“_Come unto me, all ye that
    labor._”


(_b_) Yet as compared with those who have personally transgressed, they
are recognized as possessed of a relative innocence, and of a
submissiveness and trustfulness, which may serve to illustrate the graces
of Christian character.


    _Deut 1:39_—“_your little ones ... and your children, that this
    day have no knowledge of good or evil_”; _Jonah 4:11_—“_sixscore
    thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and
    their left hand_”; _Rom. 9:11_—“_for the children being not yet
    born, neither having done anything good or bad_”; _Mat. 18:3,
    4_—“_Except ye turn, and become as little children, ye shall in no
    wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall
    humble himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in
    the kingdom of heaven._” See Julius Müller, Doct. Sin, 2:265.
    Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:50—“Unpretentious receptivity, ... not
    the reception of the kingdom of God at a childlike _age_, but in a
    childlike _character_ ... is the condition of entering; ... not
    blamelessness, but receptivity itself, on the part of those who do
    not regard themselves as too good or too bad for the offered gift,
    but receive it with hearty desire. Children have this
    unpretentious receptivity for the kingdom of God which is
    characteristic of them generally, since they have not yet other
    possessions on which they pride themselves.”


(_c_) For this reason, they are the objects of special divine compassion
and care, and through the grace of Christ are certain of salvation.


    _Mat. 18:5, 6, 10, 14_—“_whoso shall receive one such little child
    in my name receiveth me: but whoso shall cause one of these little
    ones that believe on me to stumble, it is profitable for him that
    a great millstone should be hanged about his neck, and that he
    should be sunk in the depth of the sea.... See that ye despise not
    one of these little ones: for I say unto you, that in heaven their
    angels do always behold the face of my Father who is in heaven....
    Even so it is not the will of your Father who is in heaven, that
    one of these little ones should perish_”; _19:14_—“_Suffer the
    little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for to such
    belongeth the kingdom of heaven_”—not God’s kingdom of nature, but
    his kingdom of grace, the kingdom of saved sinners. “Such” means,
    not children as children, but childlike believers. Meyer, on _Mat.
    19:14_, refers the passage to spiritual infants only: “Not little
    children,” he says, “but men of a childlike disposition.” Geikie:
    “Let the little children come unto me, and do not forbid them, for
    the kingdom of heaven is given only to such as have a childlike
    spirit and nature like theirs.” The Savior’s words do not intimate
    that little children are either (1) sinless creatures, or (2)
    subjects for baptism; but only that their (1) humble
    teachableness, (2) intense eagerness, and (3) artless trust,
    illustrate the traits necessary for admission into the divine
    kingdom. On the passages in Matthew, see Commentaries of Bengel,
    De Wette, Lange; also Neander, Planting and Training (ed.
    Robinson), 407.

    We therefore substantially agree with Dr. A. C. Kendrick, in his
    article in the Sunday School Times: “To infants and children, as
    such, the language cannot apply. It must be taken figuratively,
    and must refer to those qualities in childhood, its dependence,
    its trustfulness, its tender affection, its loving obedience,
    which are typical of the essential Christian graces.... If asked
    after the _logic_ of our Savior’s words—how he could assign, as a
    reason for allowing _literal_ little children to be brought to
    him, that _spiritual_ little children have a claim to the kingdom
    of heaven—I reply: the persons that thus, as a class, typify the
    subjects of God’s spiritual kingdom cannot be in themselves
    objects of indifference to him, or be regarded otherwise than with
    intense interest.... The class that in its very nature thus
    shadows forth the brightest features of Christian excellence must
    be subjects of God’s special concern and care.”

    To these remarks of Dr. Kendrick we would add, that Jesus’ words
    seem to us to intimate more than special concern and care. While
    these words seem intended to exclude all idea that infants are
    saved by their natural holiness, or without application to them of
    the blessings of his atonement, they also seem to us to include
    infants among the number of those who have the right to these
    blessings; in other words, Christ’s concern and care go so far as
    to choose infants to eternal life, and to make them subjects of
    the kingdom of heaven. _Cf._ _Mat. 18:14_—“_it is not the will of
    your Father who is in heaven, that one of those little ones should
    perish_”—those whom Christ has received here, he will not reject
    hereafter. Of course this to said to infants, as infants. To
    those, therefore, who die before coming to moral consciousness,
    Christ’s words assure salvation. Personal transgression, however,
    involves the necessity, before death, of a personal repentance and
    faith, in order to achieve salvation.


(_d_) The descriptions of God’s merciful provision as coëxtensive with the
ruin of the Fall also lead us to believe that those who die in infancy
receive salvation through Christ as certainly as they inherit sin from
Adam.


    _John 3:16_—“_For God so loved the world_”—includes infants. _Rom.
    5:14_—“_death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over them that
    had not sinned after the likeness of Adam’s transgression, who is
    a figure of him that was to come_”—there is an application to
    infants of the life in Christ, as there was an application to them
    of the death in Adam; _19-21_—“_For as through the one man’s
    disobedience the many were made sinners, even so through the
    obedience of the one shall the many be made righteous. And the law
    came in besides, that the trespass might abound; but when sin
    abounded, grace did abound more exceedingly: that, as sin reigned
    in death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto
    eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord_”—as without personal
    act of theirs infants inherited corruption from Adam, so without
    personal act of theirs salvation is provided for them in Christ.

    Hovey, Bib. Eschatology, 170, 171—“Though the sacred writers say
    nothing in respect to the future condition of those who die in
    infancy, one can scarcely err in deriving from this silence a
    favorable conclusion. That no prophet or apostle, that no devout
    father or mother, should have expressed any solicitude as to those
    who die before they are able to discern good from evil is
    surprising, unless such solicitude was prevented by the Spirit of
    God. There are no instances of prayer for children taken away in
    infancy. The Savior nowhere teaches that they are in danger of
    being lost. We therefore heartily and confidently believe that
    they are redeemed by the blood of Christ and sanctified by his
    Spirit, so that when they enter the unseen world they will be
    found with the saints.” David ceased to fast and weep when his
    child died, for he said: “_I shall go to him, but he will not
    return to me_” (_2 Sam. 12:23_).


(_e_) The condition of salvation for adults is personal faith. Infants are
incapable of fulfilling this condition. Since Christ has died for all, we
have reason to believe that provision is made for their reception of
Christ in some other way.


    _2 Cor. 5:15_—“_he died for all_”; _Mark 16:16_—“_He that
    believeth and is baptised shall be saved; but he that disbelieveth
    shall be condemned_” (_verses 9-20_ are of canonical authority,
    though probably not written by Mark). Dr. G. W. Northrop held
    that, as death to the Christian has ceased to be penalty, so death
    to all infants is no longer penalty, Christ having atoned for and
    removed the guilt of original sin for all men, infants included.
    But we reply that there is no evidence that there is any guilt
    taken away except for those who come into vital union with Christ.
    E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 166—“The curse falls alike on
    every one by birth, but may be alleviated or intensified by every
    one who comes to years of responsibility, according as his nature
    which brings the curse rules, or is ruled by, his reason and
    conscience. So the blessings of salvation are procured for all
    alike, but may be lost or secured according to the attitude of
    everyone toward Christ who alone procures them. To infants, as the
    curse comes without their election, so in like manner comes its
    removal.”


(_f_) At the final judgment, personal conduct is made the test of
character. But infants are incapable of personal transgression. We have
reason, therefore, to believe that they will be among the saved, since
this rule of decision will not apply to them.


    _Mat. 25:45, 46_—“_Inasmuch as ye did it not unto one of these
    least, ye did it not unto me. And these shall go away into eternal
    punishment_”; _Rom. 2:5, 6_—“_the day of wrath and revelation of
    the righteous judgment of God; who __ will render to every man
    according to his works._” Norman Fox, The Unfolding of Baptist
    Doctrine, 24—“Not only the Roman Catholics believed in the
    damnation of infants. The Lutherans, in the Augsburg Confession,
    condemn the Baptists for affirming that children are saved without
    baptism—‘damnant Anabaptistas qui ... affirmant pueros sine
    baptismo salvos fieri’—and the favorite poet of Presbyterian
    Scotland, in his Tam O’Shanter, names among objects from hell ‘Twa
    span-lang, wee, unchristened bairns.’ The Westminster Confession,
    in declaring that ‘elect infants dying in infancy’ are saved,
    implies that non-elect infants dying in infancy are lost. This was
    certainly taught by some of the framers of that creed.”

    Yet John Calvin did not believe in the damnation of infants, as he
    has been charged with believing. In the Amsterdam edition of his
    works, 8:522, we read: “I do not doubt that the infants whom the
    Lord gathers together from this life are regenerated by a secret
    operation of the Holy Spirit.” In his Institutes, book 4, chap.
    16, p. 335, he speaks of the exemption of infants from the grace
    of salvation “as an idea not free from execrable blasphemy.” The
    Presb. and Ref. Rev., Oct. 1890:634-651, quotes Calvin as follows:
    “I everywhere teach that no one can be justly condemned and perish
    except on account of actual sin; and to say that the countless
    mortals taken from life while yet infants are precipitated from
    their mothers’ arms into eternal death is a blasphemy to be
    universally detested.” So also John Owen, Works, 8:522—“There are
    two ways by which God saveth infants. First, by interesting them
    in the covenant, if their immediate or remote parents have been
    believers; ... Secondly, by his grace of election, which is most
    free and not tied to any conditions; by which I make no doubt but
    God taketh unto him in Christ many whose parents never knew, or
    were despisers of, the gospel.”


(_g_) Since there is no evidence that children dying in infancy are
regenerated prior to death, either with or without the use of external
means, it seems most probable that the work of regeneration may be
performed by the Spirit in connection with the infant soul’s first view of
Christ in the other world. As the remains of natural depravity in the
Christian are eradicated, not by death, but at death, through the sight of
Christ and union with him, so the first moment of consciousness for the
infant may be coincident with a view of Christ the Savior which
accomplishes the entire sanctification of its nature.


    _2 Cor. 3:18_—“_But we all, beholding as in a mirror the glory of
    the Lord, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory,
    even as from the Lord the Spirit_”; _1 John 3:2_—“_We know that,
    if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him; for we shall see
    him as he is._” If asked why more is not said upon the subject in
    Scripture, we reply: It is according to the analogy of God’s
    general method to hide things that are not of immediate practical
    value. In some past ages, moreover, knowledge of the fact that all
    children dying in infancy are saved might have seemed to make
    infanticide a virtue.

    While we agree with the following writers as to the salvation of
    all infants who die before the age of conscious and wilful
    transgression, we dissent from the seemingly Arminian tendency of
    the explanation which they suggest. H. E. Robins, Harmony of
    Ethics with Theology: “The judicial declaration of acquittal on
    the ground of the death of Christ which comes upon all men, into
    the benefits of which they are introduced by natural birth, is
    inchoate justification, and will become perfected justification
    through the new birth of the Holy Spirit, unless the working of
    this divine agent is resisted by the personal moral action of
    those who are lost.” So William Ashmore, in Christian Review,
    26:245-264. F. O. Dickey: “As infants are members of the race, and
    as they are justified from the penalty against inherited sin by
    the mediatorial work of Christ, so the race itself is justified
    from the same penalty and to the same extent as are they, and were
    the race to die in infancy it would be saved.” The truth in the
    above utterances seems to us to be that Christ’s union with the
    race secures the objective reconciliation of the race to God. But
    subjective and personal reconciliation depends upon a moral union
    with Christ which can be accomplished for the infant only by his
    own appropriation of Christ at death.


While, in the nature of things and by the express declarations of
Scripture, we are precluded from extending this doctrine of regeneration
at death to any who have committed personal sins, we are nevertheless
warranted in the conclusion that, certain and great as is the guilt of
original sin, no human soul is eternally condemned solely for this sin of
nature, but that, on the other hand, all who have not consciously and
wilfully transgressed are made partakers of Christ’s salvation.


    The advocates of a second probation, on the other hand, should
    logically hold that infants in the next world are in a state of
    sin, and that at death they only enter upon a period of probation
    in which they may, or may not, accept Christ,—a doctrine much less
    comforting than that propounded above. See Prentiss, in Presb.
    Rev., July, 1883: 548-580—“Lyman Beecher and Charles Hodge first
    made current in this country the doctrine of the salvation of all
    who die in infancy. If this doctrine be accepted, then it follows:
    (1) that these partakers of original sin must be saved wholly
    through divine grace and power; (2) that in the child unborn there
    is the promise and potency of complete spiritual manhood; (3) that
    salvation is possible entirely apart from the visible church and
    the means of grace; (4) that to a full half of the race this life
    is not in any way a period of probation; (5) that heathen may be
    saved who have never even heard of the gospel; (6) that the
    providence of God includes in its scope both infants and heathen.”

    “Children exert a redeeming and reclaiming influence upon us,
    their casual acts and words and simple trust recalling our
    world-hardened and wayward hearts again to the feet of God. Silas
    Marner, the old weaver of Raveloe, so pathetically and vividly
    described in George Eliot’s novel, was a hard, desolate, godless
    old miser, but after little Eppie strayed into his miserable
    cottage that memorable winter night, he began again to believe. ‘I
    think now,’ he said at last, ‘I can trusten God until I die.’ An
    incident in a Southern hospital illustrates the power of children
    to call men to repentance. A little girl was to undergo a
    dangerous operation. When she mounted the table, and the doctor
    was about to etherize her, he said: ‘Before we can make you well,
    we must put you to sleep.’ ‘Oh then, if you are going to put me to
    sleep,’ she sweetly said, ‘I must say my prayers first.’ Then,
    getting down on her knees, and folding her hands, she repeated
    that lovely prayer learned at every true mother’s feet: ‘Now I lay
    me down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to keep.’ Just for a
    moment there were moist eyes in that group, for deep chords were
    touched, and the surgeon afterwards said: ‘I prayed that night for
    the first time in thirty years.’ ” The child that is old enough to
    sin against God is old enough to trust in Christ as the Savior of
    sinners. See Van Dyke, Christ and Little Children; Whitsitt and
    Warfield, Infant Baptism and Infant Salvation; Hodge, Syst.
    Theol., 1:26, 27; Ridgeley, Body of Div., 1:422-425; Calvin,
    Institutes, II, i, 8; Westminster Larger Catechism, x, 3; Krauth,
    Infant Salvation in the Calvinistic System; Candlish on Atonement,
    part ii, chap. 1; Geo. P. Fisher, in New Englander, Apr. 1868:338;
    J. F. Clarke, Truths and Errors of Orthodoxy, 360.





