PART V. ANTHROPOLOGY, OR THE DOCTRINE OF MAN.




Chapter I. Preliminary.



I. Man a Creation of God and a Child of God.


The fact of man’s creation is declared in Gen. 1:27—“And God created man
in his own image, in the image of God created he him”; 2:7—“And Jehovah
God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils
the breath of life; and man became a living soul.”

(_a_) The Scriptures, on the one hand, negate the idea that man is the
mere product of unreasoning natural forces. They refer his existence to a
cause different from mere nature, namely, the creative act of God.


    Compare _Hebrews 12:9_—“_the Father of spirits_”; _Num.
    16:22_—“_the God of the spirits of all flesh_”; _27:16_—“_Jehovah,
    the God of the spirits of all flesh_”; _Rev. 22:6_—“_the God of
    the spirits of the prophets._” Bruce, The Providential Order,
    25—“Faith in God may remain intact, though we concede that man in
    all his characteristics, physical and psychical, is no exception
    to the universal law of growth, no breach in the continuity of the
    evolutionary process.” By “_mere_ nature” we mean nature apart
    from God. Our previous treatment of the doctrine of creation in
    general has shown that the laws of nature are only the regular
    methods of God, and that the conception of a nature apart from God
    is an irrational one. If the evolution of the lower creation
    cannot be explained without taking into account the originating
    agency of God, much less can the coming into being of man, the
    crown of all created things. Hudson, Divine Pedigree of Man:
    “Spirit in man is linked with, because derived from, God, who is
    spirit.”


(_b_) But, on the other hand, the Scriptures do not disclose the method of
man’s creation. Whether man’s physical system is or is not derived, by
natural descent, from the lower animals, the record of creation does not
inform us. As the command “Let the earth bring forth living creatures”
(Gen. 1:24) does not exclude the idea of mediate creation, through natural
generation, so the forming of man “of the dust of the ground” (Gen. 2:7)
does not in itself determine whether the creation of man’s body was
mediate or immediate.


    We may believe that man sustained to the highest preceding brute
    the same relation which the multiplied bread and fish sustained to
    the five loaves and two fishes (_Mat. 14:19_), or which the wine
    sustained to the water which was transformed at Cana (_John
    2:7-10_), or which the multiplied oil sustained to the original
    oil in the O. T. miracle (_2 K. 4:1-7_). The “_dust_,” before the
    breathing of the spirit into it, may have been animated dust.
    Natural means may have been used, so far as they would go.
    Sterrett, Reason and Authority in Religion, 39—“Our heredity is
    from God, even though it be from lower forms of life, and our goal
    is also God, even though it be through imperfect manhood.”

    Evolution does not make the idea of a Creator superfluous, because
    evolution is only the method of God. It is perfectly consistent
    with a Scriptural doctrine of Creation that man should emerge at
    the proper time, governed by different laws from the brute
    creation yet growing out of the brute, just as the foundation of a
    house built of stone is perfectly consistent with the wooden
    structure built upon it. All depends upon the plan. An atheistic
    and undesigning evolution cannot include man without excluding
    what Christianity regards as essential to man; see Griffith-Jones,
    Ascent through Christ, 43-73. But a theistic evolution can
    recognize the whole process of man’s creation as equally the work
    of nature and the work of God.

    Schurman, Agnosticism and Religion, 42—“You are not what you have
    come from, but what you have become.” Huxley said of the brutes:
    “Whether _from_ them or not, man is assuredly not _of_ them.”
    Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:289—“The religious dignity of man
    rests after all upon what he _is_, not upon the mode and manner in
    which he has _become_ what he is.” Because he came _from_ a beast,
    it does not follow that he _is_ a beast. Nor does the fact that
    man’s existence can be traced back to a brute ancestry furnish any
    proper reason why the brute should become man. Here is a teleology
    which requires a divine Creatorship.

    J. M. Bronson: “The theist must accept evolution if he would keep
    his argument for the existence of God from the unity of design in
    nature. Unless man is an _end_, he is an _anomaly_. The greatest
    argument for God is the fact that all animate nature is one vast
    and connected unity. Man has developed not _from_ the ape, but
    _away from_ the ape. He was never anything but potential man. He
    did not, as man, come into being until he became a conscious moral
    agent.” This conscious moral nature, which we call personality,
    requires a divine Author, because it surpasses all the powers
    which can be found in the animal creation. Romanes, Mental
    Evolution in Animals, tells us that: 1. Mollusca learn by
    experience; 2. Insects and spiders recognize offspring; 3. Fishes
    make mental association of objects by their similarity; 4.
    Reptiles recognize persons; 5. Hymenoptera, as bees and ants,
    communicate ideas; 6. Birds recognize pictorial representations
    and understand words; 7. Rodents, as rats and foxes, understand
    mechanisms; 8. Monkeys and elephants learn to use tools; 9.
    Anthropoid apes and dogs have indefinite morality.

    But it is definite and not indefinite morality which differences
    man from the brute. Drummond, in his Ascent of Man, concedes that
    man passed through a period when he resembled the ape more than
    any known animal, but at the same time declares that no anthropoid
    ape could develop into a man. The brute can be defined in terms of
    man, but man cannot be defined in terms of the brute. It is
    significant that in insanity the higher endowments of man
    disappear in an order precisely the reverse of that in which,
    according to the development theory, they have been acquired. The
    highest part of man totters first. The last added is first to
    suffer. Man moreover can transmit his own acquisitions to his
    posterity, as the brute cannot. Weismann, Heredity, 2:69—“The
    evolution of music does not depend upon any increase of the
    musical faculty or any alteration in the inherent physical nature
    of man, but solely upon the power of transmitting the intellectual
    achievements of each generation to those which follow. This, more
    than anything, is the cause of the superiority of men over
    animals—this, and not merely human faculty, although it may be
    admitted that this latter is much higher than in animals.” To this
    utterance of Weismann we would add that human progress depends
    quite as much upon man’s power of reception as upon man’s power of
    transmission. Interpretation must equal expression; and, in this
    interpretation of the past, man has a guarantee of the future
    which the brute does not possess.


(_c_) Psychology, however, comes in to help our interpretation of
Scripture. The radical differences between man’s soul and the principle of
intelligence in the lower animals, especially man’s possession of
self-consciousness, general ideas, the moral sense, and the power of
self-determination, show that that which chiefly constitutes him man could
not have been derived, by any natural process of development, from the
inferior creatures. We are compelled, then, to believe that God’s
“breathing into man’s nostrils the breath of life” (Gen. 2:7), though it
was a mediate creation as presupposing existing material in the shape of
animal forms, was yet an immediate creation in the sense that only a
divine reinforcement of the process of life turned the animal into man. In
other words, man came not _from_ the brute, but _through_ the brute, and
the same immanent God who had previously created the brute created also
the man.


    Tennyson, In Memoriam, XLV—“The baby new to earth and sky, What
    time his tender palm is pressed Against the circle of the breast,
    Has never thought that ‘this is I’: But as he grows he gathers
    much, And learns the use of ‘I’ and ‘me,’ And finds ‘I am not what
    I see, And other than the things I touch.’ So rounds he to a
    separate mind From whence clear memory may begin, As thro’ the
    frame that binds him in His isolation grows defined.” Fichte
    called that the birthday of his child, when the child awoke to
    self-consciousness and said “I.” Memory goes back no further than
    language. Knowledge of the ego is objective, before it is
    subjective. The child at first speaks of himself in the third
    person: “Henry did so and so.” Hence most men do not remember what
    happened before their third year, though Samuel Miles Hopkins,
    Memoir, 20, remembered what must have happened when he was only 23
    months old. Only a conscious person remembers, and he remembers
    only as his will exerts itself in attention.

    Jean Paul Richter, quoted in Ladd, Philosophy of Mind, 110—“Never
    shall I forget the phenomenon in myself, never till now recited,
    when I stood by the birth of my own self-consciousness, the place
    and time of which are distinct in my memory. On a certain
    forenoon, I stood, a very young child, within the house-door, and
    was looking out toward the wood-pile, as in an instant the inner
    revelation ‘I am I,’ like lightning from heaven, flashed and stood
    brightly before me; in that moment I had seen myself as I, for the
    first time and forever.”

    Höffding, Outlines of Psychology, 3—“The beginning of conscious
    life is to be placed probably before birth.... Sensations only
    faintly and dimly distinguished from the general feeling of
    vegetative comfort and discomfort. Still the experiences undergone
    before birth perhaps suffice to form the foundation of the
    consciousness of an external world.” Hill, Genetic Philosophy,
    282, suggests that this early state, in which the child speaks of
    self in the third person and is devoid of _self_-consciousness,
    corresponds to the brute condition of the race, before it had
    reached self-consciousness, attained language, and become man. In
    the race, however, there was no heredity to predetermine
    self-consciousness—it was a new acquisition, marking transition to
    a superior order of being.

    Connecting these remarks with our present subject, we assert that
    no brute ever yet said, or thought, “I.” With this, then, we may
    begin a series of simple distinctions between man and the brute,
    so far as the immaterial principle in each is concerned. These are
    mainly compiled from writers hereafter mentioned.

    1. The brute is conscious, but man is self-conscious. The brute
    does not objectify self. “If the pig could once say, ‘I am a pig,’
    it would at once and thereby cease to be a pig.” The brute does
    not distinguish itself from its sensations. The brute has
    perception, but only the man has apperception, _i. e._, perception
    accompanied by reference of it to the self to which it belongs.

    2. The brute has only percepts; man has also concepts. The brute
    knows white things, but not whiteness. It remembers things, but
    not thoughts. Man alone has the power of abstraction, _i. e._, the
    power of deriving abstract ideas from particular things or
    experiences.

    3. Hence the brute has no language. “Language is the expression of
    general notions by symbols” (Harris). Words are the symbols of
    concepts. Where there are no concepts there can be no words. The
    parrot utters cries; but “no parrot ever yet spoke a true word.”
    Since language is a sign, it presupposes the existence of an
    intellect capable of understanding the sign,—in short, language is
    the effect of mind, not the cause of mind. See Mivart, in Brit.
    Quar., Oct. 1881:154-172. “The ape’s tongue is eloquent in his own
    dispraise.” James, Psychology, 2:356—“The notion of a sign as
    such, and the general purpose to apply it to everything, is the
    distinctive characteristic of man.” Why do not animals speak?
    Because they have nothing to say, _i. e._, have no general ideas
    which words might express.

    4. The brute forms no judgments, _e. g._, that _this_ is like
    _that_, accompanied with belief. Hence there is no sense of the
    ridiculous, and no laughter. James, Psychology, 2:360—“The brute
    does not associate ideas by similarity.... Genius in man is the
    possession of this power of association in an extreme degree.”

    5. The brute has no reasoning—no sense that _this_ follows from
    _that_, accompanied by a feeling that the sequence is necessary.
    Association of ideas without judgment is the typical process of
    the brute mind, though not that of the mind of man. See Mind,
    5:402-409, 575-581. Man’s dream-life is the best analogue to the
    mental life of the brute.

    6. The brute has no general ideas or intuitions, as of space,
    time, substance, cause, right. Hence there is no generalizing, and
    no proper experience or progress. There is no capacity for
    improvement in animals. The brute cannot be trained, except in
    certain inferior matters of association, where independent
    judgment is not required. No animal makes tools, uses clothes,
    cooks food, breeds other animals for food. No hunter’s dog,
    however long its observation of its master, ever learned to put
    wood on a fire to keep itself from freezing. Even the rudest stone
    implements show a break in continuity and mark the introduction of
    man; see J. P. Cook, Credentials of Science, 14. “The dog can see
    the printed page as well as a man can, but no dog was ever taught
    to read a book. The animal cannot create in its own mind the
    thoughts of the writer. The physical in man, on the contrary, is
    only an aid to the spiritual. Education is a trained capacity to
    discern the inner meaning and deeper relations of things. So the
    universe is but a symbol and expression of spirit, a garment in
    which an invisible Power has robed his majesty and glory”; see S.
    S. Times, April 7, 1900. In man, mind first became supreme.

    7. The brute has determination, but not self-determination. There
    is no freedom of choice, no conscious forming of a purpose, and no
    self-movement toward a predetermined end. The donkey is
    determined, but not self-determined; he is the victim of heredity
    and environment; he acts only as he is acted upon. Harris, Philos.
    Basis of Theism, 537-554—“Man, though implicated in nature through
    his bodily organization, is in his personality supernatural; the
    brute is wholly submerged in nature.... Man is like a ship in the
    sea—in it, yet above it—guiding his course, by observing the
    heavens, even against wind and current. A brute has no such power;
    it is in nature like a balloon, wholly immersed in air, and driven
    about by its currents, with no power of steering.” Calderwood,
    Philosophy of Evolution, chapter on Right and Wrong: “The grand
    distinction of human life is self-control in the field of
    action—control over all the animal impulses, so that these do not
    spontaneously and of themselves determine activity” [as they do in
    the brute]. By what Mivart calls a process of “inverse
    anthropomorphism,” we clothe the brute with the attributes of
    freedom; but it does not really possess them. Just as we do not
    transfer to God all our human imperfections, so we ought not to
    transfer all our human perfections to the brute, “reading our full
    selves in life of lower forms.” The brute has no power to choose
    between motives; it simply obeys motive. The necessitarian
    philosophy, therefore, is a correct and excellent philosophy for
    the brute. But man’s power of initiative—in short, man’s free
    will—renders it impossible to explain his higher nature as a mere
    natural development from the inferior creatures. Even Huxley has
    said that, taking mind into the account, there is between man and
    the highest beasts an “enormous gulf,” a “divergence immeasurable”
    and “practically infinite.”

    8. The brute has no conscience and no religious nature. No dog
    ever brought back to the butcher the meat it had stolen. “The
    aspen trembles without fear, and dogs skulk without guilt.” The
    dog mentioned by Darwin, whose behavior in presence of a newspaper
    moved by the wind seemed to testify to “a sense of the
    supernatural,” was merely exhibiting the irritation due to the
    sense of an unknown future; see James, Will to Believe, 79. The
    bearing of flogged curs does not throw light upon the nature of
    conscience. If ethics is not hedonism, if moral obligation is not
    a refined utilitarianism, if the right is something distinct from
    the good we get out of it, then there must be a flaw in the theory
    that man’s conscience is simply a development of brute instincts;
    and a reinforcement of brute life from the divine source of life
    must be postulated in order to account for the appearance of man.
    Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 165-167—“Is the spirit of man derived
    from the soul of the animal? No, for neither one of these has
    self-existence. Both are self-differentiations of God. The latter
    is simply God’s preparation for the former.” Calderwood, Evolution
    and Man’s Place in Nature, 337, speaks of “the impossibility of
    tracing the origin of man’s rational life to evolution from a
    lower life.... There are no physical forces discoverable in nature
    sufficient to account for the appearance of this life.” Shaler,
    Interpretation of Nature, 186—“Man’s place has been won by an
    entire change in the limitations of his psychic development....
    The old bondage of the mind to the body is swept away.... In this
    new freedom we find the one dominant characteristic of man, the
    feature which entitles us to class him as an entirely new class of
    animal.”

    John Burroughs, Ways of Nature: “Animal life parallels human life
    at many points, but it is in another plane. Something guides the
    lower animals, but it is not thought; something restrains them,
    but it is not judgment; they are provident without prudence; they
    are active without industry; they are skilful without practice;
    they are wise without knowledge; they are rational without reason;
    they are deceptive without guile.... When they are joyful, they
    sing or they play; when they are distressed, they moan or they
    cry; ... and yet I do not suppose they experience the emotion of
    joy or sorrow, or anger or love, as we do, because these feelings
    in them do not involve reflection, memory, and what we call the
    higher nature, as with us. Their instinct is intelligence directed
    outward, never inward, as in man. They share with man the emotions
    of his animal nature, but not of his moral or æsthetic nature;
    they know no altruism, no moral code.” Mr. Burroughs maintains
    that we have no proof that animals in a state of nature can
    reflect, form abstract ideas, associate cause and effect. Animals,
    for instance, that store up food for the winter simply follow a
    provident instinct but do not take thought for the future, any
    more than does the tree that forms new buds for the coming season.
    He sums up his position as follows: “To attribute human motives
    and faculties to the animals is to caricature them; but to put us
    in such relation to them that we feel their kinship, that we see
    their lives embosomed in the same iron necessity as our own, that
    we see in their minds a humbler manifestation of the same psychic
    power and intelligence that culminates and is conscious of itself
    in man—that, I take it, is the true humanization.” We assent to
    all this except the ascription to human life of the same iron
    necessity that rules the animal creation. Man is man, because his
    free will transcends the limitations of the brute.

    While we grant, then, that man is the last stage in the
    development of life and that he has a brute ancestry, we regard
    him also as the offspring of God. The same God who was the author
    of the brute became in due time the creator of man. Though man
    came _through_ the brute, he did not come _from_ the brute, but
    from God, the Father of spirits and the author of all life.
    Œdipus’ terrific oracle: “Mayst thou ne’er know the truth of what
    thou art!” might well be uttered to those who believe only in the
    brute origin of man. Pascal says it is dangerous to let man see
    too clearly that he is on a level with the animals unless at the
    same time we show him his greatness. The doctrine that the brute
    is imperfect man is logically connected with the doctrine that man
    is a perfect brute. Thomas Carlyle: “If this brute philosophy is
    true, then man should go on all fours, and not lay claim to the
    dignity of being moral.” G. F. Wright, Ant. and Origin of Human
    Race, lecture IX—“One or other of the lower animals may exhibit
    all the faculties used by a child of fifteen months. The
    difference may seem very little, but what there is is very
    important. It is like the difference in direction in the early
    stages of two separating curves, which go on forever diverging....
    The probability is that both in his bodily and in his mental
    development man appeared as a _sport_ in nature, and leaped at
    once in some single pair from the plane of irrational being to the
    possession of the higher powers that have ever since characterized
    him and dominated both his development and his history.”

    Scripture seems to teach the doctrine that man’s nature is the
    creation of God. _Gen. 2:7_—“_Jehovah God formed man of the dust
    of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life;
    and man became a living soul_”—appears, says Hovey (State of the
    Impen. Dead, 14), “to distinguish the vital informing principle of
    human nature from its material part, pronouncing the former to be
    more directly from God, and more akin to him, than the latter.” So
    in _Zech. 12:1_—“_Jehovah, who stretcheth forth the heavens, and
    layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man
    within him_”—the soul is recognized as distinct in nature from the
    body, and of a dignity and value far beyond those of any material
    organism. _Job 32:8_—“_there is a spirit in man, and the breath of
    the Almighty giveth them understanding_”; _Eccl. 12:7_—“_the dust
    returneth to the earth as it was, and the spirit returneth unto
    God who gave it._” A sober view of the similarities and
    differences between man and the lower animals may be found in
    Lloyd Morgan, Animal Life and Intelligence. See also Martineau,
    Types, 2:65, 140, and Study, 1:180; 2:9, 13, 184, 350; Hopkins,
    Outline Study of Man, 8:23; Chadbourne, Instinct, 187-211; Porter,
    Hum. Intellect, 384, 386, 397; Bascom, Science of Mind, 295-305;
    Mansel, Metaphysics, 49, 50; Princeton Rev., Jan. 1881:104-128;
    Henslow, in Nature, May 1, 1879:21, 22; Ferrier, Remains, 2:39;
    Argyll, Unity of Nature, 117-119; Bib. Sac., 29:275-282; Max
    Müller, Lectures on Philos. of Language, no. 1, 2, 3; F. W.
    Robertson, Lectures on Genesis, 21; Le Conte, in Princeton Rev.,
    May, 1884:238-261; Lindsay, Mind in Lower Animals; Romanes, Mental
    Evolution in Animals; Fiske, The Destiny of Man.


(_d_) Comparative physiology, moreover, has, up to the present time, done
nothing to forbid the extension of this doctrine to man’s body. No single
instance has yet been adduced of the transformation of one animal species
into another, either by natural or artificial selection; much less has it
been demonstrated that the body of the brute has ever been developed into
that of man. All evolution implies progress and reinforcement of life, and
is unintelligible except as the immanent God gives new impulses to the
process. Apart from the direct agency of God, the view that man’s physical
system is descended by natural generation from some ancestral simian form
can be regarded only as an irrational hypothesis. Since the soul, then, is
an immediate creation of God, and the forming of man’s body is mentioned
by the Scripture writer in direct connection with this creation of the
spirit, man’s body was in this sense an immediate creation also.


    For the theory of natural selection, see Darwin, Origin of
    Species, 398-424, and Descent of Man, 2:368-387; Huxley, Critiques
    and Addresses, 241-269, Man’s Place in Nature, 71-138, Lay
    Sermons, 323, and art.: Biology, in Encyc. Britannica, 9th ed.;
    Romanes, Scientific Evidences of Organic Evolution. The theory
    holds that, in the struggle for existence, the varieties best
    adapted to their surroundings succeed in maintaining and
    reproducing themselves, while the rest die out. Thus, by gradual
    change and improvement of lower into higher forms of life, man has
    been evolved. We grant that Darwin has disclosed one of the
    important features of God’s method. We concede the partial truth
    of his theory. We find it supported by the vertebrate structure
    and nervous organization which man has in common with the lower
    animals; by the facts of embryonic development; of rudimentary
    organs; of common diseases and remedies; and of reversion to
    former types. But we refuse to regard natural selection as a
    complete explanation of the history of life, and that for the
    following reasons:

    1. It gives no account of the origin of substance, nor of the
    origin of variations. Darwinism simply says that “round stones
    will roll down hill further than flat ones” (Gray, Natural Science
    and Religion). It accounts for the selection, not for the
    creation, of forms. “Natural selection originates nothing. It is a
    destructive, not a creative, principle. If we must idealize it as
    a positive force, we must think of it, not as the preserver of the
    fittest, but as the destroyer, that follows ever in the wake of
    creation and devours the failures; the scavenger of creation, that
    takes out of the way forms which are not fit to live and reproduce
    themselves” (Johnson, on Theistic Evolution, in Andover Review,
    April, 1884:363-381). Natural selection is only unintelligent
    repression. Darwin’s Origin of Species is in fact “not the
    Genesis, but the Exodus, of living forms.” Schurman: “The
    _survival_ of the fittest does nothing to explain the _arrival_ of
    the fittest”; see also DeVries, Species and Varieties, _ad finem_.
    Darwin himself acknowledged that “Our ignorance of the laws of
    variation is profound.... The cause of each slight variation and
    of each monstrosity lies much more in the nature or constitution
    of the organism than in the nature of the surrounding conditions”
    (quoted by Mivart, Lessons from Nature, 280-301). Weismann has
    therefore modified the Darwinian theory by asserting that there
    would be no development unless there were a spontaneous, innate
    tendency to variation. In this innate tendency we see, not mere
    nature, but the work of an originating and superintending God. E.
    M. Caillard, in Contemp. Rev., Dec. 1893:873-881—“Spirit was the
    moulding power, from the beginning, of those lower forms which
    would ultimately become man. Instead of the physical derivation of
    the soul, we propose the spiritual derivation of the body.”

    2. Some of the most important forms appear suddenly in the
    geological record, without connecting links to unite them with the
    past. The first fishes are the Ganoid, large in size and advanced
    in type. There are no intermediate gradations between the ape and
    man. Huxley, in Man’s Place in Nature, 94, tells us that the
    lowest gorilla has a skull capacity of 24 cubic inches, whereas
    the highest gorilla has 34-½. Over against this, the lowest man
    has a skull capacity of 62; though men with less than 65 are
    invariably idiotic; the highest man has 114. Professor Burt G.
    Wilder of Cornell University: “The largest ape-brain is only half
    as large as the smallest normal human.” Wallace, Darwinism,
    458—“The average human brain weighs 48 or 49 ounces; the average
    ape’s brain is only 18 ounces.” The brain of Daniel Webster
    weighed 53 ounces; but Dr. Bastian tells of an imbecile whose
    intellectual deficiency was congenital, yet whose brain weighed 55
    ounces. Large heads do not always indicate great intellect.
    Professor Virchow points out that the Greeks, one of the most
    intellectual of nations, are also one of the smallest-headed of
    all. Bain: “While the size of the brain increases in arithmetical
    proportion, intellectual range increases in geometrical
    proportion.”

    Respecting the Enghis and Neanderthal crania, Huxley says: “The
    fossil remains of man hitherto discovered do not seem to me to
    take us appreciably nearer to that lower pithecoid form by the
    modification of which he has probably become what he is.... In
    vain have the links which should bind man to the monkey been
    sought: not a single one is there to show. The so-called
    _Protanthropos_ who should exhibit this link has not been
    found.... None have been found that stood nearer the monkey than
    the men of to-day.” Huxley argues that the difference between man
    and the gorilla is smaller than that between the gorilla and some
    apes; if the gorilla and the apes constitute one family and have a
    common origin, may not man and the gorilla have a common ancestry
    also? We reply that the space between the lowest ape and the
    highest gorilla is filled in with numberless intermediate
    gradations. The space between the lowest man and the highest man
    is also filled in with many types that shade off one into the
    other. But the space between the highest gorilla and the lowest
    man is absolutely vacant; there are no intermediate types; no
    connecting links between the ape and man have yet been found.

    Professor Virchow has also very recently expressed his belief that
    no relics of any predecessor of man have yet been discovered. He
    said: “In my judgment, no skull hitherto discovered can be
    regarded as that of a predecessor of man. In the course of the
    last fifteen years we have had opportunities of examining skulls
    of all the various races of mankind—even of the most savage
    tribes; and among them all no group has been observed differing in
    its essential characters from the general human type.... Out of
    all the skulls found in the lake-dwellings there is not one that
    lies outside the boundaries of our present population.” Dr. Eugene
    Dubois has discovered in the Post-pliocene deposits of the island
    of Java the remains of a preeminently hominine anthropoid which he
    calls _Pithecanthropus erectus_. Its cranial capacity approaches
    the physiological minimum in man, and is double that of the
    gorilla. The thigh bone is in form and dimensions the absolute
    analogue of that of man, and gives evidence of having supported a
    habitually erect body. Dr. Dubois unhesitatingly places this
    extinct Javan ape as the intermediate form between man and the
    true anthropoid apes. Haeckel (in The Nation, Sept. 15, 1898) and
    Keane (in Man Past and Present, 3), regard the _Pithecanthropus_
    as a “missing link.” But “Nature” regards it as the remains of a
    human microcephalous idiot. In addition to all this, it deserves
    to be noticed that man does not degenerate as we travel back in
    time. “The Enghis skull, the contemporary of the mammoth and the
    cave-bear, is as large as the average of to-day, and might have
    belonged to a philosopher.” The monkey nearest to man in physical
    form is no more intelligent than the elephant or the bee.

    3. There are certain facts which mere heredity cannot explain,
    such for example as the origin of the working-bee from the queen
    and the drone, neither of which produces honey. The working-bee,
    moreover, does not transmit the honey-making instinct to its
    posterity; for it is sterile and childless. If man had descended
    from the conscienceless brute, we should expect him, when
    degraded, to revert to his primitive type. On the contrary, he
    does not revert to the brute, but dies out instead. The theory can
    give no explanation of beauty in the lowest forms of life, such as
    molluscs and diatoms. Darwin grants that this beauty must be of
    use to its possessor, in order to be consistent with its
    origination through natural selection. But no such use has yet
    been shown; for the creatures which possess the beauty often live
    in the dark, or have no eyes to see. So, too, the large brain of
    the savage is beyond his needs, and is inconsistent with the
    principle of natural selection which teaches that no organ can
    permanently attain a size unrequired by its needs and its
    environment. See Wallace, Natural Selection, 338-360. G. F.
    Wright, Man and the Glacial Epoch, 242-301—“That man’s bodily
    organization is in some way a development from some extinct member
    of the animal kingdom allied to the anthropoid apes is scarcely
    any longer susceptible of doubt.... But he is certainly not
    descended from any _existing_ species of anthropoid apes.... When
    once _mind_ became supreme, the bodily adjustment must have been
    rapid, if indeed it is not necessary to suppose that the bodily
    preparation for the highest mental faculties was instantaneous, or
    by what is called in nature a _sport_.” With this statement of Dr.
    Wright we substantially agree, and therefore differ from Shedd
    when he says that there is just as much reason for supposing that
    monkeys are degenerate men, as that men are improved monkeys.
    Shakespeare, Timon of Athens, 1:1:249, seems to have hinted the
    view of Dr. Shedd: “The strain of man’s bred out into baboon and
    monkey.” Bishop Wilberforce asked Huxley whether he was related to
    an ape on his grandfather’s or grandmother’s side. Huxley replied
    that he should prefer such a relationship to having for an
    ancestor a man who used his position as a minister of religion to
    ridicule truth which he did not comprehend. “Mamma, am I descended
    from a monkey?” “I do not know, William, I never met any of your
    father’s people.”

    4. No species is yet known to have been produced either by
    artificial or by natural selection. Huxley, Lay Sermons, 323—“It
    is not absolutely proven that a group of animals having all the
    characters exhibited by species in nature has ever been originated
    by selection, whether artificial or natural”; Man’s Place in
    Nature, 107—“Our acceptance of the Darwinian hypothesis must be
    provisional, so long as one link in the chain of evidence is
    wanting; and so long as all the animals and plants certainly
    produced by selective breeding from a common stock are fertile
    with one another, that link will be wanting.” Huxley has more
    recently declared that the missing proof has been found in the
    descent of the modern horse with one toe, from Hipparion with two
    toes, Anchitherium with three, and Orohippus with four. Even if
    this were demonstrated, we should still maintain that the only
    proper analogue was to be found in that artificial selection by
    which man produces new varieties, and that natural selection can
    bring about no useful results and show no progress, unless it be
    the method and revelation of a wise and designing mind. In other
    words, selection implies intelligence and will, and therefore
    cannot be exclusively natural. Mivart, Man and Apes, 192—“If it is
    inconceivable and impossible for man’s body to be developed or to
    exist without his informing soul, we conclude that, as no natural
    process accounts for the different kind of soul—one capable of
    articulately expressing general conceptions,—so no merely natural
    process can account for the origin of the body informed by it—a
    body to which such an intellectual faculty was so essentially and
    intimately related.” Thus Mivart, who once considered that
    evolution could account for man’s body, now holds instead that it
    can account neither for man’s body nor for his soul, and calls
    natural selection “a puerile hypothesis” (Lessons from Nature,
    300; Essays and Criticisms, 2:289-314).


(_e_) While we concede, then, that man has a brute ancestry, we make two
claims by way of qualification and explanation: first, that the laws of
organic development which have been followed in man’s origin are only the
methods of God and proofs of his creatorship; secondly, that man, when he
appears upon the scene, is no longer brute, but a self-conscious and
self-determining being, made in the image of his Creator and capable of
free moral decision between good and evil.


    Both man’s original creation and his new creation in regeneration
    are creations from within, rather than from without. In both
    cases, God builds the new upon the basis of the old. Man is not a
    product of blind forces, but is rather an emanation from that same
    divine life of which the brute was a lower manifestation. The fact
    that God used preëxisting material does not prevent his authorship
    of the result. The wine in the miracle was not water because water
    had been used in the making of it, nor is man a brute because the
    brute has made some contributions to his creation. Professor John
    H. Strong: “Some who freely allow the presence and power of God in
    the age-long process seem nevertheless not clearly to see that, in
    the final result of finished man, God successfully revealed
    himself. God’s work was never really or fully done; man was a
    compound of brute and man; and a compound of two such elements
    could not be said to possess the qualities of either. God did not
    really succeed in bringing moral personality to birth. The
    evolution was incomplete; man is still on all fours; he cannot
    sin, because he was begotten of the brute; no fall, and no
    regeneration, is conceivable. We assert, on the contrary, that,
    though man came _through_ the brute, he did not come _from_ the
    brute. He came from God, whose immanent life he reveals, whose
    image he reflects in a finished moral personality. Because God
    succeeded, a fall was possible. We can believe in the age-long
    creation of evolution, provided only that this evolution completed
    itself. With that proviso, sin remains and the fall.” See also A.
    H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 163-180.

    An atheistic and unteleological evolution is a reversion to the
    savage view of animals as brethren, and to the heathen idea of a
    sphynx-man growing out of the brute. Darwin himself did not deny
    God’s authorship. He closes his first great book with the
    declaration that life, with all its potencies, was originally
    breathed “by the Creator” into the first forms of organic being.
    And in his letters he refers with evident satisfaction to Charles
    Kingsley’s finding nothing in the theory which was inconsistent
    with an earnest Christian faith. It was not Darwin, but disciples
    like Haeckel, who put forward the theory as making the hypothesis
    of a Creator superfluous. We grant the principle of evolution, but
    we regard it as only the method of the divine intelligence, and
    must moreover consider it as preceded by an original creative act,
    introducing vegetable and animal life, and as supplemented by
    other creative acts, at the introduction of man and at the
    incarnation of Christ. Chadwick, Old and New Unitarianism,
    33—“What seemed to wreck our faith in human nature [its origin
    from the brute] has been its grandest confirmation. For nothing
    argues the essential dignity of man more clearly than his triumph
    over the limitations of his brute inheritance, while the long way
    that he has come is prophecy of the moral heights undreamed of
    that await his tireless feet.” All this is true if we regard human
    nature, not as an undesigned result of atheistic evolution, but as
    the efflux and reflection of the divine personality. R. E.
    Thompson, in S. S. Times, Dec. 29, 1906—“The greatest fact in
    heredity is our descent from God, and the greatest fact in
    environment is his presence in human life at every point.”

    The atheistic conception of evolution is well satirized in the
    verse: “There was an ape in days that were earlier; Centuries
    passed and his hair became curlier; Centuries more and his thumb
    gave a twist, And he was a man and a Positivist.” That this
    conception is not a necessary conclusion of modern science, is
    clear from the statements of Wallace, the author with Darwin of
    the theory of natural selection. Wallace believes that man’s body
    was developed from the brute, but he thinks there have been three
    breaks in continuity: 1. the appearance of life; 2. the appearance
    of sensation and consciousness; and 3. the appearance of spirit.
    These seem to correspond to 1. vegetable; 2. animal; and 3. human
    life. He thinks natural selection may account for man’s place _in_
    nature, but not for man’s place _above_ nature, as a spiritual
    being. See Wallace, Darwinism, 445-478—“I fully accept Mr.
    Darwin’s conclusion as to the essential identity of man’s bodily
    structure with that of the higher mammalia, and his descent from
    some ancestral form common to man and the anthropoid apes.” But
    the conclusion that man’s higher faculties have also been derived
    from the lower animals “appears to me not to be supported by
    adequate evidence, and to be directly opposed to many
    well-ascertained facts” (461).... The mathematical, the artistic
    and musical faculties, are results, not causes, of
    advancement,—they do not help in the struggle for existence and
    could not have been developed by natural selection. The
    introduction of life (vegetable), of consciousness (animal), of
    higher faculty (human), point clearly to a world of spirit, to
    which the world of matter is subordinate (474-476).... Man’s
    intellectual and moral faculties could not have been developed
    from the animal, but must have had another origin; and for this
    origin we can find an adequate cause only in the world of spirit.

    Wallace, Natural Selection, 338—“The average cranial capacity of
    the lowest savage is probably not less than five-sixths of that of
    the highest civilized races, while the brain of the anthropoid
    apes scarcely amounts to one-third of that of man, in both cases
    taking the average; or the proportions may be represented by the
    following figures: anthropoid apes, 10; savages, 26; civilized
    man, 32.” _Ibid._, 360—“The inference I would draw from this class
    of phenomena is, that a superior intelligence has guided the
    development of man in a definite direction and for a special
    purpose, just as man guides the development of many animal and
    vegetable forms.... The controlling action of a higher
    intelligence is a necessary part of the laws of nature, just as
    the action of all surrounding organisms is one of the agencies in
    organic development,—else the laws which govern the material
    universe are insufficient for the production of man.” Sir Wm.
    Thompson: “That man could be evolved out of inferior animals is
    the wildest dream of materialism, a pure assumption which offends
    me alike by its folly and by its arrogance.” Hartmann, in his
    Anthropoid Apes, 302-306, while not despairing of “the possibility
    of discovering the true link between the world of man and
    mammals,” declares that “that purely hypothetical being, the
    common ancestor of man and apes, is still to be found,” and that
    “man cannot have descended from any of the fossil species which
    have hitherto come to our notice, nor yet from any of the species
    of apes now extant.” See Dana, Amer. Journ. Science and Arts,
    1876:251, and Geology, 603, 604; Lotze, Mikrokosmos, vol. I, bk.
    3, chap. 1; Mivart, Genesis of Species, 202-222, 259-307, Man and
    Apes, 88, 149-192, Lessons from Nature, 128-242, 280-301, The Cat.
    and Encyclop. Britannica, art.: Apes; Quatrefages, Natural History
    of Man, 64-87; Bp. Temple, Bampton Lect., 1884:161-189; Dawson,
    Story of the Earth and Man, 321-329; Duke of Argyll, Primeval Man,
    38-75; Asa Gray, Natural Science and Religion; Schmid, Theories of
    Darwin, 115-140; Carpenter, Mental Physiology, 59; McIlvaine,
    Wisdom of Holy Scripture, 55-86; Bible Commentary, 1:43;
    Martensen, Dogmatics, 136; LeConte, in Princeton Rev., Nov.
    1878:776-803; Zöckler, Urgeschichte, 81-105; Shedd, Dogm. Theol.,
    1:499-515. Also, see this Compendium, pages 392, 393.


(_f_) The truth that man is the offspring of God implies the correlative
truth of a common divine Fatherhood. God is Father of all men, in that he
originates and sustains them as personal beings like in nature to himself.
Even toward sinners God holds this natural relation of Father. It is his
fatherly love, indeed, which provides the atonement. Thus the demands of
holiness are met and the prodigal is restored to the privileges of sonship
which have been forfeited by transgression. This natural Fatherhood,
therefore, does not exclude, but prepares the way for, God’s special
Fatherhood toward those who have been regenerated by his Spirit and who
have believed on his Son; indeed, since all God’s creations take place in
and through Christ, there is a natural and physical sonship of all men, by
virtue of their relation to Christ, the eternal Son, which antedates and
prepares the way for the spiritual sonship of those who join themselves to
him by faith. Man’s natural sonship underlies the history of the fall, and
qualifies the doctrine of Sin.


    Texts referring to God’s natural and common Fatherhood are: _Mal.
    2:10_—“_Have we not all one father_ [Abraham]? _hath not one God
    created us?_” _Luke 3:38_—“_Adam, the son of God_”; _15:11-32_—the
    parable of the prodigal son, in which the father is father even
    before the prodigal returns; _John 3:16_—“_God so loved the world,
    that he gave his only begotten Son_”; _John 15:6_—“_If a man abide
    not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and they
    gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are
    burned_”;—these words imply a natural union of all men with
    Christ,—otherwise they would teach that those who are spiritually
    united to him can perish everlastingly. _Acts 17:28_—“_For we are
    also his offspring_”—words addressed by Paul to a heathen
    audience; _Col. 1:16, 17_—“_in him were all things created ... and
    in him all things consist_”; _Heb. 12:9_—“_the Father of
    spirits._” Fatherhood, in this larger sense, implies: 1.
    Origination; 2. Impartation of life; 3. Sustentation; 4. Likeness
    in faculties and powers; 5. Government; 6. Care; 7. Love. In all
    these respects God is the Father of all men, and his fatherly love
    is both preserving and atoning. God’s natural fatherhood is
    mediated by Christ, through whom all things were made, and in whom
    all things, even humanity, consist. We are naturally children of
    God, as we were _created_ in Christ; we are spiritually sons of
    God, as we have been _created anew_ in Christ Jesus. G. W.
    Northrop: “God never _becomes_ Father to any men or class of men;
    he only becomes a _reconciled_ and _complacent_ Father to those
    who become ethically like him. Men are not sons in the full ideal
    sense until they comport themselves as sons of God.” Chapman,
    Jesus Christ and the Present Age, 39—“While God is the Father of
    all men, all men are not the children of God: in other words, God
    always realizes completely the idea of Father to every man; but
    the majority of men realize only partially the idea of sonship.”

    Texts referring to the special Fatherhood of grace are: _John
    1:12, 13_—“_as many as received him, to them gave he the right to
    become children of God, even to them that believe on his name; who
    were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
    will of man, but of God_”; _Rom. 8:14_—“_for as many as are led by
    the Spirit of God, these are sons of God_”; _15_—“_ye received the
    spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father_”; _2 Cor.
    6:17_—“_Come ye out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the
    Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will
    be to you a Father, and ye shall be to me sons and daughters,
    saith the Lord Almighty_”; _Eph. 1:5, 6_—“_having foreordained us
    unto adoption as sons through Jesus Christ unto himself_”; _3:14,
    15_—“_the Father, from whom every family_ [marg. “fatherhood”] _in
    heaven and on earth is named_” (= every race among angels or
    men—so Meyer, Romans, 158, 159); _Gal 3:26_—“_for ye are all sons
    of God, through faith, in Christ Jesus_”; _4:6_—“_And because ye
    are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts,
    crying, Abba, Father_”; _1 John 3:1, 2_—“_Behold what manner of
    love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called
    children of God; __ and such we are.... Beloved, now are we
    children of God._” The sonship of the race is only rudimentary.
    The actual realization of sonship is possible only through Christ.
    _Gal. 4:1-7_ intimates a universal sonship, but a sonship in which
    the child “_differeth nothing from a bondservant though he is lord
    of all_,” and needs still to “_receive the adoption of sons_.”
    Simon, Reconciliation, 81—“It is one thing to be a father; another
    to discharge all the fatherly functions. Human fathers sometimes
    fail to behave like fathers for reasons lying solely in
    themselves; sometimes because of hindrances in the conduct or
    character of their children. No father can normally discharge his
    fatherly functions toward children who are unchildlike. So even
    the rebellious son is a son, but he does not act like a son.”
    Because all men are naturally sons of God, it does not follow that
    all men will be saved. Many who are naturally sons of God are not
    spiritually sons of God; they are only “_servants_” who “_abide
    not in the house forever_” (_John 8:35_). God is their Father, but
    they have yet to “_become_” his children (_Mat. 5:45_).

    The controversy between those who maintain and those who deny that
    God is the Father of all men is a mere logomachy. God is
    physically and naturally the Father of all men; he is morally and
    spiritually the Father only of those who have been renewed by his
    Spirit. All men are sons of God in a lower sense by virtue of
    their natural union with Christ; only those are sons of God in the
    higher sense who have joined themselves by faith to Christ in a
    spiritual union. We can therefore assent to much that is said by
    those who deny the universal divine fatherhood, as, for example,
    C. M. Mead, in Am. Jour. Theology, July, 1897:577-600, who
    maintains that sonship consists in spiritual kinship with God, and
    who quotes, in support of this view, _John 8:41-44_—“_If God were
    your Father, ye would love me.... Ye are of your father, the
    devil_” = the Fatherhood of God is not universal; _Mat. 5:44,
    45_—“_Love your enemies ... in order that ye may become sons of
    your Father who is in heaven_”; _John 1:12_—“_as many as received
    him, to them gave he the right to become children of God, even to
    them that believe on his name._” Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit,
    103—“That God has created all men does not constitute them his
    sons in the evangelical sense of the word. The sonship on which
    the N. T. dwells so constantly is based solely on the experience
    of the new birth, while the doctrine of universal sonship rests
    either on a daring denial or a daring assumption—the denial of the
    universal fall of man through sin, or the assumption of the
    universal regeneration of man through the Spirit. In either case
    the teaching belongs to ‘_another gospel_’ (_Gal. 1:7_), the
    recompense of whose preaching is not a beatitude, but an
    ‘_anathema_’ (_Gal 1:8._)”

    But we can also agree with much that is urged by the opposite
    party, as for example, Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 1:193—“God does
    not _become_ the Father, but _is_ the heavenly Father, even of
    those who become his sons.... This Fatherhood of God, instead of
    the kingship which was the dominant idea of the Jews, Jesus made
    the primary doctrine. The relation is ethical, not the Fatherhood
    of mere origination, and therefore only those who live aright are
    true sons of God.... 209—Mere kingship, or exaltation above the
    world, led to Pharisaic legal servitude and external ceremony and
    to Alexandrian philosophical speculation. The Fatherhood
    apprehended and announced by Jesus was essentially a relation of
    love and holiness.” A. H. Bradford, Age of Faith, 116-120—“There
    is something sacred in humanity. But systems of theology once
    began with the essential and natural worthlessness of man.... If
    there is no Fatherhood, then selfishness is logical. But
    Fatherhood carries with it identity of nature between the parent
    and the child. Therefore every laborer is of the nature of God,
    and he who has the nature of God cannot be treated like the
    products of factory and field.... All the children of God are by
    nature partakers of the life of God. They are called ‘_children of
    wrath_’ (_Eph. 2:3_), or ‘_of perdition_’ (_John 17:12_), only to
    indicate that their proper relations and duties have been
    violated.... Love for man is dependent on something worthy of
    love, and that is found in man’s essential divinity.” We object to
    this last statement, as attributing to man at the beginning what
    can come to him only through grace. Man was indeed created in
    Christ (_Col. 1:16_) and was a son of God by virtue of his union
    with Christ (_Luke 3:38_; _John 15:6_). But since man has sinned
    and has renounced his sonship, it can be restored and realized. In
    a moral and spiritual sense, only through the atoning work of
    Christ and the regenerating work of the Holy Spirit (_Eph.
    2:10_—“_created in Christ Jesus for good works_”; _2 Pet
    1:4_—“_his precious and exceeding great promises; that through
    these ye may become partakers of the divine nature_”).

    Many who deny the universal Fatherhood of God refuse to carry
    their doctrine to its logical extreme. To be consistent they
    should forbid the unconverted to offer the Lord’s Prayer or even
    to pray at all. A mother who did not believe God to be the Father
    of all actually said: “My children are not converted, and if I
    were to teach them the Lord’s Prayer, I must teach them to say:
    ‘Our father who art in hell’; for they are only children of the
    devil.” Papers on the question: Is God the Father of all Men? are
    to be found in the Proceedings of the Baptist Congress,
    1896:106-136. Among these the essay of F. H. Rowley asserts God’s
    universal Fatherhood upon the grounds: 1. Man is created in the
    image of God; 2. God’s fatherly treatment of man, especially in
    the life of Christ among men; 3. God’s universal claim on man for
    his filial love and trust; 4. Only God’s Fatherhood makes
    incarnation possible, for this implies oneness of nature between
    God and man. To these we may add: 5. The atoning death of Christ
    could be efficacious only upon the ground of a common nature in
    Christ and in humanity; and 6. The regenerating work of the Holy
    Spirit is intelligible only as the restoration of a filial
    relation which was native to man, but which his sin had put into
    abeyance. For denial that God is Father to any but the regenerate,
    see Candlish, Fatherhood of God; Wright, Fatherhood of God. For
    advocacy of the universal Fatherhood, see Crawford, Fatherhood of
    God; Lidgett, Fatherhood of God.



II. Unity of the Human Race.


(_a_) The Scriptures teach that the whole human race is descended from a
single pair.


    _Gen. 1:27, 28_—“_And God created man in his own image, in the
    image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And
    God blessed them: and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and
    multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it_”; _2:7_—“_And
    Jehovah God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed
    into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living
    soul_”; _22_—“_and the rib, which Jehovah God had taken from the
    man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man_”; _3:20_—“_And
    the man called his wife’s name Eve; because she was the mother of
    all living_” = even Eve is traced back to Adam; _9:19_—“_These
    three were the sons of Noah; and of these was the whole earth
    overspread._” Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 110—“Logically, it seems
    easier to account for the divergence of what was at first one,
    than for the union of what was at first heterogeneous.”


(_b_) This truth lies at the foundation of Paul’s doctrine of the organic
unity of mankind in the first transgression, and of the provision of
salvation for the race in Christ.


    _Rom. 5:12_—“_Therefore, as through one man sin entered into the
    world, and death through sin; and so death passed unto all men,
    for that all sinned_”; _19_—“_For as through the one man’s
    disobedience the many were made sinners, even so through the
    obedience of the one shall the many be made righteous_”; _1 Cor.
    15:21, 22_—“_For since by man came death, by man came also the
    resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, so also in
    Christ shall all be made alive_”; _Heb. 2:16_—“_For verily not of
    angels doth he take hold, but he taketh hold of the seed of
    Abraham._” One of the most eminent ethnologists and
    anthropologists, Prof. D. G. Brinton, said not long before his
    death that all scientific research and teaching tended to the
    conviction that mankind has descended from one pair.


(_c_) This descent of humanity from a single pair also constitutes the
ground of man’s obligation of natural brotherhood to every member of the
race.


    _Acts 17:26_—“_he made of one every nation of men to dwell on all
    the face of the earth_”—here the Rev. Vers. omits the word
    “_blood_” (“_made of one blood_”—Auth. Vers.). The word to be
    supplied is possibly “father,” but more probably “body”; _cf._
    _Heb. 2:11_—“_for both he that sanctifieth and they that are
    sanctified are all of one_ [father or body]: _for which cause he
    is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy
    name unto my brethren, In the midst of the congregation will I
    sing thy praise._”

    Winchell, in his Preadamites, has recently revived the theory
    broached in 1655 by Peyrerius, that there were men before Adam:
    “Adam is descended from a black race—not the black races from
    Adam.” Adam is simply “the remotest ancestor to whom the Jews
    could trace their lineage.... The derivation of Adam from an older
    human stock is essentially the creation of Adam.” Winchell does
    not deny the unity of the race, nor the retroactive effect of the
    atonement upon those who lived before Adam; he simply denies that
    Adam was the first man. 297—He “regards the Adamic stock as
    derived from an older and humbler human type,” originally as low
    in the scale as the present Australian savages.

    Although this theory furnishes a plausible explanation of certain
    Biblical facts, such as the marriage of Cain (_Gen. 4:17_), Cain’s
    fear that men would slay him (_Gen. 4:14_), and the distinction
    between “_the sons of God_” and “_the daughters of men_” (_Gen.
    6:1, 2_), it treats the Mosaic narrative as legendary rather than
    historical. Shem, Ham, and Japheth, it is intimated, may have
    lived hundreds of years apart from one another (409). Upon this
    view, Eve could not be “_the mother of all living_” (_Gen. 3:20_),
    nor could the transgression of Adam be the cause and beginning of
    condemnation to the whole race (_Rom. 5:12, 19_). As to Cain’s
    fear of other families who might take vengeance upon him, we must
    remember that we do not know how many children were born to Adam
    between Cain and Abel, nor what the age of Cain and Abel was, nor
    whether Cain feared only those that were then living. As to Cain’s
    marriage, we must remember that even if Cain married into another
    family, his wife, upon any hypothesis of the unity of the race,
    must have been descended from some other original Cain that
    married his sister.

    See Keil and Delitzsch, Com. on Pentateuch, 1:116—“The marriage of
    brothers and sisters was inevitable in the case of children of the
    first man, in case the human race was actually to descend from a
    single pair, and may therefore be justified, in the face of the
    Mosaic prohibition of such marriages, on the ground that the sons
    and daughters of Adam represented not merely the family but the
    genus, and that it was not till after the rise of several families
    that the bonds of fraternal and conjugal love became distinct from
    one another and assumed fixed and mutually exclusive forms, the
    violation of which is sin.” Prof. W. H. Green: “_Gen. 20:12_ shows
    that Sarah was Abraham’s half-sister;...the regulations
    subsequently ordained in the Mosaic law were not then in force.”
    G. H. Darwin, son of Charles Darwin, has shown that marriage
    between cousins is harmless where there is difference of
    temperament between the parties. Modern palæontology makes it
    probable that at the beginning of the race there was greater
    differentiation of brothers and sisters in the same family than
    obtains in later times. See Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:275. For criticism
    of the doctrine that there were men before Adam, see Methodist
    Quar. Rev., April, 1881:205-231; Presb. Rev., 1881:440-444.


The Scripture statements are corroborated by considerations drawn from
history and science. Four arguments may be briefly mentioned:


1. The argument from history.


So far as the history of nations and tribes in both hemispheres can be
traced, the evidence points to a common origin and ancestry in central
Asia.


    The European nations are acknowledged to have come, in successive
    waves of migration, from Asia. Modern ethnologists generally agree
    that the Indian races of America are derived from Mongoloid
    sources in Eastern Asia, either through Polynesia or by way of the
    Aleutian Islands. Bunsen, Philos. of Universal History, 2:112—the
    Asiatic origin of all the North American Indians “is as fully
    proved as the unity of family among themselves.” Mason, Origins of
    Invention, 361—“Before the time of Columbus, the Polynesians made
    canoe voyages from Tahiti to Hawaii, a distance of 2300 miles.”
    Keane, Man Past and Present, 1-15, 349-440, treats of the American
    Aborigines under two primitive types: Longheads from Europe and
    Roundheads from Asia. The human race, he claims, originated in
    Indomalaysia and spread thence by migration over the globe. The
    world was peopled from one center by Pleistocene man. The primary
    groups were evolved each in its special habitat, but all sprang
    from a Pleiocene precursor 100,000 years ago. W. T. Lopp,
    missionary to the Eskimos, at Port Clarence, Alaska, on the
    American side of Bering Strait, writes under date of August 31,
    1892: “No thaws during the winter, and ice blocked in the Strait.
    This has always been doubted by whalers. Eskimos have told them
    that they sometimes crossed the Strait on ice, but they have never
    believed them. Last February and March our Eskimos had a tobacco
    famine. Two parties (five men) went with dogsleds to East Cape, on
    the Siberian coast, and traded some beaver, otter and marten skins
    for Russian tobacco, and returned safely. It is only during an
    occasional winter that they can do this. But every summer they
    make several trips in their big wolf-skin boats—forty feet long.
    These observations may throw some light upon the origin of the
    prehistoric races of America.”

    Tylor, Primitive Culture, 1:48—“The semi-civilized nations of Java
    and Sumatra are found in possession of a civilization which at
    first glance shows itself to have been borrowed from Hindu and
    Moslem sources.” See also Sir Henry Rawlinson, quoted in Burgess,
    Antiquity and Unity of the Race, 156, 157; Smyth, Unity of Human
    Races, 223-236; Pickering, Races of Man, Introd., synopsis, and
    page 316; Guyot, Earth and Man, 298-334; Quatrefages, Natural
    History of Man, and Unité de l’Espèce Humaine; Godron, Unité de
    l’Espèce Humaine, 2:412 _sq._ _Per contra_, however, see Prof. A.
    H. Sayce: “The evidence is now all tending to show that the
    districts in the neighborhood of the Baltic were those from which
    the Aryan languages first radiated, and where the race or races
    who spoke them originally dwelt. The Aryan invaders of
    Northwestern India could only have been a late and distant
    offshoot of the primitive stock, speedily absorbed into the
    earlier population of the country as they advanced southward; and
    to speak of ‘our Indian brethren’ is as absurd and false as to
    claim relationship with the negroes of the United States because
    they now use an Aryan language.” Scribner, Where Did Life Begin?
    has lately adduced arguments to prove that life on the earth
    originated at the North Pole, and Prof. Asa Gray favors this view;
    see his Darwiniana, 205, and Scientific Papers, 2:152; so also
    Warren, Paradise Found; and Wieland, in Am. Journal of Science,
    Dec. 1903:401-430. Dr. J. L. Wortman, in Yale Alumni Weekly, Jan.
    14, 1903:129—“The appearance of all these primates in North
    America was very abrupt at the beginning of the second stage of
    the Eocene. And it is a striking coincidence that approximately
    the same forms appear in beds of exactly corresponding age in
    Europe. Nor does this synchronism stop with the apes. It applies
    to nearly all the other types of Eocene mammalia in the Northern
    Hemisphere, and to the accompanying flora as well. These facts can
    be explained only on the hypothesis that there was a common centre
    from which these plants and animals were distributed. Considering
    further that the present continental masses were essentially the
    same in the Eocene time as now, and that the North Polar region
    then enjoyed a subtropical climate, as is abundantly proved by
    fossil plants, we are forced to the conclusion that this common
    centre of dispersion lay approximately within the Arctic
    Circle.... The origin of the human species did not take place on
    the Western Hemisphere.”


2. The argument from language.


Comparative philology points to a common origin of all the more important
languages, and furnishes no evidence that the less important are not also
so derived.


    On Sanskrit as a connecting link between the Indo-Germanic
    languages, see Max Müller, Science of Language, 1:146-165,
    326-342, who claims that all languages pass through the three
    stages: monosyllabic, agglutinative, inflectional; and that
    nothing necessitates the admission of different independent
    beginnings for either the material or the formal elements of the
    Turanian, Semitic, and Aryan branches of speech. The changes of
    language are often rapid. Latin becomes the Romance languages, and
    Saxon and Norman are united into English, in three centuries. The
    Chinese may have departed from their primitive abodes while their
    language was yet monosyllabic.

    G. J. Romanes, Life and Letters, 195—“Children are the
    constructors of all _languages_, as distinguished from
    _language_.” Instance Helen Keller’s sudden acquisition of
    language, uttering publicly a long piece only three weeks after
    she first began to imitate the motions of the lips. G. F. Wright,
    Man and the Glacial Period, 242-301—“Recent investigations show
    that children, when from any cause isolated at an early age, will
    often produce at once a language _de novo_. Thus it would appear
    by no means improbable that various languages in America, and
    perhaps the earliest languages of the world, may have arisen in a
    short time where conditions were such that a family of small
    children could have maintained existence when for any cause
    deprived of parental and other fostering care.... Two or three
    thousand years of prehistoric time is perhaps all that would be
    required to produce the diversification of languages which appears
    at the dawn of history.... The prehistoric stage of Europe ended
    less than a thousand years before the Christian Era.” In a people
    whose speech has not been fixed by being committed to writing,
    baby-talk is a great source of linguistic corruption, and the
    changes are exceedingly rapid. Humboldt took down the vocabulary
    of a South American tribe, and after fifteen years of absence
    found their speech so changed as to seem a different language.

    Zöckler, in Jahrbuch für deutsche Theologie, 8:68 _sq._, denies
    the progress from lower methods of speech to higher, and declares
    the most highly developed inflectional languages to be the oldest
    and most widespread. Inferior languages are a degeneration from a
    higher state of culture. In the development of the Indo-Germanic
    languages (such as the French and the English), we have instances
    of change from more full and luxuriant expression to that which is
    monosyllabic or agglutinative. The theory of Max Müller is also
    opposed by Pott, Die Verschiedenheiten der menschlichen Rassen,
    202, 242. Pott calls attention to the fact that the Australian
    languages show unmistakable similarity to the languages of Eastern
    and Southern Asia, although the physical characteristics of these
    tribes are far different from the Asiatic.

    On the old Egyptian language as a connecting link between the
    Indo-European and the Semitic tongues, see Bunsen, Egypt’s Place,
    1: preface, 10; also see Farrar, Origin of Language, 213. Like the
    old Egyptian, the Berber and the Touareg are Semitic in parts of
    their vocabulary, while yet they are Aryan in grammar. So the
    Tibetan and Burmese stand between the Indo-European languages, on
    the one hand, and the monosyllabic languages, as of China, on the
    other. A French philologist claims now to have interpreted the
    _Yh-King_, the oldest and most unintelligible monumental writing
    of the Chinese, by regarding it as a corruption of the old
    Assyrian or Accadian cuneiform characters, and as resembling the
    syllabaries, vocabularies, and bilingual tablets in the ruined
    libraries of Assyria and Babylon; see Terrien de Lacouperie, The
    Oldest Book of the Chinese and its Authors, and The Languages of
    China before the Chinese, 11, note; he holds to “the
    non-indigenousness of the Chinese civilization and its derivation
    from the old Chaldæo-Babylonian focus of culture by the medium of
    Susiana.” See also Sayce, in Contemp. Rev., Jan. 1884:934-936;
    also, The Monist, Oct. 1906:562-596, on The Ideograms of the
    Chinese and the Central American Calendars. The evidence goes to
    show that the Chinese came into China from Susiana in the 23d
    century before Christ. Initial G wears down in time into a Y
    sound. Many words which begin with Y in Chinese are found in
    Accadian beginning with G, as Chinese Ye, “night,” is in Accadian
    Ge, “night.” The order of development seems to be: 1. picture
    writing; 2. syllabic writing; 3. alphabetic writing.

    In a similar manner, there is evidence that the Pharaonic
    Egyptians were immigrants from another land, namely, Babylonia.
    Hommel derives the hieroglyphs of the Egyptians from the pictures
    out of which the cuneiform characters developed, and he shows that
    the elements of the Egyptian language itself are contained in that
    mixed speech of Babylonia which originated in the fusion of
    Sumerians and Semites. The Osiris of Egypt is the Asari of the
    Sumerians. Burial in brick tombs in the first two Egyptian
    dynasties is a survival from Babylonia, as are also the
    seal-cylinders impressed on clay. On the relations between Aryan
    and Semitic languages, see Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 55-61;
    Murray, Origin and Growth of the Psalms, 7; Bib. Sac., 1870:162;
    1876:352-380; 1879:674-706. See also Pezzi, Aryan Philology, 125;
    Sayce, Principles of Comp. Philology, 132-174; Whitney, art. on
    Comp. Philology in Encyc. Britannica, also Life and Growth of
    Language, 269, and Study of Language, 307, 308—“Language affords
    certain indications of doubtful value, which, taken along with
    certain other ethnological considerations, also of questionable
    pertinency, furnish ground for suspecting an ultimate
    relationship.... That more thorough comprehension of the history
    of Semitic speech will enable us to determine this ultimate
    relationship, may perhaps be looked for with hope, though it is
    not to be expected with confidence.” See also Smyth, Unity of
    Human Races, 199-222; Smith’s Bib. Dict., art.: Confusion of
    Tongues.

    We regard the facts as, on the whole, favoring an opposite
    conclusion from that in Hastings’s Bible Dictionary, art.: Flood:
    “The diversity of the human race and of language alike makes it
    improbable that men were derived from a single pair.” E. G.
    Robinson: “The only trustworthy argument for the unity of the race
    is derived from comparative philology. If it should be established
    that one of the three families of speech was more ancient than the
    others, and the source of the others, the argument would be
    unanswerable. Coloration of the skin seems to lie back of climatic
    influences. We believe in the unity of the race because in this
    there are the fewest difficulties. We would not know how else to
    interpret Paul in _Romans 5_.” Max Müller has said that the
    fountain head of modern philology as of modern freedom and
    international law is the change wrought by Christianity,
    superseding the narrow national conception of patriotism by the
    recognition of all the nations and races as members of one great
    human family.


3. The argument from psychology.


The existence, among all families of mankind, of common mental and moral
characteristics, as evinced in common maxims, tendencies and capacities,
in the prevalence of similar traditions, and in the universal
applicability of one philosophy and religion, is most easily explained
upon the theory of a common origin.


    Among the widely prevalent traditions may be mentioned the
    tradition of the fashioning of the world and man, of a primeval
    garden, of an original innocence and happiness, of a tree of
    knowledge, of a serpent, of a temptation and fall, of a division
    of time into weeks, of a flood, of sacrifice. It is possible, if
    not probable, that certain myths, common to many nations, may have
    been handed down from a time when the families of the race had not
    yet separated. See Zöckler, in Jahrbuch für deutsche Theologie,
    8:71-90; Max Müller, Science of Language, 2:444-455; Prichard,
    Nat. Hist. of Man, 2:657-714; Smyth, Unity of Human Races,
    236-240; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:77-91; Gladstone, Juventus Mundi.


4. The argument from physiology.


A. It is the common judgment of comparative physiologists that man
constitutes but a single species. The differences which exist between the
various families of mankind are to be regarded as varieties of this
species. In proof of these statements we urge: (_a_) The numberless
intermediate gradations which connect the so-called races with each other.
(_b_) The essential identity of all races in cranial, osteological, and
dental characteristics. (_c_) The fertility of unions between individuals
of the most diverse types, and the continuous fertility of the offspring
of such unions.


    Huxley, Critiques and Addresses, 163—“It may be safely affirmed
    that, even if the differences between men are specific, they are
    so small that the assumption of more than one primitive stock for
    all is altogether superfluous. We may admit that Negroes and
    Australians are distinct species, yet be the strictest
    monogenists, and even believe in Adam and Eve as the primeval
    parents of mankind, _i. e._, on Darwin’s hypothesis”; Origin of
    Species, 118—“I am one of those who believe that at present there
    is no evidence whatever for saying that mankind sprang originally
    from more than a single pair; I must say that I cannot see any
    good ground whatever, or any tenable evidence, for believing that
    there is more than one species of man.” Owen, quoted by Burgess,
    Ant. and Unity of Race, 185—“Man forms but one species, and
    differences are but indications of varieties. These variations
    merge into each other by easy gradations.” Alex. von Humboldt:
    “The different races of men are forms of one sole species,—they
    are not different species of a genus.”

    Quatrefages, in Revue d. deux Mondes, Dec. 1860:814—“If one places
    himself exclusively upon the plane of the natural sciences, it is
    impossible not to conclude in favor of the monogenist doctrine.”
    Wagner, quoted in Bib. Sac., 19:607—“Species—the collective total
    of individuals which are capable of producing one with another an
    uninterruptedly fertile progeny.” Pickering, Races of Man,
    316—“There is no middle ground between the admission of eleven
    distinct species in the human family and their reduction to one.
    The latter opinion implies a central point of origin.”

    There is an impossibility of deciding how many races there are, if
    we once allow that there are more than one. While Pickering would
    say eleven, Agassiz says eight, Morton twenty-two, and Burke
    sixty-five. Modern science all tends to the derivation of each
    family from a single germ. Other common characteristics of all
    races of men, in addition to those mentioned in the text, are the
    duration of pregnancy, the normal temperature of the body, the
    mean frequency of the pulse, the liability to the same diseases.
    Meehan, State Botanist of Pennsylvania, maintains that hybrid
    vegetable products are no more sterile than are ordinary plants
    (Independent, Aug. 21, 1884).

    E. B. Tylor, art.: Anthropology, in Encyc. Britannica: “On the
    whole it may be asserted that the doctrine of the unity of mankind
    now stands on a firmer basis than in previous ages.” Darwin,
    Animals and Plants under Domestication, 1:39—“From the resemblance
    in several countries of the half-domesticated dogs to the wild
    species still living there, from the facility with which they can
    be crossed together, from even half tamed animals being so much
    valued by savages, and from the other circumstances previously
    remarked on which favor domestication, it is highly probable that
    the domestic dogs of the world have descended from two good
    species of wolf (_viz._, _Canis lupus_ and _Canis latrans_), and
    from two or three other doubtful species of wolves (namely, the
    European, Indian and North American forms); from at least one or
    two South American canine species; from several races or species
    of the jackal; and perhaps from one or more extinct species.” Dr.
    E. M. Moore tried unsuccessfully to produce offspring by pairing a
    Newfoundland dog and a wolf-like dog from Canada. He only proved
    anew the repugnance of even slightly separated species toward one
    another.


B. Unity of species is presumptive evidence of unity of origin. Oneness of
origin furnishes the simplest explanation of specific uniformity, if
indeed the very conception of species does not imply the repetition and
reproduction of a primordial type-idea impressed at its creation upon an
individual empowered to transmit this type-idea to its successors.


    Dana, quoted in Burgess, Antiq. and Unity of Race, 185, 186—“In
    the ascending scale of animals, the number of species in any genus
    diminishes as we rise, and should by analogy be smallest at the
    head of the series. Among mammals, the higher genera have few
    species, and the highest group next to man, the orang-outang, has
    only eight, and these constitute but two genera. Analogy requires
    that man should have preëminence and should constitute only one.”
    194—“A species corresponds to a specific amount or condition of
    concentrated force defined in the act or law of creation.... The
    species in any particular case began its existence when the first
    germ-cell or individual was created. When individuals multiply
    from generation to generation, it is but a repetition of the
    primordial type-idea.... The specific is based on a numerical
    unity, the species being nothing else than an enlargement of the
    individual.” For full statement of Dana’s view, see Bib. Sac., Oct
    1857:862-866. On the idea of species, see also Shedd, Dogm.
    Theol., 2:63-74.


(_a_) To this view is opposed the theory, propounded by Agassiz, of
different centres of creation, and of different types of humanity
corresponding to the varying fauna and flora of each. But this theory
makes the plural origin of man an exception in creation. Science points
rather to a single origin of each species, whether vegetable or animal. If
man be, as this theory grants, a single species, he should be, by the same
rule, restricted to one continent in his origin. This theory, moreover,
applies an unproved hypothesis with regard to the distribution of
organized beings in general to the very being whose whole nature and
history show conclusively that he is an exception to such a general rule,
if one exists. Since man can adapt himself to all climes and conditions,
the theory of separate centres of creation is, in his case, gratuitous and
unnecessary.


    Agassiz’s view was first published in an essay on the Provinces of
    the Animal World, in Nott and Gliddon’s Types of Mankind, a book
    gotten up in the interest of slavery. Agassiz held to eight
    distinct centres of creation, and to eight corresponding types of
    humanity—the Arctic, the Mongolian, the European, the American,
    the Negro, the Hottentot, the Malay, the Australian. Agassiz
    regarded Adam as the ancestor only of the white race, yet like
    Peyrerius and Winchell be held that man in all his various races
    constitutes but one species.

    The whole tendency of recent science, however, has been adverse to
    the doctrine of separate centres of creation, even in the case of
    animal and vegetable life. In temperate North America there are
    two hundred and seven species of quadrupeds, of which only eight,
    and these polar animals, are found in the north of Europe or Asia.
    If North America be an instance of a separate centre of creation
    for its peculiar species, why should God create the same species
    of man in eight different localities? This would make man an
    exception in creation. There is, moreover, no need of creating man
    in many separate localities; for, unlike the polar bears and the
    Norwegian firs, which cannot live at the equator, man can adapt
    himself to the most varied climates and conditions. For replies to
    Agassiz, see Bib. Sac., 19:607-632; Princeton Rev., 1862:435-464.


(_b_) It is objected, moreover, that the diversities of size, color, and
physical conformation, among the various families of mankind, are
inconsistent with the theory of a common origin. But we reply that these
diversities are of a superficial character, and can be accounted for by
corresponding diversities of condition and environment. Changes which have
been observed and recorded within historic times show that the differences
alluded to may be the result of slowly accumulated divergences from one
and the same original and ancestral type. The difficulty in the case,
moreover, is greatly relieved when we remember (1) that the period during
which these divergences have arisen is by no means limited to six thousand
years (see note on the antiquity of the race, pages 224-226); and (2)
that, since species in general exhibit their greatest power of divergence
into varieties immediately after their first introduction, all the
varieties of the human species may have presented themselves in man’s
earliest history.


    Instances of physiological change as the result of new conditions:
    The Irish driven by the English two centuries ago from Armagh and
    the south of Down, have become prognathous like the Australians.
    The inhabitants of New England have descended from the English,
    yet they have already a physical type of their own. The Indians of
    North America, or at least certain tribes of them, have
    permanently altered the shape of the skull by bandaging the head
    in infancy. The Sikhs of India, since the establishment of Bába
    Nának’s religion (1500 A. D.) and their consequent advance in
    civilization, have changed to a longer head and more regular
    features, so that they are now distinguished greatly from their
    neighbors, the Afghans, Tibetans, Hindus. The Ostiak savages have
    become the Magyar nobility of Hungary. The Turks in Europe are, in
    cranial shape, greatly in advance of the Turks in Asia from whom
    they descended. The Jews are confessedly of one ancestry; yet we
    have among them the light-haired Jews of Poland, the dark Jews of
    Spain, and the Ethiopian Jews of the Nile Valley. The Portuguese
    who settled in the East Indies in the 16th century are now as dark
    in complexion as the Hindus themselves. Africans become lighter in
    complexion as they go up from the alluvial river-banks to higher
    land, or from the coast; and on the contrary the coast tribes
    which drive out the negroes of the interior and take their
    territory end by becoming negroes themselves. See, for many of the
    above facts, Burgess, Antiquity and Unity of the Race, 195-202.

    The law of originally greater plasticity, mentioned in the text,
    was first hinted by Hall, the palæontologist of New York. It is
    accepted and defined by Dawson, Story of the Earth and Man, 360—“A
    new law is coming into view: that species when first introduced
    have an innate power of expansion, which enables them rapidly to
    extend themselves to the limit of their geographical range, and
    also to reach the limit of their divergence into races. This limit
    once reached, these races run on in parallel lines until they one
    by one run out and disappear. According to this law the most
    aberrant races of men might be developed in a few centuries, after
    which divergence would cease, and the several lines of variation
    would remain permanent, at least so long as the conditions under
    which they originated remained.” See the similar view of Von Baer
    in Schmid, Theories of Darwin, 55, note. Joseph Cook: Variability
    is a lessening quantity; the tendency to change is greatest at the
    first, but, like the rate of motion of a stone thrown upward, it
    lessens every moment after. Ruskin, Seven Lamps, 125—“The life of
    a nation is usually, like the flow of a lava-stream, first bright
    and fierce, then languid and covered, at last advancing only by
    the tumbling over and over of its frozen blocks.” Renouf, Hibbert
    Lectures, 54—“The further back we go into antiquity, the more
    closely does the Egyptian type approach the European.” Rawlinson
    says that negroes are not represented in the Egyptian monuments
    before 1500 B. C. The influence of climate is very great,
    especially in the savage state.

    In May, 1891, there died in San Francisco the son of an
    interpreter at the Merchants’ Exchange. He was 21 years of age.
    Three years before his death his clear skin was his chief claim to
    manly beauty. He was attacked by “Addison’s disease,” a gradual
    darkening of the color of the surface of the body. At the time of
    his death his skin was as dark as that of a full-blooded negro.
    His name was George L. Sturtevant. Ratzel, History of Mankind,
    1:9, 10—As there is only one species of man, “the reunion into one
    real whole of the parts which have diverged after the fashion of
    sports” is said to be “the unconscious ultimate aim of all the
    movements” which have taken place since man began his wanderings.
    “With Humboldt we can only hold fast to the external unity of the
    race.” See Sir Wm. Hunter, The Indian Empire, 223, 410; Encyc.
    Britannica, 12:808; 20:110; Zöckler, Urgeschichte, 109-132, and in
    Jahrbuch für deutsche Theologie, 8:51-71; Prichard, Researches,
    5:547-552, and Nat. Hist. of Man, 2:644-656; Duke of Argyll,
    Primeval Man, 96-108; Smith, Unity of Human Races, 255-283;
    Morris, Conflict of Science and Religion, 325-385; Rawlinson, in
    Journ. Christ. Philosophy, April, 1883:359.



III. Essential Elements of Human Nature.


1. The Dichotomous Theory.


Man has a two-fold nature,—on the one hand material, on the other hand
immaterial. He consists of body, and of spirit, or soul. That there are
two, and only two, elements in man’s being, is a fact to which
consciousness testifies. This testimony is confirmed by Scripture, in
which the prevailing representation of man’s constitution is that of
dichotomy.


    Dichotomous, from δίχα, “in two,” and τέμνω, “to cut,” = composed
    of two parts. Man is as conscious that his immaterial part is a
    unity, as that his body is a unity. He knows two, and only two,
    parts of his being—body and soul. So man is the true Janus
    (Martensen), Mr. Facing-both-ways (Bunyan). That the Scriptures
    favor dichotomy will appear by considering:


(_a_) The record of man’s creation (Gen. 2:7), in which, as a result of
the inbreathing of the divine Spirit, the body becomes possessed and
vitalized by a single principle—the living soul.


    _Gen. 2:7_—“_And Jehovah God formed man of the dust of the ground,
    and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became
    a living soul_”—here it is not said that man was first a living
    soul, and that then God breathed into him a spirit; but that God
    inbreathed spirit, and man became a living soul = God’s life took
    possession of clay, and as a result, man had a soul. _Cf._ _Job
    27:3_—“_for my life is yet whole in me, And the spirit of God is
    in my nostrils_”; _32:8_—“_there is a spirit in man, And the
    breath of the Almighty giveth them understanding_”; _33:4_—“_The
    Spirit of God hath made me, And the breath of the Almighty giveth
    me life._”


(_b_) Passages in which the human soul, or spirit, is distinguished, both
from the divine Spirit from whom it proceeded, and from the body which it
inhabits.


    _Num. 16:22_—“_O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh_”;
    _Zech. 12:1_—“_Jehovah, who ... formeth the spirit of man within
    him_”; _1 Cor. 2:11_—“_the spirit of the man which is in him ...
    the Spirit of God_”; _Heb. 12:9_—“_the Father of spirits._” The
    passages just mentioned distinguish the spirit of man from the
    Spirit of God. The following distinguish the soul, or spirit, of
    man from the body which it inhabits: _Gen, 35:18_—“_it came to
    pass, as her soul was departing (for she died)_”; _1 K. 17:21_—“_O
    Jehovah my God, I pray thee, let this child’s soul come into him
    again_”; _Eccl. 12:7_—“_the dust returneth to the earth as it was,
    and the spirit returneth unto God who gave it_”; _James
    2:26_—“_the body apart from the spirit is dead._” The first class
    of passages refutes pantheism; the second refutes materialism.


(_c_) The interchangeable use of the terms “soul” and “spirit.”


    _Gen. 41:8_—“_his spirit was troubled_”; _cf._ _Ps. 42:6_—“_my
    soul is cast down within me._” _John 12:27_—“_Now is my soul
    troubled_”; _cf._ _13:21_—“_he was troubled in the spirit._” _Mat.
    20:28_—“_to give his life (ψυχήν) a ransom for many_”; _cf._
    _27:50_—“_yielded up his spirit (πνεῦμα)._” _Heb. 12:23_—“_spirits
    of just men made perfect_”; _cf._ _Rev. 6:9_—“_I saw underneath
    the altar the souls of them that had been slain for the word of
    God._” In these passages “_spirit_” and “_soul_” seem to be used
    interchangeably.


(_d_) The mention of body and soul (or spirit) as together constituting
the whole man.


    _Mat 10:28_—“_able to destroy both soul and body in hell_”; _1
    Cor. 5:3_—“_absent in body but present in spirit_”; _3 John 2_—“_I
    pray that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul
    prospereth._” These texts imply that body and soul (or spirit)
    together constitute the whole man.

    For advocacy of the dichotomous theory, see Goodwin, in Journ.
    Society Bib. Exegesis, 1881:73-86; Godet, Bib. Studies of the O.
    T., 32; Oehler, Theology of the O. T., 1:219; Hahn, Bib. Theol. N.
    T., 390 _sq._; Schmid, Bib. Theology N. T., 503; Weiss, Bib.
    Theology N. T., 214; Luthardt, Compendium der Dogmatik, 112, 113;
    Hofmann, Schriftbeweis, 1:294-298; Kahnis, Dogmatik, 1:549; 3:249;
    Harless, Com. on Eph., 4:23, and Christian Ethics, 22; Thomasius,
    Christi Person und Werk. 1:164-168; Hodge, in Princeton Review,
    1865:116, and Systematic Theol., 2:47-51; Ebrard, Dogmatik,
    1:261-263; Wm. H. Hodge, in Presb. and Ref. Rev., Apl. 1897.


2. The Trichotomous Theory.


Side by side with this common representation of human nature as consisting
of two parts, are found passages which at first sight appear to favor
trichotomy. It must be acknowledged that πνεῦμα (spirit) and ψυχή (soul),
although often used interchangeably, and always designating the same
indivisible substance, are sometimes employed as contrasted terms.

In this more accurate use, ψυχή denotes man’s immaterial part in its
inferior powers and activities;—as ψυχή, man is a conscious individual,
and, in common with the brute creation, has an animal life, together with
appetite, imagination, memory, understanding. Πνεῦμα, on the other hand,
denotes man’s immaterial part in its higher capacities and faculties;—as
πνεῦμα, man is a being related to God, and possessing powers of reason,
conscience, and free will, which difference him from the brute creation
and constitute him responsible and immortal.


    In the following texts, spirit and soul are distinguished from
    each other: _1 Thess. 5:23_—“_And the God of peace himself
    sanctify you wholly; and may your spirit and soul and body be
    preserved entire, without blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus
    Christ_”; _Heb. 4:12_—“_For the word of God is living, and active,
    and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing even to the
    dividing of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and quick
    to discern the thoughts and intents of the heart._” Compare _1
    Cor. 2:14_—“_Now the natural_ [Gr. “_psychical_”] _man receiveth
    not the things of the Spirit of God_”; _15:44_—“_It is sown a
    natural_ [Gr. “_psychical_”] _body; it is raised a spiritual body.
    If there is a natural_ [Gr. “psychical”] _body, there is also a
    spiritual body_”; _Eph. 4:23_—“_that ye be renewed in the spirit
    of your mind_”; _Jude 19_—“_sensual_ [Gr. “_psychical_”], _having
    not the Spirit._”

    For the proper interpretation of these texts, see note on the next
    page. Among those who cite them as proofs of the trichotomous
    theory (trichotomous, from τρίχα, “in three parts,” and τέμνω, “to
    cut,” = composed of three parts, _i. e._, spirit, soul, and body)
    may be mentioned Olshausen, Opuscula, 134, and Com. on _1 Thess.,
    5:23_; Beck, Biblische Seelenlehre, 81; Delitzsch, Biblical
    Psychology, 117, 118; Göschel, in Herzog, Realencyclopädie, art.:
    Seele; also, art. by Auberlen: Geist des Menschen; Cremer, N. T.
    Lexicon, on πνεῦμα and ψυχή; Usteri, Paulin. Lehrbegriff, 384
    _sq._; Neander, Planting and Training, 394; Van Oosterzee,
    Christian Dogmatics, 365, 366; Boardman, in Bap. Quarterly, 1:177,
    325, 428; Heard, Tripartite Nature of Man, 62-114; Ellicott,
    Destiny of the Creature, 106-125.


The element of truth in trichotomy is simply this, that man has a
triplicity of endowment, in virtue of which the single soul has relations
to matter, to self, and to God. The trichotomous theory, however, as it is
ordinarily defined, endangers the unity and immateriality of our higher
nature, by holding that man consists of three _substances_, or three
component _parts_—body, soul and spirit—and that soul and spirit are as
distinct from each other as are soul and body.


    The advocates of this view differ among themselves as to the
    nature of the ψυχή and its relation to the other elements of our
    being; some (as Delitzsch) holding that the ψυχή is an efflux of
    the πνεῦμα, distinct in substance, but not in essence, even as the
    divine Word is distinct from God, while yet he is God; others (as
    Göschel) regarding the ψυχή, not as a distinct substance, but as a
    resultant of the union of the πνεῦμα and the σῶμα. Still others
    (as Cremer) hold the ψυχή to be the subject of the personal life
    whose principle is the πνεῦμα. Heard, Tripartite Nature of Man,
    103—“God is the Creator _ex traduce_ of the animal and
    intellectual part of every man.... Not so with the spirit.... It
    proceeds from God, not by creation, but by emanation.”


We regard the trichotomous theory as untenable, not only for the reasons
already urged in proof of the dichotomous theory, but from the following
additional considerations:

(_a_) Πνεῦμα, as well as ψυχή, is used of the brute creation.


    _Eccl. 3:21_—“_Who knoweth the spirit of man, whether it goeth_
    [marg. “_that goeth_”] _upward, and the spirit of the beast,
    whether it goeth_ [marg. “_that goeth_”] _downward to the earth?_”
    _Rev. 16:3_—“_And the second poured out his bowl into the sea; and
    it became blood, as of a dead man; and every living soul died,
    even the things that were in the sea_” = the fish.


(_b_) ψυχή is ascribed to Jehovah.


    _Amos 6:8_—“_The Lord Jehovah hath sworn by himself_” (lit. “_by
    his soul_”) LXX _42:1_—“_my chosen in whom my soul delighteth_”;
    _Jer. 9:9_—“_Shall I not visit them for these things? saith
    Jehovah; shall not my soul be avenged?_” _Heb. 10:38_—“_my
    righteous one shall live by faith: And if he shrink back, my soul
    hath no pleasure in him._”


(_c_) The disembodied dead are called ψυχαί.


    _Rev. 6:9_—“_I saw underneath the altar the souls of them that had
    been slain for the word of God_”; _cf._ _20:4_—“_souls of them
    that had been beheaded._”


(_d_) The highest exercises of religion are attributed to the ψυχή.


    _Mark 12:30_—“_thou shalt love the Lord thy God ... with all thy
    soul_”; _Luke 1:46_—“_My soul doth magnify the Lord_”; _Heb. 6:18,
    19_—“_the hope set before us: which we have as an anchor of the
    soul_”; _James 1:21_—“_the implanted word, which is able to save
    your souls._”


(_e_) To lose this ψυχή is to lose all.


    _Mark 8:36, 37_—“_For what doth it profit a man, to gain the whole
    world, and forfeit his life_ [or “_soul_,” ψυχή]? _For what should
    a man give in exchange for his life_ [or ‘_soul_,’ ψυχή]?”


(_f_) The passages chiefly relied upon as supporting trichotomy may be
better explained upon the view already indicated, that soul and spirit are
not two distinct substances or parts, but that they designate the
immaterial principle from different points of view.


    _1 Thess. 5:23_—“_may your spirit and soul and body be preserved
    entire_” = not a scientific enumeration of the constituent parts
    of human nature, but a comprehensive sketch of that nature in its
    chief relations; compare _Mark 12:30_—“_thou shalt love the Lord
    thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
    thy mind, and with all thy strength_”—where none would think of
    finding proof of a fourfold division of human nature. On _1 Thess.
    5:23_, see Riggenbach (in Lange’s Com.), and Commentary of Prof.
    W. A. Stevens. _Heb. 4:12_—“_piercing even to the dividing of soul
    and spirit, of both joints and marrow_” = not the dividing of soul
    _from_ spirit, or of joints _from_ marrow, but rather the piercing
    of the soul and of the spirit, even to their very joints and
    marrow; _i. e._, to the very depths of the spiritual nature. On
    _Heb. 4:12_, see Ebrard (in Olshausen’s Com.), and Lünemann (in
    Meyer’s Com.); also Tholuck, Com. _in loco_. _Jude 19_—“_sensual,
    having not the Spirit_” (ψυχικοί, πνεῦμα μὴ ἔχοντες)—even though
    πνεῦμα = the human spirit, need not mean that there is no spirit
    existing, but only that the spirit is torpid and inoperative—as we
    say of a weak man: “he has no mind,” or of an unprincipled man:
    “he has no conscience”; so Alford; see Nitzsch, Christian
    Doctrine, 202. But πνεῦμα here probably = the divine πνεῦμα. Meyer
    takes this view, and the Revised Version capitalizes the word
    “_Spirit_.” See Goodwin, Soc. Bib. Exegesis, 1881:85—“The
    distinction between ψυχή and πνεῦμα is a _functional_, and not a
    _substantial_, distinction.” Moule, Outlines of Christian
    Doctrine, 161, 162—“Soul = spirit organized, inseparably linked
    with the body; spirit = man’s inner being considered as God’s
    gift. Soul = man’s inner being viewed as his own; spirit = man’s
    inner being viewed as from God. They are not separate elements.”
    See Lightfoot, Essay on St. Paul and Seneca, appended to his Com.
    on Philippians, on the influence of the ethical language of
    Stoicism on the N. T. writers. Martineau, Seat of Authority,
    39—“The difference between man and his companion creatures on this
    earth is not that his instinctive life is less than theirs, for in
    truth it goes far beyond them; but that in him it acts in the
    presence and under the eye of other powers which transform it, and
    by giving to it vision as well as light take its blindness away.
    He is let into his own secrets.”


We conclude that the immaterial part of man, viewed as an individual and
conscious life, capable of possessing and animating a physical organism,
is called ψυχή; viewed as a rational and moral agent, susceptible of
divine influence and indwelling, this same immaterial part is called
πνεῦμα. The πνεῦμα, then, is man’s nature looking Godward, and capable of
receiving and manifesting the Πνεῦμα ἅγιον; the ψυχή is man’s nature
looking earthward, and touching the world of sense. The πνεῦμα is man’s
higher part, as related to spiritual realities or as capable of such
relation; the ψυχή is man’s higher part, as related to the body, or as
capable of such relation. Man’s being is therefore not trichotomous but
dichotomous, and his immaterial part, while possessing duality of powers,
has unity of substance.


    Man’s nature is not a three-storied house, but a two-storied
    house, with windows in the upper story looking in two
    directions—toward earth and toward heaven. The lower story is the
    physical part of us—the body. But man’s “upper story” has two
    aspects; there is an outlook toward things below, and a skylight
    through which to see the stars. “Soul” says Hovey, “is spirit as
    modified by union with the body.” Is man then the same in kind
    with the brute, but different in degree? No, man is different in
    kind, though possessed of certain powers which the brute has. The
    frog is not a magnified sensitive-plant, though his nerves
    automatically respond to irritation. The animal is different in
    kind from the vegetable, though he has some of the same powers
    which the vegetable has. God’s powers include man’s; but man is
    not of the same substance with God, nor could man be enlarged or
    developed into God. So man’s powers include those of the brute,
    but the brute is not of the same substance with man, nor could he
    be enlarged or developed into man.

    Porter, Human Intellect, 39—“The spirit of man, in addition to its
    higher endowments, may also possess the lower powers which
    vitalize dead matter into a human body.” It does not follow that
    the soul of the animal or plant is capable of man’s higher
    functions or developments, or that the subjection of man’s spirit
    to body, in the present life, disproves his immortality. Porter
    continues: “That the soul begins to exist as a vital force, does
    not require that it should always exist as such a force or in
    connection with a material body. Should it require another such
    body, it may have the power to create it for itself, as it has
    formed the one it first inhabited; or it may have already formed
    it, and may hold it ready for occupation and use as soon as it
    sloughs off the one which connects it with the earth.”

    Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism, 547—“Brutes may have organic life
    and sensitivity, and yet remain submerged in nature. It is not
    life and sensitivity that lift man above nature, but it is the
    distinctive characteristic of personality.” Parkhurst, The Pattern
    in the Mount, 17-30, on Prov. 20:27—“The spirit of man is the lamp
    of Jehovah”—not necessarily lighted, but capable of being lighted,
    and intended to be lighted, by the touch of the divine flame.
    _Cf._ _Mat. 6:22, 23_—“_The lamp of the body.... If therefore the
    light that is in thee be darkness, how great is the darkness._”

    Schleiermacher, Christliche Glaube, 2:487—“We think of the spirit
    as soul, only when in the body, so that we cannot speak of an
    immortality of the soul, in the proper sense, without bodily
    life.” The doctrine of the spiritual body is therefore the
    complement to the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. A. A.
    Hodge, Pop. Lectures, 221—“By soul we mean only one thing, _i.
    e._, an incarnate spirit, a spirit with a body. Thus we never
    speak of the souls of angels. They are pure spirits, having no
    bodies.” Lisle, Evolution of Spiritual Man, 72—“The animal is the
    foundation of the spiritual; it is what the cellar is to the
    house; it is the base of supplies.” Ladd, Philosophy of Mind,
    371-378—“Trichotomy is absolutely untenable on grounds of
    psychological science. Man’s reason, or the spirit that is in man,
    is not to be regarded as a sort of Mansard roof, built on to one
    building in a block, all the dwellings in which are otherwise
    substantially alike.... On the contrary, in every set of
    characteristics, from those called lowest to those pronounced
    highest, the soul of man differences itself from the soul of any
    species of animals.... The highest has also the lowest. All must
    be assigned to one subject.”


This view of the soul and spirit as different aspects of the same
spiritual principle furnishes a refutation of six important errors:

(_a_) That of the Gnostics, who held that the πνεῦμα is part of the divine
essence, and therefore incapable of sin.

(_b_) That of the Apollinarians, who taught that Christ’s humanity
embraced only σῶμα and ψυχή, while his divine nature furnished the πνεῦμα.

(_c_) That of the Semi-Pelagians, who excepted the human πνεῦμα from the
dominion of original sin.

(_d_) That of Placeus, who held that only the πνεῦμα was directly created
by God (see our section on Theories of Imputation).

(_e_) That of Julius Müller, who held that the ψυχή comes to us from Adam,
but that our πνεῦμα was corrupted in a previous state of being (see page
490).

(_f_) That of the Annihilationists, who hold that man at his creation had
a divine element breathed into him, which he lost by sin, and which he
recovers only in regeneration; so that only when he has this πνεῦμα
restored by virtue of his union with Christ does man become immortal,
death being to the sinner a complete extinction of being.


    Tacitus might almost be understood to be a trichotomist when he
    writes: “Si ut sapientibus placuit, non extinguuntur cum corpora
    _magnæ_ animæ.” Trichotomy allies itself readily with materialism.
    Many trichotomists hold that man can exist without a πνεῦμα, but
    that the σῶμα and the ψυχή by themselves are mere matter, and are
    incapable of eternal existence. Trichotomy, however, when it
    speaks of the πνεῦμα as the divine principle in man, seems to
    savor of emanation or of pantheism. A modern English poet
    describes the glad and winsome child as “A silver stream, Breaking
    with laughter from the lake divine, Whence all things flow.”
    Another poet, Robert Browning, in his Death in the Desert, 107,
    describes body, soul, and spirit, as “What does, what knows, what
    is—three souls, one man.”

    The Eastern church generally held to trichotomy, and is best
    represented by John of Damascus (11:12) who speaks of the soul as
    the sensuous life-principle which takes up the spirit—the spirit
    being an efflux from God. The Western church, on the other hand,
    generally held to dichotomy, and is best represented by Anselm:
    “Constat homo ex duabus naturis, ex natura animæ et ex natura
    carnis.”

    Luther has been quoted upon both sides of the controversy: by
    Delitzsch, Bib. Psych., 460-462, as trichotomous, and as making
    the Mosaic tabernacle with its three divisions an image of the
    tripartite man. “The first division,” he says, “was called the
    holy of holies, since God dwelt there, and there was no light
    therein. The next was denominated the holy place, for within it
    stood a candlestick with seven branches and lamps. The third was
    called the atrium or court; this was under the broad heaven, and
    was open to the light of the sun. A regenerate man is depicted in
    this figure. His spirit is the holy of holies, God’s
    dwelling-place, in the darkness of faith, without a light, for he
    believes what he neither sees, nor feels, nor comprehends. The
    _psyche_ of that man is the holy place, whose seven lights
    represent the various powers of understanding, the perception and
    knowledge of material and visible things. His body is the atrium
    or court, which is open to everybody, so that all can see how he
    acts and lives.”

    Thomasius, however, in his Christi Person und Werk, 1:164-168,
    quotes from Luther the following statement, which is clearly
    dichotomous: “The first part, the spirit, is the highest, deepest,
    noblest part of man. By it he is fitted to comprehend eternal
    things, and it is, in short, the house in which dwell faith and
    the word of God. The other, the soul, is this same spirit,
    according to nature, but yet in another sort of activity, namely,
    in this, that it animates the body and works through it; and it is
    its method not to grasp things incomprehensible, but only what
    reason can search out, know, and measure.” Thomasius himself says:
    “Trichotomy, I hold with Meyer, is not Scripturally sustained.”
    Neander, sometimes spoken of as a trichotomist, says that spirit
    is soul in its elevated and normal relation to God and divine
    things; ψυχή is that same soul in its relation to the sensuous and
    perhaps sinful things of this world. Godet, Bib. Studies of O. T.,
    32—“Spirit = the breath of God, considered as independent of the
    body; soul = that same breath, in so far as it gives life to the
    body.”

    The doctrine we have advocated, moreover, in contrast with the
    heathen view, puts honor upon man’s body, as proceeding from the
    hand of God and as therefore originally pure (_Gen. 1:31_—“_And
    God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very
    good_”); as intended to be the dwelling place of the divine Spirit
    (_1 Cor. 6:19_—“_know ye not that your body is a temple of the
    Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have from God?_”); and as
    containing the germ of the heavenly body (_1 Cor. 15:44_—“_it is
    sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body_”; _Rom.
    8:11_—“_shall give life also to your mortal bodies through his
    Spirit that dwelleth in you_”—here many ancient authorities read
    “_because of his Spirit that dwelleth in you_”—διά τὸ ἐνοικοῦν
    αὐτοῦ πνεῦμα). Birks, in his Difficulties of Belief, suggests that
    man, unlike angels, may have been provided with a fleshly body,
    (1) to objectify sin, and (2) to enable Christ to unite himself to
    the race, in order to save it.



IV. Origin of the Soul.


Three theories with regard to this subject have divided opinion:


1. The Theory of Preëxistence.


This view was held by Plato, Philo, and Origen; by the first, in order to
explain the soul’s possession of ideas not derived from sense; by the
second, to account for its imprisonment in the body; by the third, to
justify the disparity of conditions in which men enter the world. We
concern ourselves, however, only with the forms which the view has assumed
in modern times. Kant and Julius Müller in Germany, and Edward Beecher in
America, have advocated it, upon the ground that the inborn depravity of
the human will can be explained only by supposing a personal act of
self-determination in a previous, or timeless, state of being.


    The truth at the basis of the theory of preëxistence is simply the
    ideal existence of the soul, before birth, in the mind of God—that
    is, God’s foreknowledge of it. The intuitive ideas of which the
    soul finds itself in possession, such as space, time, cause,
    substance, right, God, are evolved from itself; in other words,
    man is so constituted that he perceives these truths upon proper
    occasions or conditions. The apparent recollection that we have
    seen at some past time a landscape which we know to be now for the
    first time before us, is an illusory putting together of
    fragmentary concepts or a mistaking of a part for the whole; we
    have seen something like a part of the landscape,—we fancy that we
    have seen this landscape, and the whole of it. Our recollection of
    a past event or scene is one whole, but this one idea may have an
    indefinite number of subordinate ideas existing within it. The
    sight of something which is similar to one of these parts suggests
    the past whole. Coleridge: “The great law of the imagination that
    likeness in part tends to become likeness of the whole.” Augustine
    hinted that this illusion of memory may have played an important
    part in developing the belief in metempsychosis.

    Other explanations are those of William James, in his Psychology:
    The brain tracts excited by the event proper, and those excited in
    its recall, are different; Baldwin, Psychology, 263, 264: We may
    remember what we have seen in a dream, or there may be a revival
    of ancestral or race experiences. Still others suggest that the
    two hemispheres of the brain act asynchronously;
    self-consciousness or apperception is distinguished from
    perception; divorce, from fatigue, of the processes of sensation
    and perception, causes paramnesia. Sully, Illusions, 280, speaks
    of an organic or atavistic memory: “May it not happen that by the
    law of hereditary transmission ... ancient experiences will now
    and then reflect themselves in our mental life, and so give rise
    to apparently personal recollections?” Letson, The Crowd, believes
    that the mob is atavistic and that it bases its action upon
    inherited impulses: “The inherited reflexes are atavistic
    memories” (quoted in Colegrove, Memory, 204).

    Plato held that intuitive ideas are reminiscences of things
    learned in a previous state of being; he regarded the body as the
    grave of the soul; and urged the fact that the soul had knowledge
    before it entered the body, as proof that the soul would have
    knowledge after it left the body, that is, would be immortal. See
    Plato, Meno, 82-85, Phædo, 72-75, Phædrus, 245-250, Republic,
    5:460 and 10:614. Alexander, Theories of the Will, 36, 37—“Plato
    represents preëxistent souls as having set before them a choice of
    virtue. The choice is free, but it will determine the destiny of
    each soul. Not God, but he who chooses, is responsible for his
    choice. After making their choice, the souls go to the fates, who
    spin the threads of their destiny, and it is thenceforth
    irreversible. As Christian theology teaches that man was free but
    lost his freedom by the fall of Adam, so Plato affirms that the
    preëxistent soul is free until it has chosen its lot in life.” See
    Introductions to the above mentioned works of Plato in Jowett’s
    translation. Philo held that all souls are emanations from God,
    and that those who allowed themselves, unlike the angels, to be
    attracted by matter, are punished for this fall by imprisonment in
    the body, which corrupts them, and from which they must break
    loose. See Philo, De Gigantibus, Pfeiffer’s ed., 2:360-364. Origen
    accounted for disparity of conditions at birth by the differences
    in the conduct of these same souls in a previous state. God’s
    justice at the first made all souls equal; condition here
    corresponds to the degree of previous guilt; _Mat. 20:3_—“_others
    standing in the market place idle_” = souls not yet brought into
    the world. The Talmudists regarded all souls as created at once in
    the beginning, and as kept like grains of corn in God’s granary,
    until the time should come for joining each to its appointed body.
    See Origen, De Anima, 7; περὶ ἀρχῶν, ii:9:6; _cf._ i:1:2, 4, 18;
    4:36. Origen’s view was condemned at the Synod of Constantinople,
    538. Many of the preceding facts and references are taken from
    Bruch, Lehre der Präexistenz, translated in Bib. Sac., 20:681-733.

    For modern advocates of the theory, see Kant, Critique of Pure
    Reason, sec. 15; Religion in. d. Grenzen d. bl. Vernunft, 26, 27;
    Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:357-401; Edward Beecher,
    Conflict of Ages. The idea of preëxistence has appeared to a
    notable extent in modern poetry. See Vaughan, The Retreate (1621);
    Wordsworth, Intimations of Immortality in Early Childhood;
    Tennyson, Two Voices, stanzas 105-119, and Early Sonnets, 25—“As
    when with downcast eyes we muse and brood, And ebb into a former
    life, or seem To lapse far back in some confused dream To states
    of mystical similitude; If one but speaks or hems or stirs his
    chair, Ever the wonder waxeth more and more, So that we say ‘All
    this hath been before, All this hath been, I know not when or
    where.’ So, friend, when first I looked upon your face, Our
    thought gave answer each to each, so true—Opposed mirrors each
    reflecting each—That though I knew not in what time or place,
    Methought that I had often met with you, And either lived in
    either’s heart and speech.” Robert Browning, La Saisiaz, and
    Christina: “Ages past the soul existed; Here an age ’tis resting
    merely, And hence fleets again for ages.” Rossetti, House of Life:
    “I have been here before, But when or how I cannot tell; I know
    the grass beyond the door, The sweet, keen smell, The sighing
    sound, the lights along the shore. You have been mine before, How
    long ago I may not know; But just when, at that swallow’s soar,
    Your neck turned so, Some veil did fall—I knew it all of yore”;
    quoted in Colegrove, Memory, 103-106, who holds the phenomenon due
    to false induction and interpretation.

    Briggs, School, College and Character, 95—“Some of us remember the
    days when we were on earth for the first time;”—which reminds us
    of the boy who remembered sitting in a corner before he was born
    and crying for fear he would be a girl. A more notable
    illustration is that found in the Life of Sir Walter Scott, by
    Lockhart, his son-in-law, 8:274—“Yesterday, at dinner time, I was
    strangely haunted by what I would call the sense of
    preëxistence—viz., a confused idea that nothing that passed was
    said for the first time—that the same topics had been discussed
    and the same persons had started the same opinions on them. It is
    true there might have been some ground for recollections,
    considering that three at least of the company were old friends
    and had kept much company together.... But the sensation was so
    strong as to resemble what is called a mirage in the desert, or a
    calenture on board of ship, when lakes are seen in the desert and
    sylvan landscapes in the sea. It was very distressing yesterday
    and brought to mind the fancies of Bishop Berkeley about an ideal
    world. There was a vile sense of want of reality in all I did and
    said.... I drank several glasses of wine, but these only
    aggravated the disorder. I did not find the _in vino veritas_ of
    the philosophers.”


To the theory of preëxistence we urge the following objections:

(_a_) It is not only wholly without support from Scripture, but it
directly contradicts the Mosaic account of man’s creation in the image of
God, and Paul’s description of all evil and death in the human race as the
result of Adam’s sin.


    _Gen. 1:27_—“_And God created man in his own image, in the image
    of God created he him_”; _31_—“_And God saw every thing that he
    had made, and, behold, it was very good._” _Rom.
    5:12_—“_Therefore, as through one man sin entered into the world,
    and death through sin; and so death passed unto all men, for that
    all sinned._” The theory of preëxistence would still leave it
    doubtful whether all men are sinners, or whether God assembles
    only sinners upon the earth.


(_b_) If the soul in this preëxistent state was conscious and personal, it
is inexplicable that we should have no remembrance of such preëxistence,
and of so important a decision in that previous condition of being;—if the
soul was yet unconscious and impersonal, the theory fails to show how a
moral act involving consequences so vast could have been performed at all.


    Christ remembered his preëxistent state; why should not we? There
    is every reason to believe that in the future state we shall
    remember our present existence; why should we not now remember the
    past state from which we came? It may be objected that
    Augustinians hold to a sin of the race in Adam—a sin which none of
    Adam’s descendants can remember. But we reply that no Augustinian
    holds to a personal existence of each member of the race in Adam,
    and therefore no Augustinian needs to account for lack of memory
    of Adam’s sin. The advocate of preëxistence, however, does hold to
    a personal existence of each soul in a previous state, and
    therefore needs to account for our lack of memory of it.


(_c_) The view sheds no light either upon the origin of sin, or upon God’s
justice in dealing with it, since it throws back the first transgression
to a state of being in which there was no flesh to tempt, and then
represents God as putting the fallen into sensuous conditions in the
highest degree unfavorable to their restoration.


    This theory only increases the difficulty of explaining the origin
    of sin, by pushing back its beginning to a state of which we know
    less than we do of the present. To say that the soul in that
    previous state was only potentially conscious and personal, is to
    deny any real probation, and to throw the blame of sin on God the
    Creator. Pfleiderer, Philos. of Religion, 1:228—“In modern times,
    the philosophers Kant, Schelling and Schopenhauer have explained
    the bad from an intelligible act of freedom, which (according to
    Schelling and Schopenhauer) also at the same time effectuates the
    temporal existence and condition of the individual soul. But what
    are we to think of as meant by such a mystical deed or act through
    which the subject of it first comes into existence? Is it not
    this, that perhaps under this singular disguise there is concealed
    the simple thought that the origin of the bad lies not so much in
    a _doing_ of the individual freedom as rather in the _rise_ of
    it,—that is to say, in the process of development through which
    the natural man becomes a moral man, and the merely potentially
    rational man becomes an actually rational man?”


(_d_) While this theory accounts for inborn spiritual sin, such as pride
and enmity to God, it gives no explanation of inherited sensual sin, which
it holds to have come from Adam, and the guilt of which must logically be
denied.


    While certain forms of the preëxistence theory are exposed to the
    last objection indicated in the text, Julius Müller claims that
    his own view escapes it; see Doctrine of Sin, 2:393. His theory,
    he says, “would contradict holy Scripture if it derived inborn
    sinfulness _solely_ from this extra-temporal act of the
    individual, without recognizing in this sinfulness the element of
    hereditary depravity in the sphere of the natural life, and its
    connection with the sin of our first parents.” Müller, whose
    trichotomy here determines his whole subsequent scheme, holds only
    the πνεῦμα to have thus fallen in a preëxistent state. The ψυχή
    comes, with the body, from Adam. The tempter only brought man’s
    latent perversity of will into open transgression. Sinfulness, as
    hereditary, does not involve guilt, but the hereditary principle
    is the “medium through which the transcendent self-perversion of
    the spiritual nature of man is transmitted to his whole temporal
    mode of being.” While man is born guilty as to his πνεῦμα, for the
    reason that this πνεῦμα sinned in a preëxistent state, he is also
    born guilty as to his ψυχή, because this was one with the first
    man in his transgression.

    Even upon the most favorable statement of Müller’s view, we fail
    to see how it can consist with the organic unity of the race; for
    in that which chiefly constitutes us men—the πνεῦμα—we are as
    distinct and separate creations as are the angels. We also fail to
    see how, upon this view, Christ can be said to take our nature;
    or, if he takes it, how it can be without sin. See Ernesti,
    Ursprung der Sünde, 2:1-247; Frohschammer, Ursprung der Seele,
    11-17: Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 3:92-122; Bruch, Lehre der
    Präexistenz, translated in Bib. Sac., 20:681-733. Also Bib. Sac.,
    11:186-191; 12:156; 17:419-427; 20:447; Kahnis, Dogmatik,
    3:250—“This doctrine is inconsistent with the indisputable fact
    that the souls of children are like those of the parents; and it
    ignores the connection of the individual with the race.”


2. The Creatian Theory.


This view was held by Aristotle, Jerome, and Pelagius, and in modern times
has been advocated by most of the Roman Catholic and Reformed theologians.
It regards the soul of each human being as immediately created by God and
joined to the body either at conception, at birth, or at some time between
these two. The advocates of the theory urge in its favor certain texts of
Scripture, referring to God as the Creator of the human spirit, together
with the fact that there is a marked individuality in the child, which
cannot be explained as a mere reproduction of the qualities existing in
the parents.


    Creatianism, as ordinarily held, regards only the body as
    propagated from past generations. Creatianists who hold to
    trichotomy would say, however, that the animal soul, the ψυχή, is
    propagated with the body, while the highest part of man, the
    πνεῦμα, is in each case a direct creation of God,—the πνεῦμα not
    being created, as the advocates of preëxistence believe, ages
    before the body, but rather at the time that the body assumes its
    distinct individuality.

    Aristotle (De Anima) first gives definite expression to this view.
    Jerome speaks of God as “making souls daily.” The scholastics
    followed Aristotle, and through the influence of the Reformed
    church, creatianism has been the prevailing opinion for the last
    two hundred years. Among its best representatives are Turretin,
    Inst., 5:13 (vol. 1:425); Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:65-76; Martensen,
    Dogmatics, 141-148; Liddon, Elements of Religion, 99-106. Certain
    Reformed theologians have defined very exactly God’s method of
    creation. Polanus (5:31:1) says that God breathes the soul into
    boys, forty days, and into girls, eighty days, after conception.
    Göschel (in Herzog, Encyclop., art.: Seele) holds that while
    dichotomy leads to traducianism, trichotomy allies itself to that
    form of creatianism which regards the πνεῦμα as a direct creation
    of God, but the ψυχή as propagated with the body. To the latter
    answers the family name; to the former the Christian name. Shall
    we count George Macdonald as a believer in Preëxistence or in
    Creatianism, when he writes in his Baby’s Catechism: “Where did
    you come from, baby dear? Out of the everywhere into here. Where
    did you get your eyes so blue? Out of the sky, as I came through.
    Where did you get that little tear? I found it waiting when I got
    here. Where did you get that pearly ear? God spoke, and it came
    out to hear. How did they all just come to be you? God thought
    about me, and so I grew.”


Creatianism is untenable for the following reasons:

(_a_) The passages adduced in its support may with equal propriety be
regarded as expressing God’s mediate agency in the origination of human
souls; while the general tenor of Scripture, as well as its
representations of God as the author of man’s body, favor this latter
interpretation.


    Passages commonly relied upon by creatianists are the following:
    _Eccl. 12:7_—“_the spirit returneth unto God who gave it_”; _Is.
    57:16_—“_the souls that I have made_”; _Zech. 12:1_—“_Jehovah ...
    who formeth the spirit of man within him_”; _Heb. 12:9_—“_the
    Father of spirits._” But God is with equal clearness declared to
    be the former of man’s body: see _Ps. 139:13, 14_—“_thou didst
    form my inward parts: Thou didst cover me_ [marg. “_knit me
    together_”] _in my mother’s womb. I will give thanks unto thee;
    for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: Wonderful are thy
    works_”; _Jer. 1:5_—“_I formed thee in the belly._” Yet we do not
    hesitate to interpret these latter passages as expressive of
    mediate, not immediate, creatorship,—God works through natural
    laws of generation and development so far as the production of
    man’s body is concerned. None of the passages first mentioned
    forbid us to suppose that he works through these same natural laws
    in the production of the soul. The truth in creatianism is the
    presence and operation of God in all natural processes. A
    transcendent God manifests himself in all physical begetting.
    Shakespeare: “There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough hew
    them how we will.” Pfleiderer, Grundriss, 112—“Creatianism, which
    emphasizes the divine origin of man, is entirely compatible with
    Traducianism, which emphasizes the mediation of natural agencies.
    So for the race as a whole, its origin in a creative activity of
    God is quite consistent with its being a product of natural
    evolution.”


(_b_) Creatianism regards the earthly father as begetting only the body of
his child—certainly as not the father of the child’s highest part. This
makes the beast to possess nobler powers of propagation than man; for the
beast multiplies himself after his own image.


    The new physiology properly views soul, not as something added
    from without, but as the animating principle of the body from the
    beginning and as having a determining influence upon its whole
    development. That children are like their parents, in intellectual
    and spiritual as well as in physical respects, is a fact of which
    the creatian theory gives no proper explanation. Mason, Faith of
    the Gospel, 115—“The love of parents to children and of children
    to parents protests against the doctrine that only the body is
    propagated.” Aubrey Moore, Science and the Faith, 207,—quoted in
    Contemp. Rev., Dec. 1893:876—“Instead of the physical derivation
    of the soul, we stand for the spiritual derivation of the body.”
    We would amend this statement by saying that we stand for the
    spiritual derivation of both soul and body, natural law being only
    the operation of spirit, human and divine.


(_c_) The individuality of the child, even in the most extreme cases, as
in the sudden rise from obscure families and surroundings of marked men
like Luther, may be better explained by supposing a law of variation
impressed upon the species at its beginning—a law whose operation is
foreseen and supervised by God.


    The differences of the child from the parent are often
    exaggerated; men are generally more the product of their ancestry
    and of their time than we are accustomed to think. Dickens made
    angelic children to be born of depraved parents, and to grow up in
    the slums. But this writing belongs to a past generation, when the
    facts of heredity were unrecognized. George Eliot’s school is
    nearer the truth; although she exaggerates the doctrine of
    heredity in turn, until all idea of free will and all hope of
    escaping our fate vanish. Shaler, Interpretation of Nature, 78,
    90—“Separate motives, handed down from generation to generation,
    sometimes remaining latent for great periods, to become suddenly
    manifested under conditions the nature of which is not
    discernible.... Conflict of inheritances [from different
    ancestors] may lead to the institution of variety.”

    Sometimes, in spite of George Eliot, a lily grows out of a
    stagnant pool—how shall we explain the fact? We must remember that
    the paternal and the maternal elements are themselves unlike; the
    union of the two may well produce a third in some respects unlike
    either; as, when two chemical elements unite, the product differs
    from either of the constituents. We must remember also that
    _nature_ is one factor; _nurture_ is another; and that the latter
    is often as potent as the former (see Galton, Inquiries into Human
    Faculty, 77-81). Environment determines to a large extent both the
    fact and the degree of development. Genius is often another name
    for Providence. Yet before all and beyond all we must recognize a
    manifold wisdom of God, which in the very organization of species
    impresses upon it a law of variation, so that at proper times and
    under proper conditions the old is modified in the line of
    progress and advance to something higher. Dante, Purgatory, canto
    vii—“Rarely into the branches of the tree Doth human worth mount
    up; and so ordains He that bestows it, that as his free gift It
    may be called.” Pompilia, the noblest character in Robert
    Browning’s Ring and the Book, came of “a bad lot.” Geo. A. Gordon,
    Christ of To-day, 123-126—“It is mockery to account for Abraham
    Lincoln and Robert Burns and William Shakespeare upon naked
    principles of heredity and environment.... All intelligence and
    all high character are transcendent, and have their source in the
    mind and heart of God. It is in the range of Christ’s
    transcendence of his earthly conditions that we note the complete
    uniqueness of his person.”


(_d_) This theory, if it allows that the soul is originally possessed of
depraved tendencies, makes God the direct author of moral evil; if it
holds the soul to have been created pure, it makes God indirectly the
author of moral evil, by teaching that he puts this pure soul into a body
which will inevitably corrupt it.


    The decisive argument against creatianism is this one, that it
    makes God the author of moral evil. See Kahnis, Dogmatik,
    3:250—“Creatianism rests upon a justly antiquated dualism between
    soul and body, and is irreconcilable with the sinful condition of
    the human soul. The truth in the doctrine is just this only, that
    generation can bring forth an immortal human life only according
    to the power imparted by God’s word, and with the special
    coöperation of God himself.” The difficulty of supposing that God
    immediately creates a pure soul, only to put it into a body that
    will infallibly corrupt it—“sicut vinum in vase acetoso”—has led
    many of the most thoughtful Reformed theologians to modify the
    creatian doctrine by combining it with traducianism.

    Rothe, Dogmatik, 1:249-251, holds to creatianism in a wider
    sense—a union of the paternal and maternal elements under the
    express and determining efficiency of God. Ebrard, Dogmatik,
    1:327-332, regards the soul as new-created, yet by a process of
    mediate creation according to law, which he calls “metaphysical
    generation.” Dorner, System of Doctrine, 3:56, says that the
    individual is not simply a manifestation of the species; God
    applies to the origination of every single man a special creative
    thought and act of will; yet he does this through the species, so
    that it is creation by law,—else the child would be, not a
    continuation of the old species, but the establishment of a new
    one. So in speaking of the human soul of Christ, Dorner says
    (3:340-349) that the soul itself does not owe its origin to Mary
    nor to the species, but to the creative act of God. This soul
    appropriates to itself from Mary’s body the elements of a human
    form, purifying them in the process so far as is consistent with
    the beginning of a life yet subject to development and human
    weakness.

    Bowne, Metaphysics, 500—“The laws of heredity must be viewed
    simply as descriptions of a fact and never as its explanation. Not
    as if ancestors passed on something to posterity, but solely
    because of the inner consistency of the divine action” are
    children like their parents. We cannot regard either of these
    mediating views as self-consistent or intelligible. We pass on
    therefore to consider the traducian theory which we believe more
    fully to meet the requirements of Scripture and of reason. For
    further discussion of creatianism, see Frohschammer, Ursprung der
    Seele, 18-58; Alger, Doctrine of a Future Life, 1-17.


3. The Traducian Theory.


This view was propounded by Tertullian, and was implicitly held by
Augustine. In modern times it has been the prevailing opinion of the
Lutheran Church. It holds that the human race was immediately created in
Adam, and, as respects both body and soul, was propagated from him by
natural generation—all souls since Adam being only mediately created by
God, as the upholder of the laws of propagation which were originally
established by him.


    Tertullian, De Anima: “Tradux peccati, tradux animæ.” Gregory of
    Nyssa: “Man being one, consisting of soul and body, the common
    beginning of his constitution must be supposed also one; so that
    he may not be both older and younger than himself—that in him
    which is bodily being first, and the other coming after” (quoted
    in Crippen, Hist. of Christ. Doct., 80). Augustine, De Pec. Mer.
    et Rem., 3:7—“In Adam all sinned, at the time when in his nature
    all were still that one man”; De Civ. Dei, 13:14—“For we all were
    in that one man, when we all were that one man.... The form in
    which we each should live was not as yet individually created and
    distributed to us, but there already existed the seminal nature
    from which we were propagated.”

    Augustine, indeed, wavered in his statements with regard to the
    origin of the soul, apparently fearing that an explicit and
    pronounced traducianism might involve materialistic consequences;
    yet, as logically lying at the basis of his doctrine of original
    sin, traducianism came to be the ruling view of the Lutheran
    reformers. In his Table Talk, Luther says: “The reproduction of
    mankind is a great marvel and mystery. Had God consulted me in the
    matter, I should have advised him to continue the generation of
    the species by fashioning them out of clay, in the way Adam was
    fashioned; as I should have counseled him also to let the sun
    remain always suspended over the earth, like a great lamp,
    maintaining perpetual light and heat.”

    Traducianism holds that man, as a species, was created in Adam. In
    Adam, the substance of humanity was yet undistributed. We derive
    our immaterial as well as our material being, by natural laws of
    propagation, from Adam,—each individual man after Adam possessing
    a part of the substance that was originated in him. Sexual
    reproduction has for its purpose the keeping of variations within
    limit. Every marriage tends to bring back the individual type to
    that of the species. The offspring represents not one of the
    parents but both. And, as each of these parents represents two
    grandparents, the offspring really represents the whole race.
    Without this conjugation the individual peculiarities would
    reproduce themselves in divergent lines like the shot from a
    shot-gun. Fission needs to be supplemented by conjugation. The use
    of sexual reproduction is to preserve the average individual in
    the face of a progressive tendency to variation. In asexual
    reproduction the offspring start on deviating lines and never mix
    their qualities with those of their mates. Sexual reproduction
    makes the individual the type of the species and gives solidarity
    to the race. See Maupas, quoted by Newman Smith, Place of Death in
    Evolution, 19-22.

    John Milton, in his Christian Doctrine, is a Traducian. He has no
    faith in the notion of a soul separate from and inhabiting the
    body. He believes in a certain corporeity of the soul. Mind and
    thought are rooted in the bodily organism. Soul was not inbreathed
    after the body was formed. The breathing of God into man’s
    nostrils was only the quickening impulse to that which already had
    life. God does not create souls every day. Man is a body-and-soul,
    or a soul-body, and he transmits himself as such. Harris, Moral
    Evolution, 171—The individual man has a great number of ancestors
    as well as a great number of descendants. He is the central point
    of an hour-glass, or a strait between two seas which widen out
    behind and before. How then shall we escape the conclusion that
    the human race was most numerous at the beginning? We must
    remember that other children have the same great-grandparents with
    ourselves; that there have been inter-marriages; and that, after
    all, the generations run on in parallel lines, that the lines
    spread a little in some countries and periods, and narrow a little
    in other countries and periods. It is like a wall covered with
    paper in diamond pattern. The lines diverge and converge, but the
    figures are parallel. See Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:7-94, Hist.
    Doctrine, 2:1-26, Discourses and Essays, 259; Baird, Elohim
    Revealed, 137-151, 335-384; Edwards, Works, 2:483; Hopkins, Works,
    1:289; Birks, Difficulties of Belief, 161; Delitzsch, Bib. Psych.,
    128-142; Frohschammer, Ursprung der Seele, 59-224.


With regard to this view we remark:

(_a_) It seems best to accord with Scripture, which represents God as
creating the species in Adam (Gen. 1:27), and as increasing and
perpetuating it through secondary agencies (1:28; _cf._ 22). Only once is
breathed into man’s nostrils the breath of life (2:7, _cf._ 22; 1 Cor.
11:8. Gen. 4:1; 5:3; 46:26; _cf._ Acts 17:21-26; Heb. 7:10), and after
man’s formation God ceases from his work of creation (Gen. 2:2).


    _Gen. 1:27_—“_And God created man in his own image, in the image
    of God created he him: male and female created he them_”;
    _28_—“_And God blessed them: and God said unto them, Be fruitful,
    and multiply, and replenish the earth_”; _cf._ _22_—of the brute
    creation: “_And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and
    multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply
    on the earth._” _Gen. 2:7_—“_And Jehovah God formed man of the
    dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of
    life; and man became a living soul_”; _cf._ _22_—“_and the rib
    which Jehovah God had taken from the man, made he a woman, and
    brought her unto the man_”; _1 Cor. 11:8_—“_For the man is not of
    the woman; but the woman of the man_” (ἐξ ἀνδρός). _Gen.
    4:1_—“_Eve ... bare Cain_”; _5:3_—“_Adam ... begat a son ...
    Seth_”; _46:26_—“_All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt,
    that came out of his loins_”; _Acts 17:26_—“_he made of one_
    [“father” or “body”] _every nation of men_”; _Heb. 7:10_—Levi
    “_was yet in the loins of his father, when Melchisedek met him_”;
    _Gen. 2:2_—“_And on the seventh day God finished his work which he
    had made, __ and he rested on the seventh day from all his work
    which he had made._” Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:19-29, adduces also
    _John 1:13; 3:6_; _Rom. 1:13; 5:12_; _1 Cor. 15:22_; _Eph. 2:3_;
    _Heb. 12:9_; _Ps. 139:15, 16_. Only Adam had the right to be a
    creatianist. Westcott, Com. on Hebrews, 114—“Levi paying tithes in
    Abraham implies that descendants are included in the ancestor so
    far that his acts have force for them. Physically, at least, the
    dead so rule the living. The individual is not a completely
    self-centred being. He is member in a body. So far traducianism is
    true. But, if this were all, man would be a mere result of the
    past, and would have no individual responsibility. There is an
    element not derived from birth, though it may follow upon it.
    Recognition of individuality is the truth in creatianism. Power of
    vision follows upon preparation of an organ of vision, modified by
    the latter but not created by it. So we have the social unity of
    the race, _plus_ the personal responsibility of the individual,
    the influence of common thoughts _plus_ the power of great men,
    the foundation of hope _plus_ the condition of judgment.”


(_b_) It is favored by the analogy of vegetable and animal life, in which
increase of numbers is secured, not by a multiplicity of immediate
creations, but by the natural derivation of new individuals from a parent
stock. A derivation of the human soul from its parents no more implies a
materialistic view of the soul and its endless division and subdivision,
than the similar derivation of the brute proves the principle of
intelligence in the lower animals to be wholly material.


    God’s method is not the method of endless miracle. God works in
    nature through second causes. God does not create a new vital
    principle at the beginning of existence of each separate apple,
    and of each separate dog. Each of these is the result of a
    self-multiplying force, implanted once for all in the first of its
    race. To say, with Moxom (Baptist Review, 1881:278), that God is
    the immediate author of each new individual, is to deny second
    causes, and to merge nature in God. The whole tendency of modern
    science is in the opposite direction. Nor is there any good reason
    for making the origin of the individual human soul an exception to
    the general rule. Augustine wavered in his traducianism because he
    feared the inference that the soul is divided and subdivided,—that
    is, that it is composed of parts, and is therefore material in its
    nature. But it does not follow that all separation is material
    separation. We do not, indeed, know how the soul is propagated.
    But we know that animal life is propagated, and still that it is
    not material, nor composed of parts. The fact that the soul is not
    material, nor composed of parts, is no reason why it may not be
    propagated also.

    It is well to remember that _substance_ does not necessarily imply
    either _extension_ or _figure_. _Substantia_ is simply that which
    stands under, underlies, supports, or in other words that which is
    the _ground_ of phenomena. The propagation of mind therefore does
    not involve any dividing up, or splitting off, as if the mind were
    a material mass. Flame is propagated, but not by division and
    subdivision. Professor Ladd is a creatianist, together with Lotze,
    whom he quotes, but he repudiates the idea that the mind is
    susceptible of division; see Ladd, Philosophy of Mind, 206,
    359-366—“The mind comes from nowhere, for it never was, as mind,
    in space, is not now in space, and cannot be conceived of as
    coming and going in space.... Mind is a growth.... Parents do not
    transmit their minds to their offspring. The child’s mind does not
    exist before it acts. Its activities _are_ its existence.” So we
    might say that flame has no existence before it acts. Yet it may
    owe its existence to a preceding flame. The Indian proverb is: “No
    lotus without a stem.” Hall Caine, in his novel The Manxman, tells
    us that the Deemster of the Isle of Man had two sons. These two
    sons were as unlike each other as are the inside and the outside
    of a bowl. But the bowl was old Deemster himself. Hartley
    Coleridge inherited his father’s imperious desire for stimulants
    and with it his inability to resist their temptation.


(_c_) The observed transmission not merely of physical, but of mental and
spiritual, characteristics in families and races, and especially the
uniformly evil moral tendencies and dispositions which all men possess
from their birth, are proof that in soul, as well as in body, we derive
our being from our human ancestry.


    Galton, in his Hereditary Genius, and Inquiries into Human
    Faculty, furnishes abundant proof of the transmission of mental
    and spiritual characteristics from father to son. Illustrations,
    in the case of families, are the American Adamses, the English
    Georges, the French Bourbons, the German Bachs. Illustrations, in
    the case of races, are the Indians, the Negroes, the Chinese, the
    Jews. Hawthorne represented the introspection and the conscience
    of Puritan New England. Emerson had a minister among his ancestry,
    either on the paternal or the maternal side, for eight generations
    back. Every man is “a chip of the old block.” “A man is an
    omnibus, in which all his ancestors are seated” (O. W. Holmes).
    Variation is one of the properties of living things,—the other is
    transmission. “On a dissecting table, in the membranes of a
    new-born infant’s body, can be seen ‘the drunkard’s tinge.’ The
    blotches on his grand-child’s cheeks furnish a mirror to the old
    debauchee. Heredity is God’s visiting of sin to the third and
    fourth generations.” On heredity and depravity, see Phelps, in
    Bib. Sac., Apr. 1884:254—“When every molecule in the paternal
    brain bears the shape of a point of interrogation, it would border
    on the miraculous if we should find the exclamation-sign of faith
    in the brain-cells of the child.”

    Robert G. Ingersoll said that most great men have great mothers,
    and that most great women have great fathers. Most of the great
    are like mountains, with the valley of ancestors on one side and
    the depression of posterity on the other. Hawthorne’s House of the
    Seven Gables illustrates the principle of heredity. But in his
    Marble Faun and Transformation, Hawthorne unwisely intimates that
    sin is a necessity to virtue, a background or condition of good.
    Dryden, Absalom and Ahithophel, 1:156—“Great wits are sure to
    madness near allied, And thin partitions do their bounds divide.”
    Lombroso, The Man of Genius, maintains that genius is a mental
    disease allied to epileptiform mania or the dementia of cranks. If
    this were so, we should infer that civilization is the result of
    insanity, and that, so soon as Napoleons, Dantes and Newtons
    manifest themselves, they should be confined in Genius Asylums.
    Robert Browning, Hohenstiel-Schwangau, comes nearer the truth: “A
    solitary great man’s worth the world. God takes the business into
    his own hands At such time: Who creates the novel flower Contrives
    to guard and give it breathing-room.... ’Tis the great Gardener
    grafts the excellence On wildlings, where he will.”


(_d_) The traducian doctrine embraces and acknowledges the element of
truth which gives plausibility to the creatian view. Traducianism,
properly defined, admits a divine concurrence throughout the whole
development of the human species, and allows, under the guidance of a
superintending Providence, special improvements in type at the birth of
marked men, similar to those which we may suppose to have occurred in the
introduction of new varieties in the animal creation.


    Page-Roberts, Oxford University Sermons: “It is no more unjust
    that man should inherit evil tendencies, than that he should
    inherit good. To make the former impossible is to make the latter
    impossible. To object to the law of heredity, is to object to
    God’s ordinance of society, and to say that God should have made
    men, like the angels, a company, and not a race.” The common moral
    characteristics of the race can only be accounted for upon the
    Scriptural view that “_that which is born of the flesh is flesh_”
    (_John 3:6_). Since propagation is a propagation of soul, as well
    as body, we see that to beget children under improper conditions
    is a crime, and that fœticide is murder. Haeckel, Evolution of
    Man, 2:3—“The human embryo passes through the whole course of its
    development in forty weeks. Each man is really older by this
    period than is usually assumed. When, for example, a child is said
    to be nine and a quarter years old, he is really ten years old.”
    Is this the reason why Hebrews call a child a year old at birth?
    President Edwards prayed for his children and his children’s
    children to the end of time, and President Woolsey congratulated
    himself that he was one of the inheritors of those prayers. R. W.
    Emerson: “How can a man get away from his ancestors?” Men of
    genius should select their ancestors with great care. When begin
    the instruction of a child? A hundred years before he is born. A
    lady whose children were noisy and troublesome said to a Quaker
    relative that she wished she could get a good Quaker governess for
    them, to teach them the quiet ways of the Society of Friends. “It
    would not do them that service,” was the reply; “they should have
    been rocked in a Quaker cradle, if they were to learn Quakerly
    ways.”

    Galton, Natural Inheritance, 104—“The child inherits partly from
    his parents, partly from his ancestry. In every population that
    intermarries freely, when the genealogy of any man is traced far
    backwards, his ancestry will be found to consist of such varied
    elements that they are indistinguishable from the sample taken at
    haphazard from the general population. Galton speaks of the
    tendency of peculiarities to revert to the general type, and says
    that a man’s brother is twice as nearly related to him as his
    father is, and nine times as nearly as his cousin. The mean
    stature of any particular class of men will be the same as that of
    the race; in other words, it will be mediocre. This tells heavily
    against the full hereditary transmission of any rare and valuable
    gift, as only a few of the many children would resemble their
    parents.” We may add to these thoughts of Galton that Christ
    himself, as respects his merely human ancestry, was not so much
    son of Mary, as he was Son of man.

    Brooks, Foundations of Zoölogy, 144-167—In an investigated case,
    “in seven and a half generations the maximum ancestry for one
    person is 382, or for three persons 1146. The names of 452 of
    them, or nearly half, are recorded, and these 452 named ancestors
    are not 452 distinct persons, but only 149, many of them, in the
    remote generations, being common ancestors of all three in many
    lines. If the lines of descent from the unrecorded ancestors were
    interrelated in the same way, as they would surely be in an old
    and stable community, the total ancestry of these three persons
    for seven and a half generations would be 378 persons instead of
    1146. The descendants of many die out. All the members of a
    species descend from a few ancestors in a remote generation, and
    these few are the common ancestors of all. Extinction of family
    names is very common. We must seek in the modern world and not in
    the remote past for an explanation of that diversity among
    individuals which passes under the name of variation. The
    genealogy of a species is not a tree, but a slender thread of very
    few strands, a little frayed at the near end, but of immeasurable
    length. A fringe of loose ends all along the thread may represent
    the animals which having no descendants are now as if they had
    never been. Each of the strands at the near end is important as a
    possible line of union between the thread of the past and that of
    the distant future.”

    Weismann, Heredity, 270, 272, 380, 384, denies Brooks’s theory
    that the male element represents the principle of variation. He
    finds the cause of variation in the union of elements from the two
    parents. Each child unites the hereditary tendencies of two
    parents, and so must be different from either. The third
    generation is a compromise between four different hereditary
    tendencies. Brooks finds the cause of variation in sexual
    reproduction, but he bases his theory upon the transmission of
    acquired characters. This transmission is denied by Weismann, who
    says that the male germ-cell does not play a different part from
    that of the female in the construction of the embryo. Children
    inherit quite as much from the father as from the mother. Like
    twins are derived from the same egg-cell. No two germ-cells
    contain exactly the same combinations of hereditary tendencies.
    Changes in environment and organism affect posterity, not
    directly, but only through other changes produced in its germinal
    matter. Hence efforts to reach high food cannot directly produce
    the giraffe. See Dawson, Modern Ideas of Evolution, 235-239;
    Bradford, Heredity and Christian Problems; Ribot, Heredity; Woods,
    Heredity in Royalty. On organic unity in connection with realism,
    see Hodge, in Princeton Rev., Jan. 1865:126-135; Dabney, Theology,
    317-321.



V. The Moral Nature of Man.


By the moral nature of man we mean those powers which fit him for right or
wrong action. These powers are intellect, sensibility, and will, together
with that peculiar power of discrimination and impulsion, which we call
conscience. In order to have moral action, man has intellect or reason, to
discern the difference between right and wrong; sensibility, to be moved
by each of these; free will, to do the one or the other. Intellect,
sensibility, and will, are man’s three faculties. But in connection with
these faculties there is a sort of activity which involves them all, and
without which there can be no moral action, namely, the activity of
conscience. Conscience applies the moral law to particular cases in our
personal experience, and proclaims that law as binding upon us. Only a
rational and sentient being can be truly moral; yet it does not come
within our province to treat of man’s intellect or sensibility in general.
We speak here only of Conscience and of Will.


1. Conscience.


A. Conscience an accompanying knowledge.—As already intimated, conscience
is not a separate faculty, like intellect, sensibility, and will, but
rather a mode in which these faculties act. Like consciousness, conscience
is an accompanying knowledge. Conscience is a knowing of self (including
our acts and states) in connection with a moral standard, or law. Adding
now the element of feeling, we may say that conscience is man’s
consciousness of his own moral relations, together with a peculiar feeling
in view of them. It thus involves the combined action of the intellect and
of the sensibility, and that in view of a certain class of objects, viz.:
right and wrong.


    There is no separate ethical faculty any more than there is a
    separate æsthetic faculty. Conscience is like taste: it has to do
    with moral being and relations, as taste has to do with æsthetic
    being and relations. But the ethical judgment and impulse are,
    like the æsthetic judgment and impulse, the mode in which
    intellect, sensibility and will act with reference to a certain
    class of objects. Conscience deals with the right, as taste deals
    with the beautiful. As consciousness (_con_ and _scio_) is a
    con-knowing, a knowing of our thoughts, desires and volitions in
    connection with a knowing of the self that has these thoughts,
    desires and volitions; so conscience is a con-knowing, a knowing
    of our moral acts and states in connection with a knowing of some
    moral standard or law which is conceived of as our true self, and
    therefore as having authority over us. Ladd, Philosophy of Mind,
    183-185—“The condemnation of self involves self-diremption, double
    consciousness. Without it Kant’s categorical imperative is
    impossible. The one self lays down the law to the other self,
    judges it, threatens it. This is what is meant, when the apostle
    says: ‘_It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me_’
    (_Rom. 7:17_).”


B. Conscience discriminative and impulsive.—But we need to define more
narrowly both the intellectual and the emotional elements in conscience.
As respects the intellectual element, we may say that conscience is a
power of judgment,—it declares our acts or states to conform, or not to
conform, to law; it declares the acts or states which conform to be
obligatory,—those which do not conform, to be forbidden. In other words,
conscience judges: (1) This is right (or, wrong); (2) I ought (or, I ought
not). In connection with this latter judgment, there comes into view the
emotional element of conscience,—we feel the claim of duty; there is an
inner sense that the wrong must not be done. Thus conscience is (1)
discriminative, and (2) impulsive.


    Robinson, Principles and Practice of Morality, 173—“The one
    distinctive function of conscience is that of authoritative
    self-judgments in the conscious presence of a supreme Personality
    to whom we as persons feel ourselves accountable. It is this
    twofold personal element in every judgment of conscience, _viz._,
    the conscious self-judgment in the presence of the all-judging
    Deity, which has led such writers as Bain and Spencer and Stephen
    to attempt the explanation of the origin and authority of
    conscience as the product of parental training and social
    environment.... Conscience is not prudential nor advisory nor
    executive, but solely judicial. Conscience is the moral reason,
    pronouncing upon moral actions. Consciousness furnishes law;
    conscience pronounces judgments; it says: Thou shalt, Thou shalt
    not. Every man must obey his conscience; if it is not enlightened,
    that is his look-out. The callousing of conscience in this life is
    already a penal infliction.” S. S. Times, Apl. 5, 1902:185—“Doing
    as well as we know how is not enough, unless we know just what is
    right and then do that. God never tells us merely to do our best,
    or according to our knowledge. It is our duty to know what is
    right, and then to do it. Ignorantia legis neminem excusat. We
    have responsibility for knowing preliminary to doing.”


C. Conscience distinguished from other mental processes.—The nature and
office of conscience will be still more clearly perceived if we
distinguish it from other processes and operations with which it is too
often confounded. The term conscience has been used by various writers to
designate either one or all of the following: 1. _Moral intuition_—the
intuitive perception of the difference between right and wrong, as
opposite moral categories. 2. _Accepted law_—the application of the
intuitive idea to general classes of actions, and the declaration that
these classes of actions are right or wrong, apart from our individual
relation to them. This accepted law is the complex product of (_a_) the
intuitive idea, (_b_) the logical intelligence, (_c_) experiences of
utility, (_d_) influences of society and education, and (e) positive
divine revelation. 3. _Judgment_—applying this accepted law to individual
and concrete cases in our own experience, and pronouncing our own acts or
states either past, present, or prospective, to be right or wrong. 4.
_Command_—authoritative declaration of obligation to do the right, or
forbear the wrong, together with an impulse of the sensibility away from
the one, and toward the other. 5. _Remorse_ or _approval_—moral sentiments
either of approbation or disapprobation, in view of past acts or states,
regarded as wrong or right. 6. _Fear_ or _hope_—instinctive disposition of
disobedience to expect punishment, and of obedience to expect reward.


    Ladd, Philos. of Conduct, 70—“The feeling of the ought is primary,
    essential, unique; the judgments as to what one ought are the
    results of environment, education and reflection.” The sentiment
    of justice is not an inheritance of civilized man alone. No Indian
    was ever robbed of his lands or had his government allowance
    stolen from him who was not as keenly conscious of the wrong as in
    like circumstances we could conceive that a philosopher would be.
    The _oughtness_ of the ought is certainly intuitive; the _whyness_
    of the ought (conformity to God) is possibly intuitive also; the
    _whatness_ of the ought is less certainly intuitive. Cutler,
    Beginnings of Ethics, 163, 164—“Intuition tells us _that_ we are
    obliged; _why_ we are obliged, and _what_ we are obliged to, we
    must learn elsewhere.” _Obligation_—that which is binding on a
    man; _ought_ is something owed; _duty_ is something due. The
    intuitive notion of duty (intellect) is matched by the sense of
    obligation (feeling).

    Bixby, Crisis in Morals, 203, 270—“All men have a sense of
    right,—of right to life, and contemporaneously perhaps, but
    certainly afterwards, of right to personal property. And my right
    implies duty in my neighbor to respect it. Then the sense of right
    becomes objective and impersonal. My neighbor’s duty to me implies
    my duty to him. I put myself in his place.” Bowne, Principles of
    Ethics, 156, 188—“First, the feeling of obligation, the idea of a
    right and a wrong with corresponding duties, is universal....
    Secondly, there is a very general agreement in the formal
    principles of action, and largely in the virtues also, such as
    benevolence, justice, gratitude.... Whether we owe anything to our
    neighbor has never been a real question. The practical trouble has
    always lain in the other question: Who is my neighbor? Thirdly,
    the specific contents of the moral ideal are not fixed, but the
    direction in which the ideal lies is generally discernible.... We
    have in ethics the same fact as in intellect—a potentially
    infallible standard, with manifold errors in its apprehension and
    application. Lucretius held that degradation and paralysis of the
    moral nature result from religion. Many claim on the other hand
    that without religion morals would disappear from the earth.”

    Robinson, Princ. and Prac. of Morality, 173—“Fear of an omnipotent
    will is very different from remorse in view of the nature of the
    supreme Being whose law we have violated.” A duty is to be settled
    in accordance with the standard of absolute right, not as public
    sentiment would dictate. A man must be ready to do right in spite
    of what everybody thinks. Just as the decisions of a judge are for
    the time binding on all good citizens, so the decisions of
    conscience, as relatively binding, must always be obeyed. They are
    presumptively right and they are the only present guide of action.
    Yet man’s present state of sin makes it quite possible that the
    decisions which are relatively right may be absolutely wrong. It
    is not enough to take one’s time from the watch; the watch may go
    wrong; there is a prior duty of regulating the watch by
    astronomical standards. Bishop Gore: “Man’s first duty is, not to
    _follow_ his conscience, but to _enlighten_ his conscience.”
    Lowell says that the Scythians used to eat their grandfathers out
    of humanity. Paine, Ethnic Trinities, 300—“Nothing is so stubborn
    or so fanatical as a wrongly instructed conscience, as Paul showed
    in his own case by his own confession” (_Acts 26:9_—“_I verily
    thought with myself that I ought to do many things contrary to the
    name of Jesus of Nazareth_”).


D. Conscience the moral judiciary of the soul.—From what has been
previously said, it is evident that only 3. and 4. are properly included
under the term conscience. Conscience is the moral judiciary of the
soul—the power within of judgment and command. Conscience must judge
according to the law given to it, and therefore, since the moral standard
accepted by the reason may be imperfect, its decisions, while relatively
just, may be absolutely unjust.—1. and 2. belong to the _moral reason_,
but not to conscience proper. Hence the duty of enlightening and
cultivating the moral reason, so that conscience may have a proper
standard of judgment.—5. and 6. belong to the sphere of _moral sentiment_,
and not to conscience proper. The office of conscience is to “bear
witness” (Rom. 2:15).


    In _Rom. 2:15_—“_they show the work of the law written in their
    hearts, their conscience bearing witness therewith, and their
    thoughts one with another accusing or else excusing them_”—we have
    conscience clearly distinguished both from the law and the
    perception of law on the one hand, and from the moral sentiments
    of approbation and disapprobation on the other. Conscience does
    not furnish the law, but it bears witness with the law which is
    furnished by other sources. It is not “that power of mind by which
    moral law is discovered to each individual” (Calderwood, Moral
    Philosophy, 77), nor can we speak of “Conscience, the Law” (as
    Whewell does in his Elements of Morality, 1:259-266). Conscience
    is not the law-book, in the court room, but it is the judge,—whose
    business is, not to make law, but to decide cases according to the
    law given to him.

    As conscience is not legislative, so it is not retributive; as it
    is not the law-book, so it is not the sheriff. We say, indeed, in
    popular language, that conscience scourges or chastises, but it is
    only in the sense in which we say that the judge punishes,—_i.
    e._, through the sheriff. The moral sentiments are the
    sheriff,—they carry out the decisions of conscience, the judge;
    but they are not themselves conscience, any more than the sheriff
    is the judge.

    Only this doctrine, that conscience does not discover law, can
    explain on the one hand the fact that men are bound to follow
    their consciences, and on the other hand the fact that their
    consciences so greatly differ as to what is right or wrong in
    particular cases. The truth is, that conscience is uniform and
    infallible, in the sense that it always decides rightly according
    to the law given it. Men’s decisions vary, only because the moral
    reason has presented to the conscience different standards by
    which to judge.

    Conscience can be educated only in the sense of acquiring greater
    facility and quickness in making its decisions. Education has its
    chief effect, not upon the conscience, but upon the moral reason,
    in rectifying its erroneous, or imperfect standards of judgment.
    Give conscience a right law by which to judge, and its decisions
    will be uniform, and absolutely as well as relatively just. We are
    bound, not only to “follow our conscience,” but to have a right
    conscience to follow,—and to follow it, not as one follows the
    beast he drives, but as the soldier follows his commander. Robert
    J. Burdette: “Following conscience as a guide is like following
    one’s nose. It is important to get the nose pointed right before
    it is safe to follow it. A man can keep the approval of his own
    conscience in very much the same way that he can keep directly
    behind his nose, and go wrong all the time.”

    Conscience is the con-knowing of a particular act or state, as
    coming under the law accepted by the reason as to right and wrong;
    and the judgment of conscience subsumes this act or state under
    that general standard. Conscience cannot _include_ the law—cannot
    itself _be_ the law,—because reason only knows, never _con_-knows.
    Reason says _scio_; only judgment says _conscio_.

    This view enables us to reconcile the intuitional and the
    empirical theories of morals. Each has its element of truth. The
    original sense of right and wrong is intuitive,—no education could
    ever impart the idea of the difference between right and wrong to
    one who had it not. But what classes of things _are_ right or
    wrong, we learn by the exercise of our logical intelligence, in
    connection with experiences of utility, influences of society and
    tradition, and positive divine revelation. Thus our moral reason,
    through a combination of intuition and education, of internal and
    external information as to general principles of right and wrong,
    furnishes the standard according to which conscience may judge the
    particular cases which come before it.

    This moral reason may become depraved by sin, so that the light
    becomes darkness (_Mat. 6:22, 23_) and conscience has only a
    perverse standard by which to judge. The “_weak_” conscience (_1
    Cor. 8:12_) is one whose standard of judgment is yet imperfect;
    the conscience “_branded_” (Rev. Vers.) or “_seared_” (A. V.) “_as
    with a hot iron_” (_1 Tim. 4:2_) is one whose standard has been
    wholly perverted by practical disobedience. The word and the
    Spirit of God are the chief agencies in rectifying our standards
    of judgment, and so of enabling conscience to make absolutely
    right decisions. God can so unite the soul to Christ, that it
    becomes partaker on the one hand of his satisfaction to justice
    and is thus “_sprinkled from an evil conscience_” (_Heb. 10:22_),
    and on the other hand of his sanctifying power and is thus enabled
    in certain respects to obey God’s command and to speak of a “_good
    conscience_” (_1 Pet. 3:16_—of single act; _3:21_—of state)
    instead of an “_evil conscience_” (_Heb. 10:22_) or a conscience
    “_defiled_” (_Tit. 1:15_) by sin. Here the “_good conscience_” is
    the conscience which has been obeyed by the will, and the “_evil
    conscience_” the conscience which has been disobeyed; with the
    result, in the first case, of approval from the moral sentiments,
    and, in the second case, of disapproval.


E. Conscience in its relation to God as law-giver.—Since conscience, in
the proper sense, gives uniform and infallible judgment that the right is
supremely obligatory, and that the wrong must be forborne at every cost,
it can be called an echo of God’s voice, and an indication in man of that
which his own true being requires.


    Conscience has sometimes been described as the voice of God in the
    soul, or as the personal presence and influence of God himself.
    But we must not identify conscience with God. D. W. Faunce:
    “Conscience is not God,—it is only a part of one’s self. To build
    up a religion about one’s own conscience, as if it were God, is
    only a refined selfishness—a worship of one part of one’s self by
    another part of one’s self.” In The Excursion, Wordsworth speaks
    of conscience as “God’s most intimate presence in the soul And his
    most perfect image in the world.” But in his Ode to Duty he more
    discreetly writes: “Stern daughter of the voice of God! O Duty! if
    that name thou love, Who art a light to guide, a rod To check the
    erring, and reprove, Thou who art victory and law When empty
    terrors overawe, From vain temptations dost set free And calmst
    the weary strife of frail humanity!” Here is an allusion to the
    Hebrew Bath Kol. “The Jews say that the Holy Spirit spoke during
    the Tabernacle by Urim and Thummim, under the first Temple by the
    Prophets, and under the second Temple by the Bath Kol—a divine
    intimation as inferior to the oracular voice proceeding from the
    mercy seat as a daughter is supposed to be inferior to her mother.
    It is also used in the sense of an approving conscience. In this
    case it is the echo of the voice of God in those who by obeying
    hear” (Hershon’s Talmudic Miscellany, 2, note). This phrase, “the
    echo of God’s voice,” is a correct description of conscience, and
    Wordsworth probably had it in mind when he spoke of duty as “the
    daughter of the voice of God.” Robert Browning describes
    conscience as “the great beacon-light God sets in all.... The
    worst man upon earth ... knows in his conscience more Of what
    right is, than arrives at birth In the best man’s acts that we bow
    before.” Jackson, James Martineau, 154—The sense of obligation is
    “a piercing ray of the great Orb of souls.” On Wordsworth’s
    conception of conscience, see A. H. Strong, Great Poets, 365-368.

    Since the activity of the immanent God reveals itself in the
    normal operations of our own faculties, conscience might be also
    regarded as man’s true self over against the false self which we
    have set up against it. Theodore Parker defines conscience as “our
    consciousness of the conscience of God.” In his fourth year, says
    Chadwick, his biographer (pages 12, 13, 185), young Theodore saw a
    little spotted tortoise and lifted his hand to strike. All at once
    something checked his arm, and a voice within said clear and loud:
    “It is wrong.” He asked his mother what it was that told him it
    was wrong. She wiped a tear from her eye with her apron, and
    taking him in her arms said: “Some men call it conscience, but I
    prefer to call it the voice of God in the soul of man. If you
    listen and obey it, then it will speak clearer and clearer, and
    will always guide you right; but if you turn a deaf ear and
    disobey, then it will fade out little by little, and will leave
    you all in the dark and without a guide. Your life depends on your
    hearing this little voice.” R. T. Smith, Man’s Knowledge of Man
    and of God, 87, 171—“Man has conscience, as he has talents.
    Conscience, no more than talent, makes him good. He is good, only
    as he follows conscience and uses talent.... The relation between
    the terms consciousness and conscience, which are in fact but
    forms of the same word, testifies to the fact that it is in the
    action of conscience that man’s consciousness of himself is
    chiefly experienced.”

    The conscience of the regenerate man may have such right
    standards, and its decisions may be followed by such uniformly
    right action, that its voice, though it is not itself God’s voice,
    is yet the very echo of God’s voice. The renewed conscience may
    take up into itself, and may express, the witness of the Holy
    Spirit (_Rom. 9:1_—“_I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
    conscience bearing witness with me in the Holy Spirit_”; _cf._
    _8:16_—“_the Spirit himself beareth witness with our spirit, that
    we are children of God_”). But even when conscience judges
    according to imperfect standards, and is imperfectly obeyed by the
    will, there is a spontaneity in its utterances and a sovereignty
    in its commands. It declares that whatever is right must be done.
    The imperative of conscience is a “categorical imperative” (Kant).
    It is independent of the human will. Even when disobeyed, it still
    asserts its authority. Before conscience, every other impulse and
    affection of man’s nature is called to bow.


F. Conscience in its relation to God as holy.—Conscience is not an
original authority. It points to something higher than itself. The
“authority of conscience” is simply the authority of the moral law, or
rather, the authority of the personal God, of whose nature the law is but
a transcript. Conscience, therefore, with its continual and supreme demand
that the right should be done, furnishes the best witness to man of the
existence of a personal God, and of the supremacy of holiness in him in
whose image we are made.


    In knowing self in connection with moral law, man not only gets
    his best knowledge of self, but his best knowledge of that other
    self opposite to him, namely, God. Gordon, Christ of To-day,
    236—“The conscience is the true Jacob’s ladder, set in the heart
    of the individual and reaching unto heaven; and upon it the angels
    of self-reproach and self-approval ascend and descend.” This is of
    course true if we confine our thoughts to the mandatory element in
    revelation. There is a higher knowledge of God which is given only
    in grace. Jacob’s ladder symbolizes the Christ who publishes not
    only the gospel but the law, and not only the law but the gospel.
    Dewey, Psychology, 344—“Conscience is intuitive, not in the sense
    that it enunciates universal laws and principles, for it lays down
    no laws. Conscience is a name for the experience of personality
    that any given act is in harmony or in discord with a truly
    realized personality.” Because obedience to the dictates of
    conscience is always relatively right, Kant could say that “an
    erring conscience is a chimæra.” But because the law accepted by
    conscience may be absolutely wrong, conscience may in its
    decisions greatly err from the truth. S. S. Times: “Saul before
    his conversion was a conscientious wrong doer. His spirit and
    character was commendable, while his conduct was reprehensible.”
    We prefer to say that Saul’s zeal for the law was a zeal to make
    the law subservient to his own pride and honor.

    Horace Bushnell said that the first requirement of a great
    ministry is a great conscience. He did not mean the punitive,
    inhibitory conscience merely, but rather the discovering,
    arousing, inspiring conscience, that sees at once the great things
    to be done, and moves toward them with a shout and a song. This
    unbiased and pure conscience is inseparable from the sense of its
    relation to God and to God’s holiness. Shakespeare, Henry VI, 2d
    Part, 3:2—“What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted?
    Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just; And he but naked,
    though locked up in steel, Whose conscience with injustice is
    corrupted.” Huxley, in his lecture at Oxford in 1893, admits and
    even insists that ethical practice must be and should be in
    opposition to evolution; that the methods of evolution do not
    account for ethical man and his ethical progress. Morality is not
    a product of the same methods by which lower orders have advanced
    in perfection of organization, namely, by the struggle for
    existence and survival of the fittest. Human progress is moral, is
    in freedom, is under the law of love, is different in kind from
    physical evolution. James Russell Lowell: “In vain we call old
    notions fudge, And bend our conscience to our dealing: The ten
    commandments will not budge, And stealing will continue stealing.”

    R. T. Smith, Man’s Knowledge of Man and of God, 161—“Conscience
    lives in human nature like a rightful king, whose claim can never
    be forgotten by his people, even though they dethrone and misuse
    him, and whose presence on the seat of judgment can alone make the
    nation to be at peace with itself.” Seth, Ethical Principles,
    424—“The Kantian theory of autonomy does not tell the whole story
    of the moral life. Its unyielding Ought, its categorical
    Imperative, issues not merely from the depths of our own nature,
    but from the heart of the universe itself. We are
    self-legislative; but we reënact the law already enacted by God;
    we recognize, rather than constitute, the law of our own being.
    The moral law is an echo, within our own souls, of the voice of
    the Eternal, _‘__whose offspring we are__’__ (Acts 17:28)_.”

    Schenkel, Christliche Dogmatik, 1:135-155—“The conscience is the
    organ by which the human spirit finds God in itself and so becomes
    aware of itself in him. Only in conscience is man conscious of
    himself as eternal, as distinct from God, yet as normally bound to
    be determined wholly by God. When we subject ourselves wholly to
    God, conscience gives us peace. When we surrender to the world the
    allegiance due only to God, conscience brings remorse. In this
    latter case we become aware that while God is in us, we are no
    longer in God. Religion is exchanged for ethics, the relation of
    communion for the relation of separation. In conscience alone man
    distinguishes himself absolutely from the brute. Man does not make
    conscience, but conscience makes man. Conscience feels every
    separation from God as an injury to self. Faith is the relating of
    the self-consciousness to the God-consciousness, the becoming sure
    of our own personality, in the absolute personality of God. Only
    in faith does conscience come to itself. But by sin this
    faith-consciousness may be turned into law-consciousness. Faith
    affirms God _in_ us; Law affirms God _outside_ of us.” Schenkel
    differs from Schleiermacher in holding that religion is not
    feeling but conscience, and that it is not a sense of dependence
    on the world, but a sense of dependence on God. Conscience
    recognizes a God distinct from the universe, a moral God, and so
    makes an unmoral religion impossible.

    Hopkins, Outline Study of Man, 283-285, Moral Science, 49, Law of
    Love, 41—“Conscience is the moral consciousness of man in view of
    his own actions as related to moral law. It is a double knowledge
    of self and of the law. Conscience is not the whole of the moral
    nature. It presupposes the moral reason, which recognizes the
    moral law and affirms its universal obligation for all moral
    beings. It is the office of conscience to bring man into personal
    relation to this law. It sets up a tribunal within him by which
    his own actions are judged. Not conscience, but the moral reason,
    judges of the conduct of others. This last is _science_, but not
    _conscience_.”

    Peabody, Moral Philos., 41-60—“Conscience not a source, but a
    means, of knowledge. Analogous to consciousness. A judicial
    faculty. Judges according to the law before it. Verdict (verum
    dictum) always relatively right, although, by the absolute
    standard of right, it may be wrong. Like all perceptive faculties,
    educated by use (not by increase of knowledge only, for man may
    act worse, the more knowledge he has). For absolutely right
    decisions, conscience is dependent upon knowledge. To recognize
    conscience as _legislator_ (as well as judge), is to fail to
    recognize any objective standard of right.” The Two Consciences,
    46, 47—“Conscience the Law, and Conscience the Witness. The latter
    is the true and proper Conscience.”

    H. B. Smith, System of Christ. Theology, 178-191—“The unity of
    conscience is not in its being one faculty or in its performing
    one function, but in its having one _object_, its relation to one
    idea, viz., _right_.... The term ‘conscience’ no more designates a
    special faculty than the term ‘religion’ does (or than the
    ‘æsthetic sense’).... The existence of conscience proves a moral
    law above us; it leads logically to a Moral Governor; ... it
    implies an essential distinction between right and wrong, an
    immutable morality; ... yet needs to be enlightened; ... men may
    be conscientious in iniquity; ... conscience is not righteousness;
    ... this may only show the greatness of the depravity, having
    conscience, and yet ever disobeying it.”

    On the New Testament passages with regard to conscience, see
    Hofmann, Lehre von dem Gewissen, 30-38; Kähler, Das Gewissen,
    225-293. For the view that conscience is primarily the cognitive
    or intuitional power of the soul, see Calderwood, Moral
    Philosophy, 77; Alexander, Moral Science, 20; McCosh, Div. Govt.,
    297-312; Talbot, Ethical Prolegomena, in Bap. Quar., July,
    1877:257-274; Park, Discourses, 260-296; Whewell, Elements of
    Morality, 1:259-266. On the whole subject of conscience, see
    Mansel, Metaphysics, 158-170; Martineau, Religion and Materialism,
    45—“The discovery of duty is as distinctly relative to an
    objective Righteousness as the perception of form to an external
    space”; also Types, 2:27-30—“We first judge ourselves; then
    others”; 53, 54, 74, 103—“Subjective morals are as absurd as
    subjective mathematics.” The best brief treatment of the whole
    subject is that of E. G. Robinson, Principles and Practice of
    Morality, 26-78. See also Wayland, Moral Science, 49; Harless,
    Christian Ethics, 45, 60; H. N. Day, Science of Ethics, 17; Janet,
    Theory of Morals, 264, 348; Kant, Metaphysic of Ethics, 62; _cf._
    Schwegler, Hist. Philosophy, 233; Haven, Mor. Philos., 41;
    Fairchild, Mor. Philos., 75; Gregory, Christian Ethics, 71;
    Passavant, Das Gewissen; Wm. Schmid, Das Gewissen.


2. Will.


A. Will defined.—Will is the soul’s power to choose between motives and to
direct its subsequent activity according to the motive thus chosen,—in
other words, the soul’s power to choose both an end and the means to
attain it. The choice of an ultimate end we call immanent preference; the
choice of means we call executive volition.


    In this definition we part company with Jonathan Edwards, Freedom
    of the Will, in Works, vol. 2. He regards the will as the soul’s
    power to act according to motive, _i. e._, to act out its nature,
    but he denies the soul’s power to choose between motives, _i. e._,
    to initiate a course of action contrary to the motive which has
    been previously dominant. Hence he is unable to explain how a holy
    being, like Satan or Adam, could ever fall. If man has no power to
    change motives, to break with the past, to begin a new course of
    action, he has no more freedom than the brute. The younger Edwards
    (Works, 1:483) shows what his father’s doctrine of the will
    implies, when he says: “Beasts therefore, according to the measure
    of their intelligence, are as free as men. Intelligence, and not
    liberty, is the only thing wanting to constitute them moral
    agents.” Yet Jonathan Edwards, determinist as he was, in his
    sermon on Pressing into the Kingdom of God (Works, 4:381), urges
    the use of means, and appeals to the sinner as if he had the power
    of choosing between the motives of self and of God. He was
    unconsciously making a powerful appeal to the will, and the human
    will responded in prolonged and mighty efforts; see Allen,
    Jonathan Edwards, 109.

    For references, and additional statements with regard to the will
    and its freedom, see chapter on Decrees, pages 361, 362, and
    article by A. H. Strong, in Baptist Review, 1883:219-242, and
    reprinted in Philosophy and Religion, 114-128. In the remarks upon
    the Decrees, we have intimated our rejection of the Arminian
    liberty of indifference, or the doctrine that the will can act
    without motive. See this doctrine advocated in Peabody, Moral
    Philosophy, 1-9. But we also reject the theory of determinism
    propounded by Jonathan Edwards (Freedom of the Will, in Works,
    vol. 2), which, as we have before remarked, identifies sensibility
    with the will, regards affections as the efficient causes of
    volitions, and speaks of the connection between motive and action
    as a necessary one. Hazard, Man a Creative First Cause, and The
    Will, 407—“Edwards gives to the controlling cause of volition in
    the past the name of motive. He treats the inclination as a
    motive, but he also makes inclination synonymous with choice and
    will, which would make will to be only the soul willing—and
    therefore the cause of its own act.” For objections to the
    Arminian theory, see H. B. Smith, Review of Whedon, in Faith and
    Philosophy, 359-399; McCosh, Divine Government, 263-318, esp. 312;
    E. G. Robinson, Principles and Practice of Morality, 109-137;
    Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:115-147.

    James, Psychology, 1:139—“Consciousness is primarily a selecting
    agency.” 2:393—“Man possesses all the instincts of animals, and a
    great many more besides. Reason, _per se_, can inhibit no
    impulses; the only thing that can neutralize an impulse is an
    impulse the other way. Reason may however make an inference which
    will excite the imagination to let loose the impulse the other
    way.” 549—“Ideal or moral action is action in the line of the
    greatest resistance.” 562—“Effort of attention is the essential
    phenomenon of will.” 567—“The terminus of the psychological
    process is volition; the point to which the will is directly
    applied is always an idea.” 568—“Though attention is the first
    thing in volition, express consent to the reality of what is
    attended to is an additional and distinct phenomenon. We say not
    only: It is a reality; but we also say: ‘Let it be a reality.’ ”
    571—“Are the duration and intensity of this effort fixed functions
    of the object, or are they not? We answer, _No_, and so we
    maintain freedom of the will.” 584—“The soul presents nothing,
    creates nothing, is at the mercy of material forces for all
    possibilities, and, by reinforcing one and checking others, it
    figures not as an _epiphenomenon_, but as something from which the
    play gets moral support.” Alexander, Theories of the Will,
    201-214, finds in Reid’s Active Powers of the Human Mind the most
    adequate empirical defense of indeterminism.


B. Will and other faculties.—(_a_) We accept the threefold division of
human faculties into intellect, sensibility, and will. (_b_) Intellect is
the soul knowing; sensibility is the soul feeling (desires, affections);
will is the soul choosing (end or means). (_c_) In every act of the soul,
all the faculties act. Knowing involves feeling and willing; feeling
involves knowing and willing; willing involves knowing and feeling. (_d_)
Logically, each latter faculty involves the preceding action of the
former; the soul must know before feeling; must know and feel before
willing. (_e_) Yet since knowing and feeling are activities, neither of
these is possible without willing.


    Socrates to Theætetus: “It would be a singular thing, my lad, if
    each of us was, as it were, a wooden horse, and within us were
    seated many separate senses. For manifestly these senses unite
    into one nature, call it the soul or what you will. And it is with
    this central form, through the organs of sense, that we perceive
    sensible objects.” Dewey, Psychology, 21—“Knowledge and feeling
    are partial aspects of the self, and hence more or less abstract,
    while will is complete, comprehending both aspects.... While the
    universal element is knowledge, the individual element is feeling,
    and the relation which connects them into one concrete content is
    will.” 364—“There is conflict of desires or motives. Deliberation
    is the comparison of desires; choice is the decision in favor of
    one. This desire is then the strongest because the whole force of
    the self is thrown into it.” 411—“The man determines himself by
    setting up either good or evil as a motive to himself, and he sets
    up either, as he will have himself be. There is no thought without
    will, for thought implies inhibition.” Ribot, Diseases of the
    Will, 73, cites the case of Coleridge, and his lack of power to
    inhibit scattering and useless ideas; 114—“Volition plunges its
    roots into the profoundest depths of the individual, and beyond
    the individual, into the species and into all species.”

    As God is not mere nature but originating force, so man is chiefly
    will. Every other act of the soul has will as an element. Wundt:
    “Jedes Denken ist ein Wollen.” There is no perception, and there
    is no thought, without attention, and attention is an act of the
    will. Hegelians and absolute idealists like Bradley, (see Mind,
    July, 1886), deny that attention is an active function of the
    self. They regard it as a necessary consequence of the more
    interesting character of preceding ideas. Thus all power to alter
    character is denied to the agent. This is an exact reversal of the
    facts of consciousness, and it would leave no will in God or man.
    T. H. Green says that the self makes the motives by identifying
    itself with one solicitation of desire rather than another, but
    that the self has no power of alternative choice in thus
    identifying itself with one solicitation of desire rather than
    another; see Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 310. James Seth, Freedom of
    Ethical Postulate: “The only hope of finding a place for real free
    will is in another than the Humian, empirical or psychological
    account of the moral person or self. Hegel and Green bring will
    again under the law of necessity. But personality is ultimate.
    Absolute uniformity is entirely unproved. We contend for a power
    of free and incalculable initiation in the self, and this it is
    necessary to maintain in the interests of morality.” Without will
    to attend to pertinent material and to reject the impertinent, we
    can have no _science_; without will to select and combine the
    elements of imagination, we can have no _art_; without will to
    choose between evil and good, we can have no _morality_. Ælfric,
    A. D. 900: “The verb ‘to will’ has no imperative, for that the
    will must be always free.”


C. Will and permanent states.—(_a_) Though every act of the soul involves
the action of all the faculties, yet in any particular action one faculty
may be more prominent than the others. So we speak of acts of intellect,
of affection, of will. (_b_) This predominant action of any single faculty
produces effects upon the other faculties associated with it. The action
of will gives a direction to the intellect and to the affections, as well
as a permanent bent to the will itself. (_c_) Each faculty, therefore, has
its permanent states as well as its transient acts, and the will may
originate these states. Hence we speak of voluntary affections, and may
with equal propriety speak of voluntary opinions. These permanent
voluntary states we denominate character.


    I “make up” my mind. Ladd, Philosophy of Conduct, 152—“I will the
    influential ideas, feelings and desires, rather than allow these
    ideas, feelings and desires to influence—not to say, determine
    me.” All men can say with Robert Browning’s Paracelsus: “I have
    subdued my life to the one purpose Whereto I ordained it.” “Sow an
    act, and you reap a habit; sow a habit, and you reap a character;
    sow a character, and you reap a destiny.” Tito, in George Eliot’s
    Romola, and Markheim in R. L. Stevenson’s story of that name, are
    instances of the gradual and almost imperceptible fixation in evil
    ways which results from seemingly slight original decisions of the
    will; see art. on Tito Melema, by Julia H. Gulliver, in New World,
    Dec. 1895:688—“Sin lies in the choice of the ideas that shall
    frequent the moral life, rather than of the actions that shall
    form the outward life.... The pivotal point of the moral life is
    the intent involved in attention.... Sin consists, not only in the
    motive, but in the making of the motive.” By every decision of the
    will in which we turn our thought either toward or away from an
    object of desire, we set nerve-tracts in operation, upon which
    thought may hereafter more or less easily travel. “Nothing makes
    an inroad, without making a road.” By slight efforts of attention
    to truth which we know ought to influence us, we may “_make level
    in the desert a highway for our God_” (_Is. 40:3_), or render the
    soul a hard trodden ground impervious to “_the word of the
    kingdom_” (_Mat. 13:19_).

    The word “character” meant originally the mark of the engraver’s
    tool upon the metal or the stone. It came then to signify the
    collective result of the engraver’s work. The use of the word in
    morals implies that every thought and act is chiseling itself into
    the imperishable substance of the soul. J. S. Mill: “A character
    is a completely fashioned will.” We may talk therefore of a
    “generic volition” (Dewey). There is a permanent bent of the will
    toward good or toward evil. Reputation is man’s shadow, sometimes
    longer, sometimes shorter, than himself. Character, on the other
    hand, is the man’s true self—“what a man is in the dark” (Dwight
    L. Moody). In this sense, “purpose is the autograph of mind.” Duke
    of Wellington: “Habit a second nature? Habit is ten times nature!”
    When Macbeth says: “If ’twere done when ’tis done, Then ’twere
    well ’twere done quickly,” the trouble is that when ’tis done, it
    is only begun. Robert Dale Owen gives us the fundamental principle
    of socialism in the maxim: “A man’s character is made for him, not
    by him.” Hence he would change man’s diet or his environment, as a
    means of forming man’s character. But Jesus teaches that what
    defiles comes not from without but from within (_Mat. 15:18_).
    Because character is the result of will, the maxim of Heraclitus
    is true: ἦθος ἀνθρώπῳ δαίμων—man’s character is his destiny. On
    habit, see James, Psychology, 1:122-127.


D. Will and motives.—(_a_) The permanent states just mentioned, when they
have been once determined, also influence the will. Internal views and
dispositions, and not simply external presentations, constitute the
strength of motives. (_b_) These motives often conflict, and though the
soul never acts without motive, it does notwithstanding choose between
motives, and so determines the end toward which it will direct its
activities. (_c_) Motives are not _causes_, which compel the will, but
_influences_, which persuade it. The power of these motives, however, is
proportioned to the strength of will which has entered into them and has
made them what they are.


    “Incentives come from the soul’s self: the rest avail not.” The
    same wind may drive two ships in opposite directions, according as
    they set their sails. The same external presentation may result in
    George Washington’s refusing, and Benedict Arnold’s accepting, the
    bribe to betray his country. Richard Lovelace of Canterbury:
    “Stone walls do not a prison make, Nor iron bars a cage; Minds
    innocent and quiet take That for a hermitage.” Jonathan Edwards
    made motives to be _efficient_ causes, when they are only _final_
    causes. We must not interpret motive as if it were locomotive. It
    is always a man’s fault when he becomes a drunkard: drink never
    takes to a man; the man takes to drink. Men who deny demerit are
    ready enough to claim merit. They hold others responsible, if not
    themselves. Bowne: “Pure arbitrariness and pure necessity are
    alike incompatible with reason. There must be a law of reason in
    the mind with which volition cannot tamper, and there must also be
    the power to determine ourselves accordingly.” Bowne, Principles
    of Ethics, 135—“If necessity is a universal thing, then the belief
    in freedom is also necessary. All grant freedom of thought, so
    that it is only executive freedom that is denied.” Bowne, Theory
    of Thought and Knowledge, 239-244—“Every system of philosophy must
    invoke freedom for the solution of the problem of error, or make
    shipwreck of reason itself.... Our faculties are made for truth,
    but they may be carelessly used, or wilfully misused, and thus
    error is born.... We need not only laws of thought, but
    self-control in accordance with them.”

    The will, in choosing _between_ motives, chooses _with_ a motive,
    namely, the motive chosen. Fairbairn, Philos. Christian Religion,
    76—“While motives may be necessary, they need not necessitate. The
    will selects motives; motives do not select the will. Heredity and
    environment do not cancel freedom, they only condition it. Thought
    is transcendence as regards the phenomena of space; will is
    transcendence as regards the phenomena of time; this double
    transcendence involves the complete supernatural character of
    man.” New World, 1892:152—“It is not the character, but the self
    that has the character, to which the ultimate moral decision is
    due.” William Ernest Henly, Poems, 119—“It matters not how strait
    the gate, How charged with punishments the scroll, I am the master
    of my fate, I am the captain of my soul.”

    Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 2:54—“A being is free, in so far
    as the inner centre of its life, from which it acts, is
    conditioned by self-determination. It is not enough that the
    deciding agent in an act be the man himself, his own nature, his
    distinctive character. In order to have accountability, we must
    have more than this; we must prove that this, his distinctive
    nature and character, springs from his own volition, and that it
    is itself the product of freedom in moral development. _Matt.
    12:33_—‘_make the tree good, and its fruit good_’—combines both.
    Acts depend upon nature; but nature again depends upon the primary
    decisions of the will (‘_make the tree good_’). Some determinism
    is not denied; but it is partly limited [by the will’s remaining
    power of choice] and partly traced back to a former
    self-determining.” _Ibid._, 67—“If freedom be the self-determining
    of the will from that which is undetermined, Determinism is found
    wanting,—because in its most spiritual form, though it grants a
    self-determination of the will, it is only such a one as springs
    from a determinateness already present; and Indifferentism is
    found wanting too, because while it maintains indeterminateness as
    presupposed in every act of will, it does not recognize an actual
    self-determining on the part of the will, which, though it be a
    self-determining, yet begets determinateness of character.... We
    must, therefore, hold the doctrine of a _conditional_ and
    _limited_ freedom.”


E. Will and contrary choice.—(_a_) Though no act of pure will is possible,
the soul may put forth single volitions in a direction opposed to its
previous ruling purpose, and thus far man has the power of a contrary
choice (Rom. 7:18—“to will is present with me”). (_b_) But in so far as
will has entered into and revealed itself in permanent states of intellect
and sensibility and in a settled bent of the will itself, man cannot by a
single act reverse his moral state, and in this respect has not the power
of a contrary choice. (_c_) In this latter case he can change his
character only indirectly, by turning his attention to considerations
fitted to awaken opposite dispositions, and by thus summoning up motives
to an opposite course.


    There is no such thing as an act of pure will. Peters,
    Willenswelt, 126—“Jedes Wollen ist ein Etwas wollen”—“all willing
    is a willing of some thing”; it has an object which the mind
    conceives, which awakens the sensibility, and which the will
    strives to realize. Cause without alternative is not true cause.
    J. F. Watts: “We know causality only as we know will, _i. e._,
    where of two possibles it makes one actual. A cause may therefore
    have more than one certain effect. In the external material world
    we cannot find _cause_, but only _antecedent_. To construct a
    theory of the will from a study of the material universe is to
    seek the living among the dead. Will is power to _make_ a
    decision, not to _be made_ by decisions, to decide between
    motives, and not to be determined by motives. Who conducts the
    trial between motives? Only the self.” While we agree with the
    above in its assertion of the certainty of nature’s sequences, we
    object to its attribution even to nature of anything like
    necessity. Since nature’s laws are merely the habits of God, God’s
    causality in nature is the regularity, not of necessity, but of
    freedom. We too are free at the strategic points. Automatic as
    most of our action is, there are times when we know ourselves to
    have power of initiative; when we put under our feet the motives
    which have dominated us in the past; when we mark out new courses
    of action. In these critical times we assert our manhood; but for
    them we would be no better than the beasts that perish. “Unless
    above himself he can erect himself, How mean a thing is man!”

    Will, with no remaining power of contrary choice, may be brute
    will, but it is not free will. We therefore deny the relevancy of
    Herbert Spencer’s argument, in his Data of Ethics, and in his
    Psychology, 2:503—“Psychical changes either conform to law, or
    they do not. If they do not conform to law, no science of
    Psychology is possible. If they do conform to law, there cannot be
    any such thing as free will.” Spinoza also, in his Ethics, holds
    that the stone, as it falls, would if it were conscious think
    itself free, and with as much justice as man; for it is doing that
    to which its constitution leads it; but no more can be said for
    him. Fisher, Nature and Method of Revelation, xiii—“To try to
    collect the ‘data of ethics’ when there is no recognition of man
    as a personal agent, capable of freely originating the conduct and
    the states of will for which he is morally responsible, is labor
    lost.” Fisher, chapter on the Personality of God, in Grounds of
    Theistic and Christian Belief—“Self-determination, as the very
    term signifies, is attended with an irresistible conviction that
    the direction of the will is self-imparted.... That the will is
    free, that is, not constrained by causes exterior, which is
    _fatalism_—and not a mere spontaneity, confined to one path by a
    force acting from within, which is _determinism_—is immediately
    evident to every unsophisticated mind. We can initiate action by
    an efficiency which is neither irresistibly controlled by motives,
    nor determined, without any capacity of alternative action, by a
    proneness inherent in its nature.... Motives have an _influence_,
    but influence is not to be confounded with _causal_ efficiency.”

    Talbot, on Will and Free Will, Bap. Rev., July, 1882—“Will is
    neither a power of unconditioned self-determination—which is not
    freedom, but an aimless, irrational, fatalistic power; nor pure
    spontaneity—which excludes from will all law but its own; but it
    is rather a power of originating action—a power which is limited
    however by inborn dispositions, by acquired habits and
    convictions, by feelings and social relations.” Ernest Naville, in
    Rev. Chrétienne, Jan. 1878:7—“Our liberty does not consist in
    producing an action of which it is the only source. It consists in
    choosing between two preëxistent impulses. It is _choice_, not
    _creation_, that is our destiny—a drop of water that can choose
    whether it will go into the Rhine or the Rhone. Gravity carries it
    down,—it chooses only its direction. Impulses do not come from the
    will, but from the sensibility; but free will chooses between
    these impulses.” Bowne, Metaphysics, 169—“Freedom is not a power
    of acting without, or apart from, motives, but simply a power of
    choosing an end or law, and of governing one’s self accordingly.”
    Porter, Moral Science, 77-111—Will is “not a power to choose
    without motive.” It “does not exclude motives to the contrary.”
    Volition “supposes two or more objects between which election is
    made. It is an act of preference, and to prefer implies that one
    motive is chosen to the exclusion of another.... To the conception
    and the act two motives at least are required.” Lyall, Intellect,
    Emotions, and Moral Nature, 581, 592—“The will follows reasons,
    inducements—but it is not _caused_. It obeys or acts under
    inducement, but it does so sovereignly. It exhibits the phenomena
    of activity, in relation to the very motive it obeys. It obeys it,
    rather than another. It determines, in reference to it, that this
    is the very motive it will obey. There is undoubtedly this
    phenomenon exhibited: the will obeying—but elective, active, in
    its obedience. If it be asked how this is possible—how the will
    can be under the influence of motive, and yet possess an
    intellectual activity—we reply that this is one of those ultimate
    phenomena which must be admitted, while they cannot be explained.”


F. Will and responsibility.—(_a_) By repeated acts of will put forth in a
given moral direction, the affections may become so confirmed in evil or
in good as to make previously certain, though not necessary, the future
good or evil action of the man. Thus, while the will is free, the man may
be the “bondservant of sin” (John 8:31-36) or the “servant of
righteousness” (Rom. 6:15-23; _cf._ Heb. 12-23—“spirits of just men made
perfect”). (_b_) Man is responsible for all effects of will, as well as
for will itself; for voluntary affections, as well as for voluntary acts;
for the intellectual views into which will has entered, as well as for the
acts of will by which these views have been formed in the past or are
maintained in the present (2 Pet. 3:5—“wilfully forget”).


    Ladd, Philosophy of Knowledge, 415—“The self stands between the
    two laws of Nature and of Conscience, and, under perpetual
    limitations from both, exercises its choice. Thus it becomes more
    and more enslaved by the one, or more and more free by habitually
    choosing to follow the other. Our conception of causality
    according to the laws of nature, and our conception of the other
    causality of freedom, are both derived from one and the same
    experience of the self. There arises a seeming antinomy only when
    we hypostatize each severally and apart from the other.” R. T.
    Smith, Man’s Knowledge of Man and of God, 69—“Making a _will_ is
    significant. Here the action of will is limited by conditions: the
    amount of the testator’s property, the number of his relatives,
    the nature of the objects of bounty within his knowledge.”

    Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism, 349-407—“Action without motives,
    or contrary to all motives, would be irrational action. Instead of
    being free, it would be like the convulsions of epilepsy. Motives
    = sensibilities. Motive is not _cause_; does not determine; is
    only influence. Yet determination is always made under the
    influence of motives. Uniformity of action is not to be explained
    by any law of uniform influence of motives, but by _character_ in
    the will. By its choice, will forms in itself a character; by
    action in accordance with this choice, it confirms and develops
    the character. Choice modifies sensibilities, and so modifies
    motives. Volitional action expresses character, but also forms and
    modifies it. Man may change his choice; yet intellect,
    sensibility, motive, habit, remain. Evil choice, having formed
    intellect and sensibility into accord with itself, must be a
    powerful hindrance to fundamental change by new and contrary
    choice; and gives small ground to expect that man left to himself
    ever will make the change. After will has acquired character by
    choices, its determinations are not transitions from complete
    indeterminateness or indifference, but are more or less
    expressions of character already formed. The theory that
    indifference is essential to freedom implies that will never
    acquires character; that voluntary action is atomistic; that every
    act is disintegrated from every other; that character, if
    acquired, would be incompatible with freedom. Character is a
    choice, yet a choice which persists, which modifies sensibility
    and intellect, and which influences subsequent determinations.”

    My freedom then is freedom within limitations. Heredity and
    environment, and above all the settled dispositions which are the
    product of past acts of will, render a large part of human action
    practically automatic. The deterministic theory is valid for
    perhaps nine-tenths of human activity. Mason, Faith of the Gospel,
    118, 119—“We naturally will with a bias toward evil. To act
    according to the perfection of nature would be true freedom. And
    this man has lost. He recognizes that he is not his true self. It
    is only with difficulty that he works toward his true self again.
    By the fall of Adam, the will, which before was conditioned but
    free, is now not only conditioned but enslaved. Nothing but the
    action of grace can free it.” Tennyson, In Memoriam, Introduction:
    “Our wills are ours, we know not how; Our wills are ours, to make
    them thine.” Studying the action of the sinful will alone, one
    might conclude that there is no such thing as freedom. Christian
    ethics, in distinction from naturalistic ethics, reveals most
    clearly the degradation of our nature, at the same time that it
    discloses the remedy in Christ: “_If therefore the Son shall make
    you free, ye shall be free indeed_” (_John 8:36_).

    Mind, Oct. 1882:567—“Kant seems to be in quest of the phantasmal
    freedom which is supposed to consist in the absence of
    determination by motives. The error of the determinists from which
    this idea is the recoil, involves an equal abstraction of the man
    from his thoughts, and interprets the relation between the two as
    an instance of the mechanical causality which exists between two
    things in nature. The point to be grasped in the controversy is
    that a man and his motives are one, and that consequently he is in
    every instance self-determined.... Indeterminism is tenable only
    if an ego can be found which is not an ego already determinate;
    but such an ego, though it may be logically distinguished and
    verbally expressed, is not a factor in psychology.” Morell, Mental
    Philosophy, 390—“Motives determine the will, and so _far_ the will
    is not free; but the man governs the motives, allowing them a less
    or a greater power of influencing his life, and so _far_ the man
    is a free agent.” Santayana: “A free man, because he is free, may
    make himself a slave; but once a slave, because he is a slave, he
    cannot make himself free.” Sidgwick, Method of Ethics, 51,
    65—“This almost overwhelming cumulative proof [of necessity]
    seems, however, more than balanced by a single argument on the
    other side: the immediate affirmation of consciousness in the
    moment of deliberate volition. It is impossible for me to think,
    at each moment, that my volition is completely determined by my
    formed character and the motives acting upon it. The opposite
    conviction is so strong as to be absolutely unshaken by the
    evidence brought against it. I cannot believe it to be illusory.”


G. Inferences from this view of the will.—(_a_) We can be responsible for
the voluntary evil affections with which we are born, and for the will’s
inherited preference of selfishness, only upon the hypothesis that we
originated these states of the affections and will, or had a part in
originating them. Scripture furnishes this explanation, in its doctrine of
Original Sin, or the doctrine of a common apostasy of the race in its
first father, and our derivation of a corrupted nature by natural
generation from him. (_b_) While there remains to man, even in his present
condition, a natural power of will by which he may put forth transient
volitions externally conformed to the divine law and so may to a limited
extent modify his character, it still remains true that the sinful bent of
his affections is not directly under his control; and this bent
constitutes a motive to evil so constant, inveterate, and powerful, that
it actually influences every member of the race to reäffirm his evil
choice, and renders necessary a special working of God’s Spirit upon his
heart to ensure his salvation. Hence the Scripture doctrine of
Regeneration.


    There is such a thing as “psychical automatism” (Ladd, Philos.
    Mind, 169). Mother: “Oscar, why can’t you be good?” “Mamma, it
    makes me so tired!” The wayward four-year-old is a type of
    universal humanity. Men are born morally tired, though they have
    energy enough of other sorts. The man who sins may lose all
    freedom, so that his soul becomes a seething mass of eructant
    evil. T. C. Chamberlain: “Conditions may make choices run rigidly
    in one direction and give as fixed uniformity as in physical
    phenomena. Put before a million typical Americans the choice
    between a quarter and a dime, and rigid uniformity of results can
    be safely predicted.” Yet Dr. Chamberlain not only grants but
    claims liberty of choice. Romanes, Mind and Motion,
    155-160—“Though volitions are largely determined by other and
    external causes, it does not follow that they are determined
    _necessarily_, and this makes all the difference between the
    theories of will as bond or free. Their intrinsic character as
    first causes protects them from being coerced by these causes and
    therefore from becoming only the mere effects of them. The
    condition to the effective operation of a _motive_—as
    distinguished from a _motor_—is the acquiescence of the first
    cause upon whom that motive is operating.” Fichte: “If any one
    adopting the dogma of necessity should remain virtuous, we must
    seek the cause of his goodness elsewhere than in the innocuousness
    of his doctrine. Upon the supposition of free will alone can duty,
    virtue, and morality have any existence.” Lessing: “Kein Mensch
    muss müssen.” Delitzsch: “Der Mensch, wie er jetzt ist, ist
    wahlfrei, aber nicht machtfrei.”

    Kant regarded freedom as an exception to the law of natural
    causality. But this freedom is not phenomenal but noumenal, for
    causality is not a category of noumena. From this freedom we get
    our whole idea of personality, for personality is freedom of the
    whole soul from the mechanism of nature. Kant treated scornfully
    the determinism of Leibnitz. He said it was the freedom of a
    turnspit, which when once wound up directed its own movements, _i.
    e._, was merely automatic. Compare with this the view of Baldwin,
    Psychology, Feeling and Will, 373—“Free choice is a synthesis, the
    outcome of which is in every case conditioned upon its elements,
    but in no case caused by them. A logical inference is conditioned
    upon its premises, but it is not caused by them. Both inference
    and choice express the nature of the conscious principle and the
    unique method of its life.... The motives do not grow into
    volitions, nor does the volition stand apart from the motives. The
    motives are partial expressions, the volition is a total
    expression, of the same existence.... Freedom is the expression of
    one’s self conditioned by past choices and present environment.”
    Shakespeare, Hamlet, 3:4—“Refrain to-night, And that shall lend a
    kind of easiness To the next abstinence: the next more easy: For
    use can almost change the stamp of nature, And either curb the
    devil or throw him out With wondrous potency.” 3:2—“Purpose is but
    the slave to memory; Of violent birth but poor validity.”
    4:7—“That we would do, We should do when we would; for this
    _would_ changes And hath abatements and delays as many As there
    are tongues, are hands, are accidents.” Goethe: “Von der Gewalt
    die alle Wesen bindet, Befreit der Mensch sich der sich
    überwindet.”

    Scotus Novanticus (Prof. Laurie of Edinburgh), Ethica, 287—“The
    chief good is fulness of life achieved through law by the action
    of will as reason on sensibility.... Immorality is the letting
    loose of feeling, in opposition to the idea and the law in it; it
    is individuality in opposition to personality.... In immorality,
    will is defeated, the personality overcome, and the subject
    volitionizes just as a dog volitionizes. The subject takes
    possession of the personality and uses it for its natural
    desires.” Maudsley, Physiology of Mind, 456, quotes Ribot,
    Diseases of the Will, 133—“Will is not the cause of anything. It
    is like the verdict of a jury, which is an effect, without being a
    cause. It is the highest force which nature has yet developed—the
    last consummate blossom of all her marvellous works.” Yet Maudsley
    argues that the mind itself has power to prevent insanity. This
    implies that there is an owner of the instrument endowed with
    power and responsibility to keep it in order. Man can do much, but
    God can do more.


H. Special objections to the deterministic theory of the will.—Determinism
holds that man’s actions are uniformly determined by motives acting upon
his character, and that he has no power to change these motives or to act
contrary to them. This denial that the will is free has serious and
pernicious consequences in theology. On the one hand, it weakens even if
it does not destroy man’s conviction with regard to responsibility, sin,
guilt and retribution, and so obscures the need of atonement; on the other
hand, it weakens if it does not destroy man’s faith in his own power as
well as in God’s power of initiating action, and so obscures the
possibility of atonement.


    Determinism is exemplified in Omar Kháyyám’s Rubáiyát: “With
    earth’s first clay they did the last man knead, And there of the
    last harvest sowed the seed; And the first morning of creation
    wrote What the last dawn of reckoning shall read.” William James,
    Will to Believe, 145-183, shows that determinism involves
    pessimism or subjectivism—good and evil are merely means of
    increasing knowledge. The result of subjectivism is in theology
    antinomianism; in literature romanticism; in practical life
    sensuality or sensualism, as in Rousseau, Renan and Zola. Hutton,
    review of Clifford in Contemp. Thoughts and Thinkers, 1:254—“The
    determinist says there would be no moral quality in actions that
    did not express previous tendency, _i. e._, a man is responsible
    only for what he cannot help doing. No effort against the grain
    will be made by him who believes that his interior mechanism
    settles for him whether he shall make it or no.” Royce, World and
    Individual, 2:342—“Your unique voices in the divine symphony are
    no more the voices of moral agents than are the stones of a
    mosaic.” The French monarch announced that all his subjects should
    be free to choose their own religion, but he added that nobody
    should choose a different religion from the king’s. “Johnny, did
    you give your little sister the choice between those two apples?”
    “Yes, Mamma; I told her she could have the little one or none, and
    she chose the little one.” Hobson’s choice was always the choice
    of the last horse in the row. The bartender with revolver in hand
    met all criticisms upon the quality of his liquor with the remark:
    “You’ll drink that whisky, and you’ll like it too!”

    Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 22—“There must be implicitly
    present to primitive man the sense of freedom, since his fetichism
    largely consists in attributing to inanimate objects the
    spontaneity which he finds in himself.” Freedom does not
    contradict conservation of energy. Professor Lodge, in Nature,
    March 26, 1891—“Although expenditure of energy is needed to
    increase the speed of matter, none is needed to alter its
    direction.... The rails that guide a train do not propel it, nor
    do they retard it; they have no essential effect upon its energy
    but a guiding effect.” J. J. Murphy, Nat. Selection and Spir.
    Freedom, 170-203—“Will does not create force but directs it. A
    very small force is able to guide the action of a great one, as in
    the steering of a modern steamship.” James Seth, in Philos. Rev.,
    3:285, 286—“As life is not energy but a determiner of the paths of
    energy, so the will is a cause, in the sense that it controls and
    directs the channels which activity shall take.” See also James
    Seth, Ethical Principles, 345-388, and Freedom as Ethical
    Postulate, 9—“The philosophical proof of freedom must be the
    demonstration of the inadequacy of the categories of science: its
    philosophical disproof must be the demonstration of the adequacy
    of such scientific categories.” Shadworth Hodgson: “Either liberty
    is true, and then the categories are insufficient, or the
    categories are sufficient, and then liberty is a delusion.” Wagner
    is the composer of determinism; there is no freedom or guilt;
    action is the result of influence and environment; a mysterious
    fate rules all. Life: “The views upon heredity Of scientists
    remind one That, shape one’s conduct as one may, One’s future is
    behind one.”

    We trace willing in God back, not to motives and antecedents, but
    to his infinite personality. If man is made in God’s image, why we
    may not trace man’s willing also back, not to motives and
    antecedents, but to his finite personality? We speak of God’s
    fiat, but we may speak of man’s fiat also. Napoleon: “There shall
    be no Alps!” Dutch William III: “I may fall, but shall fight every
    ditch, and die in the last one!” When God energizes the will, it
    becomes indomitable. _Phil. 4:13_—“_I can do all things in him
    that strengtheneth me._” Dr. E. G. Robinson was theoretically a
    determinist, and wrongly held that the highest conceivable freedom
    is to act out one’s own nature. He regarded the will as only the
    nature in movement. Will is self-determining, not in the sense
    that will determines the self, but in the sense that self
    determines the will. The will cannot be compelled, for unless
    self-determined it is no longer will. Observation, history and
    logic, he thought, lead to necessitarianism. But consciousness, he
    conceded, testifies to freedom. Consciousness must be trusted,
    though we cannot reconcile the two. The will is as great a mystery
    as is the doctrine of the Trinity. Single volitions, he says, are
    often directly in the face of the current of a man’s life. Yet he
    held that we have no consciousness of the power of a contrary
    choice. Consciousness can testify only to what springs out of the
    moral nature, not to the moral nature itself.

    Lotze, Religionsphilosophie, section 61—“An indeterminate choice
    is of course incomprehensible and inexplicable, for if it were
    comprehensible and explicable by the human intellect, if, that is,
    it could be seen to follow necessarily from the preëxisting
    conditions, it from the nature of the case could not be a morally
    free choice at all.... But we cannot comprehend any more how the
    mind can move the muscles, nor how a moving stone can set another
    stone in motion, nor how the Absolute calls into existence our
    individual selves.” Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 308-327, gives an
    able exposé of the deterministic fallacies. He cites Martineau and
    Balfour in England, Renouvier and Fonsegrive in France, Edward
    Zeller, Kuno Fischer and Saarschmidt in Germany, and William James
    in America, as recent advocates of free will.

    Martineau, Study, 2:227—“Is there not a Causal Self, over and
    above the Caused Self, or rather the Caused State and contents of
    the self left as a deposit from previous behavior? Absolute
    idealism, like Green’s, will not recognize the existence of this
    Causal Self”; Study of Religion, 2:195-324, and especially
    240—“Where two or more rival preconceptions enter the field
    together, they cannot compare themselves _inter se_: they need and
    meet a superior: it rests with the mind itself to decide. The
    decision will not be _unmotived_, for it will have its reasons. It
    will not be unconformable to the characteristics of the mind, for
    it will express its preferences. But none the less is it issued by
    a free cause that elects among the conditions, and is not elected
    by them.” 241—“So far from admitting that different effects cannot
    come from the same cause. I even venture on the paradox that
    nothing is a proper cause which is limited to one effect.”
    309—“Freedom, in the sense of option, and will, as the power of
    deciding an alternative, have no place in the doctrines of the
    German schools.” 311—“The whole illusion of Necessity springs from
    the attempt to fling out, for contemplation in the field of
    Nature, the creative new beginnings centered in personal subjects
    that transcend it.”

    See also H. B. Smith, System of Christ. Theol., 236-251; Mansel,
    Proleg. Log., 113-155, 270-278, and Metaphysics, 366; Gregory,
    Christian Ethics, 60; Abp. Manning, in Contem. Rev., Jan.
    1871:468; Ward, Philos. of Theism, 1:287-352; 2:1-79, 274-349; Bp.
    Temple, Bampton Lect., 1884:69-96; Row, Man not a Machine, in
    Present Day Tracts, 5: no. 30; Richards, Lectures on Theology,
    97-153; Solly, The Will, 167-203; William James, The Dilemma of
    Determinism, in Unitarian Review, Sept. 1884, and in The Will to
    Believe, 145-183; T. H. Green, Prolegomena to Ethics, 90-159;
    Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 310; Bradley, in Mind, July, 1886;
    Bradford, Heredity and Christian Problems, 70-101; Illingworth,
    Divine Immanence, 229-254; Ladd, Philos. of Conduct, 133-188. For
    Lotze’s view of the Will, see his Philos. of Religion, 95-106, and
    his Practical Philosophy, 35-50.




