The Project Gutenberg EBook of Systematic Theology (Volume 2 of 3) by
Augustus Hopkins Strong



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: Systematic Theology (Volume 2 of 3)

Author: Augustus Hopkins Strong

Release Date: December 31, 2013 [Ebook #44555]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF‐8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY (VOLUME 2 OF 3)***





                           Systematic Theology

                    A Compendium and Commonplace-Book

               Designed For The Use Of Theological Students

                                    By

                   Augustus Hopkins Strong, D.D., LL.D.

President and Professor of Biblical Theology in the Rochester Theological
                                 Seminary

                           Revised and Enlarged

                             In Three Volumes

                                 Volume 2

                           The Doctrine of Man

                             The Judson Press

                               Philadelphia

                                   1907





CONTENTS


Part IV. The Nature, Decrees, And Works of God. (Continued)
   Chapter IV. The Works Of God; Or The Execution Of The Decrees.
      Section I.—Creation.
         I. Definition Of Creation.
         II. Proof of the Doctrine of Creation.
            1. Direct Scripture Statements.
            2. Indirect evidence from Scripture.
         III. Theories which oppose Creation.
            1. Dualism.
            2. Emanation.
            3. Creation from eternity.
            4. Spontaneous generation.
         IV. The Mosaic Account of Creation.
            1. Its twofold nature,—as uniting the ideas of creation and of
            development.
            2. Its proper interpretation.
         V. God’s End in Creation.
            1. The testimony of Scripture.
            2. The testimony of reason.
         VI. Relation of the Doctrine of Creation to other Doctrines.
            1. To the holiness and benevolence of God.
            2. To the wisdom and free-will of God.
            3. To Christ as the Revealer of God.
            4. To Providence and Redemption.
            5. To the Observance of the Sabbath.
      Section II.—Preservation.
         I. Definition of Preservation.
         II. Proof of the Doctrine of Preservation.
            1. From Scripture.
            2. From Reason.
         III. Theories which virtually deny the doctrine of Preservation.
            1. Deism.
            2. Continuous Creation.
         IV. Remarks upon the Divine Concurrence.
      Section III.—Providence.
         I. Definition of Providence.
         II. Proof of the Doctrine of Providence.
            1. Scriptural Proof.
            2. Rational proof.
         III. Theories opposing the Doctrine of Providence.
            1. Fatalism.
            2. Casualism.
            3. Theory of a merely general providence.
         IV. Relations of the Doctrine of Providence.
            1. To miracles and works of grace.
            2. To prayer and its answer.
            3. To Christian activity.
            4. To the evil acts of free agents.
      Section IV.—Good And Evil Angels.
         I. Scripture Statements and Imitations.
            1. As to the nature and attributes of angels.
            2. As to their number and organization.
            3. As to their moral character.
            4. As to their employments.
               A. The employments of good angels.
               B. The employments of evil angels.
         II. Objections to the Doctrine of Angels.
            1. To the doctrine of angels in general.
            2. To the doctrine of evil angels in particular.
         III. Practical uses of the Doctrine of Angels.
            A. Uses of the doctrine of good angels.
            B. Uses of the doctrine of evil angels.
Part V. Anthropology, Or The Doctrine Of Man.
   Chapter I. Preliminary.
      I. Man a Creation of God and a Child of God.
      II. Unity of the Human Race.
         1. The argument from history.
         2. The argument from language.
         3. The argument from psychology.
         4. The argument from physiology.
      III. Essential Elements of Human Nature.
         1. The Dichotomous Theory.
         2. The Trichotomous Theory.
      IV. Origin of the Soul.
         1. The Theory of Preëxistence.
         2. The Creatian Theory.
         3. The Traducian Theory.
      V. The Moral Nature of Man.
         1. Conscience.
         2. Will.
   Chapter II. The Original State Of Man.
      I. Essentials of Man’s Original State.
         1. Natural likeness to God, or personality.
         2. Moral likeness to God, or holiness.
            A. The image of God as including only personality.
            B. The image of God as consisting simply in man’s natural
            capacity for religion.
      II. Incidents of Man’s Original State.
         1. Results of man’s possession of the divine image.
         2. Concomitants of man’s possession of the divine image.
   Chapter III. Sin, Or Man’s State Of Apostasy.
      Section I.—The Law Of God.
         I. Law in General.
         II. The Law of God in Particular.
         III. Relation of the Law to the Grace of God.
      Section II.—Nature Of Sin.
         I. Definition of Sin.
            1. Proof.
            2. Inferences.
         II. The Essential Principle of Sin.
            1. Sin as Sensuousness.
            2. Sin as Finiteness.
            3. Sin as Selfishness.
      Section III.—Universality Of Sin.
         I. Every human being who has arrived at moral consciousness has
         committed acts, or cherished dispositions, contrary to the divine
         law.
         II. Every member of the human race, without exception, possesses
         a corrupted nature, which is a source of actual sin, and is
         itself sin.
      Section IV.—Origin Of Sin In The Personal Act Of Adam.
         I. The Scriptural Account of the Temptation and Fall in Genesis
         3:1-7.
            1. Its general, character not mythical or allegorical, but
            historical.
            2. The course of the temptation, and the resulting fall.
         II. Difficulties connected with the Fall considered as the
         personal Act of Adam.
            1. How could a holy being fall?
            2. How could God justly permit Satanic temptation?
            3. How could a penalty so great be justly connected with
            disobedience to so slight a command?
         III. Consequences of the Fall, so far as respects Adam.
            1. Death.
            2. Positive and formal exclusion from God’s presence.
      Section V.—Imputation Of Adam’s Sin To His Posterity.
         I. Theories of Imputation.
            1. The Pelagian Theory, or Theory of Man’s natural Innocence.
            2. The Arminian Theory, or Theory of voluntarily appropriated
            Depravity.
            3. The New School Theory, or Theory of uncondemnable
            Vitiosity.
            4. The Federal Theory, or Theory of Condemnation by Covenant.
            5. Theory of Mediate Imputation, or Theory of Condemnation for
            Depravity.
            6. The Augustinian Theory, or Theory of Adam’s Natural
            Headship.
         II.—Objections to the Augustinian Doctrine of Imputation.
      Section VI.—Consequences Of Sin To Adam’s Posterity.
         I. Depravity.
            1. Depravity partial or total?
            2. Ability or inability?
         II. Guilt.
            1. Nature of guilt.
            2. Degrees of guilt.
         III. Penalty.
            1. Idea of penalty.
            2. The actual penalty of sin.
      Section VII.—The Salvation Of Infants.
Part VI. Soteriology, Or The Doctrine Of Salvation Through The Work Of
Christ And Of The Holy Spirit.
   Chapter I. Christology, Or The Redemption Wrought By Christ.
      Section I.—Historical Preparation For Redemption.
         I. Negative Preparation,—in the history of the heathen world.
         II. Positive Preparation,—in the history of Israel.
      Section II.—The Person Of Christ.
         I. Historical Survey of Views Respecting the Person of Christ.
         II. The two Natures of Christ,—their Reality and Integrity.
            1. The Humanity of Christ.
            2. The Deity of Christ.
         III. The Union of the two Natures in one Person.
            1. Proof of this Union.
            2. Modern misrepresentations of this Union.
            3. The real nature of this Union.
      Section III.—The Two States Of Christ.
         I. The State of Humiliation.
            1. The nature of this humiliation.
            2. The stages of Christ’s humiliation.
         II. The State of Exaltation.
            1. The nature of this exaltation.
            2. The stages of Christ’s exaltation.
      Section IV.—The Offices Of Christ.
         I. The Prophetic Office of Christ.
            1. The nature of Christ’s prophetic work.
            2. The stages of Christ’s prophetic work.
         II. The Priestly Office of Christ.
            1. Christ’s Sacrificial Work, or the Doctrine of the
            Atonement.
               A. Scripture Methods of Representing the Atonement.
               B. The Institution of Sacrifice, more especially as found
               in the Mosaic system.
               C. Theories of the Atonement.
                  1st. The Socinian, or Example Theory of the Atonement.
                  2nd. The Bushnellian, or Moral Influence Theory of the
                  Atonement.
                  3d. The Grotian, or Governmental Theory of the
                  Atonement.
                  4th. The Irvingian Theory, or Theory of Gradually
                  Extirpated Depravity.
                  5th. The Anselmic, or Commercial Theory of the
                  Atonement.
                  6th. The Ethical Theory of the Atonement.
               D. Objections to the Ethical Theory of the Atonement.
               E. The Extent of the Atonement.
            2. Christ’s Intercessory Work.
         III. The Kingly Office of Christ.






                               [Cover Art]

[Transcriber’s Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter
at Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]





Christo Deo Salvatori.

“THE EYE SEES ONLY THAT WHICH IT BRINGS WITH IT THE POWER OF
SEEING.”—_Cicero._

“OPEN THOU MINE EYES, THAT I MAY BEHOLD WONDROUS THINGS OUT OF THY
LAW.”—_Psalm 119:18._

“FOR WITH THEE IS THE FOUNTAIN OF LIFE: IN THY LIGHT SHALL WE SEE
LIGHT.”—_Psalm 36:9._

“FOR WE KNOW IN PART, AND WE PROPHESY IN PART; BUT WHEN THAT WHICH IS
PERFECT IS COME, THAT WHICH IS IN PART SHALL BE DONE AWAY.”—_1 Cor. 13:9,
10._





PART IV. THE NATURE, DECREES, AND WORKS OF GOD. (CONTINUED)




Chapter IV. The Works Of God; Or The Execution Of The Decrees.



Section I.—Creation.


I. Definition Of Creation.


By creation we mean that free act of the triune God by which in the
beginning for his own glory he made, without the use of preëxisting
materials, the whole visible and invisible universe.

Creation is designed origination, by a transcendent and personal God, of
that which itself is not God. The universe is related to God as our own
volitions are related to ourselves. They are not ourselves, and we are
greater than they. Creation is not simply the idea of God, or even the
plan of God, but it is the idea externalized, the plan executed; in other
words, it implied an exercise, not only of intellect, but also of will,
and this will is not an instinctive and unconscious will, but a will that
is personal and free. Such exercise of will seems to involve, not
self-development, but self-limitation, on the part of God; the
transformation of energy into force, and so a beginning of time, with its
finite successions. But, whatever the relation of creation to time,
creation makes the universe wholly dependent upon God, as its originator.


    F. H. Johnson, in Andover Rev., March, 1891:280, and What is
    Reality, 285—“Creation is designed origination.... Men never could
    have thought of God as the Creator of the world, were it not that
    they had first known themselves as creators.” We agree with the
    doctrine of Hazard, Man a Creative First Cause. Man creates ideas
    and volitions, without use of preëxisting material. He also
    indirectly, through these ideas and volitions, creates
    brain-modifications. This creation, as Johnson has shown, is
    without hands, yet elaborate, selective, progressive.
    Schopenhauer: “Matter is nothing more than causation; its true
    being is its action.”

    Prof. C. L. Herrick, Denison Quarterly, 1896:248, and
    Psychological Review, March, 1899, advocates what he calls
    _dynamism_, which he regards as the only alternative to a
    materialistic dualism which posits matter, and a God above and
    distinct from matter. He claims that the predicate of reality can
    apply only to energy. To speak of energy as _residing in_
    something is to introduce an entirely incongruous concept, for it
    continues our guest _ad infinitum_. “Force,” he says, “is energy
    under resistance, or self-limited energy, for all parts of the
    universe are derived from the energy. Energy manifesting itself
    under self-conditioning or differential forms is force. The change
    of pure energy into force is creation—the introduction of
    resistance. The progressive complication of this interference is
    evolution—a form of orderly resolution of energy. Substance is
    pure spontaneous energy. God’s substance is his energy—the
    infinite and inexhaustible store of spontaneity which makes up his
    being. The form which self-limitation impresses upon substance, in
    revealing it in force, is not God, because it no longer possesses
    the attributes of spontaneity and universality, though it emanates
    from him. When we speak of energy as self-limited, we simply imply
    that spontaneity is intelligent. The sum of God’s acts is his
    being. There is no _causa posterior_ or _extranea_, which spurs
    him on. We must recognize in the source what appears in the
    outcome. We can speak of _absolute_, but not of _infinite_ or
    _immutable_, substance. The Universe is but the partial expression
    of an infinite God.”

    Our view of creation is so nearly that of Lotze, that we here
    condense Ten Broeke’s statement of his philosophy: “Things are
    concreted laws of action. If the idea of being must include
    permanence as well as activity, we must say that only the personal
    truly is. All else is flow and process. We can interpret ontology
    only from the side of personality. Possibility of interaction
    requires the dependence of the mutually related many of the system
    upon an all-embracing, coördinating One. The finite is a mode or
    phenomenon of the One Being. Mere things are only modes of
    energizing of the One. Self-conscious personalities are created,
    posited, and depend on the One in a different way. Interaction of
    things is immanent action of the One, which the perceiving mind
    interprets as causal. Real interaction is possible only between
    the Infinite and the created finite, _i. e._, self-conscious
    persons. The finite is not a part of the Infinite, nor does it
    partly exhaust the stuff of the Infinite. The One, by an act of
    freedom, posits the many, and the many have their ground and unity
    in the Will and Thought of the One. Both the finite and the
    Infinite are free and intelligent.

    “Space is not an extra-mental reality, _sui generis_, nor an order
    of relations among realities, but a form of dynamic appearance,
    the ground of which is the fixed orderly changes in reality. So
    time is the form of change, the subjective interpretation of
    timeless yet successive changes in reality. So far as God is the
    ground of the world-process, he is in time. So far as he
    transcends the world-process in his self-conscious personality, he
    is not in time. Motion too is the subjective interpretation of
    changes in things, which changes are determined by the demands of
    the world-system and the purpose being realized in it. Not
    atomism, but dynamism, is the truth. Physical phenomena are
    referable to the activity of the Infinite, which activity is given
    a substantive character because we think under the form of
    substance and attribute. Mechanism is compatible with teleology.
    Mechanism is universal and is necessary to all system. But it is
    limited by purpose, and by the possible appearance of any new law,
    force, or act of freedom.

    “The soul is not a function of material activities, but is a true
    reality. The system is such that it can admit new factors, and the
    soul is one of these possible new factors. The soul is created as
    substantial reality, in contrast with other elements of the
    system, which are only phenomenal manifestations of the One
    Reality. The relation between soul and body is that of interaction
    between the soul and the universe, the body being that part of the
    universe which stands in closest relation with the soul (_versus_
    Bradley, who holds that ‘body and soul alike are phenomenal
    arrangements, neither one of which has any title to fact which is
    not owned by the other’). Thought is a knowledge of reality. We
    must assume an adjustment between subject and object. This
    assumption is founded on the postulate of a morally perfect God.”
    To Lotze, then, the only real creation is that of finite
    personalities,—matter being only a mode of the divine activity.
    See Lotze, Microcosmos, and Philosophy of Religion. Bowne, in his
    Metaphysics and his Philosophy of Theism, is the best expositor of
    Lotze’s system.


In further explanation of our definition we remark that

(_a_) Creation is not “production out of nothing,” as if “nothing” were a
substance out of which “something” could be formed.


    We do not regard the doctrine of Creation as bound to the use of
    the phrase “creation out of nothing,” and as standing or falling
    with it. The phrase is a philosophical one, for which we have no
    Scriptural warrant, and it is objectionable as intimating that
    “nothing” can itself be an object of thought and a source of
    being. The germ of truth intended to be conveyed in it can better
    be expressed in the phrase “without use of preëxisting materials.”


(_b_) Creation is not a fashioning of preëxisting materials, nor an
emanation from the substance of Deity, but is a making of that to exist
which once did not exist, either in form or substance.


    There is nothing divine in creation but the origination of
    substance. Fashioning is competent to the creature also. Gassendi
    said to Descartes that God’s creation, if he is the author of
    forms but not of substances, is only that of the tailor who
    clothes a man with his apparel. But substance is not necessarily
    material. We are to conceive of it rather after the analogy of our
    own ideas and volitions, and as a manifestation of spirit.
    Creation is not simply the thought of God, nor even the plan of
    God, but rather the externalization of that thought and the
    execution of that plan. Nature is “a great sheet let down from God
    out of heaven,” and containing “nothing that is common or
    unclean;” but nature is not God nor a part of God, any more than
    our ideas and volitions are ourselves or a part of ourselves.
    Nature is a partial manifestation of God, but it does not exhaust
    God.


(_c_) Creation is not an instinctive or necessary process of the divine
nature, but is the free act of a rational will, put forth for a definite
and sufficient end.


    Creation is different in kind from that eternal process of the
    divine nature in virtue of which we speak of generation and
    procession. The Son is begotten of the Father, and is of the same
    essence; the world is created without preëxisting material, is
    different from God, and is made by God. Begetting is a necessary
    act; creation is the act of God’s free grace. Begetting is
    eternal, out of time; creation is in time, or with time.

    Studia Biblica, 4:148—“Creation is the voluntary limitation which
    God has imposed on himself.... It can only be regarded as a
    Creation of free spirits.... It is a form of almighty power to
    submit to limitation. Creation is not a development of God, but a
    circumscription of God.... The world is not the expression of God,
    or an emanation from God, but rather his self-limitation.”


(_d_) Creation is the act of the triune God, in the sense that all the
persons of the Trinity, themselves uncreated, have a part in it—the Father
as the originating, the Son as the mediating, the Spirit as the realizing
cause.


    That all of God’s creative activity is exercised through Christ
    has been sufficiently proved in our treatment of the Trinity and
    of Christ’s deity as an element of that doctrine (see pages 310,
    311). We may here refer to the texts which have been previously
    considered, namely, _John 1:3, 4_—“_All things were made through
    him, and without him was not anything made. That which hath been
    made was life in him_”; _1 Cor. 8:6_—“_one Lord, Jesus Christ,
    through whom are all things_”; _Col. 1:16_—“_all things have been
    created through him, and unto him_”; _Heb. 1:10_—“_Thou, Lord, in
    the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the
    heavens are the works of thy hands._”

    The work of the Holy Spirit seems to be that of completing,
    bringing to perfection. We can understand this only by remembering
    that our Christian knowledge and love are brought to their
    consummation by the Holy Spirit, and that he is also the principle
    of our natural self-consciousness, uniting subject and object in a
    subject-object. If matter is conceived of as a manifestation of
    spirit, after the idealistic philosophy, then the Holy Spirit may
    be regarded as the perfecting and realizing agent in the
    externalization of the divine ideas. While it was the Word though
    whom all things were made, the Holy Spirit was the author of life,
    order, and adornment. Creation is not a mere manufacturing,—it is
    a spiritual act.

    John Caird, Fundamental Ideas of Christianity, 1:120—“The creation
    of the world cannot be by a Being who is external. Power
    presupposes an object on which it is exerted. 129—There is in the
    very nature of God a reason why he should reveal himself in, and
    communicate himself to, a world of finite existences, or fulfil
    and realize himself in the being and life of nature and man. His
    nature would not be what it is if such a world did not exist;
    something would be lacking to the completeness of the divine being
    without it. 144—Even with respect to human thought or
    intelligence, it is mind or spirit which creates the world. It is
    not a ready-made world on which we look; in perceiving our world
    we make it. 152-154—We make progress as we cease to think our own
    thoughts and become media of the universal Intelligence.” While we
    accept Caird’s idealistic interpretation of creation, we dissent
    from his intimation that creation is a necessity to God. The
    trinitarian being of God renders him sufficient to himself, even
    without creation. Yet those very trinitarian relations throw light
    upon the method of creation, since they disclose to us the order
    of all the divine activity. On the definition of Creation, see
    Shedd, History of Doctrine, 1:11.


II. Proof of the Doctrine of Creation.


Creation is a truth of which mere science or reason cannot fully assure
us. Physical science can observe and record changes, but it knows nothing
of origins. Reason cannot absolutely disprove the eternity of matter. For
proof of the doctrine of Creation, therefore, we rely wholly upon
Scripture. Scripture supplements science, and renders its explanation of
the universe complete.


    Drummond, in his Natural Law in the Spiritual World, claims that
    atoms, as “manufactured articles,” and the dissipation of energy,
    prove the creation of the visible from the invisible. See the same
    doctrine propounded in “The Unseen Universe.” But Sir Charles
    Lyell tells us: “Geology is the autobiography of the earth,—but
    like all autobiographies, it does not go back to the beginning.”
    Hopkins, Yale Lectures on the Scriptural View of Man: “There is
    nothing _a priori_ against the eternity of matter.” Wardlaw, Syst.
    Theol., 2:65—“We cannot form any distinct conception of creation
    out of nothing. The very idea of it might never have occurred to
    the mind of man, had it not been traditionally handed down as a
    part of the original revelation to the parents of the race.”

    Hartmann, the German philosopher, goes back to the original
    elements of the universe, and then says that science stands
    petrified before the question of their origin, as before a
    Medusa’s head. But in the presence of problems, says Dorner, the
    duty of science is not petrifaction, but solution. This is
    peculiarly true, if science is, as Hartmann thinks, a complete
    explanation of the universe. Since science, by her own
    acknowledgment, furnishes no such explanation of the origin of
    things, the Scripture revelation with regard to creation meets a
    demand of human reason, by adding the one fact without which
    science must forever be devoid of the highest unity and
    rationality. For advocacy of the eternity of matter, see
    Martineau, Essays, 1:157-169.

    E. H. Johnson, in Andover Review, Nov. 1891:505 sq., and Dec.
    1891:592 sq., remarks that evolution can be traced backward to
    more and more simple elements, to matter without motion and with
    no quality but being. Now make it still more simple by divesting
    it of existence, and you get back to the necessity of a Creator.
    An infinite number of past stages is impossible. There is no
    infinite number. Somewhere there must be a beginning. We grant to
    Dr. Johnson that the only alternative to creation is a
    materialistic dualism, or an eternal matter which is the product
    of the divine mind and will. The theories of dualism and of
    creation from eternity we shall discuss hereafter.


1. Direct Scripture Statements.


A. Genesis 1:1—“In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.” To
this it has been objected that the verb ברא does not necessarily denote
production without the use of preexisting materials (see Gen. 1:27 “God
created man in his own image”; _cf._ 2:7—“the Lord God formed man of the
dust of the ground”; also Ps. 51:10—“Create in me a clean heart”).


    “In the first two chapters of Genesis ברא is used (1) of the
    creation of the universe (_1:1_); (2) of the creation of the great
    sea monsters (_1:21_); (3) of the creation of man (_1:27_).
    Everywhere else we read of God’s _making_, as from an already
    created substance, the firmament (_1:7_), the sun, moon and stars
    (_1:16_), the brute creation (_1:25_); or of his _forming_ the
    beasts of the field out of the ground (_2:19_); or, lastly, of his
    _building up_ into a woman the rib he had taken from man (_2:22_,
    margin)”—quoted from Bible Com., 1:31. Guyot, Creation, 30—“_Bara_
    is thus reserved for marking the first introduction of each of the
    three great spheres of existence—the world of matter, the world of
    life, and the spiritual world represented by man.”


We grant, in reply, that the argument for absolute creation derived from
the mere word ברא is not entirely conclusive. Other considerations in
connection with the use of this word, however, seem to render this
interpretation of Gen. 1:1 the most plausible. Some of these
considerations we proceed to mention.

(_a_) While we acknowledge that the verb ברא “does not necessarily or
invariably denote production without the use of preëxisting materials, we
still maintain that it signifies the production of an effect for which no
natural antecedent existed before, and which can be only the result of
divine agency.” For this reason, in the Kal species it is used only of
God, and is never accompanied by any accusative denoting material.


    No accusative denoting material follows _bara_, in the passages
    indicated, for the reason that all thought of material was absent.
    See Dillmann, Genesis, 18; Oehler, Theol. O. T., 1:177. The
    quotation in the text above is from Green, Hebrew Chrestomathy,
    67. But E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 88, remarks: “Whether
    the Scriptures teach the absolute origination of matter—its
    creation out of nothing—is an open question.... No decisive
    evidence is furnished by the Hebrew word _bara_.”

    A moderate and scholarly statement of the facts is furnished by
    Professor W. J. Beecher, in S. S. Times, Dec. 23, 1893:807—“To
    create is to originate divinely.... Creation, in the sense in
    which the Bible uses the word, does not exclude the use of
    materials previously existing; for man was taken from the ground
    (_Gen. 2:7_), and woman was builded from the rib of a man
    (_2:22_). Ordinarily God brings things into existence through the
    operation of second causes. But it is possible, in our thinking,
    to withdraw attention from the second causes, and to think of
    anything as originating simply from God, apart from second causes.
    To think of a thing thus is to think of it as created. The Bible
    speaks of Israel as created, of the promised prosperity of
    Jerusalem as created, of the Ammonite people and the king of Tyre
    as created, of persons of any date in history as created (_Is.
    43:1-15_; _65:18_; _Ez. 21:30_; _28:13, 15_; _Ps. 102:18_; _Eccl.
    12:1_; _Mal. 2:10_). Miracles and the ultimate beginnings of
    second causes are necessarily thought of as creative acts; all
    other originating of things may be thought of, according to the
    purpose we have in mind, either as creation or as effected by
    second causes.”


(_b_) In the account of the creation, ברא seems to be distinguished from
עשה, “to make” either with or without the use of already existing material
(ברא לעשות, “created in making” or “made by creation,” in 2:3; and ויעש,
of the firmament, in 1:7), and from יצר, “to form” out of such material.
(See ויברא, of man regarded as a spiritual being, in 1:27; but ויצר, of
man regarded as a physical being, in 2:7.)


    See Conant, Genesis, 1; Bible Com., 1:37—“ ‘created to make’ (in
    _Gen. 2:3_) = created out of nothing, in order that he might make
    out of it all the works recorded in the six days.” Over against
    these texts, however, we must set others in which there appears no
    accurate distinguishing of these words from one another. _Bara_ is
    used in _Gen. 1:1_, _asah_ in _Gen. 2:4_, of the creation of the
    heaven and earth. Of earth, both _yatzar_ and _asah_ are used in
    _Is. 45:18_. In regard to man, in _Gen. 1:27_ we find _bara_; in
    _Gen. 1:26_ and _9:6_, _asah_; and in _Gen. 2:7_, _yatzar_. In
    _Is. 43:7_, all three are found in the same verse: “_whom I have_
    _bara_ _for my glory, I have_ _yatzar_, _yea, I have_ _asah_
    _him_.” In _Is. 45:12_, “_asah_ _the earth, and_ _bara_ _man upon
    it_”; but in _Gen. 1:1_ we read: “_God_ _bara_ _the earth_,” and
    in _9:6_ “_asah_ _man_.” _Is. 44:2—__“__the Lord that_ _asah_
    _thee_ (_i. e._, man) and _yatzar_ _thee_”; but in _Gen. 1:27_,
    God “_bara_ _man_.” _Gen. 5:2_—“_male and female_ _bara_ _he
    them_.” _Gen. 2:22_—“_the rib_ _asah_ _he a woman_”; _Gen.
    2:7_—“_he_ _yatzar_ _man_”; _i. e._, _bara_ male and female, yet
    _asah_ the woman and _yatzar_ the man. _Asah_ is not always used
    for _transform_: _Is. 41:20_—“_fir-tree, pine, box-tree_” in
    nature—_bara_; _Ps. 51:10_—“_bara_ _in me a clean heart_”; _Is.
    65:18_—God “_bara_ _Jerusalem into a rejoicing_.”


(_c_) The context shows that the meaning here is a making without the use
of preëxisting materials. Since the earth in its rude, unformed, chaotic
condition is still called “the earth” in verse 2, the word ברא in verse 1
cannot refer to any shaping or fashioning of the elements, but must
signify the calling of them into being.


    Oehler, Theology of O.T., 1:177—“By the absolute _berashith_, ‘_in
    the beginning_,’ the divine creation is fixed as an absolute
    beginning, not as a working on something that already existed.”
    _Verse 2_ cannot be the beginning of a history, for it begins with
    “_and_.” Delitzsch says of the expression “_the earth was without
    form and void_”: “From this it is evident that the void and
    formless state of the earth was not uncreated or without a
    beginning. ... It is evident that ‘_the heaven and earth_’ as God
    created them in the beginning were not the well-ordered universe,
    but the world in its elementary form.”


(_d_) The fact that ברא may have had an original signification of
“cutting,” “forming,” and that it retains this meaning in the Piel
conjugation, need not prejudice the conclusion thus reached, since terms
expressive of the most spiritual processes are derived from sensuous
roots. If ברא does not signify absolute creation, no word exists in the
Hebrew language that can express this idea.

(_e_) But this idea of production without the use of preëxisting materials
unquestionably existed among the Hebrews. The later Scriptures show that
it had become natural to the Hebrew mind. The possession of this idea by
the Hebrews, while it is either not found at all or is very dimly and
ambiguously expressed in the sacred books of the heathen, can be best
explained by supposing that it was derived from this early revelation in
Genesis.


    E. H. Johnson, Outline of Syst. Theol., 94—“_Rom. 4:17_ tells us
    that the faith of Abraham, to whom God had promised a son, grasped
    the fact that God calls into existence ‘_the things that are
    not_.’ This may be accepted as Paul’s interpretation of the first
    verse of the Bible.” It is possible that the heathen had
    occasional glimpses of this truth, though with no such clearness
    as that with which it was held in Israel. Perhaps we may say that
    through the perversions of later nature-worship something of the
    original revelation of absolute creation shines, as the first
    writing of a palimpsest appears faintly through the subsequent
    script with which it has been overlaid. If the doctrine of
    absolute creation is found at all among the heathen, it is greatly
    blurred and obscured. No one of the heathen books teaches it as do
    the sacred Scriptures of the Hebrews. Yet it seems as if this “One
    accent of the Holy Ghost The heedless world has never lost.”

    Bib. Com., 1:31—“Perhaps no other ancient language, however
    refined and philosophical, could have so dearly distinguished the
    different acts of the Maker of all things [as the Hebrew did With
    its four different words], and that because all heathen philosophy
    esteemed matter to be eternal and uncreated.” Prof. E. D. Burton:
    “Brahmanism, and the original religion of which Zoroastrianism was
    a reformation, were Eastern and Western divisions of a primitive
    Aryan, and probably monotheistic, religion. The Vedas, which
    represented the Brahmanism, leave it a question whence the world
    came, whether from God by emanation, or by the shaping of material
    eternally existent. Later Brahmanism is pantheistic, and Buddhism,
    the Reformation of Brahmanism, is atheistic.” See Shedd, Dogm.
    Theol., 1:471, and Mosheim’s references in Cudworth’s Intellectual
    System, 3:140.

    We are inclined still to hold that the doctrine of absolute
    creation was known to no other ancient nation besides the Hebrews.
    Recent investigations, however, render this somewhat more doubtful
    than it once seemed to be. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, 142, 143,
    finds creation among the early Babylonians. In his Religions of
    Ancient Egypt and Babylonia, 372-397, he says: “The elements of
    Hebrew cosmology are all Babylonian; even the creative word itself
    was a Babylonian conception; but the spirit which inspires the
    cosmology is the antithesis to that which inspired the cosmology
    of Babylonia. Between the polytheism of Babylonia and the
    monotheism of Israel a gulf is fixed which cannot be spanned. So
    soon as we have a clear monotheism, absolute creation is a
    corollary. As the monotheistic idea is corrupted, creation gives
    place to pantheistic transformation.”

    It is now claimed by others that Zoroastrianism, the Vedas, and
    the religion of the ancient Egyptians had the idea of absolute
    creation. On creation in the Zoroastrian system, see our treatment
    of Dualism, page 382. Vedic hymn in Rig Veda, 10:9, quoted by J.
    F. Clarke, Ten Great Religions, 2:205—“Originally this universe
    was soul only; nothing else whatsoever existed, active or
    inactive. He thought: ‘I will create worlds’; thus he created
    these various worlds: earth, light, mortal being, and the waters.”
    Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 216-222, speaks of a papyrus on the
    staircase of the British Museum, which reads: “The great God, the
    Lord of heaven and earth, who made all things which are ... the
    almighty God, self-existent, who made heaven and earth; ... the
    heaven was yet uncreated, uncreated was the earth; thou hast put
    together the earth; ... who made all things, but was not made.”

    But the Egyptian religion in its later development, as well as
    Brahmanism, was pantheistic, and it is possible that all the
    expressions we have quoted are to be interpreted, not as
    indicating a belief in creation out of nothing, but as asserting
    emanation, or the taking on by deity of new forms and modes of
    existence. On creation in heathen systems, see Pierret,
    Mythologie, and answer to it by Maspero; Hymn to Amen-Rha, in
    “Records of the Past”; G. C. Müller, Literature of Greece, 87, 88;
    George Smith, Chaldean Genesis, chapters 1, 3, 5 and 6; Dillmann,
    Com. on Genesis, 6th edition, Introd., 5-10; LeNormant, Hist.
    Ancienne de l’Orient, 1:17-26; 5:238; Otto Zöckler, art.:
    Schöpfung, in Herzog and Plitt, Encyclop.; S. B. Gould, Origin and
    Devel. of Relig. Beliefs, 281-292.


B. Hebrews 11:3—“By faith we understand that the worlds have been framed
by the word of God, so that what is seen hath not been made out of things
which appear” = the world was not made out of sensible and preëxisting
material, but by the direct fiat of omnipotence (see Alford, and Lünemann,
Meyer’s Com. _in loco_).


    Compare 2 Maccabees 7:28—ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων ἐποίησεν αὐτὰ ὁ Θεός. This
    the Vulgate translated by “quia ex nihilo fecit illa Deus,” and
    from the Vulgate the phrase “creation out of nothing” is derived.
    Hedge, Ways of the Spirit, points out that Wisdom 11:17 has ἐξ
    ἀμόρφου ὕλης, interprets by this the ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων in 2 Maccabees,
    and denies that this last refers to creation out of nothing. But
    we must remember that the later Apocryphal writings were composed
    under the influence of the Platonic philosophy; that the passage
    in Wisdom may be a rationalistic interpretation of that in
    Maccabees; and that even if it were independent, we are not to
    assume a harmony of view in the Apocrypha. 2 Maccabees 7:28 must
    stand by itself as a testimony to Jewish belief in creation
    without use of preëxisting material,—belief which can be traced to
    no other source than the Old Testament Scriptures. Compare _Ex.
    34:10_—“_I will do marvels such as have not been wrought_ [marg.
    “_created_”] _in all the earth_”; _Num. 16:30_—“_if Jehovah make a
    new thing_” [marg. “_create a creation_”]; _Is. 4:5_—“_Jehovah
    will create ... a cloud and smoke_”; _41:20_—“_the Holy One of
    Israel hath created it_”; _45:7, 8_—“_I form the light, and create
    darkness_”; _57:19_—“_I create the fruit of the lips_”;
    _65:17_—“_I create new heavens and a new earth_”; _Jer.
    31:22_—“_Jehovah hath created a new thing._”

    _Rom. 4:17_—“_God, who giveth life to the dead, and calleth the
    things that are not, as though they were_”; _1 Cor. 1:28_—“_things
    that are not_” [did God choose] “_that he might bring to naught
    the things that are_”; _2 Cor. 4:6_—“_God, that said, Light shall
    shine out of darkness_”—created light without preëxisting
    material,—for darkness is no material; _Col. 1:16, 17_—“_in him
    were all things created ... and he is before all things_”; so also
    _Ps. 33:9_—“_he spake, and it was done_”; _148:5_—“_he commanded,
    and they were created._” See Philo, Creation of the World, chap.
    1-7, and Life of Moses, book 3, chap. 36—“He produced the most
    perfect work, the Cosmos, out of non-existence (τοῦ μὴ ὄντος) into
    being (εἰς τὸ εἶναι).” E. H. Johnson, Syst. Theol., 94—“We have no
    reason to believe that the Hebrew mind had the idea of creation
    out of _invisible_ materials. But creation out of _visible_
    materials is in _Hebrews 11:3_ expressly denied. This text is
    therefore equivalent to an assertion that the universe was made
    without the use of _any_ preëxisting materials.”


2. Indirect evidence from Scripture.


(_a_) The past duration of the world is limited; (_b_) before the world
began to be, each of the persons of the Godhead already existed; (_c_) the
origin of the universe is ascribed to God, and to each of the persons of
the Godhead. These representations of Scripture are not only most
consistent with the view that the universe was created by God without use
of preëxisting material, but they are inexplicable upon any other
hypothesis.


    (_a_) _Mark 13:19_—“_from the beginning of the creation which God
    created until now_”; _John 17:5_—“_before the world was_”; _Eph.
    1:4_—“_before the foundation of the world._” (_b_) _Ps.
    90:2_—“_Before the mountains were brought forth, Or ever thou
    hadst formed the earth and the world, Even from everlasting to
    everlasting thou art God_”; _Prov. 8:23_—“_I was set up from
    everlasting, from the beginning, Before the earth was_”; _John
    1:1_—“_In the beginning was the Word_”; _Col. 1:17_—“_he is before
    all things_”; _Heb. 9:14_—“_the eternal Spirit_” (see Tholuck,
    Com. _in loco_). (_c_) _Eph. 3:9_—“_God who created all things_”;
    _Rom. 11:36_—“_of him ... are all things_”; _1 Cor. 8:6_—“_one
    God, the Father, of whom we are all things ... one Lord, Jesus
    Christ, through whom are all things_”; _John 1:3_—“_all things
    were made through him_”; _Col 1:16_—“_in him were all things
    created ... all things have been created through him, and unto
    him_”; _Heb. 1:2_—“_through whom also he made the worlds_”; _Gen.
    1:2_—“_and the Spirit of God moved_ [marg. “_was brooding_”] _upon
    the face of the waters._” From these passages we may also infer
    that (1) all things are absolutely dependent upon God; (2) God
    exercises supreme control over all things; (3) God is the only
    infinite Being; (4) God alone is eternal; (5) there is no
    substance out of which God creates; (6) things do not proceed from
    God by necessary emanation; the universe has its source and
    originator in God’s transcendent and personal will. See, on this
    indirect proof of creation, Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:231. Since
    other views, however, have been held to be more rational, we
    proceed to the examination of


III. Theories which oppose Creation.


1. Dualism.


Of dualism there are two forms:

A. That which holds to two self-existent principles, God and matter. These
are distinct from and coëternal with each other. Matter, however, is an
unconscious, negative, and imperfect substance, which is subordinate to
God and is made the instrument of his will. This was the underlying
principle of the Alexandrian Gnostics. It was essentially an attempt to
combine with Christianity the Platonic or Aristotelian conception of the
ὕλη. In this way it was thought to account for the existence of evil, and
to escape the difficulty of imagining a production without use of
preëxisting material. Basilides (flourished 125) and Valentinus (died
160), the representatives of this view, were influenced also by Hindu
philosophy, and their dualism is almost indistinguishable from pantheism.
A similar view has been held in modern times by John Stuart Mill and
apparently by Frederick W. Robertson.


    Dualism seeks to show how the One becomes the many, how the
    Absolute gives birth to the relative, how the Good can consist
    with evil. The ὕλη of Plato seems to have meant nothing but empty
    space, whose not-being, or merely negative existence, prevented
    the full realization of the divine ideas. Aristotle regarded the
    ὕλη as a more positive cause of imperfection,—it was like the hard
    material which hampers the sculptor in expressing his thought. The
    real problem for both Plato and Aristotle was to explain the
    passage from pure spiritual existence to that which is phenomenal
    and imperfect, from the absolute and unlimited to that which
    exists in space and time. Finiteness, instead of being created,
    was regarded as having eternal existence and as limiting all
    divine manifestations. The ὕλη, from being a mere abstraction,
    became either a negative or a positive source of evil. The
    Alexandrian Jews, under the influence of Hellenic culture, sought
    to make this dualism explain the doctrine of creation.

    Basilides and Valentinus, however, were also under the influence
    of a pantheistic philosophy brought in from the remote East—the
    philosophy of Buddhism, which taught that the original Source of
    all was a nameless Being, devoid of all qualities, and so,
    indistinguishable from Nothing. From this Being, which is
    Not-being, all existing things proceed. Aristotle and Hegel
    similarly taught that pure Being = Nothing. But inasmuch as the
    object of the Alexandrian philosophers was to show how something
    could be originated, they were obliged to conceive of the
    primitive Nothing as capable of such originating. They, moreover,
    in the absence of any conception of absolute creation, were
    compelled to conceive of a material which could be fashioned.
    Hence the Void, the Abyss, is made to take the place of matter. If
    it be said that they did not conceive of the Void or the Abyss as
    substance, we reply that they gave it just as substantial
    existence as they gave to the first Cause of things, which, in
    spite of their negative descriptions of it, involved Will and
    Design. And although they do not attribute to this secondary
    substance a positive influence for evil, they notwithstanding see
    in it the unconscious hinderer of all good.

    Principal Tulloch, in Encyc. Brit., 10:704—“In the Alexandrian
    Gnosis ... the stream of being in its ever outward flow at length
    comes in contact with dead matter which thus receives animation
    and becomes a living source of evil.” Windelband, Hist.
    Philosophy, 129, 144, 239—“With Valentinus, side by side with the
    Deity poured forth into the Pleroma or Fulness of spiritual forms,
    appears the Void, likewise original and from eternity; beside Form
    appears matter; beside the good appears the evil.” Mansel, Gnostic
    Heresies, 139—“The Platonic theory of an inert, semi-existent
    matter, ... was adopted by the Gnosis of Egypt.... 187—Valentinus
    does not content himself, like Plato, ... with assuming as the
    germ of the natural world an unformed matter existing from all
    eternity.... The whole theory may be described as a development,
    in allegorical language of the pantheistic hypothesis which in its
    outline had been previously adopted by Basilides.” A. H. Newman,
    Ch. History, 1:181-192, calls the philosophy of Basilides
    “fundamentally pantheistic.” “Valentinus,” he says, “was not so
    careful to insist on the original non-existence of God and
    everything.” We reply that even to Basilides the Non-existent One
    is endued with power; and this power accomplishes nothing until it
    comes in contact with things non-existent, and out of them
    fashions the seed of the world. The things non-existent are as
    substantial as is the Fashioner, and they imply both objectivity
    and limitation.

    Lightfoot, Com. on Colossians, 76-113, esp. 82, has traced a
    connection between the Gnostic doctrine, the earlier Colossian
    heresy, and the still earlier teaching of the Essenes of
    Palestine. All these were characterized by (1) the spirit of caste
    or intellectual exclusiveness; (2) peculiar tenets as to creation
    and as to evil; (3) practical asceticism. Matter is evil and
    separates man from God; hence intermediate beings between man and
    God as objects of worship; hence also mortification of the body as
    a means of purifying man from sin. Paul’s antidote for both errors
    was simply the person of Christ, the true and only Mediator and
    Sanctifier. See Guericke, Church History, 1:161.

    Harnack, Hist. Dogma, 1:128—“The majority of Gnostic undertakings
    may be viewed as attempts to transform Christianity into a
    theosophy.... In Gnosticism the Hellenic spirit desired to make
    itself master of Christianity, or more correctly, of the Christian
    communities.”... 232—Harnack represents one of the fundamental
    philosophic doctrines of Gnosticism to be that of the Cosmos as a
    mixture of matter with divine sparks, which has arisen from a
    descent of the latter into the former [Alexandrian Gnosticism],
    or, as some say, from the perverse, or at least merely permitted
    undertaking of a subordinate spirit [Syrian Gnosticism]. We may
    compare the Hebrew Sadducee with the Greek Epicurean; the Pharisee
    with the Stoic; the Essene with the Pythagorean. The Pharisees
    overdid the idea of God’s transcendence. Angels must come in
    between God and the world. Gnostic intermediaries were the logical
    outcome. External works of obedience were alone valid. Christ
    preached, instead of this, a religion of the heart. Wendt,
    Teaching of Jesus, 1:52—“The rejection of animal sacrifices and
    consequent abstaining from temple-worship on the part of the
    Essenes, which seems out of harmony with the rest of their legal
    obedience, is most simply explained as the consequence of their
    idea that to bring to God a bloody animal offering was derogatory
    to his transcendental character. Therefore they interpreted the O.
    T. command in an allegorizing way.”

    Lyman Abbott: “The Oriental dreams; the Greek defines; the Hebrew
    acts. All these influences met and intermingled at Alexandria.
    Emanations were mediations between the absolute, unknowable,
    all-containing God, and the personal, revealed and holy God of
    Scripture. Asceticism was one result: matter is undivine,
    therefore get rid of it. License was another result: matter is
    undivine, therefore disregard it—there is no disease and there is
    no sin—the modern doctrine of Christian Science.” Kedney,
    Christian Doctrine, 1:360-373; 2:354, conceives of the divine
    glory as an eternal material environment of God, out of which the
    universe is fashioned.

    The author of “The Unseen Universe” (page 17) wrongly calls John
    Stuart Mill a Manichæan. But Mill disclaims belief in the
    _personality_ of this principle that resists and limits God,—see
    his posthumous Essays on Religion, 176-195. F. W. Robertson,
    Lectures on Genesis, 4-16—“Before the creation of the world all
    was chaos ... but with the creation, order began.... God did not
    cease from creation, for creation is going on every day. Nature is
    God at work. Only after surprising changes, as in spring-time, do
    we say figuratively, ‘God rests.’ ” See also Frothingham,
    Christian Philosophy.


With regard to this view, we remark:

(_a_) The maxim _ex nihilo nihil fit_, upon which it rests, is true only
in so far as it asserts that no event takes place without a cause. It is
false, if it mean that nothing can ever be made except out of material
previously existing. The maxim is therefore applicable only to the realm
of second causes, and does not bar the creative power of the great first
Cause. The doctrine of creation does not dispense with a cause; on the
other hand, it assigns to the universe a sufficient cause in God.


    Lucretius: “Nihil posse creari De nihilo, neque quod genitum est
    ad nihil revocari.” Persius: “Gigni De nihilo nihil, in nihilum
    nil posse reverti.” Martensen, Dogmatics, 116—“The nothing, out of
    which God creates the world, is the eternal possibilities of his
    will, which are the sources of all the actualities of the world.”
    Lewes, Problems of Life and Mind, 2:292—“When therefore it is
    argued that the creation of something from nothing is unthinkable
    and is therefore peremptorily to be rejected, the argument seems
    to me to be defective. The process is thinkable, but not
    imaginable, conceivable but not probable.” See Cudworth,
    Intellectual System, 3:81 _sq._ Lipsius, Dogmatik, 288, remarks
    that the theory of dualism is quite as difficult as that of
    absolute creation. It holds to a point of time when God began to
    fashion preëxisting material, and can give no reason why God did
    not do it before, since there must always have been in him an
    impulse toward this fashioning.


(_b_) Although creation without the use of preëxisting material is
inconceivable, in the sense of being unpicturable to the imagination, yet
the eternity of matter is equally inconceivable. For creation without
preëxisting material, moreover, we find remote analogies in our own
creation of ideas and volitions, a fact as inexplicable as God’s bringing
of new substances into being.


    Mivart, Lessons from Nature, 371, 372—“We have to a certain extent
    an aid to the thought of absolute creation in our own free
    volition, which, as absolutely originating and determining, may be
    taken as the type to us of the creative act.” We speak of “the
    creative faculty” of the artist or poet. We cannot give reality to
    the products of our imaginations, as God can to his. But if
    thought were only substance, the analogy would be complete. Shedd,
    Dogm. Theol., 1:467—“Our thoughts and volitions are created ex
    nihilo, in the sense that one thought is not made out of another
    thought, nor one volition out of another volition.” So created
    substance may be only the mind and will of God in exercise,
    automatically in matter, freely in the case of free beings (see
    pages 90, 105-110, 383, and in our treatment of Preservation).

    Beddoes: “I have a bit of _Fiat_ in my soul, And can myself create
    my little world.” Mark Hopkins: “Man is an image of God as a
    creator.... He can purposely create, or cause to be, a future
    that, but for him, would not have been.” E. C. Stedman, Nature of
    Poetry, 223—“So far as the Poet, the artist, is creative, he
    becomes a sharer of the divine imagination and power, and even of
    the divine responsibility.” Wordsworth calls the poet a “serene
    creator of immortal things.” Imagination, he says, is but another
    name for “clearest insight, amplitude of mind, And reason in her
    most exalted mood.” “If we are ‘_gods_’ (_Ps. 82:6_), that part of
    the Infinite which is embodied in us must partake to a limited
    extent of his power to create.” Veitch, Knowing and Being,
    289—“Will, the expression of personality, both as originating
    resolutions and moulding existing material into form, is the
    nearest approach in thought which we can make to divine creation.”

    Creation is not simply the thought of God,—it is also the will of
    God—thought in expression, reason externalized. Will is creation
    out of nothing, in the sense that there is no use of preëxisting
    material. In man’s exercise of the creative imagination there is
    will, as well as intellect. Royce, Studies of Good and Evil, 256,
    points out that we can be original in (1) the style or form of our
    work; (2) in the selection of the objects we imitate; (3) in the
    invention of relatively novel combinations of material. Style,
    subject, combination, then, comprise the methods of our
    originality. Our new conceptions of nature as the expression of
    the divine mind and will bring creation more within our
    comprehension than did the old conception of the world as
    substance capable of existing apart from God. Hudson, Law of
    Psychic Phenomena, 294, thinks that we have power to create
    visible phantasms, or embodied thoughts, that can be subjectively
    perceived by others. See also Hudson’s Scientific Demonstration of
    Future Life, 153. He defines genius as the result of the
    synchronous action of the objective and subjective faculties.
    Jesus of Nazareth, in his judgment, was a wonderful psychic.
    Intuitive perception and objective reason were with him always in
    the ascendant. His miracles were misinterpreted psychic phenomena.
    Jesus never claimed that his works were outside of natural law.
    All men have the same intuitional power, though in differing
    degrees.

    We may add that the begetting of a child by man is the giving of
    substantial existence to another. Christ’s creation of man may be
    like his own begetting by the Father. Behrends: “The relation
    between God and the universe is more intimate and organic than
    that between an artist and his work. The marble figure is
    independent of the sculptor the moment it is completed. It
    remains, though he die. But the universe would vanish in the
    withdrawal of the divine presence and indwelling. If I were to use
    any figure, it would be that of generation. The immanence of God
    is the secret of natural permanence and uniformity. Creation is
    primarily a spiritual act. The universe is not what we see and
    handle. The real universe is an empire of energies, a hierarchy of
    correlated forces, whose reality and unity are rooted in the
    rational will of God perpetually active in preservation. But there
    is no identity of substance, nor is there any division of the
    divine substance.”

    Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 36—“A mind is conceivable
    which should create its objects outright by pure self-activity and
    without dependence on anything beyond itself. Such is our
    conception of the Creator’s relation to his objects. But this is
    not the case with us except to a very slight extent. Our mental
    life itself begins, and we come only gradually to a knowledge of
    things, and of ourselves. In some sense our objects are given;
    that is, we cannot have objects at will or vary their properties
    at our pleasure. In this sense we are passive in knowledge, and no
    idealism can remove this fact. But in some sense also our objects
    are our own products; for an existing object becomes an object for
    us only as we think it, and thus make it our object. In this
    sense, knowledge is an active process, and not a passive reception
    of readymade information from without.” Clarke, Self and the
    Father, 38—“Are we humiliated by having data for our imaginations
    to work upon? by being unable to create material? Not unless it be
    a shame to be second to the Creator.” Causation is as mysterious
    as Creation. Balzac lived with his characters as actual beings. On
    the Creative Principle, see N. R. Wood, The Witness of Sin,
    114-135.


(_c_) It is unphilosophical to postulate two eternal substances, when one
self-existent Cause of all things will account for the facts. (_d_) It
contradicts our fundamental notion of God as absolute sovereign to suppose
the existence of any other substance to be independent of his will. (_e_)
This second substance with which God must of necessity work, since it is,
according to the theory, inherently evil and the source of evil, not only
limits God’s power, but destroys his blessedness. (_f_) This theory does
not answer its purpose of accounting for moral evil, unless it be also
assumed that spirit is material,—in which case dualism gives place to
materialism.


    Martensen, Dogmatics, 121—“God becomes a mere demiurge, if nature
    existed before spirit. That spirit only who in a perfect sense is
    able to commence his work of creation can have power to complete
    it.” If God does not create, he must use what material he finds,
    and this working with intractable material must be his perpetual
    sorrow. Such limitation in the power of the deity seemed to John
    Stuart Mill the best explanation of the existing imperfections of
    the universe.


The other form of dualism is:

B. That which holds to the eternal existence of two antagonistic spirits,
one evil and the other good. In this view, matter is not a negative and
imperfect substance which nevertheless has self-existence, but is either
the work or the instrument of a personal and positively malignant
intelligence, who wages war against all good. This was the view of the
Manichæans. Manichæanism is a compound of Christianity and the Persian
doctrine of two eternal and opposite intelligences. Zoroaster, however,
held matter to be pure, and to be the creation of the good Being. Mani
apparently regarded matter as captive to the evil spirit, if not
absolutely his creation.


    The old story of Mani’s travels in Greece is wholly a mistake.
    Guericke, Church History, 1:185-187, maintains that Manichæanism
    contains no mixture of Platonic philosophy, has no connection with
    Judaism, and as a sect came into no direct relations with the
    Catholic church. Harnoch, Wegweiser, 22, calls Manichæanism a
    compound of Gnosticism and Parseeism. Herzog, Encyclopädie, art.:
    Mani und die Manichäer, regards Manichæanism as the fruit, acme,
    and completion of Gnosticism. Gnosticism was a heresy in the
    church; Manichæanism, like New Platonism, was an anti-church. J.
    P. Lange: “These opposing theories represent various pagan
    conceptions of the world, which, after the manner of palimpsests,
    show through Christianity.” Isaac Taylor speaks of “the creator of
    the carnivora”; and some modern Christians practically regard
    Satan as a second and equal God.

    On the Religion of Zoroaster, see Haug, Essays on Parsees,
    139-161, 302-309; also our quotations on pp. 347-349; Monier
    Williams, in 19th Century, Jan. 1881:155-177—Ahura Mazda was the
    creator of the universe. Matter was created by him, and was
    neither identified with him nor an emanation from him. In the
    divine nature there were two opposite, but not opposing,
    principles or forces, called “twins”—the one constructive, the
    other destructive; the one beneficent, the other maleficent.
    Zoroaster called these “twins” also by the name of “spirits,” and
    declared that “these two spirits created, the one the reality, the
    other the non-reality.” Williams says that these two principles
    were conflicting only in name. The only antagonism was between the
    resulting good and evil brought about by the free agent, man. See
    Jackson, Zoroaster.

    We may add that in later times this personification of principles
    in the deity seems to have become a definite belief in two
    opposing personal spirits, and that Mani, Manes, or Manichæus
    adopted this feature of Parseeism, with the addition of certain
    Christian elements. Hagenbach, History of Doctrine, 1:470—“The
    doctrine of the Manichæans was that creation was the work of
    Satan.” See also Gieseler, Church History, 1:203; Neander, Church
    History, 1:478-505; Blunt, Dict. Doct. and Hist. Theology, art.:
    Dualism; and especially Baur, Das manichäische Religionssystem. A.
    H. Newman, Ch. History, 1:194—“Manichæism is Gnosticism, with its
    Christian elements reduced to a minimum, and the Zoroastrian, old
    Babylonian, and other Oriental elements raised to the maximum.
    Manichæism is Oriental dualism under Christian names, the
    Christian names employed retaining scarcely a trace of their
    proper meaning. The most fundamental thing in Manichæism is its
    absolute dualism. The kingdom of light and the kingdom of darkness
    with their rulers stand eternally opposed to each other.”


Of this view we need only say that it is refuted (_a_) by all the
arguments for the unity, omnipotence, sovereignty, and blessedness of God;
(_b_) by the Scripture representations of the prince of evil as the
creature of God and as subject to God’s control.


    Scripture passages showing that Satan is God’s creature or subject
    are the following: _Col. 1:16_—“_for in him were all things
    created, in the heavens and upon the earth, things visible and
    things invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities
    or powers_”; _cf._ _Eph. 6:12_—“_our wrestling is not against
    flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against the
    powers, against the world-rulers of this darkness, against the
    spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places_”; _2 Pet.
    2:4_—“_God spared not the angels when they sinned, but cast them
    down to hell, and committed them to pits of darkness, to be
    reserved unto judgment_”; _Rev. 20:2_—“_laid hold on the dragon,
    the old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan_”; _10_—“_and the
    devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
    brimstone._”

    The closest analogy to Manichæan dualism is found in the popular
    conception of the devil held by the mediæval Roman church. It is a
    question whether he was regarded as a rival or as a servant of
    God. Matheson, Messages of Old Religions, says that Parseeism
    recognizes an obstructive element in the nature of God himself.
    Moral evil is reality, and there is that element of truth in
    Parseeism. But there is no reconciliation, nor is it shown that
    all things work together for good. E. H. Johnson: “This theory
    sets up matter as a sort of deity, a senseless idol endowed with
    the truly divine attribute of self-existence. But we can
    acknowledge but one God. To erect matter into an eternal Thing,
    independent of the Almighty but forever beside him, is the most
    revolting of all theories.” Tennyson, Unpublished Poem (Life,
    1:314)—“Oh me! for why is all around us here As if some lesser God
    had made the world, But had not force to shape it as he would Till
    the high God behold it from beyond, And enter it and make it
    beautiful?”

    E. G. Robinson: “Evil is not eternal; if it were, we should be
    paying our respects to it.... There is much Manichæanism in modern
    piety. We would influence soul through the body. Hence
    sacramentarianism and penance. Puritanism is theological
    Manichæanism. Christ recommended fasting because it belonged to
    his age. Christianity came from Judaism. Churchism comes largely
    from reproducing what Christ did. Christianity is not perfunctory
    in its practices. We are to fast only when there is good reason
    for it.” L. H. Mills, New World, March, 1895:51, suggests that
    Phariseeism may be the same with Farseeism, which is but another
    name for Parseeism. He thinks that Resurrection, Immortality,
    Paradise, Satan, Judgment, Hell, came from Persian sources, and
    gradually drove out the old Sadduceean simplicity. Pfleiderer,
    Philos, Religion, 1:206—“According to the Persian legend, the
    first human pair was a good creation of the all-wise Spirit,
    Ahura, who had breathed into them his own breath. But soon the
    primeval men allowed themselves to be seduced by the hostile
    Spirit Angromainyu into lying and idolatry, whereby the evil
    spirits obtained power over them and the earth and spoiled the
    good creation.”

    Disselhoff, Die klassische Poesie und die göttliche Offenbarung,
    13-25—“The Gathas of Zoroaster are the first poems of humanity. In
    them man rouses himself to assert his superiority to nature and
    the spirituality of God. God is not identified with nature. The
    impersonal nature-gods are vain idols and are causes of
    corruption. Their worshippers are servants of falsehood.
    Ahura-Mazda (living-wise) is a moral and spiritual personality.
    Ahriman is equally eternal but not equally powerful. Good has not
    complete victory over evil. Dualism is admitted and unity is lost.
    The conflict of faiths leads to separation. While one portion of
    the race remains in the Iranian highlands to maintain man’s
    freedom and independence of nature, another portion goes
    South-East to the luxuriant banks of the Ganges to serve the
    deified forces of nature. The East stands for unity, as the West
    for duality. Yet Zoroaster in the Gathas is almost deified; and
    his religion, which begins by giving predominance to the good
    Spirit, ends by being honey-combed with nature-worship.”


2. Emanation.


This theory holds that the universe is of the same substance with God, and
is the product of successive evolutions from his being. This was the view
of the Syrian Gnostics. Their system was an attempt to interpret
Christianity in the forms of Oriental theosophy. A similar doctrine was
taught, in the last century, by Swedenborg.

We object to it on the following grounds: (_a_) It virtually denies the
infinity and transcendence of God,—by applying to him a principle of
evolution, growth, and progress which belongs only to the finite and
imperfect. (_b_) It contradicts the divine holiness,—since man, who by the
theory is of the substance of God, is nevertheless morally evil. (_c_) It
leads logically to pantheism,—since the claim that human personality is
illusory cannot be maintained without also surrendering belief in the
personality of God.


    Saturninus of Antioch, Bardesanes of Edessa, Tatian of Assyria,
    Marcion of Sinope, all of the second century, were representatives
    of this view. Blunt, Dict. of Doct. and Hist. Theology, art.:
    Emanation: “The divine operation was symbolized by the image of
    the rays of light proceeding from the sun, which were most intense
    when nearest to the luminous substance of the body of which they
    formed a part, but which decreased in intensity as they receded
    from their source, until at last they disappeared altogether in
    darkness. So the spiritual effulgence of the Supreme Mind formed a
    world of spirit, the intensity of which varied inversely with its
    distance from its source, until at length it vanished in matter.
    Hence there is a chain of ever expanding Æons which are increasing
    attenuations of his substance and the sum of which constitutes his
    fulness, _i. e._, the complete revelation of his hidden being.”
    Emanation, from _e_, and _manare_, to flow forth. Guericke, Church
    History, 1:160—“many flames from one light ... the direct contrary
    to the doctrine of creation from nothing.” Neander, Church
    History, 1:372-74. The doctrine of emanation is distinctly
    materialistic. We hold, on the contrary, that the universe is an
    expression of God, but not an emanation from God.

    On the difference between Oriental emanation and eternal
    generation, see Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:470, and History Doctrine,
    1:11-18, 318, note—“1. That which is eternally generated is
    infinite, not finite; it is a divine and eternal person who is not
    the world or any portion of it. In the Oriental schemes, emanation
    is a mode of accounting for the origin of the finite. But eternal
    generation still leaves the finite to be originated. The begetting
    of the Son is the generation of an infinite person who afterwards
    creates the finite universe _de nihilo_. 2. Eternal generation has
    for its result a subsistence or personal hypostasis totally
    distinct from the world; but emanation In relation to the deity
    yields only an impersonal or at most a personified energy or
    effluence which is one of the powers or principles of nature—a
    mere _anima mundi_.” The truths of which emanation was the
    perversion and caricature were therefore the generation of the Son
    and the procession of the Spirit.

    Principal Tulloch, in Encyc. Brit., 10:704—“All the Gnostics agree
    in regarding this world as not proceeding immediately from the
    Supreme Being.... The Supreme Being is regarded as wholly
    inconceivable and indescribable—as the unfathomable Abyss
    (Valentinus)—the Unnameable (Basilides). From this transcendent
    source existence springs by emanation in a series of spiritual
    powers.... The passage from the higher spiritual world to the
    lower material one is, on the one hand, apprehended as a mere
    continued degeneracy from the Source of Life, at length
    terminating in the kingdom of darkness and death—the bordering
    chaos surrounding the kingdom of light. On the other hand the
    passage is apprehended in a more precisely dualistic form, as a
    positive invasion of the kingdom of light by a self-existent
    kingdom of darkness. According as Gnosticism adopted one or other
    of these modes of explaining the existence of the present world,
    it fell into the two great divisions which, from their places of
    origin, have received the respective names of the Alexandrian and
    Syrian Gnosis. The one, as we have seen, presents more a Western,
    the other more an Eastern type of speculation. The dualistic
    element in the one case scarcely appears beneath the pantheistic,
    and bears resemblance to the Platonic notion of the ὕλη, a mere
    blank necessity, a limitless void. In the other case, the
    dualistic element is clear and prominent, corresponding to the
    Zarathustrian doctrine of an active principle of evil as well as
    of good—of a kingdom of Ahriman, as well as a kingdom of Ormuzd.
    In the Syrian Gnosis ... there appears from the first a hostile
    principle of evil in collision with the good.”

    We must remember that dualism is an attempt to substitute for the
    doctrine of absolute creation, a theory that matter and evil are
    due to something negative or positive outside of God. Dualism is a
    theory of origins, not of results. Keeping this in mind, we may
    call the Alexandrian Gnostics dualists, while we regard emanation
    as the characteristic teaching of the Syrian Gnostics. These
    latter made matter to be only an efflux from God and evil only a
    degenerate form of good. If the Syrians held the world to be
    independent of God, this independence was conceived of only as a
    later result or product, not as an original fact. Some like
    Saturninus and Bardesanes verged toward Manichæan doctrine; others
    like Tatian and Marcion toward Egyptian dualism; but all held to
    emanation as the philosophical explanation of what the Scriptures
    call creation. These remarks will serve as qualification and
    criticism of the opinions which we proceed to quote.

    Sheldon, Ch. Hist., 1:206—“The Syrians were in general more
    dualistic than the Alexandrians. Some, after the fashion of the
    Hindu pantheists, regarded the material realm as the region of
    emptiness and illusion, the void opposite of the Pleroma, that
    world of spiritual reality and fulness; others assigned a more
    positive nature to the material, and regarded it as capable of an
    evil aggressiveness even apart from any quickening by the incoming
    of life from above.” Mansel, Gnostic Heresies, 139—“Like
    Saturninus, Bardesanes is said to have combined the doctrine of
    the malignity of matter with that of an active principle of evil;
    and he connected together these two usually antagonistic theories
    by maintaining that the inert matter was co-eternal with God,
    while Satan as the active principle of evil was produced from
    matter (or, according to another statement, co-eternal with it),
    and acted in conjunction with it. 142—The feature which is usually
    selected as characteristic of the Syrian Gnosis is the doctrine of
    dualism; that is to say, the assumption of the existence of two
    active and independent principles, the one of good, the other of
    evil. This assumption was distinctly held by Saturninus and
    Bardesanes ... in contradistinction to the Platonic theory of an
    inert semi-existent matter, which was adopted by the Gnosis of
    Egypt. The former principle found its logical development in the
    next century in Manichæaism; the latter leads with almost equal
    certainty to Pantheism.”

    A. H. Newman, Ch. History, 1:192—“Marcion did not speculate as to
    the origin of evil. The Demiurge and his kingdom are apparently
    regarded as existing from eternity. Matter he regarded as
    intrinsically evil, and he practised a rigid asceticism.” Mansel,
    Gnostic Heresies, 210—“Marcion did not, with the majority of the
    Gnostics, regard the Demiurge as a derived and dependent being,
    whose imperfection is due to his remoteness from the highest
    Cause; nor yet, according to the Persian doctrine, did he assume
    an eternal principle of pure malignity. His second principle is
    independent of and co-eternal with, the first; opposed to it
    however, not as evil to good, but as imperfection to perfection,
    or, as Marcion expressed it, as a just to a good being.
    218—Non-recognition of any principle of pure evil. Three
    principles only: the Supreme God, the Demiurge, and the eternal
    Matter, the two latter being imperfect but not necessarily evil.
    Some of the Marcionites seem to have added an evil spirit as a
    fourth principle.... Marcion is the least Gnostic of all the
    Gnostics.... 31—The Indian influence may be seen in Egypt, the
    Persian in Syria.... 32—To Platonism, modified by Judaism,
    Gnosticism owed much of its philosophical form and tendencies. To
    the dualism of the Persian religion it owed one form at least of
    its speculations on the origin and remedy of evil, and many of the
    details of its doctrine of emanations. To the Buddhism of India,
    modified again probably by Platonism, it was indebted for the
    doctrines of the antagonism between spirit and matter and the
    unreality of derived existence (the germ of the Gnostic Docetism),
    and in part at least for the theory which regards the universe as
    a series of successive emanations from the absolute Unity.”

    Emanation holds that some stuff has proceeded from the nature of
    God, and that God has formed this stuff into the universe. But
    matter is not composed of stuff at all. It is merely an activity
    of God. Origen held that ψυχή etymologically denotes a being
    which, struck off from God the central source of light and warmth,
    has cooled in its love for the good, but still has the possibility
    of returning to its spiritual origin. Pfleiderer, Philosophy of
    Religion, 2:271, thus describes Origen’s view: “As our body, while
    consisting of many members, is yet an organism which is held
    together by one soul, so the universe is to be thought of as an
    immense living being, which is held together by one soul, the
    power and the Logos of God.” Palmer, Theol. Definition, 63,
    note—“The evil of Emanationism is seen in the history of
    Gnosticism. An emanation is a portion of the divine essence
    regarded as separated from it and sent forth as independent.
    Having no perpetual bond of connection with the divine, it either
    sinks into degradation, as Basilides taught, or becomes actively
    hostile to the divine, as the Ophites believed.... In like manner
    the Deists of a later time came to regard the laws of nature as
    having an independent existence, _i. e._, as emanations.”

    John Milton, Christian Doctrine, holds this view. Matter is an
    efflux from God himself, not intrinsically bad, and incapable of
    annihilation. Finite existence is an emanation from God’s
    substance, and God has loosened his hold on those living portions
    or centres of finite existence which he has endowed with free
    will, so that these independent beings may originate actions not
    morally referable to himself. This doctrine of free will relieves
    Milton from the charge of pantheism; see Masson, Life of Milton,
    6:824-826. Lotze, Philos. Religion, xlviii, li, distinguishes
    creation from emanation by saying that creation necessitates a
    divine Will, while emanation flows by natural consequence from the
    being of God. God’s motive in creation is love, which urges him to
    communicate his holiness to other beings. God creates individual
    finite spirits, and then permits the thought, which at first was
    only his, to become the thought of these other spirits. This
    transference of his thought by will is the creation of the world.
    F. W. Farrar, on _Heb. 1:2_—“The word _Æon_ was used by the
    Gnostics to describe the various emanations by which they tried at
    once to widen and to bridge over the gulf between the human and
    the divine. Over that imaginary chasm John threw the arch of the
    Incarnation, when he wrote: ‘_The Word became flesh_’ (_John
    1:14_).”

    Upton, Hibbert Lectures, chap. 2—“In the very making of souls of
    his own essence and substance, and in the vacating of his own
    causality in order that men may be free, God already dies in order
    that they may live. God withdraws himself from our wills, so as to
    make possible free choice and even possible opposition to himself.
    Individualism admits dualism but not complete division. Our
    dualism holds still to underground connections of life between man
    and man, man and nature, man and God. Even the physical creation
    is ethical at heart: each thing is dependent on other things, and
    must serve them, or lose its own life and beauty. The branch must
    abide in the vine, or it withers and is cut off and burned” (275).

    Swedenborg held to emanation,—see Divine Love and Wisdom, 283,
    303, 905—“Every one who thinks from clear reason sees that the
    universe is not created from nothing.... All things were created
    out of a substance.... As God alone is substance in itself and
    therefore the real _esse_, it is evidence that the existence of
    things is from no other source.... Yet the created universe is not
    God, because God is not in time and space.... There is a creation
    of the universe, and of all things therein, by continual
    mediations from the First.... In the substances and matters of
    which the earths consist, there is nothing of the Divine in
    itself, but they are deprived of all that is divine in itself....
    Still they have brought with them by continuation from the
    substance of the spiritual sum that which was there from the
    Divine.” Swedenborgianism is “materialism driven deep and clinched
    on the inside.” This system reverses the Lord’s prayer; it should
    read: “As on earth, so in heaven.” He disliked certain sects, and
    he found that all who belonged to those sects were in the hells,
    condemned to everlasting punishment. The truth is not
    materialistic emanation, as Swedenborg imagined, but rather divine
    energizing in space and time. The universe is God’s system of
    graded self-limitation, from matter up to mind. It has had a
    beginning, and God has instituted it. It is a finite and partial
    manifestation of the infinite Spirit. Matter is an expression of
    spirit, but not an emanation from spirit, any more than our
    thoughts and volitions are. Finite spirits, on the other hand, are
    differentiations within the being of God himself, and so are not
    emanations from him.

    Napoleon asked Goethe what matter was. “_Esprit gelé_,”—frozen
    spirit was the answer Schelling wished Goethe had given him. But
    neither is matter spirit, nor are matter and spirit together mere
    natural effluxes from God’s substance. A divine institution of
    them is requisite (quoted substantially from Dorner, System of
    Doctrine, 2:40). Schlegel in a similar manner called architecture
    “frozen music,” and another writer calls music “dissolved
    architecture.” There is a “psychical automatism,” as Ladd says, in
    his Philosophy of Mind, 169; and Hegel calls nature “the corpse of
    the understanding—spirit to alienation from itself.” But spirit is
    the Adam, of which nature is the Eve; and man says to nature:
    “_This is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh_,” as Adam did
    in _Gen. 2:23_.


3. Creation from eternity.


This theory regards creation as an act of God in eternity past. It was
propounded by Origen, and has been held in recent times by Martensen,
Martineau, John Caird, Knight, and Pfleiderer. The necessity of supposing
such creation from eternity has been argued from God’s omnipotence, God’s
timelessness, God’s immutability, and God’s love. We consider each of
these arguments in their order.


    Origen held that God was from eternity the creator of the world of
    spirits. Martensen, in his Dogmatics, 114, shows favor to the
    maxims: “Without the world God is not God.... God created the
    world to satisfy a want in himself.... He cannot but constitute
    himself the Father of spirits.” Schiller, Die Freundschaft, last
    stanza, gives the following popular expression to this view:
    “Freundlos war der grosse Weltenmeister; Fühlte Mangel, darum
    schuf er Geister, Sel’ge Spiegel seiner Seligkeit. Fand das
    höchste Wesen schon kein Gleiches; Aus dem Kelch des ganzen
    Geisterreiches Schäumt ihm die Unendlichkeit.” The poet’s thought
    was perhaps suggested by Goethe’s Sorrows of Werther: “The flight
    of a bird above my head inspired me with the desire of being
    transported to the shores of the immeasurable waters, there to
    quaff the pleasures of life from the foaming goblet of the
    infinite.” Robert Browning, Rabbi Ben Ezra, 31—“But I need now as
    then, Thee, God, who mouldest men. And since, not even when the
    whirl was worst, Did I—to the wheel of life With shapes and colors
    rife, Bound dizzily—mistake my end, To slake thy thirst.” But this
    regards the Creator as dependent upon, and in bondage to, his own
    world.

    Pythagoras held that nature’s substances and laws are eternal.
    Martineau, Study of Religion, 1:144; 2:250, seems to make the
    creation of the world an eternal process, conceiving of it as a
    self-sundering of the Deity, in whom in some way the world was
    always contained (Schurman, Belief in God, 140). Knight, Studies
    in Philos. and Lit., 94, quotes from Byron’s Cain, I:1—“Let him
    Sit on his vast and solitary throne, Creating worlds, to make
    eternity Less burdensome to his immense existence And
    unparticipated solitude.... He, so wretched in his height, So
    restless in his wretchedness, must still Create and recreate.”
    Byron puts these words into the mouth of Lucifer. Yet Knight, in
    his Essays in Philosophy, 143, 247, regards the universe as the
    everlasting effect of an eternal Cause. Dualism, he thinks, is
    involved in the very notion of a search for God.

    W. N. Clarke, Christian Theology, 117—“God is the source of the
    universe. Whether by immediate production at some point of time,
    so that after he had existed alone there came by his act to be a
    universe, or by perpetual production from his own spiritual being,
    so that his eternal existence was always accompanied by a universe
    in some stage of being, God has brought the universe into
    existence.... Any method in which the independent God could
    produce a universe which without him could have had no existence,
    is accordant with the teachings of Scripture. Many find it easier
    philosophically to hold that God has eternally brought forth
    creation from himself, so that there has never been a time when
    there was not a universe in some stage of existence, than to think
    of an instantaneous creation of all existing things when there had
    been nothing but God before. Between these two views theology is
    not compelled to decide, provided we believe that God is a free
    Spirit greater than the universe.” We dissent from this conclusion
    of Dr. Clarke, and hold that Scripture requires us to trace the
    universe back to a beginning, while reason itself is better
    satisfied with this view than it can be with the theory of
    creation from eternity.


(_a_) Creation from eternity is not necessitated by God’s omnipotence.
Omnipotence does not necessarily imply actual creation; it implies only
power to create. Creation, moreover, is in the nature of the case a thing
begun. Creation from eternity is a contradiction in terms, and that which
is self-contradictory is not an object of power.


    The argument rests upon a misconception of eternity, regarding it
    as a prolongation of time into the endless past. We have seen in
    our discussion of eternity as an attribute of God, that eternity
    is not endless time, or time without beginning, but rather
    superiority to the law of time. Since eternity is no more past
    than it is present, the idea of creation from eternity is an
    irrational one. We must distinguish _creation in eternity past_ (=
    God and the world coëternal, yet God the cause of the world, as he
    is the begetter of the Son) from _continuous creation_ (which is
    an explanation of preservation, but not of creation at all). It is
    this latter, not the former, to which Rothe holds (see under the
    doctrine of Preservation, pages 415, 416). Birks, Difficulties of
    Belief, 81, 82—“Creation is not from eternity, since past eternity
    cannot be actually traversed any more than we can reach the bound
    of an eternity to come. There was no _time_ before creation,
    because there was no _succession_.”

    Birks, Scripture Doctrine of Creation, 78-105—“The first verse of
    Genesis excludes five speculative falsehoods: 1. that there is
    nothing but uncreated matter; 2. that there is no God distinct
    from his creatures; 3. that creation is a series of acts without a
    beginning; 4. that there is no real universe; 5. that nothing can
    be known of God or the origin of things.” Veitch, Knowing and
    Being, 22—“The ideas of creation and creative energy are emptied
    of meaning, and for them is substituted the conception or fiction
    of an eternally related or double-sided world, not of what has
    been, but of what always is. It is another form of the see-saw
    philosophy. The eternal Self only is, if the eternal manifold is;
    the eternal manifold is, if the eternal Self is. The one, in being
    the other, is or makes itself the one; the other, in being the
    one, is or makes itself the other. This may be called a unity; it
    is rather, if we might invent a term suited to the new and
    marvellous conception, an unparalleled and unbegotten twinity.”


(_b_) Creation from eternity is not necessitated by God’s timelessness.
Because God is free from the law of time it does not follow that creation
is free from that law. Rather is it true that no eternal creation is
conceivable, since this involves an infinite number. Time must have had a
beginning, and since the universe and time are coëxistent, creation could
not have been from eternity.


    _Jude 25_—“_Before all time_”—implies that time had a beginning,
    and _Eph. 1:4_—“_before the foundation of the world_”—implies that
    creation itself had a beginning. Is creation infinite? No, says
    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 1:459, because to a perfect creation unity
    is as necessary as multiplicity. The universe is an organism, and
    there can be no organism without a definite number of parts. For a
    similar reason Dorner, System Doctrine, 2:28, denies that the
    universe can be eternal. Granting on the one hand that the world
    though eternal might be dependent upon God and as soon as the plan
    was evolved there might be no reason why the execution should be
    delayed, yet on the other hand the absolutely limitless is the
    imperfect and no universe with an infinite number of parts is
    conceivable or possible. So Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin,
    1:220-225—“What has a goal or end must have a beginning; history,
    as teleological, implies creation.”

    Lotze, Philos. Religion, 74—“The world, with respect to its
    existence as well as its content, is completely dependent on the
    will of God, and not as a mere involuntary development of his
    nature.... The word ‘creation’ ought not to be used to designate a
    deed of God so much as the absolute dependence of the world on his
    will.” So Schurman, Belief in God, 146, 156, 225—“Creation is the
    eternal dependence of the world on God.... Nature is the
    externalization of spirit.... Material things exist simply as
    modes of the divine activity; they have no existence for
    themselves.” On this view that God is the Ground but not the
    Creator of the world, see Hovey, Studies in Ethics and Religion,
    23-56—“Creation is no more of a mystery than is the causal action”
    in which both Lotze and Schurman believe. “To deny that divine
    power can originate real being—can add to the sum total of
    existence—is much like saying that such power is finite.” No one
    can prove that “it is of the essence of spirit to reveal itself,”
    or if so, that it must do this by means of an organism or
    externalization. Eternal succession of changes in nature is no
    more comprehensible than are a creating God and a universe
    originating in time.


(_c_) Creation from eternity is not necessitated by God’s immutability.
His immutability requires, not an eternal creation, but only an eternal
plan of creation. The opposite principle would compel us to deny the
possibility of miracles, incarnation, and regeneration. Like creation,
these too would need to be eternal.


    We distinguish between idea and plan, between plan and execution.
    Much of God’s plan is not yet executed. The beginning of its
    execution is as easy to conceive as is the continuation of its
    execution. But the beginning of the execution of God’s plan is
    creation. Active will is an element in creation. God’s will is not
    always active. He waits for “_the fulness of the time_” (_Gal.
    4:4_) before he sends forth his Son. As we can trace back Christ’s
    earthly life to a beginning, so we can trace back the life of the
    universe to a beginning. Those who hold to creation from eternity
    usually interpret _Gen. 1:1_—“_In the beginning God created the
    heavens and the earth,_” and _John 1:1_—“_In the beginning was the
    Word,_” as both and alike meaning “in eternity.” But neither of
    these texts has this meaning. In each we are simply carried back
    to the beginning of the creation, and it is asserted that God was
    its author and that the Word already was.


(_d_) Creation from eternity is not necessitated by God’s love. Creation
is finite and cannot furnish perfect satisfaction to the infinite love of
God. God has moreover from eternity an object of love infinitely superior
to any possible creation, in the person of his Son.


    Since all things are created in Christ, the eternal Word, Reason,
    and Power of God, God can “_reconcile all things to himself_” in
    Christ (_Col. 1:20_). Athanasius called God κτίστης, ού
    τεχνίτης—Creator, not Artisan. By this he meant that God is
    immanent, and not the God of deism. But the moment we conceive of
    God as _revealing_ himself in Christ, the idea of creation as an
    eternal satisfaction of his love vanishes. God can have a plan
    without executing his plan. Decree can precede creation. Ideas of
    the universe may exist in the divine mind before they are realized
    by the divine will. There are purposes of salvation in Christ
    which antedate the world (_Eph. 1:4_). The doctrine of the
    Trinity, once firmly grasped, enables us to see the fallacy of
    such views as that of Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:286—“A
    beginning and ending in time of the creating of God are not
    thinkable. That would be to suppose a change of creating and
    resting in God, which would equalize God’s being with the
    changeable course of human life. Nor could it be conceived what
    should have hindered God from creating the world up to the
    beginning of his creating.... We say rather, with Scotus Erigena,
    that the divine creating is equally eternal with God’s being.”


(_e_) Creation from eternity, moreover, is inconsistent with the divine
independence and personality. Since God’s power and love are infinite, a
creation that satisfied them must be infinite in extent as well as eternal
in past duration—in other words, a creation equal to God. But a God thus
dependent upon external creation is neither free nor sovereign. A God
existing in necessary relations to the universe, if different in substance
from the universe, must be the God of dualism; if of the same substance
with the universe, must be the God of pantheism.


    Gore, Incarnation, 136, 137—“Christian theology is the harmony of
    pantheism and deism.... It enjoys all the riches of pantheism
    without its inherent weakness on the moral side, without making
    God dependent on the world, as the world is dependent on God. On
    the other hand, Christianity converts an unintelligible deism into
    a rational theism. It can explain how God became a creator in
    time, because it knows how creation has its eternal analogue in
    the uncreated nature; it was God’s nature eternally to produce, to
    communicate itself, to live.” In other words, it can explain how
    God can be eternally alive, independent, self-sufficient, since he
    is Trinity. Creation from eternity is a natural and logical
    outgrowth of Unitarian tendencies in theology. It is of a piece
    with the Stoic monism of which we read in Hatch, Hibbert Lectures,
    177—“Stoic monism conceived of the world as a self-evolution of
    God. Into such a conception the idea of a beginning does not
    necessarily enter. It is consistent with the idea of an eternal
    process of differentiation. That which is always has been under
    changed and changing forms. The theory is cosmological rather than
    cosmogonical. It rather explains the world as it is, than gives an
    account of its origin.”


4. Spontaneous generation.


This theory holds that creation is but the name for a natural process
still going on,—matter itself having in it the power, under proper
conditions, of taking on new functions, and of developing into organic
forms. This view is held by Owen and Bastian. We object that

(_a_) It is a pure hypothesis, not only unverified, but contrary to all
known facts. No credible instance of the production of living forms from
inorganic material has yet been adduced. So far as science can at present
teach us, the law of nature is “omne vivum e vivo,” or “ex ovo.”


    Owen, Comparative Anatomy of the Vertebrates, 3:814-818—on
    Monogeny or Thaumatogeny; quoted in Argyle, Reign of Law, 281—“We
    discern no evidence of a pause or intromission in the creation or
    coming-to-be of new plants and animals.” So Bastian, Modes of
    Origin of Lowest Organisms, Beginnings of Life, and articles on
    Heterogeneous Evolution of Living Things, in Nature, 2:170, 193,
    219, 410, 431. See Huxley’s Address before the British
    Association, and Reply to Bastian, in Nature, 2:400, 473; also
    Origin of Species, 69-79, and Physical Basis of Life, in Lay
    Sermons, 142. Answers to this last by Stirling, in Half-hours with
    Modern Scientists, and by Beale, Protoplasm or Life, Matter, and
    Mind, 73-75.

    In favor of Redi’s maxim, “omne vivum e vivo,” see Huxley, in
    Encyc. Britannica, art.: Biology, 689—“At the present moment there
    is not a shadow of trustworthy direct evidence that abiogenesis
    does take place or has taken place within the period during which
    the existence of the earth is recorded”; Flint, Physiology of Man,
    1:263-265—“As the only true philosophic view to take of the
    question, we shall assume in common with nearly all the modern
    writers on physiology that there is no such thing as spontaneous
    generation,—admitting that the exact mode of production of the
    infusoria lowest in the scale of life is not understood.” On the
    Philosophy of Evolution, see A. H. Strong, Philosophy and
    Religion, 39-57.


(_b_) If such instances could be authenticated, they would prove nothing
as against a proper doctrine of creation,—for there would still exist an
impossibility of accounting for these vivific properties of matter, except
upon the Scriptural view of an intelligent Contriver and Originator of
matter and its laws. In short, evolution implies previous involution,—if
anything comes out of matter, it must first have been put in.


    Sully: “Every doctrine of evolution must assume some definite
    initial arrangement which is supposed to contain the possibilities
    of the order which we find to be evolved and no other
    possibility.” Bixby, Crisis of Morals, 258—“If no creative fiat
    can be believed to create something out of nothing, still less is
    evolution able to perform such a contradiction.” As we can get
    morality only out of a moral germ, so we can get vitality only out
    of a vital germ. Martineau, Seat of Authority, 14—“By brooding
    long enough on an egg that is next to nothing, you can in this way
    hatch any universe actual or possible. Is it not evident that this
    is a mere trick of imagination, concealing its thefts of causation
    by committing them little by little, and taking the heap from the
    divine storehouse grain by grain?”

    Hens come before eggs. Perfect organic forms are antecedent to all
    life-cells, whether animal or vegetable. “Omnis cellula e cellula,
    sed primaria cellula ex organismo.” God created first the tree,
    and its seed was in it when created (_Gen. 1:12_). Protoplasm is
    not _proton_, but _deuteron_; the elements are antecedent to it.
    It is not true that man was never made at all but only “growed”
    like Topsy; see Watts, New Apologetic, xvi, 312. Royce, Spirit of
    Modern Philosophy, 273—“Evolution is the attempt to comprehend the
    world of experience in terms of the fundamental idealistic
    postulates: (1) without ideas, there is no reality; (2) rational
    order requires a rational Being to introduce it; (3) beneath our
    conscious self there must be an infinite Self. The question is:
    Has the world a meaning? It is not enough to refer ideas to
    mechanism. Evolution, from the nebula to man, is only the
    unfolding of the life of a divine Self.”


(_c_) This theory, therefore, if true, only supplements the doctrine of
original, absolute, immediate creation, with another doctrine of mediate
and derivative creation, or the development of the materials and forces
originated at the beginning. This development, however, cannot proceed to
any valuable end without guidance of the same intelligence which initiated
it. The Scriptures, although they do not sanction the doctrine of
spontaneous generation, do recognize processes of development as
supplementing the divine fiat which first called the elements into being.


    There is such a thing as free will, and free will does not, like
    the deterministic will, run in a groove. If there be free will in
    man, then much more is there free will in God, and God’s will does
    not run in a groove. God is not bound by law or to law. Wisdom
    does not imply monotony or uniformity. God can do a thing once
    that is never done again. Circumstances are never twice alike.
    Here is the basis not only of creation but of new creation,
    including miracle, incarnation, resurrection, regeneration,
    redemption. Though will both in God and in man is for the most
    part automatic and acts according to law, yet the power of new
    beginnings, of creative action, resides in will, wherever it is
    free, and this free will chiefly makes God to be God and man to be
    man. Without it life would be hardly worth the living, for it
    would be only the life of the brute. All schemes of evolution
    which ignore this freedom of God are pantheistic in their
    tendencies, for they practically deny both God’s transcendence and
    his personality.

    Leibnitz declined to accept the Newtonian theory of gravitation
    because it seemed to him to substitute natural forces for God. In
    our own day many still refuse to accept the Darwinian theory of
    evolution because it seems to them to substitute natural forces
    for God; see John Fiske, Idea of God, 97-102. But law is only a
    method; it presupposes a lawgiver and requires an agent.
    Gravitation and evolution are but the habitual operations of God.
    If spontaneous generation should be proved true, it would be only
    God’s way of originating life. E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology,
    91—“Spontaneous generation does not preclude the idea of a
    creative will working by natural law and secondary causes.... Of
    beginnings of life physical science knows nothing.... Of the
    processes of nature science is competent to speak and against its
    teachings respecting these there is no need that theology should
    set itself in hostility.... Even if man were derived from the
    lower animals, it would not prove that God did not create and
    order the forces employed. It may be that God bestowed upon animal
    life a plastic power.”

    Ward, Naturalism and Agnosticism, 1:180—“It is far truer to say
    that the universe is a life, than to say that it is a
    mechanism.... We can never get to God through a mere mechanism....
    With Leibnitz I would argue that absolute passivity or inertness
    is not a reality but a limit. 269—Mr. Spencer grants that to
    interpret spirit in terms of matter is impossible. 302—Natural
    selection without teleological factors is not adequate to account
    for biological evolution, and such teleological factors imply a
    psychical something endowed with feelings and will, _i. e._, Life
    and Mind. 2:130-135—Conation is more fundamental than cognition.
    149-151—Things and events precede space and time. There is no
    empty space or time. 252-257—Our assimilation of nature is the
    greeting of spirit by spirit. 259-267—Either nature is itself
    intelligent, or there is intelligence beyond it.
    274-276—Appearances do not veil reality. 274—The truth is not God
    _and_ mechanism, but God _only_ and no mechanism. 283—Naturalism
    and Agnosticism, in spite of themselves, lead us to a world of
    Spiritualistic Monism.” Newman Smyth, Christian Ethics,
    36—“Spontaneous generation is a fiction in ethics, as it is in
    psychology and biology. The moral cannot be derived from the
    non-moral, any more than consciousness can be derived from the
    unconscious, or life from the azoic rocks.”


IV. The Mosaic Account of Creation.


1. Its twofold nature,—as uniting the ideas of creation and of
development.


(_a_) Creation is asserted.—The Mosaic narrative avoids the error of
making the universe eternal or the result of an eternal process. The
cosmogony of Genesis, unlike the cosmogonies of the heathen, is prefaced
by the originating act of God, and is supplemented by successive
manifestations of creative power in the introduction of brute and of human
life.


    All nature-worship, whether it take the form of ancient polytheism
    or modern materialism, looks upon the universe only as a birth or
    growth. This view has a basis of truth, inasmuch as it regards
    natural forces as having a real existence. It is false in
    regarding these forces as needing no originator or upholder.
    Hesiod taught that in the beginning was formless matter. Genesis
    does not begin thus. God is not a demiurge, working on eternal
    matter. God antedates matter. He is the creator of matter at the
    first (_Gen. 1:1_—_bara_) and he subsequently created animal life
    (_Gen. 1:21_—“_and God created_”—_bara_) and the life of man
    (_Gen. 1:27_—“_and God create man_”—_bara_ again).

    Many statements of the doctrine of evolution err by regarding it
    as an eternal or self-originated process. But the process requires
    an originator, and the forces require an upholder. Each forward
    step implies increment of energy, and progress toward a rational
    end implies intelligence and foresight in the governing power.
    Schurman says well that Darwinism explains the _survival_ of the
    fittest, but cannot explain the _arrival_ of the fittest.
    Schurman, Agnosticism and Religion, 34—“A primitive chaos of
    star-dust which held in its womb not only the cosmos that fills
    space, not only the living creatures that teem upon it, but also
    the intellect that interprets it, the will that confronts it, and
    the conscience that transfigures it, must as certainly have God at
    the centre, as a universe mechanically arranged and periodically
    adjusted must have him at the circumference.... There is no real
    antagonism between creation and evolution. 59—Natural causation is
    the expression of a supernatural Mind in nature, and man—a being
    at once of sensibility and of rational and moral self-activity—is
    a signal and ever-present example of the interfusion of the
    natural with the supernatural in that part of universal existence
    nearest and best known to us.”

    Seebohm, quoted in J. J. Murphy, Nat. Selection and Spir. Freedom,
    76—“When we admit that Darwin’s argument in favor of the theory of
    evolution proves its truth, we doubt whether natural selection can
    be in any sense the _cause_ of the origin of species. It has
    probably played an important part in the history of evolution; its
    rôle has been that of increasing the rapidity with which the
    process of development has proceeded. Of itself it has probably
    been powerless to originate a species; the machinery by which
    species have been evolved has been completely independent of
    natural selection and could have produced all the results which we
    call the evolution of species without its aid; though the process
    would have been slow had there been no struggle of life to
    increase its pace.” New World, June, 1896:237-262, art. by Howison
    on the Limits of Evolution, finds limits in (1) the noumenal
    Reality; (2) the break between the organic and the inorganic; (3)
    break between physiological and logical genesis; (4) inability to
    explain the great fact on which its own movement rests; (5) the _a
    priori_ self-consciousness which is the essential being and true
    person of the mind.

    Evolution, according to Herbert Spencer, is “an integration of
    matter and concomitant dissipation of motion, during which the
    matter passes from an indefinite incoherent homogeneity to a
    definite coherent heterogeneity, and during which the retained
    motion goes through a parallel transformation.” D. W. Simon
    criticizes this definition as defective “because (1) it omits all
    mention both of energy and its differentiations; and (2) because
    it introduces into the definition of the process one of the
    phenomena thereof, namely, motion. As a matter of fact, both
    energy or force, and law, are subsequently and illicitly
    introduced as distinct factors of the process; they ought
    therefore to have found recognition in the definition or
    description.” Mark Hopkins, Life, 189—“God: what need of him? Have
    we not force, uniform force, and do not all things continue as
    they were from the beginning of the creation, if it ever had a
    beginning? Have we not the τὸ πᾶν, the universal All, the Soul of
    the universe, working itself up from unconsciousness through
    molecules and maggots and mice and marmots and monkeys to its
    highest culmination in man?”


(_b_) Development is recognized.—The Mosaic account represents the present
order of things as the result, not simply of original creation, but also
of subsequent arrangement and development. A fashioning of inorganic
materials is described, and also a use of these materials in providing the
conditions of organized existence. Life is described as reproducing
itself, after its first introduction, according to its own laws and by
virtue of its own inner energy.


    Martensen wrongly asserts that “Judaism represented the world
    exclusively as _creatura_, not _natura_; as κτίσις, not φύσις.”
    This is not true. Creation is represented as the bringing forth,
    not of something dead, but of something living and capable of
    self-development. Creation lays the foundation for cosmogony. Not
    only is there a fashioning and arrangement of the material which
    the original creative act has brought into being (see Gen. 1:2, 4,
    6, 7, 9, 16, 17; 2:2, 6, 7, 8—Spirit brooding; dividing light from
    darkness, and waters from waters; dry land appearing; setting
    apart of sun, moon, and stars; mist watering; forming man’s body;
    planting garden) but there is also an imparting and using of the
    productive powers of the things and beings created (_Gen. 1:12,
    22, 24, 28_—earth brought forth grass; trees yielding fruit whose
    seed was in itself; earth brought forth the living creatures; man
    commanded to be fruitful and multiply).

    The tendency at present among men of science is to regard the
    whole history of life upon the planet as the result of evolution,
    thus excluding creation, both at the beginning of the history and
    along its course. On the progress from the Orohippus, the lowest
    member of the equine series, an animal with four toes, to
    Anchitherium with three, then to Hipparion, and finally to our
    common horse, see Huxley, in Nature for May 11, 1873:33, 34. He
    argues that, if a complicated animal like the horse has arisen by
    gradual modification of a lower and less specialized form, there
    is no reason to think that other animals have arisen in a
    different way. Clarence King, Address at Yale College, 1877,
    regards American geology as teaching the doctrine of sudden yet
    natural modification of species. “When catastrophic change burst
    in upon the ages of uniformity and sounded in the ear of every
    living thing the words: ‘Change or die!’ plasticity became the
    sole principle of action.” Nature proceeded then by leaps, and
    corresponding to the leaps of geology we find leaps of biology.

    We grant the probability that the great majority of what we call
    species were produced in some such ways. If science should render
    it certain that all the present species of living creatures were
    derived by natural descent from a few original germs, and that
    these germs were themselves an evolution of inorganic forces and
    materials, we should not therefore regard the Mosaic account as
    proved untrue. We should only be required to revise our
    interpretation of the word _bara_ in _Gen. 1:21, 27_, and to give
    it there the meaning of mediate creation, or creation by law. Such
    a meaning might almost seem to be favored by _Gen. 1:11_—“_let the
    earth put forth grass_”; _20_—“_let the waters bring forth
    abundantly __ the moving creature that hath life_”; _2:7_—“_the
    Lord God formed man of the dust_”; _9_—“_out of the ground made
    the Lord God to grow every tree_”; _cf._ _Mark 4:28_—αὐτομάτη ἣ γή
    καρποφορεῖ—“_the earth brings forth fruit automatically_.” Goethe,
    Sprüche in Reimen: “Was wär ein Gott der nur von aussen stiesse,
    Im Kreis das All am Finger laufen liesse? Ihm ziemt’s die Welt im
    Innern zu bewegen, Sich in Natur, Natur in sich zu hegen, So dass,
    was in Ihm lebt und webt und ist, Nie seine Kraft, nie seinen
    Geist vermisst”—“No, such a God my worship may not win, Who lets
    the world about his finger spin, A thing eternal; God must dwell
    within.”

    All the growth of a tree takes place in from four to six weeks in
    May, June and July. The addition of woody fibre between the bark
    and the trunk results, not by impartation into it of a new force
    from without, but by the awakening of the life within. Environment
    changes and growth begins. We may even speak of an immanent
    transcendence of God—an unexhausted vitality which at times makes
    great movements forward. This is what the ancients were trying to
    express when they said that trees were inhabited by dryads and so
    groaned and bled when wounded. God’s life is in all. In evolution
    we cannot say, with LeConte, that the higher form of energy is
    “derived from the lower.” Rather let us say that both the higher
    and the lower are constantly dependent for their being on the will
    of God. The lower is only God’s preparation for his higher
    self-manifestation; see Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 165, 166.

    Even Haeckel, Hist. Creation, 1:38, can say that in the Mosaic
    narrative “two great and fundamental ideas meet us—the idea of
    separation or differentiation, and the idea of progressive
    development or perfecting. We can bestow our just and sincere
    admiration on the Jewish lawgiver’s grand insight into nature, and
    his simple and natural hypothesis of creation, without discovering
    in it a divine revelation.” Henry Drummond, whose first book,
    Natural Law in the Spiritual World, he himself in his later days
    regretted as tending in a deterministic and materialistic
    direction, came to believe rather in “spiritual law in the natural
    world.” His Ascent of Man regards evolution and law as only the
    methods of a present Deity. Darwinism seemed at first to show that
    the past history of life upon the planet was a history of
    heartless and cruel slaughter. The survival of the fittest had for
    its obverse side the destruction of myriads. Nature was “red in
    tooth and claw with ravine.” But further thought has shown that
    this gloomy view results from a partial induction of facts.
    Palæontological life was not only a struggle for life, but a
    struggle for the life of others. The beginnings of altruism are to
    be seen in the instinct of reproduction and in the care of
    offspring. In every lion’s den and tiger’s lair, in every
    mother-eagle’s feeding of her young, there is a self-sacrifice
    which faintly shadows forth man’s subordination of personal
    interests to the interests of others.

    Dr. George Harris, in his Moral Evolution, has added to Drummond’s
    doctrine the further consideration that the struggle for one’s own
    life has its moral side as well as the struggle for the life of
    others. The instinct of self-preservation is the beginning of
    right, righteousness, justice and law upon earth. Every creature
    owes it to God to preserve its own being. So we can find an
    adumbration of morality even in the predatory and internecine
    warfare of the geologic ages. The immanent God was even then
    preparing the way for the rights, the dignity, the freedom of
    humanity. B. P. Bowne, in the Independent, April 19, 1900—“The
    Copernican system made men dizzy for a time, and they held on to
    the Ptolemaic system to escape vertigo. In like manner the
    conception of God, as revealing himself in a great historic
    movement and process, in the consciences and lives of holy men, in
    the unfolding life of the church, makes dizzy the believer in a
    dictated book, and he longs for some fixed word that shall be sure
    and stedfast.” God is not limited to creating from without: he can
    also create from within; and development is as much a part of
    creation as is the origination of the elements. For further
    discussion of man’s origin, see section on Man a Creation of God,
    in our treatment of Anthropology.


2. Its proper interpretation.


We adopt neither (_a_) the allegorical, or mythical, (_b_) the
hyperliteral, nor (_c_) the hyperscientific interpretation of the Mosaic
narrative; but rather (_d_) the pictorial-summary interpretation,—which
holds that the account is a rough sketch of the history of creation, true
in all its essential features, but presented in a graphic form suited to
the common mind and to earlier as well as to later ages. While conveying
to primitive man as accurate an idea of God’s work as man was able to
comprehend, the revelation was yet given in pregnant language, so that it
could expand to all the ascertained results of subsequent physical
research. This general correspondence of the narrative with the teachings
of science, and its power to adapt itself to every advance in human
knowledge, differences it from every other cosmogony current among men.


    (_a_) The _allegorical_, or _mythical interpretation_, represents
    the Mosaic account as embodying, like the Indian and Greek
    cosmogonies, the poetic speculations of an early race as to the
    origin of the present system. We object to this interpretation
    upon the ground that the narrative of creation is inseparably
    connected with the succeeding history, and is therefore most
    naturally regarded as itself historical. This connection of the
    narrative of creation with the subsequent history, moreover,
    prevents us from believing it to be the description of a vision
    granted to Moses. It is more probably the record of an original
    revelation to the first man, handed down to Moses’ time, and used
    by Moses as a proper introduction to his history.

    We object also to the view of some higher critics that the book of
    Genesis contains two inconsistent stories. Marcus Dods, Book of
    Genesis, 2—“The compiler of this book ... lays side by side two
    accounts of man’s creation which no ingenuity can reconcile.”
    Charles A. Briggs: “The doctrine of creation in Genesis 1 is
    altogether different from that taught in Genesis 2.” W. N. Clarke,
    Christian Theology, 199-201—“It has been commonly assumed that the
    two are parallel, and tell one and the same story; but examination
    shows that this is not the case.... We have here the record of a
    tradition, rather than a revelation.... It cannot be taken as
    literal history, and it does not tell by divine authority how man
    was created.” To these utterances we reply that the two accounts
    are not inconsistent but complementary, the first chapter of
    Genesis describing man’s creation as the crown of God’s general
    work, the second describing man’s creation with greater
    particularity as the beginning of human history.

    Canon Rawlinson, in Aids to Faith, 275, compares the Mosaic
    account with the cosmogony of Berosus, the Chaldean. Pfleiderer,
    Philos. of Religion, 1:267-272, gives an account of heathen
    theories of the origin of the universe. Anaxagoras was the first
    who represented the chaotic first matter as formed through the
    ordering understanding (νοῦς) of God, and Aristotle for that
    reason called him “the first sober one among many drunken.”
    Schurman, Belief in God, 138—“In these cosmogonies the world and
    the gods grow up together; cosmogony is, at the same time,
    theogony.” Dr. E. G. Robinson: “The Bible writers believed and
    intended to state that the world was made in three literal days.
    But, on the principle that God may have meant more than they did,
    the doctrine of periods may not be inconsistent with their
    account.” For comparison of the Biblical with heathen cosmogonies,
    see Blackie in Theol. Eclectic, 1:77-87; Guyot, Creation, 58-63;
    Pope, Theology, 1:401, 402; Bible Commentary, 1:36, 48; McIlvaine,
    Wisdom of Holy Scripture, 1-54; J. F. Clarke, Ten Great Religions,
    2:193-221. For the theory of “prophetic vision,” see Kurtz, Hist.
    of Old Covenant, Introd., i-xxxvii, civ-cxxx; and Hugh Miller,
    Testimony of the Rocks, 179-210; Hastings, Dict. Bible, art.:
    Cosmogony; Sayce, Religions of Ancient Egypt and Babylonia,
    372-397.

    (_b_) The _hyperliteral interpretation_ would withdraw the
    narrative from all comparison with the conclusions of science, by
    putting the ages of geological history between the first and
    second verses of _Gen. 1_, and by making the remainder of the
    chapter an account of the fitting up of the earth, or of some
    limited portion of it, in six days of twenty-four hours each.
    Among the advocates of this view, now generally discarded, are
    Chalmers, Natural Theology, Works, 1:228-258, and John Pye Smith,
    Mosaic Account of Creation, and Scripture and Geology. To this
    view we object that there is no indication, in the Mosaic
    narrative, of so vast an interval between the first and the second
    verses; that there is no indication, in the geological history, of
    any such break between the ages of preparation and the present
    time (see Hugh Miller, Testimony of the Rocks, 141-178); and that
    there are indications in the Mosaic record itself that the word
    “_day_” is not used in its literal sense; while the other
    Scriptures unquestionably employ it to designate a period of
    indefinite duration (_Gen. 1:5_—“_God called the light Day_”—a day
    before there was a sun; _8_—“_there was evening and there was
    morning, a second day_”; _2:2_—God “_rested on the seventh day_”;
    _cf._ _Heb. 4:3-10_—where God’s day of rest seems to continue, and
    his people are exhorted to enter into it; _Gen. 2:4_—“_the day
    that Jehovah made earth and heaven_”—“_day_” here covers all the
    seven days; _cf._ _Is. 2:12_—“_a day of Jehovah of hosts_”; _Zech.
    14:7_—“_it shall be one day which is known unto Jehovah; not day,
    and not night_”; _2 Pet. 3:8_—“_one day is with the Lord as __ a
    thousand years, and a thousand years as one day_”). Guyot,
    Creation, 34, objects also to this interpretation, that the
    narrative purports to give a history of the making of the heavens
    as well as of the earth (_Gen. 2:4_—“_these are the generations of
    the heaven and of the earth_”), whereas this interpretation
    confines the history to the earth. On the meaning of the word
    “_day_,” as a period of indefinite duration, see Dana, Manual of
    Geology, 744; LeConte, Religion and Science, 262.

    (_c_) The _hyperscientific interpretation_ would find in the
    narrative a minute and precise correspondence with the geological
    record. This is not to be expected, since it is foreign to the
    purpose of revelation to teach science. Although a general concord
    between the Mosaic and geological histories may be pointed out, it
    is a needless embarrassment to compel ourselves to find in every
    detail of the former an accurate statement of some scientific
    fact. Far more probable we hold to be

    (_d_) The _pictorial-summary interpretation_. Before explaining
    this in detail, we would premise that we do not hold this or any
    future scheme of reconciling Genesis and geology to be a finality.
    Such a settlement of all the questions involved would presuppose
    not only a perfected science of the physical universe, but also a
    perfected science of hermeneutics. It is enough if we can offer
    tentative solutions which represent the present state of thought
    upon the subject. Remembering, then, that any such scheme of
    reconciliation may speedily be outgrown without prejudice to the
    truth of the Scripture narrative, we present the following as an
    approximate account of the coincidences between the Mosaic and the
    geological records. The scheme here given is a combination of the
    conclusions of Dana and Guyot, and assumes the substantial truth
    of the nebular hypothesis. It is interesting to observe that
    Augustine, who knew nothing of modern science, should have
    reached, by simple study of the text, some of the same results.
    See his Confessions, 12:8—“First God created a chaotic matter,
    which was _next_ to _nothing_. This chaotic matter was made from
    nothing, before all days. Then this chaotic, amorphous matter was
    subsequently arranged, in the succeeding six days”; De Genes. ad
    Lit., 4:27—“The length of these days is not to be determined by
    the length of our week-days. There is a series in both cases, and
    that is all.” We proceed now to the scheme:

    1. The earth, if originally in the condition of a gaseous fluid,
    must have been void and formless as described in _Genesis 1:2_.
    Here the earth is not yet separated from the condensing nebula,
    and its fluid condition is indicated by the term “_waters_.”

    2. The beginning of activity in matter would manifest itself by
    the production of light, since light is a resultant of molecular
    activity. This corresponds to the statement in _verse 3_. As the
    result of condensation, the nebula becomes luminous, and this
    process from darkness to light is described as follows: “_there
    was evening and there was morning, one day_.” Here we have a day
    without a sun—a feature in the narrative quite consistent with two
    facts of science: first, that the nebula would naturally be
    self-luminous, and, secondly, that the earth proper, which reached
    its present form before the sun, would, when it was thrown off, be
    itself a self-luminous and molten mass. The day was therefore
    continuous—day without night.

    3. The development of the earth into an independent sphere and its
    separation from the fluid around it answers to the dividing of
    “_the waters under the firmament from the waters above_,” in
    _verse 7_. Here the word “_waters_” is used to designate the
    “primordial cosmic material” (Guyot, Creation, 35-37), or the
    molten mass of earth and sun united, from which the earth is
    thrown off. The term “_waters_” is the best which the Hebrew
    language affords to express this idea of a fluid mass. _Ps. 148_
    seems to have this meaning, where it speaks of the “_waters that
    are above the heavens_” (_verse 4_)—waters which are distinguished
    from the “_deeps_” below (_verse 7_), and the “_vapor_” above
    (_verse 8_).

    4. The production of the earth’s physical features by the partial
    condensation of the vapors which enveloped the igneous sphere, and
    by the consequent outlining of the continents and oceans, is next
    described in _verse 9_ as the gathering of the waters into one
    place and the appearing of the dry land.

    5. The expression of the idea of life in the lowest plants, since
    it was in type and effect the creation of the vegetable kingdom,
    is next described in _verse 11_ as a bringing into existence of
    the characteristic forms of that kingdom. This precedes all
    mention of animal life, since the vegetable kingdom is the natural
    basis of the animal. If it be said that our earliest fossils are
    animal, we reply that the earliest vegetable forms, the _algæ_,
    were easily dissolved, and might as easily disappear; that
    graphite and bog-iron ore, appearing lower down than any animal
    remains, are the result of preceding vegetation; that animal
    forms, whenever and wherever existing, must subsist upon and
    presuppose the vegetable. The Eozoön is of necessity preceded by
    the Eophyte. If it be said that fruit-trees could not have been
    created on the third day, we reply that since the creation of the
    vegetable kingdom was to be described at one stroke and no mention
    of it was to be made subsequently, this is the proper place to
    introduce it and to mention its main characteristic forms. See
    Bible Commentary, 1:36; LeConte, Elements of Geology, 136, 285.

    6. The vapors which have hitherto shrouded the planet are now
    cleared away as preliminary to the introduction of life in its
    higher animal forms. The consequent appearance of solar light is
    described in _verses 16_ and _17_ as a making of the sun, moon,
    and stars, and a giving of them as luminaries to the earth.
    Compare _Gen. 9:13_—“_I do set my bow in the cloud._” As the
    rainbow had existed in nature before, but was now appointed to
    serve a peculiar purpose, so in the record of creation sun, moon
    and stars, which existed before, were appointed as visible lights
    for the earth,—and that for the reason that the earth was no
    longer self-luminous, and the light of the sun struggling through
    the earth’s encompassing clouds was not sufficient for the higher
    forms of life which were to come.

    7. The exhibition of the four grand types of the animal kingdom
    (radiate, molluscan, articulate, vertebrate), which characterizes
    the next stage of geological progress, is represented in _verses
    20_ and _21_ as a creation of the lower animals—those that swarm
    in the waters, and the creeping and flying species of the land.
    Huxley, in his American Addresses, objects to this assigning of
    the origin of birds to the fifth day, and declares that
    terrestrial animals exist in lower strata than any form of
    bird,—birds appearing only in the Oölitic, or New Red Sandstone.
    But we reply that the fifth day is devoted to sea-productions,
    while land-productions belong to the sixth. Birds, according to
    the latest science, are sea-productions, not land-productions.
    They originated from Saurians, and were, at the first, flying
    lizards. There being but one mention of sea-productions, all
    these, birds included, are crowded into the fifth day. Thus
    Genesis anticipates the latest science. On the ancestry of birds,
    see Pop. Science Monthly, March, 1884:606; Baptist Magazine,
    1877:505.

    8. The introduction of mammals—viviparous species, which are
    eminent above all other vertebrates for a quality prophetic of a
    high moral purpose, that of suckling their young—is indicated in
    _verses 24_ and _25_ by the creation, on the sixth day, of cattle
    and beasts of prey.

    9. Man, the first being of moral and intellectual qualities, and
    the first in whom the unity of the great design has full
    expression, forms in both the Mosaic and geologic record the last
    step of progress in creation (see _verses 26-31_). With Prof.
    Dana, we may say that “in this succession we observe not merely an
    order of events like that deduced from science; there is a system
    in the arrangement, and a far-reaching prophecy, to which
    philosophy could not have attained, however instructed.” See Dana,
    Manual of Geology, 741-746, and Bib. Sac., April, 1885:201-224.
    Richard Owen: “Man from the beginning of organisms was ideally
    present upon the earth”; see Owen, Anatomy of Vertebrates, 3:796;
    Louis Agassiz: “Man is the purpose toward which the whole animal
    creation tends from the first appearance of the first palæozoic
    fish.”

    Prof. John M. Taylor: “Man is not merely a mortal but a moral
    being. If he sinks below this plane of life he misses the path
    marked out for him by all his past development. In order to
    progress, the higher vertebrate had to subordinate everything to
    mental development. In order to become human it had to develop the
    rational intelligence. In order to become higher man, present man
    must subordinate everything to moral development. This is the
    great law of animal and human development clearly revealed in the
    sequence of physical and psychical functions.” W. E. Gladstone in
    S. S. Times, April 26, 1890, calls the Mosaic days “chapters in
    the history of creation.” He objects to calling them epochs or
    periods, because they are not of equal length, and they sometimes
    overlap. But he defends the general correspondence of the Mosaic
    narrative with the latest conclusions of science, and remarks:
    “Any man whose labor and duty for several scores of years has
    included as their central point the study of the means of making
    himself intelligible to the mass of men, is in a far better
    position to judge what would be the forms and methods of speech
    proper for the Mosaic writer to adopt, than the most perfect
    Hebraist as such, or the most consummate votary of physical
    science as such.”

    On the whole subject, see Guyot, Creation; Review of Guyot, in N.
    Eng., July, 1884:591-594; Tayler Lewis, Six Days of Creation;
    Thompson, Man in Genesis and in Geology; Agassiz, in Atlantic
    Monthly, Jan. 1874; Dawson, Story of the Earth and Man, 82, and in
    Expositor, Apl. 1886; LeConte, Science and Religion, 264; Hill, in
    Bib. Sac., April, 1875; Peirce, Ideality in the Physical Sciences,
    38-72; Boardman, The Creative Week; Godet, Bib. Studies of O. T.,
    65-138; Bell, in Nature, Nov. 24 and Dec. 1, 1882; W. E.
    Gladstone, in Nineteenth Century, Nov. 1885:685-707, Jan. 1886:1,
    176; reply by Huxley, in Nineteenth Century, Dec. 1885, and Feb.
    1886; Schmid, Theories of Darwin; Bartlett, Sources of History in
    the Pentateuch, 1-35; Cotterill, Does Science Aid Faith in Regard
    to Creation? Cox, Miracles, 1-39—chapter 1, on the Original
    Miracle—that of Creation; Zöckler, Theologie und
    Naturwissenschaft, and Urgeschichte, 1-77; Reusch, Bib.
    Schöpfungsgeschichte. On difficulties of the nebular hypothesis,
    see Stallo, Modern Physics, 277-293.


V. God’s End in Creation.


Infinite wisdom must, in creating, propose to itself the most
comprehensive and the most valuable of ends,—the end most worthy of God,
and the end most fruitful in good. Only in the light of the end proposed
can we properly judge of God’s work, or of God’s character as revealed
therein.


    It would seem that Scripture should give us an answer to the
    question: Why did God create? The great Architect can best tell
    his own design. Ambrose: “To whom shall I give greater credit
    concerning God than to God himself?” George A. Gordon, New Epoch
    for Faith, 15—“God is necessarily a being of ends. Teleology is
    the warp and woof of humanity; it must be in the warp and woof of
    Deity. Evolutionary science has but strengthened this view.
    Natural science is but a mean disguise for ignorance if it does
    not imply cosmical purpose. The movement of life from lower to
    higher is a movement upon ends. Will is the last account of the
    universe, and will is the faculty for ends. The moment one
    concludes that God is, it appears certain that he is a being of
    ends. The universe is alive with desire and movement.
    Fundamentally it is throughout an expression of will. And it
    follows, that the ultimate end of God in human history must be
    worthy of himself.”


In determining this end, we turn first to:


1. The testimony of Scripture.


This may be summed up in four statements. God finds his end (_a_) in
himself; (_b_) in his own will and pleasure; (_c_) in his own glory; (_d_)
in the making known of his power, his wisdom, his holy name. All these
statements may be combined in the following, namely, that God’s supreme
end in creation is nothing outside of himself, but is his own glory—in the
revelation, in and through creatures, of the infinite perfection of his
own being.


    (_a_) _Rom. 11:36_—“_unto him are all things_”; _Col. 1:16_—“_all
    things have been created ... unto him_” (Christ); compare _Is.
    48:11_—“_for mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it
    ... and my glory will I not give to another_”; and _1 Cor.
    15:28_—“_subject all things unto him, that God may be all in
    all._” _Proverbs 16:4_—not “The Lord hath made all things for
    himself” (A. V.) but “_Jehovah hath made everything for its own
    end_” (Rev. Vers.).

    (_b_) _Eph. 1:5, 6, 9_—“_having foreordained us ... according to
    the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
    grace ... mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure
    which he purposed in him_”; _Rev. 4:11_—“_thou didst create all
    things, and because of thy will they were, and were created._”

    (_c_) _Is. 43:7_—“_whom I have created for my glory_”; _60:21_ and
    _61:3_—the righteousness and blessedness of the redeemed are
    secured, that “_he may be glorified_”; _Luke 2:14_—the angels’
    song at the birth of Christ expressed the design of the work of
    salvation: “_Glory to God in the highest_,” and only through, and
    for its sake, “_on earth peace among men in whom he is well
    pleased_.”

    (_d_) _Ps. 143:11_—“_In thy righteousness bring my soul out of
    trouble_”; _Ez. 36:21, 22_—“_I do not this for your sake ... but
    for mine holy name_”; _39:7_—“_my holy name will I make known_”;
    _Rom. 9:17_—to Pharaoh: “_For this very purpose did I raise thee
    up, that I might show in thee my power, and that my name might be
    published abroad in all the earth_”; _22, 23_—“_riches of his
    glory_” made known in vessels of wrath, and in vessels of mercy;
    _Eph. 3:9, 10_—“_created all things; to the intent that now unto
    the principalities and the powers in the heavenly places might be
    made known through the church the manifold wisdom of God._” See
    Godet, on Ultimate Design of Man; “God in man and man in God,” in
    Princeton Rev., Nov. 1880; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:436, 535, 565,
    568. _Per contra_, see Miller, Fetich in Theology, 19, 39-45,
    88-98, 143-146.


Since holiness is the fundamental attribute in God, to make himself, his
own pleasure, his own glory, his own manifestation, to be his end in
creation, is to find his chief end in his own holiness, its maintenance,
expression, and communication. To make this his chief end, however, is not
to exclude certain subordinate ends, such as the revelation of his wisdom,
power, and love, and the consequent happiness of innumerable creatures to
whom this revelation is made.


    God’s glory is that which makes him glorious. It is not something
    without, like the praise and esteem of men, but something within,
    like the dignity and value of his own attributes. To a noble man,
    praise is very distasteful unless he is conscious of something in
    himself that justifies it. We must be like God to be
    self-respecting. Pythagoras said well: “Man’s end is to be like
    God.” And so God must look within, and find his honor and his end
    in himself. Robert Browning, Hohenstiel-Schwangau: “This is the
    glory, that in all conceived Or felt or known, I recognize a Mind,
    Not mine but like mine,—for the double joy Making all things for
    me, and me for Him.” Schurman, Belief in God, 214-216—“God
    glorifies himself in communicating himself.” The object of his
    love is the exercise of his holiness. Self-affirmation conditions
    self-communication.

    E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 94, 196—“Law and gospel are
    only two sides of the one object, the highest glory of God in the
    highest good of man.... Nor is it unworthy of God to make himself
    his own end: (_a_) It is both unworthy and criminal for a finite
    being to make himself his own end, because it is an end that can
    be reached only by degrading self and wronging others; but (_b_)
    For an infinite Creator not to make himself his own end would be
    to dishonor himself and wrong his creatures; since, thereby, (_c_)
    he must either act without an end, which is irrational, or from an
    end which is impossible without wronging his creatures; because
    (_d_) the highest welfare of his creatures, and consequently their
    happiness, is impossible except through the subordination and
    conformity of their wills to that of their infinitely perfect
    Ruler; and (_e_) without this highest welfare and happiness of his
    creatures God’s own end itself becomes impossible, for he is
    glorified only as his character is reflected in, and recognized
    by, his intelligent creatures.” Creation can add nothing to the
    essential wealth or worthiness of God. If the end were outside
    himself, it would make him dependent and a servant. The old
    theologians therefore spoke of God’s “declarative glory,” rather
    than God’s “essential glory,” as resulting from man’s obedience
    and salvation.


2. The testimony of reason.


That his own glory, in the sense just mentioned, is God’s supreme end in
creation, is evident from the following considerations:

(_a_) God’s own glory is the only end actually and perfectly attained in
the universe. Wisdom and omnipotence cannot choose an end which is
destined to be forever unattained; for _“__what his soul desireth, even
that he doeth__”__ (Job 23:13)_. God’s supreme end cannot be the happiness
of creatures, since many are miserable here and will be miserable forever.
God’s supreme end cannot be the holiness of creatures, for many are unholy
here and will be unholy forever. But while neither the holiness nor the
happiness of creatures is actually and perfectly attained, God’s glory is
made known and will be made known in both the saved and the lost. This
then must be God’s supreme end in creation.


    This doctrine teaches us that none can frustrate God’s plan. God
    will get glory out of every human life. Man may glorify God
    voluntarily by love and obedience, but if he will not do this he
    will be compelled to glorify God by his rejection and punishment.
    Better be the molten iron that runs freely into the mold prepared
    by the great Designer, than be the hard and cold iron that must be
    hammered into shape. Cleanthes, quoted by Seneca: “Ducunt volentem
    fata, nolentem trahunt.” W. C. Wilkinson, Epic of Saul, 271—“But
    some are tools, and others ministers, Of God, who works his holy
    will with all.” Christ baptizes _“__in the Holy Spirit and in
    fire__”__ (Mat. 3:11)_. Alexander McLaren: “There are two fires,
    to one or other of which we must be delivered. Either we shall
    gladly accept the purifying fire of the Spirit which burns sin out
    of us, or we shall have to meet the punitive fire which burns up
    us and our sins together. To be cleansed by the one or to be
    consumed by the other is the choice before each one of us.” Hare,
    Mission of the Comforter, on _John 16:8_, shows that the Holy
    Spirit either _convinces_ those who yield to his influence, or
    _convicts_ those who resist—the word ἐλέγχω having this double
    significance.


(_b_) God’s glory is the end intrinsically most valuable. The good of
creatures is of insignificant importance compared with this. Wisdom
dictates that the greater interest should have precedence of the less.
Because God can choose no greater end, he must choose for his end himself.
But this is to choose his holiness, and his glory in the manifestation of
that holiness.


    _Is. 40:15, 16_—“_Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket,
    and are counted as the small dust of the balance_”—like the drop
    that falls unobserved from the bucket, like the fine dust of the
    scales which the tradesman takes no notice of in weighing, so are
    all the combined millions of earth and heaven before God. He
    created, and he can in an instant destroy. The universe is but a
    drop of dew upon the fringe of his garment. It is more important
    that God should be glorified than that the universe should be
    happy. As we read in _Heb. 6:13_—“_since he could swear by none
    greater, he sware by himself_”—so here we may say: Because he
    could choose no greater end in creating, he chose himself. But to
    swear by himself is to swear by his holiness (_Ps. 89:35_). We
    infer that to find his end in himself is to find that end in his
    holiness. See Martineau on Malebranche, in Types, 177.

    The stick or the stone does not exist for itself, but for some
    consciousness. The soul of man exists in part for itself. But it
    is conscious that in a more important sense it exists for God.
    “Modern thought,” it is said, “worships and serves the creature
    more than the Creator; indeed, the chief end of the Creator seems
    to be to glorify man and to enjoy him forever.” So the small boy
    said his Catechism: “Man’s chief end is to glorify God and to
    annoy him forever.” Prof. Clifford: “The kingdom of God is
    obsolete; the kingdom of man has now come.” All this is the
    insanity of sin. _Per contra_, see Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 329,
    330—“Two things are plain in Edwards’s doctrine: first, that God
    cannot love anything other than himself: he is so great, so
    preponderating an amount of being, that what is left is hardly
    worth considering; secondly, so far as God has any love for the
    creature, it is because he is himself diffused therein: the
    fulness of his own essence has overflowed into an outer world, and
    that which he loves in created beings is his essence imparted to
    them.” But we would add that Edwards does not say they are
    themselves of the essence of God; see his Works, 2:210, 211.


(_c_) His own glory is the only end which consists with God’s independence
and sovereignty. Every being is dependent upon whomsoever or whatsoever he
makes his ultimate end. If anything in the creature is the last end of
God, God is dependent upon the creature. But since God is dependent only
on himself, he must find in himself his end.


    To create is not to increase his blessedness, but only to reveal
    it. There is no need or deficiency which creation supplies. The
    creatures who derive all from him can add nothing to him. All our
    worship is only the rendering back to him of that which is his
    own. He notices us only for his own sake and not because our
    little rivulets of praise add anything to the ocean-like fulness
    of his joy. For his own sake, and not because of our misery or our
    prayers, he redeems and exalts us. To make our pleasure and
    welfare his ultimate end would be to abdicate his throne. He
    creates, therefore, only for his own sake and for the sake of his
    glory. To this reasoning the London Spectator replies: “The glory
    of God is the splendor of a manifestation, not the intrinsic
    splendor manifested. The splendor of a manifestation, however,
    consists in the effect of the manifestation on those to whom it is
    given. Precisely because the manifestation of God’s goodness can
    be useful to us and cannot be useful to him, must its
    manifestation be intended for our sake and not for his sake. We
    gain everything by it—he nothing, except so far as it is his own
    will that we should gain what he desires to bestow upon us.” In
    this last clause we find the acknowledgment of weakness in the
    theory that God’s supreme end is the good of his creatures. God
    does gain the fulfilment of his plan, the doing of his will, the
    manifestation of himself. The great painter loves his picture less
    than he loves his ideal. He paints in order to express himself.
    God loves each soul which he creates, but he loves yet more the
    expression of his own perfections in it. And this self-expression
    is his end. Robert Browning, Paracelsus, 54—“God is the perfect
    Poet, Who in creation acts his own conceptions.” Shedd, Dogm.
    Theol., 1:357, 358; Shairp, Province of Poetry, 11, 12.

    God’s love makes him a self-expressing being. Self-expression is
    an inborn impulse in his creatures. All genius partakes of this
    characteristic of God. Sin substitutes concealment for outflow,
    and stops this self-communication which would make the good of
    each the good of all. Yet even sin cannot completely prevent it.
    The wicked man is impelled to confess. By natural law the secrets
    of all hearts will be made manifest at the judgment. Regeneration
    restores the freedom and joy of self-manifestation. Christianity
    and confession of Christ are inseparable. The preacher is simply a
    Christian further advanced in this divine privilege. We need
    utterance. Prayer is the most complete self-expression, and God’s
    presence is the only land of perfectly free speech.

    The great poet comes nearest, in the realm of secular things, to
    realizing this privilege of the Christian. No great poet ever
    wrote his best work for money, or for fame, or even for the sake
    of doing good. Hawthorne was half-humorous and only partially
    sincere, when he said he would never have written a page except
    for pay. The hope of pay may have set his pen a-going, but only
    love for his work could have made that work what it is. Motley
    more truly declared that it was all up with a writer when he began
    to consider the money he was to receive. But Hawthorne needed the
    money to live on, while Motley had a rich father and uncle to back
    him. The great writer certainly absorbs himself in his work. With
    him necessity and freedom combine. He sings as the bird sings,
    without dogmatic intent. Yet he is great in proportion as he is
    moral and religious at heart. “Arma virumque cano” is the only
    first person singular in the Æneid in which the author himself
    speaks, yet the whole Æneid is a revelation of Virgil. So we know
    little of Shakespeare’s life, but much of Shakespeare’s genius.

    Nothing is added to the tree when it blossoms and bears fruit; it
    only reveals its own inner nature. But we must distinguish in man
    his true nature from his false nature. Not his private
    peculiarities, but that in him which is permanent and universal,
    is the real treasure upon which the great poet draws. Longfellow:
    “He is the greatest artist then, Whether of pencil or of pen, Who
    follows nature. Never man, as artist or as artizan, Pursuing his
    own fantasies, Can touch the human heart or please, Or satisfy our
    nobler needs.” Tennyson, after observing the subaqueous life of a
    brook, exclaimed: “What an imagination God has!” Caird, Philos.
    Religion, 245—“The world of finite intelligences, though distinct
    from God, is still in its ideal nature one with him. That which
    God creates, and by which he reveals the hidden treasures of his
    wisdom and love, is still not foreign to his own infinite life,
    but one with it. In the knowledge of the minds that know him, in
    the self-surrender of the hearts that love him, it is no paradox
    to affirm that he knows and loves himself.”


(_d_) His own glory is an end which comprehends and secures, as a
subordinate end, every interest of the universe. The interests of the
universe are bound up in the interests of God. There is no holiness or
happiness for creatures except as God is absolute sovereign, and is
recognized as such. It is therefore not selfishness, but benevolence, for
God to make his own glory the supreme object of creation. Glory is not
vain-glory, and in expressing his ideal, that is, in expressing himself,
in his creation, he communicates to his creatures the utmost possible
good.


    This self-expression is not selfishness but benevolence. As the
    true poet forgets himself in his work, so God does not manifest
    himself for the sake of what he can make by it. Self-manifestation
    is an end in itself. But God’s self-manifestation comprises all
    good to his creatures. We are bound to love ourselves and our own
    interests just in proportion to the value of those interests. The
    monarch of a realm or the general of an army must be careful of
    his life, because the sacrifice of it may involve the loss of
    thousands of lives of soldiers or subjects. So God is the heart of
    the great system. Only by being tributary to the heart can the
    members be supplied with streams of holiness and happiness. And so
    for only one Being in the universe is it safe to live for himself.
    Man should not live for himself, because there is a higher end.
    But there is no higher end for God. “Only one being in the
    universe is excepted from the duty of subordination. Man must be
    subject to the ‘_higher powers_’ (_Rom. 13:1_). But there are no
    higher powers to God.” See Park, Discourses, 181-209.

    Bismarck’s motto: “Ohne Kaiser, kein Reich”—“Without an emperor,
    there can be no empire”—applies to God, as Von Moltke’s motto:
    “Erst wägen, dann wagen”—“First weigh, then dare”—applies to man.
    Edwards, Works, 2:215—“Selfishness is no otherwise vicious or
    unbecoming than as one is less than a multitude. The public weal
    is of greater value than his particular interest. It is fit and
    suitable that God should value himself infinitely more than his
    creatures.” Shakespeare, Hamlet, 3:3—“The single and peculiar life
    is bound With all the strength and armor of the mind To keep
    itself from noyance; but much more That spirit upon whose weal
    depends and rests The lives of many. The cease of majesty Dies not
    alone, but like a gulf doth draw What’s near it with it: it is a
    massy wheel Fixed on the summit of the highest mount, To whose
    huge spokes ten thousand lesser things Are mortis’d and adjoined;
    which, when it falls, Each small annexment, petty consequence,
    Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone did the king sigh, But
    with a general groan.”


(_e_) God’s glory is the end which in a right moral system is proposed to
creatures. This must therefore be the end which he in whose image they are
made proposes to himself. He who constitutes the centre and end of all his
creatures must find his centre and end in himself. This principle of moral
philosophy, and the conclusion drawn from it, are both explicitly and
implicitly taught in Scripture.


    The beginning of all religion is the choosing of God’s end as our
    end—the giving up of our preference of happiness, and the entrance
    upon a life devoted to God. That happiness is not the ground of
    moral obligation, is plain from the fact that there is no
    happiness in seeking happiness. That the holiness of God is the
    ground of moral obligation, is plain from the fact that the search
    after holiness is not only successful in itself, but brings
    happiness also in its train. Archbishop Leighton, Works, 695—“It
    is a wonderful instance of wisdom and goodness that God has so
    connected his own glory with our happiness, that we cannot
    properly intend the one, but that the other must follow as a
    matter of course, and our own felicity is at last resolved into
    his eternal glory.” That God will certainly secure the end for
    which he created, his own glory, and that his end is our end, is
    the true source of comfort in affliction, of strength in labor, of
    encouragement in prayer. See _Psalm 25:11_—“_For thy name’s
    sake.... Pardon mine iniquity, for it is great_”; _115:1_—“_Not
    unto us, O Jehovah, not unto us, But unto thy name give glory_”;
    _Mat. 6:33_—“_Seek ye first his kingdom, and his righteousness;
    and all these things shall be added unto you_”; _1 Cor.
    10:31_—“_Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
    do all to the glory of God_”; _1 Pet. 2:9_—“_ye are an elect race
    ... that ye may show forth the excellencies of him who called you
    out of darkness into his marvelous light_”; _4:11_—speaking,
    ministering, “_that in all things God may be glorified through
    Jesus Christ, whose is the glory and the dominion for ever and
    ever. Amen._” On the whole subject, see Edwards, Works, 2:193-257;
    Janet, Final Causes, 443-455; Princeton Theol. Essays, 2:15-32;
    Murphy, Scientific Bases of Faith, 358-362.

    It is a duty to make the most of ourselves, but only for God’s
    sake. _Jer. 45:5_—“_seekest thou great things for thyself? seek
    them not!_” But it is nowhere forbidden us to seek great things
    for God. Rather we are to “_desire earnestly the greater gifts_”
    (_1 Cor. 12:31_). Self-realization as well as self-expression is
    native to humanity. Kant: “Man, and with him every rational
    creature, is an end in himself.” But this seeking of his own good
    is to be subordinated to the higher motive of God’s glory. The
    difference between the regenerate and the unregenerate may consist
    wholly in motive. The latter lives for self, the former for God.
    Illustrate by the young man in Yale College who began to learn his
    lessons for God instead of for self, leaving his salvation in
    Christ’s hands. God requires self-renunciation, taking up the
    cross, and following Christ, because the first need of the sinner
    is to change his centre. To be self-centered is to be a savage.
    The struggle for the life of others is better. But there is
    something higher still. Life has dignity according to the worth of
    the object we install in place of self. Follow Christ, make God
    the center of your life,—so shall you achieve the best; see
    Colestock, Changing Viewpoint, 113-123.

    George A. Gordon, The New Epoch for Faith, 11-13—“The ultimate
    view of the universe is the religious view. Its worth is
    ultimately worth for the supreme Being. Here is the note of
    permanent value in Edwards’s great essay on The End of Creation.
    The final value of creation is its value for God.... Men are men
    in and through society—here is the truth which Aristotle
    teaches—but Aristotle fails to see that society attains its end
    only in and through God.” Hovey, Studies, 65—“To manifest the
    glory or perfection of God is therefore the chief end of our
    existence. To live in such a manner that his life is reflected in
    ours; that his character shall reappear, at least faintly, in
    ours; that his holiness and love shall be recognized and declared
    by us, is to do that for which we are made. And so, in requiring
    us to glorify himself, God simply requires us to do what is
    absolutely right, and what is at the same time indispensable to
    our highest welfare. Any lower aim could not have been placed
    before us, without making us content with a character unlike that
    of the First Good and the First Fair.” See statement and criticism
    of Edwards’s view in Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 227-238.


VI. Relation of the Doctrine of Creation to other Doctrines.


1. To the holiness and benevolence of God.


Creation, as the work of God, manifests of necessity God’s moral
attributes. But the existence of physical and moral evil in the universe
appears, at first sight, to impugn these attributes, and to contradict the
Scripture declaration that the work of God’s hand was “very good” (Gen.
1:31). This difficulty may be in great part removed by considering that:

(_a_) At its first creation, the world was good in two senses: first, as
free from moral evil,—sin being a later addition, the work, not of God,
but of created spirits; secondly, as adapted to beneficent ends,—for
example, the revelation of God’s perfection, and the probation and
happiness of intelligent and obedient creatures.

(_b_) Physical pain and imperfection, so far as they existed before the
introduction of moral evil, are to be regarded: first, as congruous parts
of a system of which sin was foreseen to be an incident; and secondly, as
constituting, in part, the means of future discipline and redemption for
the fallen.


    The coprolites of Saurians contain the scales and bones of fish
    which they have devoured. _Rom. 8:20-22_—“_For the creation was
    subjected to vanity, not of its own will, but by reason of him who
    subjected it, in hope that the creation itself also shall be
    delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the
    glory of the children of God. For we know that the whole creation_
    [the irrational creation] _groaneth and travaileth in pain
    together until now_”; _23_—our mortal body, as a part of nature,
    participates in the same groaning. _2 Cor. 4:17_—“_our light
    affliction, which is for the moment, worketh for us more and more
    exceedingly an eternal weight of glory._” Bowne, Philosophy of
    Theism, 224-240—“How explain our rather shabby universe? Pessimism
    assumes that perfect wisdom is compatible only with a perfect
    work, and that we know the universe to be truly worthless and
    insignificant.” John Stuart Mill, Essays on Religion, 29, brings
    in a fearful indictment of nature, her storms, lightnings,
    earthquakes, blight, decay, and death. Christianity however
    regards these as due to man, not to God; as incidents of sin; as
    the groans of creation, crying out for relief and liberty. Man’s
    body, as a part of nature, waits for the adoption, and
    resurrection of the body is to accompany the renewal of the world.

    It was Darwin’s judgment that in the world of nature and of man,
    on the whole, “happiness decidedly prevails.” Wallace, Darwinism,
    36-40—“Animals enjoy all the happiness of which they are capable.”
    Drummond, Ascent of Man, 203 _sq._—“In the struggle for life there
    is no hate—only hunger.” Martineau, Study, 1:330—“Waste of life is
    simply nature’s exuberance.” Newman Smyth, Place of Death in
    Evolution, 44-56—“Death simply buries the useless waste. Death has
    entered for life’s sake.” These utterances, however, come far
    short of a proper estimate of the evils of the world, and they
    ignore the Scriptural teaching with regard to the connection
    between death and sin. A future world into which sin and death do
    not enter shows that the present world is abnormal, and that
    morality is the only cure for mortality. Nor can the imperfections
    of the universe be explained by saying that they furnish
    opportunity for struggle and for virtue. Robert Browning, Ring and
    Book, Pope, 1875—“I can believe this dread machinery Of sin and
    sorrow, would confound me else, Devised,—all pain, at most
    expenditure Of pain by Who devised pain,—to evolve, By new
    machinery in counterpart, The moral qualities of man—how else?—To
    make him love in turn and be beloved, Creative and
    self-sacrificing too, And thus eventually godlike.” This seems
    like doing evil that good may come. We can explain mortality only
    by immorality, and that not in God but in man. Fairbairn:
    “Suffering is God’s protest against sin.”

    Wallace’s theory of the survival of the fittest was suggested by
    the prodigal destructiveness of nature. Tennyson: “Finding that of
    fifty seeds She often brings but one to bear.” William James: “Our
    dogs are _in_ our human life, but not _of_ it. The dog, under the
    knife of vivisection, cannot understand the purpose of his
    suffering. For him it is only pain. So we may lie soaking in a
    spiritual atmosphere, a dimension of Being which we have at
    present no organ for apprehending. If we knew the purpose of our
    life, all that is heroic in us would religiously acquiesce.”
    Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 72—“Love is prepared to take deeper
    and sterner measures than benevolence, which is by itself a
    shallow thing.” The Lakes of Killarny in Ireland show what a
    paradise this world might be if war had not desolated it, and if
    man had properly cared for it. Our moral sense cannot justify the
    evil in creation except upon the hypothesis that this has some
    cause and reason in the misconduct of man.

    This is not a perfect world. It was not perfect even when
    originally constituted. Its imperfection is due to sin. God made
    it with reference to the Fall,—the stage was arranged for the
    great drama of sin and redemption which was to be enacted thereon.
    We accept Bushnell’s idea of “anticipative consequences,” and
    would illustrate it by the building of a hospital-room while yet
    no member of the family is sick, and by the salvation of the
    patriarchs through a Christ yet to come. If the earliest
    vertebrates of geological history were types of man and
    preparations for his coming, then pain and death among those same
    vertebrates may equally have been a type of man’s sin and its
    results of misery. If sin had not been an incident, foreseen and
    provided for, the world might have been a paradise. As a matter of
    fact, it will become a paradise only at the completion of the
    redemptive work of Christ. Kreibig, Versöhnung, 369—“The death of
    Christ was accompanied by startling occurrences in the outward
    world, to show that the effects of his sacrifice reached even into
    nature.” Perowne refers _Ps. 96:10_—“_The world also is
    established that it cannot be moved_”—to the restoration of the
    inanimate creation; _cf._ _Heb. 12:27_—“_And this word, Yet once
    more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as
    of things that have been made, that those things which are not
    shaken may remain_”; _Rev. 21:1, 5_—“_a new heaven and a new earth
    ... Behold, I make all things new._”

    Much sport has been made of this doctrine of anticipative
    consequences. James D. Dana: “It is funny that the sin of Adam
    should have killed those old trilobites! The blunderbuss must have
    kicked back into time at a tremendous rate to have hit those poor
    innocents!” Yet every insurance policy, every taking out of an
    umbrella, every buying of a wedding ring, is an anticipative
    consequence. To deny that God made the world what it is in view of
    the events that were to take place in it, is to concede to him
    less wisdom than we attribute to our fellow-man. The most rational
    explanation of physical evil in the universe is that of _Rom.
    8:20, 21_—“_the creation was subjected to vanity ... by reason of
    him who subjected it_”—_i. e._, by reason of the first man’s
    sin—“_in hope that the creation itself also shall be delivered_.”

    Martineau, Types, 2:151—“What meaning could Pity have in a world
    where suffering was not meant to be?” Hicks, Critique of Design
    Arguments, 386—“The very badness of the world convinces us that
    God is good.” And Sir Henry Taylor’s words: “Pain in man Bears the
    high mission of the flail and fan; In brutes ’tis surely
    piteous”—receive their answer: The brute is but an appendage to
    man, and like inanimate nature it suffers from man’s fall—suffers
    not wholly in vain, for even pain in brutes serves to illustrate
    the malign influence of sin and to suggest motives for resisting
    it. Pascal: “Whatever virtue can be bought with pain is cheaply
    bought.” The pain and imperfection of the world are God’s frown
    upon sin and his warning against it. See Bushnell, chapter on
    Anticipative Consequences, in Nature and the Supernatural,
    194-219. Also McCosh, Divine Government, 26-35, 249-261; Farrar,
    Science and Theology, 82-105; Johnson, in Bap. Rev., 6:141-154;
    Fairbairn, Philos. Christ. Religion, 94-168.


2. To the wisdom and free-will of God.


No plan whatever of a finite creation can fully express the infinite
perfection of God. Since God, however, is immutable, he must always have
had a plan of the universe; since he is perfect, he must have had the best
possible plan. As wise, God cannot choose a plan less good, instead of one
more good. As rational, he cannot between plans equally good make a merely
arbitrary choice. Here is no necessity, but only the certainty that
infinite wisdom will act wisely. As no compulsion from without, so no
necessity from within, moves God to create the actual universe. Creation
is both wise and free.


    As God is both rational and wise, his having a plan of the
    universe must be better than his not having a plan would be. But
    the universe once was not; yet without a universe God was blessed
    and sufficient to himself. God’s perfection therefore requires,
    not that he have a universe, but that he have a plan of the
    universe. Again, since God is both rational and wise, his actual
    creation cannot be the worst possible, nor one arbitrarily chosen
    from two or more equally good. It must be, all things considered,
    the best possible. We are optimists rather than pessimists.

    But we reject that form of optimism which regards evil as the
    indispensable condition of the good, and sin as the direct product
    of God’s will. We hold that other form of optimism which regards
    sin as naturally destructive, but as made, in spite of itself, by
    an overruling providence, to contribute to the highest good. For
    the optimism which makes evil the necessary condition of finite
    being, see Leibnitz, Opera Philosophica, 468, 624; Hedge, Ways of
    the Spirit, 241; and Pope’s Essay on Man. For the better form of
    optimism, see Herzog, Encyclopädie, art.: Schöpfung, 13:651-653;
    Chalmers, Works, 2:286; Mark Hopkins, in Andover Rev., March,
    1885:197-210; Luthardt, Lehre des freien Willens, 9, 10—“Calvin’s
    _Quia voluit_ is not the last answer. We could have no heart for
    such a God, for he would himself have no heart. Formal will alone
    has no heart. In God real freedom controls formal, as in fallen
    man, formal controls real.”

    Janet, in his Final Causes, 429 sq. and 490-503, claims that
    optimism subjects God to fate. We have shown that this objection
    mistakes the certainty which is consistent with freedom for the
    necessity which is inconsistent with freedom. The opposite
    doctrine attributes an irrational arbitrariness to God. We are
    warranted in saying that the universe at present existing,
    considered as a partial realization of God’s developing plan, is
    the best possible for this particular point of time,—in short,
    that all is for the best,—see _Rom. 8:28_—“_to them that love God
    all things work together for good_”; _1 Cor. 3:21_—“_all things
    are yours._”

    For denial of optimism in any form, see Watson, Theol. Institutes,
    1:419; Hovey, God with Us, 206-208; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:419,
    432, 566, and 2:145; Lipsius, Dogmatik, 234-255; Flint, Theism,
    227-256; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 397-409, and esp. 405—“A wisdom
    the resources of which have been so expended that it cannot equal
    its past achievements is a finite capacity, and not the boundless
    depth of the infinite God.” But we reply that a wisdom which does
    not do that which is best is not wisdom. The limit is not in God’s
    abstract power, but in his other attributes of truth, love, and
    holiness. Hence God can say in _Is. 5:4_—“_what could have been
    done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?_”

    The perfect antithesis to an ethical and theistic optimism is
    found in the non-moral and atheistic pessimism of Schopenhauer
    (Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung) and Hartmann (Philosophie des
    Unbewussten). “All life is summed up in effort, and effort is
    painful; therefore life is pain.” But we might retort: “Life is
    active, and action is always accompanied with pleasure; therefore
    life is pleasure.” See Frances Power Cobbe, Peak in Darien,
    95-134, for a graphic account of Schopenhauer’s heartlessness,
    cowardice and arrogance. Pessimism is natural to a mind soured by
    disappointment and forgetful of God: _Eccl. 2:11_—“_all was vanity
    and a striving after wind._” Homer: “There is nothing whatever
    more wretched than man.” Seneca praises death as the best
    invention of nature. Byron: “Count o’er the joys thine hours have
    seen, Count o’er thy days from anguish free, And know, whatever
    thou hast been, ’Tis something better not to be.” But it has been
    left to Schopenhauer and Hartmann to define will as unsatisfied
    yearning, to regard life itself as a huge blunder, and to urge
    upon the human race, as the only measure of permanent relief, a
    united and universal act of suicide.

    G. H. Beard, in Andover Rev., March, 1892—“Schopenhauer utters one
    New Testament truth: the utter delusiveness of self-indulgence.
    Life which is dominated by the desires, and devoted to mere
    getting, is a pendulum swinging between pain and ennui.” Bowne,
    Philos. of Theism, 124—“For Schopenhauer the world-ground is pure
    will, without intellect or personality. But pure will is nothing.
    Will itself, except as a function of a conscious and intelligent
    spirit, is nothing.” Royce, Spirit of Mod. Philos.,
    253-280—“Schopenhauer united Kant’s thought, ‘The inmost life of
    all things is one,’ with the Hindoo insight, ‘The life of all
    these things, That art Thou.’ To him music shows best what the
    will is: passionate, struggling, wandering, restless, ever
    returning to itself, full of longing, vigor, majesty, caprice.
    Schopenhauer condemns individual suicide, and counsels
    resignation. That I must ever desire yet never fully attain, leads
    Hegel to the conception of the absolutely active and triumphant
    spirit. Schopenhauer finds in it proof of the totally evil nature
    of things. Thus while Hegel is an optimist, Schopenhauer is a
    pessimist.”

    Winwood Reade, in the title of his book, The Martyrdom of Man,
    intends to describe human history. O. W. Holmes says that Bunyan’s
    Pilgrim’s Progress “represents the universe as a trap which
    catches most of the human vermin that have its bait dangled before
    them.” Strauss: “If the prophets of pessimism prove that man had
    better never have lived, they thereby prove that themselves had
    better never have prophesied.” Hawthorne, Note-book: “Curious to
    imagine what mournings and discontent would be excited, if any of
    the great so-called calamities of human beings were to be
    abolished,—as, for instance, death.”

    On both the optimism of Leibnitz and the pessimism of
    Schopenhauer, see Bowen, Modern Philosophy; Tulloch, Modern
    Theories, 169-221; Thompson, on Modern Pessimism, in Present Day
    Tracts, 6: no. 34; Wright, on Ecclesiastes, 141-216; Barlow,
    Ultimatum of Pessimism: Culture tends to misery; God is the most
    miserable of beings; creation is a plaster for the sore. See also
    Mark Hopkins, in Princeton Review, Sept. 1882:197—“Disorder and
    misery are so mingled with order and beneficence, that both
    optimism and pessimism are possible.” Yet it is evident that there
    must be more construction than destruction, or the world would not
    be existing. Buddhism, with its Nirvana-refuge, is essentially
    pessimistic.


3. To Christ as the Revealer of God.


Since Christ is the Revealer of God in creation as well as in redemption,
the remedy for pessimism is (1) the recognition of God’s transcendence—the
universe at present not fully expressing his power, his holiness or his
love, and nature being a scheme of progressive evolution which we
imperfectly comprehend and in which there is much to follow; (2) the
recognition of sin as the free act of the creature, by which all sorrow
and pain have been caused, so that God is in no proper sense its author;
(3) the recognition of Christ _for_ us on the Cross and Christ _in_ us by
his Spirit, as revealing the age-long sorrow and suffering of God’s heart
on account of human transgression, and as manifested, in self-sacrificing
love, to deliver men from the manifold evils in which their sins have
involved them; and (4) the recognition of present probation and future
judgment, so that provision is made for removing the scandal now resting
upon the divine government and for justifying the ways of God to men.


    Christ’s Cross is the proof that God suffers more than man from
    human sin, and Christ’s judgment will show that the wicked cannot
    always prosper. In Christ alone we find the key to the dark
    problems of history and the guarantee of human progress. _Rom.
    3:25_—“_whom God set forth to be a propitiation, through faith, in
    his blood, to show his righteousness because of the passing over
    of the sins done aforetime in the forbearance of God_”;
    _8:32_—“_He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
    us all, how shall he not also with him freely give us all
    things?_” _Heb. 2:8, 9_—“_we see not yet all things subjected to
    him. But we behold ... Jesus ... crowned with glory and honor_”;
    _Acts 17:31_—“_he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the
    earth in righteousness by the man whom he hath ordained._” See
    Hill, Psychology, 283; Bradford, Heredity and Christian Problems,
    240, 241; Bruce, Providential Order, 71-88; J. M. Whiton, in Am.
    Jour. Theology, April, 1901:318.

    G. A. Gordon, New Epoch of Faith, 199—“The book of Job is called
    by Huxley the classic of pessimism.” Dean Swift, on the successive
    anniversaries of his own birth, was accustomed to read the third
    chapter of Job, which begins with the terrible “_Let the day
    perish wherein I was born_” (_3:3_). But predestination and
    election are not arbitrary. Wisdom has chosen the best possible
    plan, has ordained the salvation of all who could wisely have been
    saved, has permitted the least evil that it was wise to permit.
    _Rev. 4:11_—“_Thou didst create all things, and because of thy
    will they were, and were created._” Mason, Faith of the Gospel,
    79—“All things were present to God’s mind because of his will, and
    then, when it pleased him, had being given to them.” Pfleiderer,
    Grundriss, 36, advocates a realistic idealism. Christianity, he
    says, is not abstract optimism, for it recognizes the evil of the
    actual and regards conflict with it as the task of the world’s
    history; it is not pessimism, for it regards the evil as not
    unconquerable, but regards the good as the end and the power of
    the world.

    Jones, Robert Browning, 109, 311—“Pantheistic optimism asserts
    that all things _are_ good; Christian optimism asserts that all
    things are _working together_ for good. Reverie in Asolando: ‘From
    the first Power was—I knew. Life has made clear to me That, strive
    but for closer view, Love were as plain to see.’ Balaustion’s
    Adventure: ‘Gladness be with thee, Helper of the world! I think
    this is the authentic sign and seal Of Godship, that it ever waxes
    glad, And more glad, until gladness blossoms, bursts Into a rage
    to suffer for mankind And recommence at sorrow.’ Browning
    endeavored to find God in man, and still to leave man free. His
    optimistic faith sought reconciliation with morality. He abhorred
    the doctrine that the evils of the world are due to merely
    arbitrary sovereignty, and this doctrine he has satirized in the
    monologue of Caliban on Setebos: ‘Loving not, hating not, just
    choosing so.’ Pippa Passes: ‘God’s in his heaven—All’s right with
    the world.’ But how is this consistent with the guilt of the
    sinner? Browning does not say. He leaves the antinomy unsolved,
    only striving to hold both truths in their fulness. Love demands
    distinction between God and man, yet love unites God and man.
    Saul: ‘All’s love, but all’s law.’ Carlyle forms a striking
    contrast to Browning. Carlyle was a pessimist. He would renounce
    happiness for duty, and as a means to this end would suppress, not
    idle speech alone, but thought itself. The battle is fought
    moreover in a foreign cause. God’s cause is not ours. Duty is a
    menace, like the duty of a slave. The moral law is not a
    beneficent revelation, reconciling God and man. All is fear, and
    there is no love.” Carlyle took Emerson through the London slums
    at midnight and asked him: “Do you believe in a devil now?” But
    Emerson replied: “I am more and more convinced of the greatness
    and goodness of the English people.” On Browning and Carlyle, see
    A. H. Strong, Great Poets and their Theology, 373-447.

    Henry Ward Beecher, when asked whether life was worth living,
    replied that that depended very much upon the liver. Optimism and
    pessimism are largely matters of digestion. President Mark Hopkins
    asked a bright student if he did not believe this the best
    possible system. When the student replied in the negative, the
    President asked him how he could improve upon it. He answered: “I
    would kill off all the bed-bugs, mosquitoes and fleas, and make
    oranges and bananas grow further north.” The lady who was bitten
    by a mosquito asked whether it would be proper to speak of the
    creature as “a depraved little insect.” She was told that this
    would be improper, because depravity always implies a previous
    state of innocence, whereas the mosquito has always been as bad as
    he now is. Dr. Lyman Beecher, however, seems to have held the
    contrary view. When he had captured the mosquito who had bitten
    him, he crushed the insect, saying: “There! I’ll show you that
    there is a God in Israel!” He identified the mosquito with all the
    corporate evil of the world. Allen, Religious Progress,
    22—“Wordsworth hoped still, although the French Revolution
    depressed him; Macaulay, after reading Ranke’s History of the
    Popes, denied all religious progress.” On Huxley’s account of
    evil, see Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 265 _sq._

    Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:301, 302—“The Greeks of Homer’s
    time had a naïve and youthful optimism. But they changed from an
    optimistic to a pessimistic view. This change resulted from their
    increasing contemplation of the moral disorder of the world.” On
    the melancholy of the Greeks, see Butcher, Aspects of Greek
    Genius, 130-165. Butcher holds that the great difference between
    Greeks and Hebrews was that the former had no hope or ideal of
    progress. A. H. Bradford, Age of Faith, 74-102—“The voluptuous
    poets are pessimistic, because sensual pleasure quickly passes,
    and leaves lassitude and enervation behind. Pessimism is the basis
    of Stoicism also. It is inevitable where there is no faith in God
    and in a future life. The life of a seed underground is not
    inspiring, except in prospect of sun and flowers and fruit.”
    Bradley, Appearance and Reality, xiv, sums up the optimistic view
    as follows: “The world is the best of all possible worlds, and
    everything in it is a necessary evil.” He should have added that
    pain is the exception in the world, and finite free will is the
    cause of the trouble. Pain is made the means of developing
    character, and, when it has accomplished its purpose, pain will
    pass away.

    Jackson, James Martineau, 390—“All is well, says an American
    preacher, for if there is anything that is not well, it is well
    that it is not well. It is well that falsity and hate are not
    well, that malice and envy and cruelty are not well. What hope for
    the world or what trust in God, if they were well?” _Live_ spells
    _Evil_, only when we read it the wrong way. James Russell Lowell,
    Letters, 2:51—“The more I learn ... the more my confidence in the
    general good sense and honest intentions of mankind increases....
    The signs of the times cease to alarm me, and seem as natural as
    to a mother the teething of her seventh baby. I take great comfort
    in God. I think that he is considerably amused with us sometimes,
    and that he likes us on the whole, and would not let us get at the
    matchbox so carelessly as he does, unless he knew that the frame
    of his universe was fireproof.”

    Compare with all this the hopeless pessimism of Omar Kháyyám,
    Rubáiyát, stanza 99—“Ah Love! could you and I with Him conspire To
    grasp this sorry scheme of things entire, Would not we shatter it
    to bits—and then Remould it nearer to the heart’s desire?” Royce,
    Studies of Good and Evil, 14, in discussing the Problem of Job,
    suggests the following solution: “When you suffer, your sufferings
    are God’s sufferings, not his external work, not his external
    penalty, not the fruit of his neglect, but identically his own
    personal woe. In you God himself suffers, precisely as you do, and
    has all your concern in overcoming this grief.” F. H. Johnson,
    What is Reality, 349, 505—“The Christian ideal is not
    maintainable, if we assume that God could as easily develop his
    creation without conflict.... Happiness is only one of his ends;
    the evolution of moral character is another.” A. E. Waffle, Uses
    of Moral Evil: “(1) It aids development of holy character by
    opposition; (2) affords opportunity for ministering; (3) makes
    known to us some of the chief attributes of God; (4) enhances the
    blessedness of heaven.”


4. To Providence and Redemption.


Christianity is essentially a scheme of supernatural love and power. It
conceives of God as above the world, as well as in it,—able to manifest
himself, and actually manifesting himself, in ways unknown to mere nature.

But this absolute sovereignty and transcendence, which are manifested in
providence and redemption, are inseparable from creatorship. If the world
be eternal, like God, it must be an efflux from the substance of God and
must be absolutely equal with God. Only a proper doctrine of creation can
secure God’s absolute distinctness from the world and his sovereignty over
it.

The logical alternative of creation is therefore a system of pantheism, in
which God is an impersonal and necessary force. Hence the pantheistic
_dicta_ of Fichte: “The assumption of a creation is the fundamental error
of all false metaphysics and false theology”; of Hegel: “God evolves the
world out of himself, in order to take it back into himself again in the
Spirit”; and of Strauss: “Trinity and creation, speculatively viewed, are
one and the same,—only the one is viewed absolutely, the other
empirically.”


    Sterrett, Studies, 155, 156—“Hegel held that it belongs to God’s
    nature to create. Creation is God’s positing an _other_ which is
    not an _other_. The creation is _his_, belongs to his being or
    essence. This involves the finite as his own self-posited object
    and self-revelation. It is necessary for God to create. Love,
    Hegel says, is only another expression of the eternally Triune
    God. Love must create and love _another_. But in loving this
    _other_, God is only loving himself.” We have already, in our
    discussion of the theory of creation from eternity, shown the
    insufficiency of creation to satisfy either the love or the power
    of God. A proper doctrine of the Trinity renders the hypothesis of
    an eternal creation unnecessary and irrational. That hypothesis is
    pantheistic in tendency.

    Luthardt, Compendium der Dogmatik, 97—“Dualism might be called a
    logical alternative of creation, but for the fact that its notion
    of two gods in self-contradictory, and leads to the lowering of
    the idea of the Godhead, so that the impersonal god of pantheism
    takes its place.” Dorner, System of Doctrine, 2:11—“The world
    cannot be necessitated in order to satisfy either want or
    over-fulness in God.... The doctrine of absolute creation prevents
    the _confounding_ of God with the world. The declaration that the
    Spirit brooded over the formless elements, and that life was
    developed under the continuous operation of God’s laws and
    presence, prevents the _separation_ of God from the world. Thus
    pantheism and deism are both avoided.” See Kant and Spinoza
    contrasted in Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:468, 469. The unusually full
    treatment of the doctrine of creation in this chapter is due to a
    conviction that the doctrine constitutes an antidote to most of
    the false philosophy of our time.


5. To the Observance of the Sabbath.


We perceive from this point of view, moreover, the importance and value of
the Sabbath, as commemorating God’s act of creation, and thus God’s
personality, sovereignty, and transcendence.

(_a_) The Sabbath is of perpetual obligation as God’s appointed memorial
of his creating activity. The Sabbath requisition antedates the decalogue
and forms a part of the moral law. Made at the creation, it applies to man
as man, everywhere and always, in his present state of being.


    _Gen. 2:3_—“_And God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it;
    because that in it he rested from all his work which God had
    created and made._” Our rest is to be a miniature representation
    of God’s rest. As God worked six divine days and rested one divine
    day, so are we in imitation of him to work six human days and to
    rest one human day. In the Old Testament there are indications of
    an observance of the Sabbath day before the Mosaic legislation:
    _Gen. 4:3_—“_And in process of time_ [lit. “_at the end of days_”]
    _it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an
    offering unto Jehovah_”; _Gen. 8:10, 12_—Noah twice waited seven
    days before sending forth the dove from the ark; _Gen. 29:27,
    28_—“_fulfil the week_”; _cf._ _Judges 14:12_—“_the seven days of
    the feast_”; _Ex. 16:5_—double portion of manna promised on the
    sixth day, that none be gathered on the Sabbath (_cf._ _verses 20,
    30_). This division of days into weeks is best explained by the
    original institution of the Sabbath at man’s creation. Moses in
    the fourth commandment therefore speaks of it as already known and
    observed: _Ex. 20:8_—“_Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy._”

    The Sabbath is recognized in Assyrian accounts of the Creation;
    see Trans. Soc. Bib. Arch., 5:427, 428; Schrader, Keilinschriften,
    ed. 1883:18-22. Professor Sayce: “Seven was a sacred number
    descended to the Semites from their Accadian predecessors. Seven
    by seven had the magic knots to be tied by the witch; seven times
    had the body of the sick man to be anointed by the purifying oil.
    As the Sabbath of rest fell on each seventh day of the week, so
    the planets, like the demon-messengers of Anu, were seven in
    number, and the gods of the number seven received a particular
    honor.” But now the discovery of a calendar tablet in Mesopotamia
    shows us the week of seven days and the Sabbath in full sway in
    ancient Babylon long before the days of Moses. In this tablet the
    seventh, the fourteenth, the twenty-first and the twenty-eighth
    days are called Sabbaths, the very word used by Moses, and
    following it are the words: “A day of rest.” The restrictions are
    quite as rigid in this tablet as those in the law of Moses. This
    institution must have gone back to the Accadian period, before the
    days of Abraham. In one of the recent discoveries this day is
    called “the day of rest for the heart,” but of the gods, on
    account of the propitiation offered on that day, their heart being
    put at rest. See Jastrow, in Am. Jour. Theol., April, 1898.

    S. S. Times, Jan. 1892, art. by Dr. Jensen of the University of
    Strassburg on the Biblical and Babylonian Week: “_Subattu_ in
    Babylonia means day of propitiation, implying a religious purpose.
    A week of seven days is implied in the Babylonian Flood-Story, the
    rain continuing six days and ceasing on the seventh, and another
    period of seven days intervening between the cessation of the
    storm and the disembarking of Noah, the dove, swallow and raven
    being sent out again on the seventh day. Sabbaths are called days
    of rest for the heart, days of the completion of labor.” Hutton,
    Essays, 2:229—“Because there is in God’s mind a spring of eternal
    rest as well as of creative energy, we are enjoined to respect the
    law of rest as well as the law of labor.” We may question, indeed,
    whether this doctrine of God’s rest does not of itself refute the
    theory of eternal, continuous, and necessary creation.


(_b_) Neither our Lord nor his apostles abrogated the Sabbath of the
decalogue. The new dispensation does away with the Mosaic prescriptions as
to the method of keeping the Sabbath, but at the same time declares its
observance to be of divine origin and to be a necessity of human nature.


    Not everything in the Mosaic law is abrogated in Christ. Worship
    and reverence, regard for life and purity and property, are
    binding still. Christ did not nail to his cross every commandment
    of the decalogue. Jesus does not defend himself from the charge of
    Sabbath-breaking by saying that the Sabbath is abrogated, but by
    asserting the true idea of the Sabbath as fulfilling a fundamental
    human need. _Mark 2:27_—“_The Sabbath was made_ [by God] _for man,
    and not man for the Sabbath._” The Puritan restrictions are not
    essential to the Sabbath, nor do they correspond even with the
    methods of later Old Testament observance. The Jewish Sabbath was
    more like the New England Thanksgiving than like the New England
    Fast-day. _Nehemiah 8:12, 18_—“_And all the people went their way
    to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great
    mirth.... And they kept the feast seven days; and on the eighth
    day was a solemn assembly, according unto the ordinance_”—seems to
    include the Sabbath day as a day of gladness.

    Origen, in Homily 23 on _Numbers_ (Migne, II:358): “Leaving
    therefore the Jewish observances of the Sabbath, let us see what
    ought to be for a Christian the observance of the Sabbath. On the
    Sabbath day nothing of all the actions of the world ought to be
    done.” Christ walks through the cornfield, heals a paralytic, and
    dines with a Pharisee, all on the Sabbath day. John Milton, in his
    Christian Doctrine, is an extreme anti-sabbatarian, maintaining
    that the decalogue was abolished with the Mosaic law. He thinks it
    uncertain whether “the Lord’s day” was weekly or annual. The
    observance of the Sabbath, to his mind, is a matter not of
    authority, but of convenience. Archbishop Paley: “In my opinion
    St. Paul considered the Sabbath a sort of Jewish ritual, and not
    obligatory on Christians. A cessation on that day from labor
    beyond the time of attending public worship is not intimated in
    any part of the New Testament. The notion that Jesus and his
    apostles meant to retain the Jewish Sabbath, only shifting the day
    from the seventh to the first, prevails without sufficient
    reason.”

    According to Guizot, Calvin was so pleased with a play to be acted
    in Geneva on Sunday, that he not only attended but deferred his
    sermon so that his congregation might attend. When John Knox
    visited Calvin, he found him playing a game of bowls on Sunday.
    Martin Luther said: “Keep the day holy for its use’s sake, both to
    body and soul. But if anywhere the day is made holy for the mere
    day’s sake, if any one set up its observance on a Jewish
    foundation, then I order you to work on it, to ride on it, to
    dance on it, to do anything that shall reprove this encroachment
    on the Christian spirit and liberty.” But the most liberal and
    even radical writers of our time recognize the economic and
    patriotic uses of the Sabbath. R. W. Emerson said that its
    observance is “the core of our civilization.” Charles Sumner: “If
    we would perpetuate our Republic, we must sanctify it as well as
    fortify it, and make it at once a temple and a citadel.” Oliver
    Wendell Holmes: “He who ordained the Sabbath loved the poor.” In
    Pennsylvania they bring up from the mines every Sunday the mules
    that have been working the whole week in darkness,—otherwise they
    would become blind. So men’s spiritual sight will fail them if
    they do not weekly come up into God’s light.


(_c_) The Sabbath law binds us to set apart a seventh portion of our time
for rest and worship. It does not enjoin the simultaneous observance by
all the world of a fixed portion of absolute time, nor is such observance
possible. Christ’s example and apostolic sanction have transferred the
Sabbath from the seventh day to the first, for the reason that this last
is the day of Christ’s resurrection, and so the day when God’s spiritual
creation became in Christ complete.


    No exact portion of absolute time can be simultaneously observed
    by men in different longitudes. The day in Berlin begins six hours
    before the day in New York, so that a whole quarter of what is
    Sunday in Berlin is still Saturday in New York. Crossing the 180th
    degree of longitude from West to East we gain a day, and a
    seventh-day Sabbatarian who circumnavigated the globe might thus
    return to his starting point observing the same Sabbath with his
    fellow Christians. A. S. Carman, in the Examiner, Jan. 4, 1894,
    asserts that Heb. 4:5-9 alludes to the change of day from the
    seventh to the first, in the references to “_a Sabbath rest_” that
    “_remaineth_,” and to “_another day_” taking the place of the
    original promised day of rest. Teaching of the Twelve Apostles:
    “On the Lord’s Day assemble ye together, and give thanks, and
    break bread.”

    The change from the seventh day to the first seems to have been
    due to the resurrection of Christ upon “_the first day of the
    week_” (_Mat. 28:1_), to his meeting with the disciples upon that
    day and upon the succeeding Sunday (_John 20:26_), and to the
    pouring out of the Spirit upon the Pentecostal Sunday seven weeks
    after (_Acts 2:1_—see Bap. Quar. Rev., 185:229-232). Thus by
    Christ’s own example and by apostolic sanction the first day
    became “_the Lord’s day_” (_Rev. 1:10_), on which believers met
    regularly each week with their Lord (_Acts 20:7_—“_the first day
    of the week, when we were gathered together to break bread_”) and
    brought together their benevolent contributions (_1 Cor. 16:1,
    2_—“_Now concerning the collection for the saints ... Upon the
    first day of the week let each one of you lay by him in store, as
    he may prosper, that no collections be made when I come_”).
    Eusebius, Com. on _Ps. 92_ (Migne, V:1191, C): “Wherefore those
    things [the Levitical regulations] having been already rejected,
    the Logos through the new Covenant transferred and changed the
    festival of the Sabbath to the rising of the sun ... the Lord’s
    day ... holy and spiritual Sabbaths.”

    Justin Martyr, First Apology: “On the day called Sunday all who
    live in city or country gather together in one place, and the
    memoirs of the apostles or the writings of the prophets are
    read.... Sunday is the day on which we all hold our common
    assembly, because it is the first day on which God made the world
    and Jesus our Savior on the same day rose from the dead. For he
    was crucified on the day before, that of Saturn (Saturday); and on
    the day after that of Saturn, which is the day of the Sun
    (Sunday), having appeared to his apostles and disciples he taught
    them these things which we have submitted to you for your
    consideration.” This seems to intimate that Jesus between his
    resurrection and ascension gave command respecting the observance
    of the first day of the week. He was “_received up_” only after
    “_he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit unto the
    apostles whom he had chosen_” (_Acts 1:2_).

    The Christian Sabbath, then, is the day of Christ’s resurrection.
    The Jewish Sabbath commemorated only the beginning of the world;
    the Christian Sabbath commemorates also the new creation of the
    world in Christ, in which God’s work in humanity first becomes
    complete. C. H. M. on _Gen. 2_: “If I celebrate the seventh day it
    marks me as an earthly man, inasmuch as that day is clearly the
    rest of earth—creation-rest; if I intelligently celebrate the
    first day of the week, I am marked as a heavenly man, believing in
    the new creation in Christ.” (_Gal. 4:10, 11_—“_Ye observe days,
    and months, and seasons, and years. I am afraid of you, least by
    any means I have bestowed labor upon you in vain_”; _Col.
    2:16,17_—“_Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or
    in respect of a feast day or a new moon or a sabbath day: which
    are a shadow of the things to come; but the body is Christ’s._”)
    See George S. Gray, Eight Studies on the Lord’s Day; Hessey,
    Bampton Lectures on the Sunday; Gilfillan, The Sabbath; Wood,
    Sabbath Essays; Bacon, Sabbath Observance; Hadley, Essays
    Philological and Critical, 325-345; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 3:
    321-348; Lotz, Quæstiones de Historia Sabbati; Maurice, Sermons on
    the Sabbath; Prize Essays on the Sabbath; Crafts, The Sabbath for
    Man; A. E. Waffle, The Lord’s Day; Alvah Hovey, Studies in Ethics
    and Religion, 271-320; Guirey, The Hallowed Day; Gamble, Sunday
    and the Sabbath; Driver, art.: Sabbath, in Hastings’ Bible
    Dictionary; Broadus, Am. Com. on _Mat. 12:3_. For the seventh-day
    view, see T. B. Brown, The Sabbath; J. N. Andrews, History of the
    Sabbath. _Per contra_, see Prof. A. Rauschenbusch, Saturday or
    Sunday?



Section II.—Preservation.


I. Definition of Preservation.


Preservation is that continuous agency of God by which he maintains in
existence the things he has created, together with the properties and
powers with which he has endowed them. As the doctrine of creation is our
attempt to explain the existence of the universe, so the doctrine of
Preservation is our attempt to explain its continuance.

In explanation we remark:

(_a_) Preservation is not creation, for preservation presupposes creation.
That which is preserved must already exist, and must have come into
existence by the creative act of God.

(_b_) Preservation is not a mere negation of action, or a refraining to
destroy, on the part of God. It is a positive agency by which, at every
moment, he sustains the persons and the forces of the universe.

(_c_) Preservation implies a natural concurrence of God in all operations
of matter and of mind. Though personal beings exist and God’s will is not
the sole force, it is still true that, without his concurrence, no person
or force can continue to exist or to act.


    Dorner, System of Doctrine, 2:40-42—“Creation and preservation
    cannot be the same thing, for then man would be only the product
    of natural forces supervised by God,—whereas, man is above nature
    and is inexplicable from nature. Nature is not the whole of the
    universe, but only the preliminary basis of it.... The _rest_ of
    God is not cessation of activity, but is a new exercise of power.”
    Nor is God “the soul of the universe.” This phrase is pantheistic,
    and implies that God is the only agent.

    It is a wonder that physical life continues. The pumping of blood
    through the heart, whether we sleep or wake, requires an
    expenditure of energy far beyond our ordinary estimates. The
    muscle of the heart never rests except between the beats. All the
    blood in the body passes through the heart in each half-minute.
    The grip of the heart is greater than that of the fist. The two
    ventricles of the heart hold on the average ten ounces or
    five-eighths of a pound, and this amount is pumped out at each
    beat. At 72 per minute, this is 45 pounds per minute, 2,700 pounds
    per hour, and 64,800 pounds or 32 and four tenths tons per day.
    Encyclopædia Britannica, 11:554—“The heart does about one-fifth of
    the whole mechanical work of the body—a work equivalent to raising
    its own weight over 13,000 feet an hour. It takes its rest only in
    short snatches, as it were, its action as a whole being
    continuous. It must necessarily be the earliest sufferer from any
    improvidence as regards nutrition, mental emotion being in this
    respect quite as potential a cause of constitutional bankruptcy as
    the most violent muscular exertion.”

    Before the days of the guillotine in France, when the criminal to
    be executed sat in a chair and was decapitated by one blow of the
    sharp sword, an observer declared that the blood spouted up
    several feet into the air. Yet this great force is exerted by the
    heart so noiselessly that we are for the most part unconscious of
    it. The power at work is the power of God, and we call that
    exercise of power by the name of preservation. Crane, Religion of
    To-morrow, 130—“We do not get bread because God instituted certain
    laws of growing wheat or of baking dough, he leaving these laws to
    run of themselves. But God, personally present in the wheat, makes
    it grow, and in the dough turns it into bread. He does not make
    gravitation or cohesion, but these are phases of his present
    action. Spirit is the reality, matter and law are the modes of its
    expression. So in redemption it is not by the working of some
    perfect plan that God saves. He is the immanent God, and all of
    his benefits are but phases of his person and immediate
    influence.”


II. Proof of the Doctrine of Preservation.


1. From Scripture.


In a number of Scripture passages, preservation is expressly distinguished
from creation. Though God rested from his work of creation and established
an order of natural forces, a special and continuous divine activity is
declared to be put forth in the upholding of the universe and its powers.
This divine activity, moreover, is declared to be the activity of Christ;
as he is the mediating agent in creation, so he is the mediating agent in
preservation.


    _Nehemiah 9:6_—“_Thou art Jehovah, even thou alone; thou hast made
    heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth and
    all things that are thereon, the seas and all that is in them, and
    thou preservest them all_”; _Job 7:20_—“_O thou watcher_ [marg.
    “preserver”] _of men!_”; _Ps. 36:6_—“_thou preservest man and
    beast_”; _104:29, 30_—“_Thou takest away their breath, they die,
    And return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are
    created, And thou renewest the face of the ground._” See Perowne
    on _Ps. 104_—“A psalm to the God who is in and with nature for
    good.” Humboldt, Cosmos, 2:413—“Psalm 104 presents an image of the
    whole Cosmos.” _Acts 17:28_—“_in him we live, and move, and have
    our being_”; _Col. 1:17_—“_in him all things consist_”; _Heb. 1:2,
    3_—“_upholding all things by the word of his power._” _John
    5:17_—“_My Father worketh even until now, and I work_”—refers most
    naturally to preservation, since creation is a work completed;
    compare _Gen. 2:2_—“_on the seventh day God finished his work
    which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his
    work which he had made._” God is the upholder of physical life;
    see _Ps. 66:8, 9_—“_O bless our God ... who holdeth our soul in
    life._” God is also the upholder of spiritual life; see _1 Tim.
    6:13_—“_I charge thee in the sight of God who preserveth all
    things alive_” (ζωογονοῦντος τὰ πάντα)—the great Preserver enables
    us to persist in our Christian course. _Mat. 4:4_—“_Man shall not
    live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the
    mouth of God_”—though originally referring to physical nourishment
    is equally true of spiritual sustentation. In _Ps. 104:26_—“_There
    go the ships,_” Dawson, Mod. Ideas of Evolution, thinks the
    reference is not to man’s works but to God’s, as the parallelism:
    “There is leviathan” would indicate, and that by “ships” are meant
    “floaters” like the nautilus, which is a “little ship.” The 104th
    Psalm is a long hymn to the preserving power of God, who keeps
    alive all the creatures of the deep, both small and great.


2. From Reason.


We may argue the preserving agency of God from the following
considerations:

(_a_) Matter and mind are not self-existent. Since they have not the cause
of their being in themselves, their continuance as well as their origin
must be due to a superior power.


    Dorner, Glaubenslehre: “Were the world self-existent, it would be
    God, not world, and no religion would be possible.... The world
    has receptivity for new creations; but these, once introduced, are
    subject, like the rest, to the law of preservation”—_i. e._, are
    dependent for their continued existence upon God.


(_b_) Force implies a will of which it is the direct or indirect
expression. We know of force only through the exercise of our own wills.
Since will is the only cause of which we have direct knowledge, second
causes in nature may be regarded as only secondary, regular, and automatic
workings of the great first Cause.


    For modern theories identifying force with divine will, see
    Herschel, Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects, 460; Murphy,
    Scientific Bases, 13-15, 29-36, 42-52; Duke of Argyll, Reign of
    Law, 121-127; Wallace, Natural Selection, 363-371; Bowen,
    Metaphysics and Ethics, 146-162; Martineau, Essays, 1:63, 265, and
    Study, 1:244—“Second causes in nature bear the same relation to
    the First Cause as the automatic movement of the muscles in
    walking bears to the first decision of the will that initiated the
    walk.” It is often objected that we cannot thus identify force
    with will, because in many cases the effort of our will is
    fruitless for the reason that nervous and muscular force is
    lacking. But this proves only that force cannot be identified with
    human will, not that it cannot be identified with the divine will.
    To the divine will no force is lacking; in God will and force are
    one.

    We therefore adopt the view of Maine de Biran, that causation
    pertains only to spirit. Porter, Human Intellect, 582-588, objects
    to this view as follows: “This implies, first, that the conception
    of a material cause is self-contradictory. But the mind recognizes
    in itself spiritual energies that are not voluntary; because we
    derive our notion of cause from will, it does not follow that the
    causal relation always involves will; it would follow that the
    universe, so far as it is not intelligent, is impossible. It
    implies, secondly, that there is but one agent in the universe,
    and that the phenomena of matter and mind are but manifestations
    of one single force—the Creator’s.” We reply to this reasoning by
    asserting that no dead thing can act, and that what we call
    involuntary spiritual energies are really unconscious or
    unremembered activities of the will.

    From our present point of view we would also criticize Hodge,
    Systematic Theology, 1:596—“Because we get our idea of force from
    mind, it does not follow that mind is the only force. That mind is
    a cause is no proof that electricity may not be a cause. If matter
    is force and nothing but force, then matter is nothing, and the
    external world is simply God. In spite of such argument, men will
    believe that the external world is a reality—that matter is, and
    that it is the cause of the effects we attribute to its agency.”
    New Englander, Sept. 1883:552—“Man in early time used second
    causes, _i. e._, machines, very little to accomplish his purposes.
    His usual mode of action was by the direct use of his hands, or
    his voice, and he naturally ascribed to the gods the same method
    as his own. His own use of second causes has led man to higher
    conceptions of the divine action.” Dorner: “If the world had no
    independence, it would not reflect God, nor would creation mean
    anything.” But this independence is not absolute. Even man lives,
    moves and has his being in God (_Acts 17:28_), and whatever has
    come into being, whether material or spiritual, has life only in
    Christ (_John 1:3, 4_, marginal reading).

    Preservation is God’s continuous willing. Bowne, Introd. to Psych.
    Theory, 305, speaks of “a kind of wholesale willing.” Augustine:
    “Dei voluntas est rerum natura.” Principal Fairbairn: “Nature is
    spirit.” Tennyson, The Ancient Sage: “Force is from the heights.”
    Lord Gifford, quoted in Max Müller, Anthropological Religion,
    392—“The human soul is neither self-derived nor self-subsisting.
    It would vanish if it had not a substance, and its substance is
    God.” Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 284, 285—“Matter is simply spirit
    in its lowest form of manifestation. The absolute Cause must be
    that deeper Self which we find at the heart of our own
    self-consciousness. By self-differentiation God creates both
    matter and mind.”


(_c_) God’s sovereignty requires a belief in his special preserving
agency; since this sovereignty would not be absolute, if anything occurred
or existed independent of his will.


    James Martineau, Seat of Authority, 29, 30—“All cosmic force is
    will.... This identification of nature with God’s will _would_ be
    pantheistic only _if_ we turned the proposition round and
    identified God with _no more_ than the life of the universe. But
    we do not deny transcendency. Natural forces are God’s will, but
    God’s will _is_ more than they. He is not the equivalent of the
    All, but its directing Mind. God is not the rage of the wild
    beast, nor the sin of man. There are things and beings objective
    to him.... He puts his power into that which is _other than
    himself_, and he parts with _other use of it_ by preëngagement to
    an end. Yet he is the continuous source and supply of power to the
    system.”

    Natural forces are generic volitions of God. But human wills, with
    their power of alternative, are the product of God’s
    self-limitation, even more than nature is, for human wills do not
    always obey the divine will,—they may even oppose it. Nothing
    finite is only finite. In it is the Infinite, not only as
    immanent, but also as transcendent, and in the case of sin, as
    opposing the sinner and as punishing him. This continuous willing
    of God has its analogy in our own subconscious willing. J. M.
    Whiton, in Am. Jour. Theol., Apl. 1901:320—“Our own will, when we
    walk, does not put forth a separate volition for every step, but
    depends on the automatic action of the lower nerve-centres, which
    it both sets in motion and keeps to their work. So the divine Will
    does not work in innumerable separate acts of volition.” A. R.
    Wallace: “The whole universe is not merely dependent on, but
    actually _is_, the will of higher intelligences or of one supreme
    intelligence.... Man’s free will is only a larger artery for the
    controlling current of the universal Will, whose time-long
    evolutionary flow constitutes the self-revelation of the Infinite
    One.” This latter statement of Wallace merges the finite will far
    too completely in the will of God. It is true of nature and of all
    holy beings, but it is untrue of the wicked. These are indeed
    upheld by God in their being, but opposed by God in their conduct.
    Preservation leaves room for human freedom, responsibility, sin,
    and guilt.

    All natural forces and all personal beings therefore give
    testimony to the will of God which originated them and which
    continually sustains them. The physical universe, indeed, is in no
    sense independent of God, for its forces are only the constant
    willing of God, and its laws are only the habits of God. Only in
    the free will of intelligent beings has God disjoined from himself
    any portion of force and made it capable of contradicting his holy
    will. But even in free agents God does not cease to uphold. The
    being that sins can maintain its existence only through the
    preserving agency of God. The doctrine of preservation therefore
    holds a middle ground between two extremes. It holds that finite
    personal beings have a real existence and a relative independence.
    On the other hand it holds that these persons retain their being
    and their powers only as they are upheld by God.

    God is the soul, but not the sum, of things. Christianity holds to
    God’s transcendence as well as to God’s immanence. Immanence alone
    is God imprisoned, as transcendence alone is God banished. Gore,
    Incarnation, 136 _sq._—“Christian theology is the harmony of
    pantheism and deism.” It maintains transcendence, and so has all
    the good of pantheism without its limitations. It maintains
    immanence, and so has all the good of deism without its inability
    to show how God could be blessed without creation. Diman, Theistic
    Argument, 367—“The dynamical theory of nature as a plastic
    organism, pervaded by a system of forces uniting at last in one
    supreme Force, is altogether more in harmony with the spirit and
    teaching of the Gospel than the mechanical conceptions which
    prevailed a century ago, which insisted on viewing nature as an
    intricate machine, fashioned by a great Artificer who stood wholly
    apart from it.” On the persistency of force, _super cuncta_,
    _subter cuncta_, see Bib. Sac., Jan. 1881:1-24; Cocker, Theistic
    Conception of the World, 172-243, esp. 236. The doctrine of
    preservation therefore holds to a God both in nature and beyond
    nature. According as the one or the other of these elements is
    exclusively regarded, we have the error of Deism, or the error of
    Continuous Creation—theories which we now proceed to consider.


III. Theories which virtually deny the doctrine of Preservation.


1. Deism.


This view represents the universe as a self-sustained mechanism, from
which God withdrew as soon as he had created it, and which he left to a
process of self-development. It was held in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries by the English Herbert, Collins, Tindal, and Bolingbroke.


    Lord Herbert of Cherbury was one of the first who formed deism
    into a system. His book _De Veritate_ was published in 1624. He
    argues against the probability of God’s revealing his will to only
    a portion of the earth. This he calls “particular religion.” Yet
    he sought, and according to his own account he received, a
    revelation from heaven to encourage the publication of his work in
    disproof of revelation. He “asked for a sign,” and was answered by
    a “loud though gentle noise from the heavens.” He had the vanity
    to think his book of such importance to the cause of truth as to
    extort a declaration of the divine will, when the interests of
    half mankind could not secure any revelation at all; what God
    would not do for a nation, he would do for an individual. See
    Leslie and Leland, Method with the Deists. Deism is the
    exaggeration of the truth of God’s transcendence. See Christlieb,
    Modern Doubt and Christian Belief, 190-209. Melanchthon
    illustrates by the shipbuilder: “Ut faber discedit a navi
    exstructa et relinquit eam nautis.” God is the maker, not the
    keeper, of the watch. In Sartor Resartus, Carlyle makes
    Teufelsdröckh speak of “An absentee God, sitting idle ever since
    the first Sabbath at the outside of the universe, and seeing it
    go.” Blunt, Dict. Doct. and Hist. Theology, art.: Deism.

    “Deism emphasized the inviolability of natural law, and held to a
    mechanical view of the world” (Ten Broeke). Its God is a sort of
    Hindu Brahma, “as idle as a painted ship upon a painted
    ocean”—mere being, without content or movement. Bruce,
    Apologetics, 115-131—“God made the world so good at the first that
    the best he can do is to let it alone. Prayer is inadmissible.
    Deism implies a Pelagian view of human nature. Death redeems us by
    separating us from the body. There is natural immortality, but no
    resurrection. Lord Herbert of Cherbury, the brother of the poet
    George Herbert of Bemerton, represents the rise of Deism; Lord
    Bolingbroke its decline. Blount assailed the divine Person of the
    founder of the faith; Collins its foundation in prophecy; Woolston
    its miraculous attestation; Toland its canonical literature.
    Tindal took more general ground, and sought to show that a special
    revelation was unnecessary, impossible, unverifiable, the religion
    of nature being sufficient and superior to all religions of
    positive institution.”


We object to this view that:

(_a_) It rests upon a false analogy.—Man is able to construct a
self-moving watch only because he employs preëxisting forces, such as
gravity, elasticity, cohesion. But in a theory which likens the universe
to a machine, these forces are the very things to be accounted for.


    Deism regards the universe as a “perpetual motion.” Modern views
    of the dissipation of energy have served to discredit it. Will is
    the only explanation of the forces in nature. But according to
    deism, God builds a house, shuts himself out, locks the door, and
    then ties his own hands in order to make sure of never using the
    key. John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 114-138—“A made
    mind, a spiritual nature created by an external omnipotence, is an
    impossible and self-contradictory notion.... The human contriver
    or artist deals with materials prepared to his hand. Deism reduces
    God to a finite anthropomorphic personality, as pantheism annuls
    the finite world or absorbs it in the Infinite.” Hence Spinoza,
    the pantheist, was the great antagonist of 16th century deism. See
    Woods, Works, 2:40.


(_b_) It is a system of anthropomorphism, while it professes to exclude
anthropomorphism.—Because the upholding of all things would involve a
multiplicity of minute cares if man were the agent, it conceives of the
upholding of the universe as involving such burdens in the case of God.
Thus it saves the dignity of God by virtually denying his omnipresence,
omniscience, and omnipotence.


    The infinity of God turns into sources of delight all that would
    seem care to man. To God’s inexhaustible fulness of life there are
    no burdens involved in the upholding of the universe he has
    created. Since God, moreover, is a perpetual observer, we may
    alter the poet’s verse and say: “There’s not a flower that’s born
    to blush unseen And waste its sweetness on the desert air.” God
    does not expose his children as soon as they are born. They are
    not only his offspring; they also live, move and have their being
    in him, and are partakers of his divine nature. Gordon, Christ of
    To-day, 200—“The worst person in all history is something to God,
    if he be nothing to the world.” See Chalmers, Astronomical
    Discourses, in Works, 7:68. Kurtz, The Bible and Astronomy, in
    Introd. to History of Old Covenant, lxxxii-xcviii.


(_c_) It cannot be maintained without denying all providential
interference, in the history of creation and the subsequent history of the
world.—But the introduction of life, the creation of man, incarnation,
regeneration, the communion of intelligent creatures with a present God,
and interpositions of God in secular history, are matters of fact.


    Deism therefore continually tends to atheism. Upton, Hibbert
    Lectures, 287—“The defect of deism is that, on the human side, it
    treats all men as isolated individuals, forgetful of the immanent
    divine nature which interrelates them and in a measure unifies
    them; and that, on the divine side, it separates men from God and
    makes the relation between them a purely external one.” Ruskin:
    “The divine mind is as visible in its full energy of operation on
    every lowly bank and mouldering stone as in the lifting of the
    pillars of heaven and settling the foundations of the earth; and
    to the rightly perceiving mind there is the same majesty, the same
    power, the same unity, and the same perfection manifested in the
    casting of the clay as in the scattering of the cloud, in the
    mouldering of dust as in the kindling of the day-star.” See
    Pearson, Infidelity, 87; Hanne, Idee der absoluten Persönlichkeit,
    76.


2. Continuous Creation.


This view regards the universe as from moment to moment the result of a
new creation. It was held by the New England theologians Edwards, Hopkins,
and Emmons, and more recently in Germany by Rothe.


    Edwards, Works, 2:486-490, quotes and defends Dr. Taylor’s
    utterance: “God is the original of all being, and the only cause
    of all natural effects.” Edwards himself says: “God’s upholding
    created substance, or causing its existence in each successive
    moment, is altogether equivalent to an immediate production out of
    nothing at each moment.” He argues that the past existence of a
    thing cannot be the cause of its present existence, because a
    thing cannot act at a time and place where it is not. “This is
    equivalent to saying that God cannot produce an effect which shall
    last for one moment beyond the direct exercise of his creative
    power. What man can do, God, it seems, cannot” (A. S. Carman).
    Hopkins, Works, 1:164-167—Preservation “is really continued
    creation.” Emmons, Works, 4:363-389, esp. 381—“Since all men are
    dependent agents, all their motions, exercises, or actions must
    originate in a divine efficiency.” 2:683—“There is but one true
    and satisfactory answer to the question which has been agitated
    for centuries: ‘Whence came evil?’ and that is: It came from the
    first great Cause of all things.... It is as consistent with the
    moral rectitude of the Deity to produce sinful as holy exercises
    in the minds of men. He puts forth a positive influence to make
    moral agents act, in every instance of their conduct, as he
    pleases.” God therefore creates all the volitions of the soul, as
    he effects by his almighty power all the changes of the material
    world. Rothe also held this view. To his mind external expression
    is necessary to God. His maxim was: “Kein Gott ohne Welt”—“There
    can be no God without an accompanying world.” See Rothe, Dogmatik,
    1:126-160, esp. 150, and Theol. Ethik, 1:186-190; also in Bib.
    Sac., Jan. 1875:144. See also Lotze, Philos. of Religion, 81-94.

    The element of truth in Continuous Creation is its assumption that
    all force is will. Its error is in maintaining that all force is
    _divine_ will, and divine will in _direct_ exercise. But the human
    will is a force as well as the divine will, and the forces of
    nature are secondary and automatic, not primary and immediate,
    workings of God. These remarks may enable us to estimate the grain
    of truth in the following utterances which need important
    qualification and limitation. Bowne, Philosophy of Theism, 202,
    likens the universe to the musical note, which exists only on
    condition of being incessantly reproduced. Herbert Spencer says
    that “ideas are like the successive chords and cadences brought
    out from a piano, which successively die away as others are
    produced.” Maudsley, Physiology of Mind, quotes this passage, but
    asks quite pertinently: “What about the performer, in the case of
    the piano and in the case of the brain, respectively? Where in the
    brain is the equivalent of the harmonic conceptions in the
    performer’s mind?” Professor Fitzgerald: “All nature is living
    thought—the language of One in whom we live and move and have our
    being.” Dr. Oliver Lodge, to the British Association in 1891: “The
    barrier between matter and mind may melt away, as so many others
    have done.”


To this we object, upon the following grounds:

(_a_) It contradicts the testimony of consciousness that regular and
executive activity is not the mere repetition of an initial decision, but
is an exercise of the will entirely different in kind.


    Ladd, in his Philosophy of Mind, 144, indicates the error in
    Continuous Creation as follows: “The whole world of things is
    momently quenched and then replaced by a similar world of actually
    new realities.” The words of the poet would then be literally
    true: “Every fresh and new creation, A divine improvisation, From
    the heart of God proceeds.” Ovid, Metaph., 1:16—“Instabilis
    tellus, innabilis unda.” Seth, Hegelianism and Personality, 60,
    says that, to Fichte, “the world was thus perpetually created anew
    in each finite spirit,—revelation to intelligence being the only
    admissible meaning of that much abused term, creation.” A. L.
    Moore, Science and the Faith, 184, 185—“A theory of occasional
    intervention implies, as its correlate, a theory of ordinary
    absence.... For Christians the facts of nature are the acts of
    God. Religion relates these facts to God as their author; science
    relates them to one another as parts of a visible order. Religion
    does not tell of this interrelation; science cannot tell of their
    relation to God.”

    Continuous creation is an erroneous theory because it applies to
    human wills a principle which is true only of irrational nature
    and which is only partially true of that. I know that I am not God
    acting. My will is proof that not all force is divine will. Even
    on the monistic view, moreover, we may speak of second causes in
    nature, since God’s regular and habitual action is a second and
    subsequent thing, while his act of initiation and organization is
    the first. Neither the universe nor any part of it is to be
    identified with God, any more than my thoughts and acts are to be
    identified with me. Martineau, in Nineteenth Century, April,
    1895:559—“What is _nature_, but the promise of God’s pledged and
    habitual causality? And what is _spirit_, but the province of his
    free causality responding to needs and affections of his free
    children?... God is not a retired architect who may now and then
    be called in for repairs. Nature is not self-active, and God’s
    agency is not intrusive.” William Watson, Poems, 88—“If nature be
    a phantasm, as thou say’st, A splendid fiction and prodigious
    dream, To reach the real and true I’ll make no haste, More than
    content with worlds that only seem.”


(_b_) It exaggerates God’s power only by sacrificing his truth, love, and
holiness;—for if finite personalities are not what they seem—namely,
objective existences—God’s veracity is impugned; if the human soul has no
real freedom and life, God’s love has made no self-communication to
creatures; if God’s will is the only force in the universe, God’s holiness
can no longer be asserted, for the divine will must in that case be
regarded as the author of human sin.


    Upon this view personal identity is inexplicable. Edwards bases
    identity upon the arbitrary decree of God. God can therefore, by
    so decreeing, make Adam’s posterity one with their first father
    and responsible for his sin. Edwards’s theory of continuous
    creation, indeed, was devised as an explanation of the problem of
    original sin. The divinely appointed union of acts and exercises
    with Adam was held sufficient, without union of substance, or
    natural generation from him, to explain our being born corrupt and
    guilty. This view would have been impossible, if Edwards had not
    been an idealist, making far too much of acts and exercises and
    far too little of substance.

    It is difficult to explain the origin of Jonathan Edwards’s
    idealism. It has sometimes been attributed to the reading of
    Berkeley. Dr. Samuel Johnson, afterwards President of King’s
    College in New York City, a personal friend of Bishop Berkeley and
    an ardent follower of his teaching, was a tutor in Yale College
    while Edwards was a student. But Edwards was in Weathersfield
    while Johnson remained in New Haven, and was among those
    disaffected towards Johnson as a tutor. Yet Edwards, Original Sin,
    479, seems to allude to the Berkeleyan philosophy when he says:
    “The course of nature is demonstrated by recent improvements in
    philosophy to be indeed ... nothing but the established order and
    operation of the Author of nature” (see Allen, Jonathan Edwards,
    16, 308, 309). President McCracken, in Philos. Rev., Jan.
    1892:26-42, holds that Arthur Collier’s Clavis Universalis is the
    source of Edwards’s idealism. It is more probable that his
    idealism was the result of his own independent thinking,
    occasioned perhaps by mere hints from Locke, Newton, Cudworth, and
    Norris, with whose writings he certainly was acquainted. See E. C.
    Smyth, in Am. Jour. Theol., Oct. 1897:956; Prof. Gardiner, in
    Philos. Rev., Nov. 1900:573-596.

    How thorough-going this idealism of Edwards was may be learned
    from Noah Porter’s Discourse on Bishop George Berkeley, 71, and
    quotations from Edwards, in Journ. Spec. Philos., Oct.
    1883:401-420—“Nothing else has a proper being but spirits, and
    bodies are but the shadow of being.... Seeing the brain exists
    only mentally, I therefore acknowledge that I speak improperly
    when I say that the soul is in the brain only, as to its
    operations. For, to speak yet more strictly and abstractedly, ’tis
    nothing but the connection of the soul with these and those modes
    of its own ideas, or those mental acts of the Deity, seeing the
    brain exists only in idea.... That which truly is the substance of
    all bodies is the infinitely exact and precise and perfectly
    stable idea in God’s mind, together with his stable will that the
    same shall be gradually communicated to us and to other minds
    according to certain fixed and established methods and laws; or,
    in somewhat different language, the infinitely exact and precise
    divine idea, together with an answerable, perfectly exact,
    precise, and stable will, with respect to correspondent
    communications to created minds and effects on those minds.” It is
    easy to see how, from this view of Edwards, the “Exercise-system”
    of Hopkins and Emmons naturally developed itself. On Edwards’s
    Idealism, see Frazer’s Berkeley (Blackwood’s Philos. Classics),
    139, 140. On personal identity, see Bp. Butler, Works (Bohn’s
    ed.), 327-334.


(_c_) As deism tends to atheism, so the doctrine of continuous creation
tends to pantheism.—Arguing that, because we get our notion of force from
the action of our own wills, therefore all force must be will, and divine
will, it is compelled to merge the human will in this all-comprehending
will of God. Mind and matter alike become phenomena of one force, which
has the attributes of both; and, with the distinct existence and
personality of the human soul, we lose the distinct existence and
personality of God, as well as the freedom and accountability of man.


    Lotze tries to escape from _material_ causes and yet hold to
    _second_ causes, by intimating that these second causes may be
    spirits. But though we can see how there can be a sort of spirit
    in the brute and in the vegetable, it is hard to see how what we
    call insensate matter can have spirit in it. It must be a very
    peculiar sort of spirit—a deaf and dumb spirit, if any—and such a
    one does not help our thinking. On this theory the body of a dog
    would need to be much more highly endowed than its soul. James
    Seth, in Philos. Rev., Jan. 1894:73—“This principle of unity is a
    veritable lion’s den,—all the footprints are in one direction.
    Either it is a bare unity—the One annuls the many; or it is simply
    the All,—the ununified totality of existence.” Dorner well remarks
    that “Preservation is empowering of the creature and maintenance
    of its activity, not new bringing it into being.” On the whole
    subject, see Julius Müller, Doctrine of Sin, 1:220-225; Philippi,
    Glaubenslehre, 2:258-272; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 50; Hodge, Syst.
    Theol., 1:577-581, 595; Dabney, Theology, 338, 339.


IV. Remarks upon the Divine Concurrence.


(_a_) The divine efficiency interpenetrates that of man without destroying
or absorbing it. The influx of God’s sustaining energy is such that men
retain their natural faculties and powers. God does not work all, but all
in all.


    Preservation, then, is midway between the two errors of denying
    the first cause (deism or atheism) and denying the second causes
    (continuous creation or pantheism). _1 Cor. 12:6_—“_there are
    diversities of workings, but the same God, who worketh all things
    in all_”; _cf._ _Eph. 1:23_—the church, “_which is his body, the
    fulness of him that filleth all in all_.” God’s action is no
    _actio in distans_, or action where he is not. It is rather action
    in and through free agents, in the case of intelligent and moral
    beings, while it is his own continuous willing in the case of
    nature. Men are second causes in a sense in which nature is not.
    God works through these human second causes, but he does not
    supersede them. We cannot see the line between the two—the action
    of the first cause and the action of second causes; yet both are
    real, and each is distinct from the other, though the method of
    God’s concurrence is inscrutable. As the pen and the hand together
    produce the writing, so God’s working causes natural powers to
    work with him. The natural growth indicated by the words “_wherein
    is the seed thereof_” (_Gen. 1:11_) has its counterpart in the
    spiritual growth described in the words “_his seed abideth in
    him_” (_1 John 3:9_). Paul considers himself a reproductive agency
    in the hands of God: he begets children in the gospel (_1 Cor.
    4:15_); yet the New Testament speaks of this begetting as the work
    of God (_1 Pet. 1:3_). We are bidden to work out our own salvation
    with fear and trembling, upon the very ground that it is God who
    works in us both to will and to work (_Phil. 2:12, 13_).


(_b_) Though God preserves mind and body in their working, we are ever to
remember that God concurs with the evil acts of his creatures only as they
are natural acts, and not as they are evil.


    In holy action God gives the natural powers, and by his word and
    Spirit influences the soul to use these powers aright. But in evil
    action God gives only the natural powers; the evil direction of
    these powers is caused only by man. _Jer. 44:4_—“_Oh, do not this
    abominable thing that I hate_”; _Hab. 1:13_—“_Thou that art of
    purer eyes than to behold evil, and that canst not look on
    perverseness, wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal
    treacherously, and holdest thy peace when the wicked swalloweth up
    the man that is more righteous than he?_” _James 1:13, 14_—“_Let
    no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot
    be tempted with evil, and he himself tempteth no man: but each man
    is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed._”
    Aaron excused himself for making an Egyptian idol by saying that
    the fire did it; he asked the people for gold; “_so they gave it
    me; and I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf_”
    (_Ex. 32:24_). Aaron leaves out one important point—his own
    personal agency in it all. In like manner we lay the blame of our
    sins upon nature and upon God. Pym said of Strafford that God had
    given him great talents, of which the devil had given the
    application. But it is more true to say of the wicked man that he
    himself gives the application of his God-given powers. We are
    electric cars for which God furnishes the motive-power, but to
    which we the conductors give the direction. We are organs; the
    wind or breath of the organ is God’s; but the fingering of the
    keys is ours. Since the maker of the organ is also present at
    every moment as its preserver, the shameful abuse of his
    instrument and the dreadful music that is played are a continual
    grief and suffering to his soul. Since it is Christ who upholds
    all things by the word of his power, preservation involves the
    suffering of Christ, and this suffering is his atonement, of which
    the culmination and demonstration are seen in the cross of Calvary
    (_Heb. 1:3_). On the importance of the idea of preservation in
    Christian doctrine, see Calvin, Institutes, 1:182 (chapter 16).



Section III.—Providence.


I. Definition of Providence.


Providence is that continuous agency of God by which he makes all the
events of the physical and moral universe fulfill the original design with
which he created it.

As Creation explains the existence of the universe, and as Preservation
explains its continuance, so Providence explains its evolution and
progress.

In explanation notice:

(_a_) Providence is not to be taken merely in its etymological sense of
_fore_seeing. It is _for_seeing also, or a positive agency in connection
with all the events of history.

(_b_) Providence is to be distinguished from preservation. While
preservation is a maintenance of the existence and powers of created
things, providence is an actual care and control of them.

(_c_) Since the original plan of God is all-comprehending, the providence
which executes the plan is all-comprehending also, embracing within its
scope things small and great, and exercising care over individuals as well
as over classes.

(_d_) In respect to the good acts of men, providence embraces all those
natural influences of birth and surroundings which prepare men for the
operation of God’s word and Spirit, and which constitute motives to
obedience.

(_e_) In respect to the evil acts of men, providence is never the
efficient cause of sin, but is by turns preventive, permissive, directive,
and determinative.

(_f_) Since Christ is the only revealer of God, and he is the medium of
every divine activity, providence is to be regarded as the work of Christ;
see 1 Cor. 8:6—“one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things”;
_cf._ John 5:17—“My Father worketh even until now, and I work.”


    The Germans have the word _Fürsehung_, forseeing, looking out for,
    as well as the word _Vorsehung_, foreseeing, seeing beforehand.
    Our word “providence” embraces the meanings of both these words.
    On the general subject of providence, see Philippi, Glaubenslehre,
    2:272-284; Calvin, Institutes, 1:182-219; Dick, Theology,
    1:416-446; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 1:581-616; Bib. Sac., 12:179;
    21:584; 26:315; 30:593; N. W. Taylor, Moral Government, 2:294-326.

    Providence is God’s attention concentrated everywhere. His care is
    microscopic as well as telescopic. Robert Browning, Pippa Passes,
    _ad finem_: “All service is the same with God—With God, whose
    puppets, best and worst, Are we: there is no last nor first.”
    Canon Farrar: “In one chapter of the Koran is the story how
    Gabriel, as he waited by the gates of gold, was sent by God to
    earth to do two things. One was to prevent king Solomon from the
    sin of forgetting the hour of prayer in exultation over his royal
    steeds; the other to help a little yellow ant on the slope of
    Ararat, which had grown weary in getting food for its nest, and
    which would otherwise perish in the rain. To Gabriel the one
    behest seemed just as kingly as the other, since God had ordered
    it. ‘Silently he left The Presence, and prevented the king’s sin,
    And holp the little ant at entering in.’ ‘Nothing is too high or
    low, Too mean or mighty, if God wills it so.’ ” Yet a preacher
    began his sermon on Mat. 10:30—“The very hairs of your head are
    are all numbered”—by saying: “Why, some of you, my hearers, do not
    believe that even your heads are all numbered!”

    A modern prophet of unbelief in God’s providence is William
    Watson. In his poem entitled The Unknown God, we read: “When
    overarched by gorgeous night, I wave my trivial self away; When
    all I was to all men’s sight Shares the erasure of the day: Then
    do I cast my cumbering load, Then do I gain a sense of God.” Then
    he likens the God of the Old Testament to Odin and Zeus, and
    continues: “O streaming worlds, O crowded sky, O life, and mine
    own soul’s abyss, Myself am scarce so small that I Should bow to
    Deity like this! This my Begetter? This was what Man in his
    violent youth begot. The God I know of I shall ne’er Know, though
    he dwells exceeding nigh. Raise thou the stone and find me there.
    Cleave thou the wood and there am I. Yea, in my flesh his Spirit
    doth flow, Too near, too far, for me to know. Whate’er my deeds, I
    am not sure That I can pleasure him or vex: I, that must use a
    speech so poor It narrows the Supreme with sex. Notes he the good
    or ill in man? To hope he cares is all I can. I hope with fear.
    For did I trust This vision granted me at birth, The sire of
    heaven would seem less just Than many a faulty son of earth. And
    so he seems indeed! But then, I trust it not, this bounded ken.
    And dreaming much, I never dare To dream that in my prisoned soul
    The flutter of a trembling prayer Can move the Mind that is the
    Whole. Though kneeling nations watch and yearn, Does the primeval
    Purpose turn? Best by remembering God, say some. We keep our high
    imperial lot. Fortune, I fear, hath oftenest come When we
    forgot—when we forgot! A lovelier faith their happier crown, But
    history laughs and weeps it down: Know they not well how seven
    times seven, Wronging our mighty arms with rust, We dared not do
    the work of heaven, Lest heaven should hurl us in the dust? The
    work of heaven! ’Tis waiting still The sanction of the heavenly
    will. Unmeet to be profaned by praise Is he whose coils the world
    enfold; The God on whom I ever gaze, The God I never once behold:
    Above the cloud, above the clod, The unknown God, the unknown
    God.”

    In pleasing contrast to William Watson’s Unknown God, is the God
    of Rudyard Kipling’s Recessional: “God of our fathers, known of
    old—Lord of our far-flung battle-line—Beneath whose awful hand we
    hold Dominion over palm and pine—Lord God of hosts, be with us
    yet, Lest we forget—lest we forget! The tumult and the shouting
    dies—The captains and the kings depart—Still stands thine ancient
    Sacrifice, An humble and a contrite heart. Lord God of hosts, be
    with us yet. Lest we forget—lest we forget! Far-called our navies
    melt away—On dune and headland sinks the fire—So, all our pomp of
    yesterday Is one with Nineveh and Tyre! Judge of the nations,
    spare us yet, Lest we forget—lest we forget! If, drunk with sight
    of power, we loose Wild tongues that have not thee in awe—Such
    boasting as the Gentiles use, Or lesser breeds without the
    Law—Lord God of hosts, be with us yet, Lest we forget—lest we
    forget! For heathen heart that puts her trust In reeking tube and
    iron shard—All valiant dust that builds on dust, And guarding
    calls not thee to guard—For frantic boast and foolish word, Thy
    mercy on thy people, Lord!”

    These problems of God’s providential dealings are intelligible
    only when we consider that Christ is the revealer of God, and that
    his suffering for sin opens to us the heart of God. All history is
    the progressive manifestation of Christ’s holiness and love, and
    in the cross we have the key that unlocks the secret of the
    universe. With the cross in view, we can believe that Love rules
    over all, and that “_all things work together for good to them
    that love God._” (_Rom. 8:28_).


II. Proof of the Doctrine of Providence.


1. Scriptural Proof.


The Scripture witnesses to

A. A general providential government and control (_a_) over the universe
at large; (_b_) over the physical world; (_c_) over the brute creation;
(_d_) over the affairs of nations; (_e_) over man’s birth and lot in life;
(_f_) over the outward successes and failures of men’s lives; (_g_) over
things seemingly accidental or insignificant; (_h_) in the protection of
the righteous; (_i_) in the supply of the wants of God’s people; (_j_) in
the arrangement of answers to prayer; (_k_) in the exposure and punishment
of the wicked.


    (_a_) _Ps. 103:19_—“_his kingdom ruleth over all_”; _Dan.
    4:35_—“_doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and
    among the inhabitants of the earth_”; _Eph. 1:11_—“_worketh all
    things after the counsel of his will._”

    (_b_) _Job 37:5, 10_—“_God thundereth ... By the breath of God ice
    is given_”; _Ps. 104:14_—“_causeth the grass to grow for the
    cattle_”; _135:6, 7_—“_Whatsoever Jehovah pleased, that hath he
    done, In heaven and in earth, in the seas and in all deeps ...
    vapors ... lightnings ... wind_”; _Mat. 5:45_—“_maketh his sun to
    rise ... sendeth rain_”; _Ps. 104:16_—“_The trees of Jehovah are
    filled_”—are planted and tended by God as carefully as those which
    come under human cultivation; _cf._ _Mat. 6:30_—“_if God so clothe
    the grass of the field._”

    (_c_) _Ps. 104:21, 28_—“_young lions roar ... seek their food from
    God ... that thou givest them they gather_”; _Mat. 6:26_—“_birds
    of the heaven ... your heavenly Father feedeth them_”;
    _10:29_—“_two sparrows ... not one of them shall fall on the
    ground without your Father._”

    (_d_) _Job 12:23_—“_He increaseth the nations, and he destroyeth
    them: He enlargeth the nations, and he leadeth them captive_”;
    _Ps. 22:28_—“_the kingdom is Jehovah’s; And he is the ruler over
    the nations_”; _66:7_—“_He ruleth by his might for ever; His eyes
    observe the nations_”; _Acts 17:26_—“_made of one every nation of
    men to dwell on all the face of the earth, having determined their
    appointed seasons, and the bounds of their habitation_” (instance
    Palestine, Greece, England).

    (_e_) _1 Sam. 16:1_—“_fill thy horn with oil, and go: I will send
    thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite; for I have provided me a king
    among his sons_”; _Ps. 139:16_—“_Thine eyes did see mine unformed
    substance, And in thy book were all my members written_”; _Is.
    45:5_—“_I will gird thee, though thou hast not known me_”; _Jer.
    1:5_—“_Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee ...
    sanctified thee ... appointed thee_”; _Gal. 1:15, 16_—“_God, who
    separated me, even from my mother’s womb, and called me through
    his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among
    the Gentiles._”

    (_f_) _Ps. 75:6, 7_—“_neither from the east, nor from the west,
    Nor yet from the south cometh lifting up. But God is the judge, He
    putteth down one, and lifteth up another_”; _Luke 1:52_—“_He hath
    put down princes from their thrones, And hath exalted them of low
    degree._”

    (_g_) _Prov. 16:33_—“_The lot is cast into the lap; But the whole
    disposing thereof is of Jehovah_”; _Mat. 10:30_—“_the very hairs
    of your head are all numbered._”

    (_h_) _Ps. 4:8_—“_In peace will I both lay me down and sleep; For
    thou, Jehovah, alone makest me dwell in safety_”; _5:12_—“_thou
    wilt compass him with favor as with a shield_”; _63:8_—“_Thy right
    hand upholdeth me_”; _121:3_—“_He that keepeth thee will not
    slumber_”; _Rom. 8:28_—“_to them that love God all things work
    together for good._”

    (_i_) _Gen. 22:8, 14_—“_God will provide himself the lamb ...
    Jehovah-jireh_” (marg.: that is, “Jehovah will see,” or
    “provide”); _Deut. 8:3_—“_man doth not live by bread only, but by
    every thing that proceedeth out of the mouth of Jehovah doth man
    live_”; _Phil. 4:19_—“_my God shall supply every need of yours._”

    (_j_) _Ps. 68:10_—“_Thou, O God, didst prepare of thy goodness for
    the poor_”; _Is. 64:4_—“_neither hath the eye seen a God besides
    thee, who worketh for him that waiteth for him_”; _Mat.
    6:8_—“_your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye
    ask him_”; _32, 33_—“_all these things shall be added unto you._”

    (_k_) _Ps. 7:12, 13_—“_If a man turn not, he will whet his sword;
    He hath bent his bow and made it ready; He hath also prepared for
    him the instruments of death; He maketh his arrows fiery shafts_”;
    _11:6_—“_Upon the wicked he will rain snares; Fire and brimstone
    and burning wind shall be the portion of their cup._”


The statements of Scripture with regard to God’s providence are strikingly
confirmed by recent studies in physiography. In the early stages of human
development man was almost wholly subject to nature, and environment was a
determining factor in his progress. This is the element of truth in
Buckle’s view. But Buckle ignored the fact that, as civilization advanced,
ideas, at least at times, played a greater part than environment.
Thermopylæ cannot be explained by climate. In the later stages of human
development, nature is largely subject to man, and environment counts for
comparatively little. “There shall be no Alps!” says Napoleon. Charles
Kingsley: “The spirit of ancient tragedy was man conquered by
circumstance; the spirit of modern tragedy is man conquering
circumstance.” Yet many national characteristics can be attributed to
physical surroundings, and so far as this is the case they are due to the
ordering of God’s providence. Man’s need of fresh water leads him to
rivers,—hence the original location of London. Commerce requires
seaports,—hence New York. The need of defense leads man to bluffs and
hills,—hence Jerusalem, Athens, Rome, Edinburgh. These places of defense
became also places of worship and of appeal to God.

Goldwin Smith, in his Lectures and Essays, maintains that national
characteristics are not congenital, but are the result of environment. The
greatness of Rome and the greatness of England have been due to position.
The Romans owed their successes to being at first less warlike than their
neighbors. They were traders in the centre of the Italian seacoast, and
had to depend on discipline to make headway against marauders on the
surrounding hills. Only when drawn into foreign conquest did the
ascendency of the military spirit become complete, and then the military
spirit brought despotism as its natural penalty. Brought into contact with
varied races, Rome was led to the founding of colonies. She adopted and
assimilated the nations which she conquered, and in governing them learned
organization and law. _Parcere subjectis_ was her rule, as well as
_debellare superbos_. In a similiar manner Goldwin Smith maintains that
the greatness of England is due to position. Britain being an island, only
a bold and enterprising race could settle it. Maritime migration
strengthened freedom. Insular position gave freedom from invasion.
Isolation however gave rise to arrogance and self-assertion. The island
became a natural centre of commerce. There is a steadiness of political
progress which would have been impossible upon the continent. Yet
consolidation was tardy, owing to the fact that Great Britain consists of
_several_ islands. Scotland was always liberal, and Ireland foredoomed to
subjection.

Isaac Taylor, Spirit of Hebrew Poetry, has a valuable chapter on Palestine
as the providential theatre of divine revelation. A little land, yet a
sample-land of all lands, and a thoroughfare between the greatest lands of
antiquity, it was fitted by God to receive and to communicate his truth.
George Adam Smith’s Historical Geography of the Holy Land is a repertory
of information on this subject. Stanley, Life and Letters, 1:269-271,
treats of Greek landscape and history. Shaler, Interpretation of Nature,
sees such difference between Greek curiosity and search for causes on the
one hand, and Roman indifference to scientific explanation of facts on the
other, that he cannot think of the Greeks and the Romans as cognate
peoples. He believes that Italy was first peopled by Etrurians, a Semitic
race from Africa, and that from them the Romans descended. The Romans had
as little of the spirit of the naturalist as had the Hebrews. The Jews and
the Romans originated and propagated Christianity, but they had no
interest in science.

On God’s pre-arrangement of the physical conditions of national life,
striking suggestions may be found in Shaler, Nature and Man in America.
Instance the settlement of Massachusetts Bay between 1629 and 1639, the
only decade in which such men as John Winthrop could be found and the only
one in which they actually emigrated from England. After 1639 there was
too much to do at home, and with Charles II the spirit which animated the
Pilgrims no longer existed in England. The colonists builded better than
they knew, for though they sought a place to worship God themselves, they
had no idea of giving this same religious liberty to others. R. E.
Thompson, The Hand of God in American History, holds that the American
Republic would long since have broken in pieces by its own weight and
bulk, if the invention of steam-boat in 1807, railroad locomotive in 1829,
telegraph in 1837, and telephone in 1877, had not bound the remote parts
of the country together. A woman invented the reaper by combining the
action of a row of scissors in cutting. This was as early as 1835. Only in
1855 the competition on the Emperor’s farm at Compiègne gave supremacy to
the reaper. Without it farming would have been impossible during our civil
war, when our men were in the field and women and boys had to gather in
the crops.

B. A government and control extending to the free actions of men—(_a_) to
men’s free acts in general; (_b_) to the sinful acts of men also.


    (a) _Ex. 12:36_—“_Jehovah gave the people favor in the sight of
    the Egyptians, so that they let them have what they asked. And
    they despoiled the Egyptians_”; _1 Sam. 24:18_—“_Jehovah had
    delivered me up into thy hand_” (Saul to David); _Ps. 33:14,
    15_—“_He looketh forth Upon all the inhabitants of the earth, He
    that fashioneth the hearts of them all_” (_i. e._, equally, one as
    well as another); _Prov. 16:1_—“_The plans of the heart belong to
    man; But the answer of the tongue is from Jehovah_”;
    _19:21_—“_There are many devices in a man’s heart; But the counsel
    of Jehovah, __ that shall stand_”; _20:24_—“_A man’s goings are of
    Jehovah; How then can man understand his way?_” _21:1_—“_The
    king’s heart is in the hand of Jehovah as the watercourses: He
    turneth it whithersoever he will_” (_i. e._, as easily as the
    rivulets of the eastern fields are turned by the slightest motion
    of the hand or the foot of the husbandman); _Jer. 10:23_—“_O
    Jehovah, I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not
    in man that walketh to direct his steps_”; _Phil. 2:13_—“_it is
    God who worketh in you both to will and to work, for his good
    pleasure_”; _Eph. 2:10_—“_we are his workmanship, created in
    Christ Jesus for good works, which God afore prepared that we
    should walk in them_”; _James 4:13-15_—“_If the Lord will, we
    shall both live, and do this or that._”

    (_b_) _2 Sam. 16:10_—“_because Jehovah hath said unto him_
    [Shimei]: _Curse David_”; _24:1_—“_the anger of Jehovah was
    kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them, saying,
    Go, number Israel and Judah_”; _Rom. 11:32_—“_God hath shut up all
    unto disobedience, that he might have mercy upon all_”; _2 Thess.
    2:11, 12_—“_God sendeth them a working of error, that they should
    believe a lie: that they all might be judged who believed not the
    truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness._”

    Henry Ward Beecher: “There seems to be no order in the movements
    of the bees of a hive, but the honey-comb shows that there was a
    plan in them all.” John Hunter compared his own brain to a hive in
    which there was a great deal of buzzing and apparent disorder,
    while yet a real order underlay it all. “As bees gather their
    stores of sweets against a time of need, but are colonized by
    man’s superior intelligence for his own purposes, so men plan and
    work yet are overruled by infinite Wisdom for his own glory.” Dr.
    Deems: “The world is wide In Time and Tide, And God is guide: Then
    do not hurry. That man is blest Who does his best And leaves the
    rest: Then do not worry.” See Bruce, Providential Order, 183
    _sq._; Providence in the Individual Life, 231 _sq._


God’s providence with respect to men’s evil acts is described in Scripture
as of four sorts:

(_a_) Preventive,—God by his providence prevents sin which would otherwise
be committed. That he thus prevents sin is to be regarded as matter, not
of obligation, but of grace.


    _Gen. 20:6_—Of Abimelech: “_I also withheld thee from sinning
    against me_”; _31:24_—“_And God came to Laban the Syrian in a
    dream of the night, and said unto him, Take heed to thyself that
    thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad_”; _Psalm 19:13_—“_Keep
    back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; Let them not have
    dominion over me_”; _Hosea 2:6_—“_Behold, I will hedge up thy way
    with thorns, and I will build a wall against her, that she shall
    not find her paths_”—here the “_thorns_” and the “_wall_” may
    represent the restraints and sufferings by which God mercifully
    checks the fatal pursuit of sin (see Annotated Par. Bible _in
    loco_). Parents, government, church, traditions, customs, laws,
    age, disease, death, are all of them preventive influences. Man
    sometimes finds himself on the brink of a precipice of sin, and
    strong temptation hurries him on to make the fatal leap. Suddenly
    every nerve relaxes, all desire for the evil thing is gone, and he
    recoils from the fearful brink over which he was just now going to
    plunge. God has interfered by the voice of conscience and the
    Spirit. This too is a part of his preventive providence. Men at
    sixty years of age are eight times less likely to commit crime
    than at the age of twenty-five. Passion has subsided; fear of
    punishment has increased. The manager of a great department store,
    when asked what could prevent its absorbing all the trade of the
    city, replied: “Death!” Death certainly limits aggregations of
    property, and so constitutes a means of God’s preventive
    providence. In the life of John G. Paton, the rain sent by God
    prevented the natives from murdering him and taking his goods.


(_b_) Permissive,—God permits men to cherish and to manifest the evil
dispositions of their hearts. God’s permissive providence is simply the
negative act of withholding impediments from the path of the sinner,
instead of preventing his sin by the exercise of divine power. It implies
no ignorance, passivity, or indulgence, but consists with hatred of the
sin and determination to punish it.


    _2 Chron. 32:31_—“_God left him_ [Hezekiah], _to try him, that he
    might know all that was in his heart_”; _cf._ _Deut. 8:2_—“_that
    he might humble thee, to prove thee, to know what was in thine
    heart._” _Ps. 17:13, 14_—“_Deliver my soul from the wicked, who is
    thy sword, from men who are thy hand, O Jehovah_”; _Ps. 81:12,
    13_—“_So I let them go after the stubbornness of their heart, That
    they might walk in their own counsels. Oh that my people would
    hearken unto me!_” _Is. 53:4, 10_—“_Surely he hath borne our
    griefs.... Yet it pleased Jehovah to bruise him._” _Hosea
    4:17_—“_Ephraim __ Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone_”;
    _Acts 14:16_—“_who in the generations gone by suffered all the
    nations to walk in their own ways_”; _Rom. 1:24, 28_—“_God gave
    them up in the lusts of their hearts unto uncleanness... God gave
    them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
    fitting_”; _3:25_—“_to show his righteousness, because of the
    passing over of the sins done aforetime, in the forbearance of
    God._” To this head of permissive providence is possibly to be
    referred _1 Sam. 18:10_—“_an evil spirit from God came mightily
    upon Saul._” As the Hebrew writers saw in second causes the
    operation of the great first Cause, and said: “_The God of glory
    thundereth_” (_Ps. 29:3_), so, because even the acts of the wicked
    entered into God’s plan, the Hebrew writers sometimes represented
    God as doing what he merely permitted finite spirits to do. In _2
    Sam. 24:1_, God moves David to number Israel, but in _1 Chron.
    21:1_ the same thing is referred to Satan. God’s providence in
    these cases, however, may be directive as well as permissive.

    Tennyson, The Higher Pantheism: “God is law, say the wise; O Soul,
    and let us rejoice, For if he thunder by law the thunder is yet
    his voice.” Fisher, Nature and Method of Revelation, 56—“The clear
    separation of God’s efficiency from God’s permissive act was
    reserved to a later day. All emphasis was in the Old Testament
    laid upon the sovereign power of God.” Coleridge, in his
    Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit, letter II, speaks of “the
    habit, universal with the Hebrew doctors, of referring all
    excellent or extraordinary things to the great first Cause,
    without mention of the proximate and instrumental causes—a
    striking illustration of which may be found by comparing the
    narratives of the same events in the Psalms and in the historical
    books.... The distinction between the providential and the
    miraculous did not enter into their forms of thinking—at any rate,
    not into their mode of conveying their thoughts.” The woman who
    had been slandered rebelled when told that God had permitted it
    for her good; she maintained that Satan had inspired her accuser;
    she needed to learn that God had permitted the work of Satan.


(_c_) Directive,—God directs the evil acts of men to ends unforeseen and
unintended by the agents. When evil is in the heart and will certainly
come out, God orders its flow in one direction rather than in another, so
that its course can be best controlled and least harm may result. This is
sometimes called overruling providence.


    _Gen. 50:20_—“_as for you, ye meant evil against me; but God meant
    it for good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much
    people alive_”; _Ps. 76:10_—“_the wrath of man shall praise thee:
    The residue of wrath shalt thou gird upon thee_”—put on as an
    ornament—clothe thyself with it for thine own glory; _Is.
    10:5_—“_Ho Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in whose
    hand is mine indignation_”; _John 13:27_—“_What thou doest, do
    quickly_”—do in a particular way what is actually being done
    (Westcott, Bib. Com., _in loco_); _Acts 4:27, 28_—“_against thy
    holy Servant Jesus, whom thou didst anoint, both Herod and Pontius
    Pilate, with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, were gathered
    together, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel fore-ordained
    to come to pass._”

    To this head of directive providence should probably be referred
    the passages with regard to Pharaoh in _Ex. 4:21_—“_I will harden
    his heart, and he will not let the people go_”; _7:13_—“_and
    Pharaoh’s heart was hardened_”; _8:15_—“_he hardened his
    heart_”—_i. e._, Pharaoh hardened his own heart. Here the
    controlling agency of God did not interfere with the liberty of
    Pharaoh or oblige him to sin; but in judgment for his previous
    cruelty and impiety God withdrew the external restraints which had
    hitherto kept his sin within bounds, and placed him in
    circumstances which would have influenced to right action a
    well-disposed mind, but which God foresaw would lead a disposition
    like Pharaoh’s to the peculiar course of wickedness which he
    actually pursued.

    God hardened Pharaoh’s heart, then, first, by permitting him to
    harden his own heart, God being the author of his sin only in the
    sense that he is the author of a free being who is himself the
    direct author of his sin; secondly, by giving to him the means of
    enlightenment, Pharaoh’s very opportunities being perverted by him
    into occasions of more virulent wickedness, and good resisted
    being thus made to result in greater evil; thirdly, by judicially
    forsaking Pharaoh, when it became manifest that he would not do
    God’s will, and thus making it morally certain, though not
    necessary, that he would do evil; and fourthly, by so directing
    Pharaoh’s surroundings that his sin would manifest itself in one
    way rather than in another. Sin is like the lava of the volcano,
    which will certainly come out, but which God directs in its course
    down the mountain-side so that it will do least harm. The
    gravitation downward is due to man’s evil will; the direction to
    this side or to that is due to God’s providence. See _Rom. 9:17,
    18_—“_For this very purpose did I raise thee up, that I might show
    in thee my power, and that my name might be published abroad in
    all the earth. So then he hath mercy on whom he will, and whom he
    will he hardeneth._” Thus the very passions which excite men to
    rebel against God are made completely subservient to his purposes:
    see Annotated Paragraph Bible, on _Ps. 76:10_.

    God hardens Pharaoh’s heart only after all the earlier plagues
    have been sent. Pharaoh had hardened his own heart before. God
    hardens no man’s heart who has not first hardened it himself.
    Crane, Religion of To-morrow, 140—“Jehovah is never said to harden
    the heart of a good man, or of one who is set to do righteousness.
    It is always those who are bent on evil whom God hardens. Pharaoh
    hardens his own heart before the Lord is said to harden it. Nature
    is God, and it is the nature of human beings to harden when they
    resist softening influences.” The Watchman, Dec. 5, 1901:11—“God
    decreed to Pharaoh what Pharaoh had chosen for himself.
    Persistence in certain inclinations and volitions awakens within
    the body and soul forces which are not under the control of the
    will, and which drive the man on in the way he has chosen. After a
    time nature hardens the hearts of men to do evil.”


(_d_) Determinative,—God determines the bounds reached by the evil
passions of his creatures, and the measure of their effects. Since moral
evil is a germ capable of indefinite expansion, God’s determining the
measure of its growth does not alter its character or involve God’s
complicity with the perverse wills which cherish it.

_Job 1:12_—“_And Jehovah said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in
thy power; only upon himself put not forth thy hand_”; _2:6_—“_Behold, he
is in thy hand; only spare his life_”; _Ps. 124:2_—“_If it had not been
Jehovah who was on our side, when men rose up against us; Then had they
swallowed us up alive_”; _1 Cor. 10:13_—“_will not suffer you to be
tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation make also the
way of escape, that ye may be able to endure it_”; _2 Thess. 2:7_—“_For
the mystery of lawlessness doth already work; only there is one that
restraineth now, until he be taken out of the way_”; _Rev. 20:2, 3_—“_And
he laid hold on the dragon, the old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan,
and bound him for a thousand years._”

Pepper, Outlines of Syst. Theol., 76—The union of God’s will and man’s
will is “such that, while in one view all can be ascribed to God, in
another all can be ascribed to the creature. But how God and the creature
are united in operation is doubtless known and knowable only to God. A
very dim analogy is furnished in the union of the soul and body in men.
The hand retains its own physical laws, yet is obedient to the human will.
This theory recognizes the veracity of consciousness in its witness to
personal freedom, and yet the completeness of God’s control of both the
bad and the good. Free beings are ruled, but are ruled as free and in
their freedom. The freedom is not sacrificed to the control. The two
coëxist, each in its integrity. Any doctrine which does not allow this is
false to Scripture and destructive of religion.”


2. Rational proof.


A. Arguments _a priori_ from the divine attributes. (_a_) From the
immutability of God. This makes it certain that he will execute his
eternal plan of the universe and its history. But the execution of this
plan involves not only creation and preservation, but also providence.
(_b_) From the benevolence of God. This renders it certain that he will
care for the intelligent universe he has created. What it was worth his
while to create, it is worth his while to care for. But this care is
providence. (_c_) From the justice of God. As the source of moral law, God
must assure the vindication of law by administering justice in the
universe and punishing the rebellious. But this administration of justice
is providence.


    For heathen ideas of providence, see Cicero, De Natura Deorum,
    11:30, where Balbus speaks of the existence of the gods as that,
    “quo concesso, confitendum est eorum consilio mundum
    administrari.” Epictetus, sec. 41—“The principal and most
    important duty in religion is to possess your mind with just and
    becoming notions of the gods—to believe that there are such
    supreme beings, and that they govern and dispose of all the
    affairs of the world with a just and good providence.” Marcus
    Antoninus: “If there are no gods, or if they have no regard for
    human affairs, why should I desire to live in a world without gods
    and without a providence? But gods undoubtedly there are, and they
    regard human affairs.” See also Bib. Sac., 16:374. As we shall
    see, however, many of the heathen writers believed in a general,
    rather than in a particular, providence.

    On the argument for providence derived from God’s benevolence, see
    Appleton, Works, 1:146—“Is indolence more consistent with God’s
    majesty than action would be? The happiness of creatures is a
    good. Does it honor God to say that he is indifferent to that
    which he knows to be good and valuable? Even if the world had come
    into existence without his agency, it would become God’s moral
    character to pay some attention to creatures so numerous and so
    susceptible to pleasure and pain, especially when he might have so
    great and favorable an influence on their moral condition.” _John
    5:17_—“_My Father worketh even until now, and I work_”—is as
    applicable to providence as to preservation.

    The complexity of God’s providential arrangements may be
    illustrated by Tyndall’s explanation of the fact that heartsease
    does not grow in the neighborhood of English villages: 1. In
    English villages dogs run loose. 2. Where dogs run loose, cats
    must stay at home. 3. Where cats stay at home, field mice abound.
    4. Where field mice abound, the nests of bumble-bees are
    destroyed. 5. Where bumble-bees’ nests are destroyed, there is no
    fertilization of pollen. Therefore, where dogs go loose, no
    heartsease grows.


B. Arguments _a posteriori_ from the facts of nature and of history. (_a_)
The outward lot of individuals and nations is not wholly in their own
hands, but is in many acknowledged respects subject to the disposal of a
higher power. (_b_) The observed moral order of the world, although
imperfect, cannot be accounted for without recognition of a divine
providence. Vice is discouraged and virtue rewarded, in ways which are
beyond the power of mere nature. There must be a governing mind and will,
and this mind and will must be the mind and will of God.


    The birthplace of individuals and of nations, the natural powers
    with which they are endowed, the opportunities and immunities they
    enjoy, are beyond their own control. A man’s destiny for time and
    for eternity may be practically decided for him by his birth in a
    Christian home, rather than in a tenement-house at the Five
    Points, or in a kraal of the Hottentots. Progress largely depends
    upon “variety of environment” (H. Spencer). But this variety of
    environment is in great part independent of our own efforts.

    “There’s a Divinity that shapes our ends, Rough hew them how we
    will.” Shakespeare here expounds human consciousness. “Man
    proposes and God disposes” has become a proverb. Experience
    teaches that success and failure are not wholly due to us. Men
    often labor and lose; they consult and nothing ensues; they
    “embattle and are broken.” Providence is not always on the side of
    the heaviest battalions. Not arms but ideas have decided the fate
    of the world—as Xerxes found at Thermopylæ, and Napoleon at
    Waterloo. Great movements are generally begun without
    consciousness of their greatness. _Cf._ _Is. 42:16_—“_I will bring
    the blind by a way that they know not_”; _1 Cor. 5:37, 38_—“_thou
    sowest ... a bare grain ... but God giveth it a body even as it
    pleased him._”

    The deed returns to the doer, and character shapes destiny. This
    is true in the long run. Eternity will show the truth of the
    maxim. But here in time a sufficient number of apparent exceptions
    are permitted to render possible a moral probation. If evil were
    always immediately followed by penalty, righteousness would have a
    compelling power upon the will and the highest virtue would be
    impossible. Job’s friends accuse Job of acting upon this
    principle. The Hebrew children deny its truth, when they say:
    “_But if not_”—even if God does not deliver us—“_we will not serve
    thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up_”
    (_Dan. 3:18._)

    Martineau, Seat of Authority, 298—“Through some misdirection or
    infirmity, most of the larger agencies in history have failed to
    reach their own ideal, yet have accomplished revolutions greater
    and more beneficent; the conquests of Alexander, the empire of
    Rome, the Crusades, the ecclesiastical persecutions, the monastic
    asceticisms, the missionary zeal of Christendom, have all played a
    momentous part in the drama of the world, yet a part which is a
    surprise to each. All this shows the controlling presence of a
    Reason and a Will transcendent and divine.” Kidd, Social
    Evolution, 99, declares that the progress of the race has taken
    place only under conditions which have had no sanction from the
    reason of the great proportion of the individuals who submit to
    them. He concludes that a rational religion is a scientific
    impossibility, and that the function of religion is to provide a
    super-rational sanction for social progress. We prefer to say that
    Providence pushes the race forward even against its will.

    James Russell Lowell, Letters, 2:51, suggests that God’s calm
    control of the forces of the universe, both physical and mental,
    should give us confidence when evil seems impending: “How many
    times have I seen the fire-engines of church and state clanging
    and lumbering along to put out—a false alarm! And when the heavens
    are cloudy, what a glare can be cast by a burning shanty!” See
    Sermon on Providence in Political Revolutions, in Farrar’s Science
    and Theology, 228. On the moral order of the world,
    notwithstanding its imperfections, see Butler, Analogy, Bohn’s
    ed., 98; King, in Baptist Review, 1884:202-222.


III. Theories opposing the Doctrine of Providence.


1. Fatalism.


Fatalism maintains the certainty, but denies the freedom, of human
self-determination,—thus substituting fate for providence.

To this view we object that (_a_) it contradicts consciousness, which
testifies that we are free; (_b_) it exalts the divine power at the
expense of God’s truth, wisdom, holiness, love; (_c_) it destroys all
evidence of the personality and freedom of God; (_d_) it practically makes
necessity the only God, and leaves the imperatives of our moral nature
without present validity or future vindication.


    The Mohammedans have frequently been called fatalists, and the
    practical effect of the teachings of the Koran upon the masses is
    to make them so. The ordinary Mohammedan will have no physician or
    medicine, because everything happens as God has before appointed.
    Smith, however, in his Mohammed and Mohammedanism, denies that
    fatalism is essential to the system. _Islam_ = “submission,” and
    the participle _Moslem_ = “submitted,” _i. e._, to God. Turkish
    proverb: “A man cannot escape what is written on his forehead.”
    The Mohammedan thinks of God’s dominant attribute as being
    greatness rather than righteousness, power rather than purity. God
    is the personification of arbitrary will, not the God and Father
    of our Lord Jesus Christ. But there is in the system an absence of
    sacerdotalism, a jealousy for the honor of God, a brotherhood of
    believers, a reverence for what is considered the word of God, and
    a bold and habitual devotion of its adherents to their faith.

    Stanley, Life and Letters, 1:489, refers to the Mussulman
    tradition existing in Egypt that the fate of Islam requires that
    it should at last be superseded by Christianity. F. W. Sanders
    denies that the Koran is peculiarly _sensual_. “The Christian and
    Jewish religions,” he says, “have their paradise also. The Koran
    makes this the reward, but not the ideal, of conduct; ‘Grace from
    thy Lord—that is the grand bliss.’ The emphasis of the Koran is
    upon right living. The Koran does not teach the propagation of
    religion by _force_. It declares that there shall be no compulsion
    in religion. The practice of converting by the sword is to be
    distinguished from the teaching of Mohammed, just as the
    Inquisition and the slave-trade in Christendom do not prove that
    Jesus taught them. The Koran did not institute _polygamy_. It
    found unlimited polygamy, divorce, and infanticide. The last it
    prohibited; the two former it restricted and ameliorated, just as
    Moses found polygamy, but brought it within bounds. The Koran is
    not hostile to _secular learning_. Learning flourished under the
    Bagdad and Spanish Caliphates. When Moslems oppose learning, they
    do so without authority from the Koran. The Roman Catholic church
    has opposed schools, but we do not attribute this to the gospel.”
    See Zwemer, Moslem Doctrine of God.

    Calvinists can assert freedom, since man’s will finds its highest
    freedom only in submission to God. Islam also cultivates
    submission, but it is the submission not of love but of fear. The
    essential difference between Mohammedanism and Christianity is
    found in the revelation which the latter gives of the love of God
    in Christ—a revelation which secures from free moral agents the
    submission of love; see page 186. On fatalism, see McCosh,
    Intuitions, 266; Kant, Metaphysic of Ethics, 52-74, 98-108; Mill,
    Autobiography, 168-170, and System of Logic, 521-526; Hamilton,
    Metaphysics, 692; Stewart, Active and Moral Powers of Man, ed.
    Walker, 268-324.


2. Casualism.


Casualism transfers the freedom of mind to nature, as fatalism transfers
the fixity of nature to mind. It thus exchanges providence for chance.
Upon this view we remark:

(_a_) If chance be only another name for human ignorance, a name for the
fact that there are trivial occurrences in life which have no meaning or
relation to us,—we may acknowledge this, and still hold that providence
arranges every so-called chance, for purposes beyond our knowledge.
Chance, in this sense, is providential coincidence which we cannot
understand, and do not need to trouble ourselves about.


    Not all chances are of equal importance. The casual meeting of a
    stranger in the street need not bring God’s providence before me,
    although I know that God arranges it. Yet I can conceive of that
    meeting as leading to religious conversation and to the stranger’s
    conversion. When we are prepared for them, we shall see many
    opportunities which are now as unmeaning to us as the gold in the
    river-beds was to the early Indians in California. I should be an
    ingrate, if I escaped a lightning-stroke, and did not thank God;
    yet Dr. Arnold’s saying that every school boy should put on his
    hat for God’s glory, and with a high moral purpose, seems morbid.
    There is a certain room for the play of arbitrariness. We must not
    afflict ourselves or the church of God by requiring a Pharisaic
    punctiliousness in minutiæ. Life is too short to debate the
    question which shoe we shall put on first. “Love God and do what
    you will,” said Augustine; that is, Love God, and act out that
    love in a simple and natural way. Be free in your service, yet be
    always on the watch for indications of God’s will.


(_b_) If chance be taken in the sense of utter absence of all causal
connections in the phenomena of matter and mind,—we oppose to this notion
the fact that the causal judgment is formed in accordance with a
fundamental and necessary law of human thought, and that no science or
knowledge is possible without the assumption of its validity.


    In _Luke 10:31_, our Savior says: “_By chance a certain priest was
    going down that way_.” Janet: “Chance is not a cause, but a
    coincidence of causes.” Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge,
    197—“By chance is not meant lack of causation, but the coincidence
    in an event of mutually independent series of causation. Thus the
    unpurposed meeting of two persons is spoken of as a chance one,
    when the movement of neither implies that of the other. Here the
    antithesis of chance is purpose.”


(_c_) If chance be used in the sense of undesigning cause,—it is evidently
insufficient to explain the regular and uniform sequences of nature, or
the moral progress of the human race. These things argue a superintending
and designing mind—in other words, a providence. Since reason demands not
only a cause, but a sufficient cause, for the order of the physical and
moral world, casualism must be ruled out.


    The observer at the signal station was asked what was the climate
    of Rochester. “Climate?” he replied; “Rochester has no
    climate,—only weather!” So Chauncey Wright spoke of the ups and
    downs of human affairs as simply “cosmical weather.” But our
    intuition of design compels us to see mind and purpose in
    individual and national history, as well as in the physical
    universe. The same argument which proves the existence of God
    proves also the existence of a providence. See Farrar, Life of
    Christ, 1:155, note.


3. Theory of a merely general providence.


Many who acknowledge God’s control over the movements of planets and the
destinies of nations deny any divine arrangement of particular events.
Most of the arguments against deism are equally valid against the theory
of a merely general providence. This view is indeed only a form of deism,
which holds that God has not wholly withdrawn himself from the universe,
but that his activity within it is limited to the maintenance of general
laws.


    This appears to have been the view of most of the heathen
    philosophers. Cicero: “Magna dii curant; parva negligunt.” “Even
    in kingdoms among men,” he says, “kings do not trouble themselves
    with insignificant affairs.” Fullerton, Conceptions of the
    Infinite, 9—“Plutarch thought there could not be an infinity of
    worlds,—Providence could not possibly take charge of so many.
    ‘Troublesome and boundless infinity’ could be grasped by no
    consciousness.” The ancient Cretans made an image of Jove without
    ears, for they said: “It is a shame to believe that God would hear
    the talk of men.” So Jerome, the church Father, thought it absurd
    that God should know just how many gnats and cockroaches there
    were in the world. David Harum is wiser when he expresses the
    belief that there is nothing wholly bad or useless in the world:
    “A reasonable amount of fleas is good for a dog,—they keep him
    from broodin’ on bein’ a dog.” This has been paraphrased: “A
    reasonable number of beaux are good for a girl,—they keep her from
    brooding over her being a girl.”


In addition to the arguments above alluded to, we may urge against this
theory that:

(_a_) General control over the course of nature and of history is
impossible without control over the smallest particulars which affect the
course of nature and of history. Incidents so slight as well-nigh to
escape observation at the time of their occurrence are frequently found to
determine the whole future of a human life, and through that life the
fortunes of a whole empire and of a whole age.


    “Nothing great has great beginnings.” “Take care of the pence, and
    the pounds will take care of themselves.” “Care for the chain is
    care for the links of the chain.” Instances in point are the
    sleeplessness of King Ahasuerus (_Esther 6:1_), and the seeming
    chance that led to the reading of the record of Mordecai’s service
    and to the salvation of the Jews in Persia; the spider’s web spun
    across the entrance to the cave in which Mohammed had taken
    refuge, which so deceived his pursuers that they passed on In a
    bootless chase, leaving to the world the religion and the empire
    of the Moslems; the preaching of Peter the Hermit, which
    occasioned the first Crusade; the chance shot of an archer, which
    pierced the right eye of Harold, the last of the purely English
    kings, gained the battle of Hastings for William the Conqueror,
    and secured the throne of England for the Normans; the flight of
    pigeons to the south-west, which changed the course of Columbus,
    hitherto directed towards Virginia, to the West Indies, and so
    prevented the dominion of Spain over North America; the storm that
    dispersed the Spanish Armada and saved England from the Papacy,
    and the storm that dispersed the French fleet gathered for the
    conquest of New England—the latter on a day of fasting and prayer
    appointed by the Puritans to avert the calamity; the settling of
    New England by the Puritans, rather than by French Jesuits; the
    order of Council restraining Cromwell and his friends from sailing
    to America; Major André’s lack of self-possession in presence of
    his captors, which led him to ask an improper question instead of
    showing his passport, and which saved the American cause; the
    unusually early commencement of cold weather, which frustrated the
    plans of Napoleon and destroyed his army in Russia; the fatal shot
    at Fort Sumter, which precipitated the war of secession and
    resulted in the abolition of American slavery. Nature is linked to
    history; the breeze warps the course of the bullet; the worm
    perforates the plank of the ship. God must care for the least, or
    he cannot care for the greatest.

    “Large doors swing on small hinges.” The barking of a dog
    determined F. W. Robertson to be a preacher rather than a soldier.
    Robert Browning, Mr. Sludge the Medium: “We find great things are
    made of little things, And little things go lessening till at last
    Comes God behind them.” E. G. Robinson: “We cannot suppose only a
    general outline to have been in the mind of God, while the
    filling-up is left to be done in some other way. The general
    includes the special.” Dr. Lloyd, one of the Oxford Professors,
    said to Pusey, “I wish you would learn something about those
    German critics.” “In the obedient spirit of those times,” writes
    Pusey, “I set myself at once to learn German, and I went to
    Göttingen, to study at once the language and the theology. My life
    turned on that hint of Dr. Lloyd’s.”

    Goldwin Smith: “Had a bullet entered the brain of Cromwell or of
    William III in his first battle, or had Gustavus not fallen at
    Lützen, the course of history apparently would have been changed.
    The course even of science would have been changed, if there had
    not been a Newton and a Darwin.” The annexation of Corsica to
    France gave to France a Napoleon, and to Europe a conqueror.
    Martineau, Seat of Authority, 101—“Had the monastery at Erfurt
    deputed another than young Luther on its errand to paganized Rome,
    or had Leo X sent a less scandalous agent than Tetzel on his
    business to Germany, the seeds of the Reformation might have
    fallen by the wayside where they had no deepness of earth, and the
    Western revolt of the human mind might have taken another date and
    another form.” See Appleton, Works, 1:149 _sq._; Lecky, England in
    the Eighteenth Century, chap. I.


(_b_) The love of God which prompts a general care for the universe must
also prompt a particular care for the smallest events which affect the
happiness of his creatures. It belongs to love to regard nothing as
trifling or beneath its notice which has to do with the interests of the
object of its affection. Infinite love may therefore be expected to
provide for all, even the minutest things in the creation. Without belief
in this particular care, men cannot long believe in God’s general care.
Faith in a particular providence is indispensable to the very existence of
practical religion; for men will not worship or recognize a God who has no
direct relation to them.


    Man’s care for his own body involves care for the least important
    members of it. A lover’s devotion is known by his interest in the
    minutest concerns of his beloved. So all our affairs are matters
    of interest to God. Pope’s Essay on Man: “All nature is but art
    unknown to thee; All chance, direction which thou canst not see;
    All discord, harmony not understood; All partial evil, universal
    good.” If harvests may be labored for and lost without any agency
    of God; if rain or sun may act like fate, sweeping away the
    results of years, and God have no hand in it all; if wind and
    storm may wreck the ship and drown our dearest friends, and God
    not care for us or for our loss, then all possibility of general
    trust in God will disappear also.

    God’s care is shown in the least things as well as in the
    greatest. In Gethsemane Christ says: “_Let these go their way:
    that the word might be fulfilled which he spake, Of those whom
    thou hast given me I lost not one_” (_John 18:8, 9_). It is the
    same spirit as that of his intercessory prayer: “_I guarded them,
    and not one of them perished, but the son of perdition_” (_John
    17:12_). Christ gives himself as a prisoner that his disciples may
    go free, even as he redeems us from the curse of the law by being
    made a curse for us (_Gal. 3:13_). The dewdrop is moulded by the
    same law that rounds the planets into spheres. Gen. Grant said he
    had never but once sought a place for himself, and in that place
    he was a comparative failure; he had been an instrument in God’s
    hand for the accomplishing of God’s purposes, apart from any plan
    or thought or hope of his own.

    Of his journey through the dark continent in search of David
    Livingston, Henry M. Stanley wrote in Scribner’s Monthly for June,
    1890: “Constrained at the darkest hour humbly to confess that
    without God’s help I was helpless, I vowed a vow in the forest
    solitudes that I would confess his aid before men. Silence as of
    death was around me; it was midnight; I was weakened by illness,
    prostrated with fatigue, and wan with anxiety for my white and
    black companions, whose fate was a mystery. In this physical and
    mental distress I besought God to give me back my people. Nine
    hours later we were exulting with a rapturous joy. In full view of
    all was the crimson flag with the crescent, and beneath its waving
    folds was the long-lost rear column.... My own designs were
    frustrated constantly by unhappy circumstances. I endeavored to
    steer my course as direct as possible, but there was an
    unaccountable influence at the helm.... I have been conscious that
    the issues of every effort were in other hands.... Divinity seems
    to have hedged us while we journeyed, impelling us whither it
    would, effecting its own will, but constantly guiding and
    protecting us.” He refuses to believe that it is all the result of
    “luck”, and he closes with a doxology which we should expect from
    Livingston but not from him: “Thanks be to God, forever and ever!”


(_c_) In times of personal danger, and in remarkable conjunctures of
public affairs, men instinctively attribute to God a control of the events
which take place around them. The prayers which such startling emergencies
force from men’s lips are proof that God is present and active in human
affairs. This testimony of our mental constitution must be regarded as
virtually the testimony of him who framed this constitution.


    No advance of science can rid us of this conviction, since it
    comes from a deeper source than mere reasoning. The intuition of
    design is awakened by the connection of events in our daily life,
    as much as by the useful adaptations which we see in nature. _Ps.
    107:23-28_—“_They that go down to the sea in ships ... mount up to
    the heavens, they go down again to the depths ... And are at their
    wits’ end. Then they cry unto Jehovah in their trouble._” A narrow
    escape from death shows us a present God and Deliverer. Instance
    the general feeling throughout the land, expressed by the press as
    well as by the pulpit, at the breaking out of our rebellion and at
    the President’s subsequent Proclamation of Emancipation.

    “Est deus in nobis; agitante calescimus illo.” For contrast
    between Nansen’s ignoring of God in his polar journey and Dr.
    Jacob Chamberlain’s calling upon God in his strait in India, see
    Missionary Review, May, 1898. Sunday School Times, March 4,
    1893—“Benjamin Franklin became a deist at the age of fifteen.
    Before the Revolutionary War he was merely a shrewd and pushing
    business man. He had public spirit, and he made one happy
    discovery in science. But ‘Poor Richard’s’ sayings express his
    mind at that time. The perils and anxieties of the great war gave
    him a deeper insight. He and others entered upon it ‘with a rope
    around their necks.’ As he told the Constitutional Convention of
    1787, when he proposed that its daily sessions be opened with
    prayer, the experiences of that war showed him that ‘God verily
    rules in the affairs of men.’ And when the designs for an American
    coinage were under discussion, Franklin proposed to stamp on them,
    not ‘A Penny Saved is a Penny Earned,’ or any other piece of
    worldly prudence, but ‘The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of
    Wisdom.’ ”


(_d_) Christian experience confirms the declarations of Scripture that
particular events are brought about by God with special reference to the
good or ill of the individual. Such events occur at times in such direct
connection with the Christian’s prayers that no doubt remains with regard
to the providential arrangement of them. The possibility of such divine
agency in natural events cannot be questioned by one who, like the
Christian, has had experience of the greater wonders of regeneration and
daily intercourse with God, and who believes in the reality of creation,
incarnation, and miracles.


    Providence prepares the way for men’s conversion, sometimes by
    their own partial reformation, sometimes by the sudden death of
    others near them. Instance Luther and Judson. The Christian learns
    that the same Providence that led him before his conversion is
    busy after his conversion in directing his steps and in supplying
    his wants. Daniel Defoe: “I have been fed more by miracle than
    Elijah when the angels were his purveyors.” In _Psalm 32_, David
    celebrates not only God’s pardoning mercy but his subsequent
    providential leading: “_I will counsel thee with mine eye upon
    thee_” (_verse 8_). It may be objected that we often mistake the
    meaning of events. We answer that, as in nature, so in providence,
    we are compelled to believe, not that we _know_ the design, but
    that there _is_ a design. Instance Shelley’s drowning, and Jacob
    Knapp’s prayer that his opponent might be stricken dumb. Lyman
    Beecher’s attributing the burning of the Unitarian church to God’s
    judgment upon false doctrine was invalidated a little later by the
    burning of his own church.

    _Job 23:10_—“_He knoweth the way that is mine,_” or “_the way that
    is with me,_” _i. e._, my inmost way, life, character; “_When he
    hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold._” _1 Cor. 19:4_—“_and
    the rock was Christ_”—Christ was the ever present source of their
    refreshment and life, both physical and spiritual. God’s
    providence is all exercised through Christ. _2 Cor. 2:14_—“_But
    thanks be unto God, who always leadeth us in triumph in Christ_”;
    not, as in A. V., “_causeth us to triumph_.” Paul glories, not in
    conquering, but in being conquered. Let Christ triumph, not Paul.
    “Great King of grace, my heart subdue; I would be led in triumph
    too. A willing captive to my Lord, To own the conquests of his
    word.” Therefore Paul can call himself “_the prisoner of Christ
    Jesus_” (_Eph. 3:1_). It was Christ who had shut him up two years
    in Cæsarea, and then two succeeding years in Rome.


IV. Relations of the Doctrine of Providence.


1. To miracles and works of grace.


Particular providence is the agency of God in what seem to us the minor
affairs of nature and human life. Special providence is only an instance
of God’s particular providence which has special relation to us or makes
peculiar impression upon us. It is special, not as respects the means
which God makes use of, but as respects the effect produced upon us. In
special providence we have only a more impressive manifestation of God’s
universal control.

Miracles and works of grace like regeneration are not to be regarded as
belonging to a different order of things from God’s special providences.
They too, like special providences, may have their natural connections and
antecedents, although they more readily suggest their divine authorship.
Nature and God are not mutually exclusive,—nature is rather God’s method
of working. Since nature is only the manifestation of God, special
providence, miracle, and regeneration are simply different degrees of
extraordinary nature. Certain of the wonders of Scripture, such as the
destruction of Sennacherib’s army and the dividing of the Red Sea, the
plagues of Egypt, the flight of quails, and the draught of fishes, can be
counted as exaggerations of natural forces, while at the same time they
are operations of the wonder-working God.


    The falling of snow from a roof is an example of ordinary (or
    particular) providence. But if a man is killed by it, it becomes a
    special providence to him and to others who are thereby taught the
    insecurity of life. So the providing of coal for fuel in the
    geologic ages may be regarded by different persons in the light
    either of a general or of a special providence. In all the
    operations of nature and all the events of life God’s providence
    is exhibited. That providence becomes special, when it manifestly
    suggests some care of God for us or some duty of ours to God.
    Savage, Life beyond Death, 285—“Mary A. Livermore’s life was saved
    during her travels in the West by her hearing and instantly
    obeying what seemed to her a voice. She did not know where it came
    from; but she leaped, as the voice ordered, from one side of a car
    to the other, and instantly the side where she had been sitting
    was crushed in and utterly demolished.” In a similar way, the life
    of Dr. Oncken was saved in the railroad disaster at Norwalk.

    Trench gives the name of “providential miracles” to those
    Scripture wonders which may be explained as wrought through the
    agency of natural laws (see Trench, Miracles, 19). Mozley also
    (Miracles, 117-120) calls these wonders miracles, because of the
    predictive word of God which accompanied them. He says that the
    difference in effect between miracles and special providences is
    that the latter give _some_ warrant, while the former give _full_
    warrant, for believing that they are wrought by God. He calls
    special providences “invisible miracles.” Bp. of Southampton,
    Place of Miracles, 12, 13—“The art of Bezaleel in constructing the
    tabernacle, and the plans of generals like Moses and Joshua,
    Gideon, Barak, and David, are in the Old Testament ascribed to the
    direct inspiration of God. A less religious writer would have
    ascribed them to the instinct of military skill. No miracle is
    necessarily involved, when, in devising the system of ceremonial
    law it is said: _‘__Jehovah spake unto Moses__’__ (Num. 5:1)_. God
    is everywhere present in the history of Israel, but miracles are
    strikingly rare.” We prefer to say that the line between the
    natural and the supernatural, between special providence and
    miracle, is an arbitrary one, and that the same event may often be
    regarded either as special providence or as miracle, according as
    we look at it from the point of view of its relation to other
    events or from the point of view of its relation to God.

    E. G. Robinson: “If Vesuvius should send up ashes and lava, and a
    strong wind should scatter them, it could be said to rain fire and
    brimstone, as at Sodom and Gomorrha.” There is abundant evident of
    volcanic action at the Dead Sea. See article on the Physical
    Preparation for Israel in Palestine, by G. Frederick Wright, in
    Bib. Sac., April, 1901:364. The three great miracles—the
    destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, the parting of the waters of
    the Jordan, the falling down of the walls of Jericho—are described
    as effect of volcanic eruption, elevation of the bed of the river
    by a landslide, and earthquake-shock overthrowing the walls. Salt
    slime thrown up may have enveloped Lot’s wife and turned her into
    “_a mound of salt_” (_Gen. 19:26_). In like manner, some of Jesus’
    works of healing, as for instance those wrought upon paralytics
    and epileptics, may be susceptible of natural explanation, while
    yet they show that Christ is absolute Lord of nature. For the
    naturalistic view, see Tyndall on Miracles and Special
    Providences, in Fragments of Science, 45, 418. _Per contra_, see
    Farrar, on Divine Providence and General Laws, in Science and
    Theology, 54-80; Row, Bampton Lect. on Christian Evidences,
    109-115; Godet, Defence of Christian Faith, Chap. 2; Bowne, The
    Immanence of God, 56-65.


2. To prayer and its answer.


What has been said with regard to God’s connection with nature suggests
the question, how God can answer prayer consistently with the fixity of
natural law.


    Tyndall (see reference above), while repelling the charge of
    denying that God can answer prayer at all, yet does deny that he
    can answer it without a miracle. He says expressly “that without a
    disturbance of natural law quite as serious as the stoppage of an
    eclipse, or the rolling of the St. Lawrence up the falls of
    Niagara, no act of humiliation, individual or national, could call
    one shower from heaven or deflect toward us a single beam of the
    sun.” In reply we would remark:


A. Negatively, that the true solution is not to be reached:

(_a_) By making the sole effect of prayer to be its reflex influence upon
the petitioner.—Prayer presupposes a God who hears and answers. It will
not be offered, unless it is believed to accomplish objective as well as
subjective results.


    According to the first view mentioned above, prayer is a mere
    spiritual gymnastics—an effort to lift ourselves from the ground
    by tugging at our own boot-straps. David Hume said well, after
    hearing a sermon by Dr. Leechman: “We can make use of no
    expression or even thought in prayers and entreaties which does
    not imply that these prayers have an influence.” See Tyndall on
    Prayer and Natural Law, in Fragments of Science, 35. Will men pray
    to a God who is both deaf and dumb? Will the sailor on the
    bowsprit whistle to the wind for the sake of improving his voice?
    Horace Bushnell called this perversion of prayer a “mere dumb-bell
    exercise.” Baron Munchausen pulled himself out of the bog in China
    by tugging away at his own pigtail.

    Hyde, God’s Education of Man, 154, 155—“Prayer is not the reflex
    action of my will upon itself, but rather the communion of two
    wills, in which the finite comes into connection with the
    Infinite, and, like the trolley, appropriates its purpose and
    power.” Harnack, Wesen des Christenthums, 42, apparently follows
    Schleiermacher in unduly limiting prayer to general petitions
    which receive only a subjective answer. He tells us that “Jesus
    taught his disciples the Lord’s Prayer in response to a request
    for directions how to pray. Yet we look in vain therein for
    requests for special gifts of grace, or for particular good
    things, even though they are spiritual. The name, the will, the
    kingdom of God—these are the things which are the objects of
    petition.” Harnack forgets that the same Christ said also: “_All
    things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye receive
    them, and ye shall have them_” (_Mark 11:24_).


(_b_) Nor by holding that God answers prayer simply by spiritual means,
such as the action of the Holy Spirit upon the spirit of man.—The realm of
spirit is no less subject to law than the realm of matter. Scripture and
experience, moreover, alike testify that in answer to prayer events take
place in the outward world which would not have taken place if prayer had
not gone before.


    According to this second theory, God feeds the starving Elijah,
    not by a distinct message from heaven but by giving a
    compassionate disposition to the widow of Zarephath so that she is
    moved to help the prophet. _1 K. 17:9_—“_behold, I have commanded
    a widow there to sustain thee._” But God could also feed Elijah by
    the ravens and the angel (_1 K. 17:4; 19:15_), and the pouring
    rain that followed Elijah’s prayer (_1 K. 18:42-45_) cannot be
    explained as a subjective spiritual phenomenon. Diman, Theistic
    Argument, 268—“Our charts map out not only the solid shore but the
    windings of the ocean currents, and we look into the morning
    papers to ascertain the gathering of storms on the slopes of the
    Rocky Mountains.” But law rules in the realm of spirit as well as
    in the realm of nature. See Baden Powell, in Essays and Reviews,
    106-162; Knight, Studies in Philosophy and Literature, 340-404;
    George I. Chace, discourse before the Porter Rhet. Soc. of
    Andover, August, 1854. Governor Rice in Washington is moved to
    send money to a starving family in New York, and to secure
    employment for them. Though he has had no information with regard
    to their need, they have knelt in prayer for help just before the
    coming of the aid.


(_c_) Nor by maintaining that God suspends or breaks in upon the order of
nature, in answering every prayer that is offered.—This view does not take
account of natural laws as having objective existence, and as revealing
the order of God’s being. Omnipotence might thus suspend natural law, but
wisdom, so far as we can see, would not.


    This third theory might well be held by those who see in nature no
    force but the all-working will of God. But the properties and
    powers of matter are revelations of the divine will, and the human
    will has only a relative independence in the universe. To desire
    that God would answer all our prayers is to desire omnipotence
    without omniscience. All true prayer is therefore an expression of
    the one petition: “_Thy will be done_” (_Mat. 6:10_). E. G.
    Robinson: “It takes much common sense to pray, and many prayers
    are destitute of this quality. Man needs to pray audibly even in
    his private prayers, to get the full benefit of them. One of the
    chief benefits of the English liturgy is that the individual
    minister is lost sight of. Protestantism makes you work; in
    Romanism the church will do it all for you.”


(_d_) Nor by considering prayer as a physical force, linked in each case
to its answer, as physical cause is linked to physical effect.—Prayer is
not a force acting directly upon nature; else there would be no discretion
as to its answer. It can accomplish results in nature, only as it
influences God.


    We educate our children in two ways: first, by training them to do
    for themselves what they can do; and, secondly, by encouraging
    them to seek our help in matters beyond their power. So God
    educates us, first, by impersonal law, and, secondly, by personal
    dependence. He teaches us both to work and to ask. Notice the
    “perfect unwisdom of modern scientists who place themselves under
    the training of impersonal law, to the exclusion of that higher
    and better training which is under personality” (Hopkins, Sermon
    on Prayer-gauge, 16).


It seems more in accordance with both Scripture and reason to say that:

B. God may answer prayer, even when that answer involves changes in the
sequences of nature,—

(_a_) By new combinations of natural forces, in regions withdrawn from our
observation, so that effects are produced which these same forces left to
themselves would never have accomplished. As man combines the laws of
chemical attraction and of combustion, to fire the gunpowder and split the
rock asunder, so God may combine the laws of nature to bring about answers
to prayer. In all this there may be no suspension or violation of law, but
a use of law unknown to us.


    Hopkins, Sermon on the Prayer-gauge: “Nature is uniform in her
    processes but not in her results. Do you say that water cannot run
    uphill? Yes, it can and does. Whenever man constructs a milldam
    the water runs up the environing hills till it reaches the top of
    the milldam. Man can make a spark of electricity do his bidding;
    why cannot God use a bolt of electricity? Laws are not our
    masters, but our servants. They do our bidding all the better
    because they are uniform. And our servants are not God’s masters.”
    Kendall Brooks: “The master of a musical instrument can vary
    without limit the combination of sounds and the melodies which
    these combinations can produce. The laws of the instrument are not
    changed, but in their unchanging steadfastness produce an infinite
    variety of tunes. It is necessary that they should be unchanging
    in order to secure a desired result. So nature, which exercises
    the infinite skill of the divine Master, is governed by unvarying
    laws; but he, by these laws, produces an infinite variety of
    results.”

    Hodge, Popular Lectures, 45, 99—“The system of natural laws is far
    more flexible in God’s hands than it is in ours. We act on second
    causes externally; God acts on them internally. We act upon them
    at only a few isolated points; God acts upon every point of the
    system at the same time. The whole of nature may be as plastic to
    his will as the air in the organs of the great singer who
    articulates it into a fit expression of every thought and passion
    of his soaring soul.” Upton, Hibbert Lectures, 155—“If all the
    chemical elements of our solar system preëxisted in the fiery
    cosmic mist, there must have been a time when quite suddenly the
    attractions between these elements overcame the degree of caloric
    force which held them apart, and the rush of elements into
    chemical union must have been consummated with inconceivable
    rapidity. Uniformitarianism is not universal.”

    Shaler, Interpretation of Nature, chap. 2—“By a little increase of
    centrifugal force the elliptical orbit is changed into a parabola,
    and the planet becomes a comet. By a little reduction in
    temperature water becomes solid and loses many of its powers. So
    unexpected results are brought about and surprises as
    revolutionary as if a Supreme Power immediately intervened.”
    William James, Address before Soc. for Psych. Research:
    “Thought-transference may involve a critical point, as the
    physicists call it, which is passed only when certain psychic
    conditions are realized, and otherwise not reached at all—just as
    a big conflagration will break out at a certain temperature, below
    which no conflagration whatever, whether big or little, can
    occur.” Tennyson, Life, 1:324—“Prayer is like opening a sluice
    between the great ocean and our little channels, when the great
    sea gathers itself together and flows in at full tide.”


Since prayer is nothing more nor less than appeal to a personal and
present God, whose granting or withholding of the requested blessing is
believed to be determined by the prayer itself, we must conclude that
prayer moves God, or, in other words, induces the putting forth on his
part of an imperative volition.


    The view that in answering prayer God combines natural forces is
    elaborated by Chalmers, Works, 2:314, and 7:234. See Diman,
    Theistic Argument, 111—“When laws are conceived of, not as single,
    but as combined, instead of being immutable in their operation,
    they are the agencies of ceaseless change. Phenomena are governed,
    not by invariable forces, but by _endlessly varying combinations
    of invariable forces_.” Diman seems to have followed Argyll, Reign
    of Law, 100.

    Janet, Final Causes, 219—“I kindle a fire in my grate. I only
    intervene to produce and combine together the different agents
    whose natural action behooves to produce the effect I have need
    of; but the first step once taken, all the phenomena constituting
    combustion engender each other, conformably to their laws, without
    a new intervention of the agent; so that an observer who should
    study the series of these phenomena, without perceiving the first
    hand that had prepared all, could not seize that hand in any
    especial act, and yet there is a preconceived plan and
    combination.”

    Hopkins, Sermon on Prayer-gauge: Man, by sprinkling plaster on his
    field, may cause the corn to grow more luxuriantly; by kindling
    great fires and by firing cannon, he may cause rain; and God can
    surely, in answer to prayer, do as much as man can. Lewes says
    that the fundamental character of all theological philosophy is
    conceiving of phenomena as subject to supernatural volition, and
    consequently as eminently and irregularly variable. This notion,
    he says, is refuted, first, by exact and rational prevision of
    phenomena, and, secondly, by the possibility of our modifying
    these phenomena so as to promote our own advantage. But we ask in
    reply: If we can modify them, cannot God? But, lest this should
    seem to imply mutability in God or inconsistency in nature, we
    remark, in addition, that:


(_b_) God may have so preärranged the laws of the material universe and
the events of history that, while the answer to prayer is an expression of
his will, it is granted through the working of natural agencies, and in
perfect accordance with the general principle that results, both temporal
and spiritual, are to be attained by intelligent creatures through the use
of the appropriate and appointed means.


    J. P. Cooke, Credentials of Science, 194—“The Jacquard loom of
    itself would weave a perfectly uniform plain fabric; the
    perforated cards determine a selection of the threads, and through
    a combination of these variable conditions, so complex that the
    observer cannot follow their intricate workings, the predesigned
    pattern appears.” E. G. Robinson: “The most formidable objection
    to this theory is the apparent countenance it lends to the
    doctrine of necessitarianism. But if it presupposes that free
    actions have been taken into account, it cannot easily be shown to
    be false.” The bishop who was asked by his curate to sanction
    prayers for rain was unduly sceptical when he replied: “First
    consult the barometer.” Phillips Brooks: “Prayer is not the
    conquering of God’s reluctance, but the taking hold of God’s
    willingness.”

    The Pilgrims at Plymouth, somewhere about 1628, prayed for rain.
    They met at 9 A. M., and continued in prayer for eight or nine
    hours. While they were assembled clouds gathered, and the next
    morning began rains which, with some intervals, lasted fourteen
    days. John Easter was many years ago an evangelist in Virginia. A
    large out-door meeting was being held. Many thousands had
    assembled, when heavy storm clouds began to gather. There was no
    shelter to which the multitudes could retreat. The rain had
    already reached the adjoining fields when John Easter cried:
    “Brethren, be still, while I call upon God to stay the storm till
    the gospel is preached to this multitude!” Then he knelt and
    prayed that the audience might be spared the rain, and that after
    they had gone to their homes there might be refreshing showers.
    Behold, the clouds parted as they came near, and passed to either
    side of the crowd and then closed again, leaving the place dry
    where the audience had assembled, and the next day the postponed
    showers came down upon the ground that had been the day before
    omitted.


Since God is immanent in nature, an answer to prayer, coming about through
the intervention of natural law, may be as real a revelation of God’s
personal care as if the laws of nature were suspended, and God interposed
by an exercise of his creative power. Prayer and its answer, though having
God’s immediate volition as their connecting bond, may yet be provided for
in the original plan of the universe.


    The universe does not exist for itself, but for moral ends and
    moral beings, to reveal God and to furnish facilities of
    intercourse between God and intelligent creatures. Bishop
    Berkeley: “The universe is God’s ceaseless conversation with his
    creatures.” The universe certainly subserves moral ends—the
    discouragement of vice and the reward of virtue; why not spiritual
    ends also? When we remember that there is no true prayer which God
    does not inspire; that every true prayer is part of the plan of
    the universe linked in with all the rest and provided for at the
    beginning; that God is in nature and in mind, supervising all
    their movements and making all fulfill his will and reveal his
    personal care; that God can adjust the forces of nature to each
    other far more skilfully than can man when man produces effects
    which nature of herself could never accomplish; that God is not
    confined to nature or her forces, but can work by his creative and
    omnipotent will where other means are not sufficient,—we need have
    no fear, either that natural law will bar God’s answers to prayer,
    or that these answers will cause a shock or jar in the system of
    the universe.

    Matheson, Messages of the Old Religions, 321, 322—“Hebrew poetry
    never deals with outward nature for its own sake. The eye never
    rests on beauty for itself alone. The heavens are the work of
    God’s hands, the earth is God’s footstool, the winds are God’s
    ministers, the stars are God’s host, the thunder is God’s voice.
    What we call Nature the Jew called God.” Miss Heloise E. Hersey:
    “Plato in the Phædrus sets forth in a splendid myth the means by
    which the gods refresh themselves. Once a year, in a mighty host,
    they drive their chariots up the steep to the topmost vault of
    heaven. Thence they may behold all the wonders and the secrets of
    the universe; and, quickened by the sight of the great plain of
    truth, they return home replenished and made glad by the celestial
    vision.” Abp. Trench, Poems, 134—“Lord, what a change within us
    one short hour Spent in thy presence will prevail to make—What
    heavy burdens from our bosoms take, What parched grounds refresh
    as with a shower! We kneel, and all around us seems to lower; We
    rise, and all, the distant and the near, Stands forth in sunny
    outline, brave and clear; We kneel how weak, we rise how full of
    power! Why, therefore, should we do ourselves this wrong, Or
    others—that we are not always strong; That we are ever overborne
    with care; That we should ever weak or heartless be, Anxious or
    troubled, when with us is prayer, And joy and strength and courage
    are with thee?” See Calderwood, Science and Religion, 299-309;
    McCosh, Divine Government, 215; Liddon, Elements of Religion,
    178-203; Hamilton, Autology, 690-694. See also Jellett, Donnellan
    Lectures on the Efficacy of Prayer; Butterworth, Story of Notable
    Prayers; Patton, Prayer and its Answers; Monrad, World of Prayer;
    Prime, Power of Prayer; Phelps, The Still Hour; Haven, and
    Bickersteth, on Prayer; Prayer for Colleges; Cox, in Expositor,
    1877: chap. 3; Faunce, Prayer as a Theory and a Fact; Trumbull,
    Prayer, Its Nature and Scope.


C. If asked whether this relation between prayer and its providential
answer can be scientifically tested, we reply that it may be tested just
as a father’s love may be tested by a dutiful son.

(_a_) There is a general proof of it in the past experience of the
Christian and in the past history of the church.

_Ps. 116:1-8_—“_I love Jehovah because he heareth my voice and my
supplications._” Luther prays for the dying Melanchthon, and he recovers.
George Müller trusts to prayer, and builds his great orphan-houses. For a
multitude of instances, see Prime, Answers to Prayer. Charles H. Spurgeon:
“If there is any fact that is proved, it is that God hears prayer. If
there is any scientific statement that is capable of mathematical proof,
this is.” Mr. Spurgeon’s language is rhetorical: he means simply that
God’s answers to prayer remove all reasonable doubt. Adoniram Judson: “I
never was deeply interested in any object, I never prayed sincerely and
earnestly for anything, but it came; at some time—no matter at how distant
a day—somehow, in some shape, probably the last I should have devised—it
came. And yet I have always had so little faith! May God forgive me, and
while he condescends to use me as his instrument, wipe the sin of unbelief
from my heart!”

(_b_) In condescension to human blindness, God may sometimes submit to a
formal test of his faithfulness and power,—as in the case of Elijah and
the priests of Baal.


    _Is. 7:10-13_—Ahaz is rebuked for not asking a sign,—in him it
    indicated unbelief. _1 K. 18:36-38_—Elijah said, “_let it be known
    this day that thou art God in Israel.... Then the fire of Jehovah
    fell, and consumed the burnt offering._” Romaine speaks of “a year
    famous for believing.” _Mat 21:21, 22_—“_even if ye shall say unto
    this mountain, Be thou taken up and cast into the sea, it shall be
    done. And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
    believing, ye shall receive._” “Impossible?” said Napoleon; “then
    it shall be done!” Arthur Hallam, quoted in Tennyson’s Life,
    1:44—“With respect to prayer, you ask how I am to distinguish the
    operations of God in me from the motions of my own heart. Why
    should you distinguish them, or how do you know that there is any
    distinction? Is God less God because he acts by general laws when
    he deals with the common elements of nature?” “Watch in prayer to
    see what cometh. Foolish boys that knock at a door in wantonness,
    will not stay till somebody open to them; but a man that hath
    business will knock, and knock again, till he gets his answer.”

    Martineau, Seat of Authority, 102, 103—“God is not beyond nature
    simply,—he is within it. In nature and in mind we must find the
    action of his power. There is no need of his being a third factor
    over and above the life of nature and the life of man.” Hartley
    Coleridge: “Be not afraid to pray,—to pray is right. Pray if thou
    canst with hope, but ever pray, Though hope be weak, or sick with
    long delay; Pray in the darkness, if there be no light. Far is the
    time, remote from human sight, When war and discord on the earth
    shall cease; Yet every prayer for universal peace Avails the
    blessed time to expedite. Whate’er is good to wish, ask that of
    heaven, Though it be what thou canst not hope to see; Pray to be
    perfect, though the material leaven Forbid the spirit so on earth
    to be; But if for any wish thou dar’st not pray, Then pray to God
    to cast that wish away.”


(_c_) When proof sufficient to convince the candid inquirer has been
already given, it may not consist with the divine majesty to abide a test
imposed by mere curiosity or scepticism,—as in the case of the Jews who
sought a sign from heaven.


    _Mat. 12:39_—“_An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a
    sign; and there shall no sign be given to it but the sign of Jonah
    the prophet._” Tyndall’s prayer-gauge would ensure a conflict of
    prayers. Since our present life is a moral probation, delay in the
    answer to our prayers, and even the denial of specific things for
    which we pray, may be only signs of God’s faithfulness and love.
    George Müller: “I myself have been bringing certain requests
    before God now for seventeen years and six months, and never a day
    has passed without my praying concerning them all this time; yet
    the full answer has not come up to the present. But I look for it;
    I confidently expect it.” Christ’s prayer, “_let this cup pass
    away from me_” (_Mat. 26:39_), and Paul’s prayer that the “_thorn
    in the flesh_” might depart from him (_2 Cor. 12:7, 8_), were not
    answered in the precise way requested. No more are our prayers
    always answered in the way we expect. Christ’s prayer was not
    answered by the literal removing of the cup, because the drinking
    of the cup was really his glory; and Paul’s prayer was not
    answered by the literal removal of the thorn, because the thorn
    was needful for his own perfecting. In the case of both Jesus and
    Paul, there were larger interests to be consulted than their own
    freedom from suffering.


(_d_) Since God’s will is the link between prayer and its answer, there
can be no such thing as a physical demonstration of its efficacy in any
proposed case. Physical tests have no application to things into which
free will enters as a constitutive element. But there are moral tests, and
moral tests are as scientific as physical tests can be.


    Diman, Theistic Argument, 576, alludes to Goldwin Smith’s denial
    that any scientific method can be applied to history because it
    would make man a necessary link in a chain of cause and effect and
    so would deny his free will. But Diman says this is no more
    impossible than the development of the individual according to a
    fixed law of growth, while yet free will is sedulously respected.
    Froude says history is not a science, because no science could
    foretell Mohammedanism or Buddhism; and Goldwin Smith says that
    “prediction is the crown of all science.” But, as Diman remarks:
    “geometry, geology, physiology, are sciences, yet they do not
    predict.” Buckle brought history into contempt by asserting that
    it could be analyzed and referred solely to intellectual laws and
    forces. To all this we reply that there may be scientific tests
    which are not physical, or even intellectual, but only moral. Such
    a test God urges his people to use, in _Mal. 3:10_—“_Bring ye the
    whole tithe into the storehouse ... and prove me now herewith, if
    I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a
    blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it._” All
    such prayer is a reflection of Christ’s words—some fragment of his
    teaching transformed into a supplication (_John 15:7_; see
    Westcott, Bib. Com., _in loco_); all such prayer is moreover the
    work of the Spirit of God (_Rom. 8:26, 27_). It is therefore sure
    of an answer.

    But the test of prayer proposed by Tyndall is not applicable to
    the thing to be tested by it. Hopkins, Prayer and the
    Prayer-gauge, 22 _sq._—“We cannot measure wheat by the yard, or
    the weight of a discourse with a pair of scales.... God’s wisdom
    might see that it was not best for the petitioners, nor for the
    objects of their petition, to grant their request. Christians
    therefore could not, without special divine authorization, rest
    their faith upon the results of such a test.... Why may we not ask
    for great changes in nature? For the same reason that a
    well-informed child does not ask for the moon as a plaything....
    There are two limitations upon prayer. First, except by special
    direction of God, we cannot ask for a miracle, for the same reason
    that a child could not ask his father to burn the house down.
    Nature is the house we live in. Secondly, we cannot ask for
    anything under the laws of nature which would contravene the
    object of those laws. Whatever we can do for ourselves under these
    laws, God expects us to do. If the child is cold, let him go near
    the fire,—not beg his father to carry him.”

    Herbert Spencer’s Sociology is only social physics. He denies
    freedom, and declares anyone who will affix D. V. to the
    announcement of the Mildmay Conference to be incapable of
    understanding sociology. Prevision excludes divine or human will.
    But Mr. Spencer intimates that the evils of natural selection may
    be modified by artificial selection. What is this but the
    interference of will? And if man can interfere, cannot God do the
    same? Yet the wise child will not expect the father to give
    everything he asks for. Nor will the father who loves his child
    give him the razor to play with, or stuff him with unwholesome
    sweets, simply because the child asks these things. If the
    engineer of the ocean steamer should give me permission to press
    the lever that sets all the machinery in motion, I should decline
    to use my power and should prefer to leave such matters to him,
    unless he first suggested it and showed me how. So the Holy Spirit
    “_helpeth our infirmity; for we know not how to pray as we ought;
    but the Spirit himself __ maketh intercession for us with
    groanings which cannot be uttered_” (_Rom. 8:26_). And we ought
    not to talk of “submitting” to perfect Wisdom, or of “being
    resigned” to perfect Love. Shakespeare, Antony and Cleopatra,
    2:1—“What they [the gods] do delay, they do not deny.... We,
    ignorant of ourselves, Beg often our own harms, which the wise
    powers Deny us for our good; so find we profit By losing of our
    prayers.” See Thornton, Old-Fashioned Ethics, 286-297. _Per
    contra_, see Galton, Inquiries into Human Faculty, 277-294.


3. To Christian activity.


Here the truth lies between the two extremes of quietism and naturalism.

(_a_) In opposition to the false abnegation of human reason and will which
quietism demands, we hold that God guides us, not by continual miracle,
but by his natural providence and the energizing of our faculties by his
Spirit, so that we rationally and freely do our own work, and work out our
own salvation.


    Upham, Interior Life, 356, defines quietism as “cessation of
    wandering thoughts and discursive imaginations, rest from
    irregular desires and affections, and perfect submission of the
    will.” Its advocates, however, have often spoken of it as a giving
    up of our will and reason, and a swallowing up of these in the
    wisdom and will of God. This phraseology is misleading, and savors
    of a pantheistic merging of man in God. Dorner: “Quietism makes
    God a monarch without living subjects.” Certain English quietists,
    like the Mohammedans, will not employ physicians in sickness. They
    quote _2 Chron. 16:12, 13_—Asa “_sought not to Jehovah, but to the
    physicians. And Asa slept with his fathers_.” They forget that the
    “_physicians_” alluded to in Chronicles were probably heathen
    necromancers. Cromwell to his Ironsides: “Trust God, and keep your
    powder dry!”

    Providence does not exclude, but rather implies the operation of
    natural law, by which we mean God’s regular way of working. It
    leaves no excuse for the sarcasm of Robert Browning’s Mr. Sludge
    the Medium, 223—“Saved your precious self from what befell The
    thirty-three whom Providence forgot.” Schurman, Belief in God,
    213—“The temples were hung with the votive offerings of those only
    who had _escaped_ drowning.” “So like Provvy!” Bentham used to
    say, when anything particularly unseemly occurred in the way of
    natural catastrophe, God reveals himself in natural law.
    Physicians and medicine are his methods, as well as the
    impartation of faith and courage to the patient. The advocates of
    faith-cure should provide by faith that no believing Christian
    should die. With the apostolic miracles should go inspiration, as
    Edward Irving declared. “Every man is as lazy as circumstances
    will admit.” We throw upon the shoulders of Providence the burdens
    which belong to us to bear. “_Work out your own salvation with
    fear and trembling; for it is God who worketh in you both to will
    and to work, for his good pleasure_” (_Phil. 2:12, 13_).

    Prayer without the use of means is an insult to God. “If God has
    decreed that you should live, what is the use of your eating or
    drinking?” Can a drowning man refuse to swim, or even to lay hold
    of the rope that is thrown to him, and yet ask God to save him on
    account of his faith? “Tie your camel,” said Mohammed, “and commit
    it to God.” Frederick Douglas used to say that when in slavery he
    often prayed for freedom, but his prayer was never answered till
    he prayed with his feet—and ran away. Whitney, Integrity of
    Christian Science, 68—“The existence of the dynamo at the
    power-house does not make unnecessary the trolley line, nor the
    secondary motor, nor the conductor’s application of the power.
    True quietism is a resting in the Lord after we have done our
    part.” _Ps. 37:7_—“_Rest in Jehovah, and wait patiently for him_”;
    _Is. 57:2_—“_He entereth into peace; they rest in their beds, each
    one that walketh in his uprightness_”. Ian Maclaren, Cure of
    Souls, 147—“Religion has three places of abode: in the reason,
    which is theology; in the conscience, which is ethics; and in the
    heart, which is quietism.” On the self-guidance of Christ, see
    Adamson, The Mind in Christ, 202-232.

    George Müller, writing about ascertaining the will of God, says:
    “I seek at the beginning to get my heart into such a state that it
    has no will of its own in regard to a given matter. Nine tenths of
    the difficulties are overcome when our hearts are ready to do the
    Lord’s will, whatever it may be. Having done this, I do not leave
    the result to feeling or simple impression. If I do so, I make
    myself liable to a great delusion. I seek the will of the Spirit
    of God through, or in connection with, the Word of God. The Spirit
    and the Word must be combined. If I look to the Spirit alone,
    without the Word, I lay myself open to great delusions also. If
    the Holy Ghost guides us at all, he will do it according to the
    Scriptures, and never contrary to them. Next I take into account
    providential circumstances. These often plainly indicate God’s
    will in connection with his Word and his Spirit. I ask God in
    prayer to reveal to me his will aright. Thus through prayer to
    God, the study of the Word, and reflection, I come to a deliberate
    judgment according to the best of my knowledge and ability, and,
    if my mind is thus at peace, I proceed accordingly.”

    We must not confound rational piety with false enthusiasm. See
    Isaac Taylor, Natural History of Enthusiasm. “Not quiescence, but
    acquiescence, is demanded of us.” As God feeds “_the birds of the
    heaven_” (_Mat. 6:26_), not by dropping food from heaven into
    their mouths, but by stimulating them to seek food for themselves,
    so God provides for his rational creatures by giving them a
    sanctified common sense and by leading them to use it. In a true
    sense Christianity gives us more will than ever. The Holy Spirit
    emancipates the will, sets it upon proper objects, and fills it
    with new energy. We are therefore not to surrender ourselves
    passively to whatever professes to be a divine suggestion: _1 John
    4:1_—“_believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits, whether
    they are of God._” The test is the revealed word of God: _Is.
    8:20_—“_To the law and to the testimony! if they speak not
    according to this word, surely there is no morning for them._” See
    remarks on false Mysticism, pages 32, 33.


(_b_) In opposition to naturalism, we hold that God is continually near
the human spirit by his providential working, and that this providential
working is so adjusted to the Christian’s nature and necessities as to
furnish instruction with regard to duty, discipline of religious
character, and needed help and comfort in trial.

In interpreting God’s providences, as in interpreting Scripture, we are
dependent upon the Holy Spirit. The work of the Spirit is, indeed, in
great part an application of Scripture truth to present circumstances.
While we never allow ourselves to act blindly and irrationally, but
accustom ourselves to weigh evidence with regard to duty, we are to
expect, as the gift of the Spirit, an understanding of circumstances—a
fine sense of God’s providential purposes with regard to us, which will
make our true course plain to ourselves, although we may not always be
able to explain it to others.


    The Christian may have a continual divine guidance. Unlike the
    unfaithful and unbelieving, of whom it is said, in _Ps. 106:13_,
    “_They waited not for his counsel,_” the true believer has wisdom
    given him from above. _Ps. 32:8_—“_I will instruct thee and teach
    thee in the way which thou shalt go_”; _Prov. 3:6_—“_In all thy
    ways acknowledge him, And he will direct thy paths_”; _Phil.
    1:9_—“_And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and
    more in knowledge and all discernment_” (αἰσθήσει = spiritual
    discernment); _James 1:5_—“_if any of you lacketh wisdom, let him
    ask of God, who giveth_ (τοῦ διδόντος Θεοῦ) _to all liberally and
    upbraideth not_”; _John 15:15_—“_No longer do I call you servants;
    for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called
    you friends_”; _Col. 1:9, 10_—“_that ye may be filled with the
    knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding,
    to walk worthily of the Lord unto all pleasing._”

    God’s Spirit makes Providence as well as the Bible personal to us.
    From every page of nature, as well as of the Bible, the living God
    speaks to us. Tholuck: “The more we recognize in every daily
    occurrence God’s secret inspiration, guiding and controlling us,
    the more will all which to others wears a common and every-day
    aspect prove to us a sign and a wondrous work.” Hutton, Essays:
    “Animals that are blind slaves of impulse, driven about by forces
    from within, have so to say fewer valves in their moral
    constitution for the entrance of divine guidance. But minds alive
    to every word of God give constant opportunity for his
    interference with suggestions that may alter the course of their
    lives. The higher the mind, the more it glides into the region of
    providential control. God turns the good by the slightest breath
    of thought.” So the Christian hymn, “Guide me, O thou great
    Jehovah!” likens God’s leading of the believer to that of Israel
    by the pillar of fire and cloud; and Paul in his dungeon calls
    himself “_the prisoner of Christ Jesus_” (_Eph. 3:1_). Affliction
    is the discipline of God’s providence. Greek proverb: “He who does
    not get thrashed, does not get educated.” On God’s Leadings, see
    A. H. Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 560-562.

    Abraham “_went out, not knowing whither he went_” (_Heb. 11:8_).
    Not till he reached Canaan did he know the place of his
    destination. Like a child he placed his hand in the hand of his
    unseen Father, to be led whither he himself knew not. We often
    have guidance without discernment of that guidance. _Is.
    42:16_—“_I will bring the blind by a way that they know not; in
    paths that they know not will I lead them._” So we act more wisely
    than we ourselves understand, and afterwards look back with
    astonishment to see what we have been able to accomplish. Emerson:
    “Himself from God he could not free; He builded better than he
    knew.” Disappointments? Ah, you make a mistake in the spelling;
    the D should be an H: His appointments. Melanchthon: “Quem poetæ
    fortunam, nos Deum appellamus.” Chinese proverb: “The good God
    never smites with both hands.” “Tact is a sort of psychical
    automatism” (Ladd). There is a Christian tact which is rarely at
    fault, because its possessor is “_led by the Spirit of God_”
    (_Rom. 8:14_). Yet we must always make allowance, as Oliver
    Cromwell used to say, “for the possibility of being mistaken.”

    When Luther’s friends wrote despairingly of the negotiations at
    the Diet of Worms, he replied from Coburg that he had been looking
    up at the night sky, spangled and studded with stars, and had
    found no pillars to hold them up. And yet they did not fall. God
    needs no props for his stars and planets. He hangs them on
    nothing. So, in the working of God’s providence, the unseen is
    prop enough for the seen. Henry Drummond, Life, 127—“To find out
    God’s will: 1. Pray. 2. Think. 3. Talk to wise people, but do not
    regard their decision as final. 4. Beware of the bias of your own
    will, but do not be too much afraid of it (God never unnecessarily
    thwarts a man’s nature and likings, and it is a mistake to think
    that his will is always in the line of the disagreeable). 5.
    Meantime, do the next thing (for doing God’s will in small things
    is the best preparation for knowing it in great things). 6. When
    decision and action are necessary, go ahead. 7. Never reconsider
    the decision when it is finally acted on; and 8. You will probably
    not find out until afterwards, perhaps long afterwards, that you
    have been led at all.”

    Amiel lamented that everything was left to his own responsibility
    and declared: “It is this thought that disgusts me with the
    government of my own life. To win true peace, a man needs to feel
    himself directed, pardoned and sustained by a supreme Power, to
    feel himself in the right road, at the point where God would have
    him be,—in harmony with God and the universe. This faith gives
    strength and calm. I have not got it. All that is seems to me
    arbitrary and fortuitous.” How much better is Wordsworth’s faith,
    Excursion, book 4:581—“One adequate support For the calamities of
    mortal life Exists, one only: an assured belief That the
    procession of our fate, howe’er Sad or disturbed, is ordered by a
    Being Of infinite benevolence and power, Whose everlasting
    purposes embrace All accidents, converting them to good.” Mrs.
    Browning, De Profundis, stanza xxiii—“I praise thee while my days
    go on; I love thee while my days go on! Through dark and dearth,
    through fire and frost, With emptied arms and treasure lost, I
    thank thee while my days go on!”


4. To the evil acts of free agents.


(_a_) Here we must distinguish between the natural agency and the moral
agency of God, or between acts of permissive providence and acts of
efficient causation. We are ever to remember that God neither works evil,
nor causes his creatures to work evil. All sin is chargeable to the
self-will and perversity of the creature; to declare God the author of it
is the greatest of blasphemies.


    Bp. Wordsworth: “God _foresees_ evil deeds, but never _forces_
    them.” “God does not cause sin, any more than the rider of a
    limping horse causes the limping.” Nor can it be said that Satan
    is the author of man’s sin. Man’s powers are his own. Not Satan,
    but the man himself, gives the wrong application to these powers.
    Not the cause, but the occasion, of sin is in the tempter; the
    cause is in the evil will which yields to his persuasions.


(_b_) But while man makes up his evil decision independently of God, God
does, by his natural agency, order the method in which this inward evil
shall express itself, by limiting it in time, place, and measure, or by
guiding it to the end which his wisdom and love, and not man’s intent, has
set. In all this, however, God only allows sin to develop itself after its
own nature, so that it may be known, abhorred, and if possible overcome
and forsaken.


    Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:272-284—“Judas’s treachery works the
    reconciliation of the world, and Israel’s apostasy the salvation
    of the Gentiles.... God smooths the path of the sinner, and gives
    him chance for the outbreak of the evil, like a wise physician who
    draws to the surface of the body the disease that has been raging
    within, in order that it may be cured, if possible, by mild means,
    or, if not, may be removed by the knife.”

    Christianity rises in spite of, nay, in consequence of opposition,
    like a kite against the wind. When Christ has used the sword with
    which he has girded himself, as he used Cyrus and the Assyrian, he
    breaks it and throws it away. He turns the world upside down that
    he may get it right side up. He makes use of every member of
    society, as the locomotive uses every cog. The sufferings of the
    martyrs add to the number of the church; the worship of relics
    stimulates the Crusades; the worship of the saints leads to
    miracle plays and to the modern drama; the worship of images helps
    modern art; monasticism, scholasticism, the Papacy, even sceptical
    and destructive criticism stir up defenders of the faith.
    Shakespeare, Richard III, 5:1—“Thus doth he force the swords of
    wicked men To turn their own points on their masters’ bosoms”;
    Hamlet, 1:2—“Foul deeds will rise, though all the earth o’erwhelm
    them, to men’s eyes”; Macbeth, 1:7—“Even handed justice Commends
    the ingredients of the poisoned chalice To our own lips.”

    The Emperor of Germany went to Paris incognito and returned,
    thinking that no one had known of his absence. But at every step,
    going and coming, he was surrounded by detectives who saw that no
    harm came to him. The swallow drove again and again at the little
    struggling moth, but there was a plate glass window between them
    which neither one of them knew. Charles Darwin put his cheek
    against the plate glass of the cobra’s cage, but could not keep
    himself from starting when the cobra struck. Tacitus, Annales,
    14:5—“Noctem sideribus illustrem, quasi convinsendum ad scelus,
    dii præbuere”—“a night brilliant with stars, as if for the purpose
    of proving the crime, was granted by the gods.” See F. A. Noble,
    Our Redemption, 59-76, on the self-registry and self-disclosure of
    sin, with quotation from Daniel Webster’s speech in the case of
    Knapp at Salem: “It must be confessed. It will be confessed. There
    is no refuge from confession but suicide, and suicide is
    confession.”


(_c_) In cases of persistent iniquity, God’s providence still compels the
sinner to accomplish the design with which he and all things have been
created, namely, the manifestation of God’s holiness. Even though he
struggle against God’s plan, yet he must by his very resistance serve it.
His sin is made its own detector, judge, and tormentor. His character and
doom are made a warning to others. Refusing to glorify God in his
salvation, he is made to glorify God in his destruction.


    _Is. 10:5, 7_—“_Ho Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, the staff in
    whose hand is mine indignation!... Howbeit, he meaneth not so._”
    Charles Kingsley, Two Years Ago: “He [Treluddra] is one of those
    base natures, whom fact only lashes into greater fury,—a Pharaoh,
    whose heart the Lord himself can only harden”—here we would add
    the qualification: “consistently with the limits which he has set
    to the operations of his grace.” Pharaoh’s ordering the
    destruction of the Israelitish children (_Ex. 1:16_) was made the
    means of putting Moses under royal protection, of training him for
    his future work, and finally of rescuing the whole nation whose
    sons Pharaoh sought to destroy. So God brings good out of evil;
    see Tyler, Theology of Greek Poets, 28-35. Emerson: “My will
    fulfilled shall be, For in daylight as in dark My thunderbolt has
    eyes to see His way home to the mark.” See also Edwards, Works,
    4:300-312.

    _Col. 2:15_—“_having stripped off from himself the principalities
    and the powers_”—the hosts of evil spirits that swarmed upon him
    in their final onset—“_he made a show of them openly, triumphing
    over them in it_,” _i. e._, in the cross, thus turning their evil
    into a means of good. Royce, Spirit of Modern Philosophy,
    443,—“Love, seeking for absolute evil, is like an electric light
    engaged in searching for a shadow,—when Love gets there, the
    shadow has disappeared.” But this means, not that all things _are_
    good, but that “_all things work together __ for good_” (_Rom.
    8:28_)—God overruling for good that which in itself is only evil.
    John Wesley: “God buries his workmen, but carries on his work.”
    Sermon on “The Devil’s Mistakes”: Satan thought he could overcome
    Christ in the wilderness, in the garden, on the cross. He
    triumphed when he cast Paul into prison. But the cross was to
    Christ a lifting up, that should draw all men to him (_John
    12:32_), and Paul’s imprisonment furnished his epistles to the New
    Testament.

    “It is one of the wonders of divine love that even our blemishes
    and sins God will take when we truly repent of them and give them
    into his hands, and will in some way make them to be blessings. A
    friend once showed Ruskin a costly handkerchief on which a blot of
    ink had been made. ‘Nothing can be done with that,’ the friend
    said, thinking the handkerchief worthless and ruined now. Ruskin
    carried it away with him, and after a time sent it back to his
    friend. In a most skilful and artistic way, he had made a fine
    design in India ink, using the blot as its basis. Instead of being
    ruined, the handkerchief was made far more beautiful and valuable.
    So God takes the blots and stains upon our lives, the disfiguring
    blemishes, when we commit them to him, and by his marvellous grace
    changes them into marks of beauty. David’s grievous sin was not
    only forgiven, but was made a transforming power in his life.
    Peter’s pitiful fall became a step upward through his Lord’s
    forgiveness and gentle dealing.” So “men may rise on stepping
    stones Of their dead selves to higher things” (Tennyson, In
    Memoriam, I).



Section IV.—Good And Evil Angels.


As ministers of divine providence there is a class of finite beings,
greater in intelligence and power than man in his present state, some of
whom positively serve God’s purpose by holiness and voluntary execution of
his will, some negatively, by giving examples to the universe of defeated
and punished rebellion, and by illustrating God’s distinguishing grace in
man’s salvation.

The scholastic subtleties which encumbered this doctrine in the Middle
Ages, and the exaggerated representations of the power of evil spirits
which then prevailed, have led, by a natural reaction, to an undue
depreciation of it in more recent times.


    For scholastic discussions, see Thomas Aquinas, Summa (ed. Migne),
    1:833-993. The scholastics debated the questions, how many angels
    could stand at once on the point of a needle (relation of angels
    to space); whether an angel could be in two places at the same
    time; how great was the interval between the creation of angels
    and their fall; whether the sin of the first angel caused the sin
    of the rest; whether as many retained their integrity as fell;
    whether our atmosphere is the place of punishment for fallen
    angels; whether guardian-angels have charge of children from
    baptism, from birth, or while the infant is yet in the womb of the
    mother; even the excrements of angels were subjects of discussion,
    for if there was “_angels’ food_” (_Ps. 78:25_), and if angels ate
    (_Gen. 18:8_), it was argued that we must take the logical
    consequences.

    Dante makes the creation of angels simultaneous with that of the
    universe at large. “The fall of the rebel angels he considers to
    have taken place within twenty seconds of their creation, and to
    have originated in the pride which made Lucifer unwilling to await
    the time prefixed by his Maker for enlightening him with perfect
    knowledge”—see Rossetti, Shadow of Dante, 14, 15. Milton, unlike
    Dante, puts the creation of angels ages before the creation of
    man. He tells us that Satan’s first name in heaven is now lost.
    The sublime associations with which Milton surrounds the adversary
    diminish our abhorrence of the evil one. Satan has been called the
    hero of the Paradise Lost. Dante’s representation is much more
    true to Scripture. But we must not go to the extreme of giving
    ludicrous designations to the devil. This indicates and causes
    scepticism as to his existence.

    In mediæval times men’s minds were weighed down by the terror of
    the spirit of evil. It was thought possible to sell one’s soul to
    Satan, and such compacts were written with blood. Goethe
    represents Mephistopheles as saying to Faust: “I to thy service
    here agree to bind me, To run and never rest at call of thee; When
    _over yonder_ thou shalt find me, Then thou shalt do as much for
    me.” The cathedrals cultivated and perpetuated this superstition,
    by the figures of malignant demons which grinned from the
    gargoyles of their roofs and the capitals of their columns, and
    popular preaching exalted Satan to the rank of a rival god—a god
    more feared than was the true and living God. Satan was pictured
    as having horns and hoofs—an image of the sensual and
    bestial—which led Cuvier to remark that the adversary could not
    devour, because horns and hoofs indicated not a carnivorous but a
    ruminant quadruped.

    But there is certainly a possibility that the ascending scale of
    created intelligences does not reach its topmost point in man. As
    the distance between man and the lowest forms of life is filled in
    with numberless gradations of being, so it is possible that
    between man and God there exist creatures of higher than human
    intelligence. This possibility is turned to certainty by the
    express declarations of Scripture. The doctrine is interwoven with
    the later as well as with the earlier books of revelation.

    Quenstedt (Theol., 1:629) regards the existence of angels as
    antecedently probable, because there are no gaps in creation;
    nature does not proceed _per saltum_. As we have (1) beings purely
    corporeal, as stones; (2) beings partly corporeal and partly
    spiritual, as men: so we should expect in creation (3) beings
    wholly spiritual, as angels. Godet, in his Biblical Studies of the
    O. T., 1-29, suggests another series of gradations. As we have (1)
    vegetables—species without individuality; (2)
    animals—individuality in bondage to species; and (3) men—species
    overpowered by individuality: so we may expect (4)
    angels—individuality without species.

    If souls live after death, there is certainly a class of
    disembodied spirits. It is not impossible that God may have
    _created_ spirits without bodies. E. G. Robinson, Christian
    Theology, 110—“The existence of lesser deities in all heathen
    mythologies, and the disposition of man everywhere to believe in
    beings superior to himself and inferior to the supreme God, is a
    presumptive argument in favor of their existence.” Locke: “That
    there should be more species of intelligent creatures above us
    than there are of sensible and material below us, is probable to
    me from hence, that in all the visible and corporeal world we see
    no chasms and gaps.” Foster, Christian Life and Theology, 193—“A
    man may certainly believe in the existence of angels upon the
    testimony of one who claims to have come from the heavenly world,
    if he can believe in the Ornithorhyncus upon the testimony of
    travelers.” Tennyson, Two Voices: “This truth within thy mind
    rehearse, That in a boundless universe Is boundless better,
    boundless worse. Think you this world of hopes and fears Could
    find no statelier than his peers In yonder hundred million
    spheres?”

    The doctrine of angels affords a barrier against the false
    conception of this world as including the whole spiritual
    universe. Earth is only part of a larger organism. As Christianity
    has united Jew and Gentile, so hereafter will it blend our own and
    other orders of creation: _Col. 2:10_—“_who is the head of all
    principality and power_”—Christ is the head of angels as well as
    of men; _Eph. 1:10_—“_to sum up all things in Christ, the things
    in the heavens, and the things upon the earth._” On Christ and
    Angels, see Robertson Smith in The Expositor, second series, vols.
    1, 2, 3. On the general subject of angels, see also Whately, Good
    and Evil Angels; Twesten, transl. in Bib. Sac., 1:768, and 2:108;
    Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:282-337, and 3:251-354; Birks,
    Difficulties of Belief, 78 sq.; Scott, Existence of Evil Spirits;
    Herzog, Encyclopädie, arts.: Engel, Teufel; Jewett,
    Diabolology,—the Person and Kingdom of Satan; Alexander, Demonic
    Possession.


I. Scripture Statements and Imitations.


1. As to the nature and attributes of angels.


(_a_) They are created beings.


    _Ps. 148:2-5_—“_Praise ye him, all his angels.... For he
    commanded, and they were created_”; _Col. 1:16_—“_for in him were
    all things created ... whether thrones or dominions or
    principalities or powers_”; _cf._ _1 Pet. 3:32_—“_angels and
    authorities and powers._” God alone is uncreated and eternal. This
    is implied in _1 Tim. 6:16_—“_who only hath immortality._”


(_b_) They are incorporeal beings.


    In _Heb. 1:14_, where a single word is used to designate angels,
    they are described as “_spirits_”—“_are they not all ministering
    spirits?_” Men, with their twofold nature, material as well as
    immaterial, could not well be designated as “_spirits_.” That
    their being characteristically “_spirits_” forbids us to regard
    angels as having a bodily organism, seems implied in _Eph.
    6:12_—“_for our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but
    against ... the spiritual hosts_ [or “_things_”] _of wickedness in
    the heavenly places_”; cf. _Eph. 1:3_; _2:6_. In _Gen. 6:2_,
    “_sons of God_” =, not angels, but descendants of Seth and
    worshipers of the true God (see Murphy, Com., _in loco_). In _Ps.
    78:25_ (A. V.), “_angels’ food_” = manna coming from heaven where
    angels dwell; better, however, read with Rev. Vers.: “_bread of
    the mighty_”—probably meaning angels, though the word “_mighty_”
    is nowhere else applied to them; possibly = “bread of princes or
    nobles,” _i. e._, the finest, most delicate bread. _Mat
    22:30_—“_neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as
    angels in heaven_”—and _Luke 20:36_—“_neither can they die any
    more: for they are equal unto the angels_”—imply only that angels
    are without distinctions of sex. Saints are to be like angels, not
    as being incorporeal, but as not having the same sexual relations
    which they have here.

    There are no “souls of angels,” as there are “_souls of men_”
    (_Rev. 18:13_), and we may infer that angels have no bodies for
    souls to inhabit; see under Essential Elements of Human Nature.
    Nevius, Demon-Possession, 258, attributes to evil spirits an
    instinct or longing for a body to possess, even though it be the
    body of an inferior animal: “So in Scripture we have spirits
    represented as wandering about to seek rest in bodies, and asking
    permission to enter into swine” (_Mat. 12:43; 8:31_). Angels
    therefore, since they have no bodies, know nothing of growth, age,
    or death. Martensen, Christian Dogmatics, 133—“It is precisely
    because the angels are only spirits, but not souls, that they
    cannot possess the same rich existence as man, whose soul is the
    point of union in which spirit and nature meet.”


(_c_) They are personal—that is, intelligent and voluntary—agents.


    _2 Sam. 14:20_—“_wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of
    God_”; _Luke 4:34_—“_I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of
    God_”; _2 Tim. 2:26_—“_snare of the devil ... taken captive by him
    unto his will_”; _Rev. 22:9_—“_See thou do it not_” = exercise of
    will; _Rev. 12:12_—“_The devil is gone down unto you, having great
    wrath_” = set purpose of evil.


(_d_) They are possessed of superhuman intelligence and power, yet an
intelligence and power that has its fixed limits.


    _Mat. 24:36_—“_of that day and hour knoweth no one, not even the
    angels of heaven_” = their knowledge, though superhuman, is yet
    finite. _1 Pet. 1:12_—“_which things angels desire to look into_”;
    _Ps. 103:20_—“_angels ... mighty in strength_”; _2 Thess.
    1:7_—“_the angels of his power_”; _2 Pet. 2:11_—“_angels, though
    greater_ [than men] _in might and power_”; _Rev. 20:2, 10_—“_laid
    hold on the dragon ... and bound him ... cast into the lake of
    fire._” Compare _Ps. 72:18_—“_God ... Who only doeth wondrous
    things_” = only God can perform miracles. Angels are imperfect
    compared with God (_Job 4:18; 15:15; 25:5_).

    Power, rather than beauty or intelligence, is their striking
    characteristic. They are “_principalities and powers_” (_Col.
    1:16_). They terrify those who behold them (_Mat. 28:4_). The
    rolling away of the stone from the sepulchre took strength. A
    wheel of granite, eight feet in diameter and one foot thick,
    rolling in a groove, would weigh more than four tons. Mason, Faith
    of the Gospel, 86—“The spiritual might and burning indignation in
    the face of Stephen reminded the guilty Sanhedrin of an angelic
    vision.” Even in their tenderest ministrations they strengthen
    (_Luke 22:43_; _cf._ _Dan. 10:19_). In _1 Tim. 6:15_—“_King of
    kings and Lord of lords_”—the words “_kings_” and “_lords_”
    (βασιλευόντων and κυριευόντων) may refer to angels. In the case of
    evil spirits especially, power seems the chief thing in mind, _e.
    g._, “_the prince of this world_,” “_the strong man armed_,” “_the
    power of darkness_,” “_rulers of the darkness of this world_,”
    “_the great dragon,_” “_all the power of the enemy_,” “_all these
    things will I give thee_,” “_deliver us from the evil one_.”


(_e_) They are an order of intelligences distinct from man and older than
man.


    Angels are distinct from man. _1 Cor. 6:3_—“_we shall judge
    angels_”; _Heb. 1:14_—“_Are they not all ministering spirits, sent
    forth to do service for the sake of them that shall inherit
    salvation?_” They are not glorified human spirits; see _Heb.
    2:16_—“_for verily not to angels doth he give help, but he giveth
    help to __ the seed of Abraham_”; also _12:22, 23_, where “_the
    innumerable hosts of angels_” are distinguished from “_the church
    of the firstborn_” and “_the spirits of just men made perfect_.”
    In _Rev. 22:9_—“_I am a fellow-servant with
    thee_”—“_fellow-servant_” intimates likeness to men, not in
    nature, but in service and subordination to God, the proper object
    of worship. Sunday School Times, Mch. 15, 1902:146—“Angels are
    spoken of as greater in power and might than man, but that could
    be said of many a lower animal, or even of whirlwind and fire.
    Angels are never spoken of as a superior order of spiritual
    beings. We are to ‘_judge angels_’ (_1 Cor. 6:3_), and inferiors
    are not to judge superiors.”

    Angels are an order of intelligences older than man. The Fathers
    made the creation of angels simultaneous with the original calling
    into being of the elements, perhaps basing their opinion on the
    apocryphal Ecclesiasticus, 18:1—“he that liveth eternally created
    all things together.” In _Job 38:7_, the Hebrews parallelism makes
    “_morning stars_”—“_sons of God,_” so that angels are spoken of as
    present at certain stages of God’s creative work. The mention of
    “_the serpent_” in _Gen. 3:1_ implies the fall of Satan before the
    fall of man. We may infer that the creation of angels took place
    before the creation of man—the lower before the higher. In _Gen.
    2:1_, “_all the host of them,_” which God had created, may be
    intended to include angels. Man was the crowning work of creation,
    created after angels were created. Mason, Faith of the Gospel,
    81—“Angels were perhaps created before the material heavens and
    earth—a spiritual substratum in which the material things were
    planted, a preparatory creation to receive what was to follow. In
    the vision of Jacob they ascend first and descend after; their
    natural place is in the world below.”


The constant representation of angels as personal beings in Scripture
cannot be explained as a personification of abstract good and evil, in
accommodation to Jewish superstitions, without wresting many narrative
passages from their obvious sense; implying on the part of Christ either
dissimulation or ignorance as to an important point of doctrine; and
surrendering belief in the inspiration of the Old Testament from which
these Jewish views of angelic beings were derived.


    Jesus accommodated himself to the popular belief in respect at
    least to “_Abraham’s bosom_” (_Luke 16:22_), and he confessed
    ignorance with regard to the time of the end (_Mark 13:32_); see
    Rush Rhees, Life of Jesus of Nazareth, 245-248. But in the former
    case his hearers probably understood him to speak figuratively and
    rhetorically, while in the latter case there was no teaching of
    the false but only limitation of knowledge with regard to the
    true. Our Lord did not hesitate to contradict Pharisaic belief in
    the efficacy of ceremonies, and Sadducean denial of resurrection
    and future life. The doctrine of angels had even stronger hold
    upon the popular mind than had these errors of the Pharisees and
    Sadducees. That Jesus did not correct or deny the general belief,
    but rather himself expressed and confirmed it, implies that the
    belief was rational and Scriptural. For one of the best statements
    of the argument for the existence of evil spirits, see Broadus,
    Com. on _Mat. 8:28_.

    _Eph. 3:10_—“_to the intent that now unto the principalities and
    the powers in the heavenly places might be made known through the
    church the manifold wisdom of God_”—excludes the hypothesis that
    angels are simply abstract conceptions of good or evil. We speak
    of “moon-struck” people (lunatics), only when we know that nobody
    supposes us to believe in the power of the moon to cause madness.
    But Christ’s contemporaries _did_ suppose him to believe in
    angelic spirits, good and evil. If this belief was an error, it
    was by no means a harmless one, and the benevolence as well as the
    veracity of Christ would have led him to correct it. So too, if
    Paul had known that there were no such beings as angels, he could
    not honestly have contented himself with forbidding the Colossians
    to worship them (_Col 2:18_) but would have denied their
    existence, as he denied the existence of heathen gods (_1 Cor.
    8:4_).

    Theodore Parker said it was very evident that Jesus Christ
    believed in a personal devil. Harnack, Wesen des Christenthums,
    35—“There can be no doubt that Jesus shared with his
    contemporaries the representation of two kingdoms, the kingdom of
    God and the kingdom of the devil.” Wendt, Teaching of Jesus,
    1:164—Jesus “makes it appear as if Satan was the immediate
    tempter. I am far from thinking that he does so in a merely
    figurative way. Beyond all doubt Jesus accepted the contemporary
    ideas as to the real existence of Satan, and accordingly, in the
    particular cases of disease referred to, he supposes a real
    Satanic temptation.” Maurice, Theological Essays, 32, 34—“The
    acknowledgment of an evil spirit is characteristic of
    Christianity.” H. B. Smith, System, 261—“It would appear that the
    power of Satan in the world reached its culminating point at the
    time of Christ, and has been less ever since.”


The same remark applies to the view which regards Satan as but a
collective term for all evil beings, human or superhuman. The Scripture
representations of the progressive rage of the great adversary, from his
first assault on human virtue in Genesis to his final overthrow in
Revelation, join with the testimony of Christ just mentioned, to forbid
any other conclusion than this, that there is a personal being of great
power, who carries on organized opposition to the divine government.


    Crane, The Religion of To-morrow, 299 sq.—“We well say ‘personal
    devil,’ for there is no devil but personality.” We cannot deny the
    personality of Satan except upon principles which would compel us
    to deny the existence of good angels, the personality of the Holy
    Spirit, and the personality of God the Father,—we may add, even
    the personality of the human soul. Says Nigel Penruddock in Lord
    Beaconsfield’s “Endymion”: “Give me a single argument against his
    [Satan’s] personality, which is not applicable to the personality
    of the Deity.” One of the most ingenious devices of Satan is that
    of persuading men that he has no existence. Next to this is the
    device of substituting for belief in a personal devil the belief
    in a merely impersonal spirit of evil. Such a substitution we find
    in Pfleiderer, Philosophy of Religion, 1:311—“The idea of the
    devil was a welcome expedient for the need of advanced religious
    reflection, to put God out of relation to the evil and badness of
    the world.” Pfleiderer tells us that the early optimism of the
    Hebrews, like that of the Greeks, gave place in later times to
    pessimism and despair. But the Hebrews still had hope of
    deliverance by the Messiah and an apocalyptic reign of good.

    For the view that Satan is merely a collective term for all evil
    beings, see Bushnell, Nature and the Supernatural, 131-137.
    Bushnell, holding moral evil to be a necessary “condition
    privative” of all finite beings as such, believes that “good
    angels have all been passed through and helped up out of a fall,
    as the redeemed of mankind will be.” “_Elect angels_” (_1 Tim.
    5:21_) then would mean those saved _after_ falling, not those
    saved _from_ falling; and “_Satan_” would be, not the name of a
    particular person, but the all or total of all bad minds and
    powers. _Per contra_, see Smith’s Bible Dictionary, arts.: Angels,
    Demons, Demoniacs, Satan; Trench, Studies in the Gospels, 16-26.
    For a comparison of Satan in the Book of Job, with Milton’s Satan
    in “Paradise Lost,” and Goethe’s Mephistopheles in “Faust,” see
    Masson, The Three Devils. We may add to this list Dante’s Satan
    (or Dis) in the “Divine Comedy,” Byron’s Lucifer in “Cain,” and
    Mrs. Browning’s Lucifer in her “Drama of Exile”; see Gregory,
    Christian Ethics, 219.


2. As to their number and organization.


(_a_) They are of great multitude.


    _Deut. 33:2_—“_Jehovah ... came from the ten thousands of holy
    ones_”; _Ps. 68:17_—“_The chariots of God are twenty thousand,
    even thousands upon thousands_”; _Dan. 7:10_—“_thousands of
    thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
    stood before him_”; _Rev. 5:11_—“_I heard a voice of many angels
    ... and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand,
    and thousands of thousands._” Anselm thought that the number of
    lost angels was filled up by the number of elect men. Savage, Life
    after Death, 61—The Pharisees held very exaggerated notions of the
    number of angelic spirits. They “said that a man, if he threw a
    stone over his shoulder or cast away a broken piece of pottery,
    asked pardon of any spirit that he might possibly have hit in so
    doing.” So in W. H. H. Murray’s time it was said to be dangerous
    in the Adirondack to fire a gun,—you might hit a man.


(_b_) They constitute a company, as distinguished from a race.


    _Mat. 22:30_—“_they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but
    are as angels in heaven_”; _Luke 20:36_—“_neither can they die any
    more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are sons of God._”
    We are called “_sons of men_,” but angels are never called “_sons
    of angels_,” but only “_sons of God_.” They are not developed from
    one original stock, and no such common nature binds them together
    as binds together the race of man. They have no common character
    and history. Each was created separately, and each apostate angel
    fell by himself. Humanity fell all at once in its first father.
    Cut down a tree, and you cut down its branches. But angels were so
    many separate trees. Some lapsed into sin, but some remained holy.
    See Godet, Bib. Studies O. T., 1-29. This may be one reason why
    salvation was provided for fallen man, but not for fallen angels.
    Christ could join himself to humanity by taking the common nature
    of all. There was no common nature of angels which he could take.
    See _Heb. 2:16_—“_not to angels doth he give help._” The angels
    are “_sons of God_,” as having no earthly parentage and no
    parentage at all except the divine. _Eph. 3:14, 15_—“_the Father,
    of whom every fatherhood in heaven and on earth is named,_”—not
    “_every family_,” as in R. V., for there are no families among the
    angels. The marginal rendering “_fatherhood_” is better than
    “_family_,”—all the πατριαί are named from the πατήρ. Dodge,
    Christian Theology, 172—“The bond between angels is simply a
    mental and moral one. They can gain nothing by inheritance,
    nothing through domestic and family life, nothing through a
    society held together by a bond of blood.... Belonging to two
    worlds and not simply to one, the human soul has in it the springs
    of a deeper and wider experience than angels can have.... God
    comes nearer to man than to his angels.” Newman Smyth, Through
    Science to Faith, 191—“In the resurrection life of man, the
    species has died; man the individual lives on. Sex shall be no
    more needed for the sake of life; they shall no more marry, but
    men and women, the children of marriage, shall be as the angels.
    Through the death of the human species shall be gained, as the
    consummation of all, the immortality of the individuals.”


(_c_) They are of various ranks and endowments.


    _Col. 1:16_—“_thrones or dominions or principalities or powers_”;
    _1 Thess. 4:16_—“_the voice of the archangel_”; _Jude 9_—“_Michael
    the archangel._” Michael (= who is like God?) is the only one
    expressly called an archangel in Scripture, although Gabriel (=
    God’s hero) has been called an archangel by Milton. In Scripture,
    Michael seems the messenger of law and judgment; Gabriel, the
    messenger of mercy and promise. The fact that Scripture has but
    one archangel is proof that its doctrine of angels was not, as has
    sometimes been charged, derived from Babylonian and Persian
    sources; for there we find seven archangels instead of one. There,
    moreover, we find the evil spirit enthroned as a god, while in
    Scripture he is represented as a trembling slave.

    Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 1:51—“The devout and trustful
    consciousness of the immediate nearness of God, which is expressed
    in so many beautiful utterances of the Psalmist, appears to be
    supplanted in later Judaism by a belief in angels, which is
    closely analogous to the superstitious belief in the saints on the
    part of the Romish church. It is very significant that the Jews in
    the time of Jesus could no longer conceive of the promulgation of
    the law on Sinai, which was to them the foundation of their whole
    religion, as an immediate revelation of Jehovah to Moses, except
    as instituted through the mediation of angels (_Acts 7:38, 53_;
    _Gal. 3:19_; _Heb. 2:2_; Josephus, Ant. 15:5, 3).”


(_d_) They have an organization.


    _1 Sam. 1:11_—“_Jehovah of hosts_”; _1 K. 22:19_—“_Jehovah sitting
    on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on his
    right hand and on his left_”; _Mat. 26:53_—“_twelve legions of
    angels_”—suggests the organization of the Roman army;
    _25:41_—“_the devil and his angels_”; _Eph. 2:2_—“_the prince of
    the powers in the air_”; _Rev. 2:13_—“_Satan’s throne_” (not
    “_seat_”); _16:10_—“_throne of the beast_”—“a hellish parody of
    the heavenly kingdom” (Trench). The phrase “_host of heaven_,” in
    _Deut. 4:19_; _17:3_; _Acts 7:42_, probably = the stars; but in
    _Gen. 32:2_, “_God’s host_” = angels, for when Jacob saw the
    angels he said “_this is God’s host_.” In general the phrases
    “_God of hosts_”, “_Lord of hosts_” seem to mean “God of angels”,
    “Lord of angels”: compare _2 Chron. 18:18_; _Luke 2:13_; _Rev.
    19:14_—“_the armies which are in heaven._” Yet in _Neh. 9:6_ and
    _Ps. 33:6_ the word “_host_” seems to include both angels and
    stars.

    Satan is “the ape of God.” He has a throne. He is “_the prince of
    the world_” (_John 14:30; 16:11_), “_the prince of the powers of
    the air_” (_Eph. 2:2_). There is a cosmos and order of evil, as
    well as a cosmos and order of good, though Christ is stronger than
    the strong man armed (_Luke 11:21_) and rules even over Satan. On
    Satan in the Old Testament, see art. by T. W. Chambers, in Presb.
    and Ref. Rev., Jan. 1892:22-34. The first mention of Satan is in
    the account of the Fall in _Gen. 3:1-15_; the second in _Lev.
    16:8_, where one of the two goats on the day of atonement is said
    to be “_for Azazel_,” or Satan; the third where Satan moved David
    to number Israel (_1 Chron. 21:1_); the fourth in the book of _Job
    1:6-12_; the fifth in _Zech. 3:1-3_, where Satan stands as the
    adversary of Joshua the high priest, but Jehovah addresses Satan
    and rebukes him. Cheyne, Com. on Isaiah, vol. 1, p. 11, thinks
    that the stars were first called the hosts of God, with the notion
    that they were animated creatures. In later times the belief in
    angels threw into the background the belief in the stars as
    animated beings; the angels however were connected very closely
    with the stars. Marlowe, in his Tamburlaine, says: “The moon, the
    planets, and the meteors light, These angels in their crystal
    armor fight A doubtful battle.”


With regard to the “cherubim” of Genesis, Exodus, and Ezekiel,—with which
the “seraphim” of Isaiah and the “living creatures” of the book of
Revelation are to be identified,—the most probable interpretation is that
which regards them, not as actual beings of higher rank than man, but as
symbolic appearances, intended to represent redeemed humanity, endowed
with all the creature perfections lost by the Fall, and made to be the
dwelling-place of God.


    Some have held that the cherubim are symbols of the divine
    attributes, or of God’s government over nature; see Smith’s Bib.
    Dict., art.: Cherub; Alford, Com. on _Rev. 4:6-8_, and Hulsean
    Lectures, 1841: vol. 1, Lect. 2; Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:278. But
    whatever of truth belongs to this view may be included in the
    doctrine stated above. The cherubim are indeed symbols of nature
    pervaded by the divine energy and subordinated to the divine
    purposes, but they are symbols of nature only because they are
    symbols of man in his twofold capacity of _image of God_ and
    _priest of nature_. Man, as having a body, is a part of nature; as
    having a soul, he emerges from nature and gives to nature a voice.
    Through man, nature, otherwise blind and dead, is able to
    appreciate and to express the Creator’s glory.

    The doctrine of the cherubim embraces the following points: 1. The
    cherubim are not personal beings, but are artificial, temporary,
    symbolic figures. 2. While they are not themselves personal
    existences, they are symbols of personal existence—symbols not of
    divine or angelic perfections but of human nature (_Ex.
    1:5_—“_they had the likeness of a man_”; _Rev. 5:9_—A. V.—“_thou
    hast redeemed us to God by thy blood_”—so read א, B, and
    Tregelles; the Eng. and Am. Rev. Vers., however, follow A and
    Tischendorf, and omit the word “_us_”). 3. They are emblems of
    human nature, not in its present stage of development, but
    possessed of all its original perfections; for this reason the
    most perfect animal forms—the kinglike courage of the lion, the
    patient service of the ox, the soaring insight of the eagle—are
    combined with that of man (_Ez. 1_ and _10_; _Rev. 4:6-8_). 4.
    These cherubic forms represent, not merely material or earthly
    perfections, but human nature spiritualized and sanctified. They
    are “_living creatures_” and their life is a holy life of
    obedience to the divine will (_Ez. 1:12_—“_whither the spirit was
    to go, they went_”). 5. They symbolize a human nature exalted to
    be the dwelling-place of God. Hence the inner curtains of the
    tabernacle were inwoven with cherubic figures, and God’s glory was
    manifested on the mercy-seat between the cherubim (_Ex. 37:6-9_).
    While the flaming sword at the gates of Eden was the symbol of
    justice, the cherubim were symbols of mercy—keeping the “_way of
    the tree of life_” for man, until by sacrifice and renewal
    Paradise should be regained (_Gen. 3:24_).

    In corroboration of this general view, note that angels and
    cherubim never go together; and that in the closing visions of the
    book of Revelation these symbolic forms are seen no longer. When
    redeemed humanity has entered heaven, the figures which typified
    that humanity, having served their purpose, finally disappear. For
    fuller elaboration, see A. H. Strong, The Nature and Purpose of
    the Cherubim, in Philosophy and Religion, 391-399; Fairbairn,
    Typology, 1:185-208; Elliott, Horæ Apocalypticæ, 1:87; Bib. Sac.,
    1876:32-51; Bib. Com., 1:49-52—“The winged lions, eagles, and
    bulls, that guard the entrances of the palace of Nineveh, are
    worshipers rather than divinities.” It has lately been shown that
    the winged bull of Assyria was called “Kerub” almost as far back
    as the time of Moses. The word appears in its Hebrew form 500
    years before the Jews had any contact with the Persian dominion.
    The Jews did not derive it from any Aryan race. It belonged to
    their own language.

    The variable form of the cherubim seems to prove that they are
    symbolic appearances rather than real beings. A parallel may be
    found in classical literature. In Horace, Carmina, 3:11, 15,
    Cerberus has three heads; in 2:13, 34, he has a hundred. Bréal,
    Semantics suggests that the three heads may be dog-heads, while
    the hundred heads may be snake-heads. But Cerberus is also
    represented in Greece as having only one head. Cerberus must
    therefore be a symbol rather than an actually existing creature.
    H. W. Congdon of Wyoming, N. Y., held, however, that the cherubim
    are symbols of God’s life in the universe as a whole. _Ez.
    28:14-19_—“_the anointed cherub that covereth_”—the power of the
    King of Tyre was so all-pervading throughout his dominion, his
    sovereignty so absolute, and his decrees so instantly obeyed, that
    his rule resembled the divine government over the world. Mr.
    Congdon regarded the cherubim as a proof of monism. See
    Margoliouth, The Lord’s Prayer, 159-180. On animal characteristics
    in man, see Hopkins, Scriptural Idea of Man, 105.


3. As to their moral character.


(_a_) They were all created holy.


    _Gen. 1:31_—“_God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it
    was very good_”; _Jude 6_—“_angels that kept not their own
    beginning_”—ἀρχήν seems here to mean their beginning in holy
    character, rather than their original lordship and dominion.


(_b_) They had a probation.


    This we infer from _1 Tim. 5:21_—“_the elect angels_”; _cf._ _1
    Pet. 1:1, 2_—“_elect ... unto obedience._” If certain angels, like
    certain men, are “_elect ... unto obedience_,” it would seem to
    follow that there was a period of probation, during which their
    obedience or disobedience determined their future destiny; see
    Ellicott on _1 Tim. 5:21_. Mason, Faith of the Gospel,
    106-108—“_Gen. 3:14_—‘_Because thou hast done this, cursed art
    thou_’—in the sentence on the serpent, seems to imply that Satan’s
    day of grace was ended when he seduced man. Thenceforth he was
    driven to live on dust, to triumph only in sin, to pick up a
    living out of man, to possess man’s body or soul, to tempt from
    the good.”


(_c_) Some preserved their integrity.


    _Ps. 89:7_—“_the council of the holy ones_”—a designation of
    angels; _Mark 8:38_—“_the holy angels._” Shakespeare, Macbeth,
    4:3—“Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.”


(_d_) Some fell from their state of innocence.


    _John 8:44_—“_He was a murderer from the beginning, and standeth
    not in the truth, because there is no truth in him_”; _2 Pet.
    2:4_—“_angels when they sinned_”; _Jude 6_—“_angels who kept not
    their own beginning, but left their proper habitation._”
    Shakespeare, Henry VIII, 3:2—“Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away
    ambition; By that sin fell the angels; how can man then, The image
    of his Maker, hope to win by it?... How wretched Is that poor man
    that hangs on princes’ favors!... When he falls, he falls like
    Lucifer, Never to hope again.”


(_e_) The good are confirmed in good.


    _Mat. 6:10_—“_Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth_”;
    _18:10_—“_in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my
    Father who is in heaven_”; _2 Cor. 11:14_—“_an angel of light._”


(_f_) The evil are confirmed in evil.


    _Mat. 13:19_—“_the evil one_”; _1 John 5:18, 19_—“_the evil one
    toucheth him not ... the whole world lieth in the evil one_”;
    _cf._ _John 8:44_—“_Ye are of your father the devil ... When he
    speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the
    father thereof_”; _Mat. 6:13_—“_deliver us from the evil one._”

    From these Scriptural statements we infer that all free creatures
    pass through a period of probation; that probation does not
    necessarily involve a fall; that there is possible a sinless
    development of moral beings. Other Scriptures seem to intimate
    that the revelation of God in Christ is an object of interest and
    wonder to other orders of intelligence than our own; that they are
    drawn in Christ more closely to God and to us; in short, that they
    are confirmed in their integrity by the cross. See _1 Pet.
    1:12_—“_which things angels desire to look into_”; _Eph.
    3:10_—“_that now unto the principalities and the powers in the
    heavenly places might be made known through the church the
    manifold wisdom of God_”; _Col. 1:20_—“_through him to reconcile
    all things unto himself ... whether things upon the earth, or
    things in the heavens_”; _Eph. 1:10_—“_to sum up all things in
    Christ, the things in the heavens, and the things upon the
    earth_”—“the unification of the whole universe in Christ as the
    divine centre.... The great system is a harp all whose strings are
    in tune but one, and that one jarring string makes discord
    throughout the whole. The whole universe shall feel the influence,
    and shall be reduced to harmony, when that one string, the world
    in which we live, shall be put in tune by the hand of love and
    mercy”—freely quoted from Leitch, God’s Glory in the Heavens,
    327-330.

    It is not impossible that God is using this earth as a
    breeding-ground from which to populate the universe. Mark Hopkins,
    Life, 317—“While there shall be gathered at last and preserved, as
    Paul says, a holy church, and every man shall be perfect and the
    church shall be spotless.... there will be other forms of
    perfection in other departments of the universe. And when the
    great day of restitution shall come and God shall vindicate his
    government, there may be seen to be coming in from other
    departments of the universe a long procession of angelic forms,
    great white legions from Sirius, from Arcturus and the chambers of
    the South, gathering around the throne of God and that centre
    around which the universe revolves.”


4. As to their employments.


A. The employments of good angels.


(_a_) They stand in the presence of God and worship him.


    _Ps. 29:1, 2_—“_Ascribe unto Jehovah, O ye sons of the mighty,
    Ascribe unto Jehovah glory and strength. Ascribe unto Jehovah the
    glory due unto his name. Worship Jehovah in holy array_”—Perowne:
    “Heaven being thought of as one great temple, and all the
    worshipers therein as clothed in priestly vestments.” _Ps.
    89:7_—“_a God very terrible in the council of the holy ones,_” _i.
    e._, angels—Perowne: “Angels are called an assembly or
    congregation, as the church above, which like the church below
    worships and praises God.” _Mat. 18:10_—“_in heaven their angels
    do always behold the face of my Father who is in heaven._” In
    apparent allusion to this text, Dante represents the saints as
    dwelling in the presence of God yet at the same time rendering
    humble service to their fellow men here upon the earth. Just in
    proportion to their nearness to God and the light they receive
    from him, is the influence they are able to exert over others.


(_b_) They rejoice in God’s works.


    _Job 38:7_—“_all the sons of God shouted for joy_”; _Luke
    15:10_—“_there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over
    one sinner that repenteth_”; _cf._ _2 Tim. 2:25_—“_if peradventure
    God may give them repentance._” Dante represents the angels that
    are nearest to God, the infinite source of life, as ever advancing
    toward the spring-time of youth, so that the oldest angels are the
    youngest.


(_c_) They execute God’s will,—by working in nature;


    _Ps. 103:20_—“_Ye his angels ... that fulfil his word, Hearkening
    unto the voice of his word_”; _104:4_ marg.—“_Who maketh his
    angels winds_; _His ministers a flaming fire_,” _i. e._,
    lightnings. See Alford on _Heb. 1:7_—“The order of the Hebrew
    words here [in _Ps. 104:4_] is not the same as in the former
    verses (see especially _v. 3_), where we have: ‘_Who maketh the
    clouds his chariot_.’ For this transposition, those who insist
    that the passage means ‘he maketh winds his messengers’ can give
    no reason.”

    Farrar on _Heb. 1:7_—“_He maketh his angels winds_”; “The Rabbis
    often refer to the fact that God makes his angels assume any form
    he pleases, whether man (_Gen. 18:2_) or woman (_Zech 5:9_—‘_two
    women, and the wind was in their wings_’), or wind or flame (_Ex.
    3:2_—‘_angel ... in a flame of fire_’; _2 K. 6:17_). But that
    untenable and fleeting form of existence which is the glory of the
    angels would be an inferiority in the Son. He could not be
    clothed, as they are at God’s will, in the fleeting robes of
    material phenomena.” John Henry Newman, in his Apologia, sees an
    angel in every flower. Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 82—“Origen
    thought not a blade of grass nor a fly was without its angel.
    _Rev. 14:18_—an angel ‘_that hath power over fire_’; _John
    5:4_—intermittent spring under charge of an angel; _Mat.
    28:2_—descent of an angel caused earthquake on the morning of
    Christ’s resurrection; _Luke 13:11_—control of diseases is
    ascribed to angels.”


(_d_) by guiding the affairs of nations;


    _Dan. 10:12, 13, 21_—“_I come for thy words’ sake. But the prince
    of the kingdom of Persia withstood me ... Michael, one of the
    chief princes, came to help me ... Michael your prince_”;
    _11:1_—“_And as for me, in the first year of Darius the Mede, I
    stood up to confirm and strengthen him_”; _12:1_—“_at that time
    shall Michael stand up, the great prince who standeth for the
    children of thy people._” Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 87, suggests
    the question whether “the spirit of the age” or “the national
    character” in any particular case may not be due to the unseen
    “principalities” under which men live. Paul certainly recognizes,
    in _Eph. 2:2_, “_the prince of the powers of the air, ... the
    spirit that now worketh in the sons of disobedience._” May not
    good angels be entrusted with influence over nations’ affairs to
    counteract the evil and help the good?


(_e_) by watching over the interests of particular churches;


    _1 Cor. 11:10_—“_for this cause ought the women to have a sign of
    authority_ [_i. e._, a veil] _on her head, because of the
    angels_”—who watch over the church and have care for its order.
    Matheson, Spiritual Development of St. Paul, 242—“Man’s covering
    is woman’s power. Ministration _is_ her power and it allies her
    with a greater than man—the angel. Christianity is a feminine
    strength. Judaism had made woman only a means to an end—the
    multiplication of the race. So it had degraded her. Paul will
    restore woman to her original and equal dignity.” _Col.
    2:18_—“_Let no man rob you of your prize by a voluntary humility
    and worshiping of the angels_”—a false worship which would be very
    natural if angels were present to guard the meetings of the
    saints. _1 Tim. 5:21_—“_I charge thee in the sight of God, and
    Christ Jesus, and the elect angels, that thou observe these
    things_”—the public duties of the Christian minister.

    Alford regards “_the angels of the seven churches_” (_Rev. 1:20_)
    as superhuman beings appointed to represent and guard the
    churches, and that upon the grounds: (1) that the word is used
    elsewhere in the book of Revelation only in this sense; and (2)
    that nothing in the book is addressed to a teacher individually,
    but all to some one who reflects the complexion and fortunes of
    the church as no human person could. We prefer, however, to regard
    “_the angels of the seven churches_” as meaning simply the pastors
    of the seven churches. The word “_angel_” means simply
    “messenger,” and may be used of human as well as of superhuman
    beings—see _Hag. 1:13_—“_Haggai, Jehovah’s messenger_”—literally,
    “_the angel of Jehovah_.” The use of the word in this figurative
    sense would not be incongruous with the mystical character of the
    book of Revelation (see Bib. Sac. 12:339). John Lightfoot, Heb.
    and Talmud. Exerc., 2:90, says that “angel” was a term designating
    officer or elder of a synagogue. See also Bp. Lightfoot, Com. on
    Philippians, 187, 188; Jacobs, Eccl. Polity, 100 and note. In the
    Irvingite church, accordingly, “angels” constitute an official
    class.


(_f_) by assisting and protecting individual believers;


    _1 K. 19:5_—“_an angel touched him_ [Elijah], _and said unto him,
    Arise and eat_”; _Ps. 91:11_—“_he will give his angels charge over
    thee, To keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in
    their hands, Lest thou dash thy foot against a stone_”; _Dan.
    6:22_—“_My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions’
    mouths, and they have not hurt me_”; _Mat. 4:11_—“_angels came and
    ministered unto him_”—Jesus was the type of all believers;
    _18:10_—“_despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto
    you, that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my
    Father_”; compare _verse 6_—“_one of these little ones that
    believe on me_”; see Meyer, Com. _in loco_, who regards these
    passages as proving the doctrine of guardian angels. _Luke
    16:22_—“_the beggar died, and ... was carried away by the angels
    into Abraham’s bosom_”; _Heb. 1:14_—“_Are they not all ministering
    spirits, sent forth to do service for the sake of them that shall
    inherit salvation?_” Compare _Acts 12:15_—“_And they said, It is
    his angel_”—of Peter standing knocking; see Hackett, Com. _in
    loco_: the utterance “expresses a popular belief prevalent among
    the Jews, which is neither affirmed nor denied.” Shakespeare,
    Henry IV, 2nd part, 2:2—“For the boy—there is a good angel about
    him.” _Per contra_, see Broadus, Com. on _Mat. 18:10_—“It is
    simply said of believers as a class that there are angels which
    are ‘_their angels_’; but there is nothing here or elsewhere to
    show that one angel has special charge of one believer.”


(_g_) by punishing God’s enemies.


    _2 K. 19:35_—“_it came to pass that night, that the angel of
    Jehovah went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an
    hundred fourscore and five thousand_”; _Acts 12:23_—“_And
    immediately an angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not
    God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost._”


A general survey of this Scripture testimony as to the employments of good
angels leads us to the following conclusions:

First,—that good angels are not to be considered as the mediating agents
of God’s regular and common providence, but as the ministers of his
special providence in the affairs of his church. He “maketh his angels
winds” and “a flaming fire,” not in his ordinary procedure, but in
connection with special displays of his power for moral ends (Deut. 33:2;
Acts 7:53; Gal. 3:19; Heb. 2:2). Their intervention is apparently
occasional and exceptional—not at their own option, but only as it is
permitted or commanded by God. Hence we are not to conceive of angels as
coming between us and God, nor are we, without special revelation of the
fact, to attribute to them in any particular case the effects which the
Scriptures generally ascribe to divine providence. Like miracles,
therefore, angelic appearances generally mark God’s entrance upon new
epochs in the unfolding of his plans. Hence we read of angels at the
completion of creation (Job 38:7); at the giving of the law (Gal 3:19); at
the birth of Christ (Luke 2:13); at the two temptations in the wilderness
and in Gethsemane (Mat. 4:11, Luke 22:43); at the resurrection (Mat.
28:2); at the ascension (Acts 1:10); at the final judgment (Mat. 25:31).


    The substance of these remarks may be found in Hodge, Systematic
    Theology, 1:637-645. Milton tells us that “Millions of spiritual
    creatures walk the earth Unseen, both when we wake and when we
    sleep.” Whether this be true or not, it is a question of interest
    why such angelic beings as have to do with human affairs are not
    at present seen by men. Paul’s admonition against the “_worshiping
    of the angels_” (_Col. 2:18_) seems to suggest the reason. If men
    have not abstained from worshiping their fellow-men, when these
    latter have been priests or media of divine communications, the
    danger of idolatry would be much greater if we came into close and
    constant contact with angels; see _Rev. 22:8, 9_—“_I fell down to
    worship before the feet of the angel which showed me these things.
    And he saith unto me, See thou do it not._”

    The fact that we do not in our day see angels should not make us
    sceptical as to their existence any more than the fact that we do
    not in our day see miracles should make us doubt the reality of
    the New Testament miracles. As evil spirits were permitted to work
    most actively when Christianity began its appeal to men, so good
    angels were then most frequently recognized as executing the
    divine purposes. Nevius, Demon-Possession, 278, thinks that evil
    spirits are still at work where Christianity comes in conflict
    with heathenism, and that they retire into the background as
    Christianity triumphs. This may be true also of good angels.
    Otherwise we might be in danger of overestimating their greatness
    and authority. Father Taylor was right when he said: “Folks are
    better than angels.” It is vain to sing: “I want to be an angel.”
    We never shall be angels. Victor Hugo is wrong when he says: “I am
    the tadpole of an archangel.” John Smith is not an angel, and he
    never will be. But he may be far greater than an angel, because
    Christ took, not the nature of angels, but the nature of man
    (_Heb. 2:16_).

    As intimated above, there is no reason to believe that even the
    invisible presence of angels is a constant one. Doddridge’s dream
    of accident prevented by angelic interposition seems to embody the
    essential truth. We append the passages referred to in the text.
    _Job 38:7_—“_When the morning stars sang together, And all the
    sons of God shouted for joy_”; _Deut. 33:2_—“_Jehovah came from
    Sinai ... he came from the ten thousands of holy ones: At his
    right hand was a fiery law for them_”; _Gal. 3:19_—“_it_ [the law]
    _was ordained through angels by the hand of a mediator_”; _Heb.
    2:2_—“_the word spoken through angels_”; _Acts 7:53_—“_who
    received the law as it was ordained by angels_”; _Luke
    2:13_—“_suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the
    heavenly host_”; _Mat. 4:11_—“_Then the devil leaveth him; and
    behold, angels came and ministered unto him_”; _Luke 22:43_—“_And
    there appeared unto him an angel from heaven, strengthening him_”;
    _Mat. 28:2_—“_an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came
    and rolled away the stone, and sat upon it_”; _Acts 1:10_—“_And
    while they were looking steadfastly into heaven as he went,
    behold, two men stood by them in white apparel_”; _Mat.
    25:31_—“_when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
    angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory._”


Secondly,—that their power, as being in its nature dependent and derived,
is exercised in accordance with the laws of the spiritual and natural
world. They cannot, like God, create, perform miracles, act without means,
search the heart. Unlike the Holy Spirit, who can influence the human mind
directly, they can influence men only in ways analogous to those by which
men influence each other. As evil angels may tempt men to sin, so it is
probable that good angels may attract men to holiness.


    Recent psychical researches disclose almost unlimited
    possibilities of influencing other minds by suggestion. Slight
    physical phenomena, as the odor of a violet or the sight in a book
    of a crumpled roseleaf, may start trains of thought which change
    the whole course of a life. A word or a look may have great power
    over us. Fisher, Nature and Method of Revelation, 276—“The facts
    of hypnotism illustrate the possibility of one mind falling into a
    strange thraldom under another.” If other men can so powerfully
    influence us, it is quite possible that spirits which are not
    subject to limitations of the flesh may influence us yet more.

    Binet, in his Alterations of Personality, says that experiments on
    hysterical patients have produced in his mind the conviction that,
    in them at least, “a plurality of persons exists.... We have
    established almost with certainty that in such patients, side by
    side with the principal personality, there is a secondary
    personality, which is unknown by the first, which sees, hears,
    reflects, reasons and acts”; see Andover Review, April, 1890:422.
    Hudson, Law of Psychic Phenomena, 81-143, claims that we have two
    minds, the objective and conscious, and the subjective and
    unconscious. The latter works automatically upon suggestion from
    the objective or from other minds. In view of the facts referred
    to by Binet and Hudson, we claim that the influence of angelic
    spirits is no more incredible than is the influence of suggestion
    from living men. There is no need of attributing the phenomena of
    hypnotism to spirits of the dead. Our human nature is larger and
    more susceptible to spiritual influence than we have commonly
    believed. These psychical phenomena indeed furnish us with a
    corroboration of our Ethical Monism, for if in one human being
    there may be two or more consciousnesses, then in the one God
    there may be not only three infinite personalities but also
    multitudinous finite personalities. See T. H. Wright, The Finger
    of God, 124-133.


B. The employments of evil angels.


(_a_) They oppose God and strive to defeat his will. This is indicated in
the names applied to their chief. The word “Satan” means
“adversary”—primarily to God, secondarily to men; the term “devil”
signifies “slanderer”—of God to men, and of men to God. It is indicated
also in the description of the “man of sin” as “he that opposeth and
exalteth himself against all that is called God.”


    _Job 1:6_—Satan appears among “_the sons of God_”; _Zech.
    3:1_—“_Joshua the high priest ... and Satan standing at his right
    hand to be his adversary_”; _Mat. 13:39_—“_the enemy that sowed
    them is the devil_”; _1 Pet. 5:8_—“_your adversary the devil._”
    Satan slanders God to men, in _Gen. 3:1, 4_—“_Yea, hath God
    said?... Ye shall not surely die_”; men to God, in _Job 1:9,
    11_—“_Doth Job fear God for naught?... put forth thy hand now, and
    touch all that he hath, and he will renounce thee to thy face_”;
    _2:4, 5_—“_Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give
    for his life. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and
    his flesh, and he will renounce thee to thy face_”; _Rev.
    12:10_—“_the accuser of our brethren is cast down, who accuseth
    them before our God night and day._”

    Notice how, over against the evil spirit who thus accuses God to
    man and man to God, stands the Holy Spirit, the Advocate, who
    pleads God’s cause with man and man’s cause with God: _John
    16:8_—“_he, when he is come, will convict the world in respect of
    sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment_”; _Rom. 8:26_—“_the
    Spirit also helpeth our infirmity: for we know not how to pray as
    we ought; but the Spirit himself maketh intercession for us with
    groanings which cannot be uttered._” Hence Balaam can say: _Num.
    23:21_, “_He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, Neither hath he
    seen perverseness in Israel_”; and the Lord can say to Satan as he
    resists Joshua: “_Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan; yea, Jehovah that
    hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee_” (_Zech. 3:2_). “Thus he puts
    himself between his people and every tongue that would accuse
    them” (C. H. M.). For the description of the “_man of sin_,” see
    _2 Thess. 2:3, 4_—“_he that opposeth_”; _cf._ _verse 9_—“_whose
    coming is according to the working of Satan._”

    On the “_man of sin_,” see Wm. Arnold Stevens, in Bap. Quar. Rev.,
    July, 1889:328-360. As in _Daniel 11:36_, the great enemy of the
    faith, he who “_shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above
    every God_”, is the Syrian King, Antiochus Epiphanes, so the man
    of lawlessness described by Paul in _2 Thess. 2:3, 4_ was “the
    corrupt and impious Judaism of the apostolic age.” This only had
    its seat in the temple of God. It was doomed to destruction when
    the Lord should come at the fall of Jerusalem. But this fulfilment
    does not preclude a future and final fulfilment of the prophecy.


Contrasts between the Holy Spirit and the spirit of evil: 1. The dove, and
the serpent; 2. the father of lies, and the Spirit of truth; 3. men
possessed by dumb spirits, and men given wonderful utterance in diverse
tongues; 4. the murderer from the beginning, and the life-giving Spirit,
who regenerates the soul and quickens our mortal bodies; 5. the adversary,
and the Helper; 6. the slanderer, and the Advocate; 7. Satan’s sifting,
and the Master’s winnowing; 8. the organizing intelligence and malignity
of the evil one, and the Holy Spirit’s combination of all the forces of
matter and mind to build up the kingdom of God; 9. the strong man fully
armed, and a stronger than he; 10. the evil one who works only evil, and
the holy One who is the author of holiness in the hearts of men. The
opposition of evil angels, at first and ever since their fall, may be a
reason why they are incapable of redemption.

(_b_) They hinder man’s temporal and eternal welfare,—sometimes by
exercising a certain control over natural phenomena, but more commonly by
subjecting man’s soul to temptation. Possession of man’s being, either
physical or spiritual, by demons, is also recognized in Scripture.


    Control of natural phenomena is ascribed to evil spirits in _Job
    1:12, 16, 19_ and _2:7_—“_all that he hath is in thy power_”—and
    Satan uses lightning, whirlwind, disease, for his purposes; _Luke
    13:11, 16_—“_a woman that had a spirit of infirmity ... whom Satan
    had bound, lo, these eighteen years_”; _Acts 10:38_—“_healing all
    that were oppressed of the devil_”; _2 Cor. 12:7_—“_a thorn in the
    flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me_”; _1 Thess. 2:18_—“_we
    would fain have come unto you, I Paul once and again; and Satan
    hindered us_”; _Heb. 2:14_—“_him that had the power of death, that
    is, the devil._” Temptation is ascribed to evil spirits in _Gen.
    3:1_ _sq._—“_Now the serpent was more subtle_”; _cf._ _Rev.
    20:2_—“_the old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan_”; _Mat.
    4:3_—“_the tempter came_”; _John 13:27_—“_after the sop, then
    entered Satan into him_”; _Acts 5:3_—“_why hath Satan filled thy
    heart to lie to the Holy Spirit?_” _Eph. 2:2_—“_the spirit that
    now worketh in the sons of disobedience_”; _1 Thess. 3:5_—“_lest
    by any means the tempter had tempted you_”; _1 Pet 5:8_—“_your
    adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking
    whom he may devour._”

    At the time of Christ, popular belief undoubtedly exaggerated the
    influence of evil spirits. Savage, Life after Death, 113—“While
    God was at a distance, the demons were very, very near. The air
    about the earth was full of these evil tempting spirits. They
    caused shipwreck at sea, and sudden death on land; they blighted
    the crops; they smote and blasted in the tempests; they took
    possession of the bodies and the souls of men. They entered into
    compacts, and took mortgages on men’s souls.” If some good end has
    been attained in spite of them they feel that “Their labor must be
    to pervert that end. And out of good still to find means of evil.”
    In Goethe’s Faust, Margaret detects the evil in Mephistopheles:
    “You see that he with no soul sympathizes. ’Tis written on his
    face—he never loved.... Whenever he comes near, I cannot pray.”
    Mephistopheles describes himself as “Ein Theil von jener Kraft Die
    stäts das Böse will Und stäts das Gute schafft”—“Part of that
    power not understood, which always wills the bad, and always works
    the good”—through the overruling Providence of God. “The devil
    says his prayers backwards.” “He tried to learn the Basque
    language, but had to give it up, having learned only three words
    in two years.” Walter Scott tells us that a certain sulphur spring
    in Scotland was reputed to owe its quality to an ancient
    compulsory immersion of Satan in it.

    Satan’s temptations are represented as both negative and
    positive,—he takes away the seed sown, and he sows tares. He
    controls many subordinate evil spirits; there is only one devil,
    but there are many angels or demons, and through their agency
    Satan may accomplish his purposes.

    Satan’s negative agency is shown in _Mark 4:15_—“_when they have
    heard, straightway cometh Satan, and taketh away the word which
    hath been sown in them_”; his positive agency in _Mat. 13:38,
    39_—“_the tares are the sons of the evil one; and the enemy that
    sowed them is the devil._” One devil, but many angels: see _Mat.
    25:41_—“_the devil and his angels_”; _Mark 5:9_—“_My name is
    Legion, for we are many_”; _Eph. 2:2_—“_the prince of the powers
    of the air_”; _6:12_—“_principalities ... powers ... world-rulers
    of this darkness ... spiritual hosts of wickedness._” The mode of
    Satan’s access to the human mind we do not know. It may be that by
    moving upon our physical organism he produces subtle signs of
    thought and so reaches the understanding and desires. He certainly
    has the power to present in captivating forms the objects of
    appetite and selfish ambition, as he did to Christ in the
    wilderness (_Mat. 4:3, 6, 9_), and to appeal to our love for
    independence by saying to us, as he did to our first parents—“_ye
    shall be as God_” (_Gen. 3:5_).

    C. C. Everett, Essays Theol. and Lit., 186-218, on The Devil: “If
    the supernatural powers would only hold themselves aloof and not
    interfere with the natural processes of the world, there would be
    no sickness, no death, no sorrow.... This shows a real, though
    perhaps unconscious, faith in the goodness and trustworthiness of
    nature. The world in itself is a source only of good. Here is the
    germ of a positive religion, though this religion when it appears,
    may adopt the form of supernaturalism.” If there was no Satan,
    then Christ’s temptations came from within, and showed a
    predisposition to evil on his own part.


Possession is distinguished from bodily or mental disease, though such
disease often accompanies possession or results from it.—The demons speak
in their own persons, with supernatural knowledge, and they are directly
addressed by Christ. Jesus recognizes Satanic agency in these cases of
possession, and he rejoices in the casting out of demons, as a sign of
Satan’s downfall. These facts render it impossible to interpret the
narratives of demoniac possession as popular descriptions of abnormal
physical or mental conditions.


    Possession may apparently be either physical, as in the case of
    the Gerasene demoniacs (_Mark 5:2-4_), or spiritual, as in the
    case of the “_maid having a spirit of divination_” (_Acts 16:16_),
    where the body does not seem to have been affected. It is
    distinguished from bodily disease: see _Mat. 17:15,
    18_—“_epileptic ... the demon went out from him: and the boy was
    cured_”; _Mark 9:25_—“_Thou dumb and deaf spirit_”; _3:11,
    12_—“_the unclean spirits ... cried, saying, Thou art the Son of
    God. And he charged them much that they should not make him
    known_”; _Luke 8:30, 31_—“_And Jesus asked him, What is thy name?
    And he said, Legion; for many demons were entered unto him. And
    they entreated him that he would not command them to depart into
    the abyss_”; _10:17, 18_—“_And the seventy returned with joy,
    saying, Lord, even the demons are subject unto us in thy name. And
    he said unto them, I beheld Satan fallen as lightning from
    heaven._”


These descriptions of personal intercourse between Christ and the demons
cannot be interpreted as metaphorical. “In the temptation of Christ and in
the possession of the swine, imagination could have no place. Christ was
_above_ its delusions; the brutes were _below_ them.” Farrar (Life of
Christ, 1:337-341, and 2:excursus vii), while he admits the existence and
agency of good angels, very inconsistently gives a metaphorical
interpretation to the Scriptural accounts of evil angels. We find
corroborative evidence of the Scripture doctrine in the domination which
one wicked man frequently exercises over others; in the opinion of some
modern physicians in charge of the insane, that certain phenomena in their
patients’ experience are best explained by supposing an actual subjection
of the will to a foreign power; and, finally, in the influence of the Holy
Spirit upon the human heart. See Trench, Miracles, 125-136; Smith’s Bible
Dictionary, 1:586—“Possession is distinguished from mere temptation by the
complete or incomplete loss of the sufferer’s reason or power of will; his
actions, words, and almost his thoughts, are mastered by the evil spirit,
till his personality seems to be destroyed, or at least so overborne as to
produce the consciousness of a twofold will within him like that in a
dream. In the ordinary assaults and temptations of Satan, the will itself
yields consciously, and by yielding gradually assumes, without losing its
apparent freedom of action, the characteristics of the Satanic nature. It
is solicited, urged, and persuaded against the strivings of grace, but it
is not overborne.”

T. H. Wright, The Finger of God, argues that Jesus, in his mention of
demoniacs, accommodated himself to the beliefs of his time. Fisher, Nature
and Method of Revelation, 274, with reference to Weiss’s Meyer on _Mat.
4:24_, gives Meyer’s arguments against demoniacal possession as follows:
1. the absence of references to demoniacal possession in the Old
Testament, and the fact that so-called demoniacs were cured by exorcists;
2. that no clear case of possession occurs at present; 3. that there is no
notice of demoniacal possession in John’s Gospel, though the overcoming of
Satan is there made a part of the Messiah’s work and Satan is said to
enter into a man’s mind and take control there (_John 13:27_); 4. and that
the so-called demoniacs are not, as would be expected, of a diabolic
temper and filled with malignant feelings toward Christ. Harnack, Wesen
des Christenthums, 38—“The popular belief in demon-possession gave form to
the conceptions of those who had nervous diseases, so that they expressed
themselves in language proper only to those who were actually possessed.
Jesus is no believer in Christian Science: he calls sickness sickness and
health health; but he regards all disease as a proof and effect of the
working of the evil one.”


    On _Mark 1:21-34_, see Maclaren in S. S. Times, Jan. 23, 1904—“We
    are told by some that this demoniac was an epileptic. Possibly;
    but, if the epilepsy was not the result of possession, why should
    it take the shape of violent hatred of Jesus? And what is there in
    epilepsy to give discernment of his character and the purpose of
    his mission?” Not Jesus’ exorcism of demons as a fact, but his
    casting them out by a word, was our Lord’s wonderful
    characteristic. Nevius, Demon-Possession, 240—“May not
    demon-possession be only a different, a more advanced, form of
    hypnotism?... It is possible that these evil spirits are familiar
    with the organism of the nervous system, and are capable of acting
    upon and influencing mankind in accordance with physical and
    psychological laws.... The hypnotic trance may be effected,
    without the use of physical organs, by the mere force of
    will-power, spirit acting upon spirit.” Nevius quotes F. W. A.
    Myers, Fortnightly Rev., Nov. 1885—“One such discovery, that of
    telepathy, or the transference of thought and sensation from mind
    to mind without the agency of the recognized organs of sense, has,
    as I hold, been already achieved.” See Bennet, Diseases of the
    Bible; Kedney, Diabolology; and references in Poole’s Synopsis,
    1:343; also Bramwell, Hypnotism, 358-398.


(_c_) Yet, in spite of themselves, they execute God’s plans of punishing
the ungodly, of chastening the good, and of illustrating the nature and
fate of moral evil.


    Punishing the ungodly: _Ps. 78:49_—“_He cast upon them the
    fierceness of his anger, Wrath and indignation, and trouble, A
    band of angels of evil_”; _1 K. 22:23_—“_Jehovah hath put a lying
    spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets; and Jehovah hath
    spoken evil concerning thee._” In _Luke 22:31_, Satan’s sifting
    accomplishes the opposite of the sifter’s intention, and the same
    as the Master’s winnowing (Maclaren).

    Chastening the good: see _Job, chapters 1_ and _2_; _1 Cor.
    5:5_—“_deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the
    flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
    Jesus_”; _cf._ _1 Tim. 1:20_—“_Hymenæus and Alexander; whom I
    delivered onto Satan, that they might be taught not to
    blaspheme._” This delivering to Satan for the destruction of the
    flesh seems to have involved four things: (1) excommunication from
    the church; (2) authoritative infliction of bodily disease or
    death; (3) loss of all protection from good angels, who minister
    only to saints; (4) subjection to the buffetings and tormentings
    of the great accuser. Gould, in Am. Com. on _1 Cor. 5:5_, regards
    “delivering to Satan” as merely putting a man out of the church by
    excommunication. This of itself was equivalent to banishing him
    into “the world,” of which Satan was the ruler.

    Evil spirits illustrate the nature and fate of moral evil: see
    _Mat 8:29_—“_art thou come hither to torment us before the time?_”
    _25:41_—“_eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his
    angels_”; _2 Thess. 2:8_—“_then shall be revealed the lawless
    one_”; _James 2:19_—“_the demons also believe, and shudder_”;
    _Rev. 12:9, 12_—“_the Devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole
    world ... the devil is gone down unto you, having great wrath,
    knowing that he hath but a short time_”; _20:10_—“_cast into the
    lake of fire ... tormented day and night for ever and ever._”

    It is an interesting question whether Scripture recognizes any
    special connection of evil spirits with the systems of idolatry,
    witchcraft, and spiritualism which burden the world. _1 Cor.
    10:20_—“_the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice
    to demons, and not to God_”; _2 Thess. 2:9_—“_the working of Satan
    with all power and signs of lying wonders_”—would seem to favor an
    affirmative answer. But _1 Cor. 8:4_—“_concerning therefore the
    eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that no idol is
    anything in the world_”—seems to favor a negative answer. This
    last may, however, mean that “the beings whom the idols are
    designed to _represent_ have no existence, although it is
    afterwards shown (_10:20_) that there are _other_ beings connected
    with false worship” (Ann. Par. Bible, _in loco_). “Heathenism is
    the reign of the devil” (Meyer), and while the heathen think
    themselves to be sacrificing to Jupiter or Venus, they are really
    “_sacrificing to demons_,” and are thus furthering the plans of a
    malignant spirit who uses these forms of false religion as a means
    of enslaving their souls. In like manner, the network of
    influences which support the papacy, spiritualism, modern
    unbelief, is difficult of explanation, unless we believe in a
    superhuman intelligence which organizes these forces against God.
    In these, as well as in heathen religions, there are facts
    inexplicable upon merely natural principles of disease and
    delusion.

    Nevius, Demon-Possession, 294—“Paul teaches that the gods
    mentioned under different names are imaginary and non-existent;
    but that, behind and in connection with these gods, there are
    demons who make use of idolatry to draw men away from God; and it
    is to these that the heathen are unconsciously rendering obedience
    and service.... It is most reasonable to believe that the
    sufferings of people bewitched were caused by the devil, not by
    the so-called witches. Let us substitute ‘devilcraft’ for
    ‘witchcraft.’... Had the courts in Salem proceeded on the
    Scriptural presumption that the testimony of those under the
    control of evil spirits would, in the nature of the case, be
    false, such a thing as the Salem tragedy would never have been
    known.”


A survey of the Scripture testimony with regard to the employments of evil
spirits leads to the following general conclusions:

First,—the power of evil spirits over men is not independent of the human
will. This power cannot be exercised without at least the original consent
of the human will, and may be resisted and shaken off through prayer and
faith in God.


    _Luke 22:31, 40_—“_Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you
    as wheat.... Pray that ye enter not into temptation_”; _Eph.
    6:11_—“_Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
    stand against the wiles of the devil_”; _16_—“_the shield of
    faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
    the evil one_”; _James 4:7_—“_resist the devil, and he will flee
    from you_”; _1 Pet. 5:9_—“_whom withstand stedfast in your
    faith._” The coals are already in the human heart, in the shape of
    corrupt inclinations; Satan only blows them into flame. The double
    source of sin is illustrated in _Acts 5:3, 4_—“_Why hath Satan
    filled thy heart?... How is it that thou hast conceived this thing
    in thine heart?_” The Satanic impulse could have been resisted,
    and “_after it was_” suggested, it was still “_in his own power_,”
    as was the land that he had sold (Maclaren).

    The soul is a castle into which even the king of evil spirits
    cannot enter without receiving permission from within. Bp.
    Wordsworth: “The devil may _tempt_ us to fall, but he cannot
    _make_ us fall; he may persuade us to cast _ourselves_ down, but
    he cannot _cast_ us down.” E. G. Robinson: “It is left to us
    whether the devil shall get control of us. We pack off on the
    devil’s shoulders much of our own wrong doing, just as Adam had
    the impertinence to tell God that the woman did the mischief.”
    Both God and Satan stand at the door and knock, but neither heaven
    nor hell can come in unless we will. “We cannot prevent the birds
    from flying over our heads, but we can prevent them from making
    their nests in our hair.” _Mat 12:43-45_—“_The unclean spirit,
    when he is gone out of a man_”—suggests that the man who gets rid
    of one vice but does not occupy his mind with better things is
    ready to be repossessed. “_Seven other spirits more evil than
    himself_” implies that some demons are more wicked than others and
    so are harder to cast out (_Mark 9:29_). The Jews had cast out
    idolatry, but other and worse sins had taken possession of them.

    Hudson, Law of Psychic Phenomena, 129—“The hypnotic subject cannot
    be controlled so far as to make him do what he knows to be wrong,
    unless he himself voluntarily assents.” A. S. Hart: “Unless one is
    willing to be hypnotized, no one can put him under the influence.
    The more intelligent one is, the more susceptible. Hypnotism
    requires the subject to do two-thirds of the work, while the
    instructor does only one-third—that of telling the subject what to
    do. It is not an inherent influence, nor a gift, but can be
    learned by any one who can read. It is impossible to compel a
    person to do wrong while under the influence, for the subject
    retains a consciousness of the difference between right and
    wrong.”

    Höffding, Outlines of Psychology, 330-335—“Some persons have the
    power of intentionally calling up hallucinations; but it often
    happens to them as to Goethe’s Zauberlehrling, or
    apprentice-magician, that the phantoms gain power over them and
    will not be again dispersed. Goethe’s Fischer—‘Half she drew him
    down and half he sank’—repeats the duality in the second term; for
    to sink is to let one’s self sink.” Manton, the Puritan: “A
    stranger cannot call off a dog from the flock, but the Shepherd
    can do so with a word; so the Lord can easily rebuke Satan when he
    finds him most violent.” Spurgeon, the modern Puritan, remarks on
    the above: “O Lord, when I am worried by my great enemy, call him
    off, I pray thee! Let me hear a voice saying: ‘_Jehovah rebuke
    thee, O Satan; even Jehovah that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke
    thee!_’ (_Zech. 3:2)_. By thine election of me, rebuke him, I pray
    thee, and deliver me from ‘_the power of the dog_’! (_Ps.
    22:20)_.”


Secondly,—their power is limited, both in time and in extent, by the
permissive will of God. Evil spirits are neither omnipotent, omniscient,
nor omnipresent. We are to attribute disease and natural calamity to their
agency, only when this is matter of special revelation. Opposed to God as
evil spirits are, God compels them to serve his purposes. Their power for
harm lasts but for a season, and ultimate judgment and punishment will
vindicate God’s permission of their evil agency.


    _1 Cor. 10:13_—“_God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
    tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation make
    also the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it_”; _Jude
    6_—“_angels which kept not their own beginning, but left their
    proper habitation, he hath kept in everlasting bonds under
    darkness unto the judgment of the great day._”


Luther saw Satan nearer to man than his coat, or his shirt, or even his
skin. In all misfortune he saw the devil’s work. Was there a conflagration
in the town? By looking closely you might see a demon blowing upon the
flame. Pestilence and storm he attributed to Satan. All this was a relic
of the mediæval exaggerations of Satan’s power. It was then supposed that
men might make covenants with the evil one, in which supernatural power
was purchased at the price of final perdition (see Goethe’s Faust).


    Scripture furnishes no warrant for such representations. There
    seems to have been permitted a special activity of Satan in
    temptation and possession during our Savior’s ministry, in order
    that Christ’s power might be demonstrated. By his death Jesus
    brought “_to naught him that had the power of death, that is, the
    devil_” (_Heb. 2:14)_ and “_having despoiled the principalities
    and the powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over
    them in it_,” _i. e._, in the Cross (_Col. 2:15_). _1 John
    3:8_—“_To this end was the Son of God manifested, that he might
    destroy the works of the devil._” Evil spirits now exist and act
    only upon sufferance. McLeod, Temptation of our Lord, 24—“Satan’s
    power is limited, (1) by the fact that he is a creature; (2) by
    the fact of God’s providence; (3) by the fact of his own
    wickedness.”

    Genung, Epic of the Inner Life, 136—“Having neither fixed
    principle in himself nor connection with the source of order
    outside, Satan has not prophetic ability. He can appeal to chance,
    but he cannot foresee. So Goethe’s Mephistopheles insolently
    boasts that he can lead Faust astray: ‘What will you bet? There’s
    still a chance to gain him, If unto me full leave you give Gently
    upon _my_ road to train him!’ And in _Job 1:11; 2:5_, Satan
    wagers: ‘_He will renounce thee to thy face._’ ” William Ashmore:
    “Is Satan omnipresent? No, but he is very spry. Is he bound? Yes,
    but with a rather loose rope.” In the Persian story, God scattered
    seed. The devil buried it, and sent the rain to rot it. But soon
    it sprang up, and the wilderness blossomed as the rose.


II. Objections to the Doctrine of Angels.


1. To the doctrine of angels in general.


It is objected:

(_a_) That it is opposed to the modern scientific view of the world, as a
system of definite forces and laws.—We reply that, whatever truth there
may be in this modern view, it does not exclude the play of divine or
human free agency. It does not, therefore, exclude the possibility of
angelic agency.


    Ladd, Philosophy of Knowledge, 332—“It is easier to believe in
    angels than in ether; in God rather than atoms; and in the history
    of his kingdom as a divine self-revelation rather than in the
    physicist’s or the biologist’s purely mechanical process of
    evolution.”


(_b_) That it is opposed to the modern doctrine of infinite space above
and beneath us—a space peopled with worlds. With the surrender of the old
conception of the firmament, as a boundary separating this world from the
regions beyond, it is claimed that we must give up all belief in a heaven
of the angels.—We reply that the notions of an infinite universe, of
heaven as a definite place, and of spirits as confined to fixed locality,
are without certain warrant either in reason or in Scripture. We know
nothing of the modes of existence of pure spirits.


    What we know of the universe is certainly finite. Angels are
    apparently incorporeal beings, and as such are free from all laws
    of matter and space. Heaven and hell are essentially conditions,
    corresponding to character—conditions in which the body and the
    surroundings of the soul express and reflect its inward state. The
    main thing to be insisted on is therefore the state; place is
    merely incidental. The fact that Christ ascended to heaven with a
    human body, and that the saints are to possess glorified bodies,
    would seem to imply that heaven is a place. Christ’s declaration
    with regard to him who is “_able to destroy both soul and body in
    hell_” (_Mat. 10:28_) affords some reason for believing that hell
    is also a place.

    Where heaven and hell are, is not revealed to us. But it is not
    necessary to suppose that they are in some remote part of the
    universe; for aught we know, they may be right about us, so that
    if our eyes were opened, like those of the prophet’s servant (_2
    Kings 6:17_), we ourselves should behold them. Upon ground of
    _Eph. 2:2_—“_prince of the __ powers of the air_”—and _3:10_—“_the
    principalities and the powers in the heavenly places_”—some have
    assigned the atmosphere of the earth as the abode of angelic
    spirits, both good and evil. But the expressions “_air_” and
    “_heavenly places_” may be merely metaphorical designations of
    their spiritual method of existence.

    The idealistic philosophy, which regards time and space as merely
    subjective forms of our human thinking and as not conditioning the
    thought of God, may possibly afford some additional aid in the
    consideration of this problem. If matter be only the expression of
    God’s mind and will, having no existence apart from his
    intelligence and volition, the question of place ceases to have
    significance. Heaven is in that case simply the state in which God
    manifests himself in his grace, and hell is the state in which a
    moral being finds himself in opposition to God, and God in
    opposition to him. Christ can manifest himself to his followers in
    all parts of the earth and to all the inhabitants of heaven at one
    and the same time (_John 14:21_; _Mat. 28:20_; _Rev. 1:7_). Angels
    in like manner, being purely spiritual beings, may be free from
    the laws of space and time, and may not be limited to any fixed
    locality.

    We prefer therefore to leave the question of place undecided, and
    to accept the existence and working of angels both good and evil
    as a matter of faith, without professing to understand their
    relations to space. For the rationalistic view, see Strauss,
    Glaubenslehre, 1:670-675. _Per contra_, see Van Oosterzee,
    Christian Dogmatics, 1:308-317; Martensen, Christian Dogmatics,
    127-136.


2. To the doctrine of evil angels in particular.


It is objected that:

(_a_) The idea of the fall of angels is self-contradictory, since a fall
determined by pride presupposes pride—that is, a fall before the fall.—We
reply that the objection confounds the occasion of sin with the sin
itself. The outward motive to disobedience is not disobedience. The fall
took place only when that outward motive was chosen by free will. When the
motive of independence was selfishly adopted, only then did the innocent
desire for knowledge and power become pride and sin. How an evil volition
could originate in spirits created pure is an insoluble problem. Our faith
in God’s holiness, however, compels us to attribute the origin of this
evil volition, not to the Creator, but to the creature.


    There can be no sinful propensity before there is sin. The reason
    of the _first_ sin can not be sin itself. This would be to make
    sin a necessary development; to deny the holiness of God the
    Creator; to leave the ground of theism for pantheism.


(_b_) It is irrational to suppose that Satan should have been able to
change his whole nature by a single act, so that he thenceforth willed
only evil.—But we reply that the circumstances of that decision are
unknown to us; while the power of single acts permanently to change
character is matter of observation among men.


    Instance the effect, upon character and life, of a single act of
    falsehood or embezzlement. The first glass of intoxicating drink,
    and the first yielding to impure suggestion, often establish
    nerve-tracts in the brain and associations in the mind which are
    not reversed and overcome for a whole lifetime. “Sow an act, and
    you reap a habit; sow a habit, and you reap a character; sow a
    character, and you reap a destiny.” And what is true of men, may
    be also true of angels.


(_c_) It is impossible that so wise a being should enter upon a hopeless
rebellion.—We answer that no amount of mere knowledge ensures right moral
action. If men gratify present passion, in spite of their knowledge that
the sin involves present misery and future perdition, it is not impossible
that Satan may have done the same.


    Scherer, Essays on English Literature, 139, puts this objection as
    follows: “The idea of Satan is a contradictory idea; for it is
    contradictory to know God and yet attempt rivalry with him.” But
    we must remember that understanding is the servant of will, and is
    darkened by will. Many clever men fail to see what belongs to
    their peace. It is the very madness of sin, that it persists in
    iniquity, even when it sees and fears the approaching judgment of
    God. Jonathan Edwards: “Although the devil be exceedingly crafty
    and subtle, yet he is one of the greatest fools and blockheads in
    the world, as the subtlest of wicked men are. Sin is of such a
    nature that it strangely infatuates and stultifies the mind.” One
    of Ben Jonson’s plays has, for its title: “The Devil is an Ass.”

    Schleiermacher, Die Christliche Glaube, 1:210, urges that
    continual wickedness must have weakened Satan’s understanding, so
    that he could be no longer feared, and he adds: “Nothing is easier
    than to contend against emotional evil.” On the other hand, there
    seems evidence in Scripture of a progressive rage and devastating
    activity in the case of the evil one, beginning in Genesis and
    culminating in the Revelation. With this increasing malignity
    there is also abundant evidence of his unwisdom. We may instance
    the devil’s mistakes in misrepresenting 1. God to man (_Gen.
    3:1_—“_hath God said?_”). 2. Man to himself (_Gen. 3:4_—“_Ye shall
    not surely die_”). 3. Man to God (_Job 1:9_—“_Doth Job fear God
    for naught?_”). 4. God to himself (_Mat. 4:3_—“_If thou art the
    Son of God_”). 5. Himself to man (_2 Cor. 11:14_—“_Satan
    fashioneth himself into an angel of light_”). 6. Himself to
    himself (_Rev. 12:12_—“_the devil is gone down unto you, having
    great wrath_”—thinking he could successfully oppose God or destroy
    man).


(_d_) It is inconsistent with the benevolence of God to create and uphold
spirits, who he knows will be and do evil.—We reply that this is no more
inconsistent with God’s benevolence than the creation and preservation of
men, whose action God overrules for the furtherance of his purposes, and
whose iniquity he finally brings to light and punishes.


    Seduction of the pure by the impure, piracy, slavery, and war,
    have all been permitted among men. It is no more inconsistent with
    God’s benevolence to permit them among angelic spirits. Caroline
    Fox tells of Emerson and Carlyle that the latter once led his
    friend, the serene philosopher, through the abominations of the
    streets of London at midnight, asking him with grim humor at every
    few steps: “Do you believe in the devil now?” Emerson replied that
    the more he saw of the English people, the greater and better he
    thought them. It must have been because with such depths beneath
    them they could notwithstanding reach such heights of
    civilization. Even vice and misery can be overruled for good, and
    the fate of evil angels may be made a warning to the universe.


(_e_) The notion of organization among evil spirits is self-contradictory,
since the nature of evil is to sunder and divide.—We reply that such
organization of evil spirits is no more impossible than the organization
of wicked men, for the purpose of furthering their selfish ends. Common
hatred to God may constitute a principle of union among them, as among
men.


    Wicked men succeed in their plans only by adhering in some way to
    the good. Even a robber-horde must have laws, and there is a sort
    of “honor among thieves.” Else the world would be a pandemonium,
    and society would be what Hobbes called it: “bellum omnium contra
    omnes.” See art. on Satan, by Whitehouse, in Hastings, Dictionary
    of the Bible: “Some personalities are ganglionic centres of a
    nervous system, incarnations of evil influence. The Bible teaches
    that Satan is such a centre.”

    But the organizing power of Satan has its limitations. Nevius,
    Demon-Possession, 279—“Satan is not omniscient, and it is not
    certain that all demons are perfectly subject to his control. Want
    of vigilance on his part, and personal ambition in them, may
    obstruct and delay the execution of his plans, as among men.” An
    English parliamentarian comforted himself by saying: “If the fleas
    were all of one mind, they would have us out of bed.” Plato,
    Lysis, 214—“The good are like one another, and friends to one
    another, and the bad are never at unity with one another or with
    themselves; for they are passionate and restless, and anything
    which is at variance and enmity with itself is not likely to be in
    union or harmony with any other thing.”


(_f_) The doctrine is morally pernicious, as transferring the blame of
human sin to the being or beings who tempt men thereto.—We reply that
neither conscience nor Scripture allows temptation to be an excuse for
sin, or regards Satan as having power to compel the human will. The
objection, moreover, contradicts our observation,—for only where the
personal existence of Satan is recognized, do we find sin recognized in
its true nature.


    The diabolic character of sin makes it more guilty and abhorred.
    The immorality lies, not in the maintenance, but in the denial, of
    the doctrine. Giving up the doctrine of Satan is connected with
    laxity in the administration of criminal justice. Penalty comes to
    be regarded as only deterrent or reformatory.


(_g_) The doctrine degrades man, by representing him as the tool and slave
of Satan.—We reply that it does indeed show his actual state to be
degraded, but only with the result of exalting our idea of his original
dignity, and of his possible glory in Christ. The fact that man’s sin was
suggested from without, and not from within, may be the one mitigating
circumstance which renders possible his redemption.


    It rather puts a stigma upon human nature to say that it is _not_
    fallen—that its present condition is its original and normal
    state. Nor is it worth while to attribute to man a dignity he does
    not possess, if thereby we deprive him of the dignity that may be
    his. Satan’s sin was, in its essence, sin against the Holy Ghost,
    for which there can be no “_Father, forgive them, for they know
    not what they do_” (_Luke 23:34_), since it was choosing evil with
    the _mala gaudia mentis_, or the clearest intuition that it was
    evil. If there be no devil, then man himself is devil. It has been
    said of Voltaire, that without believing in a devil, he saw him
    everywhere—even where he was not. Christian, in Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s
    Progress, takes comfort when he finds that the blasphemous
    suggestions which came to him in the dark valley were suggestions
    from the fiend that pursued him. If all temptation is from within,
    our case would seem hopeless. But if “_an enemy hath done this_”
    (_Mat. 13:28_), then there is hope. And so we may accept the
    maxim: “Nullus diabolus, nullus Redemptor.” Unitarians have no
    Captain of their Salvation, and so have no Adversary against whom
    to contend. See Trench, Studies in the Gospels, 17; Birks,
    Difficulties of Belief, 78-100; Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:291-293. Many
    of the objections and answers mentioned above have been taken from
    Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 3:251-284, where a fuller statement of
    them may be found.


III. Practical uses of the Doctrine of Angels.


A. Uses of the doctrine of good angels.


(_a_) It gives us a new sense of the greatness of the divine resources,
and of God’s grace in our creation, to think of the multitude of unfallen
intelligences who executed the divine purposes before man appeared.

(_b_) It strengthens our faith in God’s providential care, to know that
spirits of so high rank are deputed to minister to creatures who are
environed with temptations and are conscious of sin.

(_c_) It teaches us humility, that beings of so much greater knowledge and
power than ours should gladly perform these unnoticed services, in behalf
of those whose only claim upon them is that they are children of the same
common Father.

(_d_) It helps us in the struggle against sin, to learn that these
messengers of God are near, to mark our wrong doing if we fall, and to
sustain us if we resist temptation.

(_e_) It enlarges our conceptions of the dignity of our own being, and of
the boundless possibilities of our future existence, to remember these
forms of typical innocence and love, that praise and serve God unceasingly
in heaven.


    Instance the appearance of angels in Jacob’s life at Bethel (_Gen.
    28:12_—Jacob’s conversion?) and at Mahanaim (_Gen. 32:1, 2_—two
    camps, of angels, on the right hand and on the left; _cf._ _Ps.
    34:7_—“_The angel of Jehovah encampeth round about them that fear
    him, And delivereth them_”); so too the Angel at Penuel that
    struggled with Jacob at his entering the promised land (_Gen.
    32:24_; _cf._ _Hos. 12:3, 4_—“_in his manhood he had power with
    God: yea, he had power over the angel, and prevailed_”), and “_the
    angel who hath redeemed me from all evil_” (_Gen. 48:16_) to whom
    Jacob refers on his dying bed. Edmund Spenser, The Faerie Queene:
    “And is there care in heaven? and is there love In heavenly
    spirits to these creatures base That may compassion of their evils
    move? There is; else much more wretched were the case Of men than
    beasts. But O, th’ exceeding grace Of highest God that loves his
    creatures so, And all his works with mercy doth embrace, That
    blessed angels he sends to and fro To serve to wicked man, to
    serve his wicked foe! How oft do they their silver bowers leave
    And come to succor us who succor want! How oft do they with golden
    pinions cleave The flitting skies like flying pursuivant, Against
    foul fiends to aid us militant! They for us fight; they watch and
    duly ward, And their bright squadrons round about us plant; And
    all for love, and nothing for reward. Oh, why should heavenly God
    for men have such regard!”

    It shows us that sin is not mere finiteness, to see these finite
    intelligences that maintained their integrity. Shakespeare, Henry
    VIII, 2:2—“He counsels a divorce—a loss of her That, like a jewel,
    has hung twenty years About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;
    Of her that loves him with that excellence That angels love good
    men with; even of her That, when the greatest stroke of fortune
    falls, Will bless the king.” Measure for Measure, 2:2—“Man, proud
    man, Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven, As makes the
    angels weep.”


B. Uses of the doctrine of evil angels.


(_a_) It illustrates the real nature of sin, and the depth of the ruin to
which it may bring the soul, to reflect upon the present moral condition
and eternal wretchedness to which these spirits, so highly endowed, have
brought themselves by their rebellion against God.

(_b_) It inspires a salutary fear and hatred of the first subtle
approaches of evil from within or from without, to remember that these may
be the covert advances of a personal and malignant being, who seeks to
overcome our virtue and to involve us in his own apostasy and destruction.

(_c_) It shuts us up to Christ, as the only Being who is able to deliver
us or others from the enemy of all good.

(_d_) It teaches us that our salvation is wholly of grace, since for such
multitudes of rebellious spirits no atonement and no renewal were
provided—simple justice having its way, with no mercy to interpose or
save.


    Philippi, in his Glaubenslehre, 3:151-284, suggests the following
    relations of the doctrine of Satan to the doctrine of sin: 1.
    Since Satan is a fallen _angel_, who once was pure, evil is not
    self-existent or necessary. Sin does not belong to the substance
    which God created, but is a later addition. 2. Since Satan is a
    purely _spiritual_ creature, sin cannot have its origin in mere
    sensuousness, or in the mere possession of a physical nature. 3.
    Since Satan is not a _weak_ and _poorly endowed_ creature, sin is
    not a necessary result of weakness and limitation. 4. Since Satan
    is _confirmed in evil_, sin is not necessarily a transient or
    remediable act of will. 5. Since in Satan sin _does not come to an
    end_, sin is not a step of creaturely development, or a stage of
    progress to something higher and better. On the uses of the
    doctrine, see also Van Oosterzee, Christian Dogmatics, 1:316;
    Robert Hall, Works, 3:35-51; Brooks, Satan and his Devices.

    “They never sank so low, They are not raised so high; They never
    knew such depths of woe, Such heights of majesty. The Savior did
    not join Their nature to his own; For them he shed no blood
    divine. Nor heaved a single groan.” If no redemption has been
    provided for them, it may be because: 1. sin originated with them;
    2. the sin which they committed was “_an eternal sin_” (_cf._
    _Mark 3:29_); 3. they sinned with clearer intellect and fuller
    knowledge than ours (_cf._ _Luke 23:34_); 4. their incorporeal
    being aggravated their sin and made it analogous to our sinning
    against the Holy Spirit (_cf._ _Mat. 12:31, 32_); 5. this
    incorporeal being gave no opportunity for Christ to objectify his
    grace and visibly to join himself to them (_cf._ _Heb. 2:16_); 6.
    their persistence in evil, in spite of their growing knowledge of
    the character of God as exhibited in human history, has resulted
    in a hardening of heart which is not susceptible of salvation.

    Yet angels were created in Christ (_Col. 1:16_); they consist in
    him (_Col. 1:17_); he must suffer in their sin; God would save
    them, if he consistently could. Dr. G. W. Samson held that the
    Logos became an angel before he became man, and that this explains
    his appearances as “_the angel of Jehovah_” in the Old Testament
    (_Gen. 22:11_). It is not asserted that _all_ fallen angels shall
    be eternally tormented (_Rev. 14:10_). In terms equally strong
    (_Mat. 25:41_; _Rev. 20:10_) the existence of a place of eternal
    punishment for wicked men is declared, but nevertheless we do not
    believe that all men will go there, in spite of the fact that all
    men are wicked. The silence of Scripture with regard to a
    provision of salvation for fallen angels does not prove that there
    is no such provision. _2 Pet. 2:4_ shows that evil angels have not
    received _final_ judgment, but are in a temporary state of
    existence, and their final state is yet to be revealed. If God has
    not already provided, may he not yet provide redemption for them,
    and the “_elect angels_” (_1 Tim. 5:21_) be those whom God has
    predestinated to stand this future probation and be saved, while
    only those who persist in their rebellion will be consigned to the
    lake of fire and brimstone (_Rev. 20:10_)?

    The keeper of a young tigress patted her head and she licked his
    hand. But when she grew older she seized his hand with her teeth
    and began to craunch it. He pulled away his hand in shreds. He
    learned not to fondle a tigress. Let us learn not to fondle Satan.
    Let us not be “_ignorant of his devices_” (_2 Cor. 2:11_). It is
    not well to keep loaded firearms in the chimney corner. “They who
    fear the adder’s sting will not come near her hissing.” Talmage:
    “O Lord, help us to hear the serpent’s rattle before we feel its
    fangs.” Ian Maclaren, Cure of Souls, 215—The pastor trembles for a
    soul, “when he sees the destroyer hovering over it like a hawk
    poised in midair, and would have it gathered beneath Christ’s
    wing.”

    Thomas K. Beecher: “Suppose I lived on Broadway where the crowd
    was surging past in both directions all the time. Would I leave my
    doors and windows open, saying to the crowd of strangers: ‘Enter
    my door, pass through my hall, come into my parlor, make
    yourselves at home in my dining-room, go up into my bedchambers’?
    No! I would have my windows and doors barred and locked against
    intruders, to be opened only to me and mine and those I would have
    as companions. Yet here we see foolish men and women stretching
    out their arms and saying to the spirits of the vasty deep: ‘Come
    in, and take possession of me. Write with my hands, think with my
    brain, speak with my lips, walk with my feet, use me as a medium
    for whatever you will.’ God respects the sanctity of man’s spirit.
    Even Christ stands at the door and knocks. Holy Spirit, fill me,
    so that there shall be room for no other!” (_Rev. 3:20_; _Eph.
    5:18_.)





