PART VI. SOTERIOLOGY, OR THE DOCTRINE OF SALVATION THROUGH THE WORK OF
CHRIST AND OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.




Chapter I. Christology, Or The Redemption Wrought By Christ.



Section I.—Historical Preparation For Redemption.


Since God had from eternity determined to redeem mankind, the history of
the race from the time of the Fall to the coming of Christ was
providentially arranged to prepare the way for this redemption. The
preparation was two-fold:


I. Negative Preparation,—in the history of the heathen world.


This showed (1) the true nature of sin, and the depth of spiritual
ignorance and of moral depravity to which the race, left to itself, must
fall; and (2) the powerlessness of human nature to preserve or regain an
adequate knowledge of God, or to deliver itself from sin by philosophy or
art.


    Why could not Eve have been the mother of the chosen seed, as she
    doubtless at the first supposed that she was? (_Gen. 4:1_—“_and
    she conceived, and bare Cain_ [_i. e._, “gotten”, or “acquired”],
    _and said, I have gotten a man, even Jehovah_”). Why was not the
    cross set up at the gates of Eden? Scripture intimates that a
    preparation was needful (_Gal 4:4_—“_but when the fulness of the
    time came, God hath sent forth his Son_”). Of the two agencies
    made use of, we have called heathenism the negative preparation.
    But it was not wholly negative; it was partly positive also.
    Justin Martyr spoke of a Λόγος σπερματικός among the heathen.
    Clement of Alexandria called Plato a Μωσῆς ἀττικίζων—a
    Greek-speaking Moses. Notice the priestly attitude of Pythagoras,
    Socrates, Plato, Pindar, Sophocles. The Bible recognizes Job,
    Balaam, Melchisedek, as instances of priesthood, or divine
    communication, outside the bounds of the chosen people. Heathen
    religions either were not religions, or God had a part in them.
    Confucius, Buddha, Zoroaster, were at least reformers, raised up
    in God’s providence. _Gal 4:3_ classes Judaism with the
    “_rudiments of the world_,” and _Rom. 5:20_ tells us that “_the
    law came in beside_,” as a force coöperating with other human
    factors, primitive revelation, sin, _etc._

    The positive preparation in heathenism receives greater attention
    when we conceive of Christ as the immanent God, revealing himself
    in conscience and in history. This was the real meaning of Justin
    Martyr, Apol. 1:46; 2:10, 13—“The whole race of men partook of the
    Logos, and those who lived according to reason (λόγου), were
    Christians, even though they were accounted atheists. Such among
    the Greeks were Socrates and Heracleitus, and those who resembled
    them.... Christ was known in part even to Socrates.... The
    teachings of Plato are not alien to those of Christ, though not in
    all respects similar. For all the writers of antiquity were able
    to have a dim vision of realities by means of the indwelling seed
    of the implanted Word (λόγου).” Justin Martyr claimed inspiration
    for Socrates. Tertullian spoke of Socrates as “pæne
    noster”—“almost one of us.” Paul speaks of the Cretans as having:
    “_a prophet of their own_” (_Tit. 1:12_)—probably Epimenides (596
    B. C.) whom Plato calls a θεῖος ἀνήρ—“a man of God,” and whom
    Cicero couples with Bacis and the Erythræan Sibyl. Clement of
    Alexandria, Stromata, 1:19; 6:5—“The same God who furnished both
    the covenants was the giver of the Greek philosophy to the Greeks,
    by which the Almighty is glorified among the Greeks.” Augustine:
    “Plato made me know the true God; Jesus Christ showed me the way
    to him.”

    Bruce, Apologetics, 207—“God gave to the Gentiles at least the
    starlight of religious knowledge. The Jews were elected for the
    sake of the Gentiles. There was some light even for pagans, though
    heathenism on the whole was a failure. But its very failure was a
    preparation for receiving the true religion.” Hatch, Hibbert
    Lectures, 133, 238—“Neo-Platonism, that splendid vision of
    incomparable and irrecoverable cloudland in which the sun of Greek
    philosophy set.... On its ethical side Christianity had large
    elements in common with reformed Stoicism; on its theological side
    it moved in harmony with the new movements of Platonism.” E. G.
    Robinson: “The idea that all religions but the Christian are the
    direct work of the devil is a Jewish idea, and is now abandoned.
    On the contrary, God has revealed himself to the race just so far
    as they have been capable of knowing him.... Any religion is
    better than none, for all religion implies restraint.”

    _John 1:9_—“_There was the true light, even the light which
    lighteth every man, coming into the world_”—has its Old Testament
    equivalent in _Ps. 94:10_—“_He that chastiseth the nations, shall
    not he correct, Even he that teacheth man knowledge?_” Christ is
    the great educator of the race. The preincarnate Word exerted an
    influence upon the consciences of the heathen. He alone makes it
    true that “anima naturaliter Christiana est.” Sabatier, Philos.
    Religion, 138-140—“Religion is union between God and the soul.
    That experience was first perfectly realized in Christ. Here are
    the ideal fact and the historical fact united and blended.
    Origen’s and Tertullian’s rationalism and orthodoxy each has its
    truth. The religious consciousness of Christ is the fountain head
    from which Christianity has flowed. He was a beginning of life to
    men. He had the spirit of sonship—God in man, and man in God.
    ‘Quid interius Deo?’ He showed us insistence on the moral ideal,
    yet the preaching of mercy to the sinner. The gospel was the
    acorn, and Christianity is the oak that has sprung from it. In the
    acorn, as in the tree, are some Hebraic elements that are
    temporary. Paganism is the materializing of religion; Judaism is
    the legalizing of religion. ‘In me,’ says Charles Secretan, ‘lives
    some one greater than I.’ ”

    But the positive element in heathenism was slight. Her altars and
    sacrifices, her philosophy and art, roused cravings which she was
    powerless to satisfy. Her religious systems became sources of
    deeper corruption. There was no hope, and no progress. “The
    Sphynx’s moveless calm symbolizes the monotony of Egyptian
    civilization.” Classical nations became more despairing, as they
    became more cultivated. To the best minds, truth seemed impossible
    of attainment, and all hope of general well-being seemed a dream.
    The Jews were the only forward-looking people; and all our modern
    confidence in destiny and development comes from them. They, in
    their turn, drew their hopefulness solely from prophecy. Not their
    “genius for religion,” but special revelation from God, made them
    what they were.

    Although God was in heathen history, yet so exceptional were the
    advantages of the Jews, that we can almost assent to the doctrine
    of the New Englander, Sept. 1883:576—“The Bible does not recognize
    other revelations. It speaks of the ‘_face of the covering that
    covereth all peoples, and the veil that is spread over all
    nations_’ (_Is. 25:7_); _Acts 14:16, 17_—‘_who in the generations
    gone by suffered all the nations to walk in their own ways. And
    yet he left not himself without witness_’ = not an internal
    revelation in the hearts of sages, but an external revelation in
    nature, ‘_in that he did good and gave you from heaven rains and
    fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness._’
    The convictions of heathen reformers with regard to divine
    inspiration were dim and intangible, compared with the
    consciousness of prophets and apostles that God was speaking
    through them to his people.”

    On heathenism as a preparation for Christ, see Tholuck, Nature and
    Moral Influence of Heathenism, in Bib. Repos., 1832:80, 246, 441;
    Döllinger, Gentile and Jew; Pressensé, Religions before Christ;
    Max Müller, Science of Religion, 1-128; Cocker, Christianity and
    Greek Philosophy; Ackerman, Christian Element in Plato; Farrar,
    Seekers after God; Renan, on Rome and Christianity, in Hibbert
    Lectures for 1880.


II. Positive Preparation,—in the history of Israel.


A single people was separated from all others, from the time of Abraham,
and was educated in three great truths: (1) the majesty of God, in his
unity, omnipotence, and holiness; (2) the sinfulness of man, and his moral
helplessness; (3) the certainty of a coming salvation. This education from
the time of Moses was conducted by the use of three principal agencies:

A. Law.—The Mosaic legislation, (_a_) by its theophanies and miracles,
cultivated faith in a personal and almighty God and Judge; (_b_) by its
commands and threatenings, wakened the sense of sin; (_c_) by its priestly
and sacrificial system, inspired hope of some way of pardon and access to
God.


    The education of the Jews was first of all an education by Law. In
    the history of the world, as in the history of the individual, law
    must precede gospel, John the Baptist must go before Christ,
    knowledge of sin must prepare a welcome entrance for knowledge of
    a Savior. While the heathen were studying God’s works, the chosen
    people were studying God. Men teach by words as well as by
    works,—so does God. And words reveal heart to heart, as works
    never can. “The Jews were made to know, on behalf of all mankind,
    the guilt and shame of sin. Yet just when the disease was at its
    height, the physicians were beneath contempt.” Wrightnour: “As if
    to teach all subsequent ages that no outward cleansing would
    furnish a remedy, the great deluge, which washed away the whole
    sinful antediluvian world with the exception of one comparatively
    pure family, had not cleansed the world from sin.”

    With this gradual growth in the sense of sin there was also a
    widening and deepening faith. Kuyper, Work of the Holy Spirit,
    67—“Abel, Abraham, Moses = the individual, the family, the nation.
    By faith Abel obtained witness; by faith Abraham received the son
    of the promise; and by faith Moses led Israel through the Red
    Sea.” Kurtz, Religionslehre, speaks of the relation between law
    and gospel as “Ein fliessender Gegensatz”—“a flowing
    antithesis”—like that between flower and fruit. A. B. Davidson,
    Expositor, 6:163—“The course of revelation is like a river, which
    cannot be cut up into sections.” E. G. Robinson: “The two
    fundamental ideas of Judaism were: 1. theological—the unity of
    God; 2. philosophical—the distinctness of God from the material
    world. Judaism went to seed. Jesus, with the sledge-hammer of
    truth, broke up the dead forms, and the Jews thought he was
    destroying the Law.” On methods pursued with humanity by God, see
    Simon, Reconciliation, 232-251.


B. Prophecy.—This was of two kinds: (_a_) verbal,—beginning with the
protevangelium in the garden, and extending to within four hundred years
of the coming of Christ; (_b_) typical,—in persons, as Adam, Melchisedek,
Joseph, Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Jonah; and in acts, as Isaac’s
sacrifice, and Moses’ lifting up the serpent in the wilderness.


    The relation of law to gospel was like that of a sketch to the
    finished picture, or of David’s plan for the temple to Solomon’s
    execution of it. When all other nations were sunk in pessimism and
    despair, the light of hope burned brightly among the Hebrews. The
    nation was forward-bound. Faith was its very life. The O. T.
    saints saw all the troubles of the present “sub specie
    eternitatis,” and believed that “_Light is sown for the righteous,
    And gladness for the upright in heart_” (_Ps. 97:11_). The hope of
    Job was the hope of the chosen people: “_I know that my Redeemer
    liveth, And at last he will stand up upon the earth_” (_Job
    19:25_). Hutton, Essays, 2:237—“Hebrew supernaturalism has
    transmuted forever the pure naturalism of Greek poetry. And now no
    modern poet can ever become really great who does not feel and
    reproduce in his writings the difference between the natural and
    the supernatural.”

    Christ was the reality, to which the types and ceremonies of
    Judaism pointed; and these latter disappeared when Christ had
    come, just as the petals of the blossom drop away when the fruit
    appears. Many promises to the O. T. saints which seemed to them
    promises of temporal blessing, were fulfilled in a better, because
    a more spiritual, way than they expected. Thus God cultivated in
    them a boundless trust—a trust which was essentially the same
    thing with the faith of the new dispensation, because it was the
    absolute reliance of a consciously helpless sinner upon God’s
    method of salvation, and so was implicitly, though not explicitly,
    a faith in Christ.

    The protevangelium (_Gen. 3:15_) said “_it_ [this promised seed]
    _shall bruise thy head_.” The “_it_” was rendered in some Latin
    manuscripts “_ipsa_.” Hence Roman Catholic divines attributed the
    victory to the Virgin. Notice that Satan was cursed, but not Adam
    and Eve; for they were candidates for restoration. The promise of
    the Messiah narrowed itself down as the race grew older, from
    Abraham to Judah, David, Bethlehem, and the Virgin. Prophecy spoke
    of “_the sceptre_” and of “_the seventy weeks_.” Haggai and
    Malachi foretold that the Lord should suddenly come to the second
    temple. Christ was to be true man and true God; prophet, priest,
    and king; humbled and exalted. When prophecy had become complete,
    a brief interval elapsed, and then he, of whom Moses in the law,
    and the prophets, did write, actually came.

    All these preparations for Christ’s coming, however, through the
    perversity of man became most formidable obstacles to the progress
    of the gospel. The Roman Empire put Christ to death. Philosophy
    rejected Christ as foolishness. Jewish ritualism, the mere shadow,
    usurped the place of worship and faith, the substance of religion.
    God’s last method of preparation in the case of Israel was that of


C. Judgment—Repeated divine chastisements for idolatry culminated in the
overthrow of the kingdom, and the captivity of the Jews. The exile had two
principal effects: (_a_) religious,—in giving monotheism firm root in the
heart of the people, and in leading to the establishment of the
synagogue-system, by which monotheism was thereafter preserved and
propagated; (_b_) civil,—in converting the Jews from an agricultural to a
trading people, scattering them among all nations, and finally imbuing
them with the spirit of Roman law and organization.

Thus a people was made ready to receive the gospel and to propagate it
throughout the world, at the very time when the world had become conscious
of its needs, and, through its greatest philosophers and poets, was
expressing its longings for deliverance.


    At the junction of Europe, Asia, and Africa, there lay a little
    land through which passed all the caravan-routes from the East to
    the West. Palestine was “the eye of the world.” The Hebrews
    throughout the Roman world were “the greater Palestine of the
    Dispersion.” The scattering of the Jews through all lands had
    prepared a monotheistic starting point for the gospel in every
    heathen city. Jewish synagogues had prepared places of assembly
    for the hearing of the gospel. The Greek language—the universal
    literary language of the world—had prepared a medium in which that
    gospel could be spoken. “Cæsar had unified the Latin West, as
    Alexander the Greek East”; and universal peace, together with
    Roman roads and Roman law, made it possible for that gospel, when
    once it had got a foothold, to spread itself to the ends of the
    earth. The first dawn of missionary enterprise appears among the
    proselyting Jews before Christ’s time. Christianity laid hold of
    this proselyting spirit, and sanctified it, to conquer the world
    to the faith of Christ.

    Beyschlag, N. T. Theology, 2:9, 10—“In his great expedition across
    the Hellespont, Paul reversed the course which Alexander took, and
    carried the gospel into Europe to the centres of the old Greek
    culture.” In all these preparations we see many lines converging
    to one result, in a manner inexplicable, unless we take them as
    proofs of the wisdom and power of God preparing the way for the
    kingdom of his Son; and all this in spite of the fact that “_a
    hardening in part hath befallen Israel, until the fulness of the
    Gentiles be come in_” (_Rom. 11:25_). James Robertson, Early
    Religion of Israel, 15—“Israel now instructs the world in the
    Worship of Mammon, after having once taught it the knowledge of
    God.”

    On Judaism, as a preparation for Christ, see Döllinger, Gentile
    and Jew, 2:291-419; Martensen, Dogmatics, 224-236; Hengstenberg,
    Christology of the O. T.; Smith, Prophecy a Preparation for
    Christ; Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 458-485; Fairbairn, Typology;
    MacWhorter, Jahveh Christ; Kurtz, Christliche Religionslehre, 114;
    Edwards’ History of Redemption, in Works, 1:297-395; Walker,
    Philosophy of the Plan of Salvation; Conybeare and Howson, Life
    and Epistles of St. Paul, 1:1-37; Luthardt, Fundamental Truths,
    257-281; Schaff, Hist. Christian Ch., 1:32-49; Butler’s Analogy,
    Bohn’s ed., 228-238; Bushnell, Vicarious Sac., 63-66; Max Müller,
    Science of Language, 2:443; Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk,
    1:463-485; Fisher, Beginnings of Christianity, 47-73.



Section II.—The Person Of Christ.


The redemption of mankind from sin was to be effected through a Mediator
who should unite in himself both the human nature and the divine, in order
that he might reconcile God to man and man to God. To facilitate an
understanding of the Scriptural doctrine under consideration, it will be
desirable at the outset to present a brief historical survey of views
respecting the Person of Christ.


    In the history of doctrine, as we have seen, beliefs held in
    solution at the beginning are only gradually precipitated and
    crystallized into definite formulas. The first question which
    Christians naturally asked themselves was “_What think ye of the
    Christ_” (_Mat 22:42_); then his relation to the Father; then, in
    due succession, the nature of sin, of atonement, of justification,
    of regeneration. Connecting these questions with the names of the
    great leaders who sought respectively to answer them, we have: 1.
    the Person of Christ, treated by Gregory Nazianzen (328); 2. the
    Trinity, by Athanasius (325-373); 3. Sin, by Augustine (353-430);
    4. Atonement, by Anselm (1033-1109); 5. Justification by faith, by
    Luther (1485-1560); 6. Regeneration, by John Wesley
    (1703-1791);—six weekdays of theology, leaving only a seventh, for
    the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, which may be the work of our age.
    _John 10:36_—“_him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the
    world_”—hints at some mysterious process by which the Son was
    prepared for his mission. Athanasius: “If the Word of God is in
    the _world_, as in a body, what is there strange in affirming that
    he has also entered into _humanity_?” This is the natural end of
    evolution from lower to higher. See Medd, Bampton Lectures for
    1882, on The One Mediator: The Operation of the Son of God in
    Nature and in Grace; Orr, God’s Image in Man.


I. Historical Survey of Views Respecting the Person of Christ.


1. _The Ebionites_ (אביון = “poor”; A. D. 107?) denied the reality of
Christ’s divine nature, and held him to be merely man, whether naturally
or supernaturally conceived. This man, however, held a peculiar relation
to God, in that, from the time of his baptism, an unmeasured fulness of
the divine Spirit rested upon him. Ebionism was simply Judaism within the
pale of the Christian church, and its denial of Christ’s godhood was
occasioned by the apparent incompatibility of this doctrine with
monotheism.


    Fürst (Heb. Lexicon) derives the name “Ebionite” from the word
    signifying “poor”; see _Is. 25:4_—“_thou hast been a stronghold to
    the poor_”; _Mat 5:3_—“_Blessed are the poor in spirit._” It means
    “oppressed, pious souls.” Epiphanius traces them back to the
    Christians who took refuge, A. D. 66, at Pella, just before the
    destruction of Jerusalem. They lasted down to the fourth century.
    Dorner can assign no age for the formation of the sect, nor any
    historically ascertained person as its head. It was not Judaic
    Christianity, but only a fraction of this. There were two
    divisions of the Ebionites:

    (_a_) The Nazarenes, who held to the supernatural birth of Christ,
    while they would not go to the length of admitting the preëxisting
    hypostasis of the Son. They are said to have had the gospel of
    Matthew, in Hebrew.

    (_b_) The Cerinthian Ebionites, who put the baptism of Christ in
    place of his supernatural birth, and made the ethical sonship the
    cause of the physical. It seemed to them a heathenish fable that
    the Son of God should be born of the Virgin. There was no personal
    union between the divine and human in Christ. Christ, as distinct
    from Jesus, was not a merely impersonal power descending upon
    Jesus, but a preëxisting hypostasis above the world-creating
    powers. The Cerinthian Ebionites, who on the whole best represent
    the spirit of Ebionism, approximated to Pharisaic Judaism, and
    were hostile to the writings of Paul. The Epistle to the Hebrews,
    in fact, is intended to counteract an Ebionitic tendency to
    overstrain law and to underrate Christ. In a complete view,
    however, should also be mentioned:

    (_c_) The Gnostic Ebionism of the pseudo-Clementines, which in
    order to destroy the deity of Christ and save the pure monotheism,
    so-called, of primitive religion, gave up even the best part of
    the Old Testament. In all its forms, Ebionism conceives of God and
    man as external to each other. God could not become man. Christ
    was no more than a prophet or teacher, who, as the reward of his
    virtue, was from the time of his baptism specially endowed with
    the Spirit. After his death he was exalted to kingship. But that
    would not justify the worship which the church paid him. A merely
    creaturely mediator would separate us from God, instead of uniting
    us to him. See Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:305-307 (Syst. Doct.,
    3:201-204), and Hist. Doct. Person Christ, A.1:187-217; Reuss,
    Hist. Christ. Theol., 1:100-107; Schaff, Ch. Hist., 1:213-215.


2. _The Docetæ_ (δοκέω—“to seem,” “to appear”; A. D. 70-170), like most of
the Gnostics in the second century and the Manichees in the third, denied
the reality of Christ’s human body. This view was the logical sequence of
their assumption of the inherent evil of matter. If matter is evil and
Christ was pure, then Christ’s human body must have been merely
phantasmal. Docetism was simply pagan philosophy introduced into the
church.


    The Gnostic Basilides held to a real human Christ, with whom the
    divine νοῦς became united at the baptism; but the followers of
    Basilides became Docetæ. To them, the body of Christ was merely a
    seeming one. There was no real life or death. Valentinus made the
    Æon, Christ, with a body purely pneumatic and worthy of himself,
    pass through the body of the Virgin, as water through a reed,
    taking up into himself nothing of the human nature through which
    he passed; or as a ray of light through colored glass which only
    imparts to the light a portion of its own darkness. Christ’s life
    was simply a theophany. The Patripassians and Sabellians, who are
    only sects of the Docetæ, denied all real humanity to Christ.
    Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 141—“He treads the thorns of death and
    shame ‘like a triumphal path,’ of which he never felt the
    sharpness. There was development only externally and in
    appearance. No ignorance can be ascribed to him amidst the
    omniscience of the Godhead.” Shelley: “A mortal shape to him Was
    as the vapor dim Which the orient planet animates with light.” The
    strong argument against Docetism was found in _Heb. 2:14_—“_Since
    then the children are sharers in flesh and blood, he also himself
    in like manner partook of the same._”

    That Docetism appeared so early, shows that the impression Christ
    made was that of a superhuman being. Among many of the Gnostics,
    the philosophy which lay at the basis of their Docetism was a
    pantheistic apotheosis of the world. God did not need to become
    man, for man was essentially divine. This view, and the opposite
    error of Judaism, already mentioned, both showed their
    insufficiency by attempts to combine with each other, as in the
    Alexandrian philosophy. See Dorner, Hist. Doct. Person Christ,
    A.1:218-253, and Glaubenslehre, 2:307-310 (Syst. Doct.,
    3:204-206); Neander, Ch. Hist, 1:387.


3. _The Arians_ (Arius, condemned at Nice, 325) denied the integrity of
the divine nature in Christ. They regarded the Logos who united himself to
humanity in Jesus Christ, not as possessed of absolute godhood, but as the
first and highest of created beings. This view originated in a
misinterpretation of the Scriptural accounts of Christ’s state of
humiliation, and in mistaking temporary subordination for original and
permanent inequality.


    Arianism is called by Dorner a reaction from Sabellianism.
    Sabellius had reduced the incarnation of Christ to a temporary
    phenomenon. Arius thought to lay stress on the hypostasis of the
    Son, and to give it fixity and substance. But, to his mind, the
    reality of Sonship seemed to require subordination to the Father.
    Origen had taught the subordination of the Son to the Father, in
    connection with his doctrine of eternal generation. Arius held to
    the subordination, and also to the generation, but this last, he
    declared, could not be eternal, but must be in time. See Dorner,
    Person Christ, A.2:227-244, and Glaubenslehre, 2:307, 312, 313
    (Syst. Doct., 3:203, 207-210); Herzog, Encyclopädie, art.:
    Arianismus. See also this Compendium, Vol. I:328-330.


4. _The Apollinarians_ (Apollinaris, condemned at Constantinople, 381)
denied the integrity of Christ’s human nature. According to this view,
Christ had no human νοῦς or πνεῦμα, other than that which was furnished by
the divine nature. Christ had only the human σῶμα and ψυχή; the place of
the human νοῦς or πνεῦμα was filled by the divine Logos. Apollinarism is
an attempt to construe the doctrine of Christ’s person in the forms of the
Platonic trichotomy.


    Lest divinity should seem a foreign element, when added to this
    curtailed manhood, Apollinaris said that there was an eternal
    tendency to the human in the Logos himself; that in God was the
    true manhood; that the Logos is the eternal, archetypal man. But
    here is no _becoming_ man—only a manifestation in flesh of what
    the Logos already _was_. So we have a Christ of great head and
    dwarfed body. Justin Martyr preceded Apollinaris in this view. In
    opposing it, the church Fathers said that “what the Son of God has
    not taken to himself, he has not sanctified”—τὸ ἀπρόσληπτον καὶ
    ἀθεράπευτον. See Dorner, Jahrbuch f. d. Theol., 1:397-408—“The
    impossibility, on the Arian theory, of making two finite souls
    into one, finally led to the [Apollinarian] denial of any human
    soul in Christ”; see also, Dorner, Person Christ, A.2:352-399, and
    Glaubenslehre, 2:310 (Syst. Doct., 3:206, 207); Shedd, Hist.
    Doctrine, 1:394.

    Apollinaris taught that the eternal Word took into union with
    himself, not a complete human nature, but an irrational human
    animal. Simon, Reconciliation, 329, comes near to being an
    Apollinarian, when he maintains that the incarnate Logos was
    human, but was not a man. He is the constituter of man,
    self-limited, in order that he may save that to which he has given
    life. Gore, Incarnation, 93—“Apollinaris suggested that the
    archetype of manhood exists in God, who made man in his own image,
    so that man’s nature in some sense preëxisted in God. The Son of
    God was eternally human, and he could fill the place of the human
    mind in Christ without his ceasing to be in some sense divine....
    This the church negatived,—man is not God, nor God man. The first
    principle of theism is that manhood at the bottom is not the same
    thing as Godhead. This is a principle intimately bound up with
    man’s responsibility and the reality of sin. The interests of
    theism were at stake.”


5. _The Nestorians_ (Nestorius, removed from the Patriarchate of
Constantinople, 431) denied the real union between the divine and the
human natures in Christ, making it rather a moral than an organic one.
They refused therefore to attribute to the resultant unity the attributes
of each nature, and regarded Christ as a man in very near relation to God.
Thus they virtually held to two natures and two persons, instead of two
natures in one person.


    Nestorius disliked the phrase: “Mary, mother of God.” The
    Chalcedon statement asserted its truth, with the significant
    addition: “as to his humanity.” Nestorius made Christ a peculiar
    temple of God. He believed in συνάφεια, not ἕνωσις,—junction and
    indwelling, but not absolute union. He made too much of the
    analogy of the union of the believer with Christ, and separated as
    much as possible the divine and the human. The two natures were,
    in his view, ἄλλος καὶ ἄλλος, instead of being ἄλλο καὶ ἄλλο,
    which together constitute εἶς—one personality. The union which he
    accepted was a moral union, which makes Christ simply God and man,
    instead of the God-man.

    John of Damascus compared the passion of Christ to the felling of
    a tree on which the sun shines. The axe fells the tree, but does
    no harm to the sunbeams. So the blows which struck Christ’s
    humanity caused no harm to his deity; while the flesh suffered,
    the deity remained impassible. This leaves, however, no divine
    efficacy of the human sufferings, and no personal union of the
    human with the divine. The error of Nestorius arose from a
    philosophic nominalism, which refused to conceive of nature
    without personality. He believed in nothing more than a local or
    moral union, like the marriage union, in which two become one; or
    like the state, which is sometimes called a moral person, because
    having a unity composed of many persons. See Dorner, Person
    Christ, B.1:53-79, and Glaubenslehre, 2:315, 316 (Syst. Doct.,
    3:211-213); Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 4:210; Wilberforce,
    Incarnation, 152-154.

    “There was no need here of the virgin-birth,—to secure a sinless
    father as well as mother would have been enough. Nestorianism
    holds to no real incarnation—only to an alliance between God and
    man. After the fashion of the Siamese twins, Chang and Eng, man
    and God are joined together. But the incarnation is not merely a
    higher degree of the mystical union.” Gore, Incarnation,
    94—“Nestorius adopted and popularized the doctrine of the famous
    commentator, Theodore of Mopsuestia. But the Christ of Nestorius
    was simply a deified man, not God incarnate,—he was from below,
    not from above. If he was exalted to union with the divine
    essence, his exaltation was only that of one individual man.”


6. _The Eutychians_ (condemned at Chalcedon, 451) denied the distinction
and coëxistence of the two natures, and held to a mingling of both into
one, which constituted a _tertium quid_, or third nature. Since in this
case the divine must overpower the human, it follows that the human was
really absorbed into or transmuted into the divine, although the divine
was not in all respects the same, after the union, that it was before.
Hence the Eutychians were often called Monophysites, because they
virtually reduced the two natures to one.


    They were an Alexandrian school, which included monks of
    Constantinople and Egypt. They used the words σύγχυσις,
    μεταβολή—confounding, transformation—to describe the union of the
    two natures in Christ. Humanity joined to deity was as a drop of
    honey mingled with the ocean. There was a change in either
    element, but as when a stone attracts the earth, or a meteorite
    the sun, or when a small boat pulls a ship, all the movement was
    virtually on the part of the smaller object. Humanity was so
    absorbed in deity, as to be altogether lost. The union was
    illustrated by electron, a metal compounded of silver and gold. A
    more modern illustration would be that of the chemical union of an
    acid and an alkali, to form a salt unlike either of the
    constituents.

    In effect this theory denied the human element, and, with this,
    the possibility of atonement, on the part of human nature, as well
    as of real union of man with God. Such a magical union of the two
    natures as Eutyches described is inconsistent with any real
    _becoming man_ on the part of the Logos,—the manhood is well-nigh
    as illusory as upon the theory of the Docetæ. Mason, Faith of the
    Gospel, 140—“This turns not the Godhead only but the manhood also
    into something foreign—into some nameless nature, betwixt and
    between—the fabulous nature of a semi-human demigod,” like the
    Centaur.

    The author of “The German Theology” says that “Christ’s human
    nature was utterly bereft of self, and was nothing else but a
    house and habitation of God.” The Mystics would have human
    personality so completely the organ of the divine that “we may be
    to God what man’s hand is to a man,” and that “I” and “mine” may
    cease to have any meaning. Both these views savor of Eutychianism.
    On the other hand, the Unitarian says that Christ was “a mere
    man.” But there cannot be such a thing as a mere man, exclusive of
    aught above and beyond him, self-centered and self-moved. The
    Trinitarian sometimes declares himself as believing that Christ is
    God and man, thus implying the existence of two substances. Better
    say that Christ is the God-man, who manifests all the divine
    powers and qualities of which all men and all nature are partial
    embodiments. See Dorner, Person of Christ, B.1:83-93, and
    Glaubenslehre, 2:318, 319 (Syst. Doct., 3:214-216); Guericke, Ch.
    History, 1:356-360.


The foregoing survey would seem to show that history had exhausted the
possibilities of heresy, and that the future denials of the doctrine of
Christ’s person must be, in essence, forms of the views already mentioned.
All controversies with regard to the person of Christ must, of necessity,
hinge upon one of three points: first, the reality of the two natures;
secondly, the integrity of the two natures; thirdly, the union of the two
natures in one person. Of these points, Ebionism and Docetism deny the
reality of the natures; Arianism and Apollinarianism deny their integrity;
while Nestorianism and Eutychianism deny their proper union. In opposition
to all these errors, the orthodox doctrine held its ground and maintains
it to this day.


    We may apply to this subject what Dr. A. P. Peabody said in a
    different connection: “The canon of infidelity was closed almost
    as soon as that of the Scriptures”—modern unbelievers having, for
    the most part, repeated the objections of their ancient
    predecessors. Brooks, Foundations of Zoölogy, 126—“As a shell
    which has failed to burst is picked up on some old battle-field,
    by some one on whom experience is thrown away, and is exploded by
    him in the bosom of his approving family, with disastrous results,
    so one of these abandoned beliefs may be dug up by the head of
    some intellectual family, to the confusion of those who follow him
    as their leader.”


7. _The Orthodox doctrine_ (promulgated at Chalcedon, 451) holds that in
the one person Jesus Christ there are two natures, a human nature and a
divine nature, each in its completeness and integrity, and that these two
natures are organically and indissolubly united, yet so that no third
nature is formed thereby. In brief, to use the antiquated dictum, orthodox
doctrine forbids us either to divide the person or to confound the
natures.

That this doctrine is Scriptural and rational, we have yet to show. We may
most easily arrange our proofs by reducing the three points mentioned to
two, namely: first, the reality and integrity of the two natures;
secondly, the union of the two natures in one person.


    The formula of Chalcedon is negative, with the exception of its
    assertion of a ἕνωσις ὑποστατική. It proceeds from the natures,
    and regards the result of the union to be the person. Each of the
    two natures is regarded as in movement toward the other. The
    symbol says nothing of an ἀνυποστασία of the human nature, nor
    does it say that the Logos furnishes the ego in the personality.
    John of Damascus, however, pushed forward to these conclusions,
    and his work, translated into Latin, was used by Peter Lombard,
    and determined the views of the Western church of the Middle Ages.
    Dorner regards this as having given rise to the Mariolatry,
    saint-invocation, and transubstantiation of the Roman Catholic
    Church. See Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 4:189 _sq._; Dorner, Person
    Christ, B.1:93-119, and Glaubenslehre, 2:320-328 (Syst. Doct.,
    3:216-223), in which last passage may be found valuable matter
    with regard to the changing uses of the words πρόσωπον, ὑπόστασις,
    οὐσία, _etc._

    Gore, Incarnation, 96, 101—“These decisions simply express in a
    new form, without substantial addition, the apostolic teaching as
    it is represented in the New Testament. They express it in a new
    form for protective purposes, as a legal enactment protects a
    moral principle. They are developments only in the sense that they
    represent the apostolic teaching worked out into formulas by the
    aid of a terminology which was supplied by Greek dialectics....
    What the church borrowed from Greek thought was her terminology,
    not the substance of her creed. Even in regard to her terminology
    we must make one important reservation; for Christianity laid all
    stress on the personality of God and man, of which Hellenism had
    thought but little.”


II. The two Natures of Christ,—their Reality and Integrity.


1. The Humanity of Christ.


A. Its Reality.—This may be shown as follows:

(_a_) He expressly called himself, and was called, “man.”


    _John 8:40_—“_ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the
    truth_”; _Acts 2:22_—“_Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God
    unto you_”; _Rom. 5:15_—“_the one man, Jesus Christ_”; _1 Cor.
    15:21_—“_by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of
    the dead_”; _1 Tim. 2:5_—“_one mediator also between God and man,
    himself man, Christ Jesus._” Compare the genealogies in _Mat.
    1:1-17_ and _Luke 3:23-38_, the former of which proves Jesus to be
    in the royal line, and the latter of which proves him to be in the
    natural line, of succession from David; the former tracing back
    his lineage to Abraham, and the latter to Adam. Christ is
    therefore the son of David, and of the stock of Israel. Compare
    also the phrase “_Son of man_,” _e. g._, in _Mat. 20:28_, which,
    however much it may mean in addition, certainly indicates the
    veritable humanity of Jesus. Compare, finally, the term “_flesh_”
    (= human nature), applied to him in _John 1:14_—“_And the Word
    became flesh_” and in _1 John 4:2_—“_every spirit that confesseth
    that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God._”

    “Jesus is the true Son of man whom he proclaimed himself to be.
    This implies that he is the representative of all humanity.
    Consider for a moment what is implied in your being a man. How
    many parents had you? You answer, Two. How many grandparents? You
    answer, Four. How many great-grandparents? Eight. How many
    great-great-grandparents? Sixteen. So the number of your ancestors
    increases as you go further back, and if you take in only twenty
    generations, you will have to reckon yourself as the outcome of
    more than a million progenitors. The name Smith, or Jones, which
    you bear, represents only one strain of all those million; you
    might almost as well bear any other name; your existence is more
    an expression of the race at large than of any particular family
    or line. What is true of you, was true, on the human side, of the
    Lord Jesus. In him all the lines of our common humanity converged.
    He was the Son of man, far more than he was Son of Mary”; see A.
    H. Strong, Sermon before the London Baptist Congress.


(_b_) He possessed the essential elements of human nature as at present
constituted—a material body and a rational soul.


    _Mat. 26:38_—“_My soul is exceeding sorrowful_”; _John 11:33_—“_he
    groaned in the spirit_”; _Mat. 26:26_—“_this is my body_”;
    _28_—“_this is my blood_”; _Luke 24:39_—“_a spirit hath not flesh
    and bones, as ye behold me having_”; _Heb. 2:14_—“_Since then the
    children are sharers in flesh and blood, he also himself in like
    manner partook of the same_”; _1 John 1:1_—“_that which we have
    heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we
    beheld, and our hands handled, concerning the Word of life_”;
    _4:2_—“_every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in
    the flesh is of God._”

    Yet Christ was not all men in one, and he did not illustrate the
    development of all human powers. Laughter, painting, literature,
    marriage—these provinces he did not invade. Yet we do not regard
    these as absent from the ideal man. The perfection of Jesus was
    the perfection of self-limiting love. For our sakes he sanctified
    himself (_John 17:19_), or separated himself from much that in an
    ordinary man would have been excellence and delight. He became an
    example to us, by doing God’s will and reflecting God’s character
    in his particular environment and in his particular mission—that
    of the world’s Redeemer; see H. E. Robins, Ethics of the Christian
    Life, 259-303.

    Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 86-105—“Christ was not a man
    only amongst men. His relation to the human race is not that he
    was another specimen, differing, by being another, from every one
    but himself. His relation to the race was not a differentiating
    but a consummating relation. He was not generically but
    inclusively man.... The only relation that can at all directly
    compare with it is that of Adam, who in a real sense was
    humanity.... That complete indwelling and possessing of even one
    other, which the yearnings of man toward man imperfectly approach,
    is only possible, in any fulness of the words, to that spirit of
    man which is the Spirit of God: to the Spirit of God become,
    through incarnation, the spirit of man.... If Christ’s humanity
    were not the humanity of Deity, it could not stand in the wide,
    inclusive, consummating relation, in which it stands, in fact, to
    the humanity of all other men.... Yet the centre of Christ’s being
    as man was not in himself but in God. He was the expression, by
    willing reflection, of Another.”


(_c_) He was moved by the instinctive principles, and he exercised the
active powers, which belong to a normal and developed humanity (hunger,
thirst, weariness, sleep, love, compassion, anger, anxiety, fear,
groaning, weeping, prayer).


    _Mat 4:2_—“_he afterward hungered_”; _John 19:28_—“_I thirst_”;
    _4:6_—“_Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey, sat thus
    by the well_”; _Mat 8:24_—“_the boat was covered with the waves:
    but he was asleep_”; _Mark 10:21_—“_Jesus looking upon him loved
    him_”; _Mat. 9:36_—“_when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with
    compassion for them_”; _Mark 3:5_—“_looked round about on them
    with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their heart_”; _Heb.
    5:7_—“_supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that
    was able to save him from death_”; _John 12:27_—“_Now is my soul
    troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour_”;
    _11:33_—“_he groaned in the spirit_”; _35_—“_Jesus wept_”; _Mat
    14:23_—“_he went up into the mountain apart to pray._” _Heb.
    2:16_—“_For it is not doubtless angels whom he rescueth, but he
    rescueth the seed of Abraham_” (Kendrick).

    Prof. J. P. Silvernail, on The Elocution of Jesus, finds the
    following intimations as to his delivery. It was characterized by
    1. Naturalness (sitting, as at Capernaum); 2. Deliberation
    (cultivates responsiveness in his hearers); 3. Circumspection (he
    looked at Peter); 4. Dramatic action (woman taken in adultery); 5.
    Self-control (authority, poise, no vociferation, denunciation of
    Scribes and Pharisees). All these are manifestations of truly
    human qualities and virtues. The epistle of James, the brother of
    our Lord, with its exaltation of a meek, quiet and holy life, may
    be an unconscious reflection of the character of Jesus, as it had
    appeared to James during the early days at Nazareth. So John the
    Baptist’s exclamation, “_I have need to be baptized of thee_”
    (_Mat 3:14_), may be an inference from his intercourse with Jesus
    in childhood and youth.


(_d_) He was subject to the ordinary laws of human development, both in
body and soul (grew and waxed strong in spirit; asked questions; grew in
wisdom and stature; learned obedience; suffered being tempted; was made
perfect through sufferings).


    _Luke 2:40_—“_the child grew, and waxed strong, filled with
    wisdom_”; _46_—“_sitting in the midst of the teachers, both
    hearing them, and asking them questions_” (here, at his twelfth
    year, he appears first to become fully conscious that he is the
    Sent of God, the Son of God); _49_—“_know ye not that I must be in
    my Father’s house?_” (lit. “in the things of my Father”);
    _52_—“_advanced in wisdom and stature_”; _Heb. 5:8_—“_learned
    obedience by the things which he suffered_”; _2:18_—“_in that he
    himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
    that are tempted_”; _10_—“_it became him ... to make the author of
    their salvation perfect through sufferings._”

    Keble: “Was not our Lord a little child, Taught by degrees to
    pray; By father dear and mother mild Instructed day by day?”
    Adamson, The Mind in Christ: “To Henry Drummond Christianity was
    the crown of the evolution of the whole universe. Jesus’ growth in
    stature and in favor with God and men is a picture in miniature of
    the age-long evolutionary process.” Forrest, Christ of History and
    of Experience, 185—“The incarnation of the Son was not his one
    revelation of God, but the interpretation to sinful humanity of
    all his other revelations of God in nature and history and moral
    experience, which had been darkened by sin.... The Logos,
    incarnate or not, is the τέλος as well as the ἀρχή of creation.”

    Andrew Murray, Spirit of Christ, 26, 27—“Though now baptized
    himself, he cannot yet baptize others. He must first, in the power
    of his baptism, meet temptation and overcome it; must learn
    obedience and suffer; yea, through the eternal Spirit, offer
    himself a sacrifice to God and his Will; then only could he afresh
    receive the Holy Spirit as the reward of obedience, with the power
    to baptize all who belong to him”; see _Acts 2:33_—“_Being
    therefore by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of
    the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he hath poured forth
    this, which ye see and hear._”


(_e_) He suffered and died (bloody sweat; gave up his spirit; his side
pierced, and straightway there came out blood and water).


    _Luke 22:44_—“_being in an agony he prayed more earnestly; and his
    sweat became as it were great drops of blood falling down upon the
    ground_”; _John 19:30_—“_he bowed his head, and gave up his
    spirit_”; _34_—“_one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his
    side, and straightway there came out blood and water_”—held by
    Stroud, Physical Cause of our Lord’s Death, to be proof that Jesus
    died of a broken heart.

    Anselm, Cur Deus Homo, 1:9-19—“The Lord is said to have grown in
    wisdom and favor with God, not because it was so, but because he
    acted as if it were so. So he was exalted after death, as if this
    exaltation were on account of death.” But we may reply: Resolve
    all signs of humanity into mere appearance, and you lose the
    divine nature as well as the human; for God is truth and cannot
    act a lie. The babe, the child, even the man, in certain respects,
    was ignorant. Jesus, the boy, was not making crosses, as in
    Overbeck’s picture, but rather yokes and plows, as Justin Martyr
    relates—serving a real apprenticeship in Joseph’s workshop: _Mark
    6:3_—“_Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary?_”

    See Holman Hunt’s picture, “The Shadow of the Cross”—in which not
    Jesus, but only Mary, sees the shadow of the cross upon the wall.
    He lived a life of faith, as well as of prayer (_Heb.
    12:2_—“_Jesus the author_ [captain, prince] _and perfecter of our
    faith_”), dependent upon Scripture, which was much of it, as _Ps.
    16_ and _118_, and _Is. 49, 50, 61,_ written for him, as well as
    about him. See Park, Discourses, 297-327; Deutsch, Remains,
    131—“The boldest transcendental flight of the Talmud is its
    saying: ‘God prays.’ ” In Christ’s humanity, united as it is to
    deity, we have the fact answering to this piece of Talmudic
    poetry.


B. Its Integrity. We here use the term “integrity” to signify, not merely
completeness, but perfection. That which is perfect is, _a fortiori_,
complete in all its parts. Christ’s human nature was:

(_a_) Supernaturally conceived; since the denial of his supernatural
conception involves either a denial of the purity of Mary, his mother, or
a denial of the truthfulness of Matthew’s and Luke’s narratives.


    _Luke 1:34, 35_—“_And Mary said unto the angel, How shall this be,
    seeing I know not a man? And the angel answered and said unto her,
    The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most
    High shall overshadow thee._” The “_seed of the woman_” (_Gen.
    3:15_) was one who had no earthly father. “_Eve_” = life, not only
    as being the source of physical life to the race, but also as
    bringing into the world him who was to be its spiritual life.
    Julius Müller, Proof-texts, 29—Jesus Christ “had no earthly
    father; his birth was a creative act of God, breaking through the
    chain of human generation.” Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:447 (Syst.
    Doct., 3:345)—“The new science recognizes manifold methods of
    propagation, and that too even in one and the same species.”

    Professor Loeb has found that the unfertilized egg of the
    sea-urchin may be made by chemical treatment to produce thrifty
    young, and he thinks it probable that the same effect may be
    produced among the mammalia. Thus parthenogenesis in the highest
    order of life is placed among the scientific possibilities.
    Romanes, even while he was an agnostic, affirmed that a
    virgin-birth even in the human race would be by no means out of
    the range of possibility; see his Darwin and After Darwin, 119,
    footnote—“Even if a virgin has ever conceived and borne a son, and
    even if such a fact in the human species has been unique, it would
    not betoken any breach of physiological continuity.” Only a new
    impulse from the Creator could save the Redeemer from the long
    accruing fatalities of human generation. But the new creation of
    humanity in Christ is scientifically quite as possible as its
    first creation in Adam; and in both cases there may have been no
    violation of natural law, but only a unique revelation of its
    possibilities. “Birth from a virgin made it clear that a new thing
    was taking place in the earth, and that One was coming into the
    world who was not simply man.” A. B. Bruce: “Thoroughgoing
    naturalism excludes the virgin life as well as the virgin birth.”
    See Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 254-270; A. H. Strong,
    Christ in Creation, 176.

    Paul Lobstein, Incarnation of our Lord, 217—“That which is unknown
    to the teachings of St. Peter and St. Paul, St. John and St.
    James, and our Lord himself, and is absent from the earliest and
    the latest gospels, cannot be so essential as many people have
    supposed.” This argument from silence is sufficiently met by the
    considerations that Mark passes over thirty years of our Lord’s
    life in silence; that John presupposes the narratives of Matthew
    and of Luke; that Paul does not deal with the story of Jesus’
    life. The facts were known at first only to Mary and to Joseph;
    their very nature involved reticence until Jesus was demonstrated
    to be “_the Son of God with power ... by the resurrection from the
    dead_” (_Rom. 1:4_); meantime the natural development of Jesus and
    his refusal to set up an earthly kingdom may have made the
    miraculous events of thirty years ago seem to Mary like a
    wonderful dream; so only gradually the marvellous tale of the
    mother of the Lord found its way into the gospel tradition and
    creeds of the church, and into the inmost hearts of Christians of
    all countries; see F. L. Anderson, in Baptist Review and
    Expositor, 1904:25-44, and Machen, on the N. T. Account of the
    Birth of Jesus, in Princeton Theol. Rev., Oct. 1905, and Jan.
    1906.

    Cooke, on The Virgin Birth of our Lord, in Methodist Rev., Nov.
    1904:849-857—“If there is a moral taint in the human race, if in
    the very blood and constitution of humanity there is an
    ineradicable tendency to sin, then it is utterly inconceivable
    that any one born in the race by natural means should escape the
    taint of that race. And, finally, if the virgin birth is not
    historical, then a difficulty greater than any that destructive
    criticism has yet evolved from documents, interpolations,
    psychological improbabilities and unconscious contradictions
    confronts the reason and upsets all the long results of scientific
    observation,—that a sinful and deliberately sinning and unmarried
    pair should have given life to the purest human being that ever
    lived or of whom the human race has ever dreamed, and that he,
    knowing and forgiving the sins of others, never knew the shame of
    his own origin.” See also Gore, Dissertations, 1-68, on the Virgin
    Birth of our Lord, J. Armitage Robinson, Some Thoughts on the
    Incarnation, 42, both of whom show that without assuming the
    reality of the virgin birth we cannot account for the origin of
    the narratives of Matthew and of Luke, nor for the acceptance of
    the virgin birth by the early Christians. _Per contra_, see Hoben,
    in Am. Jour. Theol., 1902:478-506, 709-752. For both sides of the
    controversy, see Symposium by Bacon, Zenos, Rhees and Warfield, in
    Am. Jour. Theol., Jan. 1906:1-30; and especially Orr, Virgin Birth
    of Christ.


(_b_) Free, both from hereditary depravity, and from actual sin; as is
shown by his never offering sacrifice, never praying for forgiveness,
teaching that all but he needed the new birth, challenging all to convict
him of a single sin.


    Jesus frequently went up to the temple, but he never offered
    sacrifice. He prayed: “_Father, forgive them_” (_Luke 23:34_); but
    he never prayed: “Father, forgive _me_.” He said: “_Ye must be
    born anew_” (_John 3:7_); but the words indicated that _he_ had no
    such need. “At no moment in all that life could a single detail
    have been altered, except for the worse.” He not only _yielded_ to
    God’s will when made known to him, but he _sought_ it: “_I seek
    not mine own will, but the will of him that sent me_” (_John
    5:30_). The anger which he showed was no passionate or selfish or
    vindictive anger, but the indignation of righteousness against
    hypocrisy and cruelty—an indignation accompanied with grief:
    “_looked round about on them with anger, being grieved at the
    hardening of their heart_” (_Mark 3:5_). F. W. H. Myers, St. Paul,
    19, 53—“Thou with strong prayer and very much entreating Willest
    be asked, and thou wilt answer then, Show the hid heart beneath
    creation beating, Smile with kind eyes and be a man with men....
    Yea, through life, death, through sorrow and through sinning, He
    shall suffice me, for he hath sufficed: Christ is the end, for
    Christ was the beginning, Christ the beginning, for the end is
    Christ.” Not personal experience of sin, but resistance to it,
    fitted him to deliver us from it.

    _Luke 1:35_—“_wherefore also the holy thing which is begotten
    shall be called the Son of God_”; _John 8:46_—“_Which of you
    convicteth me of sin?_” _14:30_—“_the prince of the world cometh:
    and he hath nothing in me_” = not the slightest evil inclination
    upon which his temptations can lay hold; _Rom. 8:3_—“_in the
    likeness of sinful flesh_” = in flesh, but without the sin which
    in other men clings to the flesh; _2 Cor. 5:21_—“_Him who knew no
    sin_”; _Heb. 4:15_—“_in all points tempted like as we are, yet
    without sin_”; _7:26_—“_holy, guileless, undefiled, separated from
    sinners_”—by the fact of his immaculate conception;
    _9:14_—“_through the eternal Spirit offered himself without
    blemish unto God_”; _1 Pet. 1:19_—“_precious blood, as of a lamb
    without blemish and without spot, even the blood of Christ_”;
    _2:22_—“_who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth_”;
    _1 John 3:5, 7_—“_in him is no sin ... he is righteous._”

    Julius Müller, Proof-texts, 29—“Had Christ been only human nature,
    he could not have been without sin. But _life_ can draw out of the
    putrescent clod materials for its own living. Divine life
    appropriates the human.” Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:446 (Syst.
    Doct., 3:344)—“What with us is regeneration, is with him the
    incarnation of God.” In this origin of Jesus’ sinlessness from his
    union with God, we see the absurdity, both doctrinally and
    practically, of speaking of an immaculate conception of the
    Virgin, and of making her sinlessness precede that of her Son. On
    the Roman Catholic doctrine of the immaculate conception of the
    Virgin, see H. B. Smith, System, 389-392; Mason, Faith of the
    Gospel, 129-131—“It makes the regeneration of humanity begin, not
    with Christ, but with the Virgin. It breaks his connection with
    the race. Instead of springing sinless from the sinful race, he
    derives his humanity from something not like the rest of us.”
    Thomas Aquinas and Liguori both call Mary the Queen of Mercy, as
    Jesus her Son is King of Justice; see Thomas, Præf. in Sept. Cath.
    Ep., Comment on Esther, 5:3, and Liguori, Glories of Mary, 1:80
    (Dublin version of 1866). Bradford, Heredity, 289—“The Roman
    church has almost apotheosized Mary; but it must not be forgotten
    that the process began with Jesus. From what he was, an inference
    was drawn concerning what his mother must have been.”

    “Christ took human nature in such a way that this nature, without
    sin, bore the consequences of sin.” That portion of human nature
    which the Logos took into union with himself was, in the very
    instant and by the fact of his taking it, purged from all its
    inherent depravity. But if in Christ there was no sin, or tendency
    to sin, how could he be tempted? In the same way, we reply, that
    Adam was tempted. Christ was not omniscient: _Mark 13:32_—“_of
    that day or that hour knoweth no one, not even the angels in
    heaven, neither the Son, but the Father._” Only at the close of
    the first temptation does Jesus recognize Satan as the adversary
    of souls: _Mat. 4:10_—“_Get thee hence, Satan._” Jesus could be
    tempted, not only because he was not omniscient, but also because
    he had the keenest susceptibility to all the forms of innocent
    desire. To these desires temptation may appeal. Sin consists, not
    in these desires, but in the gratification of them out of God’s
    order, and contrary to God’s will. Meyer: “Lust is appetite run
    wild. There is no harm in any natural appetite, considered in
    itself. But appetite has been spoiled by the Fall.” So Satan
    appealed (_Mat. 4:1-11_) to our Lord’s desire for food, for
    applause, for power; to “Ueberglaube, Aberglaude, Unglaube”
    (Kurtz); _cf._ _Mat. 26:39; 27:42; 26:53_. All temptation must be
    addressed either to desire or fear; so Christ “_was in all points
    tempted like as we are_” (_Heb. 4:15_). The first temptation, in
    the wilderness, was addressed to desire; the second, in the
    garden, was addressed to fear. Satan, after the first, “_departed
    from him for a season_” (_Luke 4:13_); but he returned, in
    Gethsemane—“_the prince of the world cometh: and he hath nothing
    in me_” (_John 14:30_)—If possible, to deter Jesus from his work,
    by rousing within him vast and agonizing fears of the suffering
    and death that lay before him. Yet, in spite of both the desire
    and the fear with which his holy soul was moved, he was “_without
    sin_” (_Heb. 4:15_). The tree on the edge of the precipice is
    fiercely blown by the winds: the strain upon the roots is
    tremendous, but the roots hold. Even in Gethsemane and on Calvary,
    Christ never prays for forgiveness, he only imparts it to others.
    See Ullman, Sinlessness of Jesus; Thomasius, Christi Person und
    Werk, 2:7-17, 126-136, esp. 135, 136; Schaff, Person of Christ,
    51-72; Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 3:330-349.


(_c_) Ideal human nature,—furnishing the moral pattern which man is
progressively to realize, although within limitations of knowledge and of
activity required by his vocation as the world’s Redeemer.


    _Psalm 8:4-8_—“_thou hast made him but little lower than God, And
    crownest him with glory and honor. Thou madest him to have
    dominion over the works of thy hands; Thou hast put all things
    under his feet_”—a description of the ideal man, which finds its
    realization only in Christ. _Heb. 2:6-10_—“_But now we see not yet
    all things subjected to him. But we behold him who hath been made
    a little lower than the angels, even Jesus, because of the
    suffering of death crowned with glory and honor._” _1 Cor.
    15:45_—“_The first ... Adam ... The last Adam_”—implies that the
    second Adam realized the full concept of humanity, which failed to
    be realized in the first Adam; so _verse 49_—“_as we have borne
    the image of the earthly_ [man], _we shall also bear the image of
    the heavenly_” [man]. _2 Cor. 3:18_—“_the glory of the Lord_” is
    the pattern, into whose likeness we are to be changed. _Phil
    3:21_—“_who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that
    it may be conformed to the body of his glory_”; _Col. 1:18_—“_that
    in all things he might have the pre-eminence_”; _1 Pet.
    2:21_—“_suffered for you, leaving you an example, that ye should
    follow his steps_”; _1 John 3:3_—“_every one that hath this hope
    set on him purifieth himself, even as he is pure._”

    The phrase “_Son of man_” (_John 5:27_; _cf._ _Dan. 7:13_, Com. of
    Pusey, _in loco_, and Westcott, in Bible Com. on John, 32-35)
    seems to intimate that Christ answers to the perfect idea of
    humanity, as it at first existed in the mind of God. Not that he
    was surpassingly beautiful in physical form; for the only way to
    reconcile the seemingly conflicting intimations is to suppose that
    in all outward respects he took our average humanity—at one time
    appearing without form or comeliness (_Is. 52:2_), and aged before
    his time (_John 8:57_—“_Thou art not yet fifty years old_”), at
    another time revealing so much of his inward grace and glory that
    men were attracted and awed (_Ps. 45:2_—“_Thou art fairer than the
    children of men_”; _Luke 4:22_—“_the words of grace which
    proceeded out of his mouth_”; _Mark 10:32_—“_Jesus was going
    before them: and they were amazed; and they that followed were
    afraid_”; _Mat. 17:1-8_—the account of the transfiguration).
    Compare the Byzantine pictures of Christ with those of the Italian
    painters,—the former ascetic and emaciated, the latter types of
    physical well-being. Modern pictures make Jesus too exclusively a
    Jew. Yet there is a certain truth in the words of Mozoomdar:
    “Jesus was an Oriental, and we Orientals understand him. He spoke
    in figure. We understand him. He was a mystic. You take him
    literally: you make an Englishman of him.” So Japanese Christians
    will not swallow the Western system of theology, because they say
    that this would be depriving the world of the Japanese view of
    Christ.

    But in all spiritual respects Christ was perfect. In him are
    united all the excellences of both the sexes, of all temperaments
    and nationalities and characters. He possesses, not simply passive
    innocence, but positive and absolute holiness, triumphant through
    temptation. He includes in himself all objects and reasons for
    affection and worship; so that, in loving him, “love can never
    love too much.” Christ’s human nature, therefore, and not human
    nature as it is in us, is the true basis of ethics and of
    theology. This absence of narrow individuality, this ideal,
    universal manhood, could not have been secured by merely natural
    laws of propagation,—it was secured by Christ’s miraculous
    conception; see Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:446 (Syst. Doct., 3:344).
    John G. Whittier, on the Birmingham philanthropist, Joseph Sturge:
    “Tender as woman, manliness and meekness In him were so allied,
    That they who judged him by his strength or weakness Saw but a
    single side.”

    Seth, Ethical Principles, 420—“The secret of the power of the
    moral Ideal is the conviction which it carries with it that it is
    no _mere_ ideal, but the expression of the supreme Reality.”
    Bowne, Theory of Thought and Knowledge, 364—“The _a priori_ only
    outlines a _possible_, and does not determine what shall be
    _actual_ within the limits of the possible. If experience is to be
    possible, it must take on certain forms, but those forms are
    compatible with an infinite variety of experience.” No _a priori_
    truths or ideals can guarantee Christianity. We want a historical
    basis, an actual Christ, a _realization_ of the divine ideal.
    “Great men,” says Amiel, “are the true men.” Yes, we add, but only
    Christ, the greatest man, shows what the true man is. The heavenly
    perfection of Jesus discloses to us the greatness of our own
    possible being, while at the same time it reveals our infinite
    shortcoming and the source from which all restoration must come.

    Gore, Incarnation, 168—“Jesus Christ is the catholic man. In a
    sense, all the greatest men have overlapped the boundaries of
    their time. ‘The truly great Have all one age, and from one
    visible space Shed influence. They, both in power and act Are
    permanent, and time is not with them, Save as it worketh for them,
    they in it.’ But in a unique sense the manhood of Jesus is
    catholic; because it is exempt, not from the limitations which
    belong to manhood, but from the limitations which make our manhood
    narrow and isolated, merely local or national.” Dale, Ephesians,
    42—“Christ is a servant and something more. There is an ease, a
    freedom, a grace, about his doing the will of God, which can
    belong only to a Son.... There is nothing constrained ... he was
    born to it.... He does the will of God as a child does the will of
    its father, naturally, as a matter of course, almost without
    thought.... No irreverent familiarity about his communion with the
    Father, but also no trace of fear, or even of wonder.... Prophets
    had fallen to the ground when the divine glory was revealed to
    them, but Christ stands calm and erect. A subject may lose his
    self-possession in the presence of his prince, but not a son.”

    Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 148—“What once he had perceived, he
    thenceforth knew. He had no opinions, no conjectures; we are never
    told that he forgot, nor even that he remembered, which would
    imply a degree of forgetting; we are not told that he arrived at
    truths by the process of reasoning them out; but he reasons them
    out for others. It is not recorded that he took counsel or formed
    plans; but he desired, and he purposed, and he did one thing with
    a view to another.” On Christ, as the ideal man, see
    Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 307-336; F. W. Robertson,
    Sermon on The Glory of the Divine Son, 2nd Series, Sermon XIX;
    Wilberforce, Incarnation, 22-99; Ebrard, Dogmatik, 2:25;
    Moorhouse, Nature and Revelation, 37; Tennyson, Introduction to In
    Memoriam; Farrar, Life of Christ, 1:148-154, and 2:excursus iv;
    Bushnell, Nature and the Supernatural, 276-332; Thomas Hughes, The
    Manliness of Christ; Hopkins, Scriptural Idea of Man, 121-145;
    Tyler, in Bib. Sac., 22:51, 620; Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:451
    _sq._


(_d_) A human nature that found its personality only in union with the
divine nature,—in other words, a human nature impersonal, in the sense
that it had no personality separate from the divine nature, and prior to
its union therewith.


    By the impersonality of Christ’s human nature, we mean only that
    it had no personality before Christ took it, no personality before
    its union with the divine. It was a human nature whose
    consciousness and will were developed only in union with the
    personality of the Logos. The Fathers therefore rejected the word
    ἀνυποστασία, and substituted the word ἐνυποστασία,—they favored
    not _un_personality but _in_personality. In still plainer terms,
    the Logos did not take into union with himself an already
    developed human person, such as James, Peter, or John, but human
    nature before it had become personal or was capable of receiving a
    name. It reached its personality only in union with his own divine
    nature. Therefore we see in Christ not two persons—a human person
    and a divine person—but one person, and that person possessed of a
    human nature as well as of a divine. For proof of this, see pages
    683-700, also Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:289-308.

    Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 136—“We count it no defect in our
    bodies that they have no personal subsistence apart from
    ourselves, and that, if separated from ourselves, they are
    nothing. They share in a true personal life because we, whose
    bodies they are, are persons. What happens to them happens to us.”
    In a similar manner the personality of the Logos furnished the
    organizing principle of Jesus’ two-fold nature. As he looked
    backward he could see himself dwelling in eternity with God, so
    far as his divine nature was concerned. But as respects his
    humanity he could remember that it was not eternal,—it had had its
    beginnings in time. Yet this humanity had never had a separate
    personal existence,—its personality had been developed only in
    connection with the divine nature. Göschel, quoted in Dorner’s
    Person of Christ, 5:170—“Christ _is_ humanity; we have it; he is
    it entirely; we participate therein. His personality precedes and
    lies at the basis of the personality of the race and its
    individuals. As idea, he is implanted in the whole of humanity; he
    lies at the basis of every human consciousness, without however
    attaining realization in an individual; for this is only possible
    in the entire race at the end of the times.”

    Emma Marie Caillard, on Man in the Light of Evolution, in Contemp.
    Rev., Dec. 1893: 873-881—“Christ is not only the goal of the race
    which is to be conformed to him, but he is also the vital
    principle which moulds each individual of that race into its own
    similitude. The perfect type exists potentially through all the
    intermediate stages by which it is more and more nearly
    approached, and, if it did not exist, neither could they. There
    could be no development of an absent life. The goal of man’s
    evolution, the perfect type of manhood, is Christ. He exists and
    always has existed potentially in the race and in the individual,
    equally before as after his visible incarnation, equally in the
    millions of those who do not, as in the far fewer millions of
    those who do, bear his name. In the strictest sense of the words,
    he is the life of man, and that in a far deeper and more intimate
    sense than he can be said to be the life of the universe.” Dale,
    Christian Fellowship, 159—“Christ’s incarnation was not an
    isolated and abnormal wonder. It was God’s witness to the true and
    ideal relation of all men to God.” The incarnation was no detached
    event,—it was the issue of an eternal process of utterance on the
    part of the Word “_whose goings forth are from of old, from
    everlasting_” (_Micah 5:2_).


(_e_) A human nature germinal, and capable of self-communication,—so
constituting him the spiritual head and beginning of a new race, the
second Adam from whom fallen man individually and collectively derives new
and holy life.


    In _Is. 9:6_, Christ is called “_Everlasting Father_.” In _Is.
    53:10_, it is said that “_he shall see his seed_.” In _Rev.
    22:16_, he calls himself “_the root_” as well as “_the offspring
    of David_.” See also _John 5.21_—“_the Son also giveth life to
    whom he will_”; _15:1_—“_I am the true vine_”—whose roots are
    planted in heaven, not on earth; the vine-man, from whom as its
    stock the new life of humanity is to spring, and into whom the
    half-withered branches of the old humanity are to be grafted that
    they may have life divine. See Trench, Sermon on Christ, the True
    Vine, in Hulsean Lectures. _John 17:2_—“_thou gavest him authority
    over all flesh, that to all whom thou hast given him, he should
    give eternal life_”; _1 Cor. 15:45_—“_the last Adam became a
    life-giving spirit_”—here “_spirit_” = not the Holy Spirit, nor
    Christ’s divine nature, but “the ego of his total divine-human
    personality.”

    _Eph. 5:23_—“_Christ also is the head of the church_” = the head
    to which all the members are united, and from which they derive
    life and power. Christ calls the disciples his “_little children_”
    (_John 13:33_); when he leaves them they are “_orphans_” (_14:18_
    marg.). “He represents himself as a father of children, no less
    than as a brother” (_20:17_—“_my brethren_”; _cf._ _Heb.
    2:11_—“_brethren_”, and _13_—“_Behold, I and the children whom God
    hath given me_”; see Westcott, Com. on _John 13:33_). The new race
    is propagated after the analogy of the old; the first Adam is the
    source of the physical, the second Adam of spiritual, life; the
    first Adam the source of corruption, the second of holiness. Hence
    _John 12:24_—“_if it die, it beareth much fruit_”; _Mat. 10:37_
    and _Luke 14:26_—“_He that loveth father or mother more than me is
    not worthy of me_” = none is worthy of me, who prefers his old
    natural ancestry to his new spiritual descent and relationship.
    Thus Christ is not simply the noblest embodiment of the old
    humanity, but also the fountain-head and beginning of a new
    humanity, the new source of life for the race. _Cf._ _1 Tim.
    2:15_—“_she shall be saved through the child-bearing_”—which
    brought Christ into the world. See Wilberforce, Incarnation,
    227-241; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 638-664; Dorner, Glaubenslehre,
    2:451 _sq._ (Syst. Doct., 3:349 _sq._).

    Lightfoot on _Col. 1:18_—“_who is the beginning, the fruits from
    the dead_”—“Here ἀρχή = 1. priority in time. Christ was first
    fruits of the dead (_1 Cor. 15:20, 23_); 2. originating power, not
    only _principium principiatum_, but also _principium principians_.
    As he _is_ first with respect to the universe, so he _becomes_
    first with respect to the church; _cf._ _Heb. 7:15, 16_—‘_another
    priest, who hath been made, not after the law of a carnal
    commandment but after the power of an endless life_’.” Paul
    teaches that “_the head of every man is Christ_” (_1 Cor. 11:3_),
    and that “_in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily_”
    (_Col. 2:9_). Whiton, Gloria Patri, 88-92, remarks on _Eph. 1:10_,
    that God’s purpose is “_to sum up all things in Christ, the things
    in the heavens, and the things upon the earth_”—to bring all
    things to a head (ἀνακεφαλαιώσασθαι). History is a perpetually
    increasing incarnation of life, whose climax and crown is the
    divine fulness of life in Christ. In him the before unconscious
    sonship of the world awakes to consciousness of the Father. He is
    worthiest to bear the name of _the_ Son of God, in a preëminent,
    but not exclusive right. We agree with these words of Whiton, if
    they mean that Christ is the only giver of life to man as he is
    the only giver of life to the universe.

    Hence Christ is the only ultimate authority in religion. He
    reveals himself in nature, in man, in history, in Scripture, but
    each of these is only a mirror which reflects _him_ to us. In each
    case the mirror is more or less blurred and the image obscured,
    yet _he_ appears in the mirror notwithstanding. The mirror is
    useless unless there is an eye to look into it, and an object to
    be seen in it. The Holy Spirit gives the eyesight, while Christ
    himself, living and present, furnishes the object (_James
    1:23-25_; _2 Cor. 3:18_; _1 Cor. 13:12_).

    Over against mankind is Christ-kind; over against the fallen and
    sinful race is the new race created by Christ’s indwelling.
    Therefore only when he ascended with his perfected manhood could
    he send the Holy Spirit, for the Holy Spirit which makes men
    children of God is the Spirit of Christ. Christ’s humanity now, by
    virtue of its perfect union with Deity, has become universally
    communicable. It is as consonant with evolution to derive
    spiritual gifts from the second Adam, a solitary source, as it is
    to derive the natural man from the first Adam, a solitary source;
    see George Harris, Moral Evolution, 409; and A. H. Strong, Christ
    in Creation, 174.

    Simon, Reconciliation, 308—“Every man is in a true sense
    essentially of divine nature—even as Paul teaches, θεῖον γένος
    (_Acts 17:29_).... At the centre, as it were, enswathed in fold
    after fold, after the manner of a bulb, we discern the living
    divine spark, impressing us qualitatively if not quantitatively,
    with the absoluteness of the great sun to which it belongs.” The
    idea of truth, beauty, right, has in it an absolute and divine
    quality. It comes from God, yet from the depths of our own nature.
    It is the evidence that Christ, “_the light that lighteth every
    man_” (_John 1:9_), is present and is working within us.

    Pfleiderer, Philos. of Religion, 1:272—“That the divine idea of
    man as ‘_the son of his love_’ (_Col. 1:13_), and of humanity as
    the kingdom of this Son of God, is the immanent final cause of all
    existence and development even in the prior world of nature, this
    has been the fundamental thought of the Christian Gnosis since the
    apostolic age, and I think that no philosophy has yet been able to
    shake or to surpass this thought—the corner stone of an idealistic
    view of the world.” But Mead, Ritschl’s Place in the History of
    Doctrine, 10, says of Pfleiderer and Ritschl: “Both recognize
    Christ as morally perfect and as the head of the Christian Church.
    Both deny his pre-existence and his essential Deity. Both reject
    the traditional conception of Christ as an atoning Redeemer.
    Ritschl calls Christ God, though inconsistently; Pfleiderer
    declines to say one thing when he seems to mean another.”


The passages here alluded to abundantly confute the Docetic denial of
Christ’s veritable human body, and the Apollinarian denial of Christ’s
veritable human soul. More than this, they establish the reality and
integrity of Christ’s human nature, as possessed of all the elements,
faculties, and powers essential to humanity.


2. The Deity of Christ.


The reality and integrity of Christ’s divine nature have been sufficiently
proved in a former chapter (see pages 305-315). We need only refer to the
evidence there given, that, during his earthly ministry, Christ:

(_a_) Possessed a knowledge of his own deity.


    _John 3:13_—“_the Son of man, who is in heaven_”—a passage with
    clearly indicates Christ’s consciousness, at certain times in his
    earthly life at least, that he was not confined to earth but was
    also in heaven [here, however, Westcott and Hort, with א and B,
    omit ὁ ὢν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ; for advocacy of the common reading, see
    Broadus, in Hovey’s Com. on _John 3:13_]; _8:58_—“_Before Abraham
    was born, I am_”—here Jesus declares that there is a respect in
    which the idea of birth and beginning does not apply to him, but
    in which he can apply to himself the name “_I am_” of the eternal
    God; _14:9, 10_—“_Have I been so long time with you, and dost thou
    not know me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father;
    how sayest thou, Show us the Father? Believest thou not that I am
    in the Father, and the Father in me?_”

    Adamson, The Mind in Christ, 24-49, gives the following instances
    of Jesus’ supernatural knowledge: 1. Jesus’ knowledge of Peter
    (_John 1:42_); 2. his finding of Philip (_1:43_); 3. his
    recognition of Nathanael (_1:47-50_); 4. of the woman of Samaria
    (_4:17-19, 39_); 5. miraculous draughts of fishes (_Luke 5:6-9_;
    _John 21:6_); 6. death of Lazarus (_John 11:14_); 7. of the ass’s
    colt (_Mat. 21:2_); 8. of the upper room (_Mark 14:15_); 9. of
    Peter’s denial (_Mat. 26:34_); 10. of the manner of his own death
    (_John 12:33_; _18:32_); 11. of the manner of Peter’s death (_John
    21:19_); 12. of the fall of Jerusalem (_Mat. 24:2_).

    Jesus does not say “our Father” but “_my Father_” (_John 20:17_).
    Rejection of him is a greater sin than rejection of the prophets,
    because he is the “_beloved Son_” of God (_Luke 20:13_). He knows
    God’s purposes better than the angels, because he is the Son of
    God (_Mark 13:32_). As Son of God, he alone knows, and he alone
    can reveal, the Father (_Mat. __ 11:27_). There to clearly
    something more in his Sonship than in that of his disciples (_John
    1:14_—“_only begotten_”; _Heb. 1:6_—“_first begotten_”). See
    Chapman, Jesus Christ and the Present Age, 37; Denney, Studies in
    Theology, 33.


(b) Exercised divine powers and prerogatives.


    _John 2:24, 25_—“_But Jesus did not trust himself unto them, for
    that he knew all man, and because he needed not that any one
    should bear witness concerning man; for he himself knew what was
    in man_”; _18:4_—“_Jesus therefore, knowing all the things that
    were coming upon him, went forth_”; _Mark 4:39_—“_he awoke, and
    rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the
    wind ceased, and there was a great calm_”; _Mat. 9:6_—“_But that
    ye may know that the Son of man hath authority on earth to forgive
    sins (then saith he to the sick of the palsy), Arise, and take up
    thy bed, and go unto thy house_”; _Mark 2:7_—“_Why doth this man
    thus speak? he blasphemeth: who can forgive sins but one, even
    God?_”

    It is not enough to keep, like Alexander Severus, a bust of
    Christ, in a private chapel, along with Virgil, Orpheus, Abraham,
    Apollonius, and other persons of the same kind; see Gibbon,
    Decline and Fall, chap. xvi. “Christ is all in all. The prince in
    the Arabian story took from a walnut-shell a miniature tent, but
    that tent expanded so as to cover, first himself, then his palace,
    then his army, and at last his whole kingdom. So Christ’s being
    and authority expand, as we reflect upon them, until they take in,
    not only ourselves, our homes and our country, but the whole world
    of sinning and suffering men, and the whole universe of God”; see
    A. H. Strong, Address at the Ecumenical Missionary Conference,
    April 23, 1900.

    Matheson, Voices of the Spirit, 39—“What is that law which I call
    gravitation, but the sign of the Son of man in heaven? It is the
    gospel of self-surrender in nature. It is the inability of any
    world to be its own centre, the necessity of every world to center
    in something else.... In the firmament as on the earth, the many
    are made one by giving the one for the many.” “Subtlest thought
    shall fail and learning falter; Churches change, forms perish,
    systems go; But our human needs, they will not alter, Christ no
    after age will e’er outgrow. Yea, amen, O changeless One, thou
    only Art life’s guide and spiritual goal; Thou the light across
    the dark vale lonely, Thou the eternal haven of the soul.”


But this is to say, in other words, that there were, in Christ, a
knowledge and a power such as belong only to God. The passages cited
furnish a refutation of both the Ebionite denial of the reality, and the
Arian denial of the integrity, of the divine nature in Christ.


    Napoleon to Count Montholon (Bertrand’s Memoirs): “I think I
    understand somewhat of human nature, and I tell you all these
    [heroes of antiquity] were men, and I am a man; but not one is
    like him: Jesus Christ was more than man.” See other testimonies
    in Schaff, Person of Christ. Even Spinoza, Tract. Theol.-Pol.,
    cap. 1 (vol. 1:383), says that “Christ communed with God, mind to
    mind ... this spiritual closeness is unique” (Martineau, Types,
    1:254), and Channing speaks of Christ as more than a human
    being,—as having exhibited a spotless purity which is the highest
    distinction of heaven. F. W. Robertson has called attention to the
    fact that the phrase “Son of man” (_John 5:27_; _cf._ _Dan. 7:13_)
    itself implies that Christ was more than man; it would have been
    an impertinence for him to have proclaimed himself Son of man,
    unless he had claimed to be something more; could not every human
    being call himself the same? When one takes this for his
    characteristic designation, as Jesus did, he implies that there is
    something strange in his being Son of man; that this is not his
    original condition and dignity; in other words, that he is also
    Son of God.

    It corroborates the argument from Scripture, to find that
    Christian experience instinctively recognizes Christ’s Godhead,
    and that Christian history shows a new conception of the dignity
    of childhood and of womanhood, of the sacredness of human life,
    and of the value of a human soul,—all arising from the belief
    that, in Christ, the Godhead honored human nature by taking it
    into perpetual union with itself, by bearing its guilt and
    punishment, and by raising it up from the dishonors of the grave
    to the glory of heaven. We need both the humanity and the deity of
    Christ; the humanity,—for, as Michael Angelo’s Last Judgment
    witnesses, the ages that neglect Christ’s humanity must have some
    human advocate and Savior, and find a poor substitute for the
    ever-present Christ in Mariolatry, the invocation of the saints,
    and the “real presence” of the wafer and the mass; the deity,—for,
    unless Christ is God, he cannot offer an infinite atonement for
    us, nor bring about a real union between our souls and the Father.
    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:325-327 (Syst. Doct., 3:221-223)—“Mary
    and the saints took Christ’s place as intercessors in heaven;
    transubstantiation furnished a present Christ on earth.” It might
    almost be said that Mary was made a fourth person in the Godhead.

    Harnack, Das Wesen des Christenthums: “It is no paradox, and
    neither is it rationalism, but the simple expression of the actual
    position as it lies before us in the gospels: Not the Son, but the
    Father alone, has a place in the gospel as Jesus proclaimed it”;
    _i. e._, Jesus has no place, authority, supremacy, in the
    gospel,—the gospel is a Christianity without Christ; see Nicoll,
    The Church’s One Foundation, 48. And this in the face of Jesus’
    own words: “_Come unto me_” (_Mat. 11:28_); “_the Son of man ...
    shall sit on the throne of his glory: and before him shall be
    gathered all the nations_” (_Mat. 25:31, 32_); “_he that hath seen
    me hath seen the Father_” (_John 14:9_); “_he that obeyeth not the
    Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him_”
    (_John 3:36_). Loisy, The Gospel and the Church, advocates the
    nut-theory in distinction from the onion-theory of doctrine. Does
    the fourth gospel appear a second century production? What of it?
    There is an evolution of doctrine as to Christ. “Harnack does not
    conceive of Christianity as a seed, at first a plant in
    potentiality, then a real plant, identical from the beginning of
    its evolution to the final limit, and from the root to the summit
    of the stem. He conceives of it rather as a fruit ripe, or over
    ripe, that must be peeled to reach the incorruptible kernel, and
    he peels his fruit so thoroughly that little remains at the end.”
    R. W. Gilder: “If Jesus is a man, And only a man, I say That of
    all mankind I will cleave to him, And will cleave alway. If Jesus
    Christ is a God, And the only God, I swear I will follow him
    through heaven and hell, The earth, the sea, and the air.”

    On Christ manifested in Nature, see Jonathan Edwards, Observations
    on Trinity, ed. Smyth, 92-97—“He who, by his immediate influence,
    gives being every moment, and by his Spirit actuates the world,
    because he inclines to communicate himself and his excellencies,
    doth doubtless communicate his excellency to bodies, as far as
    there is any consent or analogy. And the beauty of face and sweet
    airs in men are not always the effect of the corresponding
    excellencies of the mind; yet the beauties of nature are really
    emanations or shadows of the excellencies of the Son of God. So
    that, when we are delighted with flowery meadows and gentle
    breezes of wind, we may consider that we see only the emanations
    of the sweet benevolence of Jesus Christ. When we behold the
    fragrant rose and lily, we see his love and purity. So the green
    trees and fields, and singing of birds, are the emanations of his
    infinite joy and benignity. The easiness and naturalness of trees
    and vines are shadows of his beauty and loveliness. The crystal
    rivers and murmuring streams are the footsteps of his favor, grace
    and beauty. When we behold the light and brightness of the sun,
    the golden edges of an evening cloud, or the beauteous bow, we
    behold the adumbrations of his glory and goodness, and in the blue
    sky, of his mildness and gentleness. There are also many things
    wherein we may behold his awful majesty: in the sun in his
    strength, in comets, in thunder, in the hovering thunder clouds,
    in ragged rocks and the brows of mountains. That beauteous light
    wherewith the world is filled in a clear day is a lively shadow of
    his spotless holiness, and happiness and delight in communicating
    himself. And doubtless this is a reason why Christ is compared so
    often to these things, and called by their names, as the Sun of
    Righteousness, the Morning Star, the Rose of Sharon, and Lily of
    the Valley, the apple tree among trees of the wood, a bundle of
    myrrh, a roe, or a young hart. By this we may discover the beauty
    of many of those metaphors and similes which to an unphilosophical
    person do seem so uncouth. In like manner, when we behold the
    beauty of man’s body in its perfection, we still see like
    emanations of Christ’s divine perfections, although they do not
    always flow from the mental excellencies of the person that has
    them. But we see the most proper image of the beauty of Christ
    when we see beauty in the human soul.”

    On the deity of Christ, see Shedd, History of Doctrine, 1:262,
    351; Liddon, Our Lord’s Divinity, 127, 207, 458; Thomasius,
    Christi Person und Werk, 1:61-64; Hovey, God with Us, 17-23;
    Bengel on _John 10:30_. On the two natures of Christ, see A. H.
    Strong, Philosophy and Religion, 201-212.


III. The Union of the two Natures in one Person.


Distinctly as the Scriptures represent Jesus Christ to have been possessed
of a divine nature and of a human nature, each unaltered in essence and
undivested of its normal attributes and powers, they with equal
distinctness represent Jesus Christ as a single undivided personality in
whom these two natures are vitally and inseparably united, so that he is
properly, not God and man, but the God-man. The two natures are bound
together, not by the moral tie of friendship, nor by the spiritual tie
which links the believer to his Lord, but by a bond unique and
inscrutable, which constitutes them one person with a single consciousness
and will,—this consciousness and will including within their possible
range both the human nature and the divine.


    Whiton, Gloria Patri, 79-81, would give up speaking of the union
    of God _and_ man; for this, he says, involves the fallacy of two
    natures. He would speak rather of the manifestation of God _in_
    man. The ordinary Unitarian insists that Christ was “a mere man.”
    As if there could be such a thing as _mere_ man, exclusive of
    aught above him and beyond him, self-centered and self-moved. We
    can sympathize with Whiton’s objection to the phrase “God _and_
    man,” because of its implication of an imperfect union. But we
    prefer the term “God-man” to the phrase “God _in_ man,” for the
    reason that this latter phrase might equally describe the union of
    Christ with every believer. Christ is “the only begotten,” in a
    sense that every believer is not. Yet we can also sympathize with
    Dean Stanley, Life and Letters, 1:115—“Alas that a Church that has
    so divine a service should keep its long list of Articles! I am
    strengthened more than ever in my opinion that there is only
    needed, that there only should be, one, _viz_., ‘I believe that
    Christ is both God and man.’ ”


1. Proof of this Union.


(_a_) Christ uniformly speaks of himself, and is spoken of, as a single
person. There is no interchange of “I” and “thou” between the human and
the divine natures, such as we find between the persons of the Trinity
(John 17:23). Christ never uses the plural number in referring to himself,
unless it be in John 3:11—“we speak that we do know,”—and even here “we”
is more probably used as inclusive of the disciples. 1 John 4:2—“is come
in the flesh”—is supplemented by John 1:14—“became flesh”; and these texts
together assure us that Christ so came in human nature as to make that
nature an element in his single personality.


    _John 17:23_—“_I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
    perfected into one; that the world may know that thou didst send
    me, and lovedst them, even as thou lovedst me_”; _3:11_—“_We speak
    that which we know, and bear witness of that which we have seen;
    and ye receive not our witness_”; _1 John 4:2_—“_every spirit that
    confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God_”;
    _John 1:14_—“_And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us_”—he
    so came in human nature that human nature and himself formed, not
    two persons, but one person.

    In the Trinity, the Father is objective to the Son, the Son to the
    Father, and both to the Spirit. But Christ’s divinity is never
    objective to his humanity, nor his humanity to his divinity.
    Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 97—“He is not so much God
    _and_ man, as God _in_, and _through_, and _as_ man. He is one
    indivisible personality throughout.... We are to study the divine
    in and through the human. By looking for the divine side by side
    with the human, instead of discerning the divine within the human,
    we miss the significance of them both.” We mistake when we say
    that certain words of Jesus with regard to his ignorance of the
    day of the end (_Mark 13:32_) were spoken by his human nature,
    while certain other words with regard to his being in heaven at
    the same time that he was on earth (_John 3:13_) were spoken by
    his divine nature. There was never any separation of the human
    from the divine, or of the divine from the human,—all Christ’s
    words were spoken, and all Christ’s deeds were done, by the one
    person, the God-man. See Forrest, The Authority of Christ, 49-100.


(_b_) The attributes and powers of both natures are ascribed to the one
Christ, and conversely the works and dignities of the one Christ are
ascribed to either of the natures, in a way inexplicable, except upon the
principle that these two natures are organically and indissolubly united
in a single person (examples of the former usage are Rom. 1:3 and 1 Pet.
3:18; of the latter, 1 Tim. 2:5 and Heb. 1:2, 3). Hence we can say, on the
one hand, that the God-man existed before Abraham, yet was born in the
reign of Augustus Cæsar, and that Jesus Christ wept, was weary, suffered,
died, yet is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever; on the other hand,
that a divine Savior redeemed us upon the cross, and that the human Christ
is present with his people even to the end of the world (Eph. 1:23; 4:10;
Mat. 28:20).


    _Rom. 1:3_—“_his Son, who was born of the seed of David according
    to the flesh_”; _1 Pet. 3:18_—“_Christ also suffered for sins once
    ... being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the
    spirit_”; _1 Tim. 2:5_—“_one mediator also between God and men,
    himself man, Christ Jesus_”; _Heb. 1:2, 3_—“_his Son, whom he
    appointed heir of all things ... who being the effulgence of his
    glory ... when he had made purification of sins, sat down on the
    right hand of the Majesty on high_”; _Eph. 1:22, 23_—“_put all
    things in subjection under his feet, and gave him to be head over
    all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him
    that filleth all in all_”; _4:10_—“_He that descended is the same
    also that ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill
    all things_”; _Mat. 28:20_—“_lo, I am with you always, even unto
    the end of the world._”

    Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 142-145—“Mary was Theotokos, but she
    was not the mother of Christ’s Godhood, but of his humanity. We
    speak of the blood of God the Son, but it is not as God that he
    has blood. The hands of the babe Jesus made the worlds, only in
    the sense that he whose hands they were was the Agent in
    creation.... Spirit and body in us are not merely put side by
    side, and insulated from each other. The spirit does not have the
    rheumatism, and the reverent body does not commune with God. The
    reason why they affect each other is because they are equally
    ours.... Let us avoid sensuous, fondling, modes of addressing
    Christ—modes which dishonor him and enfeeble the soul of the
    worshiper.... Let us also avoid, on the other hand, such phrases
    as ‘the dying God’, which loses the manhood in the Godhead.”
    Charles H. Spurgeon remarked that people who “dear” everybody
    reminded him of the woman who said she had been reading in “dear
    Hebrews.”


(_c_) The constant Scriptural representations of the infinite value of
Christ’s atonement and of the union of the human race with God which has
been secured in him are intelligible only when Christ is regarded, not as
a man of God, but as the God-man, in whom the two natures are so united
that what each does has the value of both.


    _1 John 2:2_—“_he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for
    ours only, but also for the whole world,_”—as John in his gospel
    proves that Jesus is the Son of God, the Word, God, so in his
    first Epistle he proves that the Son of God, the Word, God, has
    become man; _Eph. 2:16-18_—“_might reconcile them both_ [Jew and
    Gentile] _in one body unto God through the cross, having slain the
    enmity thereby; and he came and preached peace to you that were
    far off, and peace to them that were nigh: for through him we both
    have our access in one Spirit unto the Father_”; _21, 22_—“_in
    whom each several building, fitly framed together, groweth into a
    holy temple in the Lord; in whom ye also are builded together for
    a habitation of God in the Spirit_”; _2 Pet. 1:4_—“_that through
    these_ [promises] _ye may become partakers of the divine nature._”
    John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 2:107—“We cannot separate
    Christ’s divine from his human acts, without rending in twain the
    unity of his person and life.”


(_d_) It corroborates this view to remember that the universal Christian
consciousness recognizes in Christ a single and undivided personality, and
expresses this recognition in its services of song and prayer.

The foregoing proof of the union of a perfect human nature and of a
perfect divine nature in the single person of Jesus Christ suffices to
refute both the Nestorian separation of the natures and the Eutychian
confounding of them. Certain modern forms of stating the doctrine of this
union, however—forms of statement into which there enter some of the
misconceptions already noticed—need a brief examination, before we proceed
to our own attempt at elucidation.


    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:403-411 (Syst. Doct., 3:300-308)—“Three
    ideas are included in incarnation: (1) assumption of human nature
    on the part of the Logos (_Heb. 2:14_—‘_partook __ of ... flesh
    and blood_’; _2 Cor. 5:19_—‘_God was in Christ_’; _Col. 2:9_—‘_in
    him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily_’); (2) new
    creation of the second Adam, by the Holy Ghost and power of the
    Highest (_Rom. 5:14_—‘_Adam’s’ transgression, who is a figure of
    him that was to come_’; _1 Cor. 15:22_—‘_as in Adam all die, so
    also in Christ shall all be made alive_’; _15:45_—‘_The first man
    Adam became a living soul, the last Adam became a life-giving
    Spirit_’; _Luke 1:35_—‘_the Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and
    the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee_’; _Mat.
    1:20_—‘_that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit_’);
    (3) becoming flesh, without contraction of deity or humanity (_1
    Tim. 3:16_—‘_who was manifested in the flesh_’; _1 John
    4:2_—‘_Jesus Christ is come in the flesh_’; _John 6:41, 51_—‘_I am
    the bread which came down out of heaven.... I am the living
    bread_’; _2 John 7_—‘_Jesus Christ cometh in the flesh_’; _John
    1:14_—‘_the word became flesh_’). This last text cannot mean: The
    Logos ceased to be what he was, and began to be only man. Nor can
    it be a mere theophany, in human form. The reality of the humanity
    is intimated, as well as the reality of the Logos.”

    The Lutherans hold to a communion of the natures, as well as to an
    impartation of their properties: (1) _genus
    idiomaticum_—impartation of attributes of both natures to the one
    person; (2) _genus apotelesmaticum_ (from ἀποτέλεσμα, “that which
    is finished or completed,” _i. e._, Jesus’ work)—attributes of the
    one person imparted to each of the constituent natures. Hence Mary
    may be called “the mother of God,” as the Chalcedon symbol
    declares, “as to his humanity,” and what each nature did has the
    value of both; (3) _genus majestaticum_—attributes of one nature
    imparted to the other, yet so that the divine nature imparts to
    the human, not the human to the divine. The Lutherans do not
    believe in a _genus tapeinoticon_, _i. e._, that the human
    elements communicated themselves to the divine. The only
    communication of the human was to the person, not to the divine
    nature, of the God-man. Examples of this third _genus
    majestaticum_ are found is _John 3:13_—“_no one hath ascended into
    heaven, but he that descended out of heaven, even the Son of man,
    who is in heaven_” [here, however, Westcott and Hort, with א and
    B, omit ὁ ὢν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ]; _5:27_—“_he gave him authority to
    execute judgment, because he is a son of man._” Of the explanation
    that this is the figure of speech called “_allæosis,_” Luther
    says: “_Allæosis_ est larva quædam diaboli, secundum cujus
    rationes ego certe nolim esse Christianus.”

    The _genus majestaticum_ is denied by the Reformed Church, on the
    ground that it does not permit a clear distinction of the natures.
    And this is one great difference between it and the Lutheran
    Church. So Hooker, in commenting upon the Son of man’s “ascending
    up where he was before,” says: “By the ‘_Son of man_’ must be
    meant the whole person of Christ, who, being man upon earth,
    filled heaven with his glorious presence; but not according to
    that nature for which the title of man is given him.” For the
    Lutheran view of this union and its results in the communion of
    natures, see Hase, Hutterus Redivivus, 11th ed., 195-197;
    Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 2:24, 25. For the Reformed
    view, see Turretin, loc. 13, quæst. 8; Hodge, Syst. Theol.,
    2:387-397, 407-418.


2. Modern misrepresentations of this Union.


A. Theory of an incomplete humanity.—Gess and Beecher hold that the
immaterial part in Christ’s humanity is only contracted and metamorphosed
deity.

The advocates of this view maintain that the divine Logos reduced himself
to the condition and limits of human nature, and thus literally became a
human soul. The theory differs from Apollinarianism, in that it does not
necessarily presuppose a trichotomous view of man’s nature. While
Apollinarianism, however, denied the human origin only of Christ’s πνεῦμα,
this theory extends the denial to his entire immaterial being,—his body
alone being derived from the Virgin. It is held, in slightly varying
forms, by the Germans, Hofmann and Ebrard, as well as by Gess; and Henry
Ward Beecher was its chief representative in America.


    Gess holds that Christ gave up his eternal holiness and divine
    self-consciousness, to become man, so that he never during his
    earthly life thought, spoke, or wrought as God, but was at all
    times destitute of divine attributes. See Gess, Scripture Doctrine
    of the Person of Christ; and synopsis of his view, by Reubelt, in
    Bib. Sac., 1870:1-32; Hofmann, Schriftbeweis, 1:234-241, and 2:20;
    Ebrard, Dogmatik, 2:144-151, and in Herzog, Encyclopädie, art.:
    Jesus Christ, der Gottmensch; also Liebner, Christliche Dogmatik.
    Henry Ward Beecher, in his Life of Jesus the Christ, chap. 3,
    emphasizes the word “_flesh,_” in _John 1:14_ and declares the
    passage to mean that the divine Spirit enveloped himself in a
    human _body_, and in that condition was subject to the
    indispensable limitations of material laws. All these advocates of
    the view hold that Deity was dormant, or paralyzed, in Christ
    during his earthly life. Its essence is there, but not its
    efficiency at any time.


Against this theory we urge the following objections:

(_a_) It rests upon a false interpretation of the passage John 1:14—ὁ
λόγος σὰρξ ἐγένετο. The word σάρξ here has its common New Testament
meaning. It designates neither soul nor body alone, but human nature in
its totality (_cf._ John 3:6—τὸ γεγεννημένον ἐκ τῆς σαρκὸς σάρξ ἐστιν;
Rom. 7:18—οὐκ οἰκεῖ ἐν ἐμοί, τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ἐν τῇ σαρκί μου, ἀγαθόν). That
ἐγένετο does not imply a transmutation of the λόγος into human nature, or
into a human soul, is evident from ἐσκήνωσεν which follows—an allusion to
the Shechinah of the Mosaic tabernacle; and from the parallel passage 1
John 4:2—ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθότα—where we are taught not only the oneness of
Christ’s person, but the distinctness of the constituent natures.


    _John 1:14_—“_the Word became flesh, and dwelt_ [tabernacled]
    _among us, and we behold his glory_”; _3:6_—“_That which is born
    of the flesh is flesh_”; _Rom., 7:18_—“_in me, that is, in my
    flesh, dwelleth no good thing_”; _1 John 4:2_—“_Jesus Christ is
    come in the flesh._” Since “_flesh_,” in Scriptural usage, denotes
    human nature in its entirety, there is as little reason to infer
    from these passages a change of the Logos into a human body, as a
    change of the Logos into a human soul. There is no curtailed
    humanity in Christ. One advantage of the monistic doctrine is that
    it avoids this error. Omnipresence is the presence of the whole of
    God in every place. _Ps. 85:9_—“_Surely his salvation is nigh them
    that fear him, That glory may dwell in our land_”—was fulfilled
    when Christ, the true Shekinah, tabernacled in human flesh and men
    “_beheld his glory, glory as of the only begotten from the Father,
    full of grace and truth_” (_John 1:14_). And Paul can say in _2
    Cor. 12:9_—“_Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
    weaknesses, that the power of Christ may spread a tabernacle over
    me._”


(_b_) It contradicts the two great classes of Scripture passages already
referred to, which assert on the one hand the divine knowledge and power
of Christ and his consciousness of oneness with the Father, and on the
other hand the completeness of his human nature and its derivation from
the stock of Israel and the seed of Abraham (Mat. 1:1-16; Heb. 2:16). Thus
it denies both the true humanity, and the true deity, of Christ.


    See the Scripture passages cited in proof of the Deity of Christ,
    pages 305-315. Gess himself acknowledges that, if the passages in
    which Jesus avers his divine knowledge and power and his
    consciousness of oneness with the Father refer to his earthly
    life, his theory is overthrown. “Apollinarianism had a certain
    sort of grotesque grandeur, in giving to the human body and soul
    of Christ an infinite, divine πνεῦμα. It maintained at least the
    divine side of Christ’s person. But the theory before us denies
    both sides.” While it so curtails deity that it is no proper
    deity, it takes away from humanity all that is valuable in
    humanity; for a manhood that consists only in body is no proper
    manhood. Such manhood is like the “half length” portrait which
    depicted only the _lower half_ of the man. _Mat. 1:1-16_, the
    genealogy of Jesus, and _Heb. 2:16_—“_taketh hold of the seed of
    Abraham_”—intimate that Christ took all that belonged to human
    nature.


(_c_) It is inconsistent with the Scriptural representations of God’s
immutability, in maintaining that the Logos gives up the attributes of
Godhead, and his place and office as second person of the Trinity, in
order to contract himself into the limits of humanity. Since attributes
and substance are correlative terms, it is impossible to hold that the
substance of God is in Christ, so long as he does not possess divine
attributes. As we shall see hereafter, however, the possession of divine
attributes by Christ does not necessarily imply his constant exercise of
them. His humiliation indeed, consisted in his giving up their independent
exercise.


    See Dorner, Unveränderlichkeit Gottes, in Jahrbuch für deutsche
    Theologie, 1:361; 2:440; 3:579; esp. 1:390-412—“Gess holds that,
    during the thirty-three years of Jesus’ earthly life, the Trinity
    was altered; the Father no more poured his fulness into the Son;
    the Son no more, with the Father, sent forth the Holy Spirit; the
    world was upheld and governed by Father and Spirit alone, without
    the mediation of the Son; the Father ceased to beget the Son. He
    says the Father alone has _aseity_; he is the only Monas. The
    Trinity is a family, whose head is the Father, but whose number
    and condition is variable. To Gess, it is indifferent whether the
    Trinity consists of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, or (as during
    Jesus’ life) of only one. But this is a Trinity in which two
    members are accidental. A Trinity that can get along without one
    of its members is not the Scriptural Trinity. The Father depends
    on the Son, and the Spirit depends on the Son, as much as the Son
    depends on the Father. To take away the Son is to take away the
    Father and the Spirit. This giving up of the actuality of his
    attributes, even of his holiness, on the part of the Logos, is in
    order to make it possible for Christ to sin. But can we ascribe
    the possibility of sin to a being who is really God? The reality
    of temptation requires us to postulate a veritable human soul.”


(_d_) It is destructive of the whole Scriptural scheme of salvation, in
that it renders impossible any experience of human nature on the part of
the divine,—for when God becomes man he ceases to be God; in that it
renders impossible any sufficient atonement on the part of human
nature,—for mere humanity, even though its essence be a contracted and
dormant deity, is not capable of a suffering which shall have infinite
value; in that it renders impossible any proper union of the human race
with God in the person of Jesus Christ,—for where true deity and true
humanity are both absent, there can be no union between the two.


    See Dorner, Jahrbuch f. d. Theologie, 1:390—“Upon this theory only
    an exhibitory atonement can be maintained. There is no real
    humanity that, in the strength of divinity, can bring a sacrifice
    to God. Not substitution, therefore, but obedience, on this view,
    reconciles us to God. Even if it is said that God’s Spirit is the
    real soul in all men, this will not help the matter; for we should
    then have to make an essential distinction between the indwelling
    of the Spirit in the unregenerate, the regenerate, and Christ,
    respectively. But in that case we lose the likeness between
    Christ’s nature and our own,—Christ’s being preëxistent, and ours
    not. Without this pantheistic doctrine, Christ’s unlikeness to us
    is yet greater; for he is really a wandering God, clothed in a
    human body, and cannot properly be called a human soul. We have
    then no middle-point between the body and the Godhead; and in the
    state of exaltation, we have no manhood at all,—only the infinite
    Logos, in a glorified body as his garment.”

    Isaac Watts’s theory of a preëxistent humanity in like manner
    implies that humanity is originally in deity; it does not proceed
    from a human stock, but from a divine; between the human and the
    divine there is no proper distinction; hence there can be no
    proper redeeming of humanity; see Bib. Sac., 1875:421. A. A.
    Hodge, Pop. Lectures, 226—“If Christ does not take a human πνεῦμα,
    he cannot be a high-priest who feels with us in all our
    infirmities, having been tempted like us.” Mason, Faith of the
    Gospel, 138—“The conversion of the Godhead into flesh would have
    only added one more man to the number of men—a sinless one,
    perhaps, among sinners—but it would have effected no union of God
    and men.” On the theory in general, see Hovey, God with Us, 62-69;
    Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:430-440; Philippi, Glaubenslehre,
    4:386-408; Biedermann, Christliche Dogmatik, 356-359; Bruce,
    Humiliation of Christ, 187, 230; Schaff, Christ and Christianity,
    115-119.


B. Theory of a gradual incarnation.—Dorner and Rothe hold that the union
between the divine and the human natures is not completed by the
incarnating act.

The advocates of this view maintain that the union between the two natures
is accomplished by a gradual communication of the fulness of the divine
Logos to the man Christ Jesus. This communication is mediated by the human
consciousness of Jesus. Before the human consciousness begins, the
personality of the Logos is not yet divine-human. The personal union
completes itself only gradually, as the human consciousness is
sufficiently developed to appropriate the divine.


    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:660 (Syst. Doct., 4:125)—“In order that
    Christ might show his high-priestly love by suffering and death,
    the different sides of his personality yet stood to one another in
    relative separableness. The divine-human union in him,
    accordingly, was before his death not yet completely actualized,
    although its completion was from the beginning divinely assured.”
    2:431 (Syst. Doct., 3:328)—“In spite of this _becoming_, inside of
    the _Unio_, the Logos is from the beginning united with Jesus in
    the deepest foundation of his being, and Jesus’ life has ever been
    a divine-human one, in that a present receptivity for the Godhead
    has never remained without its satisfaction.... Even the
    unconscious humanity of the babe turns receptively to the Logos,
    as the plant turns toward the light. The initial union makes
    Christ already the God-man, but not in such a way as to prevent a
    subsequent _becoming_; for surely he did become omniscient and
    incapable of death, as he was not at the beginning.”

    2:464 _sq._ (Syst. Doct., 3:363 _sq._)—“The actual life of God, as
    the Logos, reaches beyond the beginnings of the divine-human life.
    For if the _Unio_ is to complete itself by growth, the relation of
    impartation and reception must continue. In his personal
    consciousness, there was a distinction between duty and being. The
    will had to take up practically, and turn into action, each new
    revelation or perception of God’s will on the part of intellect or
    conscience. He had to maintain, with his will, each revelation of
    his nature and work. In his twelfth year, he says: ‘_I must be
    about my Father’s business._’ To Satan’s temptation: ‘_Art thou
    God’s Son?_’ he must reply with an affirmation that suppresses all
    doubt, though he will not prove it by miracle. This moral growth,
    as it was the will of the Father, was his task. He hears from his
    Father, and obeys. In him, imperfect knowledge was never the same
    with false conception. In us, ignorance has error for its obverse
    side. But this was never the case with him, though he grew in
    knowledge unto the end.” Dorner’s view of the Person of Christ may
    be found in his Hist. Doct. Person Christ, 5:248-261;
    Glaubenslehre, 2:347-474 (Syst. Doct., 3:243-373).

    A summary of his views is also given in Princeton Rev.,
    1873:71-87—Dorner illustrates the relation between the humanity
    and the deity of Christ by the relation between God and man, in
    conscience, and in the witness of the Spirit. “So far as the human
    element was immature or incomplete, so far the Logos was not
    present. Knowledge advanced to unity with the Logos, and the human
    will afterwards confirmed the best and highest knowledge. A
    resignation of both the Logos and the human nature to the union is
    involved in the incarnation. The growth continues until the idea,
    and the reality, of divine humanity perfectly coincide. The
    assumption of unity was gradual, in the life of Christ. His
    exaltation began with the perfection of this development.” Rothe’s
    statement of the theory can be found in his Dogmatik, 2:49-182;
    and in Bib. Sac., 27:386.


It is objectionable for the following reasons:

(_a_) The Scripture plainly teaches that that which was born of Mary was
as completely Son of God as Son of man (Luke 1:35); and that in the
incarnating act, and not at his resurrection, Jesus Christ became the
God-man (Phil. 2:7). But this theory virtually teaches the birth of a man
who subsequently and gradually became the God-man, by consciously
appropriating the Logos to whom he sustained ethical relations—relations
with regard to which the Scripture is entirely silent. Its radical error
is that of mistaking an incomplete consciousness of the union for an
incomplete union.


    In _Luke 1:35_—“_the holy thing which is begotten shall be called
    the Son of God_”—and _Phil. 2:7_—“_emptied himself, taking the
    form of servant, being made in the likeness of men_”—we have
    evidence that Christ was both Son of God and Son of man from the
    very beginning of his earthly life. But, according to Dorner,
    before there was any human consciousness, the personality of Jesus
    Christ was not divine-human.


(_b_) Since consciousness and will belong to personality, as distinguished
from nature, the hypothesis of a mutual, conscious, and voluntary
appropriation of divinity by humanity and of humanity by divinity, during
the earthly life of Christ, is but a more subtle form of the Nestorian
doctrine of a double personality. It follows, moreover, that as these two
personalities do not become absolutely one until the resurrection, the
death of the man Jesus Christ, to whom the Logos has not yet fully united
himself, cannot possess an infinite atoning efficacy.


    Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 2:68-70, objects to Dorner’s
    view, that it “leads us to a man who is in intimate communion with
    God,—a man of God, but not a man who is God.” He maintains,
    against Dorner, that “the union between the divine and human in
    Christ exists before the consciousness of it.” 193-195—Dorner’s
    view “makes each element, the divine and the human, long for the
    other, and reach its truth and reality only in the other. This, so
    far as the divine is concerned, is very like pantheism. Two
    _willing_ personalities are presupposed, with ethical relation to
    each other,—two persons, at least at the first. Says Dorner: ‘So
    long as the manhood is yet unconscious, the person of the Logos is
    not yet the central _ego_ of this man. At the beginning, the Logos
    does not impart himself, so far as he is person or
    self-consciousness. He keeps apart by himself, just in proportion
    as the manhood fails in power of perception.’ At the beginning,
    then, this man is not yet the God-man; the Logos only works in
    him, and on him. ‘The _unio personalis_ grows and completes
    itself,—becomes ever more all-sided and complete. Till the
    resurrection, there is a relative separability still.’ Thus
    Dorner. But the Scripture knows nothing of an ethical relation of
    the divine, to the human in Christ’s person. It knows only of one
    divine-human subject.” See also Thomasius, 2:80-92.


(_c_) While this theory asserts a final complete union of God and man in
Jesus Christ, it renders this union far more difficult to reason, by
involving the merging of two persons in one, rather than the union of two
natures in one person. We have seen, moreover, that the Scripture gives no
countenance to the doctrine of a double personality during the earthly
life of Christ. The God-man never says: “I and the Logos are one”; “he
that hath seen me hath seen the Logos”; “the Logos is greater than I”; “I
go to the Logos.” In the absence of all Scripture evidence in favor of
this theory, we must regard the rational and dogmatic arguments against it
as conclusive.


    Liebner, in Jahrbuch f. d. Theologie, 3:349-366, urges, against
    Dorner, that there is no sign in Scripture of such communion
    between the two natures of Christ as exists between the three
    persons of the Trinity. Philippi also objects to Dorner’s view:
    (1) that it implies a pantheistic identity of essence in both God
    and man; (2) that it makes the resurrection, not the birth, the
    time when the Word became flesh; (3) that it does not explain how
    two personalities can become one; see Philippi, Glaubenslehre,
    4:364-380. Philippi quotes Dorner as saying: “The unity of essence
    of God and man is the great discovery of this age.” But that
    Dorner was no pantheist appears from the following quotations from
    his Hist. Doctrine of the Person of Christ, II, 3:5, 23, 69,
    115—“Protestant philosophy has brought about the recognition of
    the essential connection and unity of the human and the divine....
    To the theology of the present day, the divine and human are not
    mutually exclusive but connected magnitudes, having an inward
    relation to each other and reciprocally confirming each other, by
    which view both separation and identification are set aside....
    And now the common task of carrying on the union of faculties and
    qualities to a union of essence was devolved on both. The
    difference between them is that only God has aseity.... Were we to
    set our face against every view which represents the divine and
    human as intimately and essentially related, we should be wilfully
    throwing away the gains of centuries, and returning to a soil
    where a Christology is an absolute impossibility.”

    See also Dorner, System, 1:123—“Faith postulates a difference
    between the world and God, between whom religion seeks a union.
    Faith does not wish to be a mere relation to itself or to its own
    representations and thoughts. That would be a monologue; faith
    desires a dialogue. Therefore it does not consent with a monism
    which recognizes only God or the world (with the ego). The duality
    (not the dualism, which is opposed to such monism, but which has
    no desire to oppose the rational demand for unity) is in fact a
    condition of true and vital unity.” The _unity_ is the foundation
    of religion; the _difference_ is the foundation of morality.
    Morality and religion are but different manifestations of the same
    principle. Man’s moral endeavor is the working of God within him.
    God can be revealed only in the perfect character and life of
    Jesus Christ. See Jones, Robert Browning, 146.

    Stalker, Imago Christi: “Christ was not half a God and half a man,
    but he was perfectly God and perfectly man.” Moberly, Atonement
    and Personality, 95—“The Incarnate did not oscillate between being
    God and being man. He was indeed _always_ God, and yet never
    otherwise God than as expressed within the possibilities of human
    consciousness and character.” He knew that he was something more
    than he was as incarnate. His miracles showed what humanity might
    become. John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 14—“The divinity
    of Christ was not that of a divine nature in local or mechanical
    juxtaposition with a human, but of a divine nature that suffused,
    blended, identified itself with the thoughts, feelings, volitions
    of a human individuality. Whatever of divinity could not
    organically unite itself with and breathe through a human spirit,
    was not and could not be present in one who, whatever else he was,
    was really and truly human.” See also Biedermann, Dogmatik,
    351-353; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:428-430.


3. The real nature of this Union.


(_a_) Its great importance.—While the Scriptures represent the person of
Christ as the crowning mystery of the Christian scheme (Matt 11:27; Col.
1:27; 2:2; 1 Tim. 3:16), they also incite us to its study (John 17:3;
20:27; Luke 24:39; Phil. 3:8, 10). This is the more needful, since Christ
is not only the central point of Christianity, but is Christianity
itself—the embodied reconciliation and union between man and God. The
following remarks are offered, not as fully explaining, but only as in
some respects relieving, the difficulties of the subject.


    _Matt. 11:27_—“_no one knoweth the Son, save the Father; neither
    doth any know the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the
    Son willeth to reveal him._” Here it seems to be intimated that
    the mystery of the nature of the Son is even greater than that of
    the Father. Shedd, Hist. Doct., 1:408—The Person of Christ is in
    some respects more baffling to reason than the Trinity. Yet there
    is a profane neglect, as well as a profane curiosity: _Col.
    1:27_—“_the riches of the glory of this mystery ... which is
    Christ in you, the hope of glory_”; _2:2, 3_—“_the mystery of God,
    even Christ, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
    hidden_”; _1 Tim. 3:16_—“_great is the mystery of godliness; He
    who was manifested in the flesh_”—here the Vulgate, the Latin
    Fathers, and Buttmann make μυστήριον the antecedent of ὅς, the
    relative taking the _natural_ gender of its antecedent, and
    μυστήριον referring to Christ; _Heb. 2:11_—“_both he that
    sanctifieth and they that are sanctified are all of one_ [not
    father, but race, or substance]” (_cf._ _Acts 17:26_—“_he made of
    one every nation of men_”)—an allusion to the solidarity of the
    race and Christ’s participation in all that belongs to us.

    _John 17:3_—“_this is life eternal, that they should know thee the
    only true God, and him who thou didst send, even Jesus Christ_”;
    _20:27_—“_Reach hither thy finger, and see my hands; and reach
    hither thy hand, and put it into my side: and be not faithless,
    but believing_”; _Luke 24:39_—“_See my hands and my feet, that it
    is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and
    bones, as ye behold me having_”; _Phil. 3:8, 10_—“_I count all
    things to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
    Jesus my Lord ... that I may know him_”; _1 John 1:1_—“_that which
    we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which
    we beheld, and our hands handled, concerning the Word of life._”

    Nash, Ethics and Revelation, 254, 255—“Ranke said that Alexander
    was one of the few men in whom biography is identical with
    universal history. The words apply far better to Christ.” Crane,
    Religion of To-morrow, 267—“Religion being merely the personality
    of God, Christianity the personality of Christ.” Pascal: “Jesus
    Christ is the centre of everything and the object of everything,
    and he who does not know him knows nothing of the order of nature
    and nothing of himself.” Goethe in his last years wrote: “Humanity
    cannot take a retrograde step, and we may say that the Christian
    religion, now that it has once appeared, can never again
    disappear; now that it has once found a divine embodiment, cannot
    again be dissolved.” H. B. Smith, that man of clear and devout
    thought, put his whole doctrine into one sentence: “Let us come to
    Jesus,—the person of Christ is the centre of theology.” Dean
    Stanley never tired of quoting as his own Confession of Faith the
    words of John Bunyan: “Blest Cross—blest Sepulchre—blest rather
    he—The man who there was put to shame for me!” And Charles Wesley
    wrote on Catholic Love: “Weary of all this wordy strife, These
    motions, forms, and modes and names, To thee, the Way, the Truth,
    the Life, Whose love my simple heart inflames—Divinely taught, at
    last I fly, With thee and thine to live and die.”

    “We have two great lakes, named Erie and Ontario, and these are
    connected by the Niagara River through which Erie pours its waters
    into Ontario. The whole Christian Church throughout the ages has
    been called the overflow of Jesus Christ, who is infinitely
    greater than it. Let Lake Erie be the symbol of Christ, the
    pre-existent Logos, the Eternal Word, God revealed in the
    universe. Let Niagara River be a picture to us of this same Christ
    now confined to the narrow channel of His manifestation in the
    flesh, but within those limits showing the same eastward current
    and downward gravitation which men perceived so imperfectly
    before. The tremendous cataract, with its waters plunging into the
    abyss and shaking the very earth, is the suffering and death of
    the Son of God, which for the first time makes palpable to human
    hearts the forces of righteousness and love operative in the
    Divine nature from the beginning. The law of universal life has
    been made manifest; now it is seen that justice and judgment are
    the foundations of God’s throne; that God’s righteousness
    everywhere and always makes penalty to follow sin; that the love
    which creates and upholds sinners must itself be numbered with the
    transgressors, and must bear their iniquities. Niagara has
    demonstrated the gravitation of Lake Erie. And not in vain. For
    from Niagara there widens out another peaceful lake. Ontario is
    the offspring and likeness of Erie. So redeemed humanity is the
    overflow of Jesus Christ, but only of Jesus Christ after He has
    passed through the measureless self-abandonment of His earthly
    life and of His tragic death on Calvary. As the waters of Lake
    Ontario are ever fed by Niagara, so the Church draws its life from
    the cross. And Christ’s purpose is, not that we should repeat
    Calvary, for that we can never do, but that we should reflect in
    ourselves the same onward movement and gravitation towards
    self-sacrifice which He has revealed as characterizing the very
    life of God” (A. H. Strong, Sermon before the Baptist World
    Congress, London, July 12, 1905).


(_b_) The chief problems.—These problems are the following: 1. one
personality and two natures; 2. human nature without personality; 3.
relation of the Logos to the humanity during the earthly life of Christ;
4. relation of the humanity to the Logos during the heavenly life of
Christ. We may throw light on 1, by the figure of two concentric circles;
on 2, by remembering that two earthly parents unite in producing a single
child; on 3, by the illustration of latent memory, which contains so much
more than present recollection; on 4, by the thought that body is the
manifestation of spirit, and that Christ in his heavenly state is not
confined to place.


    Luther said that we should need “new tongues” before we could
    properly set forth this doctrine,—particularly a new language with
    regard to the nature of man. The further elucidation of the
    problems mentioned above will immediately occupy our attention.
    Our investigation should not be prejudiced by the fact that the
    divine element in Jesus Christ manifests itself within human
    limitations. This is the condition of all revelation. _John
    14:9_—“_he that hath seen me hath seen the father_”; _Col.
    2:9_—“_in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily_” =
    up to the measure of human capacity to receive and to express the
    divine. _Heb. 2:11_ and _Acts 17:26_ both attribute to man a
    consubstantiality with Christ, and Christ is the manifested God.
    It is a law of hydrostatics that the smallest column of water will
    balance the largest. Lake Erie will be no higher than the water in
    the tube connected therewith. So the person of Christ reached the
    level of God, though limited in extent and environment. He was God
    manifest in the flesh.

    Robert Browning, Death in the Desert: “I say, the acknowledgment
    of God in Christ Accepted by thy reason, solves for thee All
    questions in the earth and out of it, And has so far advanced thee
    to be wise”; Epilogue to Dramatis Personæ: “That one Face, far
    from vanish, rather grows, Or decomposes but to recompose, Become
    my Universe that feels and knows.” “That face,” said Browning to
    Mrs. Orr, as he finished reading the poem, “is the face of Christ.
    That is how I feel him.” This is his answer to those victims of
    nineteenth century scepticism for whom incarnate Love has
    disappeared from the universe, carrying with it the belief in God.
    He thus attests the continued presence of God in Christ, both in
    nature and humanity. On Browning as a Christian Poet, see A. H.
    Strong, The Great Poets and their Theology, 373-447; S. Law
    Wilson, Theology of Modern Literature, 181-226.


(_c_) Reason for mystery.—The union of the two natures in Christ’s person
is necessarily inscrutable, because there are no analogies to it in our
experience. Attempts to illustrate it on the one hand from the union and
yet the distinctness of soul and body, of iron and heat, and on the other
hand from the union and yet the distinctness of Christ and the believer,
of the divine Son and the Father, are one-sided and become utterly
misleading, if they are regarded as furnishing a rationale of the union
and not simply a means of repelling objection. The first two illustrations
mentioned above lack the essential element of two natures to make them
complete: soul and body are not two natures, but one, nor are iron and
heat two substances. The last two illustrations mentioned above lack the
element of single personality: Christ and the believer are two persons,
not one, even as the Son and the Father are not one person, but two.


    The two illustrations most commonly employed are the union of soul
    and body, and the union of the believer with Christ. Each of these
    illustrates one side of the great doctrine, but each must be
    complemented by the other. The former, taken by itself, would be
    Eutychian; the latter, taken by itself, would be Nestorian. Like
    the doctrine of the Trinity, the Person of Christ is an absolutely
    unique fact, for which we can find no complete analogies. But
    neither do we know how soul and body are united. See Blunt, Dict.
    Doct. and Hist. Theol., art.: Hypostasis; Sartorius, Person and
    Work of Christ, 27-65; Wilberforce, Incarnation, 39-77; Luthardt,
    Fund. Truths, 281-334.

    A. A. Hodge, Popular Lectures, 218, 230—“Many people are
    Unitarians, not because of the difficulties of the Trinity, but
    because of the difficulties of the Person of Christ.... The union
    of the two natures is not mechanical, as between oxygen and
    nitrogen in our air; nor chemical, as between oxygen and hydrogen
    in water; nor organic, as between our hearts and our brains; but
    personal. The best illustration is the union of body and soul in
    our own persons,—how perfectly joined they are in the great
    orator! Yet here are not two natures, but one human nature. We
    need therefore to add the illustration of the union between the
    believer and Christ.” And here too we must confess the
    imperfection of the analogy, for Christ and the believer are two
    persons, and not one. The person of the God-man is unique and
    without adequate parallel. But this constitutes its dignity and
    glory.


(_d_) Ground of possibility.—The possibility of the union of deity and
humanity in one person is grounded in the original creation of man in the
divine image. Man’s kinship to God, in other words, his possession of a
rational and spiritual nature, is the condition of incarnation. Brute-life
is incapable of union with God. But human nature is capable of the divine,
in the sense not only that it lives, moves, and has its being in God, but
that God may unite himself indissolubly to it and endue it with divine
powers, while yet it remains all the more truly human. Since the moral
image of God in human nature has been lost by sin, Christ, the perfect
image of God after which man was originally made, restores that lost image
by uniting himself to humanity and filling it with his divine life and
love.


    _2 Pet. 1:4_—“_partakers of the divine nature._” Creation and
    providence do not furnish the last limit of God’s indwelling.
    Beyond these, there is the spiritual union between the believer
    and Christ, and even beyond this, there is the unity of God and
    man in the person of Jesus Christ. Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:283
    (Syst. Doct., 3:180)—“Humanity in Christ is related to divinity,
    as woman to man in marriage. It is receptive, but it is exalted by
    receiving. Christ is the offspring of the [marriage] covenant
    between God and Israel.” _Ib._, 2:403-411 (Syst. Doct.,
    3:301-308)—“The question is: How can Christ be both Creator and
    creature? The Logos, as such, stands over against the creature as
    a distinct object. How can he become, and be, that which exists
    only as object of his activity and inworking? Can the cause become
    its own effect? The problem is solved, only by remembering that
    the divine and human, though distinct from each other, are not to
    be thought of as foreign to each other and mutually exclusive. The
    very thing that distinguishes them binds them together. Their
    essential distinction is that God has aseity, while man has simply
    dependence. ‘_Deep calleth unto deep_’ (_Ps. 42:7_)—the deep of
    the divine riches, and the deep of human poverty, call to each
    other. ‘From me a cry,—from him reply.’ God’s infinite resources
    and man’s infinite need, God’s measureless supply and man’s
    boundless receptivity, attract each other, until they unite in him
    in whom dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. The mutual
    attraction is of an ethical sort, but the divine love has ‘_first
    loved_’ (_1 John 4:19_).

    “The new second creation is therefore not merely, like the first
    creation, one that distinguishes from God,—it is one that unites
    with God. Nature is distinct from God, yet God moves and works in
    nature. Much more does human nature find its only true reality, or
    realization, in union with God. God’s uniting act does not violate
    or unmake it, but rather first causes it to be what, in God’s
    idea, it was meant to be.” Incarnation is therefore the very
    fulfilment of the idea of humanity. The supernatural assumption of
    humanity is the most natural of all things. Man is not a mere
    tangent to God, but an empty vessel to be filled from the infinite
    fountain. Natura humana in Christo capax divinæ. See Talbot, in
    Bap. Quar., 1868:129; Martensen, Christian Dogmatics, 270.

    God could not have become an angel, or a tree, or a stone. But he
    could become man, because man was made in his image. God in man,
    as Phillips Brooks held, is the absolutely natural. Channing said
    that “all minds are of one family.” E. B. Andrews: “Divinity and
    humanity are not contradictory predicates. If this had been
    properly understood, there would have been no Unitarian movement.
    Man is in a true sense divine. This is also true of Christ. But he
    is infinitely further along in the divine nature than we are. If
    we say his divinity is a new kind, then the new kind arises out of
    the degree.” “Were not the eye itself a sun, No light for it could
    ever shine: By nothing godlike could the soul be won, Were not the
    soul itself divine.”

    John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 1:165—“A smaller circle
    may represent a larger in respect of its circularity; but a
    circle, small or large, cannot be the image of a square.” ...
    2:101—“God would not be God without union with man, and man would
    not be man without union with God. Immanent in the spirits he has
    made, he shares their pains and sorrows.... Showing the infinite
    element in man, Christ attracts us toward his own moral
    excellence.” Lyman Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist,
    190—“Incarnation is the indwelling of God in his children, of
    which the type and pattern is seen in him who is at once the
    manifestation of God to man, and the revelation to men of what
    humanity is to be when God’s work in the world is done—perfect God
    and perfect man, because God perfectly dwelling in a perfect man.”

    We have quoted these latter utterances, not because we regard them
    as admitting the full truth with regard to the union of the divine
    and human in Christ; but because they recognize the essential
    likeness of the human to the divine, and so help our understanding
    of the union between the two. We go further than the writers
    quoted, in maintaining not merely an indwelling of God in Christ,
    but an organic and essential union. Christ moreover is not the
    God-man by virtue of his possessing a larger measure of the divine
    than we, but rather by being the original source of all life, both
    human and divine. We hold to his deity as well as to his divinity,
    as some of these authors apparently do not. See _Heb. 7:15,
    16_—“_another priest, who hath been made ... after the power of an
    endless life_”; _John 1:4_—“_In him was life; and the life was the
    light of men._”


(_e_) No double personality.—This possession of two natures does not
involve a double personality in the God-man, for the reason that the Logos
takes into union with himself, not an individual man with already
developed personality, but human nature which has had no separate
existence before its union with the divine. Christ’s human nature is
impersonal, in the sense that it attains self-consciousness, and
self-determination only in the personality of the God-man. Here it is
important to mark the distinction between nature and person. Nature is
substance possessed in common; the persons of the Trinity have one nature;
there is a common nature of mankind. Person is nature separately
subsisting, with powers of consciousness and will. Since the human nature
of Christ has not and never had a separate subsistence, it is impersonal,
and in the God-man the Logos furnishes the principle of personality. It is
equally important to observe that self-consciousness and
self-determination do not belong to nature as such, but only to
personality. For this reason, Christ has not two consciousnesses and two
wills, but a single consciousness and a single will. This consciousness
and will, moreover, is never simply human, but is always theanthropic—an
activity of the one personality which unites in itself the human and the
divine (Mark 13:32; Luke 22:42).


    The human father and the human mother are distinct persons, and
    they each give something of their own peculiar nature to their
    child; yet the result is, not two persons in the child, but only
    one person, with one consciousness and one will. So the Fatherhood
    of God and the motherhood of Mary produced not a double
    personality in Christ, but a single personality. Dorner
    illustrates the union of human and divine in Jesus by the _Holy
    Spirit_ in the Christian,—nothing foreign, nothing distinguishable
    from the human life into which it enters; and by the _moral
    sense_, which is the very presence and power of God in the human
    soul,—yet conscience does not break up the unity of the life; see
    C. C. Everett, Essays, 32. These illustrations help us to
    understand the interpenetration of the human by the divine in
    Jesus; but they are defective in suggesting that his relation to
    God was different from ours not in kind but only in degree. Only
    Jesus could say: “_Before Abraham was born, I am_” (_John 8:58_);
    “_I and the Father are one_” (_John 10:30_).

    The theory of two consciousnesses and two wills, first elaborated
    by John of Damascus, was an unwarranted addition to the orthodox
    doctrine propounded at Chalcedon. Although the view of John of
    Damascus was sanctioned by the Council of Constantinople (681),
    “this Council has never been regarded by the Greek Church as
    œcumenical, and its composition and spirit deprive its decisions
    of all value as indicating the true sense of Scripture”; see
    Bruce, Humiliation of Christ, 90. _Nature_ has consciousness and
    will, only as it is manifested in _person_. The one person has a
    single consciousness and will, which embraces within its scope at
    all times a human nature, and sometimes a divine. Notice that we
    do not say Christ’s human nature had no will, but only that it had
    none before its union with the divine nature, and none separately
    from the one will which was made up of the human and the divine
    united; _versus_ Current Discussions in Theology, 5:283.

    Sartorius uses the illustration of two concentric circles: the one
    ego of personality in Christ is at the same time the centre of
    both circles, the human nature and the divine. Or, still better,
    illustrate by a smaller vessel of air inverted and sunk, sometimes
    below its centre, sometimes above, in a far larger vessel of
    water. See _Mark 13:32_—“_of that day or that hour knoweth no one,
    not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son_”; _Luke
    22:42_—“_Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me:
    nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done._” To say that,
    although in his capacity as man he was ignorant, yet at that same
    moment in his capacity as God he was omniscient, is to accuse
    Christ of unveracity. Whenever Christ spoke, it was not one of the
    natures that spoke, but the person in whom both natures were
    united.

    We subjoin various definitions of personality: Boëthius, quoted in
    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:415 (Syst. Doct., 3:313)—“Persona est
    animæ rationalis individua substantia”; F. W. Robertson, Lect. on
    Gen., p. 3—“Personality = self-consciousness, will, character”;
    Porter, Human Intellect, 626—“Personality = distinct subsistence,
    either actually or latently self-conscious and self-determining”;
    Harris, Philos. Basis of Theism, 408—“Person = being, conscious of
    self, subsisting in individuality and identity, and endowed with
    intuitive reason, rational sensibility, and free-will.” Dr. E. G.
    Robinson defines “nature” as “that substratum or condition of
    being which determines the kind and attributes of the person, but
    which is clearly distinguishable from the person itself.”

    Lotze, Metaphysics, § 244—“The identity of the subject of inward
    experience is all that we require. So far as, and so long as, the
    soul knows itself as this identical subject, it is and is named,
    simply for that reason, substance.” Illingworth, Personality,
    Human and Divine, 32—“Our conception of substance is not derived
    from the physical, but from the mental, world. Substance is first
    of all that which underlies our mental affections and
    manifestations. Kant declared that the idea of freedom is the
    source of our idea of personality. Personality consists in the
    freedom of the whole soul from the mechanism of nature.” On
    personality, see Windelband, Hist. Philos., 238. For the theory of
    two consciousnesses and two wills, see Philippi, Glaubenslehre,
    4:129, 234; Kahnis, Dogmatik, 2:314; Ridgeley, Body of Divinity,
    1:476; Hodge, Syst Theol., 2:378-391; Shedd, Dogm. Theol.,
    2:289-308, esp. 328. _Per contra_, see Hovey, God with Us, 66;
    Schaff, Church Hist., 1:757, and 3:751; Calderwood, Moral
    Philosophy, 12-14; Wilberforce, Incarnation, 148-169; Van
    Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 512-518.


(_f_) Effect upon the human.—The union of the divine and the human natures
makes the latter possessed of the powers belonging to the former; in other
words, the attributes of the divine nature are imparted to the human
without passing over into its essence,—so that the human Christ even on
earth had power to be, to know, and to do, as God. That this power was
latent, or was only rarely manifested, was the result of the self-chosen
state of humiliation upon which the God-man had entered. In this state of
humiliation, the communication of the contents of his divine nature to the
human was mediated by the Holy Spirit. The God-man, in his servant-form,
knew and taught and performed only what the Spirit permitted and directed
(Mat. 3:16; John 3:34; Acts 1:2; 10:38; Heb. 9:14). But when thus
permitted, he knew, taught, and performed, not, like the prophets, by
power communicated from without, but by virtue of his own inner divine
energy (Mat. 17:2; Mark 5:41; Luke 5:20, 21; 6:19; John 2:11, 24, 25;
3:13; 20:19).


    Kahnis, Dogmatik, 2d ed., 2:77—“Human nature does not become
    divine, but (as Chemnitz has said) only the medium of the divine;
    as the moon has not a light of her own, but only shines in the
    light of the sun. So human nature may derivatively exercise divine
    attributes, because it is united to the divine in one person.”
    Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 151—“Our souls spiritualize our
    bodies, and will one day give us the spiritual body, while yet the
    body does not become spirit. So the Godhead gives divine powers to
    the humanity in Christ, while yet the humanity does not cease to
    be humanity.”

    Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 4:131—“The union exalts the human, as
    light brightens the air, heat gives glow to the iron, spirit
    exalts the body, the Holy Spirit hallows the believer by union
    with his soul. Fire gives to iron its own properties of lighting
    and burning; yet the iron does not become fire. Soul gives to body
    its life-energy; yet the body does not become soul. The Holy
    Spirit sanctifies the believer, but the believer does not become
    divine; for the divine principle is the determining one. We do not
    speak of airy light, of iron heat, or of a bodily soul. So human
    nature possesses the divine only derivatively. In this sense it is
    _our_ destiny to become ‘_partakers of the divine nature_’ (_2
    Pet. 1:4_). Even in his earthly life, when he wished to be, or
    more correctly, when the Spirit permitted, he was omnipotent,
    omniscient, omnipresent, could walk the sea, or pass through
    closed doors. But, in his state of humiliation, he was subject to
    the Holy Spirit.”

    In _Mat. 3:16_, the anointing of the Spirit at his baptism was not
    the descent of a material dove (“_as a dove_”). The dove-like
    appearance was only the outward sign of the coming forth of the
    Holy Spirit from the depths of his being and pouring itself like a
    flood into his divine-human consciousness. _John 3:34_—“_for he
    giveth not the Spirit by measure_”; _Acts 1:2_—“_after that he had
    given commandment through the Holy Spirit unto the apostles_”;
    _10:38_—“_Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed him with the Holy
    Spirit and with power: who went about doing good, and healing all
    that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him_”; _Heb,
    9:14_—“_the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
    offered himself without blemish onto God._”

    When permitted by the Holy Spirit, he knew, taught, and wrought as
    God: _Mat. 17:2_—“_he was transfigured before them_”; _Mark
    5:41_—“_Damsel, I say unto thee, Arise_”; _Luke 5:20, 21_—“_Man,
    thy sins are forgiven thee.... Who can forgive sins, but God
    alone?_”—_Luke 6:19_—“_power came forth from him, and healed them
    all_”; _John 2:11_—“_This beginning of his signs did Jesus in Cana
    of Galilee, and manifested his glory_”; _24, 25_—“_he knew all
    men.... he himself knew what was in man_”; _3:13_—“_the Son of
    man, who is __ in heaven_” [here, however, Westcott and Hort, with
    א and B, omit ὁ ὢν ἔν τῷ ὀυρανῷ,—for advocacy of the common
    reading, see Broadus, in Hovey’s Com., on _John 3:13_];
    _20:19_—“_when the doors were shut ... Jesus came and stood in the
    midst._”

    Christ is the “_servant of Jehovah_” (_Is. 42:1-7; 49:1-12; 52:13;
    53:11_) and the meaning of παῖς (_Acts 3:13, 28; 4:27, 30_) is not
    “child” or “Son”; it is “_servant_,” as in the Revised Version.
    But, in the state of exaltation, Christ is the “_Lord of the
    Spirit_” (_2 Cor. 3:18_—Meyer), giving the Spirit (_John 16:7_—“_I
    will send him unto you_”), present in the Spirit (_John 14:18_—“_I
    come unto you_”; _Mat. 28:20_—“_I am with you always, even unto
    the the end of the world_”), and working through the Spirit (_1
    Cor. 15:45_—“_The last Adam became a life-giving spirit_”); _2
    Cor. 3:17_—“_Now the Lord is the Spirit_”. On Christ’s relation to
    the Holy Spirit, see John Owen, Works, 282-297; Robins, in Bib.
    Sac., Oct. 1874:615; Wilberforce, Incarnation, 208-241.

    Delitzsch: “The conception of the servant of Jehovah is, as it
    were, a pyramid, of which the base is the people of Israel as a
    whole; the central part, Israel according to the Spirit; and the
    summit, the Mediator of Salvation who rises out of Israel.” Cheyne
    on Isaiah, 2:253, agrees with this view of Delitzsch, which is
    also the view of Oehler. The O. T. is the life of a nation; the N.
    T. is the life of a man. The chief end of the nation was to
    produce the man; the chief end of the man was to save the world.
    Sabatier, Philos. Religion, 59—“If humanity were not potentially
    and in some degree an Immanuel, God with us, there would never
    have issued from its bosom he who bore and revealed this blessed
    name.” We would enlarge and amend this illustration of the
    pyramid, by making the base to be the Logos, as Creator and
    Upholder of all (_Eph. 1:23_; _Col. 1:16_); the stratum which
    rests next upon the Logos is universal humanity (_Ps, 8:5, 6_);
    then comes Israel as a whole (_Mat. 2:15_); spiritual Israel rests
    upon Israel after the flesh (_Is. 42:1-7_); as the acme and cap
    stone of all, Christ appears, to crown the pyramid, the true
    servant of Jehovah and Son of man (_Is. 53:11_; _Mat. 20:28_). We
    may go even further and represent Christ as forming the basis of
    another inverted pyramid of redeemed humanity ever growing and
    rising to heaven (_Is. 9:6_—“_Everlasting Father_”; _Is.
    53:10_—“_he shall see his seed_”; _Rev. 22:16_—“_root and
    offspring of David_”; _Heb. 2:13_—“_I and the children whom God
    hath given me._”)


(_g_) Effect upon the divine.—This communion of the natures was such that,
although the divine nature in itself is incapable of ignorance, weakness,
temptation, suffering, or death, the one person Jesus Christ was capable
of these by virtue of the union of the divine nature with a human nature
in him. As the human Savior can exercise divine attributes, not in virtue
of his humanity alone, but derivatively, by virtue of his possession of a
divine nature, so the divine Savior can suffer and be ignorant as man, not
in his divine nature, but derivatively, by virtue of his possession of a
human nature. We may illustrate this from the connection between body and
soul. The soul suffers pain from its union with the body, of which apart
from the body it would be incapable. So the God-man, although in his
divine nature impassible, was capable, through his union with humanity, of
absolutely infinite suffering.


    Just as my soul could never suffer the pains of fire if it were
    only soul, but can suffer those pains in union with the body, so
    the otherwise impassible God can suffer mortal pangs through his
    union with humanity, which he never could suffer if he had not
    joined himself to my nature. The union between the humanity and
    the deity is so close, that deity itself is brought under the
    curse and penalty of the law. Because Christ was God, did he pass
    unscorched through the fires of Gethsemane and Calvary? Rather let
    us say, because Christ was God, he underwent a suffering that was
    absolutely infinite. Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 4:300 _sq._;
    Lawrence, in Bib. Sac., 24:41; Schöberlein, in Jahrbuch für
    deutsche Theologie, 1871:459-501.

    A. J. F. Behrends, in The Examiner, April 21, 1898—“Jesus Christ
    is God in the form of man; as completely God as if he were not
    man; as completely man as if he were not God. He is always divine
    and always human.... The infirmities and pains of his body pierced
    his divine nature.... The demand of the law was not laid upon
    Christ from without, but proceeded from within. It is the
    righteousness _in_ him which makes his death necessary.”


(_h_) Necessity of the union.—The union of two natures in one person is
necessary to constitute Jesus Christ a proper mediator between man and
God. His two-fold nature gives him fellowship with both parties, since it
involves an equal dignity with God, and at the same time a perfect
sympathy with man (Heb. 2:17, 18; 4:15, 16). This two-fold nature,
moreover, enables him to present to both God and man proper terms of
reconciliation: being man, he can make atonement for man; being God, his
atonement has infinite value; while both his divinity and his humanity
combine to move the hearts of offenders and constrain them to submission
and love (1 Tim. 2:5; Heb. 7:25).


    _Heb. 2:17,18_—“_Wherefore it behooved him in all things to be
    made like unto his brethren, that he might become a merciful and
    faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make
    propitiation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself
    hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
    tempted_”; _4:15,16_—“_For we have not a high priest that cannot
    be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but one that hath
    been in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us
    therefore draw near with boldness unto the throne of grace, that
    we may receive mercy, and may find grace to help us in time of
    need_”; _1 Tim. 2:5_—“_one God, one mediator also between God and
    men, himself man, Christ Jesus_”; _Heb. 7:25_—“_Wherefore also he
    is able to save to the uttermost them that draw near unto God
    through him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for
    them._”

    Because Christ is man, he can make atonement for man and can
    sympathize with man. Because Christ is God, his atonement has
    infinite value, and the union which he effects with God is
    complete. A merely human Savior could never reconcile or reunite
    us to God. But a divine-human Savior meets all our needs. See
    Wilberforce, Incarnation, 170-208. As the high priest of old bore
    on his mitre the name Jehovah, and on his breastplate the names of
    the tribes of Israel, so Christ Jesus is God with us, and at the
    same time our propitiatory representative before God. In Virgil’s
    Æneid, Dido says well: “Haud ignara malí, miseris succurrere
    disco”—“Myself not ignorant of woe, Compassion I have learned to
    show.” And Terence uttered almost a Christian word when he wrote:
    “Homo sum, et humani nihil a me alienum puto”—“I am a man, and I
    count nothing human as foreign to me.” Christ’s experience and
    divinity made these words far more true of him than of any merely
    human being.


(_i_) The union eternal.—The union of humanity with deity in the person of
Christ is indissoluble and eternal. Unlike the avatars of the East, the
incarnation was a permanent assumption of human nature by the second
person of the Trinity. In the ascension of Christ, glorified humanity has
attained the throne of the universe. By his Spirit, this same divine-human
Savior is omnipresent to secure the progress of his kingdom. The final
subjection of the Son to the Father, alluded to in 1 Cor. 15:28, cannot be
other than the complete return of the Son to his original relation to the
Father; since, according to John 17:5, Christ is again to possess the
glory which he had with the Father before the world was (_cf._ Heb. 1:8;
7:24, 25).


    _1 Cor. 15:28_—“_and when all things have been subjected unto him,
    then shall the Son also himself be subjected to him that did
    subject all things unto him, that God may be all in all_”; _John
    17:5_—“_Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory
    which I had with thee before the world was_”; _Heb. 1:8_—“_of the
    Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever_”;
    _7:24_—“_he, because he abideth forever, hath his priesthood
    unchangeable._” Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:281-283 (Syst. Doct.
    3:177-179), holds that there is a present and relative distinction
    between the Son’s will, as Mediator, and that of the Father (_Mat.
    26:39_—“_not as I will, but as thou wilt_”)—a distinction which
    shall cease when Christ becomes Judge (_John 16:26_—“_In that day
    ye shall ask in my name: and I say not onto you, that I will pray
    the Father for you_”) If Christ’s _reign_ ceased, he would be
    inferior to the saints, who are themselves to reign. But they are
    to reign only in and with Christ, their head.

    The best illustration of the possible meaning of Christ’s giving
    up the kingdom is found in the Governor of the East India Company
    giving up his authority to the Queen and merging it in that of the
    home government, he himself, however, at the same time becoming
    Secretary of State for India. So Christ will give up his
    vicegerency, but not his mediatorship. Now he reigns by delegated
    authority; then he will reign in union with the Father. So
    Kendrick, in Bib. Sac., Jan. 1890:68-83. Wrightnour: “When the
    great remedy has wrought its perfect cure, the physician will no
    longer be looked upon as the physician. When the work of
    redemption is completed, the mediatorial office of the Son will
    cease.” We may add that other offices of friendship and
    instruction will then begin.

    Melanchthon: “Christ will finish his work as Mediator, and then
    will reign as God, immediately revealing to us the Deity.”
    Quenstedt, quoted in Schmid, Dogmatik, 293, thinks the giving up
    of the kingdom will be only an exchange of outward administration
    for inward,—not a surrender of all power and authority, but only
    of one mode of exercising it. Hanna, on Resurrection, lect. 4—“It
    is not a giving up of his mediatorial authority,—that throne is to
    endure forever,—but it is a simple public recognition of the fact
    that God is all in all, that Christ is God’s medium of
    accomplishing all.” An. Par. Bible, on _1 Cor. 15:28_—“Not his
    mediatorial relation to his own people shall be given up; much
    less his personal relation to the Godhead, as the divine Word; but
    only his mediatorial relation to the world at large.” See also
    Edwards, Observations on the Trinity, 85 _sq._ Expositor’s Greek
    Testament, on _1 Cor. 15:28_, “affirms no other subjection than is
    involved in Sonship.... This implies no inferiority of nature, no
    extrusion from power, but the free submission of love ... which is
    the essence of the filial spirit which actuated Christ from first
    to last.... Whatsoever glory he gains is devoted to the glory and
    power of the Father, who glorifies him in turn.”

    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:402 (Syst. Doct., 3:297-299)—“We are not
    to imagine incarnations of Christ in the angel-world, or in other
    spheres. This would make incarnation only the change of a garment,
    a passing theophany; and Christ’s relation to humanity would be a
    merely external one.” Bishop of Salisbury, quoted in Swayne, Our
    Lord’s Knowledge as Man, XX—“Are we permitted to believe that
    there is something parallel to the progress of our Lord’s humanity
    in the state of humiliation, still going on even now, in the state
    of exaltation? that it is, in fact, becoming more and more
    adequate to the divine nature? See _Col. 1:24_—‘_fill up that
    which is lacking_’; _Heb. 10:12, 13_—‘_expecting till his
    enemies_’; _1 Cor. 15:28_—‘_when all things have been subjected
    unto him._’ ” In our judgment such a conclusion is unwarranted, in
    view of the fact that the God-man in his exaltation has the glory
    of his preëxistent state (_John 17:5_); that all the heavenly
    powers are already subject to him (_Eph. 1:21, 22_); and that he
    is now omnipresent (_Mat. 28:20_).


(_j_) Infinite and finite in Christ.—Our investigation of the Scripture
teaching with regard to the Person of Christ leads us to three important
conclusions: 1. that deity and humanity, the infinite and the finite, in
him are not mutually exclusive; 2. that the humanity in Christ differs
from his deity not merely in degree but also in kind; and 3. that this
difference in kind is the difference between the infinite original and the
finite derivative, so that Christ is the source of life, both physical and
spiritual, for all men.


    Our doctrine excludes the view that Christ is only quantitatively
    different from other men in whom God’s Spirit dwells. He is
    qualitatively different, in that he is the source of life, and
    they the recipients. Not only is it true that the fulness of the
    Godhead is in him alone,—it is also true that he is himself God,
    self-revealing and self-communicating, as men are not. Yet we
    cannot hold with E. H. Johnson, Outline of Syst. Theol., 176-178,
    that Christ’s humanity was of one species with his deity, but not
    of one substance. We know of but one underlying substance and
    ground of being. This one substance is self-limiting, and so
    self-manifesting, in Jesus Christ. The determining element is not
    the human but the divine. The infinite Source has a finite
    manifestation; but in the finite we see the Infinite; _2 Cor.
    5:19_—“_God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself_”;
    _John 14:9_—“_he that hath seen me hath seen the Father._” We can
    therefore agree with the following writers who regard all men as
    partakers of the life of God, while yet we deny that Christ is
    only a man, distinguished from his fellows by having a larger
    share in that life than they have.

    J. M. Whiton: “How is the divine spirit which is manifest in the
    life of the man Christ Jesus to be distinguished, _qua_ divine,
    from the same divine spirit as manifested in the life of humanity?
    I answer, that in him, the person Christ, dwelleth the _fulness_
    of the Godhead bodily. I emphasize _fulness_, and say: The
    God-head is alike in the race and in its spiritual head, but the
    _fulness_ is in the head alone—a fulness of course not absolute,
    since circumscribed by a human organism, but a fulness to the
    limits of the organism. Essential deity cannot be ascribed to the
    human Christ, except as in common with the race created in the
    image of God. Life is one, and all life is divine.”... Gloria
    Patri, 88, 23—“Every incarnation of life is _pro tanto_ and in its
    measure an incarnation of God ... and God’s way is a perpetually
    increasing incarnation of life whose climax and crown is the
    divine fulness of life in Christ.... The _Homoousios_ of the
    Nicene Creed was a great victory of the truth. But the Nicene
    Fathers builded better than they knew. The Unitarian Dr. Hedge
    praised them because they got at the truth, the logical conclusion
    of which was to come so long after, that God and man are of one
    substance.” So Momerie, Inspiration, holds man’s nature to be the
    same in kind with God’s. See criticism of this view in Watts, New
    Apologetic, 133, 134. _Homoiousios_ he regards as involving
    _homoousios_; the divine nature capable of fission or
    segmentation, broken off in portions, and distributed among finite
    moral agents; the divine nature undergoing perpetual curtailment;
    every man therefore to some extent inspired, and evil as truly an
    inspiration of God as is good. Watts seems to us to lack the
    proper conception of the infinite as the ground of the finite, and
    so not excluding it.

    Lyman Abbott affirms that Christ is, “not God _and_ man, but God
    _in_ man.” Christ differs from other men only as the flower
    differs from the bulb. As the true man, he is genuinely divine.
    Deity and humanity are not two distinct natures, but one nature.
    The ethico-spiritual nature which is finite in man is identical
    with the nature which is infinite in God. Christ’s distinction
    from other men is therefore in the degree in which he shared this
    nature and possessed a unique fulness of life—“_anointed with the
    Holy Spirit and with power_” (_Acts 10:38_). Phillips Brooks: “To
    this humanity of man as a part of God—to this I cling; for I do
    love it, and I will know nothing else.... Man is, in virtue of his
    essential humanity, partaker of the life of the essential Word....
    Into every soul, just so far as it is possible for that soul to
    receive it, God beats his life and gives his help.” Phillips
    Brooks believes in the redemptive indwelling of God in man, so
    that salvation is of man, for man, and by man. He does not scruple
    to say to every man: “You are a part of God.”

    While we shrink from the expressions which seem to imply a
    partition of the divine nature, we are compelled to recognize a
    truth which these writers are laboring to express, the truth
    namely of the essential oneness of all life, and of God in Christ
    as the source and giver of it. “Jesus quotes approvingly the words
    of _Psalm 82:6_—‘_I said, Ye are Gods._’ Microscopic, indeed, but
    divine are we—sparks from the flame of deity. God is the Creator,
    but it is through Christ as the mediating and as the final Cause.
    ‘_And we through him_’ (_1 Cor. 8:6_)—we exist for him, for the
    realization of a divine humanity in solidarity with him. Christ is
    at once the end and the instrumental cause of the whole process.”
    Samuel Harris, God the Creator and Lord of All, speaks of “the
    essentially human in God, and the essentially divine in man.” The
    Son, or Word of God, “when manifested in the forms of a finite
    personality, is the essential Christ, revealing that in God which
    is essentially and eternally human.”

    Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion, 1:196—“The whole of humanity is the
    object of the divine love; it is an Immanuel and son of God; its
    whole history is a continual incarnation of God; as indeed it is
    said in Scripture that we are a divine offspring, and that we live
    and move and have our being in God. But what lies potentially in
    the human consciousness of God is not on that account also
    manifestly revealed to it from the beginning.” Hatch, Hibbert
    Lectures, 175-180, on Stoic monism and Platonic dualism, tells us
    that the Stoics believed in a personal λόγος and an impersonal
    ὕλη, both of them modes of a single substance. Some regarded God
    as a mode of matter, _natura naturata_: “Jupiter est quodcunque
    vides, quodcunque moveris” (Lucan, Phars., 9:579); others
    conceived of him as the _natura naturans_,—this became the
    governing conception.... The products are all divine, but not
    equally divine.... Nearest of all to the pure essence of God is
    the human soul: it is an emanation or outflow from him, a sapling
    which is separate from and yet continues the life of the parent
    tree, a colony in which some members of the parent state have
    settled. Plato followed Anaxagoras in holding that mind is
    separate from matter and acts upon it. God is outside the world.
    He shapes it as a carpenter shapes wood. On the general subject of
    the union of deity and humanity in the person of Christ, see
    Herzog, Encyclopädie, art.: Christologie; Barrows, in Bib. Sac.,
    10:765; 26:83; also, Bib. Sac., 17:535; John Owen, Person of
    Christ, in Works, 1:223; Hooker, Eccl. Polity, book v. chap.
    51-56: Boyce, in Bap. Quar., 1870:385; Shedd, Hist. Doct., 1:403
    sq.; Hovey, God with Us, 61-88; Plumptre, Christ and Christendom,
    appendix; E. H. Johnson, The Idea of Law in Christology, in Bib.
    Sac., Oct. 1889:599-625.



Section III.—The Two States Of Christ.


I. The State of Humiliation.


1. The nature of this humiliation.


We may dismiss, as unworthy of serious notice, the views that it consisted
essentially either in the union of the Logos with human nature,—for this
union with human nature continues in the state of exaltation; or in the
outward trials and privations of Christ’s human life,—for this view casts
reproach upon poverty, and ignores the power of the soul to rise superior
to its outward circumstances.


    E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 224—“The error of supposing it
    too humiliating to obey law was derived from the Roman treasury of
    merit and works of supererogation. Better was Frederick the
    Great’s sentiment when his sturdy subject and neighbor, the
    miller, whose windmill he had attempted to remove, having beaten
    him in a lawsuit, the thwarted monarch exclaimed: ‘Thank God,
    there is law in Prussia!’ ” Palmer, Theological Definition,
    79—“God reveals himself in the rock, vegetable, animal, man. Must
    not the process go on? Must there not appear in the fulness of
    time a man who will reveal God as perfectly as is possible in
    human conditions—a man who is God under the limitations of
    humanity? Such incarnation is humiliation only in the eyes of men.
    To Christ it is lifting up, exaltation, glory; _John 12:32_—‘_And
    I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto
    myself._’ ” George Harris, Moral Evolution, 409—“The divinity of
    Christ is not obscured, but is more clearly seen, shining through
    his humanity.”


We may devote more attention to the

A. Theory of Thomasius, Delitzsch, and Crosby, that the humiliation
consisted in the surrender of the relative divine attributes.

This theory holds that the Logos, although retaining his divine
self-consciousness and his immanent attributes of holiness, love, and
truth, surrendered his relative attributes of omniscience, omnipotence,
and omnipresence, in order to take to himself veritable human nature.
According to this view, there are, indeed, two natures in Christ, but
neither of these natures is infinite. Thomasius and Delitzsch are the
chief advocates of this theory in Germany. Dr. Howard Crosby has
maintained a similar view in America.


    The theory of Thomasius, Delitzsch, and Crosby has been, though
    improperly, called the theory of the Kenosis (from
    ἐκένωσεν—“_emptied himself_”—in _Phil. 2:7_), and its advocates
    are often called Kenotic theologians. There is a Kenosis of the
    Logos, but it is of a different sort from that which this theory
    supposes. For statements of this theory, see Thomasius, Christi
    Person und Werk, 2:233-255, 542-550; Delitzsch, Biblische
    Psychologie, 323-333; Howard Crosby, in Bap. Quar., 1870:350-363—a
    discourse subsequently published in a separate volume, with the
    title: The True Humanity of Christ, and reviewed by Shedd, in
    Presb. Rev., April, 1881:429-431. Crosby emphasizes the word
    “_became_,” in _John 1:14_—“_and the Word became flesh_”—and gives
    the Word “_flesh_” the sense of “man,” or “human.” Crosby, then,
    should logically deny, though he does not deny, that Christ’s body
    was derived from the Virgin.


We object to this view that:

(_a_) It contradicts the Scriptures already referred to, in which Christ
asserts his divine knowledge and power. Divinity, it is said, can give up
its world-functions, for it existed without these before creation. But to
give up divine attributes is to give up the substance of Godhead. Nor is
it a sufficient reply to say that only the relative attributes are given
up, while the immanent attributes, which chiefly characterize the Godhead,
are retained; for the immanent necessarily involve the relative, as the
greater involve the less.


    Liebner, Jahrbuch f. d. Theol., 3:349-356—“Is the Logos here? But
    wherein does he show his presence, that it may be known?” Hase,
    Hutterus Redivivus, 11th ed., 217, note. John Caird, Fund. Ideas
    of Christianity, 2:125-146, criticises the theory of the Kenosis,
    but grants that, with all its self-contradictions, as he regards
    them, it is an attempt to render conceivable the profound truth of
    a sympathizing, self-sacrificing God.


(_b_) Since the Logos, in uniting himself to a human soul, reduces himself
to the condition and limitations of a human soul, the theory is virtually
a theory of the coëxistence of two human souls in Christ. But the union of
two finite souls is more difficult to explain than the union of a finite
and an infinite,—since there can be in the former case no intelligent
guidance and control of the human element by the divine.


    Dorner, Jahrbuch f. d. Theol., 1:397-408—“The impossibility of
    making two finite souls into one finally drove Arianism to the
    denial of any human soul in Christ” (Apollinarianism). This
    statement of Dorner, which we have already quoted in our account
    of Apollinarianism, illustrates the similar impossibility, upon
    the theory of Thomasius, of constructing out of two finite souls
    the person of Christ. See also Hovey, God with Us, 68.


(_c_) This theory fails to secure its end, that of making comprehensible
the human development of Jesus,—for even though divested of the relative
attributes of Godhood, the Logos still retains his divine
self-consciousness, together with his immanent attributes of holiness,
love, and truth. This is as difficult to reconcile with a purely natural
human development as the possession of the relative divine attributes
would be. The theory logically leads to a further denial of the possession
of any divine attributes, or of any divine consciousness at all, on the
part of Christ, and merges itself in the view of Gess and Beecher, that
the Godhead of the Logos is actually transformed into a human soul.


    Kahnis, Dogmatik 3:343—“The old theology conceived of Christ as in
    full and unbroken use of the divine self-consciousness, the divine
    attributes, and the divine world-functions, from the conception
    until death. Though Jesus, as fœtus, child, boy, was not almighty
    and omnipresent according to his human nature, yet he was so, as
    to his divine nature, which constituted one _ego_ with his human.
    Thomasius, however, declared that the Logos gave up his relative
    attributes, during his sojourn in flesh. Dorner’s objection to
    this, on the ground of the divine unchangeableness, overshoots the
    mark, because it makes any _becoming_ impossible.

    “But some things in Thomasius’ doctrine are still difficult: 1st,
    divinity can certainly give up its world-functions, for it has
    existed without these before the world was. In the nature of an
    absolute personality, however, lies an absolute knowing, willing,
    feeling, which it cannot give up. Hence _Phil. 2:6-11_ speaks of a
    giving-up of divine glory, but not of a giving-up of divine
    attributes or nature. 2d, little is gained by such an assumption
    of the giving-up of _relative_ attributes, since the Logos, even
    while divested of a part of his attributes, still has full
    possession of his divine self-consciousness, which must make a
    purely human development no less difficult. 3d, the expressions of
    divine self-consciousness, the works of divine power, the words of
    divine wisdom, prove that Jesus was in possession of his divine
    self-consciousness and attributes.

    “The essential thing which the Kenotics aim at, however, stands
    fast; namely, that the divine personality of the Logos divested
    itself of its glory (_John 17:5_), riches (_2 Cor. 8:6_), divine
    form (_Phil. 2:6_). This divesting is the becoming man. The
    humiliation, then, was a giving up of the use, not of the
    possession, of the divine nature and attributes. That man can thus
    give up self-consciousness and powers, we see every day in sleep.
    But man does not, thereby, cease to be man. So we maintain that
    the Logos, when he became man, did not divest himself of his
    divine person and nature, which was impossible; but only divested
    himself of the use and exercise of these—these being latent to
    him—in order to unfold themselves to use in the measure to which
    his human nature developed itself—a use which found its completion
    in the condition of exaltation.” This statement of Kahnis,
    although approaching correctness, is still neither quite correct
    nor quite complete.


B. Theory that the humiliation consisted in the surrender of the
independent exercise of the divine attributes.

This theory, which we regard as the most satisfactory of all, may be more
fully set forth as follows. The humiliation, as the Scriptures seem to
show, consisted:

(_a_) In that act of the preëxistent Logos by which he gave up his divine
glory with the Father, in order to take a servant-form. In this act, he
resigned not the possession, nor yet entirely the use, but rather the
independent exercise, of the divine attributes.


    _John 17:5_—“_glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory
    which I had with thee before the world was_”; _Phil. 2:6,
    7_—“_who, existing in the form of God, counted not the being on an
    equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself,
    taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men_”;
    _2 Cor. 8:9_—“_For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
    that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that
    ye through his poverty might become rich._” Pompilia, in Robert
    Browning’s The Ring and the Book: “Now I see how God is likest God
    in being born.”

    Omniscience gives up all knowledge but that of the child, the
    infant, the embryo, the infinitesimal germ of humanity.
    Omnipotence gives up all power but that of the impregnated ovum in
    the womb of the Virgin. The Godhead narrows itself down to a point
    that is next to absolute extinction. Jesus washing his disciples’
    feet, in _John 13:1-20_, is the symbol of his coming down from his
    throne of glory and taking the form of a servant, in order that he
    may purify us, by regeneration and sanctification, for the
    marriage-supper of the Lamb.


(_b_) In the submission of the Logos to the control of the Holy Spirit and
the limitations of his Messianic mission, in his communication of the
divine fulness of the human nature which he had taken into union with
himself.


    _Acts 1:2_—Jesus, “_after that he had given commandment through
    the Holy Spirit unto the apostles whom he had chosen_”;
    _10:38_—“_Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed him with the Holy
    Spirit and with power_”; _Heb. 9:14_—“_the blood of Christ, who
    through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish unto
    God._” A minor may have a great estate left to him, yet may have
    only such use of it as his guardian permits. In Homer’s Iliad,
    when Andromache brings her infant son to part with Hector, the boy
    is terrified by the warlike plumes of his father’s helmet, and
    Hector puts them off to embrace him. So God lays aside “That
    glorious form, that light unsufferable, And that far-beaming blaze
    of majesty.” Arthur H. Hallam, in John Brown’s Rab and his
    Friends, 282, 283—“Revelation is the voluntary approximation of
    the infinite Being to the ways and thoughts of finite humanity.”


(_c_) In the continuous surrender, on the part of the God-man, so far as
his human nature was concerned, of the exercise of those divine powers
with which it was endowed by virtue of its union with the divine, and in
the voluntary acceptance, which followed upon this, of temptation,
suffering, and death.


    _Mat. 26:53_—“_thinkest thou that I cannot beseech my Father, and
    he shall even now send me more than twelve legions of angels?_”
    _John 10:17, 18_—“_Therefore doth the Father love me, because I
    lay down my life, that I may take it again. No one taketh it away
    from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down,
    and I have power to take it again_”; _Phil. 2:8_—“_and being found
    in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, becoming obedient even
    unto death, yea, the death of the cross._” _Cf._ Shakespeare,
    Merchant of Venice: “Such music is there in immortal souls, That
    while this muddy vesture of decay Doth close it in, we cannot see
    it.”


Each of these elements of the doctrine has its own Scriptural support. We
must therefore regard the humiliation of Christ, not as consisting in a
single act, but as involving a continuous self-renunciation, which began
with the Kenosis of the Logos in becoming man, and which culminated in the
self-subjection of the God-man to the death of the cross.


    Our doctrine of Christ’s humiliation will be better understood if
    we put it midway between two pairs of erroneous views, making it
    the third of five. The list would be as follows: (1) Gess: The
    Logos gave up all divine attributes; (2) Thomasius: The Logos gave
    up relative attributes only; (3) True View: The Logos gave up the
    independent exercise of divine attributes; (4) Old Orthodoxy:
    Christ gave up the use of divine attributes; (5) Anselm: Christ
    acted as if he did not possess divine attributes. The full
    exposition of the classical passage with reference to the
    humiliation, namely, _Phil. 2:5-8_, we give below, under the next
    paragraph, pages 705, 706. Brentius illustrated Christ’s
    humiliation by the king who travels incognito. But Mason, Faith of
    the Gospel, 158, says well that “to part in appearance with only
    the fruition of the divine attributes would be to impose upon us
    with a pretence of self-sacrifice; but to part with it in reality
    was to manifest most perfectly the true nature of God.”

    This same objection lies against the explanation given in the
    Church Quarterly Review, Oct. 1891:1-30, on Our Lord’s Knowledge
    as Man: “If divine knowledge exists in a different form from
    human, and a translation into a different form is necessary before
    it can be available in the human sphere, our Lord might know the
    day of judgment as God, and yet be ignorant of it as man. This
    must have been the case if he did not choose to translate it into
    the human form. But it might also have been incapable of
    translation. The processes of divine knowledge may be far above
    our finite comprehension.” This seems to us to be a virtual denial
    of the unity of Christ’s person, and to make our Lord play fast
    and loose with the truth. He either knew, or he did not know; and
    his denial that he knew makes it impossible that he should have
    known in any sense.


2. The stages of Christ’s humiliation.


We may distinguish: (_a_) That act of the preïncarnate Logos by which, in
becoming man, he gave up the independent exercise of the divine
attributes. (_b_) His submission to the common laws which regulate the
origin of souls from a preëxisting sinful stock, in taking his human
nature from the Virgin,—a human nature which only the miraculous
conception rendered pure. (_c_) His subjection to the limitations involved
in a human growth and development,—reaching the consciousness of his
sonship at his twelfth year, and working no miracles till after the
baptism. (_d_) The subordination of himself, in state, knowledge,
teaching, and acts, to the control of the Holy Spirit,—so living, not
independently, but as a servant. (_e_) His subjection, as connected with a
sinful race, to temptation and suffering, and finally to the death which
constituted the penalty of the law.


    Peter Lombard asked whether God could know more than he was aware
    of? It is only another way of putting the question whether, during
    the earthly life of Christ, the Logos existed outside of the flesh
    of Jesus. We must answer in the affirmative. Otherwise the number
    of the persons in the Trinity would be variable, and the universe
    could do without him who is ever “_upholding all things by the
    word of his power_” (_Heb. 1:3_), and in whom “_all things
    consist_” (_Col. 1:17_). Let us recall the nature of God’s
    omnipresence (see pages 279-282). Omnipresence is nothing less
    than the presence of the whole of God in every place. From this it
    follows, that the whole Christ can be present in every believer as
    fully as if that believer were the only one to receive of his
    fulness, and that the whole Logos can be united to and be present
    in the man Christ Jesus, while at the same time he fills and
    governs the universe. By virtue of this omnipresence, therefore,
    the whole Logos can suffer on earth, while yet the whole Logos
    reigns in heaven. The Logos outside of Christ has the perpetual
    consciousness of his Godhead, while yet the Logos, as united to
    humanity in Christ, is subject to ignorance, weakness, and death.
    Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:153—“Jehovah, though present in the form of
    the burning bush, was at the same time omnipresent also”;
    2:265-284, esp. 282—“Because the sun is shining in and through a
    cloud, it does not follow that it cannot at the same time be
    shining through the remainder of universal space, unobstructed by
    any vapor whatever.” Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 21—“Not with
    God, as with finite man, does arrival in one place necessitate
    withdrawal from another.” John Calvin: “The whole Christ was
    there; but not all that was in Christ was there.” See Adamson, The
    Mind of Christ.

    How the independent exercise of the attributes of omnipotence,
    omniscience, and omnipresence can be surrendered, even for a time,
    would be inconceivable, if we were regarding the Logos as he is in
    himself, seated upon the throne of the universe. The matter is
    somewhat easier when we remember that it was not the Logos _per
    se_, but rather the God-man, Jesus Christ, in whom the Logos
    submitted to this humiliation. South, Sermons, 2:9—“Be the
    fountain never so full, yet if it communicate itself by a little
    pipe, the stream can be but small and inconsiderable, and equal to
    the measure of its conveyance.” Sartorius, Person and Work of
    Christ, 39—“The human eye, when open, sees heaven and earth; but
    when shut, it sees little or nothing. Yet its inherent capacity
    does not change. So divinity does not change its nature, when it
    drops the curtain of humanity before the eyes of the God-man.”

    The divine in Christ, during most of his earthly life, is latent,
    or only now and then present to his consciousness or manifested to
    others. Illustrate from second childhood, where the mind itself
    exists, but is not capable of use; or from first childhood, where
    even a Newton or a Humboldt, if brought back to earth and made to
    occupy an infant body and brain, would develop as an infant, with
    infantile powers. There is more in memory than we can at this
    moment recall,—memory is greater than recollection. There is more
    of us at all times than we know,—only the sudden emergency reveals
    the largeness of our resources of mind and heart and will. The new
    nature, in the regenerate, is greater than it appears: “_Beloved,
    now are we children of God, and it is not yet made manifest what
    we shall be. We, know that, if he shall be manifested, we shall be
    like him_” (_1 John 3:2_). So in Christ there was an ocean-like
    fulness of resource, of which only now and then the Spirit
    permitted the consciousness and the exercise.

    Without denying (with Dorner) the completeness, even from the
    moment of the conception, of the union between the deity and the
    humanity, we may still say with Kahnis: “The human nature of
    Christ, according to the measure of its development, appropriates
    more and more to its conscious use the latent fulness of the
    divine nature.” So we take the middle ground between two opposite
    extremes. On the one hand, the Kenosis was not the extinction of
    the Logos. Nor, on the other hand, did Christ hunger and sleep by
    miracle,—this is Docetism. We must not minimize Christ’s
    humiliation, for this was his glory. There was no limit to his
    descent, except that arising from his sinlessness. His humiliation
    was not merely the giving-up of the appearance of Godhead. Baird,
    Elohim Revealed, 585—“Should any one aim to celebrate the
    condescension of the emperor Charles the Fifth, by dwelling on the
    fact that he laid aside the robes of royalty and assumed the style
    of a subject, and altogether ignore the more important matter that
    he actually became a private person, it would be very weak and
    absurd.” _Cf._ _2 Cor. 8:9_—“_though he was rich, yet for your
    sakes he became poor_” = he beggared himself. _Mat. 27:46_—“_My
    God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?_” = non-exercise of divine
    omniscience.

    Inasmuch, however, as the passage _Phil. 2:6-8_ is the chief basis
    and support of the doctrine of Christ’s humiliation, we here
    subjoin a more detailed examination of it.

    EXPOSITION OF PHILIPPIANS, 2:6-8. The passage reads: “_who,
    existing in the form of God, counted not the being on an equality
    with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the
    form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; and being
    found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, becoming obedient
    even unto death, yea, the death of the cross_.”

    The subject of the sentence is at first (_verses 6, 7_) Christ
    Jesus, regarded as the preëxistent Logos; subsequently (_verse
    8_), this same Christ Jesus, regarded as incarnate. This change in
    the subject is indicated by the contrast between μορφῇ θεοῦ
    (_verse 6_) and μορφὴν δούλου (_verse 7_), as well as by the
    participles λαβών and γενόμενος (_verse 7_) and εύρεθείς (_verse
    8_) It is asserted, then, that the preëxisting Logos, “although
    subsisting in the form of God, did not regard his equality with
    God as a thing to be forcibly retained, but emptied himself by
    taking the form of a servant, (that is,) by being made in the
    likeness of men. And being found in outward condition as a man, he
    (the incarnate son of God, yet further) humbled himself, by
    becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the cross” (_verse
    8_).

    Here notice that what the Logos divested himself of, in becoming
    man, is not the substance of his Godhead, but the “_form of God_”
    in which this substance was manifested. This “_form of God_” can
    be only that independent exercise of the powers and prerogatives
    of Deity which constitutes his “_equality with God_.” This he
    surrenders, in the act of “_taking the form of a servant_”—or
    becoming subordinate, as man. (Here other Scriptures complete the
    view, by their representations of the controlling influence of the
    Holy Spirit in the earthly life of Christ.) The phrases “made in
    the likeness of men” and “found in fashion as a man” are used to
    intimate, not that Jesus Christ was not really man, but that he
    was God as well as man, and therefore free from the sin which
    clings to man (_cf._ _Rom. 8:3_—ἐν ὁμοιώματι σαρκὸς
    ἁμαρτίας—Meyer). Finally, this one person, now God and man united,
    submits himself, consciously and voluntarily, to the humiliation
    of an ignominious death.

    See Lightfoot, on _Phil. 2:8_—“Christ divested himself, not of his
    divine nature, for that was impossible, but of the glories and
    prerogatives of Deity. This he did by taking the form of a
    servant.” Evans, in Presb. Rev., 1883:287—“Two stages in Christ’s
    humiliation, each represented by a finite verb defining the
    central act of the particular stage, accompanied by two modal
    participles. 1st stage indicated in _v. 7_. Its central act is:
    ‘_he emptied himself_.’ Its two modalities are: (1) ‘_taking the
    form of servant_’; (2) ‘_being made in the likeness of men_.’ Here
    we have the humiliation of the Kenosis,—that by which Christ
    _became_ man. 2d stage, indicated in _v. 8_. Its central act is:
    ‘_he humbled himself_.’ Its two modalities are: (1) ‘_being found
    in fashion as a man_’; (2) ‘_becoming obedient unto death, yea,
    the death of the cross_.’ Here we have the humiliation of his
    obedience and death,—that by which, _in_ humanity, he became a
    sacrifice for our sins.”

    Meyer refers _Eph. 5:31_ exclusively to Christ and the church,
    making the completed union future, however, _i. e._, at the time
    of the Parousia. “_For this cause shall a man leave his father and
    mother_” = “in the incarnation, Christ leaves father and mother
    (his seat at the right hand of God), and cleaves to his wife (the
    church), and then the two (the descended Christ and the church)
    become one flesh (one ethical person, as the married pair become
    one by physical union). The Fathers, however, (Jerome, Theodoret,
    Chrysostom), referred it to the incarnation.” On the
    interpretation of _Phil 2:6-11_, see Comm. of Neander, Meyer,
    Lange, Ellicott.

    On the question whether Christ would have become man had there
    been no sin, theologians are divided. Dorner, Martensen, and
    Westcott answer in the affirmative; Robinson, Watts, and Denney in
    the negative. See Dorner, Hist. Doct. Person of Christ, 5:236;
    Martensen, Christian Dogmatics, 327-329; Westcott, Com. on
    Hebrews, page 8—“The Incarnation is in its essence independent of
    the Fall, though conditioned by it as to its circumstances.” _Per
    contra_, see Robinson, Christ. Theol., 219, note—“It would be
    difficult to show that a like method of argument from _a priori_
    premisses will not equally avail to prove sin to have been a
    necessary part of the scheme of creation.” Denney, Studies in
    Theology, 101, objects to the doctrine of necessary incarnation
    irrespective of sin, that it tends to obliterate the distinction
    between nature and grace, to blur the definite outlines of the
    redemption wrought by Christ, as the supreme revelation of God and
    his love. See also Watts, New Apologetic, 198-202; Julius Müller,
    Dogmat. Abhandlungen, 66-126; Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 512-526,
    543-548; Forrest, The Authority of Christ, 340-345. On the general
    subject of the Kenosis of the Logos, see Bruce, Humiliation of
    Christ; Robins, in Bib. Sac., Oct. 1874:615; Philippi,
    Glaubenslehre, 4:138-150, 386-475; Pope, Person of Christ, 23;
    Bodemeyer, Lehre von der Kenosis; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:610-625.


II. The State of Exaltation.


1. The nature of this exaltation.


It consisted essentially in: (_a_) A resumption, on the part of the Logos,
of his independent exercise of divine attributes. (_b_) The withdrawal, on
the part of the Logos, of all limitations in his communication of the
divine fulness to the human nature of Christ. (_c_) The corresponding
exercise, on the part of the human nature, of those powers which belonged
to it by virtue of its union with the divine.


    The eighth Psalm, with its account of the glory of human nature,
    is at present fulfilled only in Christ (see _Heb. 2:9_—“_but we
    behold ... Jesus_”). _Heb. 2:7_—ἠλάττωσας αὐτὸν βραχύ τι παρ᾽
    ἀγγέλους—may be translated, as in the margin of the Rev. Vers.:
    “_Thou madest __ him for a little while lower than the angels._”
    Christ’s human body was not necessarily subject to death; only by
    outward compulsion or voluntary surrender could he die. Hence
    resurrection was a natural necessity (_Acts 2:24_—“_whom God
    raised up, having loosed the pangs of death: because it was not
    possible he should be holden of it_”; _31_—“_neither was he left
    unto Hades, nor did his flesh see corruption_”). This exaltation,
    which then affected humanity only in its head, is to be the
    experience also of the members. Our bodies also are to be
    delivered from the bondage of corruption, and we are to sit with
    Christ upon his throne.


2. The stages of Christ’s exaltation.


(a) The quickening and resurrection.

Both Lutherans and Romanists distinguish between these two, making the
former precede, and the latter follow, Christ’s “preaching to the spirits
in prison.” These views rest upon a misinterpretation of 1 Pet. 3:18-20.
Lutherans teach that Christ descended into hell, to proclaim his triumph
to evil spirits. But this is to give ἐκήρυξεν the unusual sense of
proclaiming his triumph, instead of his gospel. Romanists teach that
Christ entered the underworld to preach to Old Testament saints, that they
might be saved. But the passage speaks only of the disobedient; it cannot
be pressed into the support of a sacramental theory of the salvation of
Old Testament believers. The passage does not assert the descent of Christ
into the world of spirits, but only a work of the preïncarnate Logos in
offering salvation, through Noah, to the world then about to perish.


    Augustine, Ad Euodiam, ep. 99—“The spirits shut up in prison are
    the unbelievers who lived in the time of Noah, whose spirits or
    souls were shut up in the darkness of ignorance as in a prison;
    Christ preached to them, not in the flesh, for he was not yet
    incarnate, but in the spirit, that is, in his divine nature.”
    Calvin taught that Christ descended into the underworld and
    suffered the pains of the lost. But not all Calvinists hold with
    him here; see Princeton Essays, 1:153. Meyer, on _Rom. 10:7_,
    regards the question—“_Who shall descend into the abyss?_ (_that
    is, to bring Christ up from the dead_)”—as an allusion to, and so
    indirectly a proof-text for, Christ’s descent into the underworld.
    Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 211, favors a preaching to the dead:
    “During that time [the three days] he did not return to heaven and
    his Father.” But though _John 20:17_ is referred to for proof, is
    not this statement true only of his body? So far as the soul is
    concerned, Christ can say: “_Father, into thy hands I commend my
    spirit_,” and “_To-day thou shalt be with me in Paradise_” (_Luke
    23:43, 46_).

    Zahn and Dorner best represent the Lutheran view. Zahn, in
    Expositor, March, 1898: 216-223—“If Jesus was truly man, then his
    soul, after it left the body, entered into the fellowship of
    departed spirits.... If Jesus is he who lives forevermore and even
    his dying was his act, this carrying in the realm of the dead
    cannot be thought of as a purely passive condition, but must have
    been known to those who dwelt there..... If Jesus was the Redeemer
    of mankind, the generations of those who had passed away must have
    thus been brought into personal relation to him, his work and his
    kingdom, without waiting for the last day.”

    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:662 (Syst. Doct., 4:127), thinks
    “Christ’s descent into Hades marks a new era of his pneumatic
    life, in which he shows himself free from the limitations of time
    and space.” He rejects “Luther’s notion of a merely triumphal
    progress and proclamation of Christ. Before Christ,” he says,
    “there was no abode peopled by the damned. The descent was an
    application of the benefit of the atonement (implied in
    κηρύσσειν). The work was prophetic, not high-priestly nor kingly.
    Going to the spirits in prison is spoken of as a spontaneous act,
    not one of physical necessity. No power of Hades led him over into
    Hades. Deliverance from the limitations of a mortal body is
    already an indication of a higher stage of existence. Christ’s
    soul is bodiless for a time—πνεῦμα only—as the departed were.

    “The ceasing of this preaching is neither recorded, nor reasonably
    to be supposed,—indeed the ancient church supposed it carried on
    through the apostles. It expresses the universal significance of
    Christ for former generations and for the entire kingdom of the
    dead. No physical power is a limit to him. The gates of hell, or
    Hades, shall not prevail over or against him. The intermediate
    state is one of blessedness for him, and he can admit the penitent
    thief into it. Even those who were not laid hold of by Christ’s
    historic manifestation in this earthly life still must, and may,
    be brought into relation with him, in order to be able to accept
    or to reject him. And thus the universal relation of Christ to
    humanity and the absoluteness of the Christian religion are
    confirmed.” So Dorner, for substance.

    All this _versus_ Strauss, who thought that the dying of vast
    masses of men, before and after Christ, who had not been brought
    into relation to Christ, proves that the Christian religion is not
    necessary to salvation, because not universal. For advocacy of
    Christ’s preaching to the dead, see also Jahrbuch für d. Theol.,
    23:177-228; W. W. Patton, in N. Eng., July, 1882:460-478; John
    Miller, Problems Suggested by the Bible, part 1:93-98; part 2:38;
    Plumptre, The Spirits in Prison; Kendrick, in Bap. Rev., Apl.
    1888; Clemen, Niedergefahren zu den Toten.

    For the opposite view, see “No Preaching to the Dead,” in
    Princeton Rev., March, 1875:197; 1878:451-491; Hovey, in Bap.
    Quar., 4:486 _sq._, and Bib. Eschatology, 97-107; Love, Christ’s
    Preaching to the Spirits in Prison; Cowles, in Bib. Sac.,
    1875:401; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:616-622; Salmond, in Popular
    Commentary; and Johnstone, Com., in loco. So Augustine, Thomas
    Aquinas, and Bishop Pearson. See also E. D. Morris, Is There
    Salvation after Death? and Wright, Relation of Death to Probation,
    22:28—“If Christ preached to spirits in Hades, it may have been to
    demonstrate the _hopelessness_ of adding in the other world to the
    privileges enjoyed in this. We do not read that it had any
    favorable effect upon the hearers. If men will not hear Moses and
    the Prophets, then they will not hear one risen from the dead.
    ‘_Today thou shalt be with me in Paradise_’ (_Luke 23:43_) was not
    comforting, if Christ was going that day to the realm of lost
    spirits. The antediluvians, however, were specially favored with
    Noah’s preaching, and were specially wicked.”

    For full statement of the view presented in the text, that the
    preaching referred to was the preaching of Christ as preëxisting
    Logos to the spirits, now in prison, when once they were
    disobedient in the days of Noah, see Bartlett, in New Englander,
    Oct. 1872: 601 sq., and in Bib. Sac., Apr. 1883:333-373. Before
    giving the substance of Bartlett’s exposition, we transcribe in
    full the passage in question, _1 Pet. 3:18-20_—“_Because Christ
    also suffered for sins once, the righteous for the unrighteous,
    that he might bring us to God; being put to death in the flesh,
    but made alive in the spirit; in which also he went and preached
    unto the spirits in prison, that aforetime were disobedient, when
    the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah._”

    Bartlett expounds as follows: “ ‘_In which_ [πνεύματι, divine
    nature] ‘_he went and preached to the spirits in prison when once
    they disobeyed._’ ἀπειθήσασιν is circumstantial aorist, indicating
    the time of the preaching as a definite past: It is an anarthrous
    dative, as in _Luke 8:27_; _Mat. 8:23_; _Acts 15:25_; _22:17_. It
    is an appositive, or predicative, participle. [That the aorist
    participle does not necessarily describe an action preliminary to
    that of the principal verb appears from its use in _verse 18_
    (θανατωθείς), in _1 Thess. 1:6_ (δεξάμενοι), and in _Col. 2:11,
    13_.] The connection of thought is: Peter exhorts his readers to
    endure suffering bravely, because Christ did so,—in his lower
    nature being put to death, in his higher nature enduring the
    opposition of sinners before the flood. Sinners of that time only
    are mentioned, because this permits an introduction of the
    subsequent reference to baptism. _Cf._ _Gen. 6:3_; _1 Pet. 1:10,
    11_; _2 Pet. 2:4, 5_.”


(_b_) The ascension and sitting at the right hand of God.

As the resurrection proclaimed Christ to men as the perfected and
glorified man, the conqueror of sin and lord of death, the ascension
proclaimed him to the universe as the reinstated God, the possessor of
universal dominion, the omnipresent object of worship and hearer of
prayer. _Dextra Dei ubique est._


    _Mat. 28:18, 20_—“_All authority hath been given unto me in heaven
    and on earth.... lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of
    the world_”; _Mark 16:19_—“_So then the Lord Jesus, after he had
    spoken unto them, was received up into heaven, and sat down at the
    right hand of God_”; _Acts 7:55_—“_But he, being full of the Holy
    Spirit, looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of
    God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God_”; _2 Cor.
    13:4_—“_he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth through
    the power of God_”; _Eph. 1:22, 23_—“_he put all things in
    subjection under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things
    to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth
    all in all_”; _4:10_—“_He that descended is the same also that
    ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all
    things._” Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 4:184-189—“Before the
    resurrection, Christ was the God-_man_; since the resurrection, he
    is the _God_-man.... He ate with his disciples, not to show the
    _quality_, but the _reality_, of his human body.” Nicoll, Life of
    Christ: “It was hard for Elijah to ascend”—it required chariot and
    horses of fire—“but it was easier for Christ to ascend than to
    descend,”—there was a gravitation upwards. Maclaren: “He has not
    left the world, though he has ascended to the Father, any more
    than he left the Father when he came into the world”; _John
    1:18_—“_the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the
    Father_”; _3:13_—“_the Son of man, who is in heaven._”

    We are compelled here to consider the problem of the relation of
    the humanity to the Logos in the state of exaltation. The
    Lutherans maintain the ubiquity of Christ’s human body, and they
    make it the basis of their doctrine of the sacraments. Dorner,
    Glaubenslehre, 2:674-676 (Syst. Doct., 4:138-142), holds to “a
    presence, not simply of the Logos, but of the whole God-man, with
    all his people, but not necessarily likewise a similar presence in
    the world; in other words, his presence is morally conditioned by
    men’s receptivity.” The old theologians said that Christ is not in
    heaven, quasi carcere. Calvin, Institutes, 2:15—he is “incarnate,
    but not incarcerated.” He has gone into heaven, the place of
    spirits, and he manifests himself there; but he has also gone far
    above all heavens, that he may fill all things. He is with his
    people alway. All power is given into his hand. The church is the
    fulness of him that filleth all in all. So the Acts of the
    Apostles speak constantly of the Son of man, of the man Jesus as
    God, ever present, the object of worship, seated at the right hand
    of God, having all the powers and prerogatives of Deity. See
    Westcott, Bible Com., on _John 20:22_—“_he breathed on them, and
    saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit_”—“The characteristic
    effect of the Paschal gift was shown in the new faith by which the
    disciples were gathered into a living society; the characteristic
    effect of the Pentecostal gift was shown in the exercise of
    supremacy potentially universal.”

    Who and what is this Christ who is present with his people when
    they pray? It is not enough to say, He is simply the Holy Spirit;
    for the Holy Spirit is the “_Spirit of Christ_” (_Rom. 8:9_), and
    in having the Holy Spirit we have Christ himself (_John 16:7_—“_I
    will send him_ [the Comforter] _unto you_”; _14:18_—“_I come unto
    you_”). The Christ, who is thus present with us when we pray, is
    not simply the Logos, or the divine nature of Christ,—his humanity
    being separated from the divinity and being localized in heaven.
    This would be inconsistent with his promise, “_Lo, I am with
    you_,” in which the “I” that spoke was not simply Deity, but Deity
    and humanity inseparably united; and it would deny the real and
    indissoluble union of the two natures. The elder brother and
    sympathizing Savior who is with us when we pray is man, as well as
    God. This manhood is therefore ubiquitous by virtue of its union
    with the Godhead.

    But this is not to say that Christ’s human _body_ is everywhere
    present. It would seem that body must exist in spatial relations,
    and be confined to place. We do not know that this is so with
    regard to soul. Heaven would seem to be a place, because Christ’s
    body is there; and a spiritual body is not a body which is spirit,
    but a body which is suited to the uses of the spirit. But even
    though Christ may manifest himself, in a glorified human body,
    only in heaven, his human soul, by virtue of its union with the
    divine nature, can at the same moment be with all his scattered
    people over the whole earth. As, in the days of his flesh, his
    humanity was confined to place, while as to his Deity he could
    speak of the Son of man who is in heaven, so now, although his
    human body may be confined to place, his human soul is ubiquitous.
    Humanity can exist without body; for during the three days in the
    sepulchre, Christ’s body was on earth, but his soul was in the
    other world; and in like manner there is, during the intermediate
    state, a separation of the soul and the body of believers. But
    humanity cannot exist without soul; and if the human Savior is
    with us, then his humanity, at least so far as respects its
    immaterial part, must be everywhere present. _Per contra_, see
    Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:326, 327. Since Christ’s human nature has
    derivatively become possessed of divine attributes, there is no
    validity in the notion of a progressiveness in that nature, now
    that it has ascended to the right hand of God. See Philippi,
    Glaubenslehre, 4:131; Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 558, 576.

    Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:327—“Suppose the presence of the divine
    nature of Christ in the soul of a believer in London. This divine
    nature is at the same moment conjoined with, and present to, and
    modified by, the human nature of Christ, which is in heaven and
    not in London.” So Hooker, Eccl. Pol., 54, 55, and E. G. Robinson:
    “Christ is in heaven at the right hand of the Father, interceding
    for us, while he is present in the church by his Spirit. We pray
    to the theanthropic Jesus. Possession of a human body does not now
    constitute a limitation. We know little of the nature of the
    present body.” We add to this last excellent remark the expression
    of our own conviction that the modern conception of the merely
    relative nature of space, and the idealistic view of matter as
    only the expression of mind and will, have relieved this subject
    of many of its former difficulties. If Christ is omnipresent and
    if his body is simply the manifestation of his soul, then every
    soul may feel the presence of his humanity even now and “_every
    eye_” may “_see him_” at his second coming, even though believers
    may be separated as far as is Boston from Pekin. The body from
    which his glory flashes forth may be visible in ten thousand
    places at the same time; (_Mat. 28:20_; _Rev. 1:7_).



Section IV.—The Offices Of Christ.


The Scriptures represent Christ’s offices as three in number,—prophetic,
priestly, and kingly. Although these terms are derived from concrete human
relations, they express perfectly distinct ideas. The prophet, the priest,
and the king, of the Old Testament, were detached but designed
prefigurations of him who should combine all these various activities in
himself, and should furnish the ideal reality, of which they were the
imperfect symbols.


    _1 Cor. 1:30_—“_of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who was made unto
    us wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification, and
    redemption._” Here “_wisdom_” seems to indicate the prophetic,
    “_righteousness_” (or “_justification_”) the priestly, and
    “_sanctification and redemption_” the kingly work of Christ.
    Denovan: “Three offices are necessary. Christ must be a prophet,
    to save us from the ignorance of sin; a priest, to save us from
    its guilt; a king, to save us from its dominion in our flesh. Our
    faith cannot have firm basis in any one of these alone, any more
    than a stool can stand on less than three legs.” See Van
    Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 583-586; Archer Butler, Sermons, 1:314.

    A. A. Hodge, Popular Lectures, 235—“For ‘office,’ there are two
    words in Latin: _munus_ = position (of Mediator), and _officia_ =
    functions (of Prophet, Priest, and King). They are not separate
    offices, as are those of President, Chief-Justice, and Senator.
    They are not separate functions, capable of successive and
    isolated performance. They are rather like the several functions
    of the one living human body—lungs, heart, brain—functionally
    distinct, yet interdependent, and together constituting one life.
    So the functions of Prophet, Priest, and King mutually imply one
    another: Christ is always a prophetical Priest, and a priestly
    Prophet; and he is always a royal Priest, and a priestly King; and
    together they accomplish one redemption, to which all are equally
    essential. Christ is both μεσίτης and παράκλητος.”


I. The Prophetic Office of Christ.


1. The nature of Christ’s prophetic work.


(_a_) Here we must avoid the narrow interpretation which would make the
prophet a mere foreteller of future events. He was rather an inspired
interpreter or revealer of the divine will, a medium of communication
between God and men (προφήτης = not foreteller, but forteller, or
forth-teller. _Cf._ Gen. 20:7,—of Abraham; Ps. 105:15,—of the patriarchs;
Mat. 11:9,—of John the Baptist; 1 Cor. 12:28, Eph. 2:20, and 3:5,—of N. T.
expounders of Scripture).


    _Gen. 20:7_—“_restore the man’s wife; for he is a prophet_”—spoken
    of Abraham; _Ps. 105:15_—“_Touch not mine anointed ones, And do my
    prophets no harm_”—spoken of the patriarchs; _Mat. 11:9_—“_But
    wherefore went ye out? to see a prophet? Yea, I say into you, and
    much more than a prophet_”—spoken of John the Baptist, from whom
    we have no recorded predictions, and whose pointing to Jesus as
    the “_Lamb of God_” (_John 1:29_) was apparently but an echo of
    _Isaiah 53_. _1 Cor. 12:28_—“_first apostles, secondly prophets_”;
    _Eph. 2:20_—“_built upon the foundation of the apostles and
    prophets_”; _3:5_—“_revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets
    in the Spirit_”—all these latter texts speaking of New Testament
    expounders of Scripture.

    Any organ of divine revelation, or medium of divine communication,
    is a prophet. “Hence,” says Philippi, “the books of Joshua,
    Judges, Samuel, and Kings are called ‘_prophetæ priores_,’ or ‘the
    earlier prophets.’ Bernard’s _Respice, Aspice, Prospice_ describes
    the work of the prophet: for the prophet might see and might
    disclose things in the past, things in the present, or things in
    the future. Daniel was a prophet, in telling Nebuchadnezzar what
    his dream had been, as well as in telling its interpretation
    (_Dan. 2:28, 36_). The woman of Samaria rightly called Christ a
    prophet, when he told her all things that ever she did (_John
    4:29_).” On the work of the prophet, see Stanley, Jewish Church,
    1:491.


(_b_) The prophet commonly united three methods of fulfilling his
office,—those of teaching, predicting, and miracle-working. In all these
respects, Jesus Christ did the work of a prophet (Deut 18:15; _cf._ Acts
3:22; Mat. 13:57; Luke 13:33; John 6:14). He taught (Mat. 5-7), he uttered
predictions (Mat. 24 and 25), he wrought miracles (Mat. 8 and 9), while in
his person, his life, his work, and his death, he revealed the Father
(John 8:26; 14:9; 17:8).


    _Deut. 18:15_—“_Jehovah thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet,
    from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him
    shall ye hearken_”; _cf._ _Acts 3:22_—where this prophecy is said
    to be fulfilled in Christ. Jesus calls himself a prophet in _Mat.
    13:57_—“_A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country,
    and in his own house_”; _Luke 13:33_—“_Nevertheless I must go on
    my way to-day and to-morrow and the day following: for it cannot
    be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem._” He was called a
    prophet: _John 6:14_—“_When therefore the people saw the sign
    which he did, they said, This is of a truth the prophet that
    cometh into the world._” _John 8:26_—“_the things which I heard
    from him_ [the Father], _these speak I unto the world_”;
    _14:9_—“_he that hath seen me hath seen the Father_”; _17:8_—“_the
    words which thou gavest me I have given unto them._”

    Denovan: “Christ teaches us by his word, his Spirit, his example.”
    Christ’s miracles were mainly miracles of healing. “Only sickness
    is contagious with us. But Christ was an example of perfect
    health, and his health was contagious. By its overflow, he healed
    others. Only a ‘_touch_’ (_Mat. 9:21_) was necessary.”

    Edwin P. Parker, on Horace Bushnell: “The two fundamental elements
    of prophecy are insight and expression. Christian prophecy implies
    insight or discernment of spiritual things by divine illumination,
    and expression of them, by inspiration, in terms of Christian
    truth or in the tones and cadences of Christian testimony. We may
    define it, then, as the publication, under the impulse of
    inspiration, and for edification, of truths perceived by divine
    illumination, apprehended by faith, and assimilated by
    experience.... It requires a natural basis and rational
    preparation in the human mind, a suitable stock of natural gifts
    on which to graft the spiritual gift for support and nourishment.
    These gifts have had devout culture. They have been crowned by
    illuminations and inspirations. Because insight gives foresight,
    the prophet will be a seer of things as they are unfolding and
    becoming; will discern far-signalings and intimations of
    Providence; will forerun men to prepare the way for them, and them
    for the way of God’s coming kingdom.”


2. The stages of Christ’s prophetic work.


These are four, namely:

(_a_) The preparatory work of the Logos, in enlightening mankind before
the time of Christ’s advent in the flesh.—All preliminary religious
knowledge, whether within or without the bounds of the chosen people, is
from Christ, the revealer of God.


    Christ’s prophetic work began before he came in the flesh. _John
    1:9_—“_There was the true light, even the light which lighteth
    every man, coming into the world_”—all the natural light of
    conscience, science, philosophy, art, civilization, is the light
    of Christ. Tennyson: “Our little systems have their day, They have
    their day and cease to be; They are but broken lights of thee, And
    thou, O Lord, art more than they.” _Heb. 12:25, 26_—“_See that ye
    refuse not him that speaketh.... whose voice then_ [at Sinai]
    _shook the earth: but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more
    will I make to tremble not the earth only, but also the heaven_”;
    _Luke 11:49_—“_Therefore said the wisdom of God, I will send unto
    them prophets and apostles_”; _cf._ _Mat 23:34_—“_behold, I send
    unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: some of them shall
    ye kill and crucify_”—which shows that Jesus was referring to his
    own teachings, as well as to those of the earlier prophets.


(_b_) The earthly ministry of Christ incarnate.—In his earthly ministry,
Christ showed himself the prophet _par excellence_. While he submitted,
like the Old Testament prophets, to the direction of the Holy Spirit,
unlike them, he found the sources of all knowledge and power within
himself. The word of God did not _come_ to him,—he was _himself_ the Word.


    _Luke 6:19_—“_And all the multitude sought to touch him; for power
    came forth from him, and healed them all_”; _John 2:11_—“_This
    beginning of his signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and
    manifested his glory_”; _8:38, 58_—“_I speak the things which I
    have seen with my Father.... Before Abraham was born, I am_”;
    _cf._ _Jer. 2:1_—“_the word of Jehovah came to me_”; _John
    1:1_—“_In the beginning was the Word._” _Mat. 26:53_—“_twelve
    legions of angels_”; _John 10:18_—of his life: “_I have power to
    lay it down, and I have power to take it again_”; _34_—“_Is it not
    written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he called them gods,
    unto whom the word of God came ... say ye of him, whom the Father
    sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I
    said, I am the Son of God?_” Martensen, Dogmatics, 295-301, says
    of Jesus’ teaching that “its source was not inspiration, but
    incarnation.” Jesus was not inspired,—he was the Inspirer.
    Therefore he is the true “Master of those who know.” His disciples
    act in his name; he acts in his own name.


(_c_) The guidance and teaching of his church on earth, since his
ascension.—Christ’s prophetic activity is continued through the preaching
of his apostles and ministers, and by the enlightening influences of his
Holy Spirit (John 16:12-14; Acts 1:1). The apostles unfolded the germs of
doctrine put into their hands by Christ. The church is, in a derivative
sense, a prophetic institution, established to teach the world by its
preaching and its ordinances. But Christians are prophets, only as being
proclaimers of Christ’s teaching (Num. 11:29; Joel 2:28).


    _John 16:12-14_—“_I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
    cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is
    come, he shall guide you into all the truth.... He shall glorify
    me: for he shall take of mine and shall declare it unto you_”;
    _Acts 1:1_—“_The former treatise I made, O Theophilus, concerning
    all that Jesus began both to do and to teach_”—Christ’s prophetic
    work was only _begun_, during his earthly ministry; it is
    continued since his ascension. The inspiration of the apostles,
    the illumination of all preachers and Christians to understand and
    to unfold the meaning of the word they wrote, the conviction of
    sinners, and the sanctification of believers,—all these are parts
    of Christ’s prophetic work, performed through the Holy Spirit.

    By virtue of their union with Christ and participation in Christ’s
    Spirit, all Christians are made in a secondary sense prophets, as
    well as priests and kings. _Num. 11:29_—“_Would that all Jehovah’s
    people were prophets, that Jehovah would put his Spirit upon
    them_”; _Joel 2:28_—“_I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh;
    and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy._” All modern
    prophecy that is true, however, is but the republication of
    Christ’s message—the proclamation and expounding of truth already
    revealed in Scripture. “All so-called new prophecy, from Montanus
    to Swedenborg, proves its own falsity by its lack of attesting
    miracles.”

    A. A. Hodge, Popular Lectures, 242—“Every human prophet
    presupposes an infinite eternal divine Prophet from whom his
    knowledge is received, just as every stream presupposes a fountain
    from which it flows.... As the telescope of highest power takes
    into its field the narrowest segment of the sky, so Christ the
    prophet sometimes gives the intensest insight into the glowing
    centre of the heavenly world to those whom this world regards as
    unlearned and foolish, and the church recognizes as only babes in
    Christ.”


(_d_) Christ’s final revelation of the Father to his saints in glory (John
16:25; 17:24, 26; _cf._ Is. 64:4; 1 Cor. 13:12).—Thus Christ’s prophetic
work will be an endless one, as the Father whom he reveals is infinite.


    _John 16:25_—“_the hour cometh, when I shall no more speak unto
    you in dark sayings, but shall tell you plainly of the Father_”;
    _17:24_—“_I desire that where I am, they also may be with me; that
    they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me_”; _26_—“_I
    made known unto them thy name, and will make it known._” The
    revelation of his own glory will be the revelation of the Father,
    in the Son. _Is. 64:4_—“_For from of old men have not heard, nor
    perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen a God besides
    thee, who worketh for him that waiteth for him_”; _1 Cor.
    13:12_—“_now we see in a mirror, darkly; but then face to face:
    now I know in part; but then shall I know fully even as also I was
    fully known._” _Rev. 21:23_—“_And the city hath no need of the
    sun, neither of the moon, to shine upon it: for the glory of God
    did lighten it, and the lamp thereof is the Lamb_”—not light, but
    lamp. Light is something generally diffused; one sees _by_ it, but
    one cannot see _it_. Lamp is the narrowing down, the
    concentrating, the focusing of light, so that the light becomes
    definite and visible. So in heaven Christ will be the visible God.
    We shall never see the Father separate from Christ. No man or
    angel has at any time seen God, “_whom no man hath seen, nor can
    see._” “_The only begotten Son ... he hath declared him,_” and he
    will forever declare him (_John 1:18_; _1 Tim. 6:16_).

    The ministers of the gospel in modern times, so far as they are
    joined to Christ and possessed by his spirit, have a right to call
    themselves prophets. The prophet is one—1. sent by God and
    conscious of his mission; 2. with a message from God which he is
    under compulsion to deliver; 3. a message grounded in the truth of
    the past, setting it in new lights for the present, and making new
    applications of it for the future. The word of the Lord must come
    to him; it must be his gospel; there must be things new as well as
    old. All mathematics are in the simplest axiom; but it needs
    divine illumination to discover them. All truth was in Jesus’
    words, nay, in the first prophecy uttered after the Fall, but only
    the apostles brought it out. The prophet’s message must be 4. a
    message for the place and time—primarily for contemporaries and
    present needs; 5. a message of eternal significance and worldwide
    influence. As the prophet’s word was for the whole world, so our
    word may be for other worlds, that _“__unto the principalities and
    the powers in the heavenly places might be made known through the
    church the manifold wisdom of God__”__ (Eph. 3:10)_. It must be
    also 6. a message of the kingdom and triumph of Christ, which puts
    over against the distractions and calamities of the present time
    the glowing ideal and the perfect consummation to which God is
    leading his people: “_Blessed be the glory of Jehovah from his
    place_”; “_Jehovah is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep
    silence before him_” (_Ez. 3:12; Hab. 2:20_). On the whole subject
    of Christ’s prophetic office, see Philippi, Glaubenslehre, IV,
    2:24-27; Bruce, Humiliation of Christ, 320-330; Shedd, Dogm.
    Theol., 2:366-370.


II. The Priestly Office of Christ.


The priest was a person divinely appointed to transact with God on man’s
behalf. He fulfilled his office, first by offering sacrifice, and secondly
by making intercession. In both these respects Christ is priest.


    _Hebrews 7:24-28_—“_he, because he abideth forever, hath his
    priesthood unchangeable. Wherefore also he is able to save to the
    uttermost them that draw near unto God through him, seeing he ever
    liveth to make intercession for them. For such a high priest
    became us, holy, guileless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and
    made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, like these
    high priests, to offer up sacrifices, first for his own sins, and
    then for the sins of the people: for this he did once for all,
    when he offered up himself. For the law appointeth men high
    priests, having infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was
    after the law, appointeth a Son, perfected for evermore._” The
    whole race was shut out from God by its sin. But God chose the
    Israelites as a priestly nation, Levi as a priestly tribe, Aaron
    as a priestly family, the high priest out of this family as type
    of the great high priest, Jesus Christ. J. S. Candlish, in Bib.
    World, Feb. 1897:87-97, cites the following facts with regard to
    our Lord’s sufferings as proofs of the doctrine of atonement: 1.
    Christ gave up his life by a perfectly free act; 2. out of regard
    to God his Father and obedience to his will; 3. the bitterest
    element of his suffering was that he endured it at the hand of
    God; 4. this divine appointment and infliction of suffering is
    inexplicable, except as Christ endured the divine judgment against
    the sin of the race.


1. Christ’s Sacrificial Work, or the Doctrine of the Atonement.


The Scriptures teach that Christ obeyed and suffered in our stead, to
satisfy an immanent demand of the divine holiness, and thus remove an
obstacle in the divine mind to the pardon and restoration of the guilty.
This statement may be expanded and explained in a preliminary way as
follows:—

(_a_) The fundamental attribute of God is holiness, and holiness is not
self-communicating love, but self-affirming righteousness. Holiness limits
and conditions love, for love can will happiness only as happiness results
from or consists with righteousness, that is, with conformity to God.


    We have shown in our discussion of the divine attributes (vol. 1,
    pages 268-275) that holiness is neither self-love nor love, but
    self-affirming purity and right. Those who maintain that love is
    self-affirming as well as self-communicating, and therefore that
    holiness is God’s love for himself, must still admit that this
    self-affirming love which is holiness conditions and furnishes the
    standard for the self-communicating love which is benevolence. But
    we hold that holiness is not identical with, nor a manifestation
    of, love. Since self-maintenance must precede self-impartation;
    and since benevolence finds its object, motive, standard, and
    limit in righteousness, holiness, the self-affirming attribute,
    can in no way be resolved into love, the self-communicating. God
    must first maintain his own being before he can give to another;
    and this self-maintenance must have its reason and motive in the
    worth of that which is maintained. Holiness cannot be love,
    because love is irrational and capricious except as it has a
    standard by which it is regulated, and this standard cannot be
    itself love, but must be holiness. To make holiness a form of love
    is really to deny its existence, and with this to deny that any
    atonement is necessary for man’s salvation.


(_b_) The universe is a reflection of God, and Christ the Logos is its
life. God has constituted the universe, and humanity as a part of it, so
as to express his holiness, positively by connecting happiness with
righteousness, negatively by attaching unhappiness or suffering to sin.


    We have seen, in vol. I, pages 109, 309-311, 335-338, that since
    Christ is the Logos, the immanent God, God revealed in nature, in
    humanity, and in redemption, the universe must be recognized as
    created, upheld and governed by the same Being who in the course
    of history was manifest in human form and who made atonement for
    human sin by his death on Calvary. As all God’s creative activity
    has been exercised through Christ (vol. I, page 310), so it is
    Christ in whom all things consist or are held together (vol. I,
    page 311). Providence, as well as preservation, is his work. He
    makes the universe to reflect God, and especially God’s ethical
    nature. That pain or loss universally and inevitably follow sin is
    the proof that God is unalterably opposed to moral evil; and the
    demands and reproaches of conscience witness that holiness is the
    fundamental attribute of God’s being.


(_c_) Christ the Logos, as the Revealer of God in the universe and in
humanity, must condemn sin by visiting upon it the suffering which is its
penalty; while at the same time, as the Life of humanity, he must endure
the reaction of God’s holiness against sin which constitutes that penalty.


    Here is a double work of Christ which Paul distinctly declares in
    _Rom. 8:3_—“_For what the law could not do, in that it was weak
    through the flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of
    sinful flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh._” The
    meaning is that God did through Christ what the law could not do,
    namely, accomplish deliverance for humanity; and did this by
    sending his son in a nature which in us is identified with sin. In
    connection with sin (περὶ ἁμαρτίας), and as an offering for sin,
    God condemned sin, by condemning Christ. Expositor’s Greek
    Testament, _in loco_: “When the question is asked, In what sense
    did God send his Son ‘in connection with sin’, there is only one
    answer possible. He sent him to expiate sin by his sacrificial
    death. This is the centre and foundation of Paul’s gospel; see
    _Rom. 3:25_ _sq._” But whatever God did in condemning sin he did
    through Christ; “_God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
    himself_” (_2 Cor. 5:19_); Christ was the condemner, as well as
    the condemned; conscience in us, which unites the accuser and the
    accused, shows us how Christ could be both the Judge and the
    Sin-bearer.


(_d_) Our personality is not self-contained. We live, move, and have our
being naturally in Christ the Logos. Our reason, affection, conscience,
and will are complete only in him. He is generic humanity, of which we are
the offshoots. When his righteousness condemns sin, and his love
voluntarily endures the suffering which is sin’s penalty, humanity
ratifies the judgment of God, makes full propitiation for sin, and
satisfies the demands of holiness.


    My personal existence is grounded in God. I cannot perceive the
    world outside of me nor recognize the existence of my fellow men,
    except as he bridges the gulf between me and the universe.
    Complete self-consciousness would be impossible if we did not
    partake of the universal Reason. The smallest child makes
    assumptions and uses processes of logic which are all instinctive,
    but which indicate the working in him of an absolute and infinite
    Intelligence. True love is possible only as God’s love flows into
    us and takes possession of us; so that the poet can truly say:
    “Our loves in higher love endure.” No human will is truly free,
    unless God emancipates it; only he whom the Son of God makes free
    is free indeed; “_work out your own salvation with fear and
    trembling; for it is God who worketh in you both to will and to
    work_” (_Phil. 2:12, 13_). Our moral nature, even more than our
    intellectual nature, witnesses that we are not sufficient to
    ourselves, but are complete only in him in whom we live and move
    and have our being (_Col. 2:10_; _Acts 17:28_). No man can make a
    conscience for himself. There is a common conscience, over and
    above the finite and individual conscience. That common conscience
    is one in all moral beings. John Watson: “There is no
    consciousness of self apart from the consciousness of other selves
    and things, and no consciousness of the world apart from the
    consciousness of the single Reality presupposed in both.” This
    single Reality is Jesus Christ, the manifested God, the Light that
    lighteth every man, and the Life of all that lives (_John 1:4,
    9_). He can represent humanity before God, because his immanent
    Deity constitutes the very essence of humanity.


(_e_) While Christ’s love explains his willingness to endure suffering for
us, only his holiness furnishes the reason for that constitution of the
universe and of human nature which makes this suffering necessary. As
respects us, his sufferings are substitutionary, since his divinity and
his sinlessness enable him to do for us what we could never do for
ourselves. Yet this substitution is also a sharing—not the work of one
external to us, but of one who is the life of humanity, the soul of our
soul and the life of our life, and so responsible with us for the sins of
the race.


    Most of the recent treatises on the Atonement have been
    descriptions of the effects of the Atonement upon life and
    character, but have thrown no light upon the Atonement itself, if
    indeed they have not denied its existence. We must not emphasize
    the effects by ignoring the cause. Scripture declares the ultimate
    aim of the Atonement to be that God “_might himself be just_”
    (_Rom. 3:26_); and no theory of the atonement will meet the
    demands of reason or conscience that does not ground its necessity
    in God’s righteousness, rather than in his love. We acknowledge
    that our conceptions of atonement have suffered some change. To
    our fathers the atonement was a mere historical fact, a sacrifice
    offered in a few brief hours upon the Cross. It was a literal
    substitution of Christ’s suffering for ours, the payment of our
    debt by another, and upon the ground of that payment we are
    permitted to go free. Those sufferings were soon over, and the
    hymn, “Love’s Redeeming Work is Done,” expressed the believer’s
    joy in a finished redemption. And all this is true. But it is only
    a part of the truth. The atonement, like every other doctrine of
    Christianity, is a fact of life; and such facts of life cannot be
    crowded into our definitions, because they are greater than any
    definitions that we can frame. We must add to the idea of
    _substitution_ the idea of _sharing_. Christ’s doing and suffering
    is not that of one external and foreign to us. He is bone of our
    bone, and flesh of our flesh; the bearer of our humanity; yes, the
    very life of the race.


(_f_) The historical work of the incarnate Christ is not itself the
atonement,—it is rather the revelation of the atonement. The suffering of
the incarnate Christ is the manifestation in space and time of the eternal
suffering of God on account of human sin. Yet without the historical work
which was finished on Calvary, the age-long suffering of God could never
have been made comprehensible to men.


    The life that Christ lived in Palestine and the death that he
    endured on Calvary were the revelation of a union with mankind
    which antedated the Fall. Being thus joined to us from the
    beginning, he has suffered in all human sin; “_in all our
    affliction he has been afflicted_” (_Is. 63:9_); so that the
    Psalmist can say: “_Blessed be the Lord, who daily beareth our
    burden, even the God who is our salvation_” (_Ps. 68:19_). The
    historical sacrifice was a burning-glass which focused the
    diffused rays of the Sun of righteousness and made them effective
    in the melting of human hearts. The sufferings of Christ take
    deepest hold upon us only when we see in them the two contrasted
    but complementary truths: that holiness must make penalty to
    follow sin, and that love must share that penalty with the
    transgressor. The Cross was the concrete exhibition of the
    holiness that required, and of the love that provided, man’s
    redemption. Those six hours of pain could never have procured our
    salvation if they had not been a revelation of eternal facts in
    the being of God. The heart of God and the meaning of all previous
    history were then unveiled. The whole evolution of humanity was
    there depicted in its essential elements, on the one hand the sin
    and condemnation of the race, on the other hand the grace and
    suffering of him who was its life and salvation. As he who hung
    upon the cross was God, manifest in the flesh, so the suffering of
    the cross was God’s suffering for sin, manifest in the flesh. The
    imputation of our sins to him is the result of his natural union
    with us. He has been our substitute from the beginning. We cannot
    quarrel with the doctrine of substitution when we see that this
    substitution is but the sharing of our griefs and sorrows by him
    whose very life pulsates in our veins. See A. H. Strong, Christ in
    Creation, 78-80, 177-180.


(_g_) The historical sacrifice of our Lord is not only the final
revelation of the heart of God, but also the manifestation of the law of
universal life—the law that sin brings suffering to all connected with it,
and that we can overcome sin in ourselves and in the world only by
entering into the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings and Christ’s victory,
or, in other words, only by union with him through faith.


    We too are subject to the same law of life. We who enter into
    fellowship with our Lord “_fill up ... that which is lacking of
    the afflictions of Christ ... for his body’s sake, which is the
    church_” (_Col. 1:24_). The Christian Church can reign with Christ
    only as it partakes in his suffering. The atonement becomes a
    model and stimulus to self-sacrifice, and a test of Christian
    character. But it is easy to see how the subjective effect of
    Christ’s sacrifice may absorb the attention, to the exclusion of
    its ground and cause. The moral influence of the atonement has
    taken deep hold upon our minds, and we are in danger of forgetting
    that it is the holiness of God, and not the salvation of men, that
    primarily requires it. When sharing excludes substitution; when
    reconciliation of man to God excludes reconciliation of God to
    man; when the only peace secured is peace in the sinner’s heart
    and no thought is given to that peace with God which it is the
    first object of the atonement to secure; then the whole
    evangelical system is weakened, God’s righteousness is ignored,
    and man is practically put in place of God. We must not go back to
    the old mechanical and arbitrary conceptions of the atonement,—we
    must go forward to a more vital apprehension of the relation of
    the race to Christ. A larger knowledge of Christ, the life of
    humanity, will enable us to hold fast the objective nature of the
    atonement, and its necessity as grounded in the holiness of God;
    while at the same time we appropriate all that is good in the
    modern view of the atonement, as the final demonstration of God’s
    constraining love which moves men to repentance and submission.
    See A. H. Strong, Cleveland Address, 1904:16-18; Dinsmore, The
    Atonement in Literature and in Life, 213-250.


A. Scripture Methods of Representing the Atonement.


We may classify the Scripture representations according as they conform to
moral, commercial, legal or sacrificial analogies.

(_a_) MORAL.—The atonement is described as

A _provision originating in God’s love_, and manifesting this love to the
universe; but also as an _example of disinterested love_, to secure our
deliverance from selfishness.—In these latter passages, Christ’s death is
referred to as a source of moral stimulus to men.


    _A provision_: _John 3:16_—“_For God so loved the world, that he
    gave his only begotten Son_”; _Rom. 5:8_—“_God commendeth his own
    love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died
    for us_”; _1 John 4:9_—“_Herein was the love of God manifested in
    us, that God hath sent his only begotten Son into the world that
    we might live through him_”; _Heb. 2:9_—“_Jesus, because of the
    suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace
    of God he should taste of death for every man_”—redemption
    originated in the love of the Father, as well as in that of the
    Son.—_An example_: _Luke 9:22-24_—“_The Son of man must suffer ...
    and be killed.... If any man would come after me, let him ... take
    up his cross daily, and follow me ... whosoever shall lose his
    life for my sake, the same shall save it_”; _2 Cor. 5:15_—“_he
    died for all, that they that live should no longer live unto
    themselves_”; _Gal. 1:4_—“_gave himself for our sins, that he
    might deliver us out of this present __ evil world_”; _Eph.
    5:25-27_—“_Christ also loved the church, and gave himself up for
    it; that he might sanctify it_”; _Col. 1:22_—“_reconciled in the
    body of his flesh through death, to present you holy_”; _Titus
    2:14_—“_gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
    iniquity, and purify_”; _1 Pet. 2:21-24_—“_Christ also suffered
    for you, leaving you an example, that ye should follow his steps:
    who did no sin ... who his own self bare our sins in his body upon
    the tree, that we, having died unto sins, might live unto
    righteousness._” Mason, Faith of the Gospel, 181—“A pious
    cottager, on hearing the text, ‘_God so loved the world_,’
    exclaimed: ‘Ah, that _was_ love! I could have given myself, but I
    could never have given my son.’ ” There was a wounding of the
    Father through the heart of the Son: “_they shall look unto me
    whom they have pierced; and they shall mourn for him, as one
    mourneth for his only son_” (_Zech. 12:10_).


(b) COMMERCIAL.—The atonement is described as

A _ransom_, paid to free us from the bondage of sin (note in these
passages the use of ἀντί, the preposition of price, bargain, exchange).—In
these passages, Christ’s death is represented as the price of our
deliverance from sin and death.


    _Mat. 20:28, and Mark 10:45_—“_to give his life a ransom for
    many_”—λύτρον ἀντὶ πολλῶν. _1 Tim. 2:6_—“_who gave himself a
    ransom for all_”—ἀντίλυτρον. Ἀντί (“_for_,” in the sense of
    “instead of”) is never confounded with ὑπέρ (“_for_,” in the sense
    of “in behalf of,” “for the benefit of”). Ἀντί is the preposition
    of price, bargain, exchange; and this signification is traceable
    in every passage where it occurs in the N. T. See _Mat.
    2:22_—“_Archelaus was reigning over Judea in the room of_ [ἀντί]
    _his father Herod_”; _Luke 11:11_—“_shall his son ask ... a fish,
    and he for_ [ἀντί] _a fish give him a serpent?_” _Heb.
    12:2_—“_Jesus the author and perfecter of our faith, who for_
    [ἀντί = as the price of] _the joy that was set before him endured
    the cross_”; _16_—“_Esau, who for_ [ἀντί = in exchange for] _one
    mess of meat sold his own birthright._” See also _Mat.
    16:26_—“_what shall a man give in exchange for_ (ἀντάλλαγμα) _his
    life_” = how shall he buy it back, when once he has lost it?
    Ἀντίλυτρον = substitutionary ransom. The connection in _1 Tim.
    2:6_ requires that ὑπέρ should mean “instead of.” We should
    interpret this ὑπέρ by the ἀντί in _Mat. 20:28_. “Something befell
    Christ, and by reason of that, the same thing need not befall
    sinners” (E. Y. Mullins).

    Meyer, on _Mat. 20:28_—“_to give his life a ransom for many_”—“The
    ψυχή is conceived of as λύτρον, a ransom, for, through the
    shedding of the blood, it becomes the τιμή (price) of redemption.”
    See also _1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23_—“_ye were bought with a price_”; and
    _2 Pet. 2:1_—“_denying even the Master that bought them._” The
    word “redemption,” indeed, means simply “repurchase,” or “the
    state of being repurchased”—_i. e._, delivered by the payment of a
    price. _Rev. 5:9_—“_thou wast slain, and didst purchase unto God
    with thy blood men of every tribe._” Winer, N. T. Grammar, 258—“In
    Greek, ἀντί is the preposition of price.” Buttmann, N. T. Grammar,
    321—“In the signification of the preposition ἀντί (instead of,
    for), no deviation occurs from ordinary usage.” See Grimm’s Wilke,
    Lexicon Græco-Lat.: “ἀντί, _in vicem_, _anstatt_”; Thayer, Lexicon
    N. T.—“ἀντί, of that for which anything is given, received,
    endured; ... of the price of sale (or purchase) _Mat. 20:28_”;
    also Cremer, N. T. Lex., on ἀντάλλαγμα.

    Pfleiderer, in New World, Sept. 1899, doubts whether Jesus ever
    really uttered the words “_give his life a ransom for many_”
    (_Mat. 20:28_). He regards them as essentially Pauline, and the
    result of later dogmatic reflection on the death of Jesus as a
    means of redemption. So Paine, Evolution of Trinitarianism,
    377-381. But these words occur not in Luke, the Pauline gospel,
    but in Matthew, which is much earlier. They represent at any rate
    the apostolic conception of Jesus’ teaching, a conception which
    Jesus himself promised should be formed under the guidance of the
    Holy Spirit, who should bring all things to the remembrance of his
    apostles and should guide them into all the truth (_John 14:26_;
    _16:13_). As will be seen below, Pfleiderer declares the Pauline
    doctrine to be that of substitutionary suffering.


(_c_) LEGAL.—The atonement is described as

An act of _obedience_ to the law which sinners had violated; a _penalty_,
borne in order to rescue the guilty; and an _exhibition_ of God’s
righteousness, necessary to the vindication of his procedure in the pardon
and restoration of sinners.—In these passages the death of Christ is
represented as demanded by God’s law and government.


    _Obedience_: _Gal. 4:4, 5_—“_born of a woman, born under the law,
    that he might redeem them that were under the law_”; _Mat.
    3:15_—“_thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness_”—Christ’s
    baptism prefigured his death, and was a consecration to death;
    _cf._ _Mark 10:38_—“_Are ye able to drink the cup that I drink? or
    to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?_” _Luke
    12:50_—“_I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I
    straitened till it be accomplished!_” _Mat. 26:39_—“_My Father, if
    it be possible, let this cup pass away from me: nevertheless, not
    as I will, but as thou wilt_”; _5:17_—“_Think not that I came to
    destroy the law or the prophets: I came not to destroy, but to
    fulfil_”; _Phil. 2:8_—“_becoming obedient even unto death_”; _Rom.
    5:19_—“_through the obedience of the one shall the many be made
    righteous_”; _10:4_—“_Christ is the end of the law unto
    righteousness to every one that believeth._”—_Penalty_: _Rom.
    4:25_—“_who was delivered up for our trespasses, and was raised
    for our justification_”; _8:3_—“_God, sending his own Son in the
    likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the
    flesh_”; _2 Cor. 5:21_—“_Him who knew no sin he made to be sin on
    our behalf_”—here “_sin_”—a sinner, an accursed one (Meyer); _Gal.
    1:4_—“_gave himself for our sins_”; _3:13_—“_Christ redeemed us
    from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us; for it is
    written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree_”; _cf._ _Deut
    21:23_—“_he that is hanged is accursed of God._” _Heb.
    9:28_—“_Christ also, having been once offered to bear the sins of
    many_”; _cf._ _Lev. 5:17_—“_if any one sin ... yet is he guilty,
    and shall bear his iniquity_”; _Num. 14:34_—“_for every day a
    year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty years_”; _Lam.
    5:7_—“_Our fathers sinned and are not; And we have borne their
    iniquities._”—_Exhibition_: _Rom. 3:25, 26_—“_whom God set forth
    to be a propitiation, through faith, in his blood, to show his
    righteousness because of the passing over of the sins done
    aforetime, in the forbearance of God_”; _cf._ _Heb. 9:15_—“_a
    death having taken place for the redemption of the transgressions
    that were under the first covenant._”

    On these passages, see an excellent section in Pfleiderer, Die
    Ritschl’sche Theologie, 38-53. Pfleiderer severely criticizes
    Ritschl’s evasion of their natural force and declares Paul’s
    teaching to be that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
    law by suffering as a substitute the death threatened by the law
    against sinners. So Orelli Cone, Paul, 261. On the other hand, L.
    L. Paine, Evolution of Trinitarianism, 288-307, chapter on the New
    Christian Atonement, holds that Christ taught only reconciliation
    on condition of repentance. Paul added the idea of mediation drawn
    from the Platonic dualism of Philo. The Epistle to the Hebrews
    made Christ a sacrificial victim to propitiate God, so that the
    reconciliation became Godward instead of manward. But Professor
    Paine’s view that Paul taught an Arian Mediatorship is incorrect.
    “_God was in Christ_” (_2 Cor. 5:19_) and God “_manifested in the
    flesh_” (_1 Tim. 3:16_) are the keynote of Paul’s teaching, and
    this is identical with John’s doctrine of the Logos: “_the Word
    was God_,” and “_the Word became flesh_” (_John 1:1, 14_)

    The Outlook, December 15, 1900, in criticizing Prof. Paine, states
    three postulates of the New Trinitarianism as: 1. The essential
    kinship of God and man,—in man there is an essential divineness,
    in God there is an essential humanness. 2. The divine
    immanence,—this universal presence gives nature its physical
    unity, and humanity its moral unity. This is not pantheism, any
    more than the presence of man’s spirit in all he thinks and does
    proves that man’s spirit is only the sum of his experiences. 3.
    God transcends all phenomena,—though in all, he is greater than
    all. He entered perfectly into one man, and through this
    indwelling in one man he is gradually entering into all men and
    filling all men with his fulness, so that Christ will be the
    first-born among many brethren. The defects of this view, which
    contains many elements of truth, are: 1. That it regards Christ as
    the product instead of the Producer, the divinely formed man
    instead of the humanly acting God, the head man among men instead
    of the Creator and Life of humanity; 2. That it therefore renders
    impossible any divine bearing of the sins of all men by Jesus
    Christ, and substitutes for it such a histrionic exhibition of
    God’s feeling and such a beauty of example as are possible within
    the limits of human nature,—in other words, there is no real Deity
    of Christ and no objective atonement.


(d) SACRIFICIAL.—The atonement is described as

A work of _priestly mediation_, which reconciles God to men,—notice here
that the term “reconciliation” has its usual sense of removing enmity, not
from the offending, but from the offended party;—a _sin-offering_,
presented on behalf of transgressors;—a _propitiation_, which satisfies
the demands of violated holiness;—and a _substitution_, of Christ’s
obedience and sufferings for ours.—These passages, taken together, show
that Christ’s death is demanded by God’s attribute of justice, or
holiness, if sinners are to be saved.


    _Priestly mediation_: _Heb. 9:11, 12_—“_Christ having come a high
    priest, ... nor yet through the blood of goats and calves, but
    through his own blood, entered in once for all into the holy
    place, having obtained eternal redemption_”; _Rom. 5:10_—“_while
    we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of
    his Son_”; _2 Cor. 5:18, 19_—“_all things are of God, who
    reconciled us to himself through Christ.... God was in Christ
    reconciling the world unto himself, not reckoning unto them their
    trespasses_”; _Eph. 2:16_—“_might reconcile them both in one body
    unto God through the cross, having slain the enmity thereby_”;
    _cf._ _12, 13, 19_—“_strangers from the covenants of the
    promise.... far off.... no more strangers and sojourners, but ye
    are fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of
    God_”; _Col. 1:20_—“_through him to reconcile all things unto
    himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross._”

    On all these passages, see Meyer, who shows the meaning of the
    apostle to be, that “we were ‘_enemies_,’ not actively, as hostile
    to God, but passively, as those with whom God was angry.” The
    epistle to the Romans begins with the revelation of wrath against
    Gentile and Jew alike (_Rom. 1:18_). “_While we were enemies_”
    (_Rom. 5:10_)—“when God was hostile to us.” “Reconciliation” is
    therefore the removal of God’s wrath toward man. Meyer, on this
    last passage, says that Christ’s death does not remove man’s wrath
    toward God [this is not the work of Christ, but of the Holy
    Spirit]. The offender reconciles the person offended, not himself.
    See Denney, Com. on _Rom. 5:9-11_, in Expositor’s Gk. Test.

    _Cf._ _Num. 25:13_, where Phinehas, by slaying Zimri, is said to
    have “_made atonement for the children of Israel_.” Surely, the
    “_atonement_” here cannot be a reconciliation of _Israel_. The
    action terminates, not on the subject, but on the object—God. So,
    _1 Sam. 29:4_—“_wherewith should this fellow reconcile himself
    unto his lord? should it not be with the heads of these men?_”
    _Mat. 5:23, 24_—“_If therefore thou art offering thy gift at the
    altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught against
    thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first
    be reconciled to thy brother_ [_i. e._, remove his enmity, not
    thine own], _and then come and offer thy gift._” See Shedd, Dogm.
    Theol., 2:387-398.

    Pfleiderer, Die Ritschl’sche Theologie, 42—“Ἐχθροὶ ὄντες (_Rom.
    5:10_) = not the active disposition of enmity to God on our part,
    but our passive condition under the enmity or wrath of God.” Paul
    was not the author of this doctrine,—he claims that he received it
    from Christ himself (_Gal. 1:12_). Simon, Reconciliation, 167—“The
    idea that only man needs to be reconciled arises from a false
    conception of the unchangeableness of God. But God would be
    unjust, if his relation to man were the same after his sin as it
    was before.” The old hymn expressed the truth: “My God is
    reconciled; His pardoning voice I hear; He owns me for his child;
    I can no longer fear; With filial trust I now draw nigh, And
    ‘Father, Abba, Father’ cry.”

    _A sin-offering_: _John 1:29_—“_Behold, the Lamb of God, that
    taketh away the sin of the world_”—here αἴρων means to take away
    by taking or bearing; to take, and so take away. It is an allusion
    to the sin-offering of _Isaiah 53:6-12_—“_when thou shalt make his
    soul an offering for sin ... as a lamb that is led to the
    slaughter ... Jehovah hath laid on him the iniquity of us all._”
    _Mat. 26:28_—“_this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured
    out for many unto remission of sins_”; _cf._ _Ps. 50:5_—“_made a
    covenant with me by sacrifice._” _1 John 1:7_—“_the blood of Jesus
    his Son cleanseth us from all sin_”—not sanctification, but
    justification; _1 Cor. 5:7_—“_our passover also hath been
    sacrificed, even Christ_”; _cf._ _Deut. 16:2-6_—“_thou shalt
    sacrifice the passover unto Jehovah thy God._” _Eph. 5:2_—“_gave
    himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for an odor
    of a sweet smell_” (see Com. of Salmond, in Expositor’s Greek
    Testament); _Heb. 9:14_—“_the blood of Christ, who through the
    eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish unto God_”; _22,
    26_—“_apart from shedding of blood there is no remission.... now
    once in the end of the ages hath he been manifested to put away
    sin by the sacrifice of himself_”; _1 Pet. 1:18, 19_—“_redeemed
    ... with precious blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without
    spot, even the blood of Christ._” See Expos. Gk. Test., on _Eph.
    1:7_.

    Lowrie, Doctrine of St. John, 35, points out that _John
    6:52-59_—“_eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood_”—is Christ’s
    reference to his death in terms of _sacrifice_. So, as we shall
    see below, it is a _propitiation_ (_1 John 2:2_). We therefore
    strongly object to the statement of Wilson, Gospel of Atonement,
    64—“Christ’s death is a sacrifice, if sacrifice means the crowning
    instance of that suffering of the innocent for the guilty which
    springs from the solidarity of mankind; but there is no thought of
    substitution or expiation.” Wilson forgets that this necessity of
    suffering arises from God’s righteousness; that without this
    suffering man cannot be saved; that Christ endures what we, on
    account of the insensibility of sin, cannot feel or endure; that
    this suffering takes the place of ours, so that we are saved
    thereby. Wilson holds that the Incarnation _constituted_ the
    Atonement, and that all thought of expiation may be eliminated.
    Henry B. Smith far better summed up the gospel in the words:
    “Incarnation in order to Atonement.” We regard as still better the
    words: “Incarnation in order to reveal the Atonement.”

    _A propitiation_: _Rom. 3:25, 26_—“_whom God set forth to be a
    propitiation, ... in his blood ... that he might himself be just,
    and the justifier of him that hath faith in Jesus._” A full and
    critical exposition of this passage will be found under the
    Ethical Theory of the Atonement, pages 750-760. Here it is
    sufficient to say that it shows: (1) that Christ’s death is a
    propitiatory sacrifice; (2) that its first and main effect is upon
    God; (3) that the particular attribute in God which demands the
    atonement is his justice, or holiness; (4) that the satisfaction
    of this holiness is the necessary condition of God’s justifying
    the believer.

    Compare _Luke 18:13_, marg.—“_God, be thou merciful unto me the
    sinner_”; lit.: “_God be propitiated toward me the sinner_”—by the
    sacrifice, whose smoke was ascending before the publican, even
    while he prayed. _Heb. 2:17_—“_a merciful and faithful high priest
    in things pertaining to God, to make propitiation for the sins of
    the people_”; _1 John 2:2_—“_and he is the propitiation for our
    sins; and not for ours only, but also for the whole world_”;
    _4:10_—“_Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved
    us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins_”; _cf._
    _Gen. 32:20_, LXX.—“_I will appease_ [ἐξιλάσομαι, “propitiate”]
    _him with the present that goeth before me_”; _Prov. 16:14_,
    LXX.—“_The wrath of a king is as messengers of death; but a wise
    man will pacify it_” [ἐξιλάσεται, “propitiate it”].

    On propitiation, see Foster, Christian Life and Theology,
    216—“Something was thereby done which rendered God inclined to
    pardon the sinner. God is made inclined to forgive sinners by the
    sacrifice, because his righteousness was exhibited by the
    infliction of the penalty of sin; but not because he needed to be
    inclined in heart to love the sinner or to exercise his mercy. In
    fact, it was he himself who ‘_set forth_’ Jesus as ‘_a
    propitiation_’ (_Rom. 3:25, 26_).” Paul never merges the objective
    atonement in its subjective effects, although no writer of the New
    Testament has more fully recognized these subjective effects. With
    him Christ for us upon the Cross is the necessary preparation for
    Christ _in_ us by his Spirit. Gould, Bib. Theol. N. T., 74, 75,
    89, 172, unwarrantably contrasts Paul’s representation of Christ
    as priest with what he calls the representation of Christ as
    prophet in the Epistle to the Hebrews: “The priest says: Man’s
    return to God is not enough,—there must be an expiation of man’s
    sin. This is Paul’s doctrine. The prophet says: There never was a
    divine provision for sacrifice. Man’s return to God is the thing
    wanted. But this return must be completed. Jesus is the perfect
    prophet who gives us an example of restored obedience, and who
    comes in to perfect man’s imperfect work. This is the doctrine of
    the Epistle to the Hebrews.” This recognition of expiation in
    Paul’s teaching, together with denial of its validity and
    interpretation of the Epistle to the Hebrews as prophetic rather
    than priestly, is a curiosity of modern exegesis.

    Lyman Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 107-127, goes still
    further and affirms: “In the N. T. God is never said to be
    propitiated, nor is it ever said that Jesus Christ propitiates God
    or satisfies God’s wrath.” Yet Dr. Abbott adds that in the N. T.
    God is represented as self-propitiated: “Christianity is
    distinguished from paganism by representing God as appeasing his
    own wrath and satisfying his own justice by the forth-putting of
    his own love.” This self-propitiation however must not be thought
    of as a bearing of penalty: “Nowhere in the O. T. is the idea of a
    sacrifice coupled with the idea of penalty,—it is always coupled
    with purification—‘_with his stripes we are healed_’ (_Is. 53:5_).
    And in the N. T., ‘_the Lamb of God ... taketh away the sin of the
    world_’ (_John 1:29_); ‘_the blood of Jesus ... cleanseth_’ (_1
    John 1:7_).... What humanity needs is not the removal of the
    penalty, but removal of the sin.” This seems to us a distinct
    contradiction of both Paul and John, with whom propitiation is an
    essential of Christian doctrine (see _Rom. 3:25_; _1 John 2:2_),
    while we grant that the propitiation is made, not by sinful man,
    but by God himself in the person of his Son. See George B. Gow, on
    The Place of Expiation in Human Redemption, Am. Jour. Theol.,
    1900:734-756.

    _A substitution_: _Luke 22:37_—“_he was reckoned with
    transgressors_”; _cf._ _Lev. 16:21, 22_—“_and Aaron shall lay both
    his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all
    the iniquities of the children of Israel ... he shall put them
    upon the head of the goat ... and the goat shall bear upon him all
    their iniquities unto a solitary land_”; _Is. 53:5, 6_—“_he was
    wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities;
    the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes
    we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned
    every one to his own way; and Jehovah hath laid on him the
    iniquity of us all._” _John 10:11_—“_the good shepherd layeth down
    his life for the sheep_”; _Rom. 5:6-8_—“_while we were yet weak,
    in due season Christ died for the ungodly. For scarcely for a
    righteous man will one die: for peradventure for the good man some
    one would even dare to die. But God commendeth his own love toward
    us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us_”; _1
    Pet. 3:18_—“_Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for
    the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God._”

    To these texts we must add all those mentioned under (_b_) above,
    in which Christ’s death is described as a ransom. Besides Meyer’s
    comment, there quoted, on _Mat. 20:28_—“_to give his life a ransom
    for many,_” λύτρον ἀντὶ πολλῶν—Meyer also says: “ἀντί denotes
    substitution. That which is given as a ransom takes the place of,
    is given instead of, those who are to be set free in consideration
    thereof. Ἀντί can only be understood in the sense of substitution
    in the act of which the ransom is presented as an equivalent, to
    secure the deliverance of those on whose behalf the ransom is
    paid,—a view which is only confirmed by the fact that, in other
    parts of the N. T., this ransom is usually spoken of as an
    expiatory sacrifice. That which they [those for whom the ransom is
    paid] are redeemed from, is the eternal ἀπώλεια in which, as
    having the wrath of God abiding upon them, they would remain
    imprisoned, as in a state of hopeless bondage, unless the guilt of
    their sins were expiated.”

    Cremer, N. T. Lex., says that “in both the N. T. texts, _Mat.
    16:26_ and _Mark 8:37_, the word ἀντάλλαγμα, like λύτρον, is akin
    to the conception of atonement: _cf._ _Is. 43:3, 4_; _51:11_;
    _Amos 5:12_. This is a confirmation of the fact that satisfaction
    and substitution essentially belong to the idea of atonement.”
    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:515 (Syst. Doct., 3:414)—“_Mat. 20:28_
    contains the thought of a substitution. While the whole world is
    not of equal worth with the soul, and could not purchase it,
    Christ’s death and work are so valuable, that they can serve as a
    ransom.”

    The sufferings of the righteous were recognized in Rabbinical
    Judaism as having a substitutionary significance for the sins of
    others; see Weber, Altsynagog. Palestin. Theologie, 314; Schürer,
    Geschichte des jüdischen Volkes, 2:466 (translation, div. II, vol.
    2:186). But Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:225-262, says this idea of
    vicarious satisfaction was an addition of Paul to the teaching of
    Jesus. Wendt grants that both Paul and John taught substitution,
    but he denies that Jesus did. He claims that ἀντί in _Mat. 20:28_
    means simply that Jesus gave his life as a means whereby he
    obtains the deliverance of many. But this interpretation is a
    non-natural one, and violates linguistic usage. It holds that Paul
    and John misunderstood or misrepresented the words of our Lord. We
    prefer the frank acknowledgment by Pfleiderer that Jesus, as well
    as Paul and John, taught substitution, but that neither one of
    them was correct. Colestock, on Substitution as a Stage in
    Theological Thought, similarly holds that the idea of substitution
    must be abandoned. We grant that the idea of substitution needs to
    be supplemented by the idea of sharing, and so relieved of its
    external and mechanical implications, but that to abandon the
    conception itself is to abandon faith in the evangelists and in
    Jesus himself.

    Dr. W. N. Clarke, in his Christian Theology, rejects the doctrine
    of retribution for sin, and denies the possibility of penal
    suffering for another. A proper view of penalty, and of Christ’s
    vital connection with humanity, would make these rejected ideas
    not only credible but inevitable. Dr. Alvah Hovey reviews Dr.
    Clarke’s Theology, Am. Jour. Theology, Jan. 1899:205—“If we do not
    import into the endurance of penalty some degree of sinful feeling
    or volition, there is no ground for denying that a holy being may
    bear it in place of a sinner. For nothing but wrong-doing, or
    approval of wrong-doing, is impossible to a holy being. Indeed,
    for one to bear for another the just penalty of his sin, provided
    that other may thereby be saved from it and made a friend of God,
    is perhaps the highest conceivable function of love or good-will.”
    Denney, Studies, 126, 127, shows that “substitution means simply
    that man is dependent for his acceptance with God upon something
    which Christ has done for him, and which he could never have done
    and never needs to do for himself.... The forfeiting of his free
    life has freed our forfeited lives. This substitution can be
    preached, and it binds men to Christ by making them forever
    dependent on him. The condemnation of our sins in Christ upon his
    cross is the barb on the hook,—without it your bait will be taken,
    but you will not catch men; you will not annihilate pride, and
    make Christ the Alpha and Omega in man’s redemption.” On the
    Scripture proofs, see Crawford, Atonement, 1:1-193; Dale,
    Atonement, 65-256; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, iv. 2:243-342;
    Smeaton, Our Lord’s and the Apostles’ Doctrine of Atonement.


An examination of the passages referred to shows that, while the forms in
which the atoning work of Christ is described are in part derived from
moral, commercial, and legal relations, the prevailing language is that of
sacrifice. A correct view of the atonement must therefore be grounded upon
a proper interpretation of the institution of sacrifice, especially as
found in the Mosaic system.


    The question is sometimes asked: Why is there so little in Jesus’
    own words about atonement? Dr. R. W. Dale replies: Because Christ
    did not come to preach the gospel,—he came that there might be a
    gospel to preach. The Cross had to be endured, before it could be
    explained. Jesus came to be the sacrifice, not to _speak_ about
    it. But his reticence is just what he told us we should find in
    his words. He proclaimed their incompleteness, and referred us to
    a subsequent Teacher—the Holy Spirit. The testimony of the Holy
    Spirit we have in the words of the apostles. We must remember that
    the gospels were supplementary to the epistles, not the epistles
    to the gospels. The gospels merely fill out our knowledge of
    Christ. It is not for the Redeemer to magnify the cost of
    salvation, but for the redeemed. “None of the ransomed ever knew.”
    The doer of a great deed has the least to say about it.

    Harnack: “There is an inner law which compels the sinner to look
    upon God as a wrathful Judge.... Yet no other feeling is
    possible.” We regard this confession as a demonstration of the
    psychological correctness of Paul’s doctrine of a vicarious
    atonement. Human nature has been so constituted by God that it
    reflects the demand of his holiness. That conscience needs to be
    appeased is proof that God needs to be appeased. When Whiton
    declares that propitiation is offered only to our conscience,
    which is the wrath of that which is of God within us, and that
    Christ bore our sins, not in substitution for us, but in
    fellowship with us, to rouse our consciences to hatred of them, he
    forgets that God is not only immanent in the conscience but also
    transcendent, and that the verdicts of conscience are only
    indications of the higher verdicts of God: _1 John 3:20_—“_if our
    heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knoweth all
    things._” Lyman Abbott, Theology of an Evolutionist, 57—“A people
    half emancipated from the paganism that imagines that God must be
    placated by sacrifice before he can forgive sins gave to the
    sacrificial system that Israel had borrowed from paganism the same
    divine authority which they gave to those revolutionary elements
    in the system which were destined eventually to sweep it entirely
    out of existence.” So Bowne, Atonement, 74—“The essential moral
    fact is that, if God is to forgive unrighteous men, some way must
    be found of making them righteous. The difficulty is not forensic,
    but moral.” Both Abbott and Bowne regard righteousness as a mere
    form of benevolence, and the atonement as only a means to a
    utilitarian end, namely, the restoration and happiness of the
    creature. A more correct view of God’s righteousness as the
    fundamental attribute of his being, as inwrought into the
    constitution of the universe, and as infallibly connecting
    suffering with sin, would have led these writers to see a divine
    wisdom and inspiration in the institution of sacrifice, and a
    divine necessity that God should suffer if man is to go free.


B. The Institution of Sacrifice, more especially as found in the Mosaic
system.


(_a_) We may dismiss as untenable, on the one hand, the theory that
sacrifice is essentially the presentation of a gift (Hofmann,
Baring-Gould) or a feast (Spencer) to the Deity; and on the other hand the
theory that sacrifice is a symbol of renewed fellowship (Keil), or of the
grateful offering to God of the whole life and being of the worshiper
(Bähr). Neither of these theories can explain the fact that the sacrifice
is a bloody offering, involving the suffering and death of the victim, and
brought, not by the simply grateful, but by the conscience-stricken soul.


    For the views of sacrifice here mentioned, see Hofmann,
    Schriftbeweis, II, 1:214-294; Baring-Gould, Origin and Devel. of
    Relig. Belief, 368-390; Spencer, De Legibus Hebræorum; Keil, Bib.
    Archäologie, sec. 43, 47; Bähr, Symbolik des Mosaischen Cultus,
    2:196, 269; also synopsis of Bähr’s view, in Bib. Sac., Oct.
    1870:593; Jan. 1871:171. _Per contra_, see Crawford, Atonement,
    228-240; Lange, Introd. to Com. on Exodus, 38—“The heathen change
    God’s symbols into myths (rationalism), as the Jews change God’s
    sacrifices into meritorious service (ritualism).” Westcott,
    Hebrews, 281-294, seems to hold with Spencer that sacrifice is
    essentially a feast made as an offering to God. So Philo: “God
    receives the faithful offerer to his own table, giving him back
    part of the sacrifice.” Compare with this the ghosts in Homer’s
    Odyssey, who receive strength from drinking the blood of the
    sacrifices. Bähr’s view is only half of the truth. Reunion
    presupposes Expiation. Lyttleton, in Lux Mundi, 281—“The sinner
    must first expiate his sin by suffering,—then only can he give to
    God the life thus purified by an expiatory death.” Jahn, Bib.
    Archæology, sec. 373, 378—“It is of the very idea of the sacrifice
    that the victim shall be presented directly to God, and in the
    presentation shall be destroyed.” Bowne, Philos. of Theism, 253,
    speaks of the delicate feeling of the Biblical critic who, with
    his mouth full of beef or mutton, professes to be shocked at the
    cruelty to animals involved in the temple sacrifices. Lord Bacon:
    “Hieroglyphics came before letters, and parables before
    arguments.” “The old dispensation was God’s great parable to man.
    The Theocracy was graven all over with divine hieroglyphics. Does
    there exist the Rosetta stone by which we can read these
    hieroglyphics? The shadows, that have been shortening up into
    definiteness of outline, pass away and vanish utterly under the
    full meridian splendor of the Sun of Righteousness.” On _Eph.
    1:7_—“_the blood of Christ,_” as an expiatory sacrifice which
    secures our justification, see Salmond, in Expositor’s Greek
    Testament.


(_b_) The true import of the sacrifice, as is abundantly evident from both
heathen and Jewish sources, embraced three elements,—first, that of
satisfaction to offended Deity, or propitiation offered to violated
holiness; secondly, that of substitution of suffering and death on the
part of the innocent, for the deserved punishment of the guilty; and,
thirdly, community of life between the offerer and the victim. Combining
these three ideas, we have as the total import of the sacrifice:
Satisfaction by substitution, and substitution by incorporation. The
bloody sacrifice among the heathen expressed the consciousness that sin
involves guilt; that guilt exposes man to the righteous wrath of God; that
without expiation of that guilt there is no forgiveness; and that through
the suffering of another who shares his life the sinner may expiate his
sin.


    Luthardt, Compendium der Dogmatik, 170, quotes from Nägelsbach,
    Nachhomerische Theologie, 338 _sq._—“The essence of punishment is
    retribution (Vergeltung), and retribution is a fundamental law of
    the world-order. In retribution lies the atoning power of
    punishment. This consciousness that the nature of sin demands
    retribution, in other words, this certainty that there is in Deity
    a righteousness that punishes sin, taken in connection with the
    consciousness of personal transgression, awakens the longing for
    atonement,”—which is expressed in the sacrifice of a slaughtered
    beast. The Greeks recognized representative expiation, not only in
    the sacrifice of beasts, but in human sacrifices. See examples in
    Tyler, Theol. Gk. Poets, 196, 197, 245-253; see also Virgil,
    Æneid, 5:815—“Unum pro multis dabitur caput”; Ovid, Fasti, vi—“Cor
    pro corde, precor; pro fibris sumite fibras. Hanc animam vobis pro
    meliore damus.”

    Stahl, Christliche Philosophie, 146—“Every unperverted conscience
    declares the eternal law of righteousness that punishment shall
    follow inevitably on sin. In the moral realm, there is another way
    of satisfying righteousness—that of atonement. This differs from
    punishment in its effect, that is, reconciliation,—the moral
    authority asserting itself, not by the destruction of the
    offender, but by taking him up into itself and uniting itself to
    him. But the offender cannot offer his own sacrifice,—that must be
    done by the priest.” In the Prometheus Bound, of Æschylus, Hermes
    says to Prometheus: “Hope not for an end to such oppression, until
    a god appears as thy substitute in torment, ready to descend for
    thee into the unillumined realm of Hades and the dark abyss of
    Tartarus.” And this is done by Chiron, the wisest and most just of
    the Centaurs, the son of Chronos, sacrificing himself for
    Prometheus, while Hercules kills the eagle at his breast and so
    delivers him from torment. This legend of Æschylus is almost a
    prediction of the true Redeemer. See article on Sacrifice, by
    Paterson, in Hastings, Bible Dictionary.

    Westcott, Hebrews, 282, maintains that the idea of expiatory
    offerings, answering to the consciousness of sin, does not belong
    to the early religion of Greece. We reply that Homer’s Iliad, in
    its first book, describes just such an expiatory offering made to
    Phœbus Apollo, so turning away his wrath and causing the plague
    that wastes the Greeks to cease. E. G. Robinson held that there is
    “no evidence that the Jews had any idea of the efficacy of
    sacrifice for the expiation of moral guilt.” But in approaching
    either the tabernacle or the temple the altar always presented
    itself before the laver. H. Clay Trumbull, S. S. Times, Nov. 30,
    1901:801—“The Passover was not a passing by of the houses of
    Israelites, but a passing over or crossing over by Jehovah to
    enter the homes of those who would welcome him and who had entered
    into covenant with him by sacrifice. The Oriental sovereign was
    accompanied by his executioner, who entered to smite the
    first-born of the house only when there was no covenanting at the
    door.” We regard this explanation as substituting an incidental
    result and effect of sacrifice for the sacrifice itself. This
    always had in it the idea of reparation for wrong-doing by
    substitutionary suffering.

    Curtis, Primitive Semitic Religion of To-day, on the Significance
    of Sacrifice, 218-237, tells us that he went to Palestine
    prepossessed by Robertson Smith’s explanation that sacrifice was a
    feast symbolizing friendly communion between man and his God. He
    came to the conclusion that the sacrificial meal was not the
    primary element, but that there was a substitutionary value in the
    offering. Gift and feast are not excluded; but these are sequences
    and incidentals. Misfortune is evidence of sin; sin needs to be
    expiated; the anger of God needs to be removed. The sacrifice
    consisted principally in the shedding of the blood of the victim.
    The “bursting forth of the blood” satisfied and bought off the
    Deity. George Adam Smith on _Isaiah 53_ (2:364)—“Innocent as he
    is, he gives his life as a satisfaction to the divine law for the
    guilt of his people. His death was no mere martyrdom or
    miscarriage of human justice: in God’s intent and purpose, but
    also by its own voluntary offering, it was an expiatory sacrifice.
    There is no exegete but agrees to this. 353—The substitution of
    the servant of Jehovah for the guilty people and the redemptive
    force of that substitution are no arbitrary doctrine.”

    _Satisfaction_ means simply that there is a principle in God’s
    being which not simply refuses sin passively, but also opposes it
    actively. The judge, if he be upright, must repel a bribe with
    indignation, and the pure woman must flame out in anger against an
    infamous proposal. R. W. Emerson: “Your goodness must have some
    edge to it,—else it is none.” But the judge and the woman do not
    enjoy this repelling,—they suffer rather. So God’s satisfaction is
    no gloating over the pain or loss which he is compelled to
    inflict. God has a wrath which is calm, judicial, inevitable—the
    natural reaction of holiness against unholiness. Christ suffers
    both as one with the inflicter and as one with those on whom
    punishment is inflicted: “_For Christ also pleased not himself;
    but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee
    fell on me_” (_Rom. 15:3_; _cf._ _Ps. 69:9_).


(_c_) In considering the exact purport and efficacy of the Mosaic
sacrifices, we must distinguish between their theocratical, and their
spiritual, offices. They were, on the one hand, the appointed means
whereby the offender could be restored to the outward place and
privileges, as member of the theocracy, which he had forfeited by neglect
or transgression; and they accomplished this purpose irrespectively of the
temper and spirit with which they were offered. On the other hand, they
were symbolic of the vicarious sufferings and death of Christ, and
obtained forgiveness and acceptance with God only as they were offered in
true penitence, and with faith in God’s method of salvation.


    _Heb. 9:13, 14_—“_For if the blood of goats and bulls, and the
    ashes of a heifer sprinkling them that have been defiled, sanctify
    unto the cleanness of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of
    Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without
    blemish unto God, cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve
    the living God?_” _10:3, 4_—“_But in those sacrifices there is a
    remembrance made of sins year by year. For it is impossible that
    the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins._” Christ’s
    death also, like the O. T. sacrifices, works temporal benefit even
    to those who have no faith; see pages 771, 772.

    Robertson, Early Religion of Israel, 441, 448, answers the
    contention of the higher critics that, in the days of Isaiah,
    Micah, Hosea, Jeremiah, no Levitical code existed; that these
    prophets expressed disapproval of the whole sacrificial system, as
    a thing of mere human device and destitute of divine sanction. But
    the Book of the Covenant surely existed in their day, with its
    command: “_An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me, and shalt
    sacrifice thereon thy burnt-offerings_” (_Ex. 20:24_). Or, if it
    is maintained that Isaiah condemned even that early piece of
    legislation, it proves too much, for it would make the prophet
    also condemn the Sabbath as a piece of will-worship, and even
    reject prayer as displeasing to God, since in the same connection
    he says: “_new moon and Sabbath ... I cannot away with ... when ye
    spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you_” (_Is.
    1:13-15_). Isaiah was condemning simply _heartless_ sacrifice;
    else we make him condemn all that went on at the temple. _Micah
    6:8_—“_what doth Jehovah require of thee, but to do justly?_” This
    does not exclude the offering of sacrifice, for Micah anticipates
    the time when “_the mountain of Jehovah’s house shall be
    established on the top of the mountains, ... And many nations
    shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of
    Jehovah_” (_Micah 4:1, 2_). _Hos. 6:6_—“_I desire goodness, and
    not sacrifice,_” is interpreted by what follows, “_and the
    knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings_.” Compare _Prov. 8:10;
    17:12_; and Samuel’s words: “_to obey is better than sacrifice_”
    (_1 Sam. 15:22_). What was the altar from which Isaiah drew his
    description of God’s theophany and from which was taken the live
    coal that touched his lips and prepared him to be a prophet? (_Is.
    6:1-8). Jer. 7:22_—“_I spake not ... concerning burnt-offerings or
    sacrifices ... but this thing ... Hearken unto my voice._”
    Jeremiah insists only on the worthlessness of sacrifice where
    there is no heart.


(_d_) Thus the Old Testament sacrifices, when rightly offered, involved a
consciousness of sin on the part of the worshiper, the bringing of a
victim to atone for the sin, the laying of the hand of the offerer upon
the victim’s head, the confession of sin by the offerer, the slaying of
the beast, the sprinkling or pouring-out of the blood upon the altar, and
the consequent forgiveness of the sin and acceptance of the worshiper. The
sin-offering and the scape-goat of the great day of atonement symbolized
yet more distinctly the two elementary ideas of sacrifice, namely,
satisfaction and substitution, together with the consequent removal of
guilt from those on whose behalf the sacrifice was offered.


    _Lev. 1:4_—“_And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the
    burnt-offering; and it shall be accepted for him, to make
    atonement for him_”; _4:20_—“_Thus shall he do with the bullock;
    as he did with the bullock of the sin-offering, so shall he do
    with this; and the priest shall make atonement for them, and they
    shall be forgiven_”; so _31_ and _35_—“_and the priest shall make
    atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned, and he
    shall be forgiven_”; so _5:10, 16_; _6:7_. _Lev. 17:11_—“_For the
    life of the flesh is in the blood; and I have given it to you upon
    the altar to make atonement for your souls: for it is the blood
    that maketh atonement by reason of the life._”

    The patriarchal sacrifices were sin-offerings, as the sacrifice of
    Job for his friends witnesses: _Job 42:7-9_—“_My wrath is kindled
    against thee_ [Eliphaz] _... therefore, take unto you seven
    bullocks ... and offer up for yourselves a burnt-offering_”; _cf._
    _33:24_—“_Then God is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him
    from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom_”; _1:5_—Job
    offered burnt-offerings for his sons, for he said, “_It may be
    that my sons have sinned, and renounced God in their hearts_”;
    _Gen. 8:20_—Noah “_offered burnt-offerings on the altar_”;
    _21_—“_and Jehovah smelled the sweet savor; and Jehovah said in
    his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man’s
    sake._”

    That vicarious suffering is intended in all these sacrifices, is
    plain from _Lev. 16:1-34_—the account of the sin-offering and the
    scape-goat of the great day of atonement, the full meaning of
    which we give below; also from _Gen. 22:13_—“_Abraham went and
    took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt-offering in the stead
    of his son_”; _Ex. 32:30-32_—where Moses says: “_Ye have sinned a
    great sin: and now I will go up unto Jehovah; peradventure I shall
    make atonement for your sin. And Moses returned unto Jehovah, and
    said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them
    gods of gold. Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin—; and if
    not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast
    written._” See also _Deut. 21:1-9_—the expiation of an uncertain
    murder, by the sacrifice of a heifer,—where Oehler, O. T.
    Theology, 1:389, says: “Evidently the punishment of death incurred
    by the manslayer is executed symbolically upon the heifer.” In
    _Is. 53:1-12_—“_All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned
    every one to his own way; and Jehovah hath laid on him the
    iniquity of us all ... stripes ... offering for sin_”—the ideas of
    both satisfaction and substitution are still more plain.

    Wallace, Representative Responsibility: “The animals offered in
    sacrifice must be animals brought into direct relation to man,
    subject to him, his property. They could not be spoils of the
    chase. They must bear the mark and impress of humanity. Upon the
    sacrifice human hands must be laid—the hands of the offerer and
    the hands of the priest. The offering is the substitute of the
    offerer. The priest is the substitute of the offerer. The priest
    and the sacrifice were _one symbol_. [Hence, in the new
    dispensation, the priest and the sacrifice are one—both are found
    in Christ.] The high priest must enter the holy of holies with his
    own finger dipped in blood: the blood must be in contact with his
    own person,—another indication of the identification of the two.
    Life is nourished and sustained by life. All life lower than man
    may be sacrificed for the good of man. The blood must be spilled
    on the ground. ‘_In the blood is the life._’ The life is reserved
    by God. It is given _for_ man, but not _to_ him. Life for life is
    the law of the creation. So the life of Christ, also, for _our_
    life.—Adam was originally priest of the family and of the race.
    But he lost his representative character by the one act of
    disobedience, and his redemption was that of the individual, not
    that of the race. The race ceased to have a representative. The
    subjects of the divine government were henceforth to be, not the
    natural offspring of Adam as such, but the redeemed. That the body
    and the blood are both required, indicates the demand that the
    death should be by a violence that sheds blood. The sacrifices
    showed forth, not Christ himself [his character, his life], but
    Christ’s death.”

    This following is a tentative scheme of the JEWISH SACRIFICES. The
    general reason for sacrifice is expressed in _Lev. 17:11_ (quoted
    above). I. _For the individual_: 1. The sin-offering = sacrifice
    to expiate sins of ignorance (thoughtlessness and plausible
    temptation): _Lev. 4:14, 20, 31_. 2. The trespass-offering =
    sacrifice to expiate sins of omission: _Lev. 5:5, 6_. 3. The
    burnt-offering = sacrifice to expiate general sinfulness: _Lev.
    1:3_ (the offering of Mary, _Luke 2:24_). II. _For the family_:
    The Passover: _Ex. 12:27_. III. _For the people_: 1. The daily
    morning and evening sacrifice: _Ex. 29:38-46_. 2. The offering of
    the great day of atonement: _Lev. 16:6-10_. In this last, two
    victims were employed, one to represent the means—death, and the
    other to represent the result—forgiveness. One victim could not
    represent both the atonement—by shedding of blood, and the
    justification—by putting away sin.

    Jesus died for our sins at the Passover feast and at the hour of
    daily sacrifice. McLaren, in S. S. Times, Nov. 30,
    1901:801—“Shedding of blood and consequent safety were only a part
    of the teaching of the Passover. There is a double identification
    of the person offering with his sacrifice: first, in that he
    offers it as his representative, laying his hand on its head, or
    otherwise transferring his personality, as it were, to it; and
    secondly, in that, receiving it back again from God to whom he
    gave it, he feeds on it, so making it part of his life and
    nourishing himself thereby: ‘_My flesh ... which I will give ...
    for the life of the world ... he that eateth me, he also shall
    live because of me_’ (_John 6:51, 57_).”

    Chambers, in Presb. and Ref. Rev., Jan. 1892:22-34—On the great
    day of atonement “the double offering—one for Jehovah and the
    other for Azazel—typified not only the removing of the guilt of
    the people, but its transfer to the odious and detestable being
    who was the first cause of its existence,” _i. e._, Satan.
    Lidgett, Spir. Principle of the Atonement, 112, 113—“It was not
    the punishment which the goat bore away into the wilderness, for
    the idea of punishment is not directly associated with the
    scapegoat. It bears the sin—the whole unfaithfulness of the
    community which had defiled the holy places—out from them, so that
    henceforth they may be pure.... The sin-offering—representing the
    sinner by receiving the burden of his sin—makes expiation by
    yielding up and yielding back its life to God, under conditions
    which represent at once the wrath and the placability of God.”

    On the Jewish sacrifices, see Fairbairn, Typology, 1:209-223;
    Wünsche, Die Leiden des Messias; Jukes, O. T. Sacrifices; Smeaton,
    Apostle’s Doctrine of Atonement, 25-53; Kurtz, Sacrificial Worship
    of O. T., 120; Bible Com., 1:502-508, and Introd. to Leviticus;
    Candlish on Atonement, 123-142; Weber, Vom Zorne Gottes, 161-180.
    On passages in Leviticus, see Com. of Knobel, in Exeg. Handb. d.
    Alt. Test.


(_e_) It is not essential to this view to maintain that a formal divine
institution of the rite of sacrifice, at man’s expulsion from Eden, can be
proved from Scripture. Like the family and the state, sacrifice may,
without such formal inculcation, possess divine sanction, and be ordained
of God. The well-nigh universal prevalence of sacrifice, however, together
with the fact that its nature, as a bloody offering, seems to preclude
man’s own invention of it, combines with certain Scripture intimations to
favor the view that it was a primitive divine appointment. From the time
of Moses, there can be no question as to its divine authority.


    Compare the origin of prayer and worship, for which we find no
    formal divine injunctions at the beginnings of history. _Heb.
    11:4_—“_By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice
    than Cain, through which he had witness borne to him that he was
    righteous, God bearing witness in respect of his gifts_”—here it
    may be argued that since Abel’s faith was not presumption, it must
    have had some injunction and promise of God to base itself upon.
    _Gen. 4:3, 4_—“_Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an
    offering unto Jehovah. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings
    of his flock and of the fat thereof. And Jehovah had respect unto
    Abel and to his offering: but unto Cain and to his offering he had
    not respect._”

    It has been urged, in corroboration of this view, that the
    previous existence of sacrifice is intimated in _Gen. 3:21_—“_And
    Jehovah God made for Adam and for his wife coats of skins, and
    clothed them._” Since the killing of animals for food was not
    permitted until long afterwards (_Gen. 9:3_—to Noah: “_Every
    moving thing that liveth shall be food for you_”), the inference
    has been drawn, that the skins with which God clothed our first
    parents were the skins of animals slain for sacrifice,—this
    clothing furnishing a type of the righteousness of Christ which
    secures our restoration to God’s favor, as the death of the
    victims furnished a type of the suffering of Christ which secures
    for us remission of punishment. We must regard this, however, as a
    pleasing and possibly correct hypothesis, rather than as a
    demonstrated truth of Scripture. Since the unperverted instincts
    of human nature are an expression of God’s will, Abel’s faith may
    have consisted in trusting these, rather than the promptings of
    selfishness and self-righteousness. The death of animals in
    sacrifice, like the death of Christ which it signified, was only
    the hastening of what belonged to them because of their connection
    with human sin. Faith recognized this connection. On the divine
    appointment of sacrifice, see Park, in Bib. Sac., Jan.
    1876:102-132. Westcott, Hebrews, 281—“There is no reason to think
    that sacrifice was instituted in obedience to a direct
    revelation.... It is mentioned in Scripture at first as natural
    and known. It was practically universal in prechristian times....
    In due time the popular practice of sacrifice was regulated by
    revelation as disciplinary, and also used as a vehicle for typical
    teaching.” We prefer to say that sacrifice probably originated in
    a fundamental instinct of humanity, and was therefore a divine
    ordinance as much as were marriage and government.

    On _Gen. 4:3, 4_, see C. H. M.—“The entire difference between Cain
    and Abel lay, not in their natures, but in their sacrifices. Cain
    brought to God the sin-stained fruit of a cursed earth. Here was
    no recognition of the fact that he was a sinner, condemned to
    death. All his toil could not satisfy God’s holiness, or remove
    the penalty. But Abel recognized his sin, condemnation,
    helplessness, death, and brought the bloody sacrifice—the
    sacrifice of another—the sacrifice provided by God, to meet the
    claims of God. He found a substitute, and he presented it in
    faith—the faith that looks away from self to Christ, or God’s
    appointed way of salvation. The difference was not in their
    persons, but in their gifts. Of Abel it is said, that God ‘_bore
    witness in respect of his gifts_’ (_Heb. 11:4_). To Cain it is
    said, ‘_if thou doest well_ (LXX.: ὀρθῶς προσενένκης—_if thou
    offerest correctly_) _shalt thou not be accepted?_’ But Cain
    desired to get away from God and from God’s way, and to lose
    himself in the world. This is ‘_the way of Cain_’ (_Jude 11_).”
    _Per contra_, see Crawford, Atonement, 259—“Both in Levitical and
    patriarchal times, we have no formal institution of sacrifice, but
    the regulation of sacrifice already existing. But Abel’s faith may
    have had respect, not to a revelation with regard to sacrificial
    worship, but with regard to the promised Redeemer; and his
    sacrifice may have expressed that faith. If so, God’s acceptance
    of it gave a divine warrant to future sacrifices. It was not
    will-worship, because it was not substituted for some other
    worship which God had previously instituted. It is not necessary
    to suppose that God gave an expressed command. Abel may have been
    moved by some inward divine monition. Thus Adam said to Eve,
    ‘_This is now bone of my bones...._’ (_Gen. 2:23_), before any
    divine command of marriage. No fruits were presented during the
    patriarchal dispensation. Heathen sacrifices were corruptions of
    primitive sacrifice.” Von Lasaulx, Die Sühnopfer der Griechen und
    Römer, und ihr Verhältniss zu dem einen auf Golgotha, 1—“The first
    word of the _original_ man was probably a prayer, the first action
    of _fallen_ man a sacrifice”; see translation in Bib. Sac., 1:
    368-408. Bishop Butler: “By the general prevalence of propitiatory
    sacrifices over the heathen world, the notion of repentance alone
    being sufficient to expiate guilt appears to be contrary to the
    general sense of mankind.”


(_f_) The New Testament assumes and presupposes the Old Testament doctrine
of sacrifice. The sacrificial language in which its descriptions of
Christ’s work are clothed cannot be explained as an accommodation to
Jewish methods of thought, since this terminology was in large part in
common use among the heathen, and Paul used it more than any other of the
apostles in dealing with the Gentiles. To deny to it its Old Testament
meaning, when used by New Testament writers to describe the work of
Christ, is to deny any proper inspiration both in the Mosaic appointment
of sacrifices and in the apostolic interpretations of them. We must
therefore maintain, as the result of a simple induction of Scripture
facts, that the death of Christ is a vicarious offering, provided by God’s
love for the purpose of satisfying an internal demand of the divine
holiness, and of removing an obstacle in the divine mind to the renewal
and pardon of sinners.


    “The epistle of James makes no allusion to sacrifice. But he would
    not have failed to allude to it, if he had held the moral view of
    the atonement; for it would then have been an obvious help to his
    argument against merely formal service. Christ protested against
    washing hands and keeping Sabbath days. If sacrifice had been a
    piece of human formality, how indignantly would he have inveighed
    against it! But instead of this he received from John the Baptist,
    without rebuke, the words: ‘_Behold, the Lamb of God, that taketh
    away the sin of the world_’ (_John 1:29_).”

    A. A. Hodge, Popular Lectures, 247—“The sacrifices of bulls and
    goats were like token-money, as our paper-promises to pay,
    accepted at their face-value till the day of settlement. But the
    sacrifice of Christ was the gold which absolutely extinguished all
    debt by its intrinsic value. Hence, when Christ died, the veil
    that separated man from God was rent from the top to the bottom by
    supernatural hands. When the real expiation was finished, the
    whole symbolical system representing it became _functum officio_,
    and was abolished. Soon after this, the temple was razed to the
    ground, and the ritual was rendered forever impossible.”

    For denial that Christ’s death is to be interpreted by heathen or
    Jewish sacrifices, see Maurice on Sac., 154—“The heathen
    signification of words, when applied to a Christian use, must be
    not merely modified, but inverted”; Jowett, Epistles of St. Paul,
    2:479—“The heathen and Jewish sacrifices rather show us what the
    sacrifice of Christ was not, than what it was.” Bushnell and Young
    do not doubt the expiatory nature of heathen sacrifices. But the
    main terms which the N. T. uses to describe Christ’s sacrifice are
    borrowed from the Greek sacrificial ritual, _e. g._, θυσία,
    προσφορά, ἰλασμός, ἁγιάζω, καθαίρω, ἰλάσκομαι. To deny that these
    terms, when applied to Christ, imply expiation and substitution,
    is to deny the inspiration of those who used them. See Cave,
    Scripture Doctrine of Sacrifice; art. on Sacrifice, in Smith’s
    Bible Dictionary.

    With all these indications of our dissent from the modern denial
    of expiatory sacrifice, we deem it desirable by way of contrast to
    present the clearest possible statement of the view from which we
    dissent. This may be found in Pfleiderer, Philosophy of Religion,
    1:238, 260, 261—“The gradual distinction of the moral from the
    ceremonial, the repression and ultimate replacement of ceremonial
    expiation by the moral purification of the sense and life, and
    consequently the transformation of the mystical conception of
    redemption into the corresponding ethical conception of education,
    may be designated as the kernel and the teleological principle of
    the development of the history of religion.... But to Paul the
    question in what sense the death of the Cross could be the means
    of the Messianic redemption found its answer simply from the
    presuppositions of the Pharisaic theology, which beheld in the
    innocent suffering, and especially in the martyr-death, of the
    righteous, an expiatory means compensating for the sins of the
    whole people. What would be more natural than that Paul should
    contemplate the death on the Cross in the same way, as an
    expiatory means of salvation for the redemption of the sinful
    world?

    “We are thus led to see in this theory the symbolical presentment
    of the truth that the new man suffers, as it were, vicariously,
    for the old man; for he takes upon himself the daily pain of
    self-subjugation, and bears guiltlessly in patience the evils
    which the old man could not but necessarily impute to himself as
    punishment. Therefore as Christ is the exemplification of the
    moral idea of man, so his death is the symbol of that moral
    process of painful self-subjugation in obedience and patience, in
    which the true inner redemption of man consists.... In like manner
    Fichte said that the only proper means of salvation is the death
    of selfhood, death _with_ Jesus, regeneration.

    “The defect in the Kant-Fichtean doctrine of redemption consisted
    in this, that it limited the process of ethical transformation to
    the individual, and endeavored to explain it from his subjective
    reason and freedom alone. How could the individual deliver himself
    from his powerlessness and become free? This question was
    unsolved. The Christian doctrine of redemption is that the moral
    liberation of the individual is not the effect of his own natural
    power, but the effect of the divine Spirit, who, from the
    beginning of human history, put forth his activity as the power
    educating to the good, and especially has created for himself in
    the Christian community a permanent organ for the education of the
    people and of individuals. It was the moral individualism of Kant
    which prevented him from finding in the historically realized
    common spirit of the good the real force available for the
    individual becoming good.”


C. Theories of the Atonement.


1st. The Socinian, or Example Theory of the Atonement.


This theory holds that subjective sinfulness is the sole barrier between
man and God. Not God, but only man, needs to be reconciled. The only
method of reconciliation is to better man’s moral condition. This can be
effected by man’s own will, through repentance and reformation. The death
of Christ is but the death of a noble martyr. He redeems us, only as his
human example of faithfulness to truth and duty has a powerful influence
upon our moral improvement. This fact the apostles, either consciously or
unconsciously, clothed in the language of the Greek and Jewish sacrifices.
This theory was fully elaborated by Lælius Socinus and Faustus Socinus of
Poland, in the 16th century. Its modern advocates are found in the
Unitarian body.


    The Socinian theory may be found stated, and advocated, in
    Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum, 1:566-600; Martineau, Studies of
    Christianity, 83-176; J. F. Clarke, Orthodoxy, Its Truths and
    Errors, 235-265; Ellis, Unitarianism and Orthodoxy; Sheldon, Sin
    and Redemption, 146-210. The text which at first sight most seems
    to favor this view is _1 Pet 2:21_—“_Christ also suffered for you,
    leaving you an example, that ye should follow his steps._” But see
    under (_e_) below. When Correggio saw Raphael’s picture of St.
    Cecilia, he exclaimed: “I too am a painter.” So Socinus held that
    Christ’s example roused our humanity to imitation. He regarded
    expiation as heathenish and impossible; every one must receive
    according to his deeds; God is ready to grant forgiveness on
    simple repentance.

    E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 277—“The theory first insists
    on the inviolability of moral sequences in the conduct of every
    moral agent; and then insists that, on a given condition, the
    consequences of transgression may be arrested by almighty fiat....
    Unitarianism errs in giving a transforming power to that which
    works beneficently only after the transformation has been
    wrought.” In ascribing to human nature a power of
    self-reformation, it ignores man’s need of regeneration by the
    Holy Spirit. But even this renewing work of the Holy Spirit
    presupposes the atoning work of Christ. “_Ye must be born anew_”
    (_John 3:7_) necessitates “_Even so must the Son of man be lifted
    up_” (_John 3:14_). It is only the Cross that satisfies man’s
    instinct of reparation. Harnack, Das Wesen des Christenthums,
    99—“Those who regarded Christ’s death soon ceased to bring any
    other bloody offering to God. This is true both in Judaism and in
    heathenism. Christ’s death put an end to all bloody offerings in
    religious history. The impulse to sacrifice found its satisfaction
    in the Cross of Christ.” We regard this as proof that the Cross is
    essentially a satisfaction to the divine justice, and not a mere
    example of faithfulness to duty. The Socinian theory is the first
    of six theories of the Atonement, which roughly correspond with
    our six previously treated theories of sin, and this first theory
    includes most of the false doctrine which appears in mitigated
    forms in several of the theories following.


To this theory we make the following objections:

(_a_) It is based upon false philosophical principles,—as, for example,
that will is merely the faculty of volitions; that the foundation of
virtue is in utility; that law is an expression of arbitrary will; that
penalty is a means of reforming the offender; that righteousness, in
either God or man, is only a manifestation of benevolence.


    If the will is simply the faculty of volitions, and not also the
    fundamental determination of the being to an ultimate end, then
    man can, by a single volition, effect his own reformation and
    reconciliation to God. If the foundation of virtue is in utility,
    then there is nothing in the divine being that prevents pardon,
    the good of the creature, and not the demands of God’s holiness,
    being the reason for Christ’s suffering. If law is an expression
    of arbitrary will, instead of being a transcript of the divine
    nature, it may at any time be dispensed with, and the sinner may
    be pardoned on mere repentance. If penalty is merely a means of
    reforming the offender, then sin does not involve objective guilt,
    or obligation to suffer, and sin may be forgiven, at any moment,
    to all who forsake it,—indeed, _must_ be forgiven, since
    punishment is out of place when the sinner is reformed. If
    righteousness is only a form or manifestation of benevolence, then
    God can show his benevolence as easily through pardon as through
    penalty, and Christ’s death is only intended to attract us toward
    the good by the force of a noble example.

    Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:218-264, is essentially Socinian in
    his view of Jesus’ death. Yet he ascribes to Jesus the idea that
    suffering is _necessary_, even for one who stands in perfect love
    and blessed fellowship with God, since earthly blessedness is not
    the true blessedness, and since a true piety is impossible without
    renunciation and stooping to minister to others. The earthly
    life-sacrifice of the Messiah was his necessary and greatest act,
    and was the culminating point of his teaching. Suffering made him
    a perfect example, and so ensured the success of his work. But why
    God should have made it necessary that the holiest must suffer,
    Wendt does not explain. This constitution of things we can
    understand only as a revelation of the holiness of God, and of his
    punitive relation to human sin. Simon, Reconciliation, 357, shows
    well that example might have sufficed for a race that merely
    needed leadership. But what the race needed most was energizing,
    the fulfilment of the conditions of restoration to God on their
    behalf by one of themselves, by one whose very essence they
    shared, who created them, in whom they consisted, and whose work
    was therefore their work. Christ condemned with the divine
    condemnation the thoughts and impulses arising from his
    subconscious life. Before the sin, which for the moment seemed to
    be his, could become his, he condemned it. He sympathized with,
    nay, he revealed, the very justice and sorrow of God. _Hebrews
    2:16-18_—“_For verily not to angels doth he give help, but he
    giveth help to the seed of Abraham. Wherefore it behooved him in
    all things to be made like unto his brethren, that he might become
    a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God,
    to make propitiation for the sins of the people. For in that he
    himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
    that are tempted._”


(_b_) It is a natural outgrowth from the Pelagian view of sin, and
logically necessitates a curtailment or surrender of every other
characteristic doctrine of Christianity—inspiration, sin, the deity of
Christ, justification, regeneration, and eternal retribution.


    The Socinian theory requires a surrender of the doctrine of
    inspiration; for the idea of vicarious and expiatory sacrifice is
    woven into the very warp and woof of the Old and New Testaments.
    It requires an abandonment of the Scripture doctrine of sin; for
    in it all idea of sin as perversion of nature rendering the sinner
    unable to save himself, and as objective guilt demanding
    satisfaction to the divine holiness, is denied. It requires us to
    give up the deity of Christ; for if sin is a slight evil, and man
    can save himself from its penalty and power, then there is no
    longer need of either an infinite suffering or an infinite Savior,
    and a human Christ is as good as a divine. It requires us to give
    up the Scripture doctrine of justification, as God’s act of
    declaring the sinner just in the eye of the law, solely on account
    of the righteousness and death of Christ to whom he is united by
    faith; for the Socinian theory cannot permit the counting to a man
    of any other righteousness than his own. It requires a denial of
    the doctrine of regeneration; for this is no longer the work of
    God, but the work of the sinner; it is no longer a change of the
    affections below consciousness, but a self-reforming volition of
    the sinner himself. It requires a denial of eternal retribution;
    for this is no longer appropriate to finite transgression of
    arbitrary law, and to superficial sinning that does not involve
    nature.


(_c_) It contradicts the Scripture teachings, that sin involves objective
guilt as well as subjective defilement; that the holiness of God must
punish sin; that the atonement was a bearing of the punishment of sin for
men; and that this vicarious bearing of punishment was necessary, on the
part of God, to make possible the showing of favor to the guilty.


    The Scriptures do not make the main object of the atonement to be
    man’s subjective moral improvement. It is to God that the
    sacrifice is offered, and the object of it is to satisfy the
    divine holiness, and to remove from the divine mind an obstacle to
    the showing of favor to the guilty. It was something external to
    man and his happiness or virtue, that required that Christ should
    suffer. What Emerson has said of the martyr is yet more true of
    Christ: “Though love repine, and reason chafe, There comes a voice
    without reply, ’Tis man’s perdition to be safe, When for the truth
    he ought to die.” The truth for which Christ died was truth
    internal to the nature of God; not simply truth externalized and
    published among men. What the truth of God required, that Christ
    rendered—full satisfaction to violated justice. “Jesus paid it
    all”; and no obedience or righteousness of ours can be added to
    his work, as a ground of our salvation.

    E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 276—“This theory fails of a
    due recognition of that deep-seated, universal and innate sense of
    ill-desert, which in all times and everywhere has prompted men to
    aim at some expiation of their guilt. For this sense of guilt and
    its requirements the moral influence theory makes no adequate
    provision, either in Christ or in those whom Christ saves.
    Supposing Christ’s redemptive work to consist merely in winning
    men to the practice of righteousness, it takes no account of
    penalty, either as the sanction of the law, as the reaction of the
    divine holiness against sin, or as the upbraiding of the
    individual conscience.... The Socinian theory overlooks the fact
    that there must be some objective manifestation of God’s wrath and
    displeasure against sin.”


(_d_) It furnishes no proper explanation of the sufferings and death of
Christ. The unmartyrlike anguish cannot be accounted for, and the
forsaking by the Father cannot be justified, upon the hypothesis that
Christ died as a mere witness to truth. If Christ’s sufferings were not
propitiatory, they neither furnish us with a perfect example, nor
constitute a manifestation of the love of God.


    Compare Jesus’ feeling, in view of death, with that of Paul:
    “_having the desire to depart_” (_Phil 1:23_). Jesus was filled
    with anguish: “_Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say?
    Father, save me from this hour_” (_John 12:27_). If Christ was
    simply a martyr, then he is not a perfect example; for many a
    martyr has shown greater courage in prospect of death, and in the
    final agony has been able to say that the fire that consumed him
    was “a bed of roses.” Gethsemane, with its mental anguish, is
    apparently recorded in order to indicate that Christ’s sufferings
    even on the cross were not mainly physical sufferings. The Roman
    Catholic Church unduly emphasizes the physical side of our Lord’s
    passion, but loses sight of its spiritual element. The Christ of
    Rome indeed is either a babe or dead, and the crucifix presents to
    us not a risen and living Redeemer, but a mangled and lifeless
    body.

    Stroud, in his Physical Cause of our Lord’s Death, has made it
    probable that Jesus died of a broken heart, and that this alone
    explains _John 19:34_—“_one of the soldiers with a spear pierced
    his side, and straightway there came out blood and water_”—_i.
    e._, the heart had already been ruptured by grief. That grief was
    grief at the forsaking of the Father (_Mat. 27:46_—“_My God, my
    God, why hast thou forsaken me?_”), and the resulting death shows
    that that forsaking was no imaginary one. Did God make the holiest
    man of all to be the greatest sufferer of all the ages? This heart
    broken by the forsaking of the Father means more than martyrdom.
    If Christ’s death is not propitiatory, it fills me with terror and
    despair; for it presents me not only with a very imperfect example
    in Christ, but with a proof of measureless injustice on the part
    of God. _Luke 23:28_—“_weep not for me, but weep for
    yourselves_”—Jesus rejects all pity that forgets his suffering for
    others.

    To the above view of Stroud, Westcott objects that blood does not
    readily flow from an ordinary corpse. The separation of the red
    corpuscles of the blood from the serum, or water, would be the
    beginning of decomposition, and would be inconsistent with the
    statement in _Acts 2:31_—“_neither did his flesh see corruption._”
    But Dr. W. W. Keen of Philadelphia, in his article on The Bloody
    Sweat of our Lord (Bib. Sac., July, 1897:469-484) endorses
    Stroud’s view as to the physical cause of our Lord’s death.
    Christ’s being forsaken by the Father was only the culmination of
    that relative withdrawal which constituted the source of Christ’s
    loneliness through life. Through life he was a servant of the
    Spirit. On the cross the Spirit left him to the weakness of
    unassisted humanity, destitute of conscious divine resources.
    Compare the curious reading of _Heb. 2:9_—“_that he apart from
    God_ (χωρὶς Θεοῦ) _should taste death for every man._”

    If Christ merely supposed himself to be deserted by God, “not only
    does Christ become an erring man, and, so far as the predicate
    deity is applicable to him, an erring God; but, if he cherished
    unfounded distrust of God, how can it be possible still to
    maintain that his will was in abiding, perfect agreement and
    identity with the will of God?” See Kant, Lotze, and Ritschl, by
    Stählin, 219. Charles C. Everett, Gospel of Paul, says Jesus was
    not crucified because he was accursed, but he was accursed because
    he was crucified, so that, in wreaking vengeance upon him, Jewish
    law abrogated itself. This interpretation however contradicts _2
    Cor. 5:21_—“_Him who knew no sin he made to be sin on our
    behalf_”—where the divine identification of Christ with the race
    of sinners antedates and explains his sufferings. _John
    1:29_—“_the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the
    world_”—does not refer to Jesus as a lamb for gentleness, but as a
    lamb for sacrifice. Maclaren: “How does Christ’s death prove God’s
    love? Only on one supposition, namely, that Christ is the
    incarnate Son of God, sent by the Father’s love and being his
    express image”; and, we may add, suffering vicariously for us and
    removing the obstacle in God’s mind to our pardon.


(_e_) The influence of Christ’s example is neither declared in Scripture,
nor found in Christian experience, to be the chief result secured by his
death. Mere example is but a new preaching of the law, which repels and
condemns. The cross has power to lead men to holiness, only as it first
shows a satisfaction made for their sins. Accordingly, most of the
passages which represent Christ as an example also contain references to
his propitiatory work.


    There is no virtue in simply setting an example. Christ did
    nothing, simply for the sake of example. Even his baptism was the
    symbol of his propitiatory death; see pages 761, 762. The
    apostle’s exhortation is not “abstain from all _appearance_ of
    evil” (_1 Thess. 5:22_, A. Vers.), but “_abstain from every form
    of evil_” (Rev. Vers.). Christ’s death is the payment of a real
    debt due to God; and the convicted sinner needs first to see the
    debt which he owes to the divine justice paid by Christ, before he
    can think hopefully of reforming his life. The hymns of the
    church: “I lay my sins on Jesus,” and “Not all the blood of
    beasts,” represent the view of Christ’s sufferings which
    Christians have derived from the Scriptures. When the sinner sees
    that the mortgage is cancelled, that the penalty has been borne,
    he can devote himself freely to the service of his Redeemer. _Rev.
    12:11_—“_they overcame him_ [Satan] _because of the blood of the
    Lamb_”—as Christ overcame Satan by his propitiatory sacrifice, so
    we overcome by appropriating to ourselves Christ’s atonement and
    his Spirit; _cf._ _1 John 5:4_—“_this is the victory that hath
    overcome the world, even our faith._” The very text upon which
    Socinians most rely, when it is taken in connection with the
    context, proves their theory to be a misrepresentation of
    Scripture, _1 Pet. 2:21_—“_Christ also suffered for you, leaving
    you an example, that ye should follow his steps_”—is succeeded by
    _verse 24_—“_who his own self bare our sins in his body upon the
    tree, that we, having died unto sins, might live unto
    righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed_”—the latter words
    being a direct quotation from Isaiah’s description of the
    substitutionary sufferings of the Messiah (_Is. 53:5_).

    When a deeply convicted sinner was told that God could cleanse his
    heart and make him over anew, he replied with righteous
    impatience: “That is not what I want,—I have a debt to pay first!”
    A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the Spirit, 28, 89—“Nowhere in
    tabernacle or temple shall we ever find the laver placed before
    the altar. The altar is Calvary, and the laver is Pentecost,—one
    stands for the sacrificial blood, the other for the sanctifying
    Spirit.... So the oil which symbolised the sanctifying Spirit was
    always put ‘_upon the blood of the trespass-offering_’ (_Lev.
    14:17_).” The extremity of Christ’s suffering on the Cross was
    coincident with the extremest manifestation of the guilt of the
    race. The greatness of this he theoretically knew from the
    beginning of his ministry. His baptism was not intended merely to
    set an example. It was a recognition that sin deserved death; that
    he was numbered with the transgressors; that he was sent to die
    for the sin of the world. He was not so much a teacher, as he was
    the subject of all teaching. In him the great suffering of the
    holy God on account of sin is exhibited to the universe. The pain
    of a few brief hours saves a world, only because it sets forth an
    eternal fact in God’s being and opens to us God’s very heart.

    Shakespeare, Henry V, 4:1—“There is some soul of goodness in
    things evil. Would men observingly distil it out.” It is well to
    preach on Christ as an example. Lyman Abbott says that Jesus’
    blood purchases our pardon and redeems us to God, just as a
    patriot’s blood redeems his country from servitude and purchases
    its liberty. But even Ritschl, Just. and Recon., 2, goes beyond
    this, when he says: “Those who advocate the example theory should
    remember that Jesus withdraws himself from imitation when he sets
    himself over against his disciples as the Author of forgiveness.
    And they perceive that pardon must first be appropriated, before
    it is possible for them to imitate his piety and moral
    achievement.” This is a partial recognition of the truth that the
    removal of objective guilt by Christ’s atonement must precede the
    removal of subjective defilement by Christ’s regenerating and
    sanctifying Spirit. Lidgett, Spir. Princ. of Atonement, 265-280,
    shows that there is a fatherly demand for satisfaction, which must
    be met by the filial response of the child. Thomas Chalmers at the
    beginning of his ministry urged on his people the reformation of
    their lives. But he confesses: “I never heard of any such
    reformations being effected amongst them.” Only when he preached
    the alienation of men from God, and forgiveness through the blood
    of Christ, did he hear of their betterment.

    Gordon, Christ of To-day, 129—“The consciousness of sin is largely
    the creation of Christ.” Men like Paul, Luther, and Edwards show
    this impressively. Foster, Christian life and Theology,
    198-201—“There is of course a sense in which the Christian must
    imitate Christ’s death, for he is to ‘_take up his cross daily_’
    (_Luke 9:23_) and follow his Master; but in its highest meaning
    and fullest scope the death of Christ is no more an object set for
    our imitation than is the creation of the world.... Christ does
    for man in his sacrifice what man could not do for himself. We see
    in the Cross: 1. the magnitude of the guilt of sin; 2. our own
    self-condemnation; 3. the adequate remedy,—for the object of law
    is gained in the display of righteousness; 4. the objective ground
    of forgiveness.” Maclaren: “Christianity without a dying Christ is
    a dying Christianity.”


(_f_) This theory contradicts the whole tenor of the New Testament, in
making the life, and not the death, of Christ the most significant and
important feature of his work. The constant allusions to the death of
Christ as the source of our salvation, as well as the symbolism of the
ordinances, cannot be explained upon a theory which regards Christ as a
mere example, and considers his sufferings as incidents, rather than
essentials, of his work.


    Dr. H. B. Hackett frequently called attention to the fact that the
    recording in the gospels of only three years of Jesus’ life, and
    the prominence given in the record to the closing scenes of that
    life, are evidence that not his life, but his death, was the great
    work of our Lord. Christ’s death, and not his life, is the central
    truth of Christianity. The cross is _par excellence_ the Christian
    symbol. In both the ordinances—in Baptism as well as in the Lord’s
    Supper—it is the death of Christ that is primarily set forth.
    Neither Christ’s example, nor his teaching, reveals God as does
    his death. It is the death of Christ that links together all
    Christian doctrines. The mark of Christ’s blood is upon them all,
    as the scarlet thread running through every cord and rope of the
    British navy gives sign that it is the property of the crown.

    Did Jesus’ death have no other relation to our salvation than
    Paul’s death had? Paul was a martyr, but his death is not even
    recorded. Gould, Bib. Theol. N. T., 92—“Paul does not dwell in any
    way upon the life or work of our Lord, except as they are involved
    in his death and resurrection.” What did Jesus’ words: “_It is
    finished_” (_John 19:30_) mean? What was finished on the Socinian
    theory? The Socinian salvation had not yet begun. Why did not
    Jesus make the ordinances of Baptism and the Lord’s Supper to be
    memorials of his birth, rather than of his death? Why was not the
    veil of the temple rent at his baptism, or at the Sermon on the
    Mount? It was because only his death opened the way to God. In
    talking with Nicodemus, Jesus brushed aside the complimentary:
    “_we know that thou art a teacher come from God_” (_John 3:2_).
    Recognizing Jesus as teacher is not enough. There must be a
    renewal by the Spirit of God, so that one recognizes also the
    lifting up of the Son of man as atoning Savior (_John 3:14, 15_).
    And to Peter, Jesus said: “_If I wash thee not, thou hast no part
    with me_” (_John 13:8_). One cannot have part with Christ as
    Teacher, while one rejects him as Redeemer from sin. On the
    Socinian doctrine of the Atonement, see Crawford, Atonement,
    279-296; Shedd, History of Doctrine, 2:376-386; Doctrines of the
    Early Socinians, in Princeton Essays, 1:194-211; Philippi,
    Glaubenslehre, IV, 2:156-180; Fock, Socinianismus.


2nd. The Bushnellian, or Moral Influence Theory of the Atonement.


This holds, like the Socinian, that there is no principle of the divine
nature which is propitiated by Christ’s death; but that this death is a
manifestation of the love of God, suffering in and with the sins of his
creatures. Christ’s atonement, therefore, is the merely natural
consequence of his taking human nature upon him; and is a suffering, not
of penalty in man’s stead, but of the combined woes and griefs which the
living of a human life involves. This atonement has effect, not to satisfy
divine justice, but so to reveal divine love as to soften human hearts and
to lead them to repentance; in other words, Christ’s sufferings were
necessary, not in order to remove an obstacle to the pardon of sinners
which exists in the mind of God, but in order to convince sinners that
there exists no such obstacle. This theory, for substance, has been
advocated by Bushnell, in America; by Robertson, Maurice, Campbell, and
Young, in Great Britain; by Schleiermacher and Ritschl, in Germany.


    Origen and Abelard are earlier representatives of this view. It
    may be found stated in Bushnell’s Vicarious Sacrifice. Bushnell’s
    later work, Forgiveness and Law, contains a modification of his
    earlier doctrine, to which he was driven by the criticisms upon
    his Vicarious Sacrifice. In the later work, he acknowledges what
    he had so strenuously denied in the earlier, namely, that Christ’s
    death has effect upon God as well as upon man, and that God cannot
    forgive without thus “making cost to himself.” He makes open
    confession of the impotence of his former teaching to convert
    sinners, and, as the only efficient homiletic, he recommends the
    preaching of the very doctrine of propitiatory sacrifice which he
    had written his book to supersede. Even in Forgiveness and Law,
    however, there is no recognition of the true principle and ground
    of the Atonement in God’s punitive holiness. Since the original
    form of Bushnell’s doctrine is the only one which has met with
    wide acceptance, we direct our objections mainly to this.

    F. W. Robertson, Sermons, 1:163-178, holds that Christ’s
    sufferings were the necessary result of the position in which he
    had placed himself of conflict or collision with the evil that is
    in the world. He came in contact with the whirling wheel, and was
    crushed by it; he planted his heel upon the cockatrice’s den, and
    was pierced by its fang. Maurice, on Sacrifice, 209, and Theol.
    Essays, 141, 228, regards Christ’s sufferings as an illustration,
    given by the ideal man, of the self-sacrifice due to God from the
    humanity of which he is the root and head, all men being redeemed
    in him, irrespective of their faith, and needing only to have
    brought to them the news of this redemption. Young, Life and Light
    of Men, holds a view essentially the same with Robertson’s.
    Christ’s death is the necessary result of his collision with evil,
    and his sufferings extirpate sin, simply by manifesting God’s
    self-sacrificing love,

    Campbell, Atonement, 129-191, quotes from Edwards, to show that
    infinite justice might be satisfied in either one of two ways: (1)
    by an infinite punishment; (2) by an adequate repentance. This
    last, which Edwards passed by as impracticable, Campbell declares
    to have been the real atonement offered by Christ, who stands as
    the great Penitent, confessing the sin of the world. Mason, Faith
    of the Gospel, 160-210, takes substantially the view of Campbell,
    denying substitution, and emphasizing Christ’s oneness with the
    race and his confession of human sin. He grants indeed that our
    Lord bore penalty, but only in the sense that he realized how
    great was the condemnation and penalty of the race.

    Schleiermacher denies any satisfaction to God by substitution. He
    puts in its place an influence of Christ’s personality on men, so
    that they feel themselves reconciled and redeemed. The atonement
    is purely subjective. Yet it is the work of Christ, in that only
    _Christ’s_ oneness with God has taught men that _they_ can be one
    with God. Christ’s consciousness of his being in God and knowing
    God, and his power to impart this consciousness to others, make
    him a Mediator and Savior. The idea of reparation, compensation,
    satisfaction, substitution, is wholly Jewish. He regarded it as
    possible only to a narrow-minded people. He tells us that he hates
    in religion that kind of historic relation. He had no such sense
    of the holiness of God, or of the guilt of man, as would make
    necessary any suffering of punishment or offering to God for human
    sin. He desires to replace external and historical Christianity by
    a Christianity that is internal and subjective. See
    Schleiermacher, Der Christliche Glaube, 2:94-161.

    Ritschl however is the most recent and influential representative
    of the Moral Influence theory in Germany. His view is to be found
    in his Rechtfertigung und Versöhnung, or in English translation,
    Justification and Reconciliation. Ritschl is anti-Hegelian and
    libertarian, but like Schleiermacher he does not treat sin with
    seriousness; he regards the sense of guilt as an illusion which it
    is the part of Christ to dispel; there is an inadequate conception
    of Christ’s person, a practical denial of his pre-existence and
    work of objective atonement; indeed, the work of Christ is hardly
    put into any precise relation to sin at all; see Denney, Studies
    in Theology, 136-151. E. H. Johnson: “Many Ritschlians deny both
    the miraculous conception and the bodily resurrection of Jesus.
    Sin does not particularly concern God; Christ is Savior only as
    Buddha was, achieving lordship over the world by indifference to
    it; he is the Word of God, only as he reveals this divine
    indifference to things. All this does not agree with the N. T.
    teaching that Christ is the only begotten Son of God, that he was
    with the Father before the world was, that he made expiation of
    sins to God, and that sin is that abominable thing that God
    hates.” For a general survey of the Ritschlian theology, see Orr,
    Ritschlian Theology, 231-271; Presb. and Ref. Rev., July,
    1891:443-458 (art. by Zahn), and Jan. 1892:1-21 (art. by C. M.
    Mead); Andover Review, July, 1893:440-461; Am. Jour. Theology,
    Jan. 1899:22-44 (art. by H. R. Mackintosh); Lidgett, Spir. Prin.
    of Atonement, 190-207; Foster, Christ. Life and Theology; and the
    work of Garvie on Ritschl. For statement and criticism of other
    forms of the Moral Influence theory, see Crawford, Atonement,
    297-366; Watts, New Apologetic, 210-247.


To this theory we object as follows:

(_a_) While it embraces a valuable element of truth, namely, the moral
influence upon men _of_ the sufferings of the God-man, it is false by
defect, in that it substitutes a subordinate effect of the atonement for
its chief aim, and yet unfairly appropriates the name “vicarious,” which
belongs only to the latter. Suffering _with_ the sinner is by no means
suffering _in his stead_.


    Dale, Atonement, 137, illustrates Bushnell’s view by the loyal
    wife, who suffers exile or imprisonment with her husband; by the
    philanthropist, who suffers the privations and hardships of a
    savage people, whom he can civilize only by enduring the miseries
    from which he would rescue them; by the Moravian missionary, who
    enters for life the lepers’ enclosure, that he may convert its
    inmates. So Potwin says that suffering and death are the cost of
    the atonement, not the atonement _itself_.

    But we reply that such sufferings as these do not make Christ’s
    sacrifice _vicarious_. The word “vicarious” (from _vicis_) implies
    substitution, which this theory denies. The vicar of a parish is
    not necessarily one who performs service with, and in sympathy
    with, the rector,—he is rather one who stands in the rector’s
    place. A vice-president is one who acts in place of the president;
    “A. B., appointed consul, _vice_ C. D., resigned,” implies that A.
    B. is now to serve in the stead of C. D. If Christ is a “vicarious
    sacrifice,” then he makes atonement to God _in the place and
    stead_ of sinners. Christ’s suffering _in and with sinners_,
    though it is a most important and affecting fact, is not the
    suffering in their stead in which the atonement consists. Though
    suffering in and with sinners may be in part the _medium_ through
    which Christ was enabled to endure God’s wrath against sin, it is
    not to be confounded with the _reason_ why God lays this suffering
    upon him; nor should it blind us to the fact that this reason is
    his standing in the sinner’s place to answer for sin to the
    retributive holiness of God.


(_b_) It rests upon false philosophical principles,—as, that righteousness
is identical with benevolence, instead of conditioning it; that God is
subject to an eternal law of love, instead of being himself the source of
all law; that the aim of penalty is the reformation of the offender.


    Hovey, God with Us, 181-271, has given one of the best replies to
    Bushnell. He shows that if God is subject to an eternal law of
    love, then God is necessarily a Savior; that he must have created
    man as soon as he could; that he makes men holy as fast as
    possible; that he does all the good he can; that he is no better
    than he should be. But this is to deny the transcendence of God,
    and reduce omnipotence to a mere nature-power. The conception of
    God as subject to law imperils God’s self-sufficiency and freedom.
    For Bushnell’s statements with regard to the identity of
    righteousness and love, and for criticisms upon them, see our
    treatment of the attribute of Holiness, vol. I, pages 268-275.

    Watts, New Apologetic, 277-280, points out that, upon Bushnell’s
    principles, there must be an atonement for fallen angels. God was
    bound to assume the angelic nature and to do for angels all that
    he has done for us. There is also no reason for restricting either
    the atonement or the offer of salvation to the present life. B. B.
    Warfield, in Princeton Review, 1903:81-92, shows well that all the
    forms of the Moral Influence theory rest upon the assumption that,
    God is only love, and that all that is required as ground of the
    sinner’s forgiveness is penitence, either Christ’s, or his own, or
    both together.

    Ignoring the divine holiness and minimizing the guilt of sin, many
    modern writers make atonement to be a mere incident of Christ’s
    incarnation. Phillips Brooks, Life, 2:350, 351—“Atonement by
    suffering is the result of the Incarnation; atonement being the
    necessary, and suffering the incidental element of that result.
    But sacrifice is an essential element, for sacrifice truly
    signifies here the consecration of human nature to its highest use
    and utterance, and does not necessarily involve the thought of
    pain. It is not the destruction but the fulfilment of human life.
    Inasmuch as the human life thus consecrated and fulfilled is the
    same in us as in Jesus, and inasmuch as his consecration and
    fulfilment makes morally possible for us the same consecration and
    fulfilment of it which he achieved, therefore his atonement and
    his sacrifice, and incidentally his suffering, become vicarious.
    It is not that they make unnecessary, but that they make possible
    and successful in us, the same processes which were perfect in
    him.”


(_c_) The theory furnishes no proper reason for Christ’s suffering. While
it shows that the Savior necessarily suffers from his contact with human
sin and sorrow, it gives no explanation of that constitution of the
universe which makes suffering the consequence of sin, not only to the
sinner, but also to the innocent being who comes into connection with sin.
The holiness of God, which is manifested in this constitution of things
and which requires this atonement, is entirely ignored.


    B. W. Lockhart, in a recent statement of the doctrine of the
    atonement, shows this defect of apprehension: “God in Christ
    reconciled the world to himself; Christ did not reconcile God to
    man, but man to God. Christ did not enable God to save men; God
    enabled Christ to save men. The sufferings of Christ were
    vicarious as the highest illustration of that spiritual law by
    which the good soul is impelled to suffer that others may not
    suffer, to die that others may not die. The vicarious sufferings
    of Jesus were also the great revelation to man of the vicarious
    nature of God; a revelation of the cross as eternal in his nature;
    that it is in the heart of God to bear the sin and sorrow of his
    creatures in his eternal love and pity; a revelation moreover that
    the law which saves the lost through the vicarious labors of
    godlike souls prevails wherever the godlike and the lost soul can
    influence each other.”

    While there is much in the above statement with which we agree, we
    charge it with misapprehending the reason for Christ’s suffering.
    That reason is to be found only in that holiness of God which
    expresses itself in the very constitution of the universe. Not
    love but holiness has made suffering invariably to follow sin, so
    that penalty falls not only upon the transgressor but upon him who
    is the life and sponsor of the transgressor. God’s holiness brings
    suffering to God, and to Christ who manifests God. Love bears the
    suffering, but it is holiness that necessitates it. The statement
    of Lockhart above gives account of the effect—reconciliation; but
    it fails to recognize the cause—propitiation. The words of E. G.
    Robinson furnish the needed complement: “The work of Christ has
    two sides, propitiatory and reconciling. Christ felt the pang of
    association with a guilty race. The divine displeasure rested on
    him as possessing the guilty nature. In his own person he redeems
    this nature by bearing its penalty. Propitiation must precede
    reconciliation. The Moral Influence theory recognizes the
    necessity of a subjective change in man, but makes no provision of
    an objective agency to secure it.”


(_d_) It contradicts the plain teachings of Scripture, that the atonement
is necessary, not simply to reveal God’s love, but to satisfy his justice;
that Christ’s sufferings are propitiatory and penal; and that the human
conscience needs to be propitiated by Christ’s sacrifice, before it can
feel the moral influence of his sufferings.


    That the atonement is primarily an offering to God, and not to the
    sinner, appears from _Eph. 5:2_—“_gave himself up for us, an
    offering and a sacrifice to God_”; _Heb. 9:14,_—“_offered himself
    without blemish unto God._” Conscience, the reflection of God’s
    holiness, can be propitiated only by propitiating holiness itself.
    Mere love and sympathy are maudlin, and powerless to move, unless
    there is a background of righteousness. Spear: “An appeal to man,
    without anything back of it to emphasize and enforce the appeal,
    will never touch the heart. The mere _appearance_ of an atonement
    has no moral influence.” Crawford, Atonement, 358-367—“Instead of
    delivering us from penalty, in order to deliver us from sin, this
    theory made Christ to deliver us from sin, in order that he may
    deliver us from penalty. But this reverses the order of Scripture.
    And Dr. Bushnell concedes, in the end, that the moral view of the
    atonement is morally powerless; and that the Objective view he
    condemns is, after all, indispensable to the salvation of
    sinners.”

    Some men are quite ready to forgive those whom they have offended.
    The Ritschlian school sees no guilt to be atoned for, and no
    propitiation to be necessary. Only man needs to be reconciled.
    Ritschlians are quite ready to forgive God. The only atonement is
    an atonement, made by repentance, to the human conscience. Shedd
    says well: “All that is requisite in order to satisfaction and
    peace of conscience in the sinful soul is also requisite in order
    to the satisfaction of God himself.” Walter Besant: “It is not
    enough to be forgiven,—one has also to forgive one’s self.” The
    converse proposition is yet more true: It is not enough to forgive
    one’s self,—one has also to be forgiven; indeed, one cannot
    rightly forgive one’s self, unless one has been first forgiven; _1
    John 3:20_—“_if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our
    heart, and knoweth all things._” A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the
    Spirit, 201—“As the high priest carried the blood into the Holy of
    Holies under the old dispensation, so does the Spirit take the
    blood of Christ into the inner sanctuary of our spirit in the new
    dispensation, in order that he may ‘_cleanse your conscience from
    dead works to serve the living God_’ (_Heb. 9:14_).”


(_e_) It can be maintained, only by wresting from their obvious meaning
those passages of Scripture which speak of Christ as suffering for our
sins; which represent his blood as accomplishing something for us in
heaven, when presented there by our intercessor; which declare forgiveness
to be a remitting of past offences upon the ground of Christ’s death; and
which describe justification as a pronouncing, not a making, just.


    We have seen that the forms in which the Scriptures describe
    Christ’s death are mainly drawn from sacrifice. Notice Bushnell’s
    acknowledgment that these “altar-forms” are the most vivid and
    effective methods of presenting Christ’s work, and that the
    preacher cannot dispense with them. Why he should not dispense
    with them, if the meaning has gone out of them, is not so clear.

    In his later work, entitled Forgiveness and Law, Bushnell appears
    to recognize this inconsistency, and represents God as affected by
    the atonement, after all; in other words, the atonement has an
    objective as well as a subjective influence. God can forgive, only
    by “making cost to himself.” He “works down his resentment, by
    suffering for us.” This verges toward the true view, but it does
    not recognize the demand of divine holiness for satisfaction; and
    it attributes passion, weakness, and imperfection to God. Dorner,
    Glaubenslehre, 2:591 (Syst. Doct., 4:59, 69), objects to this
    modified Moral Influence theory, that the love that can do good to
    an enemy is _already forgiving_ love; so that the benefit to the
    enemy cannot be, as Bushnell supposes, a _condition of the
    forgiveness_.

    To Campbell’s view, that Christ is the great Penitent, and that
    his atonement consists essentially in his confessing the sins of
    the world, we reply, that no confession or penitence is possible
    without responsibility. If Christ had no substitutionary office,
    the ordering of his sufferings on the part of God was manifest
    injustice. Such sufferings, moreover, are impossible upon grounds
    of mere sympathy. The Scripture explains them by declaring that he
    bore our curse, and became a ransom in our place. There was more
    therefore in the sufferings of Christ than “a perfect Amen in
    humanity to the judgment of God on the sin of man.” Not Phinehas’s
    zeal for God, but his execution of judgment, made an atonement
    (_Ps. 106:30_—“_executed judgment_”—LXX.: ἐξιλάσατο, “_made
    propitiation_”) and turned away the wrath of God. Observe here the
    contrast between the _priestly_ atonement of Aaron, who stood
    between the living and the dead, and the _judicial_ atonement of
    Phinehas, who executed righteous judgment, and so turned away
    wrath. In neither case did mere _confession_ suffice to take away
    sin. On Campbell’s view see further, on page 760.

    Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 98, has the great merit of
    pointing out that Christ shares our sufferings in virtue of the
    fact that our personality has its ground in him; but that this
    sharing of our penalty was necessitated by God’s righteousness he
    has failed to indicate. He tells us that “Christ sanctified the
    present and cancels the past. He offers to God a living holiness
    in human conditions and character; he makes the awful sacrifice in
    humanity of a perfect contrition. The one is the offering of
    obedience, the other the offering of atonement; the one the
    offering of the life, the other the offering of the death.” This
    modification of Campbell’s view can be rationally maintained only
    by connecting with it a prior declaration that the fundamental
    attribute of God is holiness; that holiness is self-affirming
    righteousness; that this righteousness necessarily expresses
    itself in the punishment of sin; that Christ’s relation to the
    race as its upholder and life made him the bearer of its guilt and
    justly responsible for its sin. Scripture declares the ultimate
    aim of the atonement to be that God “_might himself be just_”
    (_Rom. 3:26_), and no theory of the atonement will meet the
    demands of either reason or conscience that does not ground its
    necessity in God’s righteousness, rather than in his love.

    E. Y. Mullins: “If Christ’s union with humanity made it possible
    for him to be ‘the representative Penitent,’ and to be the Amen of
    humanity to God’s just condemnation of sin, his union with God
    made it also possible for him to be the representative of the
    Judge, and to be the Amen of the divine nature to suffering, as
    the expression of condemnation.” Denney, Studies in Theology, 102,
    103—“The serious element in sin is not man’s dislike, suspicion,
    alienation from God, nor the debilitating, corrupting effects of
    vice in human nature, but rather God’s condemnation of man. This
    Christ endured, and died that the condemnation might be removed.
    ‘Bearing shame and scoffing rude, In my place condemned he stood;
    Sealed my pardon with his blood; Hallelujah!’ ”

    Bushnell regards _Mat. 8:17_—“_Himself took our infirmities, and
    bare our diseases_”—as indicating the nature of Christ’s atoning
    work. The meaning then would be, that he sympathized so fully with
    all human ills that he made them his own. Hovey, however, has
    given a more complete and correct explanation. The words mean
    rather: “His deep sympathy with these effects of sin so moved him,
    that it typified his final bearing of the sins themselves, or
    constituted a preliminary and partial endurance of the suffering
    which was to expiate the sins of men.” His sighing when he cured
    the deaf man (_Mark 7:34_) and his weeping at the grave of Lazarus
    (_John 11:35_) were caused by the anticipatory realization that he
    was one with the humanity which was under the curse, and that he
    too had “_become a curse for us_” (_Gal. 3:13_). The great error
    of Bushnell is his denial of the objective necessity and effect of
    Jesus’ death, and all Scripture which points to an influence of
    the atonement outside of us is a refutation of his theory.


(_f_) This theory confounds God’s method of saving men with men’s
experience of being saved. It makes the atonement itself consist of its
effects in the believer’s union with Christ and the purifying influence of
that union upon the character and life.


    Stevens, in his Doctrine of Salvation, makes this mistake. He
    says: “The old forms of the doctrine of the atonement—that the
    suffering of Christ was necessary to appease the wrath of God and
    induce him to forgive; or to satisfy the law of God and enable him
    to forgive; or to move upon man’s heart to induce him to accept
    forgiveness; have all proved inadequate. Yet to reject the passion
    of Christ is to reject the chief element of power in
    Christianity.... To me the words ‘eternal atonement’ denote the
    dateless passion of God on account of sin; they mean that God is,
    by his very nature, a sin-bearer—that sin grieves and wounds his
    heart, and that he sorrows and suffers in consequence of it. It
    results from the divine love—alike from its holiness and from its
    sympathy—that ‘in our affliction he is afflicted.’ Atonement on
    its ‘Godward side’ is a name for the grief and pain inflicted by
    sin upon the paternal heart of God. Of this divine sorrow for sin,
    the afflictions of Christ are a revelation. In the bitter grief
    and anguish which he experienced on account of sin we see
    reflected the pain and sorrow which sin brings to the divine
    love.”

    All this is well said, with the exception that holiness is
    regarded as a form of love, and the primary offence of sin is
    regarded as the grieving of the Father’s heart. Dr. Stevens fails
    to consider that if love were supreme there would be nothing to
    prevent unholy tolerance of sin. Because holiness is supreme, love
    is conditioned thereby. It is holiness and not love that connects
    suffering with sin, and requires that the Redeemer should suffer.
    Dr. Stevens asserts that the theories hitherto current in
    Protestant churches and the theory for which he pleads are
    “forever irreconcilable”; they are “based on radically different
    conceptions of God.” The British Weekly, Nov. 16, 1905—“The
    doctrine of the atonement is not the doctrine that salvation is
    deliverance from sin, and that this deliverance is the work of
    God, a work the motive of which is God’s love for men; these are
    truths which every one who writes on the Atonement assumes. The
    doctrine of the Atonement has for its task to explain _how_ this
    work is done.... Dr. Stevens makes no contribution whatever to its
    fulfilment. He grants that we have in Paul ‘the theory of a
    substitutionary expiation.’ But he finds something else in Paul
    which he thinks a more adequate rendering of the apostle’s
    Christian experience—the idea, namely, of dying with Christ and
    rising with him; and on the strength of accepting this last he
    feels at liberty to drop the substitutionary expiation overboard
    as something to be explained from Paul’s controversial position,
    or from his Pharisaic inheritance, something at all events which
    has no permanent value for the Christian mind.... The experience
    is dependent on the method. Paul did not die with Christ as an
    alternative to having Christ die with him; he died with Christ
    wholly and solely because Christ died for him. It was the meaning
    carried by the last two words—the meaning unfolded in the theory
    of substitutionary expiation—which had the moral motive in it to
    draw Paul into union with his Lord in life and death.... On Dr.
    Stevens’ own showing, Paul held the two ideas side by side; for
    him the mystical union with Christ was only possible through the
    acceptance of truths with which Dr. Stevens does not know what to
    do.”


(_g_) This theory would confine the influence of the atonement to those
who have heard of it,—thus excluding patriarchs and heathen. But the
Scriptures represent Christ as being the Savior of all men, in the sense
of securing them grace, which, but for his atoning work, could never have
been bestowed consistently with the divine holiness.


    Hovey: “The manward influence of the atonement is far more
    extensive than the moral influence of it.” Christ is Advocate, not
    with the sinner, but with the Father. While the Spirit’s work has
    moral influence over the hearts of men, the Son secures, through
    the presentation of his blood, in heaven, the pardon which can
    come only from God (_1 John 2:1_—“_we have an advocate with the
    Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for
    our sins_”). Hence _1:9_—“_If we confess our sins, he_ [God] _is
    faithful and righteous [faithful to his promise and righteous to
    Christ] to forgive us our sins._” Hence the publican does not
    first pray for change of heart, but for mercy upon the ground of
    sacrifice (_Luke 18:13,_—“_God, be thou merciful to me a sinner,_”
    but literally: “_God be propitiated toward me the sinner_”). See
    Balfour, in Brit. and For. Ev. Rev., Apr. 1884:230-254; Martin,
    Atonement, 216-237; Theol. Eclectic, 4:364-409.

    Gravitation kept the universe stable, long before it was
    discovered by man. So the atonement of Christ was inuring to the
    salvation of men, long before they suspected its existence. The
    “_Light of the world_” (_John 8:12_) has many “X rays,” beyond the
    visible spectrum, but able to impress the image of Christ upon
    patriarchs or heathen. This light has been shining through all the
    ages, but “_the darkness apprehended it not_” (_John 1:5_). Its
    rays register themselves only where there is a sensitive heart to
    receive them. Let them shine through a man, and how much unknown
    sin, and unknown possibilities of good, they reveal! The Moral
    Influence theory does not take account of the preëxistent Christ
    and of his atoning work before his manifestation in the flesh. It
    therefore leads logically to belief in a second probation for the
    many imbeciles, outcasts, and heathen who in this world do not
    hear of Christ’s atonement. The doctrine of Bushnell in this way
    undermines the doctrine of future retribution.

    To Lyman Abbott, the atonement is the self-propitiation of God’s
    love, and its influence is exerted through education. In his
    Theology of an Evolutionist, 118, 190, he maintains that the
    atonement is “a true reconciliation between God and man, making
    them at one through the incarnation and passion of Jesus Christ,
    who lived and suffered, not to redeem men from future torment, but
    to purify and perfect them in God’s likeness by uniting them to
    God.... Sacrifice is not a penalty borne by an innocent sufferer
    for guilty men,—a doctrine for which there is no authority either
    in Scripture or in life (_1 Peter 3:18?_)—but a laying down of
    one’s life in love, that another may receive life.... Redemption
    is not restoration to a lost state of innocence, impossible to be
    restored, but a culmination of the long process when man shall be
    presented before his Father ‘_not having spot or wrinkle or any
    such thing_’ (_Eph. 5:27_).... We believe not in the propitiation
    of an angry God by another suffering to appease the Father’s
    wrath, but in the perpetual self-propitiation of the Father, whose
    mercy, going forth to redeem from sin, satisfies as nothing else
    could the divine indignation against sin, by abolishing it....
    Mercy is hate pitying; it is the pity of wrath. The pity conquers
    the hate only by lifting the sinner up from his degradation and
    restoring him to purity.” And yet in all this there is no mention
    of the divine righteousness as the source of the indignation and
    the object of the propitiation!

    It is interesting to note that some of the greatest advocates of
    the Moral Influence theory have reverted to the older faith when
    they came to die. In his dying moments, as L. W. Munhall tells us,
    Horace Bushnell said: “I fear what I have written and said upon
    the moral idea of the atonement is misleading and will do great
    harm;” and, as he thought of it further, he cried: “Oh Lord Jesus,
    I trust for mercy only in the shed blood that thou didst offer on
    Calvary!” Schleiermacher, on his deathbed, assembled his family
    and a few friends, and himself administered the Lord’s Supper.
    After praying and blessing the bread, and after pronouncing the
    words: “_This is my body, broken for you_,” he added: “This is our
    foundation!” As he started to bless the cup, he cried: “Quick,
    quick, bring the cup! I am so happy!” Then he sank quietly back,
    and was no more; see life of Rothe, by Nippold, 2:53, 54. Ritschl,
    in his History of Pietism, 2:65, had severely criticized Paul
    Gerhardt’s hymn: “O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden,” as describing
    physical suffering; but he begged his son to repeat the two last
    verses of that hymn: “O sacred head now wounded!” when he came to
    die. And in general, the convicted sinner finds peace most quickly
    and surely when he is pointed to the Redeemer who died on the
    Cross and endured the penalty of sin in his stead.


3d. The Grotian, or Governmental Theory of the Atonement.


This theory holds that the atonement is a satisfaction, not to any
internal principle of the divine nature, but to the necessities of
government. God’s government of the universe cannot be maintained, nor can
the divine law preserve its authority over its subjects, unless the pardon
of offenders is accompanied by some exhibition of the high estimate which
God sets upon his law, and the heinous guilt of violating it. Such an
exhibition of divine regard for the law is furnished in the sufferings and
death of Christ. Christ does not suffer the precise penalty of the law,
but God graciously accepts his suffering as a substitute for the penalty.
This bearing of substituted suffering on the part of Christ gives the
divine law such hold upon the consciences and hearts of men, that God can
pardon the guilty upon their repentance, without detriment to the
interests of his government. The author of this theory was Hugo Grotius,
the Dutch jurist and theologian (1583-1645). The theory is characteristic
of the New England theology, and is generally held by those who accept the
New School view of sin.


    Grotius was a precocious genius. He wrote good Latin verses at
    nine years of age; was ripe for the University at twelve: edited
    the encyclopædic work of Marcianus Capella at fifteen. Even thus
    early he went with an embassy to the court of France, where he
    spent a year. Returning home, he took the degree of doctor of
    laws. In literature he edited the remains of Aratus, and wrote
    three dramas in Latin. At twenty he was appointed historiographer
    of the United Provinces; then advocate-general of the fisc for
    Holland and Zealand. He wrote on international law; was appointed
    deputy to England; was imprisoned for his theological opinions;
    escaped to Paris; became ambassador of Sweden to France. He wrote
    commentaries on Scripture, also history, theology, and poetry. He
    was indifferent to dogma, a lover of peace, a compromiser, an
    unpartisan believer, dealing with doctrine more as a statesman
    than as a theologian. Of Grotius, Dr. E. G. Robinson used to say:
    “It is ordained of almighty God that the man who dips into
    everything never gets to the bottom of anything.”

    Grotius, the jurist, conceived of law as a mere matter of
    political expediency—a device to procure practical governmental
    results. The text most frequently quoted in support of his theory,
    is _Is. 42:21_—“_It pleased Jehovah, for his righteousness’ sake,
    to magnify the law, and make it honorable._” Strangely enough, the
    explanation is added: “even when its demands are unfulfilled.”
    Park: “Christ satisfied the law, by making it desirable and
    consistent for God not to come up to the demands of the law.
    Christ suffers a divine chastisement in consequence of our sins.
    Christ was cursed for Adam’s sin, just as the heavens and the
    earth were cursed for Adam’s sin,—that is, he bore pains and
    sufferings on account of it.”

    Grotius used the word _acceptilatio_, by which he meant God’s
    sovereign provision of a suffering which was not itself penalty,
    but which he had determined to accept as a substitute for penalty.
    Here we have a virtual denial that there is anything in God’s
    nature that requires Christ to suffer; for if penalty may be
    remitted in part, it may be remitted in whole, and the reason why
    Christ suffers at all is to be found, not in any demand of God’s
    holiness, but solely in the beneficial influence of these
    sufferings upon man; so that in principle this theory is allied to
    the Example theory and the Moral Influence theory, already
    mentioned.

    Notice the difference between holding to a _substitute for
    penalty_, as Grotius did, and holding to an _equivalent
    substituted penalty_, as the Scriptures do. Grotius’s own
    statement of his view may be found in his Defensio Fidei Catholicæ
    de Satisfactione (Works, 4:297-338). More modern statements of it
    are those of Wardlaw, in his Systematic Theology, 2:358-395, and
    of Albert Barnes, on the Atonement. The history of New England
    thought upon the subject is given in Discourses and Treatises on
    the Atonement, edited by Prof. Park, of Andover. President
    Woolsey: “Christ’s suffering was due to a deep and awful sense of
    responsibility, a conception of the supreme importance to man of
    his standing firm at this crisis. He bore, not the wrath of God,
    but suffering, as the only way of redemption so far as men’s own
    feeling of sin was concerned, and so far as the government of God
    was concerned.” This unites the Governmental and the Moral
    Influence theories.

    Foster, Christian Life and Theology, 226, 227—“Grotius emphasized
    the idea of law rather than that of justice, and made the
    sufferings of Christ a legal example and the occasion of the
    relaxation of the law, and not the strict penalty demanded by
    justice. But this view, however it may have been considered and
    have served in the clarification of the thinking of the times, met
    with no general reception, and left little trace of itself among
    those theologians who maintained the line of evangelical
    theological descent.”


To this theory we urge the following objections:

(_a_) While it contains a valuable element of truth, namely, that the
sufferings and death of Christ secure the interests of God’s government,
it is false by defect, in substituting for the chief aim of the atonement
one which is only subordinate and incidental.


    In our discussion of Penalty (pages 655, 656), we have seen that
    the object of punishment is not primarily the security of
    government. It is not right to punish a man for the beneficial
    effect on society. Ill-desert must go before punishment, or the
    punishment can have no beneficial effect on society. No punishment
    can work good to society, that is not just and right in itself.


(_b_) It rests upon false philosophical principles,—as, that utility is
the ground of moral obligation; that law is an expression of the will,
rather than of the nature, of God; that the aim of penalty is to deter
from the commission of offences; and that righteousness is resolvable into
benevolence.


    Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:573-581; 3:188, 189—“For God to take that
    as satisfaction which is not really such, is to say that there is
    no truth in anything. God may take a part for the whole, error for
    truth, wrong for right. The theory really denies the necessity for
    the work of Christ. If every created thing offered to God is worth
    just so much as God accepts it for, then the blood of bulls and
    goats might take away sins, and Christ is dead in vain.” Dorner,
    Glaubenslehre, 2:570, 571 (Syst. Doct., 4:38-40)—“_Acceptilatio_
    implies that nothing is good and right in itself. God is
    indifferent to good or evil. Man is bound by authority and force
    alone. There is no necessity of punishment or atonement. The
    doctrine of indulgences and of supererogation logically follows.”


(_c_) It ignores and virtually denies that immanent holiness of God of
which the law with its threatened penalties, and the human conscience with
its demand for punishment, are only finite reflections. There is something
back of government; if the atonement satisfies government, it must be by
satisfying that justice of God of which government is an expression.


    No deeply convicted sinner feels that his controversy is with
    government. Undone and polluted, he feels himself in antagonism to
    the purity of a personal God. Government is not greater than God,
    but less. What satisfies God must satisfy government. Hence the
    sinner prays: “_Against thee, thee only, have I sinned_” (_Ps.
    51:4_); “_God be propitiated toward me the sinner_” (literal
    translation of _Luke 18:13_),—propitiated through God’s own
    appointed sacrifice whose smoke is ascending in his behalf even
    while he prays.

    In the divine government this theory recognizes no constitution,
    but only legislative enactment; even this legislative enactment is
    grounded in no necessity of God’s nature, but only in expediency
    or in God’s arbitrary will; law may be abrogated for merely
    economic reasons, if any incidental good may be gained thereby. J.
    M. Campbell, Atonement, 81, 144—“No awakened sinner, into whose
    spirit the terrors of the law have entered, ever thinks of
    rectoral justice, but of absolute justice, and of absolute justice
    only.... Rectoral justice so presupposes absolute justice, and so
    throws the mind back on that absolute justice, that the idea of an
    atonement that will satisfy the one, though it might not the
    other, is a delusion.”

    N. W. Taylor’s Theology was entitled: “Moral Government,” and C.
    G. Finney’s Systematic Theology was a treatise on Moral
    Government, although it called itself by another name. But because
    New England ideas of government were not sufficiently grounded in
    God’s holiness, but were rather based upon utility, expediency, or
    happiness, the very idea of government has dropped out of the New
    School theology, and its advocates with well-nigh one accord have
    gone over to the Moral Influence theory of the atonement, which is
    only a modified Socinianism. Both the Andover atonement and that
    of Oberlin have become purely subjective. For this reason the
    Grotian or Governmental theory has lost its hold upon the
    theological world and needs to have no large amount of space
    devoted to it.


(_d_) It makes that to be an exhibition of justice which is not an
exercise of justice; the atonement being, according to this theory, not an
execution of law, but an exhibition of regard for law, which will make it
safe to pardon the violators of law. Such a merely scenic representation
can inspire respect for law, only so long as the essential unreality of it
is unsuspected.


    To teach that sin will be punished, there must be punishment.
    Potwin: “How the exhibition of what sin deserves, but does not
    get, can satisfy justice, is hard to see.” The Socinian view of
    Christ as an example of virtue is more intelligible than the
    Grotian view of Christ as an example of chastisement. Lyman
    Abbott: “If I thought that Jesus suffered and died to produce a
    moral impression on me, it would not produce a moral impression on
    me.” William Ashmore: “A stage tragedian commits a mock murder in
    order to move people to tears. If Christ was in no sense a
    substitute, or if he was not co-responsible with the sinner he
    represents, then God and Christ are participants in a real tragedy
    the most awful that ever darkened human history, simply for the
    sake of its effect on men to move their callous sensibilities—a
    stage-trick for the same effect.”

    The mother pretends to cry in order to induce her child to obey.
    But the child will obey only while it thinks the mother’s grief a
    reality, and the last state of that child is worse than the first.
    Christ’s atonement is no passion-play. Hell cannot be cured by
    homœopathy. The sacrifice of Calvary is no dramatic exhibition of
    suffering for the purpose of producing a moral impression on
    awe-stricken spectators. It is an object-lesson, only because it
    is a reality. All God’s justice and all God’s love are focused in
    the Cross, so that it teaches more of God and his truth than all
    space and time beside.

    John Milton, Paradise Lost, book 5, speaks of “mist, the common
    gloss of theologians.” Such mist is the legal fiction by which
    Christ’s suffering is taken in place of legal penalty, while yet
    it is not the legal penalty itself. B. G. Robinson: “Atonement is
    not an arbitrary contrivance, so that if one person will endure a
    certain amount of suffering, a certain number of others may go
    scot-free.” Mercy never cheats justice. Yet the New School theory
    of atonement admits that Christ cheated justice by a trick. It
    substituted the penalty of Christ for the penalty of the redeemed,
    and then substituted something else for the penalty of Christ.


(_e_) The intensity of Christ’s sufferings in the garden and on the cross
is inexplicable upon the theory that the atonement was a histrionic
exhibition of God’s regard for his government, and can be explained only
upon the view that Christ actually endured the wrath of God against human
sin.


    Christ refused the “_wine mingled with myrrh_” (_Mark 15:23_),
    that he might to the last have full possession of his powers and
    speak no words but words of truth and soberness. His cry of agony:
    “_My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?_” (_Mat. 27:46_), was
    not an ejaculation of thoughtless or delirious suffering. It
    expressed the deepest meaning of the crucifixion. The darkening of
    the heavens was only the outward symbol of the hiding of the
    countenance of God from him who was “_made to be sin on our
    behalf_” (_2 Cor. 5:21_). In the case of Christ, above that of all
    others, _finis coronat_, and dying words are undying words. “The
    tongues of dying men Enforce attention like deep harmony; When
    words are scarce they’re seldom spent in vain, For they breathe
    truth that breathe their words in pain.” _Versus_ Park,
    Discourses, 328-355.

    A pure woman needs to meet an infamous proposition with something
    more than a mild refusal. She must flame up and be angry. _Ps.
    97:10_—“_O ye that love Jehovah, hate evil_”; _Eph. 4:26_—“_Be ye
    angry, and sin not._” So it belongs to the holiness of God not to
    let sin go unchallenged. God not only _shows_ anger, but he _is_
    angry. It is the wrath of God which sin must meet, and which
    Christ must meet when he is numbered with the transgressors. Death
    was the cup of which he was to drink (_Mat. 20:22_; _John 18:11_),
    and which he drained to the dregs. Mason, Faith of the Gospel,
    196—“Jesus alone of all men truly ‘_tasted death_’ (_Heb. 2:9_).
    Some men are too stolid and unimaginative to taste it. To
    Christians the bitterness of death is gone, just because Christ
    died and rose again. But to Jesus its terrors were as yet
    undiminished. He resolutely set all his faculties to sound to the
    depths the dreadfulness of dying.”

    We therefore cannot agree with either Wendt or Johnson in the
    following quotations. Wendt, Teaching of Jesus, 2:249, 250—“The
    forsaking of the Father was not an absolute one, since Jesus still
    called him ‘_My God_’ (_Mat. 27:46_). Jesus felt the failing of
    that energy of spirit which had hitherto upheld him, and he
    expresses simply his ardent desire and prayer that God would once
    more grant him his power and assistance.” E. H. Johnson, The Holy
    Spirit, 143, 144—“It is not even necessary to believe that God hid
    his face from Christ at the last moment. It is necessary only to
    admit that Christ no longer saw the Father’s face.... He felt that
    it was so; but it was not so.” These explanations make Christ’s
    sufferings and Christ’s words unreal, and to our mind they are
    inconsistent with both his deity and his atonement.


(_f_) The actual power of the atonement over the human conscience and
heart is due, not to its exhibiting God’s regard for law, but to its
exhibiting an actual execution of law, and an actual satisfaction of
violated holiness made by Christ in the sinner’s stead.


    Whiton, Gloria Patri, 143, 144, claims that Christ is the
    propitiation for our sins only by bringing peace to the conscience
    and satisfying the divine demand that is felt therein. Whiton
    regards the atonement not as a governmental work outside of us,
    but as an educational work within. Aside from the objection that
    this view merges God’s transcendence in his immanence, we urge the
    words of Matthew Henry: “Nothing can satisfy an offended
    conscience but that which satisfied an offended God.” C. J.
    Baldwin: “The lake spread out has no moving power; it turns the
    mill-wheel only when contracted into the narrow stream and pouring
    over the fall. So the wide love of God moves men, only when it is
    concentrated into the sacrifice of the cross.”


(_g_) The theory contradicts all those passages of Scripture which
represent the atonement as necessary; as propitiating God himself; as
being a revelation of God’s righteousness; as being an execution of the
penalty of the law; as making salvation a matter of debt to the believer,
on the ground of what Christ has done; as actually purging our sins,
instead of making that purging possible; as not simply assuring the sinner
that God may now pardon him on account of what Christ has done, but that
Christ has actually wrought out a complete salvation, and will bestow it
upon all who come to him.


    John Bunyan, Pilgrim’s Progress, chapter vi—“Upon that place stood
    a Cross, and a little below, in the bottom, a Sepulchre. So I saw
    in my dream, that just as Christian came up with the Cross, his
    burden loosed from off his shoulders, and fell from off his back,
    and began to tumble, and so continued to do, till it came to the
    mouth of the Sepulchre, where it fell in, and I saw it no more.
    Then was Christian glad and lightsome, and said with a merry
    heart, He hath given me rest by his sorrow, and life by his death.
    Then he stood still awhile to look and wonder; for it was very
    surprising to him that the sight of the Cross should thus ease him
    of his burden.”

    John Bunyan’s story is truer to Christian experience than is the
    Governmental theory. The sinner finds peace, not by coming to God
    with a distant respect to Christ, but by coming directly to the
    “_Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world_” (_John
    1:29_). Christ’s words to every conscious sinner are simply:
    “_Come unto me_” (_Mat. 11:28_). Upon the ground of what Christ
    has done, salvation is a matter of debt to the believer. _1 John
    1:9_—“_If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to
    forgive us our sins_”—faithful to his promise, and righteous to
    Christ. The Governmental theory, on the other hand, tends to
    discourage the sinner’s direct access to Christ, and to render the
    way to conscious acceptance with God more circuitous and less
    certain.

    When The Outlook says: “Not even to the Son of God must we come
    instead of coming to God,” we can see only plain denial of the
    validity of Christ’s demands and promises, for he demands
    immediate submission when he bids the sinner follow him, and he
    promises immediate salvation when he assures all who come to him
    that he will not cast them out. The theory of Grotius is legal and
    speculative, but it is not Scriptural, nor does it answer the
    needs of human nature. For criticism of Albert Barnes’s doctrine,
    see Watts, New Apologetic, 210-300. For criticism of the Grotian
    theory in general, see Shedd, Hist. Doctrine, 2:347-369; Crawford,
    Atonement, 367; Cunningham, Hist. Theology, 2:355; Princeton
    Essays, 1:259-292; Essay on Atonement, by Abp. Thomson, in Aids to
    Faith; McIlvaine, Wisdom of Holy Scripture, 194-196; S. H. Tyng,
    Christian Pastor; Charles Hodge, Essays, 129-184; Lidgett, Spir.
    Prin. of Atonement, 151-154.


4th. The Irvingian Theory, or Theory of Gradually Extirpated Depravity.


This holds that, in his incarnation, Christ took human nature as it was in
Adam, not before the Fall, but after the Fall,—human nature, therefore,
with its inborn corruption and predisposition to moral evil; that,
notwithstanding the possession of this tainted and depraved nature,
Christ, through the power of the Holy Spirit, or of his divine nature, not
only kept his human nature from manifesting itself in any actual or
personal sin, but gradually purified it, through struggle and suffering,
until in his death he completely extirpated its original depravity, and
reunited it to God. This subjective purification of human nature in the
person of Jesus Christ constitutes his atonement, and men are saved, not
by any objective propitiation, but only by becoming through faith
partakers of Christ’s new humanity. This theory was elaborated by Edward
Irving, of London (1792-1834), and it has been held, in substance, by
Menken and Dippel in Germany.


    Irving was in this preceded by Felix of Urgella, in Spain († 818),
    whom Alcuin opposed. Felix said that the Logos united with human
    nature, without sanctifying it beforehand. Edward Irving, in his
    early life colleague of Dr. Chalmers, at Glasgow, was in his later
    years a preacher, in London, of the National Church of Scotland.
    For his own statement of his view of the Atonement, see his
    Collected Works, 5:9-398. See also Life of Irving, by Mrs.
    Oliphant; Menken, Schriften, 3:279-404; 6:351 _sq._; Guericke, in
    Studien und Kritiken, 1843: Heft 2; David Brown, in Expositor,
    Oct. 1887:264 _sq._, and letter of Irving to Marcus Dods, in
    British Weekly, Mch. 25, 1887. For other references, see
    Hagenbach, Hist. Doct., 2:496-498.

    Irving’s followers differ in their representation of his views.
    Says Miller, Hist. and Doct. of Irvingism, 1:85—“If indeed we made
    Christ a sinner, then indeed all creeds are at an end and we are
    worthy to die the death of blasphemers.... The miraculous
    conception depriveth him of human personality, and it also
    depriveth him of original sin and guilt needing to be atoned for
    by another, but it doth not deprive him of the substance of sinful
    flesh and blood,—that is, flesh and blood the same with the flesh
    and blood of his brethren.” 2:14—Freer says: “So that, despite it
    was fallen flesh he had assumed, he was, through the Eternal
    Spirit, born into the world ‘the Holy Thing’.” 11-15,
    282-305—“Unfallen humanity needed not redemption, therefore, Jesus
    did not take it. He took fallen humanity, but purged it in the act
    of taking it. The nature of which he took part was sinful in the
    lump, but in his person most holy.”

    So, says an Irvingian tract, “Being part of the very nature that
    had incurred the penalty of sin, though in his person never having
    committed or even thought it, part of the common humanity could
    suffer that penalty, and did so suffer, to make atonement for that
    nature, though he who took it knew no sin.” Dr. Curry, quoted in
    McClintock and Strong, Encyclopædia, 4:663, 664—“The Godhead came
    into vital union with humanity fallen and under the law. The last
    thought carried, to Irving’s realistic mode of thinking, the
    notion of Christ’s participation in the fallen character of
    humanity, which he designated by terms that implied a real
    sinfulness in Christ. He attempted to get rid of the odiousness of
    that idea, by saying that this was overborne, and at length wholly
    expelled, by the indwelling Godhead.”

    We must regard the later expounders of Irvingian doctrine as
    having softened down, if they have not wholly expunged, its most
    characteristic feature, as the following notation from Irving’s
    own words will show: Works, 5:115—“That Christ took our fallen
    nature, is most manifest, because there was no other in existence
    to take.” 123—“The human nature is thoroughly fallen; the mere
    apprehension of it by the Son doth not make it holy.” 128—“His
    soul did mourn and grieve and pray to God continually, that it
    might be delivered from the mortality, corruption, and temptation
    which it felt in its fleshly tabernacle.” 152—“These sufferings
    came not by imputation merely, but by actual participation of the
    sinful and cursed thing.” Irving frequently quoted _Heb.
    2:10_—“_make the author of their salvation perfect through
    sufferings._”

    Irving’s followers deny Christ’s sinfulness, only by assuming that
    inborn infirmity and congenital tendencies to evil are not sin,—in
    other words, that not native depravity, but only actual
    transgression, is to be denominated sin. Irving, in our judgment,
    was rightly charged with asserting the sinfulness of Christ’s
    human nature, and it was upon this charge that he was deposed from
    the ministry by the Presbytery in Scotland.

    Irving was of commanding stature, powerful voice, natural and
    graceful oratory. He loved the antique and the grand. For a time
    in London he was the great popular sensation. But shortly after
    the opening of his new church in Regent’s Square in 1827, he found
    that fashion had taken its departure and that his church was no
    longer crowded. He concluded that the world was under the reign of
    Satan; he became a fanatical millennarian; he gave himself wholly
    to the study of prophecy. In 1830 he thought the apostolic gifts
    were revived, and he held to the hope of a restoration of the
    primitive church, although he himself was relegated to a
    comparatively subordinate position. He exhausted his energies, and
    died at the age of forty-two. “If I had married Irving,” said Mrs.
    Thomas Carlyle, “there would have been no tongues.”


To this theory we offer the following objections:

(_a_) While it embraces an important element of truth, namely, the fact of
a new humanity in Christ of which all believers become partakers, it is
chargeable with serious error in denying the objective atonement which
makes the subjective application possible.


    Bruce, in his Humiliation of Christ, calls this a theory of
    “redemption by sample.” It is a purely subjective atonement which
    Irving has in mind. Deliverance from sin, in order to deliverance
    from penalty, is an exact reversal of the Scripture order. Yet
    this deliverance from sin, to Irving’s view, was to be secured in
    an external and mechanical way. He held that it was the Old
    Testament economy which should abide, while the New Testament
    economy should pass away. This is Sacramentarianism, or dependence
    upon the external rite, rather than upon the internal grace, as
    essential to salvation. The followers of Irving are
    Sacramentarians. The crucifix and candles, incense and gorgeous
    vestments, a highly complicated and symbolic ritual, they regard
    as a necessary accompaniment of religion. They feel the need of
    external authority, visible and permanent, but one that rests upon
    inspiration and continual supernatural help. They do not find this
    authority, as the Romanists do, in the Pope,—they find it in their
    new Apostles and Prophets. The church can never be renewed, as
    they think, except by the restoration of all the ministering
    orders mentioned in _Eph. 4:11_—“_apostles ... prophets ...
    evangelists ... pastors ... teachers._” But the N. T. mark of an
    apostle is that Christ has appeared to him. Irving’s apostles
    cannot stand this test. See Luthardt, Erinnerungen aus vergangenen
    Tagen, 237.


(_b_) It rests upon false fundamental principles,—as, that law is
identical with the natural order of the universe, and as such, is an
exhaustive expression of the will and nature of God; that sin is merely a
power of moral evil within the soul, instead of also involving an
objective guilt and desert of punishment; that penalty is the mere
reaction of law against the transgressor, instead of being also the
revelation of a personal wrath against sin; that the evil taint of human
nature can be extirpated by suffering its natural consequences,—penalty in
this way reforming the transgressor.


    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:463 (Syst. Doct., 3:361, 362)—“On
    Irving’s theory, evil inclinations are not sinful. Sinfulness
    belongs only to evil acts. The loose connection between the Logos
    and humanity savors of Nestorianism. It is the work of the
    _person_ to rid itself of something in the humanity which does not
    render it really sinful. If Jesus’ sinfulness of nature did not
    render his person sinful, this must be true of us,—which is a
    Pelagian element, revealed also in the denial that for our
    redemption we need Christ as an atoning sacrifice. It is not
    necessary to a complete incarnation for Christ to take a _sinful_
    nature, unless sin is _essential_ to human nature. In Irving’s
    view, the death of Christ’s body works the regeneration of his
    sinful nature. But this is to make sin a merely physical thing,
    and the body the only part of man needing redemption.” Penalty
    would thus become a reformer, and death a Savior.

    Irving held that there are two kinds of sin: 1. guiltless sin; 2.
    guilty sin. Passive depravity is not guilty; it is a part of man’s
    sensual nature; without it we would not be human. But the moment
    this fallen nature expresses itself in action, it becomes guilty.
    Irving near the close of his life claimed a sort of sinless
    perfection; for so long as he could keep this sinful nature
    inactive, and be guided by the Holy Spirit, he was free from sin
    and guilt. Christ took this passive sin, that he might be like
    unto his brethren, and that he might be able to suffer.


(_c_) It contradicts the express and implicit representations of
Scripture, with regard to Christ’s freedom from all taint of hereditary
depravity; misrepresents his life as a growing consciousness of the
underlying corruption of his human nature, which culminated at Gethsemane
and Calvary; and denies the truth of his own statements, when it declares
that he must have died on account of his own depravity, even though none
were to be saved thereby.


    “I shall maintain until death,” said Irving, “that the flesh of
    Christ was as rebellious as ours, as fallen as ours.... Human
    nature was corrupt to the core and black as hell, and this is the
    human nature the Son of God took upon himself and was clothed
    with.” The Rescuer must stand as deep in the mire as the one he
    rescues. There was no substitution. Christ waged war with the sin
    of his own flesh and he expelled it. His glory was not in saving
    others, but in saving himself, and so demonstrating the power of
    man through the Holy Spirit to cast out sin from his heart and
    life. Irving held that his theory was the only one taught in
    Scripture and held from the first by the church.

    Nicoll, Life of Christ, 183—“All others, as they grow in holiness,
    grow in their sense of sin. But when Christ is forsaken of the
    Father, he asks ‘Why?’ well knowing that the reason is not in his
    sin. He never makes confession of sin. In his longest prayer, the
    preface is an assertion of righteousness: ‘_I glorified thee_’
    (_John 17:4_). His last utterance from the cross is a quotation
    from _Ps. 31:5_—‘_Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit_’
    (_Luke 23:46_), but he does not add, as the Psalm does, ‘_thou
    hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth_,’ for he needed no
    redemption, being himself the Redeemer.”


(_d_) It makes the active obedience of Christ, and the subjective
purification of his human nature, to be the chief features of his work,
while the Scriptures make his death and passive bearing of penalty the
centre of all, and ever regard him as one who is personally pure and who
vicariously bears the punishment of the guilty.


    In Irving’s theory there is no imputation, or representation, or
    substitution. His only idea of sacrifice is that sin itself shall
    be sacrificed, or annihilated. The many subjective theories of the
    atonement show that the offence of the cross has not ceased (_Gal.
    5:11_—“_then hath the stumbling-block of the cross been done
    away_”). Christ crucified is still a stumbling-block to modern
    speculation. Yet it is, as of old, “_the power of God unto
    salvation_” (_Rom. 1:16_; _cf._ _1 Cor. 1:23, 24_—“_we preach
    Christ crucified, unto Jews a stumbling-block and unto Gentiles
    foolishness; but unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks,
    Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God_”).

    As the ocean receives the impurities of the rivers and purges
    them, so Irving represented Christ as receiving into himself the
    impurities of humanity and purging the race from its sin. Here is
    the sense of defilement, but no sense of guilt; subjective
    pollution, but no objective condemnation. We take precisely
    opposite ground from that of Irving, namely, that Christ had, not
    hereditary depravity, but hereditary guilt; that he was under
    obligation to suffer for the sins of the race to which he had
    historically united himself, and of which he was the creator, the
    upholder, and the life. He was “_made to be sin on our behalf_”
    (_2 Cor. 5:21_), not in the sense of one defiled, as Irving
    thought, but in the sense of one condemned to bear our iniquities
    and to suffer their penal consequences. The test of a theory of
    the atonement, as the test of a religion, is its power to “cleanse
    that red right hand” of Lady Macbeth; in other words, its power to
    satisfy the divine justice of which our condemning conscience is
    only the reflection. The theory of Irving has no such power. Dr.
    E. G. Robinson verged toward Irving’s view, when he claimed that
    “Christ took human nature as he found it.”


(_e_) It necessitates the surrender of the doctrine of justification as a
merely declaratory act of God; and requires such a view of the divine
holiness, expressed only through the order of nature, as can be maintained
only upon principles of pantheism.


    Thomas Aquinas inquired whether Christ was slain by himself, or by
    another. The question suggests a larger one—whether God has
    constituted other forces than his own, personal and impersonal, in
    the universe, over against which he stands in his transcendence;
    or whether all his activity is merged in, and identical with, the
    activity of the creature. The theory of a merely subjective
    atonement is more consistent with the latter view than the former.
    For criticism of Irvingian doctrine, see Studien und Kritiken.
    1845:319; 1877:354-374; Princeton Rev., April 1863:207; Christian
    Rev., 28:234 sq.; Ullmann, Sinlessness of Jesus, 219-232.


5th. The Anselmic, or Commercial Theory of the Atonement.


This theory holds that sin is a violation of the divine honor or majesty,
and, as committed against an infinite being, deserves an infinite
punishment; that the majesty of God requires him to execute punishment,
while the love of God pleads for the sparing of the guilty; that this
conflict of divine attributes is eternally reconciled by the voluntary
sacrifice of the God-man, who bears in virtue of the dignity of his person
the intensively infinite punishment of sin, which must otherwise have been
suffered extensively and eternally by sinners; that this suffering of the
God-man presents to the divine majesty an exact equivalent for the
deserved sufferings of the elect; and that, as the result of this
satisfaction of the divine claims, the elect sinners are pardoned and
regenerated. This view was first broached by Anselm of Canterbury
(1033-1109) as a substitute for the earlier patristic view that Christ’s
death was a ransom paid to Satan, to deliver sinners from his power. It is
held by many Scotch theologians, and, in this country, by the Princeton
School.


    The old patristic theory, which the Anselmic view superseded, has
    been called the Military theory of the Atonement. Satan, as a
    captor in war, had a right to his captives, which could be bought
    off only by ransom. It was Justin Martyr who first propounded this
    view that Christ paid a ransom to Satan. Gregory of Nyssa added
    that Christ’s humanity was the bait with which Satan was attracted
    to the hidden hook of Christ’s deity, and so was caught by
    artifice. Peter Lombard, Sent., 3:19—“What did the Redeemer to our
    captor? He held out to him his cross as a mouse-trap; in it he
    set, as a bait, his blood.” Even Luther compares Satan to the
    crocodile which swallows the ichneumon, only to find that the
    little animal eats its insides out.

    These metaphors show this, at least, that no age of the church has
    believed in a merely subjective atonement. Nor was this relation
    to Satan the only aspect in which the atonement was regarded even
    by the early church. So early as the fourth century, we find a
    great church Father maintaining that the death of Christ was
    required by the truth and goodness of God. See Crippen, History of
    Christian Doctrine, 129—“Athanasius (325-373) held that the death
    of Christ was the payment of a debt due to God. His argument is
    briefly this: God, having threatened death as the punishment of
    sin, would be untrue if he did not fulfil his threatening. But it
    would be equally unworthy of the divine goodness to permit
    rational beings, to whom he had imparted his own Spirit, to incur
    this death in consequence of an imposition practiced on them by
    the devil. Seeing then that nothing but death could solve this
    dilemma, the Word, who could not die, assumed a mortal body, and,
    offering his human nature a sacrifice for all, fulfilled the law
    by his death.” Gregory Nazianzen (390) “retained the figure of a
    ransom, but, clearly perceiving that the analogy was incomplete,
    he explained the death of Christ as an expedient to reconcile the
    divine attributes.”

    But, although many theologians had recognized a relation of
    atonement to God, none before Anselm had given any clear account
    of the nature of this relation. Anselm’s acute, brief, and
    beautiful treatise entitled “Cur Deus Homo” constitutes the
    greatest single contribution to the discussion of this doctrine.
    He shows that “whatever man owes, he owes to God, not to the
    devil.... He who does not yield due honor to God, withholds from
    him what is his, and dishonors him; and this is sin.... It is
    necessary that either the stolen honor be restored, or that
    punishment follow.” Man, because of original sin, cannot make
    satisfaction for the dishonor done to God,—“a sinner cannot
    justify a sinner.” Neither could an angel make this satisfaction.
    None can make it but God. “If then none can make it but God, and
    none owes it but man, it must needs be wrought out by God, made
    man.” The God-man, to make satisfaction for the sins of all
    mankind, must “give to God, of his own, something that is more
    valuable than all that is under God.” Such a gift of infinite
    value was his death. The reward of his sacrifice turns to the
    advantage of man, and thus the justice and love of God are
    reconciled.

    The foregoing synopsis is mainly taken from Crippen, Hist. Christ.
    Doct., 134, 135. The Cur Deus Homo of Anselm is translated in Bib.
    Sac., 11:729; 12:52. A synopsis of it is given in Lichtenberger’s
    Encyclopédie des Sciences Religieuses, vol. 1, art.: Anselm. The
    treatises on the Atonement by Symington, Candlish, Martin,
    Smeaton, in Great Britain, advocate for substance the view of
    Anselm, as indeed it was held by Calvin before them. In America,
    the theory is represented by Nathanael Emmons, A. Alexander, and
    Charles Hodge (Syst. Theol., 2:470-540).


To this theory we make the following objections:

(_a_) While it contains a valuable element of truth, in its representation
of the atonement as satisfying a principle of the divine nature, it
conceives of this principle in too formal and external a manner,—making
the idea of the divine honor or majesty more prominent than that of the
divine holiness, in which the divine honor and majesty are grounded.


    The theory has been called the “Criminal theory” of the Atonement,
    as the old patristic theory of a ransom paid to Satan has been
    called the “Military theory.” It had its origin in a time when
    exaggerated ideas prevailed respecting the authority of popes and
    emperors, and when dishonor done to their majesty (_crimen læsæ
    majestatis_) was the highest offence known to law. See article by
    Cramer, in Studien und Kritiken, 1880:7, on Wurzeln des
    Anselm’schen Satisfactionsbegriffes.

    Allen, Jonathan Edwards, 88, 89—“From the point of view of
    Sovereignty, there could be no necessity for atonement. In
    Mohammedanism, where sovereignty is the supreme and sole
    theological principle, no need is felt for satisfying the divine
    justice. God may pardon whom he will, on whatever grounds his
    sovereign will may dictate. It therefore constituted a great
    advance in Latin theology, as also an evidence of its immeasurable
    superiority to Mohammedanism, when Anselm for the first time, in a
    clear and emphatic manner, had asserted an inward necessity in the
    being of God that his justice should receive satisfaction for the
    affront which had been offered to it by human sinfulness.”

    Henry George, Progress and Poverty, 481—“In the days of feudalism,
    men thought of heaven as organized on a feudal basis, and ranked
    the first and second Persons of the Trinity as Suzerain and
    Tenant-in-Chief.” William James, Varieties of Religious
    Experience, 329, 830—“The monarchical type of sovereignty was, for
    example, so ineradicably planted in the mind of our forefathers,
    that a dose of cruelty and arbitrariness in their Deity seems
    positively to have been required by their imagination. They called
    the cruelty ‘retributive justice,’ and a God without it would
    certainly not have struck them as sovereign enough. But to-day we
    abhor the very notion of eternal suffering inflicted; and that
    arbitrary dealing out of salvation and damnation to selected
    individuals, of which Jonathan Edwards could persuade himself that
    he had not only a conviction, but a ‘delightful conviction,’ as of
    a doctrine ‘exceeding pleasant, bright, and sweet,’ appears to us,
    if sovereignly anything, sovereignly irrational and mean.”


(_b_) In its eagerness to maintain the atoning efficacy of Christ’s
passive obedience, the active obedience, quite as clearly expressed in
Scripture, is insufficiently emphasized and well nigh lost sight of.


    Neither Christ’s active obedience alone, nor Christ’s obedient
    passion alone, can save us. As we shall see hereafter, in our
    examination of the doctrine of Justification, the latter was
    needed as the ground upon which our penalty could be remitted; the
    former as the ground upon which we might be admitted to the divine
    favor. Calvin has reflected the passive element in Anselm’s view,
    in the following passages of his Institutes: II, 17:3—“God, to
    whom we were hateful through sin, was appeased by the death of his
    Son, and was made propitious to us.”... II, 16:7—“It is necessary
    to consider how he substituted himself in order to pay the price
    of our redemption. Death held us under its yoke, but he, in our
    place, delivered himself into its power, that he might exempt us
    from it.”... II, 16:2—“Christ interposed and bore what, by the
    just judgment of God, was impending over sinners; with his own
    blood expiated the sin which rendered them hateful to God; by this
    expiation satisfied and duly propitiated the Father; by this
    intercession appeased his anger; on this basis founded peace
    between God and men; and by this tie secured the divine
    benevolence toward them.”

    It has been said that Anselm regarded Christ’s death not as a
    vicarious punishment, but as a voluntary sacrifice in compensation
    for which the guilty were released and justified. So Neander,
    Hist. Christ. Dogmas (Bohn), 2:517, understands Anselm to teach
    “the necessity of a satisfactio vicaria activa,” and says: “We do
    not find in his writings the doctrine of a satisfactio passiva: he
    nowhere says that Christ had endured the punishment of men.”
    Shedd, Hist. Christ. Doctrine, 2:282, thinks this a
    misunderstanding of Anselm. The Encyclopædia Britannica takes the
    view of Shedd, when it speaks of Christ’s sufferings as penalty:
    “The justice of man demands satisfaction; and as an insult to
    infinite honor is itself infinite, the satisfaction must be
    infinite, _i. e._, it must outweigh all that is not God. Such a
    penalty can only be paid by God himself, and, as a penalty for
    man, must be paid under the form of man. Satisfaction is only
    possible through the God-man. Now this God-man, as sinless, is
    exempt from the punishment of sin; his passion is therefore
    voluntary, not given as due. The merit of it is therefore
    infinite; God’s justice is thus appeased, and his mercy may extend
    to man.” The truth then appears to be that Anselm held Christ’s
    obedience to be passive, in that he satisfied God’s justice by
    enduring punishment which the sinner deserved; but that he held
    this same obedience of Christ to be active, in that he endured
    this penalty voluntarily, when there was no obligation upon him so
    to do.

    Shedd, Dogmatic Theology, 2:431, 461, 462—“Christ not only
    suffered the penalty, but obeyed the precept, of the law. In this
    case law and justice get their whole dues. But when lost man only
    suffers the penalty, but does not obey the precept, the law is
    defrauded of a part of its dues. No law is completely obeyed, if
    only its penalty is endured.... Consequently, a sinner can never
    completely and exhaustively satisfy the divine law, however much
    or long he may suffer, because he cannot at one and the same time
    endure the penalty and obey the precept. He owes ‘_ten thousand
    talents_’ and has ‘_not wherewith to pay_’ (_Mat. 18:24, 25_), But
    Christ did both, and therefore he ‘_magnified the law and made it
    honorable_’ (_Is. 42:21_), in an infinitely higher degree than the
    whole human family would have done, had they all personally
    suffered for their sins.” _Cf._ Edwards, Works, 1:406.


(_c_) It allows disproportionate weight to those passages of Scripture
which represent the atonement under commercial analogies, as the payment
of a debt or ransom, to the exclusion of those which describe it as an
ethical fact, whose value is to be estimated not quantitatively, but
qualitatively.


    Milton, Paradise Lost, 3:209-212—“Die he, or justice must, unless
    for him Some other, able and as willing, pay The rigid
    satisfaction, death for death.” The main text relied upon by the
    advocates of the Commercial theory is _Mat. 20:28_—“_give his life
    a ransom for many._” Pfleiderer, Philosophy of Religion,
    1:257—“The work of Christ, as Anselm construed it, was in fact
    nothing else than the prototype of the meritorious performances
    and satisfactions of the ecclesiastical saints, and was therefore,
    from the point of view of the mediæval church, thought out quite
    logically. All the more remarkable is it that the churches of the
    Reformation could be satisfied with this theory, notwithstanding
    that it stood in complete contradiction to their deeper moral
    consciousness. If, according to Protestant principles generally,
    there are no supererogatory meritorious works, then one would
    suppose that such cannot be accepted even in the case of Jesus.”

    E. G. Robinson, Christian Theology, 258—“The Anselmic theory was
    rejected by Abelard for grounding the atonement in justice instead
    of benevolence, and for taking insufficient account of the power
    of Christ’s sufferings and death in procuring a subjective change
    in man.” Encyc. Brit., 2:93 (art.: Anselm)—“This theory has
    exercised immense influence on the form of church doctrine. It is
    certainly an advance on the older patristic theory, in so far as
    it substitutes for a contest between God and Satan, a contest
    between the goodness and justice of God; but it puts the whole
    relation on a merely legal footing, gives it no ethical bearing,
    and neglects altogether the consciousness of the individual to be
    redeemed. In this respect it contrasts unfavorably with the later
    theory of Abelard.”


(_d_) It represents the atonement as having reference only to the elect,
and ignores the Scripture declarations that Christ died for all.


    Anselm, like Augustine, limited the atonement to the elect. Yet
    Leo the Great, in 461, had affirmed that “so precious is the
    shedding of Christ’s blood for the unjust, that if the whole
    universe of captives would believe in the Redeemer, no chain of
    the devil could hold them” (Crippen, 132). Bishop Gailor, of the
    Episcopal Church, heard General Booth at Memphis say in 1903:
    “Friends, Jesus shed his blood to pay the price, and he bought
    from God enough salvation to go round.” The Bishop says: “I felt
    that his view of salvation was different from mine. Yet such
    teaching, partial as it is, lifts men by the thousand from the
    mire and vice of sin into the power and purity of a new life in
    Jesus Christ.”

    Foster, Christian Life and Theology, 221—“Anselm does not clearly
    connect the death of Christ with the punishment of sin, since he
    makes it a supererogatory work voluntarily done, in consequence of
    which it is ‘fitting’ that forgiveness should be bestowed on
    sinners.... Yet his theory served to hand down to later
    theologians the great idea of the objective atonement.”


(_e_) It is defective in holding to a merely external transfer of the
merit of Christ’s work, while it does not clearly state the internal
ground of that transfer, in the union of the believer with Christ.


    This needed supplement, namely, the doctrine of the Union of the
    Believer with Christ, was furnished by Thomas Aquinas, Summa, pars
    3, quæs. 8. The Anselmic theory is Romanist in its tendency, as
    the theory next to be mentioned is Protestant in its tendency. P.
    S. Moxom asserts that salvation is not by substitution, but by
    incorporation. We prefer to say that salvation is by substitution,
    but that the substitution is by incorporation. Incorporation
    involves substitution, and another’s pain inures to my account.
    Christ being incorporate with humanity, all the exposures and
    liabilities of humanity fell upon him. Simon, Reconciliation by
    Incarnation, is an attempt to unite the two elements of the
    doctrine.

    Lidgett, Spir. Prin. of Atonement, 182-189—“As Anselm represents
    it, Christ’s death is not ours in any such sense that we can enter
    into it. Bushnell justly charges that it leaves no moral dynamic
    in the Cross.” For criticism of Anselm, see John Caird, Fund.
    Ideas of Christianity, 2:172-193: Thomasius, Christi Person und
    Werk, III, 2:230-241; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, IV, 2:70 sq.; Baur,
    Dogmengeschichte, 2:416 _sq._; Shedd, Hist. Doct., 2:273-286;
    Dale, Atonement, 279-292; McIlvaine, Wisdom of Holy Scripture,
    196-199; Kreibig, Versöhnungslehre, 176-178.


6th. The Ethical Theory of the Atonement.


In propounding what we conceive to be the true theory of the atonement, it
seems desirable to divide our treatment into two parts. No theory can be
satisfactory which does not furnish a solution of the two problems: 1.
What did the atonement accomplish? or, in other words, what was the object
of Christ’s death? The answer to this question must be a description of
the atonement in its relation to holiness in God. 2. What were the means
used? or, in other words, how could Christ justly die? The answer to this
question must be a description of the atonement as arising from Christ’s
relation to humanity. We take up these two parts of the subject in order.


    Edwards, Works, 1:609, says that two things make Christ’s
    sufferings a satisfaction for human guilt: (1) their equality or
    equivalence to the punishment that the sinner deserves; (2) the
    union between him and them, or the propriety of his being
    accepted, in suffering, as the representative of the sinner.
    Christ bore God’s wrath: (1) by the sight of sin and punishment;
    (2) by enduring the effects of wrath ordered by God. See also
    Edwards, Sermon on the Satisfaction of Christ. These statements of
    Edwards suggest the two points of view from which we regard the
    atonement; but they come short of the Scriptural declarations, in
    that they do not distinctly assert Christ’s endurance of penalty
    itself. Thus they leave the way open for the New School theories
    of the atonement, propounded by the successors of Edwards.

    Adolphe Monod said well: “Save first the holy law of my God,—after
    that you shall save me.” Edwards felt the first of these needs,
    for he says, in his Mysteries of Scripture, Works, 3:542—“The
    necessity of Christ’s satisfaction to divine justice is, as it
    were, the centre and hinge of all doctrines of pure revelation.
    Other doctrines are comparatively of little importance, except as
    they have respect to this.” And in his Work of Redemption, Works,
    1:412—“Christ was born to the end that he might die; and therefore
    he did, as it were, begin to die as soon as he was born.” See
    _John 12:32_—“_And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw
    all men unto myself. But this he said, signifying by what manner
    of death he should die._” Christ was “_lifted up_”: 1. as a
    propitiation to the holiness of God, which makes suffering to
    follow sin, so affording the only ground for pardon without and
    peace within; 2. as a power to purify the hearts and lives of men,
    Jesus being as “_the serpent lifted up in the wilderness_” (_John
    3:14_), and we overcoming “_because of the blood of the Lamb_”
    (_Rev. 12:11_).


_First_,—the Atonement as related to Holiness in God.

The Ethical theory holds that the necessity of the atonement is grounded
in the holiness of God, of which conscience in man is a finite reflection.
There is an ethical principle in the divine nature, which demands that sin
shall be punished. Aside from its results, sin is essentially
ill-deserving. As we who are made in God’s image mark our growth in purity
by the increasing quickness with which we detect impurity, and the
increasing hatred which we feel toward it, so infinite purity is a
consuming fire to all iniquity. As there is an ethical demand in our
natures that not only others’ wickedness, but our own wickedness, be
visited with punishment, and a keen conscience cannot rest till it has
made satisfaction to justice for its misdeeds, so there is an ethical
demand of God’s nature that penalty follow sin.


    The holiness of God has conscience and penalty for its correlates
    and consequences. Gordon, Christ of To-day, 216—“In old Athens,
    the rock on whose top sat the Court of the Areopagus, representing
    the highest reason and the best character of the Athenian state,
    had underneath it the Cave of the Furies.” Shakespeare knew human
    nature and he bears witness to its need of atonement. In his last
    Will and Testament he writes: “First, I commend my soul into the
    hands of God, my Creator, hoping and assuredly believing, through
    the only merits of Jesus Christ my Savior, to be made partaker of
    life everlasting.” Richard III, 1:4—“I charge you, as you hope to
    have redemption By Christ’s dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
    That you depart and lay no hands on me.” Richard II, 4:1—“The
    world’s Ransom, blessed Mary’s Son.” Henry VI, 2d part, 3:2—“That
    dread King took our state upon him, To free us from his Father’s
    wrathful curse.” Henry IV, 1st part, 1:1—“Those holy fields, Over
    whose acres walked those blessed feet, Which fourteen hundred
    years ago were nailed For our advantage on the bitter Cross.”
    Measure for Measure, 2:2—“Why, all the souls that are were forfeit
    once; And he that might the vantage best have took Found out the
    remedy.” Henry VI, 2d part, 1:1—“Now, by the death of him that
    died for all!” All’s Well that Ends Well, 3:4—“What angel shall
    Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive Unless her prayers,
    whom heaven delights to hear And loves to grant, reprieve him from
    the wrath Of greatest justice.” See a good statement of the
    Ethical theory of the Atonement in its relation to God’s holiness,
    in Denney, Studies in Theology, 100-124.


Punishment is the constitutional reaction of God’s being against moral
evil—the self-assertion of infinite holiness against its antagonist and
would-be destroyer. In God this demand is devoid of all passion, and is
consistent with infinite benevolence. It is a demand that cannot be
evaded, since the holiness from which it springs is unchanging. The
atonement is therefore a satisfaction of the ethical demand of the divine
nature, by the substitution of Christ’s penal sufferings for the
punishment of the guilty.


    John Wessel, a Reformer before the Reformation (1419-1489): “Ipse
    deus, ipse sacerdos, ipse hostia, pro se, de se, sibi
    satisfecit”—“Himself being at the same time God, priest, and
    sacrificial victim, he made satisfaction to himself, for himself
    [_i. e._, for the sins of men to whom he had united himself], and
    by himself [by his own sinless sufferings].” Quarles’s Emblems: “O
    groundless deeps! O love beyond degree! The Offended dies, to set
    the offender free!”

    Spurgeon, Autobiography, 1:98—“When I was in the hand of the Holy
    Spirit, under conviction of sin, I had a clear and sharp sense of
    the justice of God. Sin, whatever it might be to other people,
    became to me an intolerable burden. It was not so much that I
    feared hell, as that I feared sin; and all the while I had upon my
    mind a deep concern for the honor of God’s name and the integrity
    of his moral government. I felt that it would not satisfy my
    conscience if I could be forgiven unjustly. But then there came
    the question: ‘How could God be just, and yet justify me who had
    been so guilty?’... The doctrine of the atonement is to my mind
    one of the surest proofs of the inspiration of Holy Scripture. Who
    would or could have thought of the just Ruler dying for the unjust
    rebel?”


This substitution is unknown to mere law, and above and beyond the powers
of law. It is an operation of grace. Grace, however, does not violate or
suspend law, but takes it up into itself and fulfils it. The righteousness
of law is maintained, in that the source of all law, the judge and
punisher, himself voluntarily submits to bear the penalty, and bears it in
the human nature that has sinned.


    Matheson, Moments on the Mount, 221—“In conscience, man condemns
    and is condemned. Christ was God in the flesh, both priest and
    sacrificial victim (_Heb. 9:12_). He is ‘_full of
    grace_’—forgiving grace—but he is ‘_full of truth_’ also, and so
    ‘_the only-begotten from the Father_’ (_John 1:14_). Not
    forgiveness that ignores sin, not justice that has no mercy. He
    forgave the sinner, because he bore the sin.” Kaftan, referring to
    some modern theologians who have returned to the old doctrine but
    who have said that the basis of the atonement is, not the
    juridical idea of punishment, but the ethical idea of
    propitiation, affirms as follows: “On the contrary the highest
    ethical idea of propitiation is just that of punishment. Take this
    away, and propitiation becomes nothing but the inferior and
    unworthy idea of appeasing the wrath of an incensed deity.
    Precisely the idea of the vicarious suffering of punishment is the
    idea which must in some way be brought to a full expression for
    the sake of the ethical consciousness.

    “The conscience awakened by God can accept no forgiveness which is
    not experienced as at the same time a condemnation of sin....
    Jesus, though he was without sin and deserved no punishment, took
    upon himself all the evils which have come into the world as the
    consequence and punishment of sin, even to the shameful death on
    the Cross at the hand of sinners.... Consequently for the good of
    man he bore all that which man had deserved, and thereby has man
    escaped the final eternal punishment and has become a child of
    God.... This is not merely a subjective conclusion upon the
    related facts, but it is as objective and real as anything which
    faith recognizes and knows.”


Thus the atonement answers the ethical demand of the divine nature that
sin be punished if the offender is to go free. The interests of the divine
government are secured as a first subordinate result of this satisfaction
to God himself, of whose nature the government is an expression; while, as
a second subordinate result, provision is made for the needs of human
nature,—on the one hand the need of an objective satisfaction to its
ethical demand of punishment for sin, and on the other the need of a
manifestation of divine love and mercy that will affect the heart and move
it to repentance.


    The great classical passage with reference to the atonement is
    _Rom. 3:25, 26_—“_whom God set forth to be a propitiation, through
    faith, in his blood, to show his righteousness because of the
    passing over of the sins done aforetime, in the forbearance of
    God; for the showing, I say, of his righteousness at this present
    season: that he might himself be just, and the justifier of him
    that hath faith is Jesus._” Or, somewhat more freely translated,
    the passage would read:—“_whom God hath set forth in his blood as
    a propitiatory sacrifice, through faith, to show forth his
    righteousness on account of the pretermission of past offenses in
    the forbearance of God; to declare his righteousness in the time
    now present, so that he may be just and yet may justify him who
    believeth in Jesus_.”

    EXPOSITION OF ROM. 3:25, 26.—These verses are an expanded
    statement of the subject of the epistle—the revelation of the
    “_righteousness of God_” (= the righteousness which God provides
    and which God accepts)—which had been mentioned in _1:17_, but
    which now has new light thrown upon it by the demonstration, in
    _1:18-3:20_, that both Gentiles and Jews are under condemnation,
    and are alike shut up for salvation to some other method than that
    of works. We subjoin the substance of Meyer’s comments upon this
    passage.

    “_Verse 25._ ‘_God has set forth Christ as an effectual
    propitiatory offering, through faith, by means of his blood_,’ _i.
    e._, in that he caused him to shed his blood. ἐν τῷ αὐτοῦ αἵματι
    belongs to προέθετο, not to πίστεως. The purpose of this setting
    forth in his blood is εἰς ἔνδειξιν τῆς δικαιοσύνης αὐτοῦ, ‘_for
    the display of his_ [judicial and punitive] _righteousness_,’
    which received its satisfaction in the death of Christ as a
    propitiatory offering, and was thereby practically demonstrated
    and exhibited. ‘_On account of the passing-by of sins that had
    previously taken place_,’ _i. e._, because he had allowed the
    pre-Christian sins to go without punishment, whereby his
    righteousness had been lost sight of and obscured, and had come to
    need an ἔνδειξις, or exhibition to men. Omittance is not
    acquittance. πάρεσις, passing-by, is intermediate between pardon
    and punishment. ‘_In virtue of the forbearance of God_’ expresses
    the motive of the πάρεσις. Before Christ’s sacrifice, God’s
    administration was a scandal,—it needed vindication. The atonement
    is God’s answer to the charge of freeing the guilty.

    “_Verse 26._ εἰς τὸ εἶναι is not epexegetical of εἰς ἔνδειξιν, but
    presents the teleology of the ἱλαστήριον, the final aim of the
    whole affirmation from ὂν προέθετο to καιρῷ—namely, first, God’s
    _being just_, and secondly, his _appearing just_ in consequence of
    this. _Justus et justificans_, instead of _justus et condemnans_,
    this is the _summum paradoxon evangelicum_. Of this revelation of
    righteousness, not through condemnation, but through atonement,
    grace is the determining ground.”

    We repeat what was said on pages 719, 720, with regard to the
    teaching of the passage, namely, that it shows: (1) that Christ’s
    death is a propitiatory sacrifice; (2) that its first and main
    effect is upon God; (3) that the particular attribute in God which
    demands the atonement in his justice, or holiness; (4) that the
    satisfaction of this holiness is the necessary condition of God’s
    justifying the believer. It is only incidentally and subordinately
    that the atonement is a necessity to man; Paul speaks of it here
    mainly as a necessity to God. Christ suffers, indeed, that God may
    _appear_ righteous; but behind the appearance lies the reality;
    the main object of Christ’s suffering is that God may _be_
    righteous, while he pardons the believing sinner; in other words,
    the ground of the atonement is something internal to God himself.
    See _Heb. 2:10_—it “_became_” God = it was morally fitting in God,
    to make Christ suffer; _cf._ _Zech. 6:8_—“_they that go toward the
    north country have quieted my spirit in the north country_”—the
    judgments inflicted on Babylon have satisfied my justice.

    Charnock: “He who once ‘_quenched the violence of fire_’ for those
    Hebrew children, has also quenched the fires of God’s anger
    against the sinner, hotter than furnace heated seven times.” The
    same God who is a God of holiness, and who in virtue of his
    holiness must punish human sin, is also a God of mercy, and in
    virtue of his mercy himself bears the punishment of human sin.
    Dorner, Gesch. prot. Theologie, 98—“Christ is not only mediator
    between God and man, but between the just God and the merciful
    God”—_cf._ _Ps. 85:10_—“_Mercy and truth are met together;
    righteousness and peace have kissed each other,_” “Conscience
    demands vicariousness, for conscience declares that a gratuitous
    pardon would not be just”; see Knight, Colloquia Peripatetica, 88.

    Lidgett, Spir. Principle of the Atonement, 219, 304—“The Atonement
    1. has Godward significance; 2. consists in our Lord’s endurance
    of death on our behalf; 3. the spirit in which he endured death is
    of vital importance to the efficacy of his sacrifice, namely,
    obedience.... God gives repentance, yet requires it; he gives
    atonement, yet requires it. ‘_Thanks be to God for his unspeakable
    gift_’ (_2 Cor. 9:15_).” Simon, in Expositor, 6:321-334 (for
    substance)—“As in prayer we ask God to energize us and enable us
    to obey his law, and he answers by entering our hearts and obeying
    in us and for us: as we pray for strength in affliction, and find
    him helping us by putting his Spirit into us, and suffering in us
    and for us; so in atonement, Christ, the manifested God, obeys and
    suffers in our stead. Even the moral theory implies substitution
    also. God in us obeys his own law and bears the sorrows that sin
    has caused. Why can he not, in human nature, also endure the
    penalty of sin? The possibility of this cannot be consistently
    denied by any who believe in divine help granted in answer to
    prayer. The doctrine of the atonement and the doctrine of prayer
    stand or fall together.”

    See on the whole subject, Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 272-324,
    Philosophy of History, 65-69, and Dogmatic Theology, 2:401-463;
    Magee, Atonement and Sacrifice, 27, 53, 258; Edwards’s Works,
    4:140 sq.; Weber, Vom Zorne Gottes, 214-334; Owen, on Divine
    Justice, in Works, 10:500-512; Philippi, Glaubenslehre, IV,
    2:27-114; Hopkins, Works, 1:319-368; Schöberlein, in Studien und
    Kritiken, 1845:267-318, and 1847:7-70, also in Herzog,
    Encyclopädie, art.: Versöhnung; Jahrbuch f. d. Theol., 3:713, and
    8:213; Macdonnell, Atonement, 115-214; Luthardt, Saving Truths,
    114-138; Baird, Elohim Revealed, 605-637; Lawrence, in Bib. Sac.,
    20:332-339; Kreibig, Versöhnungslehre; Waffle, in Bap. Rev.,
    1882:263-286; Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:641-662 (Syst. Doct.,
    4:107-124); Remensnyder, The Atonement and Modern Thought.


_Secondly_,—the Atonement as related to Humanity in Christ.

The Ethical theory of the atonement holds that Christ stands in such
relation to humanity, that what God’s holiness demands Christ is under
obligation to pay, longs to pay, inevitably does pay, and pays so fully,
in virtue of his two-fold nature, that every claim of justice is
satisfied, and the sinner who accepts what Christ has done in his behalf
is saved.


    Dr. R. W. Dale, in his work on The Atonement, states the question
    before us: “What must be Christ’s relation to men, in order to
    make it possible that he should die for them?” We would change the
    form of the question, so that it should read: “What must be
    Christ’s relation to men, in order to make it not only possible,
    but just and necessary, that he should die for them?” Dale
    replies, for substance, that Christ must have had an original and
    central relation to the human race and to every member of it; see
    Denney, Death of Christ, 318. In our treatment of Ethical Monism,
    of the Trinity, and of the Person of Christ, we have shown that
    Christ, as Logos, as the immanent God, is the Life of humanity,
    laden with responsibility for human sin, while yet he personally
    knows no sin. Of this race-responsibility and race-guilt which
    Christ assumed, and for which he suffered so soon as man had
    sinned, Christ’s obedience and suffering in the flesh were the
    visible reflection and revelation. Only in Christ’s organic union
    with the race can we find the vital relation which will make his
    vicarious sufferings either possible or just. Only when we regard
    Calvary as revealing eternal principles of the divine nature, can
    we see how the sufferings of those few hours upon the Cross could
    suffice to save the millions of mankind.

    Dr. E. Y. Mullins has set forth the doctrine of the Atonement in
    five propositions: “1. In order to atonement Christ became vitally
    united to the human race. It was only by assuming the nature of
    those he would redeem that he could break the power of their
    captor.... The human race may be likened to many sparrows who had
    been caught in the snare of the fowler, and were hopelessly
    struggling against their fate. A great eagle swoops down from the
    sky, becomes entangled with the sparrows in the net, and then
    spreading his mighty wings he soars upward bearing the snare and
    captives and breaking its meshes he delivers himself and them....
    Christ the fountain head of life imparting his own vitality to the
    redeemed, and causing them to share in the experiences of
    Gethsemane and Calvary, breaking thus for them the power of sin
    and death—this is the atonement, by virtue of which sin is put
    away and man is united to God.”

    Dr. Mullins properly regards this view of atonement as too narrow,
    inasmuch as it disregards the differences between Christ and men
    arising from his sinlessness and his deity. He adds therefore that
    “2. Christ became the substitute for sinners; 3. became the
    representative of men before God; 4. gained power over human
    hearts to win them from sin and reconcile them to God; and 5.
    became a propitiation and satisfaction, rendering the remission of
    sins consistent with the divine holiness.” If Christ’s union with
    the race be one which begins with creation and antedates the Fall,
    all of the later points in the above scheme are only natural
    correlates and consequences of the first,—substitution,
    representation, reconciliation, propitiation, satisfaction, are
    only different aspects of the work which Christ does for us, by
    virtue of the fact that he is the immanent God, the Life of
    humanity, priest and victim, condemning and condemned, atoning and
    atoned.


We have seen how God can justly demand satisfaction; we now show how
Christ can justly make it; or, in other words, how the innocent can justly
suffer for the guilty. The solution of the problem lies in Christ’s union
with humanity. The first result of that union is obligation to suffer for
men; since, being one with the race, Christ had a share in the
responsibility of the race to the law and the justice of God. In him
humanity was created; at every stage of its existence humanity was upheld
by his power; as the immanent God he was the life of the race and of every
member of it. Christ’s sharing of man’s life justly and inevitably
subjected him to man’s exposures and liabilities, and especially to God’s
condemnation on account of sin.


    In the seventh chapter of Elsie Venner, Oliver Wendell Holmes
    makes the Reverend Mr. Honeywood lay aside an old sermon on Human
    Nature, and write one on The Obligations of an infinite Creator to
    a finite Creature. A. J. F. Behrends grounded our Lord’s
    representative relation not in his human nature but in his divine
    nature. “He is our representative not because he was in the loins
    of Adam, but because we, Adam included, were in his loins.
    Personal created existence is grounded in the Logos, so that God
    must deal with him as well as with every individual sinner, and
    sin and guilt and punishment must smite the Logos as well as the
    sinner, and that, whether the sinner is saved or not. This is not,
    as is often charged, a denial of grace or of freedom in grace, for
    it is no denial of freedom or grace to show that they are
    eternally rational and conformable to eternal law. In the ideal
    sphere, necessity and freedom, law and grace, coalesce.” J. C. C.
    Clarke, Man and his Divine Father, 387—“Vicarious atonement does
    not consist in any single act.... No one act embraces it all, and
    no one definition can compass it.” In this sense we may adopt the
    words of Forsyth: “In the atonement the Holy Father dealt with a
    world’s sin on (not _in_) a world-soul.”

    G. B. Foster, on _Mat. 26:53, 54_—“_Thinkest thou that I cannot
    beseech my Father, and he shall even now send me more than twelve
    legions of angels? How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled,
    that thus it must be?_” “On this ‘_must be_’ the Scripture is
    based, not this ‘_must be_’ on the Scripture. The ‘_must be_’ was
    the ethical demand of his connection with the race. It would have
    been immoral for him to break away from the organism. The law of
    the organism is: From each according to ability; to each according
    to need. David in song, Aristotle in logic, Darwin in science, are
    under obligation to contribute to the organism the talent they
    have. Shall they be under obligation, and Jesus go scot-free? But
    Jesus can contribute atonement, and because he can, he must.
    Moreover, he is a member, not only of the whole, but of each
    part,—_Rom. 12:5_—‘_members one of another._’ As membership of the
    whole makes him liable for the sin of the whole, so his being a
    member of the part makes him liable for the sin of that part.”

    Fairbairn, Place of Christ in Modern Theology, 483, 484—“There is
    a sense in which the Patripassian theory is right; the Father did
    suffer; though it was not as the Son that he suffered, but in
    modes distinct and different.... Through his pity the misery of
    man became his sorrow.... There is a disclosure of his suffering
    in the surrender of the Son. This surrender represented the
    sacrifice and passion of the whole Godhead. Here degree and
    proportion are out of place; were it not, we might say that the
    Father suffered more in giving than the Son in being given. He who
    gave to duty had not the reward of him who rejoiced to do it....
    One member of the Trinity could not suffer without all
    suffering.... The visible sacrifice was that of the Son; the
    invisible sacrifice was that of the Father.” The Andover Theory,
    represented in Progressive Orthodoxy, 43-53, affirms not only the
    Moral Influence of the Atonement, but also that the whole race of
    mankind is naturally in Christ and was therefore punished in and
    by his suffering and death; quoted in Hovey, Manual of Christian
    Theology, 269; see Hovey’s own view, 270-276, though he does not
    seem to recognize the atonement as existing before the
    incarnation.


Christ’s share in the responsibility of the race to the law and justice of
God was not destroyed by his incarnation, nor by his purification in the
womb of the virgin. In virtue of the organic unity of the race, each
member of the race since Adam has been born into the same state into which
Adam fell. The consequences of Adam’s sin, both to himself and to his
posterity, are: (1) depravity, or the corruption of human nature; (2)
guilt, or obligation to make satisfaction for sin to the divine holiness;
(3) penalty, or actual endurance of loss or suffering visited by that
holiness upon the guilty.


    Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 117—“Christ had taken upon
    him, as the living expression of himself, a nature which was
    weighed down, not merely by present incapacities, but by present
    incapacities as part of the judicial necessary result of accepted
    and inherent sinfulness. Human nature was not only disabled but
    guilty, and the disabilities were themselves a consequence and
    aspect of the guilt”; see review of Moberly by Rashdall, in Jour.
    Theol. Studies, 3:198-211. Lidgett, Spir. Princ. of Atonement,
    166-168, criticizes Dr. Dale for neglecting the fatherly purpose
    of the Atonement to serve the moral training of the
    child—punishment marking ill-desert in order to bring this
    ill-desert to the consciousness of the offender,—and for
    neglecting also the positive assertion in the atonement that the
    law is holy and just and good—something more than the negative
    expression of sin’s ill-desert. See especially Lidgett’s chapter
    on the relation of our Lord to the human race, 351-378, in which
    he grounds the atonement in the solidarity of mankind, its organic
    union with the Son of God, and Christ’s immanence in humanity.

    Bowne, The Atonement, 101—“Something like this work of grace was a
    moral necessity with God. It was an awful responsibility that was
    taken when our human race was launched with its fearful
    possibilities of good and evil. God thereby put himself under
    infinite obligation to care for his human family; and reflections
    upon his position as Creator and Ruler, instead of removing only
    make more manifest this obligation. So long as we conceive of God
    as sitting apart in supreme ease and self-satisfaction, he is not
    love at all, but only a reflex of our selfishness and vulgarity.
    So long as we conceive him as bestowing upon us out of his
    infinite fulness but at no real cost to himself, he sinks before
    the moral heroes of the race. There is ever a higher thought
    possible, until we see God taking the world upon his heart,
    entering into the fellowship of our sorrow, and becoming the
    supreme burdenbearer and leader in all self-sacrifice. Then only
    are the possibilities of grace and love and moral heroism and
    condescension filled up, so that nothing higher remains. And the
    work of Christ himself, so far as it was an historical event, must
    be viewed, not merely as a piece of history, but also as a
    manifestation of that Cross which was hidden in the divine love
    from the foundation of the world, and which is involved in the
    existence of the human world at all.”

    John Caird, Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 2:90, 91—“Conceive of the
    ideal of moral perfection incarnate in a human personality, and at
    the same time one who loves us with a love so absolute that he
    identifies himself with us and makes our good and evil his
    own—bring together these elements in a living, conscious human
    spirit, and you have in it a capacity of shame and anguish, a
    possibility of bearing the burden of human guilt and wretchedness,
    which lost and guilty humanity can never bear for itself.”


If Christ had been born into the world by ordinary generation, he too
would have had depravity, guilt, penalty. But he was not so born. In the
womb of the Virgin, the human nature which he took was purged from its
depravity. But this purging away of depravity did not take away guilt, or
penalty. There was still left the just exposure to the penalty of violated
law. Although Christ’s nature was purified, his obligation to suffer yet
remained. He might have declined to join himself to humanity, and then he
need not have suffered. He might have sundered his connection with the
race, and then he need not have suffered. But once born of the Virgin,
once possessed of the human nature that was under the curse, he was bound
to suffer. The whole mass and weight of God’s displeasure against the race
fell on him, when once he became a member of the race.


    Because Christ is essential humanity, the universal man, the life
    of the race, he is the central brain to which and through which
    all ideas must pass. He is the central heart to which and through
    which all pains must be communicated. You cannot telephone to your
    friend across the town without first ringing up the central
    office. You cannot injure your neighbor without first injuring
    Christ. Each one of us can say of him: “_Against thee, thee only,
    have I sinned_” (_Ps. 51:4_). Because of his central and
    all-inclusive humanity, he must bear in his own person all the
    burdens of humanity, and must be “_the Lamb of God, that_” taketh,
    and so “_taketh away, the sin of the world_” (_John 1:29_). Simms
    Reeves, the great English tenor, said that the passion-music was
    too much for him; he was found completely overcome after singing
    the prophet’s words in _Lam. 1:12_—“_Is it nothing to you, all ye
    that pass by? Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
    sorrow, which is brought upon me, Wherewith Jehovah hath afflicted
    me in the day of his fierce anger._”

    Father Damien gave his life in ministry to the lepers’ colony of
    the Hawaiian Islands. Though free from the disease when he
    entered, he was at last himself stricken with the leprosy, and
    then wrote: “I must now stay with my own people.” Once a leper,
    there was no release. When Christ once joined himself to humanity,
    all the exposures and liabilities of humanity fell upon him.
    Through himself personally without sin, he was made sin for us.
    Christ inherited guilt and penalty. _Heb. 2:14, 15_—“_Since then
    the children are sharers in flesh and blood, he also himself in
    like manner partook of the same; that through death he might bring
    to naught him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and
    might deliver all them who through fear of death were all their
    life-time subject to bondage._”

    Only God can forgive sin, because only God can feel it in its true
    heinousness and rate it at its true worth. Christ could forgive
    sin because he added to the divine feeling with regard to sin the
    anguish of a pure humanity on account of it. Shelley, Julian and
    Maddolo: “Me, whose heart a stranger’s tear might wear, As
    water-drops the sandy fountain-stone; Me, who am as a nerve o’er
    which do creep The Else unfelt oppressions of the earth.” S. W.
    Culver: “We cannot be saved, as we are taught geometry, by lecture
    and diagram. No person ever yet saved another from drowning by
    standing coolly by and telling him the importance of rising to the
    surface and the necessity of respiration. No, he must plunge into
    the destructive element, and take upon himself the very condition
    of the drowning man, and by the exertion of his own strength, by
    the vigor of his own life, save him from the impending death. When
    your child is encompassed by the flames that consume your
    dwelling, you will not save him by calling to him from without.
    You must make your way through the devouring flame, till you come
    personally into the very conditions of his peril and danger, and,
    thence returning, bear him forth to freedom and safety.”


Notice, however, that this guilt which Christ took upon himself by his
union with humanity was: (1) not the guilt of personal sin—such guilt as
belongs to every adult member of the race; (2) not even the guilt of
inherited depravity—such guilt as belongs to infants, and to those who
have not come to moral consciousness; but (3) solely the guilt of Adam’s
sin, which belongs, prior to personal transgression, and apart from
inherited depravity, to every member of the race who has derived his life
from Adam. This original sin and inherited guilt, but without the
depravity that ordinarily accompanies them, Christ takes, and so takes
away. He can justly bear penalty, because he inherits guilt. And since
this guilt is not his personal guilt, but the guilt of that one sin in
which “all sinned”—the guilt of the common transgression of the race in
Adam, the guilt of the root-sin from which all other sins have sprung—he
who is personally pure can vicariously bear the penalty due to the sin of
all.


    Christ was conscious of innocence in his personal relations, but
    not in his race relations. He gathered into himself all the
    penalties of humanity, as Winkelried gathered into his own bosom
    at Sempach the pikes of the Austrians and so made a way for the
    victorious Swiss. Christ took to himself the shame of humanity, as
    the mother takes upon her the daughter’s shame, repenting of it
    and suffering on account of it. But this could not be in the case
    of Christ unless there had been a tie uniting him to men far more
    vital, organic, and profound than that which unites mother and
    daughter. Christ is naturally the life of all men, before he
    becomes spiritually the life of true believers. Matheson, Spir.
    Devel. of St. Paul, 197-215, 244, speaks of Christ’s secular
    priesthood, of an outer as well as an inner membership in the body
    of Christ. He is sacrificial head of the world as well as
    sacrificial head of the church. In Paul’s latest letters, he
    declares of Christ that he is “_the Savior of all men, specially
    of them that believe_” (_1 Tim. 4:10_). There is a grace that
    “_hath appeared, bringing salvation to all men_” (_Tit. 2:11_). He
    “_gave gifts unto men_” (_Eph. 4:8_), “_Yea, among the rebellious
    also, that Jehovah God might dwell with them_” (_Ps. 68:18_).
    “_Every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected_”
    (_1 Tim. 4:4_).

    Royce, World and Individual, 2:408—“Our sorrows are identically
    God’s own sorrows.... I sorrow, but the sorrow is not only mine.
    This same sorrow, just as it is for me, is God’s sorrow.... The
    divine fulfilment can be won only through the sorrows of time....
    Unless God knows sorrow, he knows not the highest good, which
    consists in the overcoming of sorrow.” Godet, in The Atonement,
    331-351—“Jesus condemned sin as God condemned it. When he felt
    forsaken on the Cross, he performed that act by which the offender
    himself condemns his sin, and by that condemnation, so far as it
    depends on himself, makes it to disappear. There is but one
    conscience in all moral beings. This echo in Christ of God’s
    judgment against sin was to re-echo in all other human
    consciences. This has transformed God’s love of compassion into a
    love of satisfaction. Holiness joins suffering to sin. But the
    element of reparation in the Cross was not in the suffering but in
    the submission. The child who revolts against its punishment has
    made no reparation at all. We appropriate Christ’s work when we by
    faith ourselves condemn sin and accept him.”


If it be asked whether this is not simply a suffering for his own sin, or
rather for his own share of the sin of the race, we reply that his own
share in the sin of the race is not the sole reason why he suffers; it
furnishes only the subjective reason and ground for the proper laying upon
him of the sin of all. Christ’s union with the race in his incarnation is
only the outward and visible expression of a prior union with the race
which began when he created the race. As “in him were all things created,”
and as “in him all things consist,” or hold together (Col. 1:16, 17), it
follows that he who is the life of humanity must, though personally pure,
be involved in responsibility for all human sin, and “it was necessary
that the Christ should suffer” (Acts 17:3). This suffering was an enduring
of the reaction of the divine holiness against sin and so was a bearing of
penalty (Is. 53:6; Gal. 3:13), but it was also the voluntary execution of
a plan that antedated creation (Phil. 2:6, 7), and Christ’s sacrifice in
time showed what had been in the heart of God from eternity (Heb. 9:14;
Rev. 13:8).


    Our treatment is intended to meet the chief modern objection to
    the atonement. Greg, Creed of Christendom, 2:222, speaks of “the
    strangely inconsistent doctrine that God is so _just_ that he
    could not let sin go unpunished, yet so _unjust_ that he could
    punish it in the person of the innocent.... It is for orthodox
    dialectics to explain how the divine justice can be _impugned_ by
    pardoning the guilty, and yet _vindicated_ by punishing the
    innocent” (quoted in Lias, Atonement, 16). In order to meet this
    difficulty, the following accounts of Christ’s identification with
    humanity have been given:

    1. That of Isaac Watts (see Bib. Sac., 1875:421). This holds that
    the humanity of Christ, both in body and soul, preëxisted before
    the incarnation, and was manifested to the patriarchs. We reply
    that Christ’s human nature is declared to be derived from the
    Virgin.

    2. That of R. W. Dale (Atonement, 265-440). This holds that Christ
    is responsible for human sin because, as the Upholder and Life of
    all, he is naturally one with all men, and is spiritually one with
    all believers (_Acts 17:28_—“_in him we live, and move, and have
    our being_”; _Col. 1:17_—“_in him all things consist_”; _John
    14:20_—“_I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you_”). If
    Christ’s bearing our sins, however, is to be explained by the
    union of the believer with Christ, the effect is made to explain
    the cause, and Christ could have died only for the elect (see a
    review of Dale, in Brit. Quar. Rev., Apr., 1876:221-225). The
    union of Christ with the race by creation—a union which recognizes
    Christ’s purity and man’s sin—still remains as a most valuable
    element of truth in the theory of Dr. Dale.

    3. That of Edward Irving. Christ has a corrupted nature, an inborn
    infirmity and depravity, which he gradually overcomes. But the
    Scriptures, on the contrary, assert his holiness and separateness
    from sinners. (See references, on pages 744-747.)

    4. That of John Miller, Theology, 114-128; also in his chapter:
    Was Christ in Adam? in Questions Awakened by the Bible. Christ, as
    to his human nature, although created pure, was yet, as one of
    Adam’s posterity, conceived of as a sinner in Adam. To him
    attached “the guilt of the act in which all men stood together in
    a federal relation.... He was decreed to be guilty for the sins of
    all mankind.” Although there is a truth contained in this
    statement, it is vitiated by Miller’s federalism and creatianism.
    Arbitrary imputation and legal fiction do not help us here. We
    need such an actual union of Christ with humanity, and such a
    derivation of the substance of his being, by natural generation
    from Adam, as will make him not simply the constructive heir, but
    the natural heir, of the guilt of the race. We come, therefore, to
    what we regard as the true view, namely:

    5. That the humanity of Christ was not a new creation, but was
    derived from Adam, through Mary his mother; so that Christ, so far
    as his humanity was concerned, was in Adam just as we were, and
    had the same race-responsibility with ourselves. As Adam’s
    descendant, he was responsible for Adam’s sin, like every other
    member of the race; the chief difference being, that while we
    inherit from Adam both guilt and depravity, he whom the Holy
    Spirit purified, inherited not the depravity, but only the guilt.
    Christ took to himself, not sin (depravity), but the consequences
    of sin. In him there was abolition of sin, without abolition of
    obligation to suffer for sin; while in the believer, there is
    abolition of obligation to suffer, without abolition of sin
    itself.

    The justice of Christ’s sufferings has been imperfectly
    illustrated by the obligation of the silent partner of a business
    firm to pay debts of the firm which he did not personally
    contract; or by the obligation of the husband to pay the debts of
    his wife; or by the obligation of a purchasing country to assume
    the debts of the province which it purchases (Wm. Ashmore). There
    have been men who have spent the strength of a lifetime in
    clearing off the indebtedness of an insolvent father, long since
    deceased. They recognized an organic unity of the family, which
    morally, if not legally, made their father’s liabilities their
    own. So, it is said, Christ recognized the organic unity of the
    race, and saw that, having become one of that sinning race, he had
    involved himself in all its liabilities, even to the suffering of
    death, the great penalty of sin.

    The fault of all the analogies just mentioned is that they are
    purely commercial. A transference of pecuniary obligation is
    easier to understand than a transference of criminal liability. I
    cannot justly bear another’s penalty, unless I can in some way
    share his guilt. The theory we advocate shows how such a sharing
    of our guilt on the part of Christ was possible. All believers in
    substitution hold that Christ bore our guilt: “My soul looks back
    to see The burdens thou didst bear When hanging on the accursed
    tree, And hopes her guilt was there.” But we claim that, by virtue
    of Christ’s union with humanity, that guilt was not only an
    imputed, but also an imparted, guilt.

    With Christ’s obligation to suffer, there were connected two
    other, though minor, results of his assumption of humanity: first,
    the longing to suffer; and secondly, the inevitableness of his
    suffering. He felt the longing to suffer which perfect love to God
    must feel, in view of the demands upon the race, of that holiness
    of God which he loved more than he loved the race itself; which
    perfect love to man must feel, in view of the fact that bearing
    the penalty of man’s sin was the only way to save him. Hence we
    see Christ pressing forward to the cross with such majestic
    determination that the disciples were amazed and afraid (_Mark
    10:32_). Hence we hear him saying: “_With desire have I desired to
    eat this passover_” (_Luke 23:15_); “_I have a baptism to be
    baptised with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!_”
    (_Luke 12:50_).

    Here is the truth in Campbell’s theory of the atonement. Christ is
    the great Penitent before God, making confession of the sin of the
    race, which others of that race could neither see nor feel. But
    the view we present is a larger and completer one than that of
    Campbell, in that it makes this confession and reparation
    obligatory upon Christ, as Campbell’s view does not, and
    recognizes the penal nature of Christ’s sufferings, which
    Campbell’s view denies. Lias, Atonement, 79—“The head of a clan,
    himself intensely loyal to his king, finds that his clan have been
    involved in rebellion. The more intense and perfect his loyalty,
    the more thorough his nobleness of heart and affection for his
    people, the more inexcusable and flagrant the rebellion of those
    for whom he pleads,—the more acute would be his agony, as their
    representative and head. Nothing would be more true to human
    nature, in the best sense of those words, than that the conflict
    between loyalty to his king and affection for his vassals should
    induce him to offer his life for theirs, to ask that the
    punishment they deserved should be inflicted on him.”

    The second minor consequence of Christ’s assumption of humanity
    was, that, being such as he was, he could not help suffering; in
    other words, the obligatory and the desired were also the
    inevitable. Since he was a being of perfect purity, contact with
    the sin of the race, of which he was a member, necessarily
    involved an actual suffering, of an intenser kind than we can
    conceive. Sin is self-isolating, but love and righteousness have
    in them the instinct of human unity. In Christ all the nerves and
    sensibilities of humanity met. He was the only healthy member of
    the race. When life returns to a frozen limb, there is pain. So
    Christ, as the only sensitive member of a benumbed and stupefied
    humanity, felt all the pangs of shame and suffering which
    rightfully belonged to sinners; but which they could not feel,
    simply because of the depth of their depravity. Because Christ was
    pure, yet had united himself to a sinful and guilty race,
    therefore “_it must needs be that Christ should suffer_” (A. V.)
    or, “_it behooved the Christ to suffer_” (Rev. Vers., _Acts
    17:3_); see also _John 3:14_—“_so must the Son of man be lifted
    up_”—“The Incarnation, under the actual circumstances of humanity,
    carried with it the necessity of the Passion” (Westcott, in Bib.
    Com., _in loco_).

    Compare John Woolman’s Journal, 4, 5—“O Lord, my God, the amazing
    horrors of darkness were gathered about me, and covered me all
    over, and I saw no way to go forth; I felt the depth and extent of
    the misery of my fellow creatures, separated from the divine
    harmony, and it was greater than I could bear, and I was crushed
    down under it; I lifted up my head, I stretched out my arm, but
    there was none to help me; I looked round about, and was amazed.
    In the depths of misery, I remembered that thou art omnipotent and
    that I had called thee Father.” He had vision of a “dull, gloomy
    mass,” darkening half the heavens, and he was told that it was
    “human beings, in as great misery as they could be and live; and
    he was mixed with them, and henceforth he might not consider
    himself a distinct and separate being.”

    This suffering in and with the sins of men, which Dr. Bushnell
    emphasized so strongly, though it is not, as he thought, the
    principal element, is notwithstanding an indispensable element in
    the atonement of Christ. Suffering in and with the sinner is one
    way, though not the only way, in which Christ is enabled to bear
    the wrath of God which constitutes the real penalty of sin.

    EXPOSITION OF 2 COR. 5:21.—It remains for us to adduce the
    Scriptural proof of this natural assumption of human guilt by
    Christ. We find it in _2 Cor. 5:21_—“_Him who knew no sin he made
    to be sin on our behalf; that we might become the righteousness of
    God in him._” “_Righteousness_” here cannot mean subjective
    purity, for then “_made to be sin_” would mean that God made
    Christ to be subjectively depraved. As Christ was not made
    _unholy_, the meaning cannot be that we are made _holy_ persons in
    him. Meyer calls attention to this parallel between
    “_righteousness_” and “_sin_”:—“_That we might become the
    righteousness of God in him_” = that we might become justified
    persons. Correspondingly, “_made to be sin on our behalf_” must =
    made to be a condemned person. “_Him who knew no sin_” = Christ
    had no experience of sin—this was the necessary postulate of his
    work of atonement. “_Made sin for us_,” therefore, is the abstract
    for the concrete, and = made a sinner, in the sense that the
    penalty of sin fell upon him. So Meyer, for substance.

    We must, however, regard this interpretation of Meyer’s as coming
    short of the full meaning of the apostle. As justification is not
    simply remission of _actual_ punishment, but is also deliverance
    from the _obligation_ to suffer punishment,—in other words, as
    “_righteousness_” in the text = persons delivered from the _guilt_
    as well as from the _penalty_ of sin,—so the contrasted term
    “_sin_,” in the text,—a person not only _actually_ punished, but
    also under _obligation_ to suffer punishment;—in other words,
    Christ is “_made sin_,” not only in the sense of being put under
    _penalty_, but also in the sense of being put under _guilt_.
    (_Cf._ Symington, Atonement, 17.)

    In a note to the last edition of Meyer, this is substantially
    granted. “It is to be noted,” he says, “that ἁμαρτίαν, like κατάρα
    in _Gal. 3:13_, necessarily includes in itself the notion of
    guilt.” Meyer adds, however: “The guilt of which Christ appears as
    bearer was not his own (μὴ γνόντα ἁμαρτίαν); hence the guilt of
    men was transferred to him; consequently the justification of men
    is imputative.” Here the implication that the guilt which Christ
    bears is his simply by imputation seems to us contrary to the
    analogy of faith. As Adam’s sin is ours only because we are
    actually one with Adam, and as Christ’s righteousness is imputed
    to us only as we are actually united to Christ, so our sins are
    imputed to Christ only as Christ is actually one with the race. He
    was “_made sin_” by being made one with the sinners; he took our
    guilt by taking our nature. He who “_knew no sin_” came to be
    “_sin for us_” by being born of a sinful stock; by inheritance the
    common guilt of the race became his. Guilt was not simply
    _imputed_ to Christ; it was _imparted_ also.

    This exposition may be made more clear by putting the two
    contrasted thoughts in parallel columns, as follows:

    Made righteousness in him =      Made sin for us =
    righteous persons;               a sinful person;
    justified persons;               a condemned person;
    freed from guilt, or             put under guilt, or obligation
    obligation to suffer;            to suffer;
    by spiritual union with          by natural union with the
    Christ.                          race.

    For a good exposition of _2 Cor. 5:21_, _Gal. 3:13_, and _Rom.
    3:25, 26_, see Denney, Studies in Theology, 109-124.


The Atonement, then, on the part of God, has its ground (1) in the
holiness of God, which must visit sin with condemnation, even though this
condemnation brings death to his Son; and (2) in the love of God, which
itself provides the sacrifice, by suffering in and with his Son for the
sins of men, but through that suffering opening a way and means of
salvation.

The Atonement, on the part of man, is accomplished through (1) the
solidarity of the race; of which (2) Christ is the life, and so its
representative and surety; (3) justly yet voluntarily bearing its guilt
and shame and condemnation as his own.


    Melanchthon: “Christ was made sin for us, not only in respect to
    punishment, but primarily by being chargeable with guilt also
    (_culpæ et reatus_)”—quoted by Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk,
    3:95, 102, 103, 107; also 1:307, 314 _sq._ Thomasius says that
    “Christ bore the guilt of the race by imputation; but as in the
    case of the imputation of Adam’s sin to us, imputation of our sins
    to Christ presupposes a real relationship. Christ appropriated our
    sin. He sank himself into our guilt.” Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:442
    (Syst. Doct., 3:350, 351), agrees with Thomasius, that “Christ
    entered into our natural mortality, which for us is a penal
    condition, and into the state of collective guilt, so far as it is
    an evil, a burden to be borne; not that he had personal guilt, but
    rather that he entered into our guilt-laden common life, not as a
    stranger, but as one actually belonging to it—put under its law,
    according to the will of the Father and of his own love.”

    When, and how, did Christ take this guilt and this penalty upon
    him? With regard to penalty, we have no difficulty in answering
    that, as his whole life of suffering was propitiatory, so penalty
    rested upon him from the very beginning of his life. This penalty
    was inherited, and was the consequence of Christ’s taking human
    nature (_Gal. 4:4, 5_—“_born of a woman, born under the law_”).
    But penalty and guilt are correlates; if Christ inherited penalty,
    it must have been because he inherited guilt. This subjection to
    the common guilt of the race was intimated in Jesus’ circumcision
    (_Luke 2:21_); in his ritual purification (_Luke 2:22_—“_their
    purification_”—_i. e._, the purification of Mary and the babe; see
    Lange, Life of Christ; Commentaries of Alford, Webster and
    Wilkinson; and An. Par. Bible); in his legal redemption (_Luke
    2:23, 24_; _cf._ _Ex. 13:2, 13_); and in his baptism (_Mat.
    3:15_—“_thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness_”). The
    baptized person went down into the water, as one laden with sin
    and guilt, in order that this sin and guilt might be buried
    forever, and that he might rise from the typical grave to a new
    and holy life. (Ebrard: “Baptism = death.”) So Christ’s submission
    to John’s baptism of repentance was not only a consecration to
    death, but also a recognition and confession of his implication in
    that guilt of the race for which death was the appointed and
    inevitable penalty (_cf._ _Mat. 10:38_; _Luke 12:50_; _Mat.
    26:39_); and, as his baptism was a prefiguration of his death, we
    may learn from his baptism something with regard to the meaning of
    his death. See further, under The Symbolism of Baptism.

    As one who had had guilt, Christ was “_justified in the spirit_”
    (_1 Tim. 3:16_); and this justification appears to have taken
    place after he “_was manifested in the flesh_” (_1 Tim. 3:16_),
    and when “_he was raised for our justification_” (_Rom. 4:25_).
    Compare _Rom. 1:4_—“_declared to be the Son of God with power,
    according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the
    dead_”; _6:7-10_—“_he that hath died is justified from sin. But if
    we died with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him;
    knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more;
    death no more hath dominion over him. For the death that he died,
    he died unto sin once; but the life that he liveth, he liveth unto
    God_”—here all Christians are conceived of as ideally justified in
    the justification of Christ, when Christ died for our sins and
    rose again. _8:3_—“_God, sending his own Son in the likeness of
    sinful flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh_”—here Meyer
    says: “The sending does not precede the condemnation; but the
    condemnation is effected in and with the sending.” _John
    16:10_—“_of righteousness, because I go to the Father_”;
    _19:30_—“_It is finished._” On _1 Tim. 3:16_, see the Commentary
    of Bengel.

    If it be asked whether Jesus, then, before his death, was an
    unjustified person, we answer that, while personally pure and
    well-pleasing to God (_Mat. 3:17_), he himself was conscious of a
    race-responsibility and a race-guilt which must be atoned for
    (_John 12:27_—“_Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say?
    Father, save me from this hour. But for this cause came I unto
    this hour_”); and that guilty human nature in him endured at the
    last the separation from God which constitutes the essence of
    death, sin’s penalty (_Mat. 27:46_—“_My God, my God, why hast thou
    forsaken me?_”). We must remember that, as even the believer must
    “_be judged according to man in the flesh_” (_1 Pet. 4:6_), that
    is, must suffer the death which to unbelievers is the penalty of
    sin, although he “_live according to God in the Spirit_,” so
    Christ, in order that we might be delivered from both guilt and
    penalty, was “_put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the
    spirit_” (_3:18_);—in other words, as Christ was man, the penalty
    due to human guilt belonged to him to bear; but, as he was God, he
    could exhaust that penalty, and could be a proper substitute for
    others.

    If it be asked whether he, who from the moment of the conception
    “_sanctified himself_” (_John 17:19_), did not from that moment
    also justify himself, we reply that although, through the
    retroactive efficacy of his atonement and upon the ground of it,
    human nature in him was purged of its depravity from the moment
    that he took that nature; and although, upon the ground of that
    atonement, believers before his advent were both sanctified and
    justified; yet his own justification could not have proceeded upon
    the ground of his atonement, and also his atonement have proceeded
    upon the ground of his justification. This would be a vicious
    circle; somewhere we must have a beginning. That beginning was in
    the cross, where guilt was first purged (_Heb. 1:3_—“_when he had
    made purification of sins, sat down on the right hand of the
    Majesty on high_”; _Mat. 27:42_—“_He saved others; himself he
    cannot save_”; _cf._ _Rev. 13:8_—“_the Lamb that hath been slain
    from the foundation of the world_”).

    If it be said that guilt and depravity are practically
    inseparable, and that, if Christ had guilt, he must have had
    depravity also, we reply that in civil law we distinguish between
    them,—the conversion of a murderer would not remove his obligation
    to suffer upon the gallows; and we reply further, that in
    justification we distinguish between them,—depravity still
    remaining, though guilt is removed. So we may say that Christ
    takes guilt without depravity, in order that we may have depravity
    without guilt. See page 645; also Böhl, Incarnation des göttlichen
    Wortes; Pope, Higher Catechism, 118; A. H. Strong, on the
    Necessity of the Atonement, in Philosophy and Religion, 213-219.
    _Per contra_, see Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:59 note, 82.


Christ therefore, as incarnate, rather revealed the atonement than made
it. The historical work of atonement was finished upon the Cross, but that
historical work only revealed to men the atonement made both before and
since by the extra-mundane Logos. The eternal Love of God suffering the
necessary reaction of his own Holiness against the sin of his creatures
and with a view to their salvation—this is the essence of the Atonement.


    Nash, Ethics and Revelation, 252, 253—“Christ, as God’s atonement,
    is the revelation and discovery of the fact that sacrifice is as
    deep in God as his being. He is a holy Creator.... He must take
    upon himself the shame and pain of sin.” The earthly tabernacle
    and its sacrifices were only the shadow of those in the heavens,
    and Moses was bidden to make the earthly after the pattern which
    he saw in the mount. So the historical atonement was but the
    shadowing forth to dull and finite minds of an infinite demand of
    the divine holiness and an infinite satisfaction rendered by the
    divine love. Godet, S. S. Times, Oct. 16, 1886—“Christ so
    identified himself with the race he came to save, by sharing its
    life or its very blood, that when the race itself was redeemed
    from the curse of sin, his resurrection followed as the first
    fruits of that redemption”; _Rom. 4:25_—“_delivered up for our
    trespasses ... raised for our justification._”

    Simon, Redemption of Man, 322—“If the Logos is generally the
    Mediator of the divine immanence in Creation, especially in man;
    if men are differentiations of the effluent divine energy; and if
    the Logos is the immanent controlling principle of all
    differentiation, _i. e._, the principle of all _form_—must not the
    self-perversion of these human differentiations necessarily react
    on him who is their constitutive principle? 339—Remember that men
    have not first to engraft themselves into Christ, the living
    whole.... They subsist naturally in him, and they have to separate
    themselves, cut themselves off from him, if they are to be
    separate. This is the mistake made in the ‘Life in Christ’ theory.
    Men are treated as in some sense out of Christ, and as having to
    get into connection with Christ.... It is not that we have to
    create the relation,—we have simply to accept, to recognize, to
    ratify it. Rejecting Christ is not so much refusal to _become_ one
    with Christ, as it is refusal to _remain_ one with him, refusal to
    let him be our life.”

    A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 33, 172—“When God breathed into
    man’s nostrils the breath of life, he communicated freedom, and
    made possible the creature’s self-chosen alienation from himself,
    the giver of that life. While man could never break the natural
    bond which united him to God, he could break the spiritual bond,
    and could introduce even into the life of God a principle of
    discord and evil. Tie a cord tightly about your finger; you
    partially isolate the finger, diminish its nutrition, bring about
    atrophy and disease. Yet the life of the whole system rouses
    itself to put away the evil, to untie the cord, to free the
    diseased and suffering member. The illustration is far from
    adequate; but it helps at a single point. There has been given to
    each intelligent and moral agent the power, spiritually, to
    isolate himself from God, while yet he is naturally joined to God,
    and is wholly dependent upon God for the removal of the sin which
    has so separated him from his Maker. Sin is the act of the
    creature, but salvation is the act of the Creator.

    “If you could imagine a finger endowed with free will and trying
    to sunder its connection with the body by tying a string around
    itself, you would have a picture of man trying to sunder his
    connection with Christ. What is the result of such an attempt?
    Why, pain, decay; possible, nay, incipient death, to the finger.
    By what law? By the law of the organism, which is so constituted
    as to maintain itself against its own disruption by the revolt of
    the members. The pain and death of the finger is the reaction of
    the whole against the treason of the part. The finger suffers
    pain. But are there no results of pain to the body? Does not the
    body feel pain also? How plain it is that no such pain can be
    confined to the single part! The heart feels, aye, the whole
    organism feels, because all the parts are members one of another.
    It not only suffers, but that suffering tends to remedy the evil
    and to remove its cause. The body summons its forces, pours new
    tides of life into the dying member, strives to rid the finger of
    the ligature that binds it. So through all the course of history,
    Christ, the natural life of the race, has been afflicted in the
    affliction of humanity and has suffered for human sin. This
    suffering has been an atoning suffering, since it has been due to
    righteousness. If God had not been holy, if God had not made all
    nature express the holiness of his being, if God had not made pain
    and loss the necessary consequences of sin, then Christ would not
    have suffered. But since these things are sin’s penalty and Christ
    is the life of the sinful race, it must needs be that Christ
    should suffer. There is nothing arbitrary in laying upon him the
    iniquities of us all. Original grace, like original sin, is only
    the ethical interpretation of biological facts.” See also Ames, on
    Biological Aspects of the Atonement, in Methodist Review, Nov.
    1905:943-953.


In favor of the Substitutionary or Ethical view of the atonement we may
urge the following considerations:

(_a_) It rests upon correct philosophical principles with regard to the
nature of will, law, sin, penalty, righteousness.


    This theory holds that there are permanent states, as well as
    transient acts, of the will; and that the will is not simply the
    faculty of volitions, but also the fundamental determination of
    the being to an ultimate end. It regards law as having its basis,
    not in arbitrary will or in governmental expediency, but rather in
    the nature of God, and as being a necessary transcript of God’s
    holiness. It considers sin to consist not simply in acts, but in
    permanent evil states of the affections and will. It makes the
    object of penalty to be, not the reformation of the offender, or
    the prevention of evil doing, but the vindication of justice,
    outraged by violation of law. It teaches that righteousness is not
    benevolence or a form of benevolence, but a distinct and separate
    attribute of the divine nature which demands that sin should be
    visited with punishment, apart from any consideration of the
    useful results that will flow therefrom.


(_b_) It combines in itself all the valuable elements in the theories
before mentioned, while it avoids their inconsistencies, by showing the
deeper principle upon which each of these elements is based.


    The Ethical theory admits the indispensableness of Christ’s
    example, advocated by the Socinian theory; the moral influence of
    his suffering, urged by the Bushnellian theory; the securing of
    the safety of government, insisted on by the Grotian theory; the
    participation of the believer in Christ’s new humanity, taught by
    the Irvingian theory; the satisfaction to God’s majesty for the
    elect, made so much of by the Anselmic theory. But the Ethical
    theory claims that all these other theories require, as a
    presupposition for their effective working, that ethical
    satisfaction to the holiness of God which is rendered in guilty
    human nature by the Son of God who took that nature to redeem it.


(_c_) It most fully meets the requirements of Scripture, by holding that
the necessity of the atonement is absolute, since it rests upon the
demands of immanent holiness, the fundamental attribute of God.


    _Acts 17:3_—“_it behooved the Christ to suffer, and to rise again
    from the dead_”—lit.: “_it was necessary for the Christ to
    suffer_”; _Luke 24:26_—“_Behooved it not the Christ to suffer
    these things, and to enter into his glory?_”—lit.: “_Was it not
    necessary that the Christ should suffer these things?_” It is not
    enough to say that Christ must suffer in order that the prophecies
    might be fulfilled. Why was it prophesied that he should suffer?
    Why did God purpose that he should suffer? The ultimate necessity
    is a necessity in the nature of God.

    Plato, Republic, 2:361—“The righteous man who is thought to be
    unrighteous will be scourged, racked, bound; will have his eyes
    put out; and finally, having endured all sorts of evil, will be
    impaled.” This means that, as human society is at present
    constituted, even a righteous person must suffer for the sins of
    the world. “Mors mortis Morti mortem nisi morte dedisset, Æternæ
    vitæ janua clausa foret”—“Had not the Death-of-death to Death his
    death-blow given, Forever closed were the gate, the gate of life
    and heaven.”


(_d_) It shows most satisfactorily how the demands of holiness are met;
namely, by the propitiatory offering of one who is personally pure, but
who by union with the human race has inherited its guilt and penalty.


    “_Quo non ascendam?_”—“Whither shall I not rise?” exclaimed the
    greatest minister of modern kings, in a moment of intoxication.
    “Whither shall I not stoop?” says the Lord Jesus. King Humbert,
    during the scourge of cholera in Italy: “In Castellammare they
    make merry; in Naples they die: I go to Naples.”

    Wrightnour: “The illustration of Powhatan raising his club to slay
    John Smith, while Pocahontas flings herself between the uplifted
    club and the victim, is not a good one. God is not an angry being,
    bound to strike something, no matter what. If Powhatan could have
    taken the blow himself, out of a desire to spare the victim, it
    would be better. The Father and the Son are one. Bronson Alcott,
    in his school at Concord, when punishment was necessary, sometimes
    placed the rod in the hand of the offender and bade him strike his
    (Alcott’s) hand, rather than that the law of the school should be
    broken without punishment following. The result was that very few
    rules were broken. So God in Christ bore the sins of the world,
    and endured the penalty for man’s violation of his law.”


(_e_) It furnishes the only proper explanation of the sacrificial language
of the New Testament, and of the sacrificial rites of the Old, considered
as prophetic of Christ’s atoning work.


    Foster, Christian Life and Theology, 207-211—“The imposition of
    hands on the head of the victim is entirely unexplained, except in
    the account of the great day of Atonement, when by the same
    gesture and by distinct confession the sins of the people were
    ‘_put upon the head of the goat_’ (_Lev. 16:21_) to be borne away
    into the wilderness. The blood was sacred and was to be poured out
    before the Lord, evidently in place of the forfeited life of the
    sinner which should have been rendered up.” Watts, New
    Apologetics, 205—“ ‘_The Lord will provide_’ was the truth taught
    when Abraham found a ram provided by God which he ‘_offered up as
    a burnt offering in the stead of his son_’ (_Gen. 22:13, 14_). As
    the ram was not Abraham’s ram, the sacrifice of it could not teach
    that all Abraham had belonged to God, and should, with entire
    faith in his goodness, be devoted to him; but it did teach that
    ‘_apart from shedding of blood there is no remission_’ (_Heb.
    9:22_).” _2 Chron. 29:27_—“_when the burnt offering began, the
    song of Jehovah began also._”


(_f_) It alone gives proper place to the death of Christ as the central
feature of his work,—set forth in the ordinances, and of chief power in
Christian experience.


    Martin Luther, when he had realized the truth of the Atonement,
    was found sobbing before a crucifix and moaning: “Für mich! für
    mich!”—“For me! for me!” Elisha Kane, the Arctic explorer, while
    searching for signs of Sir John Franklin and his party, sent out
    eight or ten men to explore the surrounding region. After several
    days three returned, almost crazed with the cold—thermometer fifty
    degrees below zero—and reported that the other men were dying
    miles away. Dr. Kane organized a company of ten, and though
    suffering himself with an old heart-trouble, led them to the
    rescue. Three times he fainted during the eighteen hours of
    marching and suffering; but he found the men. “We knew you would
    come! we knew you would come, brother!” whispered one of them,
    hardly able to speak. Why was he sure Dr. Kane would come? Because
    he knew the stuff Dr. Kane was made of, and knew that he would
    risk his life for any one of them. It is a parable of Christ’s
    relation to our salvation. He is our elder brother, bone of our
    bone and flesh of our flesh, and he not only risks death, but he
    endures death, in order to save us.


(_g_) It gives us the only means of understanding the sufferings of Christ
in the garden and on the cross, or of reconciling them with the divine
justice.


    Kreibig, Versöhnungslehre: “Man has a guilt that demands the
    punitive sufferings of a mediator. Christ shows a suffering that
    cannot be justified except by reference to some other guilt than
    his own. Combine these two facts, and you have the problem of the
    atonement solved.” J. G. Whittier: “Through all the depths of sin
    and loss Drops the plummet of the Cross; Never yet abyss was found
    Deeper than the Cross could sound.” Alcestis purchased life for
    Admetus her husband by dying in his stead; Marcus Curtius saved
    Rome by leaping into the yawning chasm; the Russian servant threw
    himself to the wolves to rescue his master. Berdoe, Robert
    Browning, 47—“To know God as the theist knows him may suffice for
    pure spirits, for those who have never sinned, suffered, nor felt
    the need of a Savior; but for fallen and sinful men the Christ of
    Christianity is an imperative necessity; and those who have never
    surrendered themselves to him have never known what it is to
    experience the rest he gives to the heavy-laden soul.”


(_h_) As no other theory does, this view satisfies the ethical demand of
human nature; pacifies the convicted conscience; assures the sinner that
he may find instant salvation in Christ; and so makes possible a new life
of holiness, while at the same time it furnishes the highest incentives to
such a life.


    Shedd: “The offended party (1) permits a substitution; (2)
    provides a substitute; (3) substitutes himself.” George Eliot:
    “Justice is like the kingdom of God; it is not without us, as a
    fact; it is ‘within us,’ as a great yearning.” But it is both
    without and within, and the inward is only the reflection of the
    outward; the subjective demands of conscience only reflect the
    objective demands of holiness.

    And yet, while this view of the atonement exalts the holiness of
    God, it surpasses every other view in its moving exhibition of
    God’s love—a love that is not satisfied with suffering in and with
    the sinner, or with making that suffering a demonstration of God’s
    regard for law; but a love that sinks itself into the sinner’s
    guilt and bears his penalty,—comes down so low as to make itself
    one with him in all but his depravity—makes every sacrifice but
    the sacrifice of God’s holiness—a sacrifice which God could not
    make, without ceasing to be God; see _1 John 4:10_—“_Herein is
    love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
    Son to be the propitiation for our sins._” The soldier who had
    been thought reprobate was moved to complete reform when he was
    once forgiven. William Huntington, in his Autobiography, says that
    one of his sharpest sensations of pain, after he had been
    quickened by divine grace, was that he felt such pity for God.
    Never was man abused as God has been. _Rom. 2:4_—“_the goodness of
    God leadeth thee to repentance_”; _12:1_—“_the mercies of God_”
    lead you “_to present your bodies a living sacrifice_”; _2 Cor.
    5:14, 15_—“_the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus
    judge, that one died for all, therefore all died; and he died for
    all, that they that live should no longer live unto themselves,
    but unto him who for their sakes died and rose again._” The effect
    of Christ’s atonement on Christian character and life may be
    illustrated from the proclamation of Garabaldi: “He that loves
    Italy, let him follow me! I promise him hardship, I promise him
    suffering, I promise him death. But he that loves Italy, let him
    follow me!”


D. Objections to the Ethical Theory of the Atonement.


    On the general subject of these objections, Philippi,
    Glaubenslehre, iv, 2:156-180, remarks: (1) that it rests with God
    alone to say whether he will pardon sin, and in what way he will
    pardon it; (2) that human instincts are a very unsafe standard by
    which to judge the procedure of the Governor of the universe; and
    (3) that one plain declaration of God, with regard to the plan of
    salvation, proves the fallacy and error of all reasonings against
    it. We must correct our watches and clocks by astronomic
    standards.


(_a_) That a God who does not pardon sin without atonement must lack
either omnipotence or love.—We answer, on the one hand, that God’s
omnipotence is the revelation of his nature, and not a matter of arbitrary
will; and, on the other hand, that God’s love is ever exercised
consistently with his fundamental attribute of holiness, so that while
holiness demands the sacrifice, love provides it. Mercy is shown, not by
trampling upon the claims of justice, but by vicariously satisfying them.


    Because man does not need to avenge personal wrongs, it does not
    follow that God must not. In fact, such avenging is forbidden to
    us upon the ground that it belongs to God; _Rom. 12:19_—“_Avenge
    not yourselves, beloved, but give place unto wrath: for it is
    written, Vengeance belongeth unto me; I will recompense, saith the
    Lord._” But there are limits even to our passing over of offences.
    Even the father must sometimes chastise; and although this
    chastisement is not properly punishment, it becomes punishment,
    when the father becomes a teacher or a governor. Then, other than
    personal interests come in. “Because a father can forgive without
    atonement, it does not follow that the state can do the same”
    (Shedd). But God is more than Father, more than Teacher, more than
    Governor. In him, person and right are identical. For him to let
    sin go unpunished is to approve of it; which is the same as a
    denial of holiness.

    Whatever pardon is granted, then, must be pardon through
    punishment. Mere repentance never expiates crime, even under civil
    government. The truly penitent man never feels that his repentance
    constitutes a ground of acceptance; the more he repents, the more
    he recognizes his need of reparation and expiation. Hence God
    meets the demand of man’s conscience, as well as of his own
    holiness, when he provides a substituted punishment. God shows his
    love by meeting the demands of holiness, and by meeting them with
    the sacrifice of himself. See Mozley on Predestination, 390.

    The publican prays, not that God may be merciful without
    sacrifice, but: “_God be propitiated toward me, the sinner!_”
    (_Luke 18:13_); in other words, he asks for mercy only through and
    upon the ground of, sacrifice. We cannot atone to others for the
    wrong we have done them, nor can we even atone to our own souls. A
    third party, and an infinite being, must make atonement, as we
    cannot. It is only upon the ground that God himself has made
    provision for satisfying the claims of justice, that we are bidden
    to forgive others. Should Othello then forgive Iago? Yes, if Iago
    repents; _Luke 17:3_—“_If thy brother sin, rebuke him; and if he
    repent, forgive him._” But if he does not repent? Yes, so far as
    Othello’s own disposition is concerned. He must not hate Iago, but
    must wish him well; _Luke 6:27_—“_Love your enemies, do good to
    them that hate you, bless them that curse you, pray for them that
    despitefully use you._” But he cannot receive Iago to his
    fellowship till he repents. On the duty and ground of forgiving
    one another, see Martineau, Seat of Authority, 613, 614; Straffen,
    Hulsean Lectures on the Propitiation for Sin.


(_b_) That satisfaction and forgiveness are mutually exclusive.—We answer
that, since it is not a third party, but the Judge himself, who makes
satisfaction to his own violated holiness, forgiveness is still optional,
and may be offered upon terms agreeable to himself. Christ’s sacrifice is
not a pecuniary, but a penal, satisfaction. The objection is valid against
the merely commercial view of the atonement, not against the ethical view
of it.


    Forgiveness is something beyond the mere taking away of penalty.
    When a man bears the penalty of his crime, has the community no
    right to be indignant with him? There is a distinction between
    pecuniary and penal satisfaction. Pecuniary satisfaction has
    respect only to the thing due; penal satisfaction has respect also
    to the person of the offender. If pardon is a matter of justice in
    God’s government, it is so only as respects Christ. To the
    recipient it is only mercy. “_Faithful and righteous to forgive us
    our sins_” (_1 John 1:9_)—faithful to his promise, and righteous
    to Christ. Neither the atonement, nor the promise, gives the
    offender any personal claim.

    Philemon must forgive Onesimus the pecuniary _debt_, when Paul
    pays it; not so with the personal _injury_ Onesimus has done to
    Philemon; there is no forgiveness of this, until Onesimus repents
    and asks pardon. An amnesty may be offered to all, but upon
    conditions. Instance Amos Lawrence’s offering to the forger the
    forged paper he had bought up, upon condition that he would
    confess himself bankrupt, and put all his affairs into the hands
    of his benefactor. So the fact that Christ has paid our debts does
    not preclude his offering to us the benefit of what he has done,
    upon condition of our repentance and faith. The equivalent is not
    furnished by man, but by God. God may therefore offer the results
    of it upon his own terms. Did then the entire race fairly pay its
    penalty when one suffered, just as all incurred the penalty when
    one sinned? Yes,—all who receive their life from each—Adam on the
    one hand, and Christ on the other. See under Union with Christ—its
    Consequences; see also Shedd, Discourses and Essays, 295 note,
    321, and Dogm. Theol., 2:383-389; Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:614-615
    (Syst. Doct., 4:82, 83). _Versus_ Current Discussions in Theology,
    5:281.

    Hovey calls Christ’s relation to human sin a vice-penal one. Just
    as vice-regal position carries with it all the responsibility,
    care, and anxiety of regal authority, so does a vice-penal
    relation to sin carry with it all the suffering and loss of the
    original punishment. The person on whom it falls is different, but
    his punishment is the same, at least in penal value. As vice-regal
    authority may be superseded by regal, so vice-penal suffering, if
    despised, may be superseded by the original penalty. Is there a
    waste of vice-penal suffering when any are lost for whom it was
    endured? On the same principle we might object to any suffering on
    the part of Christ for those who refuse to be saved by him. Such
    suffering may benefit others, if not those for whom it was in the
    first instance endured.

    If compensation is made, it is said, there is nothing to forgive;
    if forgiveness is granted, no compensation can be required. This
    reminds us of Narvaez, who saw no reason for forgiving his enemies
    until he had shot them all. When the offended party furnishes the
    compensation, he can offer its benefits upon his own terms. Dr.
    Pentecost: “A prisoner in Scotland was brought before the Judge.
    As the culprit entered the box, he looked into the face of the
    Judge to see if he could discover mercy there. The Judge and the
    prisoner exchanged glances, and then there came a mutual
    recognition. The prisoner said to himself: ‘It is all right this
    time,’ for the Judge had been his classmate in Edinburgh
    University twenty-five years before. When sentence was pronounced,
    it was five pounds sterling, the limit of the law for the
    misdemeanor charged, and the culprit was sorely disappointed as he
    was led away to prison. But the Judge went at once and paid the
    fine, telling the clerk to write the man’s discharge. This the
    Judge delivered in person, explaining that the demands of the law
    must be met, and having been met, the man was free.”


(_c_) That there can be no real propitiation, since the judge and the
sacrifice are one.—We answer that this objection ignores the existence of
personal relations within the divine nature, and the fact that the God-man
is distinguishable from God. The satisfaction is grounded in the
distinction of persons in the Godhead; while the love in which it
originates belongs to the unity of the divine essence.


    The satisfaction is not rendered to a _part_ of the Godhead, for
    the whole Godhead is in the Father, in a certain manner; as
    omnipresence = _totus in omni parte_. So the offering is perfect,
    because the whole Godhead is also in Christ (_2 Cor. 5:19_—“_God
    was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself_”). Lyman Abbott
    says that the word “propitiate” is used in the New Testament only
    in the middle voice, to show that God propitiates himself.
    Lyttelton, in Lux Mundi, 302—“The Atonement is undoubtedly a
    mystery, but all forgiveness is a mystery. It avails to lift the
    load of guilt that presses upon an offender. A change passes over
    him that can only be described as regenerative, life-giving; and
    thus the assurance of pardon, however conveyed, may be said to
    obliterate in some degree the consequences of the past. 310—Christ
    bore sufferings, not that we might be freed from them, for we have
    deserved them, but that we might be enabled to bear them, as he
    did, victoriously and in unbroken union with God.”


(_d_) That the suffering of the innocent for the guilty is not an
execution of justice, but an act of manifest injustice.—We answer, that
this is true only upon the supposition that the Son bears the penalty of
our sins, not voluntarily, but compulsorily; or upon the supposition that
one who is personally innocent can in no way become involved in the guilt
and penalty of others,—both of them hypotheses contrary to Scripture and
to fact.


    The mystery of the atonement lies in the fact of unmerited
    sufferings on the part of Christ. Over against this stands the
    corresponding mystery of unmerited pardon to believers. We have
    attempted to show that, while Christ was personally innocent, he
    was so involved with others in the consequences of the Fall, that
    the guilt and penalty of the race belonged to him to bear. When we
    discuss the doctrine of Justification, we shall see that, by a
    similar union of the believer with Christ, Christ’s justification
    becomes ours.

    To one who believes in Christ as the immanent God, the life of
    humanity, the Creator and Upholder of mankind, the bearing by
    Christ of the just punishment of human sin seems inevitable. The
    very laws of nature are only the manifestation of his holiness,
    and he who thus reveals God is also subject to God’s law. The
    historical process which culminated on Calvary was the
    manifestation of an age-long suffering endured by Christ on
    account of his connection with the race from the very first moment
    of their sin. A. H. Strong, Christ in Creation, 80-83—“A God of
    love and holiness must be a God of suffering just so certainly as
    there is sin. Paul declares that he fills up ‘_that which is
    lacking of the afflictions of Christ ... for his body’s sake,
    which is the church_’ (_Col. 1:24_); in other words, Christ still
    suffers in the believers who are his body. The historical
    suffering indeed is ended; the agony of Golgotha is finished; the
    days when joy was swallowed up in sorrow are past; death has no
    more dominion over our Lord. But sorrow for sin is not ended; it
    still continues and will continue so long as sin exists. But it
    does not now militate against Christ’s blessedness, because the
    sorrow is overbalanced and overborne by the infinite knowledge and
    glory of his divine nature. Bushnell and Beecher were right when
    they maintained that suffering for sin was the natural consequence
    of Christ’s relation to the sinning creation. They were wrong in
    mistaking the nature of that suffering and in not seeing that the
    constitution of things which necessitates it, since it is the
    expression of God’s holiness, gives that suffering a penal
    character and makes Christ a substitutionary offering for the sins
    of the world.”


(_e_) That there can be no transfer of punishment or merit, since these
are personal.—We answer that the idea of representation and suretyship is
common in human society and government; and that such representation and
suretyship are inevitable, wherever there is community of life between the
innocent and the guilty. When Christ took our nature, he could not do
otherwise than take our responsibilities also.


    Christ became responsible for the humanity with which he was
    organically one. Both poets and historians have recognized the
    propriety of one member of a house, or a race, answering for
    another. Antigone expiates the crime of her house. Marcus Curtius
    holds himself ready to die for his nation. Louis XVI has been
    called a “sacrificial lamb,” offered up for the crimes of his
    race. So Christ’s sacrifice is of benefit to the whole family of
    man, because he is one with that family. But here is the
    limitation also. It does not extend to angels, because he took not
    on him the nature of angels (_Heb. 2:16_—“_For verily not of the
    angels doth he take hold, but he taketh hold of the seed of
    Abraham_”).

    “A strange thing happened recently in one of our courts of
    justice. A young man was asked why the extreme penalty should not
    be passed upon him. At that moment, a gray-haired man, his face
    furrowed with sorrow, stepped into the prisoner’s box unhindered,
    placed his hand affectionately upon the culprit’s shoulder, and
    said: ‘Your honor, we have nothing to say. The verdict which has
    been found against us is just. We have only to ask for mercy.’
    ‘We!’ There was nothing against this old father. Yet, at that
    moment he lost himself. He identified his very being with that of
    his wayward boy. Do you not pity the criminal son because of your
    pity for his aged and sorrowing father? Because he has so
    suffered, is not your demand that the son suffer somewhat
    mitigated? Will not the judge modify his sentence on that account?
    Nature knows no forgiveness; but human nature does; and it is not
    nature, but human nature, that is made in the image of God”; see
    Prof. A. S. Coats, in The Examiner, Sept. 12, 1889.


(_f_) That remorse, as a part of the penalty of sin, could not have been
suffered by Christ.—We answer, on the one hand, that it may not be
essential to the idea of penalty that Christ should have borne the
identical pangs which the lost would have endured; and, on the other hand,
that we do not know how completely a perfectly holy being, possessed of
super-human knowledge and love, might have felt even the pangs of remorse
for the condition of that humanity of which he was the central conscience
and heart.


    Instance the lawyer, mourning the fall of a star of his
    profession; the woman, filled with shame by the degradation of one
    of her own sex; the father, anguished by his daughter’s
    waywardness; the Christian, crushed by the sins of the church and
    the world. The self-isolating spirit cannot conceive how perfectly
    love and holiness can make their own the sin of the race of which
    they are a part.

    Simon, Reconciliation, 366—“Inasmuch as the sin of the human race
    culminated in the crucifixion which crowned Christ’s own
    sufferings, clearly the life of humanity entering him
    subconsciously must have been most completely laden with sin and
    with the fear of death which is its fruit, at the very moment when
    he himself was enduring death in its most terrible form. Of
    necessity therefore he felt as if he were the sinner of sinners,
    and cried out in agony: ‘_My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
    me?_’ (_Mat. 27:46_).”

    Christ could realize our penal condition. Beings who have a like
    spiritual nature can realize and bear the spiritual sufferings of
    one another. David’s sorrow was not unjust, when he cried: “_Would
    I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!_” (_2 Sam.
    18:33_). Moberly, Atonement and Personality, 117—“Is penitence
    possible in the personally sinless? We answer that only one who is
    perfectly sinless can perfectly repent, and this identification of
    the sinless with the sinner is vital to the gospel.” Lucy Larcom:
    “There be sad women, sick and poor. And those who walk in garments
    soiled; Their shame, their sorrow I endure; By their defeat my
    hope is foiled; The blot they bear is on my name; Who sins, and I
    am not to blame?”


(_g_) That the sufferings of Christ, as finite in time, do not constitute
a satisfaction to the infinite demands of the law.—We answer that the
infinite dignity of the sufferer constitutes his sufferings a full
equivalent, in the eye of infinite justice. Substitution excludes identity
of suffering; it does not exclude equivalence. Since justice aims its
penalties not so much at the person as at the sin, it may admit equivalent
suffering, when this is endured in the very nature that has sinned.


    The sufferings of a dog, and of a man, have different values.
    Death is the wages of sin; and Christ, in suffering death,
    suffered our penalty. Eternity of suffering is unessential to the
    idea of penalty. A finite being cannot exhaust an infinite curse;
    but an infinite being can exhaust it, in a few brief hours. Shedd,
    Discourses and Essays, 307—“A golden eagle is worth a thousand
    copper cents. The penalty paid by Christ is strictly and literally
    _equivalent_ to that which the sinner would have borne, although
    it is not _identical_. The vicarious bearing of it excludes the
    latter.” Andrew Fuller thought Christ would have had to suffer
    just as much, if only one sinner were to have been saved thereby.

    The atonement is a unique fact, only partially illustrated by debt
    and penalty. Yet the terms “purchase” and “ransom” are Scriptural,
    and mean simply that the justice of God punishes sin as it
    deserves; and that, having determined what is deserved, God cannot
    change. See Owen, quoted in Campbell on Atonement, 58, 59.
    Christ’s sacrifice, since it is absolutely infinite, can have
    nothing added to it. If Christ’s sacrifice satisfies the Judge of
    all, it may well satisfy us.


(_h_) That if Christ’s passive obedience made satisfaction to the divine
justice, then his active obedience was superfluous.—We answer that the
active obedience and the passive obedience are inseparable. The latter is
essential to the former; and both are needed to secure for the sinner, on
the one hand, pardon, and, on the other hand, that which goes beyond
pardon, namely, restoration to the divine favor. The objection holds only
against a superficial and external view of the atonement.


    For more full exposition of this point, see our treatment of
    Justification; and also, Owen, in Works, 5:175-204. Both the
    active and the passive obedience of Christ are insisted on by the
    apostle Paul. Opposition to the Pauline theology is opposition to
    the gospel of Christ. Charles Cuthbert Hall, Universal Elements of
    the Christian Religion, 140—“The effects of this are already
    appearing in the impoverished religious values of the sermons
    produced by the younger generation of preachers, and the
    deplorable decline of spiritual life and knowledge in many
    churches. Results open to observation show that the movement to
    simplify the Christian essence by discarding the theology of St.
    Paul easily carries the teaching of the Christian pulpit to a
    position where, for those who submit to that teaching, the
    characteristic experiences of the Christian life became
    practically impossible. The Christian sense of sin; Christian
    penitence at the foot of the Cross; Christian faith in an atoning
    Savior; Christian peace with God through the mediation of Jesus
    Christ—these and other experiences, which were the very life of
    apostles and apostolic souls, fade from the view of the ministry,
    have no meaning for the younger generation.”


(_i_) That the doctrine is immoral in its practical tendencies, since
Christ’s obedience takes the place of ours, and renders ours
unnecessary.—We answer that the objection ignores not only the method by
which the benefits of the atonement are appropriated, namely, repentance
and faith, but also the regenerating and sanctifying power bestowed upon
all who believe. Faith in the atonement does not induce license, but
“works by love” (Gal. 5:6) and “cleanses the heart” (Acts 15:9).


    Water is of little use to a thirsty man, if he will not drink. The
    faith which accepts Christ ratifies all that Christ has done, and
    takes Christ as a new principle of life. Paul bids Philemon
    receive Onesimus as himself,—not the old Onesimus, but a new
    Onesimus into whom the spirit of Paul has entered (_Philemon 17_).
    So God receives us as new creatures in Christ. Though we cannot
    earn salvation, we must take it; and this taking it involves a
    surrender of heart and life which ensures union with Christ and
    moral progress.

    What shall be done to the convicted murderer who tears up the
    pardon which his wife’s prayers and tears have secured from the
    Governor? Nothing remains but to execute the sentence of the law.
    Hon. George F. Danforth, Justice of the New York State Court of
    Appeals, in a private letter says: “Although it may be stated in a
    general way that a pardon reaches both the punishment prescribed
    for the offence and the guilt of the offender, so that in the eye
    of the law he is as innocent as if he had never committed the
    offence, the pardon making him as it were a new man with a new
    credit and capacity, yet a delivery of the pardon is essential to
    its validity, and delivery is not complete without acceptance. It
    cannot be forced upon him. In that respect it is like a deed. The
    delivery may be in person to the offender or to his agent, and its
    acceptance may be proved by circumstances like any other fact.”


(_j_) That if the atonement requires faith as its complement, then it does
not in itself furnish a complete satisfaction to God’s justice.—We answer
that faith is not the ground of our acceptance with God, as the atonement
is, and so is not a work at all; faith is only the medium of
appropriation. We are saved not by faith, or on account of faith, but only
through faith. It is not faith, but the atonement which faith accepts,
that satisfies the justice of God.


    Illustrate by the amnesty granted to a city, upon conditions to be
    accepted by each inhabitant. The acceptance is not the ground upon
    which the amnesty is granted; it is the medium through which the
    benefits of the amnesty are enjoyed. With regard to the
    difficulties connected with the atonement, we may say, in
    conclusion, with Bishop Butler: “If the Scripture has, as surely
    it has, left this matter of the satisfaction of Christ mysterious,
    left somewhat in it unrevealed, all conjectures about it must be,
    if not evidently absurd, yet at least uncertain. Nor has any one
    reason to complain for want of further information, unless he can
    show his claim to it.” While we cannot say with President Stearns:
    “Christ’s work removed the hindrances in the eternal justice of
    the universe to the pardon of the sinner, but _how_ we cannot
    tell”—cannot say this, because we believe the main outlines of the
    plan of salvation to be revealed in Scripture—yet we grant that
    many questions remain unsolved. But, as bread nourishes even those
    who know nothing of its chemical constituents, or of the method of
    its digestion and assimilation, so the atonement of Christ saves
    those who accept it, even though they do not know _how_ it saves
    them. Balfour, Foundations of Belief, 264-267—“Heat was once
    thought to be a form of matter; now it is regarded as a mode of
    motion. We can get the good of it, whichever theory we adopt, or
    even if we have no theory. So we may get the good of
    reconciliation with God, even though we differ as to our theory of
    the Atonement.”—“One of the Roman Emperors commanded his fleet to
    bring from Alexandria sand for the arena, although his people at
    Rome were visited with famine. But a certain shipmaster declared
    that, whatever the emperor commanded, his ship should bring wheat.
    So, whatever sand others may bring to starving human souls, let us
    bring to them the wheat of the gospel—the substitutionary
    atonement of Jesus Christ.” For answers to objections, see
    Philippi, Glaubenslehre, iv, 2:156-180; Crawford, Atonement,
    384-468; Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:526-543; Baird, Elohim Revealed,
    623 sq.; Wm. Thomson, The Atoning Work of Christ; Hopkins, Works,
    1:321.


E. The Extent of the Atonement.


The Scriptures represent the atonement as having been made for all men,
and as sufficient for the salvation of all. Not the _atonement_ therefore
is limited, but the _application_ of the atonement through the work of the
Holy Spirit.

Upon this principle of a universal atonement, but a special application of
it to the elect, we must interpret such passages as Eph. 1:4, 7; 2 Tim.
1:9, 10; John 17:9, 20, 24—asserting a special efficacy of the atonement
in the case of the elect; and also such passages as 2 Pet. 2:1; 1 John
2:2; Tim. 2:6; 4:10; Tit. 2:11—asserting that the death of Christ is for
all.


    Passages asserting special efficacy of the atonement, in the case
    of the elect, are the following: _Eph. 1:4_—“_chose us in him
    before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
    without __ blemish before him in love_”; _7_—“_in whom we have our
    redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses,
    according to the riches of his grace_”; _2 Tim. 1:9, 10_—God “_who
    saved us, and called us with a holy calling, not according to our
    works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given
    us in Christ Jesus before times eternal, but hath now been
    manifested by the appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus, who
    abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through
    the gospel_”; _John 17:9_—“_I pray for them: I pray not for the
    world, but for those whom thou hast given me_”; _20_—“_Neither for
    these only do I pray, but for them also that believe on me through
    their word_”; _24_—“_Father, that which thou hast given me, I
    desire that where I am, they also may be with me; that they may
    beheld my glory, which thou hast given me._”

    Passages asserting that the death of Christ is for all are the
    following: _2 Pet 2:1_—“_false teachers, who shall privily bring
    in destructive heresies, denying even the Master that bought
    them_”; _1 John 2:2_—“_and he is the propitiation for our sins;
    and not for ours only, but also for the whole world_”; _1 Tim.
    2:6_—Christ Jesus “_who gave himself a ransom for all_”;
    _4:10_—“_the living God, who is the Savior of all men, specially
    of them that believe_”; _Tit. 2:11_—“_For the grace of God hath
    appeared, bringing salvation to all men._” _Rom. 3:22_ (A.
    V.)—“_unto all and upon all them that believe_”—has sometimes been
    interpreted as meaning “unto all men, and upon all believers” (εἰς
    = destination; ἐπί = extent). But the Rev. Vers. omits the words
    “_and upon all_,” and Meyer, who retains the words, remarks that
    τοῦς πιστεύοντας belongs to πάντας in both instances.

    Unconscious participation in the atonement of Christ, by virtue of
    our common humanity in him, makes us the heirs of much temporal
    blessing. Conscious participation in the atonement of Christ, by
    virtue of our faith in him and his work for us, gives us
    justification and eternal life. Matthew Henry said that the
    Atonement is “sufficient for all; effectual for many.” J. M.
    Whiton, in The Outlook, Sept. 25, 1897—“It was Samuel Hopkins of
    Rhode Island (1721-1803) who first declared that Christ had made
    atonement for all men, not for the elect part alone, as Calvinists
    affirmed.” We should say “as some Calvinists affirmed”; for, as we
    shall see, John Calvin himself declared that “Christ suffered for
    the sins of the whole world.” Alfred Tennyson once asked an old
    Methodist woman what was the news. “Why, Mr. Tennyson, there’s
    only one piece of news that I know,—that Christ died for all men.”
    And he said to her; “That is old news, and good news, and new
    news.”


If it be asked in what sense Christ is the Savior of all men, we reply:

(_a_) That the atonement of Christ secures for all men a delay in the
execution of the sentence against sin, and a space for repentance,
together with a continuance of the common blessings of life which have
been forfeited by transgression.


    If strict justice had been executed, the race would have been cut
    off at the first sin. That man lives after sinning, is due wholly
    to the Cross. There is a pretermission, or “_passing over of the
    sins done aforetime, in the forbearance of God_” (_Rom. 3:25_),
    the justification of which is found only in the sacrifice of
    Calvary. This “_passing over_,” however, is limited in its
    duration: see _Acts 17:30, 31_—“_The times of ignorance therefore
    God overlooked; but now he commandeth men that they should all
    everywhere repent: inasmuch as he hath appointed a day in which he
    will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he hath
    ordained._”

    One may get the benefit of the law of gravitation without
    understanding much about its nature, and patriarchs and heathen
    have doubtless been saved through Christ’s atonement, although
    they have never heard his name, but have only cast themselves as
    helpless sinners upon the mercy of God. That mercy of God was
    Christ, though they did not know it. Our modern pious Jews will
    experience a strange surprise when they find that not only
    forgiveness of sin but every other blessing of life has come to
    them through the crucified Jesus. _Matt. 8:11_—“_many shall come
    from the east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and
    Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven._”

    Dr. G.W. Northrop held that the work of Christ is universal in
    three respects: 1. It reconciled God to the whole race, apart from
    personal transgression; 2. It secured the bestowment upon all of
    common grace, and the means of common grace; 3. It rendered
    certain the bestowment of eternal life upon all who would so use
    common grace and the means of common grace as to make it morally
    possible for God as a wise and holy Governor to grant his special
    and renewing grace.


(_b_) That the atonement of Christ has made objective provision for the
salvation of all, by removing from the divine mind every obstacle to the
pardon and restoration of sinners, except their wilful opposition to God
and refusal to turn to him.


    Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 604—“On God’s side, all is now taken
    away which could make a separation,—unless any should themselves
    choose to remain separated from him.” The gospel message is not:
    God will forgive if you return; but rather: God _has_ shown mercy;
    only believe, and it is your portion in Christ.

    Ashmore, The New Trial of the Sinner, in Christian Review,
    26:245-264—“The atonement has come to all men and upon all men.
    Its coëxtensiveness with the effects of Adam’s sin is seen in that
    all creatures, such as infants and insane persons, incapable of
    refusing it, are saved without their consent, just as they were
    involved in the sin of Adam without their consent. The reason why
    others are not saved is because when the atonement comes to them
    and upon them, instead of consenting to be included in it, they
    reject it. If they are born under the curse, so likewise they are
    born under the atonement which is intended to remove that curse;
    they remain under its shelter till they are old enough to
    repudiate it; they shut out its influences as a man closes his
    window-blind to shut out the beams of the sun; they ward them off
    by direct opposition, as a man builds dykes around his field to
    keep out the streams which would otherwise flow in and fertilize
    the soil.”


(_c_) That the atonement of Christ has procured for all men the powerful
incentives to repentance presented in the Cross, and the combined agency
of the Christian church and of the Holy Spirit, by which these incentives
are brought to bear upon them.


    Just as much sun and rain would be needed, if only one farmer on
    earth were to be benefited. Christ would not need to suffer more,
    if all were to be saved. His sufferings, as we have seen, were not
    the payment of a pecuniary debt. Having endured the penalty of the
    sinner, justice permits the sinner’s discharge, but does not
    require it, except as the fulfilment of a promise to his
    substitute, and then only upon the appointed condition of
    repentance and faith. The _atonement_ is unlimited,—the whole
    human race might be saved through it; the _application_ of the
    atonement is limited,—only those who repent and believe are
    actually saved by it.

    Robert G. Farley: “The prospective mother prepares a complete and
    beautiful outfit for her expected child. But the child is
    still-born. Yet the outfit was prepared just the same as if it had
    lived. And Christ’s work is completed as much for one man as for
    another, as much for the unbeliever as for the believer.”


Christ is specially the Savior of those who believe, in that he exerts a
special power of his Spirit to procure their acceptance of his salvation.
This is not, however, a part of his work of atonement; it is the
application of the atonement, and as such is hereafter to be considered.


    Among those who hold to a limited atonement is Owen. Campbell
    quotes him as saying: “Christ did not die for all the sins of all
    men; for if this were so, why are not all freed from the
    punishment of all their sins? You will say, ‘Because of their
    unbelief,—they will not believe.’ But this unbelief is a sin, and
    Christ was punished for it. Why then does this, more than other
    sins, hinder them from partaking of the fruits of his death?”

    So also Turretin, loc. 4, quæs. 10 and 17; Symington, Atonement,
    184-234; Candlish on the Atonement; Cunningham, Hist. Theol.,
    2:323-370; Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:464-489. For the view presented
    in the text, see Andrew Fuller, Works, 2:373, 374; 689-698;
    706-709; Wardlaw, Syst. Theol., 2:485-549; Jenkyn, Extent of the
    Atonement; E. P. Griffin, Extent of the Atonement; Woods, Works,
    2:490-521; Richards, Lectures on Theology, 302-327.


2. Christ’s Intercessory Work.


The Priesthood of Christ does not cease with his work of atonement, but
continues forever. In the presence of God he fulfils the second office of
the priest, namely that of intercession.


    _Heb. 7:23-25_—“_priests many in number, because that by death
    they are hindered from continuing: but he, because he abideth
    forever, hath his priesthood unchangeable. Wherefore also he is
    able to save to the uttermost them that draw near onto God through
    him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them._” C. H.
    M. on _Ex. 17:12_—“The hands of our great Intercessor never hang
    down, as Moses’ did, nor does he need any one to hold them up. The
    same rod of God’s power which was used by Moses to smite the rock
    (Atonement) was in Moses’ hand on the hill (Intercession).”

    Denney’s Studies in Theology, 166—“If we see nothing unnatural in
    the fact that Christ prayed for Peter on earth, we need not make
    any difficulty about his praying for us in heaven. The relation is
    the same; the only difference is that Christ is now exalted, and
    prays, not with strong crying and tears, but in the sovereignty
    and prevailing power of one who has achieved eternal redemption
    for his people.”


A. Nature of Christ’s Intercession.—This is not to be conceived of either
as an external and vocal petitioning, nor as a mere figure of speech for
the natural and continuous influence of his sacrifice; but rather as a
special activity of Christ in securing, upon the ground of that sacrifice,
whatever of blessing comes to men, whether that blessing be temporal or
spiritual.


    _1 John 2:1_—“_if any man sin, we have an advocate with the
    Father, Jesus Christ the righteous_”; _Rom. 8:34_—“_It is Jesus
    Christ that died, yea rather, that was raised from the dead, who
    is at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for
    us_”—here Meyer seems to favor the meaning of external and vocal
    petitioning, as of the glorified God-man: _Heb. 7:25_—“_ever
    liveth to make intercession for them._” On the ground of this
    effectual intercession he can pronounce the true sacerdotal
    _benediction_; and all the benedictions of his ministers and
    apostles are but fruits and emblems of this (see the Aaronic
    benediction in _Num. 6:24-26_, and the apostolic benedictions in
    _1 Cor. 1:3_ and _2 Cor. 13:14_).


B. Objects of Christ’s Intercession.—We may distinguish (_a_) that general
intercession which secures to all men certain temporal benefits of his
atoning work, and (_b_) that special intercession which secures the divine
acceptance of the persons of believers and the divine bestowment of all
gifts needful for their salvation.


    (_a_) General intercession for all men: _Is. 53:12_—“_he bare the
    sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors_”; _Luke
    23:34_—“_And Jesus said, Father, forgive them; for they know not
    what they do_”—a beginning of his priestly intercession, even
    while he was being nailed to the cross.

    (_b_) Special intercession for his saints: _Mat. 18:19, 20_—“_if
    two of you shall agree on earth as touching anything that they
    shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in
    heaven. For when two or three are gathered together in my name,
    there am I in the midst of them_”; _Luke 22:31, 32_—“_Simon,
    Simon, behold, Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you as
    wheat: but I made supplication for thee, that thy faith fail
    not_”; _John 14:16_—“_I will pray the Father, and he shall give
    you another Comforter_”; _17:9_—“_I pray for them; I pray not for
    the world, but for those whom thou hast given me_”; _Acts
    2:33_—“_Being therefore by the right hand of God exalted, and
    having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he
    hath poured forth this, which ye see and hear_”; _Eph. 1:6_—“_the
    glory of his grace, which he freely bestowed on us in the
    Beloved_”; _2:18_—“_through him we both have our access in one
    Spirit unto the Father_”; _3:12_—“_in whom we have boldness and
    access in confidence through our faith in him_”; _Heb. 2:17,
    18_—“_Wherefore it behooved him in all things to be made like unto
    his brethren, that he might become a merciful and faithful high
    priest in things pertaining to God, to make propitiation for the
    sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being
    tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted_”; _4:15,
    16_—“_For we have not a high priest that cannot be touched with
    the feeling of our infirmities; but one that hath been in all
    points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore
    draw near with boldness unto the throne of grace, that we may
    receive mercy, and may find grace to help as in time of need_”; _1
    Pet 2:5_—“_a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
    acceptable to God through Jesus Christ_”; _Rev. 5:6_—“_And I saw
    in the midst of the throne ... a Lamb standing, as though it had
    been slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the
    seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth_”; _7:16,
    17_—“_They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither
    shall the sun strike upon them, nor any heat: for the lamb that is
    in the midst of the throne shall be their shepherd, and shall
    guide them unto fountains of waters of life: and God shall wipe
    away every tear from their eyes._”


C. Relation of Christ’s Intercession to that of the Holy Spirit.—The Holy
Spirit is an advocate within us, teaching us how to pray as we ought;
Christ is an advocate in heaven, securing from the Father the answer of
our prayers. Thus the work of Christ and of the Holy Spirit are
complements to each other, and parts of one whole.


    _John 14:26_—“_But the Comforter, even the Holy Spirit, whom the
    Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
    bring to your remembrance all that I said unto you_”; _Rom.
    8:26_—“_And in like manner the Spirit __ also helpeth our
    infirmity: for we know not how to pray as we ought; but the Spirit
    himself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
    uttered_”; _27_—“_and he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is
    the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the
    saints according to the will of God._”

    The intercession of the Holy Spirit may be illustrated by the work
    of the mother, who teaches her child to pray by putting words into
    his mouth or by suggesting subjects for prayer. “The whole Trinity
    is present in the Christian’s closet; the Father hears; the Son
    advocates his cause at the Father’s right hand; the Holy Spirit
    intercedes in the heart of the believer.” Therefore “When God
    inclines the heart to pray, He hath an ear to hear.” The impulse
    to prayer, within our hearts, is evidence that Christ is urging
    our claims in heaven.


D. Relation of Christ’s Intercession to that of saints.—All true
intercession is either directly or indirectly the intercession of Christ.
Christians are organs of Christ’s Spirit. To suppose Christ in us to offer
prayer to one of his saints, instead of directly to the Father, is to
blaspheme Christ, and utterly misconceive the nature of prayer.


    Saints on earth, by their union with Christ, the great high
    priest, are themselves constituted intercessors; and as the high
    priest of old bore upon his bosom the breastplate engraven with
    the names of the tribes of Israel (_Ex. 28:9-12_), so the
    Christian is to bear upon his heart in prayer before God the
    interests of his family, the church, and the world (_1 Tim.
    3:1_—“_I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications,
    prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men_”). See
    Symington on Intercession, in Atonement and Intercession, 256-308;
    Milligan, Ascension and Heavenly Priesthood of our Lord.

    Luckock, After Death, finds evidence of belief in the intercession
    of the saints in heaven as early as the second century. Invocation
    of the saints he regards as beginning not earlier than the fourth
    century. He approves the doctrine that the saints pray _for us_,
    but rejects the doctrine that we are to pray _to them_. Prayers
    _for_ the dead he strongly advocates. Bramhall, Works,
    1:57—Invocation of the saints is “not necessary, for two reasons:
    _first_, no saint doth love us so well as Christ: no saint hath
    given us such assurance of his love, or done so much for us as
    Christ; no saint is so willing to help us as Christ; and
    _secondly_, we have no command from God to invocate them.” A. B.
    Cave: “The system of human mediation falls away in the advent to
    our souls of the living Christ. Who wants stars, or even the moon,
    after the sun is up?”


III. The Kingly Office of Christ.


This is to be distinguished from the sovereignty which Christ originally
possessed in virtue of his divine nature. Christ’s kingship is the
sovereignty of the divine-human Redeemer, which belonged to him of right
from the moment of his birth, but which was fully exercised only from the
time of his entrance upon the state of exaltation. By virtue of this
kingly office, Christ rules all things in heaven and earth, for the glory
of God and the execution of God’s purpose of salvation.

(_a_) With respect to the universe at large, Christ’s kingdom is a kingdom
of power; he upholds, governs, and judges the world.


    _Ps. 2:6-8_—“_I have set my king.... Thou art my son.... uttermost
    parts of the earth for thy possession_”; _8:6_—“_madest him to
    have dominion over the works of thy hands; Thou hast put all
    things under his feet_”; _cf._ _Heb. 2:8, 9_—“_we see not yet all
    things subjected to him. But we beheld ... Jesus ... crowned with
    glory and honor_”; _Mat. 25:31, 32_—“_when the Son of man shall
    come in his glory ... then shall he sit on the throne of his
    glory: and before him shall be gathered all the nations_”;
    _28:18_—“_All authority hath been given unto me in heaven and on
    earth_”; _Heb. 1:3_—“_upholding all things by the word of his
    power_”; _Rev. 19:15, 16_—“_smite the nations ... rule them with a
    rod of iron ... King of Kings, and Lord of Lords._”

    Julius Müller, Proof-texts, 34, says incorrectly, as we think,
    that “the _regnum naturæ_ of the old theology is
    unsupported,—there are only the _regnum gratiæ_ and the _regnum
    gloriæ_.” A. J. Gordon: “Christ is now creation’s sceptre-bearer,
    as he was once creation’s burden-bearer.”


(_b_) With respect to his militant church, it is a kingdom of grace; he
founds, legislates for, administers, defends, and augments his church on
earth.


    _Luke 2:11_—“_born to you ... a Savior, who is Christ the lord_”;
    _19:38_—“_Blessed is the King that cometh in the name of the
    Lord_”; _John 18:36, 37_—“_My kingdom is not of this world....
    Thou sayest it, for I am a king.... Every one that is of the truth
    heareth my voice_”; _Eph. 1:22_—“_he put all things in subjection
    under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the
    church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in
    all_”; _Heb. 1:8_—“_of the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for
    ever and ever._”

    Dorner, Glaubenslehre, 2:677 (Syst. Doct., 4:142, 143)—“All great
    men can be said to have an after-influence (_Nachwirkung_) after
    their death, but only of Christ can it be said that he has an
    after-activity (_Fortwirkung_). The sending of the Spirit is part
    of Christ’s work as King.” P. S. Moxom, Bap. Quar. Rev., Jan.
    1886:25-36—“Preëminence of Christ, as source of the church’s
    being; ground of the church’s unity; source of the church’s law;
    mould of the church’s life.” A. J. Gordon: “As the church endures
    hardness and humiliation as united to him who was on the cross, so
    she should exhibit something of supernatural energy as united with
    him who is on the throne.” Luther: “We tell our Lord God, that if
    he will have his church, he must look after it himself. We cannot
    sustain it, and, if we could, we should become the proudest asses
    under heaven.... If it had been possible for pope, priest or
    minister to destroy the church of Jesus Christ, it would have been
    destroyed long ago.” Luther, watching the proceedings of the Diet
    of Augsburg, made a noteworthy discovery. He saw the stars bestud
    the canopy of the sky, and though there were no pillars to hold
    them up they kept their place and the sky fell not. The business
    of holding up the sky and its stars has been on the minds of men
    in all ages. But we do not need to provide props to hold up the
    sky. God will look after his church and after Christian doctrine.
    For of Christ it has been written in _1 Cor. 15:25_—“_For he must
    reign, till he hath put all his enemies under his feet._”

    “Thrice blessed is he to whom is given The instinct that can tell
    That God is in the field when he Is most invisible.” Since Christ
    is King, it is a duty never to despair of church or of the world.
    Dr. E. G. Robinson declared that Christian character was never
    more complete than now, nor more nearly approaching the ideal man.
    We may add that modern education, modern commerce, modern
    invention, modern civilization, are to be regarded as the
    revelations of Christ, the Light of the world, and the Ruler of
    the nations. All progress of knowledge, government, society, is
    progress of his truth, and a prophecy of the complete
    establishment of his kingdom.


(_c_) With respect to his church triumphant, it is a kingdom of glory; he
rewards his redeemed people with the full revelation of himself, upon the
completion of his kingdom in the resurrection and the judgment.


    _John 17:24_—“_Father, that which thou hast given me, I desire
    that where I am, they also may be with me, that they may behold my
    glory_”; _1 Pet. 3:21, 22_—“_Jesus Christ; who is on the right
    hand of God, having gone into heaven; angels and authorities and
    powers being made subject unto him_”; _2 Pet. 1:11_—“_thus shall
    be richly supplied unto you the entrance into the eternal kingdom
    of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ._” See Andrew Murray, With
    Christ in the School of Prayer, preface, vi—“_Rev. 1:6_—‘_made us
    to be a kingdom, to be priests unto his God and Father._’ ” Both
    in the king and the priest, the chief thing is power, influence,
    blessing. In the king, it is the power coming downward; in the
    priest, it is the power rising upward, prevailing with God. As in
    Christ, so in us, the kingly power is founded on the priestly:
    _Heb. 7:25_—“_able to save to the uttermost, ... seeing he ever
    liveth to make intercession_”.

    Watts, New Apologetic, preface, ix—“We cannot have Christ as King
    without having him also as Priest. It is as the Lamb that he sits
    upon the throne in the Apocalypse; as the Lamb that he conducts
    his conflict with the kings of the earth; and it is from the
    throne of God on which the Lamb appears that the water of life
    flows forth that carries refreshing throughout the Paradise of
    God.”

    Luther: “Now Christ reigns, not in visible, public manner, but
    through the word, just as we see the sun through a cloud. We see
    the light, but not the sun itself. But when the clouds are gone,
    then we see at the same time both light and sun.” We may close our
    consideration of Christ’s Kingship with two practical remarks: 1.
    We never can think too much of the cross, but we may think too
    little of the throne. 2. We can not have Christ as our Prophet or
    our Priest, unless we take him also as our King. On Christ’s
    Kingship, see Philippi, Glaubenslehre, IV, 2:342-351; Van
    Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 586 sq.; Garbett, Christ as Prophet, Priest,
    and King, 2:243-438; J. M. Mason, Sermon on Messiah’s Throne, in
    Works, 3:241-275.






***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY (VOLUME 2 OF 3)***



CREDITS


December 31, 2013

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Colin Bell, CCEL, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>.



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 44555‐0.txt or 44555‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/4/5/5/44555/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

