Chapter II. The Original State Of Man.


In determining man’s original state, we are wholly dependent upon
Scripture. This represents human nature as coming from God’s hand, and
therefore “very good” (Gen. 1:31). It moreover draws a parallel between
man’s first state and that of his restoration (Col. 3:10; Eph. 4:24). In
interpreting these passages, however, we are to remember the twofold
danger, on the one hand of putting man so high that no progress is
conceivable, on the other hand of putting him so low that he could not
fall. We shall the more easily avoid these dangers by distinguishing
between the essentials and the incidents of man’s original state.


    _Gen. 1:31_—“_And God saw everything that he had made, and,
    behold, it was very good_”; _Col. 3:10_—“_the new man, that is
    being renewed unto knowledge after the image of him that created
    him_”; _Eph. 4:24_—“_the new man that after God hath been created
    in righteousness and holiness of truth._”

    Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:337-399—“The original state must be (1)
    a contrast to sin; (2) a parallel to the state of restoration.
    Difficulties in the way of understanding it: (1) What lives in
    regeneration is something foreign to our present nature (‘_it is
    no longer I that live, but Christ liveth in me_’—_Gal. 2:20_); but
    the original state was something native. (2) It was a state of
    childhood. We cannot fully enter into childhood, though we see it
    about us, and have ourselves been through it. The original state
    is yet more difficult to reproduce to reason. (3) Man’s external
    circumstances and his organization have suffered great changes, so
    that the present is no sign of the past. We must recur to the
    Scriptures, therefore, as well-nigh our only guide.” John Caird,
    Fund. Ideas of Christianity, 1:164-195, points out that ideal
    perfection is to be looked for, not at the outset, but at the
    final stage of the spiritual life. If man were wholly finite, he
    would not know his finitude.

    Lord Bacon: “The sparkle of the purity of man’s first estate.”
    Calvin: “It was monstrous impiety that a son of the earth should
    not be satisfied with being made after the similitude of God,
    unless he could also be equal with him.” Prof. Hastings: “The
    truly natural is not the real, but the ideal. Made in the image of
    God—between that beginning and the end stands God made in the
    image of man.” On the general subject of man’s original state, see
    Zöckler, 3:283-290; Thomasius, Christi Person und Werk, 1:215-243;
    Ebrard, Dogmatik, 1:267-276; Van Oosterzee, Dogmatics, 374-375;
    Hodge, Syst. Theol., 2:92-116.



I. Essentials of Man’s Original State.


These are summed up in the phrase “the image of God.” In God’s image man
is said to have been created (Gen. 1:26, 27). In what did this image of
God consist? We reply that it consisted in 1. Natural likeness to God, or
personality; 2. Moral likeness to God, or holiness.


    _Gen. 1:26, 27_—“_And God said, Let us make man in our image,
    after our likeness.... And God created man in his own image, in
    the image of God created he him._” It is of great importance to
    distinguish clearly between the two elements embraced in this
    image of God, the natural and the moral. By virtue of the first,
    man possessed certain _faculties_ (intellect, affection, will); by
    virtue of the second, he had _right tendencies_ (bent, proclivity,
    disposition). By virtue of the first, he was invested with certain
    _powers_; by virtue of the second, a certain _direction_ was
    imparted to these powers. As created in the natural image of God,
    man had a moral _nature_; as created in the moral image of God,
    man had a holy _character_. The first gave him _natural_ ability;
    the second gave him _moral_ ability. The Greek Fathers emphasized
    the first element, or _personality_; the Latin Fathers emphasized
    the second element, or _holiness_. See Orr, God’s Image in Man.

    As the Logos, or divine Reason, Christ Jesus, dwells in humanity
    and constitutes the principle of its being, humanity shares with
    Christ in the image of God. That image is never wholly lost. It is
    completely restored in sinners when the Spirit of Christ gains
    control of their wills and they merge their life in his. To those
    who accused Jesus of blasphemy, he replied by quoting the words of
    _Psalm 82:6_—“_I said, Ye are gods_”—words spoken of imperfect
    earthly rulers. Thus, in _John 10:34-36_, Jesus, who constitutes
    the very essence of humanity, justifies his own claim to divinity
    by showing that even men who represent God are also in a minor
    sense “_partakers of the divine nature_” (_2 Pet. 1:4_). Hence the
    many legends, in heathen religions, of the divine descent of man.
    _1 Cor. 11:3_—“_the head of every man is Christ._” In every man,
    even the most degraded, there is an image of God to be brought
    out, as Michael Angelo saw the angel in the rough block of marble.
    This natural _worth_ does not imply _worthiness_; it implies only
    capacity for redemption. “The abysmal depths of personality,”
    which Tennyson speaks of, are sounded, as man goes down in thought
    successively from individual sins to sin of the heart and to
    race-sin. But “the deeper depth is out of reach To all, O God, but
    thee.” From this deeper depth, where man is rooted and grounded in
    God, rise aspirations for a better life. These are not due to the
    man himself, but to Christ, the immanent God, who ever works
    within him. Fanny J. Crosby: “Rescue the perishing, Care for the
    dying.... Down in the human heart, crushed by the tempter,
    Feelings lie buried that grace can restore; Touched by a loving
    heart, wakened by kindness, Chords that were broken will vibrate
    once more.”


1. Natural likeness to God, or personality.


Man was created a personal being, and was by this personality
distinguished from the brute. By personality we mean the twofold power to
know self as related to the world and to God, and to determine self in
view of moral ends. By virtue of this personality, man could at his
creation choose which of the objects of his knowledge—self, the world, or
God—should be the norm and centre of his development. This natural
likeness to God is inalienable, and as constituting a capacity for
redemption gives value to the life even of the unregenerate (Gen. 9:6; 1
Cor. 11:7; James 3:9).


    For definitions of personality, see notes on the Anthropological
    Argument, page 82; on Pantheism, pages 104, 105; on the
    Attributes, pages 252-254; and on the Person of Christ, in Part
    VI. Here we may content ourselves with the formula: Personality =
    self-consciousness + self-determination. _Self_-consciousness and
    _self_-determination, as distinguished from the consciousness and
    determination of the brute, involve all the higher mental and
    moral powers which constitute us men. Conscience is but a mode of
    their activity. Notice that the term “image” does not, in man,
    imply _perfect_ representation. Only Christ is the “_very image_”
    of God (_Heb. 1:3_), the “_image of the invisible God_” (_Col.
    1:15_—on which see Lightfoot). Christ is the image of God
    absolutely and archetypally; man, only relatively and
    derivatively. But notice also that, since God is Spirit, man made
    in God’s image cannot be a material thing. By virtue of his
    possession of this first element of the image of God, namely,
    personality, materialism is excluded.

    This first element of the divine image man can never lose until he
    ceases to be man. Even insanity can only obscure this natural
    image,—it cannot destroy it. St. Bernard well said that it could
    not be burned out, even in hell. The lost piece of money (_Luke
    15:8_) still bore the image and superscription of the king, even
    though it did not know it, and did not even know that it was lost.
    Human nature is therefore to be reverenced, and he who destroys
    human life is to be put to death: _Gen. 9:6_—“_for in the image of
    God made he man_”; _1 Cor. 11:7_—“_a man indeed ought not to have
    his head veiled, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God_”;
    _James 3:9_—even men whom we curse “_are made after the likeness
    of God_”; _cf._ _Ps. 8:5_—“_thou hast made him but little lower
    than God_”; _1 Pet. 2:17_—“_Honor all men._” In the being of every
    man are continents which no Columbus has ever yet discovered,
    depths of possible joy or sorrow which no plummet has ever yet
    sounded. A whole heaven, a whole hell, may lie within the compass
    of his single soul. If we could see the meanest real Christian as
    he will be in the great hereafter, we should bow before him as
    John bowed before the angel in the Apocalypse, for we should not
    be able to distinguish him from God (_Rev. 22:8, 9_).

    Sir William Hamilton: “On earth there is nothing great but man; In
    man there is nothing great but mind.” We accept this dictum only
    if “mind” can be understood to include man’s moral powers together
    with the right direction of those powers. Shakespeare, Hamlet,
    2:2—“What a piece of work is man! how noble in reason! how
    infinite in faculty! in form and moving how express and admirable!
    in action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god!”
    Pascal: “Man is greater than the universe; the universe may crush
    him, but it does not know that it crushes him.” Whiton, Gloria
    Patri, 94—“God is not only the Giver but the Sharer of my life. My
    natural powers are that part of God’s power which is lodged with
    me in trust to keep and use.” Man can be an _instrument_ of God,
    without being an _agent_ of God. “Each man has his place and value
    as a reflection of God and of Christ. Like a letter in a word, or
    a word in a sentence, he gets his meaning from his context; but
    the sentence is meaningless without him; rays from the whole
    universe converge in him.” John Howe’s Living Temple shows the
    greatness of human nature in its first construction and even in
    its ruin. Only a noble ship could make so great a wreck.
    Aristotle, Problem, sec. 30—“No excellent soul is exempt from a
    mixture of madness.” Seneca, De Tranquillitate Animi, 15—“There is
    no great genius without a tincture of madness.”

    Kant: “So act as to treat humanity, whether in thine own person or
    in that of any other, in every case as an _end_, and never as a
    _means_ only.” If there is a divine element in every man, then we
    have no right to _use_ a human being merely for our own pleasure
    or profit. In receiving him we receive Christ, and in receiving
    Christ we receive him who sent Christ (_Mat. 10:40_). Christ is
    the vine and all men are his natural branches, cutting themselves
    off only when they refuse to bear fruit, and condemning themselves
    to the burning only because they destroy, so far as they can
    destroy, God’s image in them, all that makes them worth preserving
    (_John 15:1-6_). Cicero: “Homo mortalis deus.” This possession of
    natural likeness to God, or personality, involves boundless
    possibilities of good or ill, and it constitutes the natural
    foundation of the love for man which is required of us by the law.
    Indeed it constitutes the reason why Christ should die. Man was
    worth redeeming. The woman whose ring slipped from her finger and
    fell into the heap of mud in the gutter, bared her white arm and
    thrust her hand into the slimy mass until she found her ring; but
    she would not have done this if the ring had not contained a
    costly diamond. The lost piece of money, the lost sheep, the lost
    son, were worth effort to seek and to save (_Luke 15_). But, on
    the other hand, it is folly when man, made in the image of God,
    “blinds himself with clay.” The man on shipboard, who playfully
    tossed up the diamond ring which contained his whole fortune, at
    last to his distress tossed it overboard. There is a “_merchandise
    of souls_” (_Rev. 18:13_) and we must not juggle with them.

    Christ’s death for man, by showing the worth of humanity, has
    recreated ethics. “Plato defended infanticide as under certain
    circumstances permissible. Aristotle viewed slavery as founded in
    the nature of things. The reason assigned was the essential
    inferiority of nature on the part of the enslaved.” But the divine
    image in man makes these barbarities no longer possible to us.
    Christ sometimes looked upon men with anger, but he never looked
    upon them with contempt. He taught the woman, he blessed the
    child, he cleansed the leper, he raised the dead. His own death
    revealed the infinite worth of the meanest human soul, and taught
    us to count all men as brethren for whose salvation we may well
    lay down our lives. George Washington answered the salute of his
    slave. Abraham Lincoln took off his hat to a negro who gave him
    his blessing as he entered Richmond; but a lady who had been
    brought up under the old regime looked from a window upon the
    scene with unspeakable horror. Robert Burns, walking with a
    nobleman in Edinburgh, met an old townsfellow from Ayr and stopped
    to talk with him. The nobleman, kept waiting, grew restive, and
    afterward reproved Burns for talking to a man with so bad a coat.
    Burns replied: “I was not talking to the coat,—I was talking to
    the man.” Jean Ingelow: “The street and market place Grow holy
    ground: each face—Pale faces marked with care, Dark, toilworn
    brows—grows fair. King’s children are all these, though want and
    sin Have marred their beauty, glorious within. We may not pass
    them but with reverent eye.” See Porter, Human Intellect, 393,
    394, 401; Wuttke, Christian Ethics, 2:42; Philippi, Glaubenslehre,
    2:343.


2. Moral likeness to God, or holiness.


In addition to the powers of self-consciousness and self-determination
just mentioned, man was created with such a direction of the affections
and the will, as constituted God the supreme end of man’s being, and
constituted man a finite reflection of God’s moral attributes. Since
holiness is the fundamental attribute of God, this must of necessity be
the chief attribute of his image in the moral beings whom he creates. That
original righteousness was essential to this image, is also distinctly
taught in Scripture (Eccl. 7:29; Eph. 4:24; Col. 3:10).


    Besides the possession of natural powers, the image of God
    involves the possession of right moral tendencies. It is not
    enough to say that man was created in a state of innocence. The
    Scripture asserts that man had a righteousness like God’s: _Eccl.
    7:29_—“_God made man upright_”; _Eph. 4:24_—“_the new man, that
    after God hath been created in righteousness and holiness of
    truth_”—here Meyer says: “κατὰ Θεόν, ‘_after God_,’ _i. e._, _ad
    exemplum Dei_, after the pattern of God (_Gal. 4:28_—κατὰ Ἰσαάκ,
    ‘after Isaac’ = as Isaac was). This phrase makes the creation of
    the new man a parallel to that of our first parents, who were
    created after God’s image; they too, before sin came into
    existence through Adam, were sinless—‘_in righteousness and
    holiness of truth_.’ ” On N. T. “truth” = rectitude, see Wendt,
    Teaching of Jesus, 1:257-260.

    Meyer refers also, as a parallel passage, to _Col. 3:10_—“_the new
    man, that is being renewed unto knowledge after the image of him
    that created him._” Here the “_knowledge_” referred to is that
    knowledge of God which is the source of all virtue, and which is
    inseparable from holiness of heart. “Holiness has two sides or
    phases: (1) it is perception and knowledge; (2) it is inclination
    and feeling” (Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 2:97). On _Eph. 4:24_ and _Col.
    3:10_, the classical passages with regard to man’s original state,
    see also the Commentaries of DeWette, Rückert, Ellicott, and
    compare _Gen. 5:3_—“_And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years,
    and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image,_” _i. e._,
    in his own sinful likeness, which is evidently contrasted with the
    “_likeness of God_” (_verse 1_) in which he himself had been
    created (An. Par. Bible). _2 Cor. 4:4_—“_Christ, who is the image
    of God_”—where the phrase “_image of God_” is not simply the
    _natural_, but also the _moral_, image. Since Christ is the image
    of God primarily in his holiness, man’s creation in the image of
    God must have involved a holiness like Christ’s, so far as such
    holiness could belong to a being yet untried, that is, so far as
    respects man’s tastes and dispositions prior to moral action.

    “Couldst thou in vision see Thyself the man God meant, Thou
    nevermore couldst be The man thou art—content.” Newly created man
    had right moral tendencies, as well as freedom from actual fault.
    Otherwise the communion with God described in Genesis would not
    have been possible. Goethe: “Unless the eye were sunlike, how
    could it see the sun?” Because a holy disposition accompanied
    man’s innocence, he was capable of obedience, and was guilty when
    he sinned. The loss of this moral likeness to God was the chief
    calamity of the Fall. Man is now “the glory and the scandal of the
    universe.” He has defaced the image of God in his nature, even
    though that image, in its natural aspect, is ineffaceable (E. H.
    Johnson).

    The dignity of human nature consists, not so much in what man is,
    as in what God meant him to be, and in what God means him yet to
    become, when the lost image of God is restored by the union of
    man’s soul with Christ. Because of his future possibilities, the
    meanest of mankind is sacred. The great sin of the second table of
    the decalogue is the sin of despising our fellow man. To cherish
    contempt for others can have its root only in idolatry of self and
    rebellion against God. Abraham Lincoln said well that “God must
    have liked common people,—else he would not have made so many of
    them.” Regard for the image of God in man leads also to kind and
    reverent treatment even of those lower animals in which so many
    human characteristics are foreshadowed. Bradford, Heredity and
    Christian Problems, 166—“The current philosophy says: The fittest
    will survive; let the rest die. The religion of Christ says: That
    maxim as applied to men is just, only as regards their
    characteristics, of which indeed only the fittest should survive.
    It does not and cannot apply to the men themselves, since all men,
    being children of God, are supremely fit. The very fact that a
    human being is sick, weak, poor, an outcast, and a vagabond, is
    the strongest possible appeal for effort toward his salvation. Let
    individuals look upon humanity from the point of view of Christ,
    and they will not be long in finding ways in which environment can
    be caused to work for righteousness.”


This original righteousness, in which the image of God chiefly consisted,
is to be viewed:

(_a_) Not as constituting the substance or essence of human nature,—for in
this case human nature would have ceased to exist as soon as man sinned.


    Men every day change their tastes and loves, without changing the
    essence or substance of their being. When sin is called a
    “nature,” therefore (as by Shedd, in his Essay on “Sin a Nature,
    and that Nature Guilt”), it is only in the sense of being
    something inborn (_natura_, from _nascor_). Hereditary tastes may
    just as properly be denominated a “nature” as may the substance of
    one’s being. Moehler, the greatest modern Roman Catholic critic of
    Protestant doctrine, in his Symbolism, 58, 59, absurdly holds
    Luther to have taught that by the Fall man lost his essential
    nature, and that another essence was substituted in its room.
    Luther, however, is only rhetorical when he says: “It is the
    nature of man to sin; sin constitutes the essence of man; the
    nature of man since the Fall has become quite changed; original
    sin is that very thing which is born of father and mother; the
    clay out of which we are formed is damnable; the fœtus in the
    maternal womb is sin; man as born of his father and mother,
    together with his whole essence and nature, is not only a sinner
    but sin itself.”


(_b_) Nor as a _gift_ from without, foreign to human nature, and added to
it after man’s creation,—for man is said to have possessed the divine
image by the fact of creation, and not by subsequent bestowal.


    As men, since Adam, are born with a sinful nature, that is, with
    tendencies away from God, so Adam was created with a holy nature,
    that is, with tendencies toward God. Moehler says: “God cannot
    give a man actions.” We reply: “No, but God can give man
    dispositions; and he does this at the first creation, as well as
    at the new creation (regeneration).”


(_c_) But rather, as an original direction or tendency of man’s affections
and will, still accompanied by the power of evil choice, and so, differing
from the perfected holiness of the saints, as instinctive affection and
child-like innocence differ from the holiness that has been developed and
confirmed by experience of temptation.


    Man’s original righteousness was not immutable or indefectible;
    there was still the possibility of sinning. Though the first man
    was fundamentally good, he still had the power of choosing evil.
    There was a bent of the affections and will toward God, but man
    was not yet confirmed in holiness. Man’s love for God was like the
    germinal filial affection in the child, not developed, yet
    sincere—“caritas puerilis, non virilis.”


(_d_) As a moral disposition, moreover, which was propagable to Adam’s
descendants, if it continued, and which, though lost to him and to them,
if Adam sinned, would still leave man possessed of a natural likeness to
God which made him susceptible of God’s redeeming grace.


    Hooker (Works, ed. Keble, 2:683) distinguishes between aptness and
    ableness. The latter, men have lost; the former, they retain,—else
    grace could not work in us, more than in the brutes. Hase: “Only
    enough likeness to God remained to remind man of what he had lost,
    and enable him to feel the hell of God’s forsaking.” The moral
    likeness to God can be restored, but only by God himself. God
    secures this to men by making “_the light of the gospel of the
    glory of Christ, who is the image of God, ... dawn upon them_” (_2
    Cor. 4:4_). Pusey made _Ps. 72:6_—“_He will come down like rain
    upon the mown grass_”—the image of a world hopelessly dead, but
    with a hidden capacity for receiving life. Dr. Daggett: “Man is a
    ‘_son of the morning_’ (_Is. 14:12_), fallen, yet arrested midway
    between heaven and hell, a prize between the powers of light and
    darkness.” See Edwards, Works, 2:19, 20, 381-390; Hopkins, Works,
    1:162; Shedd, Hist. Doctrine, 2:50-66; Augustine, De Civitate Dei,
    14:11.


In the light of the preceding investigation, we may properly estimate two
theories of man’s original state which claim to be more Scriptural and
reasonable:


A. The image of God as including only personality.


This theory denies that any positive determination to virtue inhered
originally in man’s nature, and regards man at the beginning as simply
possessed of spiritual powers, perfectly adjusted to each other. This is
the view of Schleiermacher, who is followed by Nitzsch, Julius Müller, and
Hofmann.


    For the view here combated, see Schleiermacher, Christl. Glaube,
    sec. 60; Nitzsch, System of Christian Doctrine, 201; Julius
    Müller, Doct. of Sin, 2:113-133, 350-357; Hofmann, Schriftbeweis,
    1:287-291; Bib. Sac., 7:409-425. Julius Müller’s theory of the
    Fall in a preëxistent state makes it impossible for him to hold
    here that Adam was possessed of moral likeness to God. The origin
    of his view of the image of God renders it liable to suspicion.
    Pfleiderer, Grundriss, 113—“The original state of man was that of
    child-like innocence or morally indifferent naturalness, which had
    in itself indeed the possibility (_Anlage_) of ideal development,
    but in such a way that its realization could be reached only by
    struggle with its natural opposite. The image of God was already
    present in the original state, but only as the possibility
    (_Anlage_) of real likeness to God—the endowment of reason which
    belonged to human personality. The _reality_ of a spirit like that
    of God has appeared first in the _second_ Adam, and has become the
    principle of the kingdom of God.”

    Raymond (Theology, 2:43, 132) is an American representative of the
    view that the image of God consists in mere personality: “The
    image of God in which man was created did not consist in an
    inclination and determination of the will to holiness.” This is
    maintained upon the ground that such a moral likeness to God would
    have rendered it impossible for man to fall,—to which we reply
    that Adam’s righteousness was not immutable, and the bias of his
    will toward God did not render it impossible for him to sin.
    Motives do not compel the will, and Adam at least had a certain
    power of contrary choice. E. G. Robinson, Christ. Theology,
    119-122, also maintains that the image of God signified only that
    personality which distinguished man from the brute. Christ, he
    says, carries forward human nature to a higher point, instead of
    merely restoring what is lost. “_Very good_” (_Gen. 1:31_) does
    not imply moral perfection,—this cannot be the result of creation,
    but only of discipline and will. Man’s original state was only one
    of untried innocence. Dr. Robinson is combating the view that the
    first man was at his creation possessed of a developed character.
    He distinguishes between character and the germs of character.
    These germs he grants that man possessed. And so he defines the
    image of God as a constitutional predisposition toward a course of
    right conduct. This is all the perfection which we claim for the
    first man. We hold that this predisposition toward the good can
    properly be called character, since it is the germ from which all
    holy action springs.


In addition to what has already been said in support of the opposite view,
we may urge against this theory the following objections:

(_a_) It is contrary to analogy, in making man the author of his own
holiness; our sinful condition is not the product of our individual wills,
nor is our subsequent condition of holiness the product of anything but
God’s regenerating power.


    To hold that Adam was created undecided, would make man, as
    Philippi says, in the highest sense his own creator. But morally,
    as well as physically, man is God’s creature. In regeneration it
    is not sufficient for God to give _power_ to decide for good; God
    must give new _love_ also. If this be so in the new creation, God
    could give love in the first creation also. Holiness therefore is
    creatable. “_Underived_ holiness is possible only in God; in its
    origin, it is _given_ both to angels and men.” Therefore we pray:
    “_Create in me a clean heart_” (_Ps. 51:10_); “_Incline my heart
    unto thy testimonies_” (_Ps. 119:36_). See Edwards, Eff. Grace,
    sec. 43-51; Kaftan, Dogmatik, 290—“If Adam’s perfection was not a
    moral perfection, then his sin was no real moral corruption.” The
    _animus_ of the theory we are combating seems to be an
    unwillingness to grant that man, either in his first creation or
    in his new creation, owes his holiness to God.


(_b_) The knowledge of God in which man was originally created logically
presupposes a direction toward God of man’s affections and will, since
only the holy heart can have any proper understanding of the God of
holiness.


    “Ubi caritas, ibi claritas.” Man’s heart was originally filled
    with divine love, and out of this came the knowledge of God. We
    know God only as we love him, and this love comes not from our own
    single volition. No one loves by command, because no one can give
    himself love. In Adam love was an inborn impulse, which he could
    affirm or deny. Compare _1 Cor. 8:3_—“_if any man loveth God, the
    same_ [God] _is known by him_”; _1 John 4:8_—“_He that loveth not
    knoweth not God._” See other Scripture references on pages 3, 4.


(_c_) A likeness to God in mere personality, such as Satan also possesses,
comes far short of answering the demands of the Scripture, in which the
ethical conception of the divine nature so overshadows the merely natural.
The image of God must be, not simply ability to be like God, but actual
likeness.


    God could never create an intelligent being evenly balanced
    between good and evil—“on the razor’s edge”—“on the fence.” The
    preacher who took for his text “_Adam, where art thou?_” had for
    his first head: “It is every man’s business to be somewhere;” for
    his second: “Some of you are where you ought not to be;” and for
    his third: “Get where you ought to be, as soon as possible.” A
    simple capacity for good or evil is, as Augustine says, already
    sinful. A man who is neutral between good and evil is already a
    violator of that law, which requires likeness to God in the bent
    of his nature. Delitzsch, Bib. Psychol., 45-84—“Personality is
    only the basis of the divine image,—it is not the image itself.”
    Bledsoe says there can be no created virtue or viciousness. Whedon
    (On the Will, 388) objects to this, and says rather: “There can be
    no created moral desert, good or evil. Adam’s nature as created
    was pure and excellent, but there was nothing meritorious until he
    had freely and rightly exercised his will with full power to the
    contrary.” We add: There was nothing meritorious even then. For
    substance of these objections, see Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:346.
    Lessing said that the character of the Germans was to have no
    character. Goethe partook of this cosmopolitan characterlessness
    (Prof. Seely). Tennyson had Goethe in view when he wrote in The
    Palace of Art: “I sit apart, holding no form of creed, but
    contemplating all.” And Goethe is probably still alluded to in the
    words: “A glorious devil, large in heart and brain, That did love
    beauty only, Or if good, good only for its beauty”; see A. H.
    Strong, The Great Poets and their Theology, 331; Robert Browning,
    Christmas Eve: “The truth in God’s breast Lies trace for trace
    upon ours impressed: Though he is so bright, and we so dim, We are
    made in his image to witness him.”


B. The image of God as consisting simply in man’s natural capacity for
religion.


This view, first elaborated by the scholastics, is the doctrine of the
Roman Catholic Church. It distinguishes between the image and the likeness
of God. The former (צלם—Gen. 1:26) alone belonged to man’s nature at its
creation. The latter (דמות) was the product of his own acts of obedience.
In order that this obedience might be made easier and the consequent
likeness to God more sure, a third element was added—an element not
belonging to man’s nature—namely, a supernatural gift of special grace,
which acted as a curb upon the sensuous impulses, and brought them under
the control of reason. Original righteousness was therefore not a natural
endowment, but a joint product of man’s obedience and of God’s
supernatural grace.


    Roman Catholicism holds that the white paper of man’s soul
    received two impressions instead of one. Protestantism sees no
    reason why both impressions should not have been given at the
    beginning. Kaftan, in Am. Jour. Theology, 4:708, gives a good
    statement of the Roman Catholic view. It holds that the supreme
    good transcends the finite mind and its powers of comprehension.
    Even at the first it was beyond man’s created nature. The _donum
    superadditum_ did not inwardly and personally belong to him. Now
    that he has lost it, he is entirely dependent on the church for
    truth and grace. He does not receive the truth because it is this
    and no other, but because the church tells him that it is the
    truth.

    The Roman Catholic doctrine may be roughly and pictorially stated
    as follows: As created, man was morally naked, or devoid of
    positive righteousness (_pura naturalia_, or _in puris
    naturalibus_). By obedience he obtained as a reward from God
    (_donum supernaturale_, or _superadditum_) a suit of clothes or
    robe of righteousness to protect him, so that he became clothed
    (_vestitus_). This suit of clothes, however, was a sort of magic
    spell of which he could be divested. The adversary attacked him
    and stripped him of his suit. After his sin he was one despoiled
    (_spoliatus_). But his condition after differed from his condition
    before this attack, only as a stripped man differs from a naked
    man (_spoliatus a nudo_). He was now only in the same state in
    which he was created, with the single exception of the weakness he
    might feel as the result of losing his customary clothing. He
    could still earn himself another suit,—in fact, he could earn two
    or more, so as to sell, or give away, what he did not need for
    himself. The phrase _in puris naturalibus_ describes the original
    state, as the phrase _spoliatus a nudo_ describes the difference
    resulting from man’s sin.


Many of the considerations already adduced apply equally as arguments
against this view. We may say, however, with reference to certain features
peculiar to the theory:

(_a_) No such distinction can justly be drawn between the words צלם and
דםות. The addition of the synonym simply strengthens the expression, and
both together signify “the very image.”

(_b_) Whatever is denoted by either or both of these words was bestowed
upon man in and by the fact of creation, and the additional hypothesis of
a supernatural gift not originally belonging to man’s nature, but
subsequently conferred, has no foundation either here or elsewhere in
Scripture. Man is said to have been created in the image and likeness of
God, not to have been afterwards endowed with either of them.

(_c_) The concreated opposition between sense and reason which this theory
supposes is inconsistent with the Scripture declaration that the work of
God’s hands “was very good” (Gen. 1:31), and transfers the blame of
temptation and sin from man to God. To hold to a merely negative
innocence, in which evil desire was only slumbering, is to make God author
of sin by making him author of the constitution which rendered sin
inevitable.

(_d_) This theory directly contradicts Scripture by making the effect of
the first sin to have been a weakening but not a perversion of human
nature, and the work of regeneration to be not a renewal of the affections
but merely a strengthening of the natural powers. The theory regards that
first sin as simply despoiling man of a special gift of grace and as
putting him where he was when first created—still able to obey God and to
coöperate with God for his own salvation,—whereas the Scripture represents
man since the fall as “dead through ... trespasses and sins” (Eph. 2:1),
as incapable of true obedience (Rom. 8:7—“not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can it be”), and as needing to be “created in Christ Jesus
for good works” (Eph. 2:10).


    At few points in Christian doctrine do we see more clearly than
    here the large results of error which may ultimately spring from
    what might at first sight seem to be only a slight divergence from
    the truth. Augustine had rightly taught that in Adam the _posse
    non peccare_ was accompanied by a _posse peccare_, and that for
    this reason man’s holy disposition needed the help of divine grace
    to preserve its integrity. But the scholastics wrongly added that
    this original disposition to righteousness was not the outflow of
    man’s nature as originally created, but was the gift of grace. As
    this later teaching, however, was by some disputed, the Council of
    Trent (sess. 5, cap. 1) left the matter more indefinite, simply
    declaring man: “Sanctitatem et justitiam in qua _constitutus
    fuerat_, amisisse.” The Roman Catechism, however (1:2:19),
    explained the phrase “constitutus fuerat” by the words: “Tum
    originalis justitiæ admirabile donum _addidit_.” And Bellarmine
    (De Gratia, 2) says plainly: “Imago, quæ est ipsa natura mentis et
    voluntatis, a solo Deo fieri potuit; similitudo autem, quæ in
    virtute et probitate consistit, _a nobis quoque_ Deo adjuvante
    perficitur.”... (5) “Integritas illa ... non fuit naturalis ejus
    conditio, sed supernaturalis evectio.... Addidisse homini donum
    quoddam insigne, justitiam videlicet originalem, qua veluti aureo
    quodam fræno pars inferior parti superiori subjecta contineretur.”

    Moehler (Symbolism, 21-35) holds that the religious faculty—the
    “image of God”; the pious exertion of this faculty—the “likeness
    of God.” He seems to favor the view that Adam received “this
    supernatural gift of a holy and blessed communion with God at a
    later period than his creation, _i. e._, only when he had prepared
    himself for its reception and by his own efforts had rendered
    himself worthy of it.” He was created “just” and acceptable to
    God, even without communion with God or help from God. He became
    “holy” and enjoyed communion with God, only when God rewarded his
    obedience and bestowed the _supernaturale donum_. Although Moehler
    favors this view and claims that it is permitted by the standards,
    he also says that it is not definitely taught. The quotations from
    Bellarmine and the Roman Catechism above make it clear that it is
    the prevailing doctrine of the Roman Catholic church.

    So, to quote the words of Shedd, “the Tridentine theology starts
    with Pelagianism and ends with Augustinianism. Created without
    character, God subsequently endows man with character.... The
    Papal idea of creation differs from the Augustinian in that it
    involves imperfection. There is a disease and languor which
    require a subsequent and supernatural act to remedy.” The
    Augustinian and Protestant conception of man’s original state is
    far nobler than this. The ethical element is not a later addition,
    but is man’s true nature—essential to God’s idea of him. The
    normal and original condition of man (_pura naturalia_) is one of
    grace and of the Spirit’s indwelling—hence, of direction toward
    God.

    From this original difference between Roman Catholic and
    Protestant doctrine with regard to man’s original state result
    diverging views as to sin and as to regeneration. The Protestant
    holds that, as man was possessed by creation of moral likeness to
    God, or holiness, so his sin robbed his nature of its integrity,
    deprived it of essential and concreated advantages and powers, and
    substituted for these a positive corruption and tendency to evil.
    Unpremeditated evil desire, or concupiscence, is original sin; as
    concreated love for God constituted man’s original righteousness.
    No man since the fall has original righteousness, and it is man’s
    sin that he has it not. Since without love to God no act, emotion,
    or thought of man can answer the demands of God’s law, the
    Scripture denies to fallen man all power of himself to know,
    think, feel, or do aright. His nature therefore needs a
    new-creation, a resurrection from death, such as God only, by his
    mighty Spirit, can work; and to this work of God man can
    contribute nothing, except as power is first given him by God
    himself.

    According to the Roman Catholic view, however, since the image of
    God in which man was created included only man’s religious
    faculty, his sin can rob him only of what became subsequently and
    adventitiously his. Fallen man differs from unfallen only as
    _spoliatus a nudo_. He loses only a sort of magic spell, which
    leaves him still in possession of all his essential powers.
    Unpremeditated evil desire, or concupiscence, is not sin; for this
    belonged to his nature even before he fell. His sin has therefore
    only put him back into the natural state of conflict and
    concupiscence, ordered by God in the concreated opposition of
    sense and reason. The sole qualification is this, that, having
    made an evil decision, his will is weakened. “Man does not need
    resurrection from death, but rather a crutch to help his lameness,
    a tonic to reinforce his feebleness, a medicine to cure his
    sickness.” He is still able to turn to God; and in regeneration
    the Holy Spirit simply awakens and strengthens the natural ability
    slumbering in the natural man. But even here, man must yield to
    the influence of the Holy Spirit; and regeneration is effected by
    uniting his power to the divine. In baptism the guilt of original
    sin is remitted, and everything called sin is taken away. No
    baptized person has any further process of regeneration to
    undergo. Man has not only strength to coöperate with God for his
    own salvation, but he may even go beyond the demands of the law
    and perform works of supererogation. And the whole sacramental
    system of the Roman Catholic Church, with its salvation by works,
    its purgatorial fires, and its invocation of the saints, connects
    itself logically with this erroneous theory of man’s original
    state.

    See Dorner’s Augustinus, 116; Perrone, Prælectiones Theologicæ,
    1:737-748; Winer, Confessions, 79, 80; Dorner, History Protestant
    Theology, 38, 39, and Glaubenslehre, 1:51; Van Oosterzee,
    Dogmatics, 376; Cunningham, Historical Theology, 1:516-586; Shedd,
    Hist. Doctrine, 2:140-149.



II. Incidents of Man’s Original State.


1. Results of man’s possession of the divine image.


(_a_) Reflection of this divine image in man’s physical form.—Even in
man’s body were typified those higher attributes which chiefly constituted
his likeness to God. A gross perversion of this truth, however, is the
view which holds, upon the ground of Gen. 2:7, and 3:8, that the image of
God consists in bodily resemblance to the Creator. In the first of these
passages, it is not the divine image, but the body, that is formed of
dust, and into this body the soul that possesses the divine image is
breathed. The second of these passages is to be interpreted by those other
portions of the Pentateuch in which God is represented as free from all
limitations of matter (Gen. 11:5; 18:15).


    The spirit presents the divine image immediately: the body,
    mediately. The scholastics called the soul the image of God
    _proprie_; the body they called the image of God _significative_.
    Soul is the direct reflection of God; body is the reflection of
    that reflection. The _os sublime_ manifests the dignity of the
    endowments within. Hence the word “upright,” as applied to moral
    condition; one of the first impulses of the renewed man is to
    physical purity. Compare Ovid, Metaph., bk. 1, Dryden’s transl.:
    “Thus while the mute creation downward bend Their sight, and to
    their earthly mother tend, Man looks aloft, and with erected eyes
    Beholds his own hereditary skies.” (Ἄνθρωπος, from ἀνά, ἄνω,
    suffix _tra_, and ὢψ, with reference to the upright posture.)
    Milton speaks of “the human face divine.” S. S. Times, July 28,
    1900—“Man is the only erect being among living creatures. He alone
    looks up naturally and without effort. He foregoes his birthright
    when he looks only at what is on a level with his eyes and
    occupies himself only with what lies in the plane of his own
    existence.”

    Bretschneider (Dogmatik, 1:682) regards the Scripture as teaching
    that the image of God consists in bodily resemblance to the
    Creator, but considers this as only the imperfect method of
    representation belonging to an early age. So Strauss,
    Glaubenslehre, 1:687. They refer to _Gen. 2:7_—“_And Jehovah God
    formed man of the dust of the ground_”; _3:8_—“_Jehovah God
    walking in the garden._” But see _Gen. 11:5_—“_And Jehovah came
    down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men
    builded_”; _Is. 66:1_—“_Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
    footstool_”; _1 K. 8:27_—“_behold, heaven and the heaven of
    heavens cannot contain thee._” On the Anthropomorphites, see
    Hagenbach, Hist. Doct., 1:103, 308, 491. For answers to
    Bretschneider and Strauss, see Philippi, Glaubenslehre, 2:364.


(_b_) Subjection of the sensuous impulses to the control of the
spirit.—Here we are to hold a middle ground between two extremes. On the
one hand, the first man possessed a body and a spirit so fitted to each
other that no conflict was felt between their several claims. On the other
hand, this physical perfection was not final and absolute, but relative
and provisional. There was still room for progress to a higher state of
being (Gen. 3:22).


    Sir Henry Watton’s Happy Life: “That man was free from servile
    bands Of hope to rise or fear to fall, Lord of himself if not of
    lands, And having nothing yet had all.” Here we hold to the
    _æquale temperamentum_. There was no disease, but rather the joy
    of abounding health. Labor was only a happy activity. God’s
    infinite creatorship and fountainhead of being was typified in
    man’s powers of generation. But there was no concreated opposition
    of sense and reason, nor an imperfect physical nature with whose
    impulses reason was at war. With this moderate Scriptural
    doctrine, contrast the exaggerations of the Fathers and of the
    scholastics. Augustine says that Adam’s reason was to ours what
    the bird’s is to that of the tortoise; propagation in the unfallen
    state would have been without concupiscence, and the new-born
    child would have attained perfection at birth. Albertus Magnus
    thought the first man would have felt no pain, even though he had
    been stoned with heavy stones. Scotus Erigena held that the male
    and female elements were yet undistinguished. Others called
    sexuality the first sin. Jacob Boehme regarded the intestinal
    canal, and all connected with it, as the consequence of the Fall;
    he had the fancy that the earth was transparent at the first and
    cast no shadow,—sin, he thought, had made it opaque and dark;
    redemption would restore it to its first estate and make night a
    thing of the past. South, Sermons, 1:24, 25—“Man came into the
    world a philosopher.... Aristotle was but the rubbish of an Adam.”
    Lyman Abbott tells us of a minister who assured his congregation
    that Adam was acquainted with the telephone. But God educates his
    children, as chemists educate their pupils, by putting them into
    the laboratory and letting them work. Scripture does not represent
    Adam as a walking encyclopædia, but as a being yet inexperienced;
    see _Gen. 3:22_—“_Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know
    good and evil_”; _1 Cor. 15:46_—“_that is not first which is
    spiritual, but that which is natural; then that which is
    spiritual._” On this last text, see Expositor’s Greek Testament.


(_c_) Dominion over the lower creation.—Adam possessed an insight into
nature analogous to that of susceptible childhood, and therefore was able
to name and to rule the brute creation (Gen. 2:19). Yet this native
insight was capable of development into the higher knowledge of culture
and science. From Gen. 1:26 (_cf._ Ps. 8:5-8), it has been erroneously
inferred that the image of God in man consists in dominion over the brute
creation and the natural world. But, in this verse, the words “let them
have dominion” do not define the image of God, but indicate the result of
possessing that image. To make the image of God consist in this dominion,
would imply that only the divine omnipotence was shadowed forth in man.


    _Gen. 2:19_—“_Jehovah God formed every beast of the field, and
    every bird of the heavens; and brought them unto the man to see
    what he would call them_”; _20_—“_And the man gave names to all
    cattle_”; _Gen. 1:26_—“_Let us make man in our image, after our
    likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
    over the birds of the heavens, and over the cattle_”; _cf._ _Ps.
    8:5-8_—“_thou hast made him but little lower than God, And
    crownest him with glory and honor. Thou makest him to have
    dominion over the works of thy hands; Thou hast put all things
    under his feet: All sheep and oxen, Yea, and the beasts of the
    field._” Adam’s naming the animals implied insight into their
    nature; see Porter, Hum. Intellect, 393, 394, 401. On man’s
    original dominion over (1) self, (2) nature, (3) fellow-man, see
    Hopkins, Scriptural Idea of Man, 105.

    Courage and a good conscience have a power over the brute
    creation, and unfallen man can well be supposed to have dominated
    creatures which had no experience of human cruelty. Rarey tamed
    the wildest horses by his steadfast and fearless eye. In Paris a
    young woman was hypnotized and put into a den of lions. She had no
    fear of the lions and the lions paid not the slightest attention
    to her. The little daughter of an English officer in South Africa
    wandered away from camp and spent the night among lions.
    “Katrina,” her father said when he found her, “were you not afraid
    to be alone here?” “No, papa,” she replied, “the big dogs played
    with me and one of them lay here and kept me warm.” MacLaren, in
    S. S. Times, Dec. 23, 1893—“The dominion over all creatures
    results from likeness to God. It is not then a mere right to use
    them for one’s own material advantage, but a viceroy’s authority,
    which the holder is bound to employ for the honor of the true
    King.” This principle gives the warrant and the limit to
    vivisection and to the killing of the lower animals for food
    (_Gen. 9:2, 3._).

    Socinian writers generally hold the view that the image of God
    consisted simply in this dominion. Holding a low view of the
    nature of sin, they are naturally disinclined to believe that the
    fall has wrought any profound change in human nature. See their
    view stated in the Racovian Catechism, 21. It is held also by the
    Arminian Limborch, Theol. Christ., ii, 24:2, 3, 11. Upon the basis
    of this interpretation of Scripture, the Encratites held, with
    Peter Martyr, that women do not possess the divine image at all.


(_d_) Communion with God.—Our first parents enjoyed the divine presence
and teaching (Gen. 2:16). It would seem that God manifested himself to
them in visible form (Gen. 3:8). This companionship was both in kind and
degree suited to their spiritual capacity, and by no means necessarily
involved that perfected vision of God which is possible to beings of
confirmed and unchangeable holiness (Mat. 5:8; 1 John 3:2).


    _Gen. 2:16_—“_And Jehovah God commanded the man_”; _3:8_—“_And
    they heard the voice of Jehovah God walking in the garden in the
    cool of the day_”; _Mat. 5:8_—“_Blessed are the pure in heart: for
    they shall see God_”; _1 John 3:2_—“_We know that, if he shall be
    manifested, we shall be like him; for we shall see him even as he
    is_”; _Rev. 22:4_—“_and they shall see his his face._”


2. Concomitants of man’s possession of the divine image.


(_a_) Surroundings and society fitted to yield happiness and to assist a
holy development of human nature (Eden and Eve). We append some recent
theories with regard to the creation of Eve and the nature of Eden.


    Eden—pleasure, delight. Tennyson: “When high in Paradise By the
    four rivers the first roses blew.” Streams were necessary to the
    very existence of an oriental garden. Hopkins, Script. Idea of
    Man, 107—“Man includes woman. Creation of _a_ man without a woman
    would not have been the creation of man. Adam called her name Eve
    but God called their name Adam.” Mat. Henry: “Not out of his head
    to top him, nor out of his feet to be trampled on by him; but out
    of his side to be equal with him, under his arm to be protected by
    him, and near his heart to be beloved.” Robert Burns says of
    nature: “Her ’prentice hand she tried on man, And then she made
    the lasses, O!” Stevens, Pauline Theology, 329—“In the natural
    relations of the sexes there is a certain reciprocal dependence,
    since it is not only true that woman was made from man, but that
    man is born of woman (_1 Cor. 11:11, 12_).” Of the Elgin marbles
    Boswell asked: “Don’t you think them indecent?” Dr. Johnson
    replied: “No, sir; but your question is.” Man, who in the adult
    state possesses twelve pairs of ribs, is found in the embryonic
    state to have thirteen or fourteen. Dawson, Modern Ideas of
    Evolution, 148—“Why does not the male man lack one rib? Because
    only the individual skeleton of Adam was affected by the taking of
    the rib.... The unfinished vertebral arches of the skin-fibrous
    layer may have produced a new individual by a process of budding
    or gemmation.”

    H. H. Bawden suggests that the account of Eve’s creation may be
    the “pictorial summary” of an actual phylogenetic evolutionary
    process by which the sexes were separated or isolated from a
    common hermaphroditic ancestor or ancestry. The mesodermic portion
    of the organism in which the urinogenital system has its origin
    develops later than the ectodermic or the endodermic portions. The
    word “rib” may designate this mesodermic portion. Bayard Taylor,
    John Godfrey’s Fortunes, 392, suggests that a genius is
    hermaphroditic, adding a male element to the woman, and a female
    element to the man. Professor Loeb, Am. Journ. Physiology, Vol.
    III, no. 3, has found that in certain chemical solutions prepared
    in the laboratory, approximately the concentration of sea-water,
    the unfertilized eggs of the sea-urchin will mature without the
    intervention of the spermatozoön. Perfect embryos and normal
    individuals are produced under these conditions. He thinks it
    probable that similar parthenogenesis may be produced in higher
    types of being. In 1900 he achieved successful results on
    Annelids, though it is doubtful whether he produced anything more
    than normal _larvæ_. These results have been criticized by a
    European investigator who is also a Roman priest. Prof. Loeb wrote
    a rejoinder in which he expressed surprise that a representative
    of the Roman church did not heartily endorse his conclusions,
    since they afford a vindication of the doctrine of the immaculate
    conception.

    H. H. Bawden has reviewed Prof. Loeb’s work in the Psychological
    Review, Jan. 1900. Janósik has found segmentation in the
    unfertilized eggs of mammalians. Prof. Loeb considers it possible
    that only the ions of the blood prevent the parthenogenetic origin
    of embryos in mammals, and thinks it not improbable that by a
    transitory change in these ions it will be possible to produce
    complete parthenogenesis in these higher types. Dr. Bawden goes on
    to say that “both parent and child are dependent upon a common
    source of energy. The universe is one great organism, and there is
    no inorganic or non-organic matter, but differences only in
    degrees of organization. Sex is designed only secondarily for the
    perpetuation of species; primarily it is the bond or medium for
    the connection and interaction of the various parts of this great
    organism, for maintaining that degree of heterogeneity which is
    the prerequisite of a high degree of organization. By means of the
    growth of a lifetime I have become an essential part in a great
    organic system. What I call my individual personality represents
    simply the focusing, the flowering of the universe at one finite
    concrete point or centre. Must not then my personality continue as
    long as that universal system continues? And is immortality
    conceivable if the soul is something shut up within itself,
    unshareable and unique? Are not the many foci mutually
    interdependent, instead of mutually exclusive? We must not then
    conceive of an immortality which means the continued existence of
    an individual cut off from that social context which is really
    essential to his very nature.”

    J. H. Richardson suggests in the Standard, Sept. 10, 1901, that
    the first chapter of Genesis describes the creation of the
    spiritual part of man only—that part which was made in the image
    of God—while the second chapter describes the creation of man’s
    body, the animal part, which may have been originated by a process
    of evolution. S. W. Howland, in Bib. Sac., Jan. 1903:121-128,
    supposes Adam and Eve to have been twins, joined by the ensiform
    cartilage or breast-bone, as were the Siamese Chang and Eng. By
    violence or accident this cartilage was broken before it hardened
    into bone, and the two were separated until puberty. Then Adam saw
    Eve coming to him with a bone projecting from her side
    corresponding to the hollow in his own side, and said: “She is
    bone of my bone; she must have been taken from my side when I
    slept.” This tradition was handed down to his posterity. The Jews
    have a tradition that Adam was created double-sexed, and that the
    two sexes were afterwards separated. The Hindus say that man was
    at first of both sexes and divided himself in order to people the
    earth. In the Zodiac of Dendera, Castor and Pollux appear as man
    and woman, and these twins, some say, were called Adam and Eve.
    The Coptic name for this sign is _Pi Mahi_, “the United.” Darwin,
    in the postscript to a letter to Lyell, written as early as July,
    1850, tells his friend that he has “a pleasant genealogy for
    mankind,” and describes our remotest ancestor as “an animal which
    breathed water, had a swim-bladder, a great swimming tail, an
    imperfect skull, and was undoubtedly a hermaphrodite.”

    Matthew Arnold speaks of “the freshness of the early world.”
    Novalis says that “all philosophy begins in homesickness.”
    Shelley, Skylark: “We look before and after, And pine for what is
    not; Our sincerest laughter With some pain is fraught; Our
    sweetest songs are those That tell of saddest thought.”—“The
    golden conception of a Paradise is the poet’s guiding thought.”
    There is a universal feeling that we are not now in our natural
    state; that we are far away from home; that we are exiles from our
    true habitation. Keble, Groans of Nature: “Such thoughts, the
    wreck of Paradise, Through many a dreary age, Upbore whate’er of
    good or wise Yet lived in bard or sage.” Poetry and music echo the
    longing for some possession lost. Jessica in Shakespeare’s
    Merchant of Venice: “I am never merry when I hear sweet music.”
    All true poetry is forward-looking or backward-looking prophecy,
    as sculpture sets before us the original or the resurrection body.
    See Isaac Taylor, Hebrew Poetry, 94-101; Tyler, Theol. of Greek
    Poets, 225, 226.

    Wellhausen, on the legend of a golden age, says: “It is the
    yearning song which goes through all the peoples: having attained
    the historical civilization, they feel the worth of the goods
    which they have sacrificed for it.” He regards the golden age as
    only an ideal image, like the millennial kingdom at the end. Man
    differs from the beast in this power to form ideals. His
    destination _to_ God shows his descent _from_ God. Hegel in a
    similar manner claimed that the Paradisaic condition is only an
    ideal conception underlying human development. But may not the
    traditions of the gardens of Brahma and of the Hesperides embody
    the world’s recollection of an historical fact, when man was free
    from external evil and possessed all that could minister to
    innocent joy? The “golden age” of the heathen was connected with
    the hope of restoration. So the use of the doctrine of man’s
    original state is to convince men of the high ideal once realized,
    properly belonging to man, now lost, and recoverable, not by man’s
    own powers, but only through God’s provision in Christ. For
    references in classic writers to a golden age, see Luthardt,
    Compendium, 115. He mentions the following: Hesiod, Works and
    Days, 109-208; Aratus, Phenom., 100-184; Plato, Tim., 233; Vergil,
    Ec., 4, Georgics, 1:135, Æneid, 8:314.


(_b_) Provisions for the trying of man’s virtue.—Since man was not yet in
a state of confirmed holiness, but rather of simple childlike innocence,
he could be made perfect only through temptation. Hence the “tree of the
knowledge of good and evil” (Gen 2:9). The one slight command best tested
the spirit of obedience. Temptation did not necessitate a fall, If
resisted, it would strengthen virtue. In that case, the _posse non
peccare_ would have become the _non posse peccare_.


    Thomasius: “That evil is a necessary transition-point to good, is
    Satan’s doctrine and philosophy.” The tree was mainly a tree of
    probation. It is right for a father to make his son’s title to his
    estate depend upon the performance of some filial duty, as
    Thaddeus Stevens made his son’s possession of property conditional
    upon his keeping the temperance-pledge. Whether, besides this, the
    tree of knowledge was naturally hurtful or poisonous, we do not
    know.


(_c_) Opportunity of securing physical immortality.—The body of the first
man was in itself mortal (1 Cor. 15:45). Science shows that physical life
involves decay and loss. But means were apparently provided for checking
this decay and preserving the body’s youth. This means was the “tree of
life” (Gen. 2:9). If Adam had maintained his integrity, the body might
have been developed and transfigured, without intervention of death. In
other words, the _posse non mori_ might have become a _non posse mori_.


    The tree of life was symbolic of communion with God and of man’s
    dependence upon him. But this, only because it had a physical
    efficacy. It was sacramental and memorial to the soul, because it
    sustained the life of the body. Natural immortality without
    holiness would have been unending misery. Sinful man was therefore
    shut out from the tree of life, till he could be prepared for it
    by God’s righteousness. Redemption and resurrection not only
    restore that which was lost, but give what man was originally
    created to attain: _1 Cor. 15:45_—“_The first man Adam became a
    living soul. The last man Adam became a life-giving spirit_”;
    _Rev. 22:14_—“_Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they
    may have the right to come to the tree of life._”


The conclusions we have thus reached with regard to the incidents of man’s
original state are combated upon two distinct grounds:

1st. The facts bearing upon man’s prehistoric condition point to a
development from primitive savagery to civilization. Among these facts may
be mentioned the succession of implements and weapons from stone to bronze
and iron; the polyandry and communal marriage systems of the lowest
tribes; the relics of barbarous customs still prevailing among the most
civilized.


    For the theory of an originally savage condition of man, see Sir
    John Lubbock, Prehistoric Times, and Origin of Civilization: “The
    primitive condition of mankind was one of utter barbarism”; but
    especially L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, who divides human
    progress into three great periods, the savage, the barbarian, and
    the civilized. Each of the two former has three states, as
    follows: I. Savage: 1. Lowest state, marked by attainment of
    speech and subsistence upon roots. 2. Middle state, marked by
    fish-food and fire. 3. Upper state, marked by use of the bow and
    hunting. II. Barbarian: 1. Lower state, marked by invention and
    use of pottery. 2. Middle state, marked by use of domestic
    animals, maize, and building stone. 3. Upper state, marked by
    invention and use of iron tools. III. Civilized man next appears,
    with the introduction of the phonetic alphabet and writing. J. S.
    Stuart-Glennie, Contemp. Rev., Dec. 1892:844, defines civilization
    as “enforced social organization, with written records, and hence
    intellectual development and social progress.”


With regard to this view we remark:

(_a_) It is based upon an insufficient induction of facts.—History shows a
law of degeneration supplementing and often counteracting the tendency to
development. In the earliest times of which we have any record, we find
nations in a high state of civilization; but in the case of every nation
whose history runs back of the Christian era—as for example, the Romans,
the Greeks, the Egyptians—the subsequent progress has been downward, and
no nation is known to have recovered from barbarism except as the result
of influence from without.


    Lubbock seems to admit that cannibalism was not primeval; yet he
    shows a general tendency to take every brutal custom as a sample
    of man’s first state. And this, in spite of the fact that many
    such customs have been the result of corruption. Bride-catching,
    for example, could not possibly have been primeval, in the strict
    sense of that term. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 1:48, presents a far
    more moderate view. He favors a theory of development, but with
    degeneration “as a secondary action largely and deeply affecting
    the development of civilization.” So the Duke of Argyll, Unity of
    Nature: “Civilization and savagery are both the results of
    evolutionary development; but the one is a development in the
    upward, the latter in the downward direction; and for this reason,
    neither civilization nor savagery can rationally be looked upon as
    the primitive condition of man.” Shedd, Dogm. Theol., 1:467—“As
    plausible an argument might be constructed out of the
    deterioration and degradation of some of the human family to prove
    that man may have evolved downward into an anthropoid ape, as that
    which has been constructed to prove that he has been evolved
    upward from one.”

    Modern nations fall far short of the old Greek perception and
    expression of beauty. Modern Egyptians, Bushmen, Australians, are
    unquestionably degenerate races. See Lankester, Degeneration. The
    same is true of Italians and Spaniards, as well as of Turks.
    Abyssinians are now polygamists, though their ancestors were
    Christians and monogamists. The physical degeneration of portions
    of the population of Ireland is well known. See Mivart, Lessons
    from Nature, 146-160, who applies to the savage-theory the tests
    of language, morals, and religion, and who quotes Herbert Spencer
    as saying: “Probably most of them [savages], if not all of them,
    had ancestors in higher states, and among their beliefs remain
    some which were evolved during those higher states.... It is quite
    possible, and I believe highly probable, that retrogression has
    been as frequent as progression.” Spencer, however, denies that
    savagery is always caused by lapse from civilization.

    Bib. Sac., 6:715; 29:282—“Man as a moral being does not tend to
    rise but to fall, and that with a geometric progress, except he be
    elevated and sustained by some force from without and above
    himself. While man once civilized may advance, yet moral ideas are
    apparently never developed from within.” Had savagery been man’s
    primitive condition, he never could have emerged. See Whately,
    Origin of Civilization, who maintains that man needed not only a
    divine Creator, but a divine Instructor. Seelye, Introd. to A
    Century of Dishonor, 3—“The first missionaries to the Indians in
    Canada took with them skilled laborers to teach the savages how to
    till their fields, to provide them with comfortable homes,
    clothing, and food. But the Indians preferred their wigwams,
    skins, raw flesh, and filth. Only as Christian influences taught
    the Indian his inner need, and how this was to be supplied, was he
    led to wish and work for the improvement of his outward condition
    and habits. Civilization does not reproduce itself. It must first
    be kindled, and it can then be kept alive only by a power
    genuinely Christian.” So Wallace, in Nature, Sept. 7, 1876, vol.
    14:408-412.

    Griffith-Jones, Ascent through Christ, 149-168, shows that
    evolution does not necessarily involve development as regards
    particular races. There is degeneration in all the organic orders.
    As regards man, he may be evolving in some directions, while in
    others he has degenerated. Lidgett, Spir. Principle of the
    Atonement, 245, speaks of “Prof. Clifford as pointing to the
    history of human progress and declaring that mankind is a risen
    and not a fallen race. There is no real contradiction between
    these two views. God has not let man go because man has rebelled
    against him. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound.” The
    humanity which was created in Christ and which is upheld by his
    power has ever received reinforcements of its physical and mental
    life, in spite of its moral and spiritual deterioration. “Some
    shrimps, by the adjustment of their bodily parts, go onward to the
    higher structure of the lobsters and crabs; while others, taking
    up the habit of dwelling in the gills of fishes, sink downward
    into a state closely resembling that of the worms.” Drummond,
    Ascent of Man: “When a boy’s kite comes down in our garden, we do
    not hold that it originally came from the clouds. So nations went
    up, before they came down. There is a national gravitation. The
    stick age preceded the stone age, but has been lost.” Tennyson:
    “Evolution ever climbing after some ideal good, And Reversion ever
    dragging Evolution in the mud.” Evolution often becomes
    devolution, if not devilution. A. J. Gordon, Ministry of the
    Spirit, 104—“The Jordan is the fitting symbol of our natural life,
    rising in a lofty elevation, and from pure springs, but plunging
    steadily down till it pours itself into that Dead Sea from which
    there is no outlet.”


(_b_) Later investigations have rendered it probable that the stone age of
some localities was contemporaneous with the bronze and iron ages of
others, while certain tribes and nations, instead of making progress from
one to the other, were never, so far back as we can trace them, without
the knowledge and use of the metals. It is to be observed, moreover, that
even without such knowledge and use man is not necessarily a barbarian,
though he may be a child.


    On the question whether the arts of civilization can be lost, see
    Arthur Mitchell, Past in the Present, 219: Rude art is often the
    debasement of a higher, instead of being the earlier; the rudest
    art in a nation may coëxist with the highest; cave-life may
    accompany high civilization. Illustrations from modern Scotland,
    where burial of a cock for epilepsy, and sacrifice of a bull, were
    until very recently extant. Certain arts have unquestionably been
    lost, as glass-making and iron-working in Assyria (see Mivart,
    referred to above). The most ancient men do not appear to have
    been inferior to the latest, either physically or intellectually.
    Rawlinson: “The explorers who have dug deep into the Mesopotamian
    mounds, and have ransacked the tombs of Egypt, have come upon no
    certain traces of savage man in those regions which a wide-spread
    tradition makes the cradle of the human race.” The Tyrolese
    peasants show that a rude people may be moral, and a very simple
    people may be highly intelligent. See Southall, Recent Origin of
    Man, 386-449; Schliemann, Troy and her Remains, 274.

    Mason, Origins of Invention, 110, 124, 128—“There is no evidence
    that a stone age ever existed in some regions. In Africa, Canada,
    and perhaps Michigan, the metal age was as old as the stone age.”
    An illustration of the mathematical powers of the savage is given
    by Rev. A. E. Hunt in an account of the native arithmetic of
    Murray Islands, Torres Straits. “Netat” (one) and “neis” (two) are
    the only numerals, higher numbers being described by combinations
    of these, as “neis-netat” for three, “neis-i-neis” for four, etc.,
    or by reference to one of the fingers, elbows or other parts of
    the body. A total of thirty-one could be counted by the latter
    method. Beyond this all numbers were “many,” as this was the limit
    reached in counting before the introduction of English numerals,
    now in general use in the islands.

    Shaler, Interpretation of Nature, 171—“It is commonly supposed
    that the direction of the movement [in the variation of species]
    is ever upward. The fact is on the contrary that in a large number
    of cases, perhaps in the aggregate in more than half, the change
    gives rise to a form which, by all the canons by which we
    determine relative rank, is to be regarded as regressive or
    degradational.... Species, genera, families, and orders have all,
    like the individuals of which they are composed, a period of decay
    in which the gain won by infinite toil and pains is altogether
    lost in the old age of the group.” Shaler goes on to say that in
    the matter of variation successes are to failures as 1 to 100,000,
    and if man be counted the solitary distinguished success, then the
    proportion is something like 1 to 100,000,000. No species that
    passes away is ever reinstated. If man were now to disappear,
    there is no reason to believe that by any process of change a
    similar creature would be evolved, however long the animal kingdom
    continued to exist. The use of these successive chances to produce
    man is inexplicable except upon the hypothesis of an infinite
    designing Wisdom.


(_c_) The barbarous customs to which this view looks for support may
better be explained as marks of broken-down civilization than as relics of
a primitive and universal savagery. Even if they indicated a former state
of barbarism, that state might have been itself preceded by a condition of
comparative culture.


    Mark Hopkins, in Princeton Rev. Sept., 1882:194—“There is no cruel
    treatment of females among animals. If man came from the lower
    animals, then he cannot have been originally savage; for you find
    the most of this cruel treatment among savages.” Tylor instances
    “street Arabs.” He compares street Arabs to a ruined house, but
    savage tribes to a builder’s yard. See Duke of Argyll, Primeval
    Man, 129, 133; Bushnell, Nature and the Supernatural, 223;
    McLennan, Studies in Ancient History. Gulick, in Bib. Sac., July,
    1892:517—“Cannibalism and infanticide are unknown among the
    anthropoid apes. These must be the results of degradation. Pirates
    and slavetraders are not men of low and abortive intelligence, but
    men of education who deliberately throw off all restraint, and who
    use their powers for the destruction of society.”

    Keane, Man, Past and Present, 40, quotes Sir H. H. Johnston, an
    administrator who has had a wider experience of the natives of
    Africa than any man living, as saying that “the tendency of the
    negro for several centuries past has been an actual retrograde
    one—return toward the savage and even the brute. If he had been
    cut off from the immigration of the Arab and the European, the
    purely Negroid races, left to themselves, so far from advancing
    towards a higher type of humanity, might have actually reverted by
    degrees to a type no longer human.” Ratzel’s History of Mankind:
    “We assign no great antiquity to Polynesian civilization. In New
    Zealand it is a matter of only some centuries back. In newly
    occupied territories, the development of the population began upon
    a higher level and then fell off. The Maoris’ decadence resulted
    in the rapid impoverishment of culture, and the character of the
    people became more savage and cruel. Captain Cook found objects of
    art worshiped by the descendants of those who produced them.”

    Recent researches have entirely discredited L. H. Morgan’s theory
    of an original brutal promiscuity of the human race. Ritchie,
    Darwin and Hegel, 6, note—“The theory of an original promiscuity
    is rendered extremely doubtful by the habits of many of the higher
    animals.” E. B. Tylor, in 19th Century, July, 1906—“A sort of
    family life, lasting for the sake of the young, beyond a single
    pairing season, exists among the higher manlike apes. The male
    gorilla keeps watch and ward over his progeny. He is the antetype
    of the house-father. The matriarchal system is a later device for
    political reasons, to bind together in peace and alliance tribes
    that would otherwise be hostile. But it is an artificial system
    introduced as a substitute for and in opposition to the natural
    paternal system. When the social pressure is removed, the
    maternalized husband emancipates himself, and paternalism begins.”
    Westermarck, History of Human Marriage: “Marriage and the family
    are thus intimately connected with one another; it is for the
    benefit of the young that male and female continue to live
    together. Marriage is therefore rooted in the family, rather than
    the family in marriage.... There is not a shred of genuine
    evidence for the notion that promiscuity ever formed a general
    stage in the social history of mankind. The hypothesis of
    promiscuity, instead of belonging to the class of hypotheses which
    are scientifically permissible, has no real foundation, and is
    essentially unscientific.” Howard, History of Matrimonial
    Institutions: “Marriage or pairing between one man and one woman,
    though the union be often transitory and the rule often violated,
    is the typical form of sexual union from the infancy of the human
    race.”


(_d_) The well-nigh universal tradition of a golden age of virtue and
happiness may be most easily explained upon the Scripture view of an
actual creation of the race in holiness and its subsequent apostasy.


    For references in classic writers to a golden age, see Luthardt,
    Compendium der Dogmatik, 115; Pfleiderer, Philos. Religion,
    1:205—“In Hesiod we have the legend of a golden age under the
    lordship of Chronos, when man was free from cares and toils, in
    untroubled youth and cheerfulness, with a superabundance of the
    gifts which the earth furnished of itself; the race was indeed not
    immortal, but it experienced death even as a soft sleep.” We may
    add that capacity for religious truth depends upon moral
    conditions. Very early races therefore have a purer faith than the
    later ones. Increasing depravity makes it harder for the later
    generations to exercise faith. The wisdom-literature may have been
    very early instead of very late, just as monotheistic ideas are
    clearer the further we go back. Bixby, Crisis in Morals,
    171—“Precisely because such tribes [Australian and African
    savages] have been deficient in average moral quality, have they
    failed to march upward on the road of civilization with the rest
    of mankind, and have fallen into these bog holes of savage
    degradation.” On petrified civilizations, see Henry George,
    Progress and Poverty, 433-439—“The law of human progress, what is
    it but the moral law?” On retrogressive development in nature, see
    Weismann, Heredity, 2:1-30. But see also Mary E. Case, “Did the
    Romans Degenerate?” in Internat. Journ. Ethics. Jan. 1893:165-182,
    in which it is maintained that the Romans made constant advances
    rather. Henry Sumner Maine calls the Bible the most important
    single document in the history of sociology, because it exhibits
    authentically the early development of society from the family,
    through the tribe, into the nation,—a progress learned only by
    glimpses, intervals, and survivals of old usages in the literature
    of other nations.


2nd. That the religious history of mankind warrants us in inferring a
necessary and universal law of progress, in accordance with which man
passes from fetichism to polytheism and monotheism,—this first theological
stage, of which fetichism, polytheism, and monotheism are parts, being
succeeded by the metaphysical stage, and that in turn by the positive.


    This theory is propounded by Comte, in his Positive Philosophy,
    English transl., 25, 26, 515-636—“Each branch of our knowledge
    passes successively through three different theoretical
    conditions: the Theological, or fictitious; the Metaphysical, or
    abstract; and the Scientific, or positive.... The first is the
    necessary point of departure of the human understanding; and the
    third is its fixed and definite state. The second is merely a
    state of transition. In the theological state, the human mind,
    seeking the essential nature of beings, the first and final
    causes, the origin and purpose, of all effects—in short, absolute
    knowledge—supposes all phenomena to be produced by the immediate
    action of supernatural beings. In the metaphysical state, which is
    only a modification of the first, the mind supposes, instead of
    supernatural beings, abstract forces, veritable entities, that is,
    personified abstractions, inherent in all beings, and capable of
    producing all phenomena. What is called the explanation of
    phenomena is, in this stage, a mere reference of each to its
    proper entity. In the final, the positive state, the mind has
    given over the vain search after absolute notions, the origin and
    destination of the universe, and the causes of phenomena, and
    applies itself to the study of their laws—that is, their
    invariable relations of succession and resemblance.... The
    theological system arrived at its highest perfection when it
    substituted the providential action of a single Being for the
    varied operations of numerous divinities. In the last stage of the
    metaphysical system, men substituted one great entity, Nature, as
    the cause of all phenomena, instead of the multitude of entities
    at first supposed. In the same way the ultimate perfection of the
    positive system would be to represent all phenomena as particular
    aspects of a single general fact—such as Gravitation, for
    instance.”


This assumed law of progress, however, is contradicted by the following
facts:

(_a_) Not only did the monotheism of the Hebrews precede the great
polytheistic systems of antiquity, but even these heathen religions are
purer from polytheistic elements, the further back we trace them; so that
the facts point to an original monotheistic basis for them all.


    The gradual deterioration of all religions, apart from special
    revelation and influence from God, is proof that the purely
    evolutionary theory is defective. The most natural supposition is
    that of a primitive revelation, which little by little receded
    from human memory. In Japan, Shinto was originally the worship of
    Heaven. The worship of the dead, the deification of the Mikado,
    etc., were a corruption and aftergrowth. The Mikado’s ancestors,
    instead of coming from heaven, came from Korea. Shinto was
    originally a form of monotheism. Not one of the first emperors was
    deified after death. Apotheosis of the Mikados dated from the
    corruption of Shinto through the importation of Buddhism. Andrew
    Lang, in his Making of Religion, advocates primitive monotheism.
    T. G. Pinches, of the British Museum, 1894, declares that, as in
    the earliest Egyptian, so in the early Babylonian records, there
    is evidence of a primitive monotheism. Nevins, Demon-Possession,
    170-173, quotes W. A. P. Martin, President of the Peking
    University, as follows: “China, India, Egypt and Greece all agree
    in the monotheistic type of their early religion. The Orphic
    Hymns, long before the advent of the popular divinities,
    celebrated the _Pantheos_, the universal God. The odes compiled by
    Confucius testify to the early worship of Shangte, the Supreme
    Ruler. The Vedas speak of ‘one unknown true Being, all-present,
    all-powerful, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the
    Universe.’ And in Egypt, as late as the time of Plutarch, there
    were still vestiges of a monotheistic worship.”

    On the evidences of an original monotheism, see Max Müller, Chips,
    1:337; Rawlinson, in Present Day Tracts, 2: no. 11; Legge,
    Religions of China, 8, 11; Diestel, in Jahrbuch für deutsche
    Theologie, 1860, and vol. 5:669; Philip Smith, Anc. Hist. of East,
    65, 195; Warren, on the Earliest Creed of Mankind, in the Meth.
    Quar. Rev., Jan. 1884.


(_b_) “There is no proof that the Indo-Germanic or Semitic stocks ever
practiced fetich worship, or were ever enslaved by the lowest types of
mythological religion, or ascended from them to somewhat higher” (Fisher).


    See Fisher, Essays on Supernat. Origin of Christianity, 545;
    Bartlett, Sources of History in the Pentateuch, 36-115. Herbert
    Spencer once held that fetichism was primordial. But he afterwards
    changed his mind, and said that the facts proved to be exactly the
    opposite when he had become better acquainted with the ideas of
    savages; see his Principles of Sociology, 1:343. Mr. Spencer
    finally traced the beginnings of religion to the worship of
    ancestors. But in China no ancestor has ever become a god; see
    Hill, Genetic Philosophy, 304-313. And unless man had an inborn
    sense of divinity, he could deify neither ancestors nor ghosts.
    Professor Hilprecht of Philadelphia says: “As the attempt has
    recently been made to trace the pure monotheism of Israel to
    Babylonian sources, I am bound to declare this an absolute
    impossibility, on the basis of my fourteen years’ researches in
    Babylonian cuneiform inscriptions. The faith of Israel’s chosen
    people is: ‘Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord.’ And
    this faith could never have proceeded from the Babylonian mountain
    of gods, that charnel-house full of corruption and dead men’s
    bones.”


(_c_) Some of the earliest remains of man yet found show, by the burial of
food and weapons with the dead, that there already existed the idea of
spiritual beings and of a future state, and therefore a religion of a
higher sort than fetichism.


    Idolatry proper regards the idol as the symbol and representative
    of a spiritual being who exists apart from the material object,
    though he manifests himself through it. Fetichism, however,
    identifies the divinity with the material thing, and worships the
    stock or stone; spirit is not conceived of as existing apart from
    body. Belief in spiritual beings and a future state is therefore
    proof of a religion higher in kind than fetichism. See Lyell,
    Antiquity of Man, quoted in Dawson, Story of Earth and Man, 384;
    see also 368, 372, 386—“Man’s capacities for degradation are
    commensurate with his capacities for improvement” (Dawson). Lyell,
    in his last edition, however, admits the evidence from the
    Aurignac cave to be doubtful. See art. by Dawkins, in Nature,
    4:208.


(_d_) The theory in question, in making theological thought a merely
transient stage of mental evolution, ignores the fact that religion has
its root in the intuitions and yearnings of the human soul, and that
therefore no philosophical or scientific progress can ever abolish it.
While the terms theological, metaphysical, and positive may properly mark
the order in which the ideas of the individual and the race are acquired,
positivism errs in holding that these three phases of thought are mutually
exclusive, and that upon the rise of the later the earlier must of
necessity become extinct.


    John Stuart Mill suggests that “personifying” would be a much
    better term than “theological” to designate the earliest efforts
    to explain physical phenomena. On the fundamental principles of
    Positivism, see New Englander, 1873:323-386; Diman, Theistic
    Argument, 338—“Three coëxistent states are here confounded with
    three successive stages of human thought; three aspects of things
    with three epochs of time. Theology, metaphysics, and science must
    always exist side by side, for all positive science rests on
    metaphysical principles, and theology lies behind both. All are as
    permanent as human reason itself.” Martineau, Types, 1:487—“Comte
    sets up mediæval Christianity as the typical example of evolved
    monotheism, and develops it out of the Greek and Roman polytheism
    which it overthrew and dissipated. But the religion of modern
    Europe notoriously does not descend from the same source as its
    civilization and is no continuation of the ancient culture,”—it
    comes rather from Hebrew sources; Essays, Philos. and Theol.,
    1:24, 62—“The Jews were always a disobliging people; what business
    had they to be up so early in the morning, disturbing the house
    ever so long before M. Comte’s bell rang to prayers?” See also
    Gillett, God in Human Thought, 1:17-23; Rawlinson, in Journ.
    Christ. Philos., April, 1883:353; Nineteenth Century, Oct.
    1886:473-490.




