letter L the door being within the angle and opening into the short part
of the letter.  A couch was to the left, the bed-place to the right; my
writing-desk and the chronometers’ table faced the door.  But any one
opening it, unless he stepped right inside, had no view of what I call
the long (or vertical) part of the letter.  It contained some lockers
surmounted by a bookcase; and a few clothes, a thick jacket or two, caps,
oilskin coat, and such like, hung on hooks.  There was at the bottom of
that part a door opening into my bath-room, which could be entered also
directly from the saloon.  But that way was never used.

The mysterious arrival had discovered the advantage of this particular
shape.  Entering my room, lighted strongly by a big bulkhead lamp swung
on gimbals above my writing-desk, I did not see him anywhere till he
stepped out quietly from behind the coats hung in the recessed part.

“I heard somebody moving about, and went in there at once,” he whispered.

I, too, spoke under my breath.

“Nobody is likely to come in here without knocking and getting
permission.”

He nodded.  His face was thin and the sunburn faded, as though he had
been ill.  And no wonder.  He had been, I heard presently, kept under
arrest in his cabin for nearly seven weeks.  But there was nothing sickly
in his eyes or in his expression.  He was not a bit like me, really; yet,
as we stood leaning over my bed-place, whispering side by side, with our
dark heads together and our backs to the door, anybody bold enough to
open it stealthily would have been treated to the uncanny sight of a
double captain busy talking in whispers with his other self.

“But all this doesn’t tell me how you came to hang on to our
side-ladder,” I inquired, in the hardly audible murmurs we used, after he
had told me something more of the proceedings on board the _Sephora_ once
the bad weather was over.

“When we sighted Java Head I had had time to think all those matters out
several times over.  I had six weeks of doing nothing else, and with only
an hour or so every evening for a tramp on the quarter-deck.”

He whispered, his arms folded on the side of my bed-place, staring
through the open port.  And I could imagine perfectly the manner of this
thinking out—a stubborn if not a steadfast operation; something of which
I should have been perfectly incapable.

“I reckoned it would be dark before we closed with the land,” he
continued, so low that I had to strain my hearing, near as we were to
each other, shoulder touching shoulder almost.  “So I asked to speak to
the old man.  He always seemed very sick when he came to see me—as if he
could not look me in the face.  You know, that foresail saved the ship.
She was too deep to have run long under bare poles.  And it was I that
managed to set it for him.  Anyway, he came.  When I had him in my
cabin—he stood by the door looking at me as if I had the halter round my
neck already—I asked him right away to leave my cabin door unlocked at
night while the ship was going through Sunda Straits.  There would be the
Java coast within two or three miles, off Angier Point.  I wanted nothing
more.  I’ve had a prize for swimming my second year in the Conway.”

“I can believe it,” I breathed out.

“God only knows why they locked me in every night.  To see some of their
faces you’d have thought they were afraid I’d go about at night
strangling people.  Am I a murdering brute?  Do I look it?  By Jove! if I
had been he wouldn’t have trusted himself like that into my room.  You’ll
say I might have chucked him aside and bolted out, there and then—it was
dark already.  Well, no.  And for the same reason I wouldn’t think of
trying to smash the door.  There would have been a rush to stop me at the
noise, and I did not mean to get into a confounded scrimmage.  Somebody
else might have got killed—for I would not have broken out only to get
chucked back, and I did not want any more of that work.  He refused,
looking more sick than ever.  He was afraid of the men, and also of that
old second mate of his who had been sailing with him for years—a
grey-headed old humbug; and his steward, too, had been with him devil
knows how long—seventeen years or more—a dogmatic sort of loafer who
hated me like poison, just because I was the chief mate.  No chief mate
ever made more than one voyage in the _Sephora_, you know.  Those two old
chaps ran the ship.  Devil only knows what the skipper wasn’t afraid of
(all his nerve went to pieces altogether in that hellish spell of bad
weather we had)—of what the law would do to him—of his wife, perhaps.
Oh, yes! she’s on board.  Though I don’t think she would have meddled.
She would have been only too glad to have me out of the ship in any way.
The ‘brand of Cain’ business, don’t you see.  That’s all right.  I was
ready enough to go off wandering on the face of the earth—and that was
price enough to pay for an Abel of that sort.  Anyhow, he wouldn’t listen
to me.  ‘This thing must take its course.  I represent the law here.’  He
was shaking like a leaf.  ‘So you won’t?’  ‘No!’  ‘Then I hope you will
be able to sleep on that,’ I said, and turned my back on him.  ‘I wonder
that _you_ can,’ cries he, and locks the door.

“Well, after that, I couldn’t.  Not very well.  That was three weeks ago.
We have had a slow passage through the Java Sea; drifted about Carimata
for ten days.  When we anchored here they thought, I suppose, it was all
right.  The nearest land (and that’s five miles) is the ship’s
destination; the consul would soon set about catching me; and there would
have been no object in bolting to these islets there.  I don’t suppose
there’s a drop of water on them.  I don’t know how it was, but to-night
that steward, after bringing me my supper, went out to let me eat it, and
left the door unlocked.  And I ate it—all there was, too.  After I had
finished I strolled out on the quarterdeck.  I don’t know that I meant to
do anything.  A breath of fresh air was all I wanted, I believe.  Then a
sudden temptation came over me.  I kicked off my slippers and was in the
water before I had made up my mind fairly.  Somebody heard the splash and
they raised an awful hullabaloo.  ‘He’s gone!  Lower the boats!  He’s
committed suicide!  No, he’s swimming.’  Certainly I was swimming.  It’s
not so easy for a swimmer like me to commit suicide by drowning.  I
landed on the nearest islet before the boat left the ship’s side.  I
heard them pulling about in the dark, hailing, and so on, but after a bit
they gave up.  Everything quieted down and the anchorage became as still
as death.  I sat down on a stone and began to think.  I felt certain they
would start searching for me at daylight.  There was no place to hide on
those stony things—and if there had been, what would have been the good?
But now I was clear of that ship, I was not going back.  So after a while
I took off all my clothes, tied them up in a bundle with a stone inside,
and dropped them in the deep water on the outer side of that islet.  That
was suicide enough for me.  Let them think what they liked, but I didn’t
mean to drown myself.  I meant to swim till I sank—but that’s not the
same thing.  I struck out for another of these little islands, and it was
from that one that I first saw your riding-light.  Something to swim for.
I went on easily, and on the way I came upon a flat rock a foot or two
above water.  In the daytime, I dare say, you might make it out with a
glass from your poop.  I scrambled up on it and rested myself for a bit.
Then I made another start.  That last spell must have been over a mile.”

His whisper was getting fainter and fainter, and all the time he stared
straight out through the port-hole, in which there was not even a star to
be seen.  I had not interrupted him.  There was something that made
comment impossible in his narrative, or perhaps in himself; a sort of
feeling, a quality, which I can’t find a name for.  And when he ceased,
all I found was a futile whisper: “So you swam for our light?”

“Yes—straight for it.  It was something to swim for.  I couldn’t see any
stars low down because the coast was in the way, and I couldn’t see the
land, either.  The water was like glass.  One might have been swimming in
a confounded thousand-feet deep cistern with no place for scrambling out
anywhere; but what I didn’t like was the notion of swimming round and
round like a crazed bullock before I gave out; and as I didn’t mean to go
back . . . No.  Do you see me being hauled back, stark naked, off one of
these little islands by the scruff of the neck and fighting like a wild
beast?  Somebody would have got killed for certain, and I did not want
any of that.  So I went on.  Then your ladder—”

“Why didn’t you hail the ship?” I asked, a little louder.

He touched my shoulder lightly.  Lazy footsteps came right over our heads
and stopped.  The second mate had crossed from the other side of the poop
and might have been hanging over the rail, for all we knew.

“He couldn’t hear us talking—could he?”  My double breathed into my very
ear, anxiously.

His anxiety was an answer, a sufficient answer, to the question I had put
to him.  An answer containing all the difficulty of that situation.  I
closed the port-hole quietly, to make sure.  A louder word might have
been overheard.

“Who’s that?” he whispered then.

“My second mate.  But I don’t know much more of the fellow than you do.”

And I told him a little about myself.  I had been appointed to take
charge while I least expected anything of the sort, not quite a fortnight
ago.  I didn’t know either the ship or the people.  Hadn’t had the time
in port to look about me or size anybody up.  And as to the crew, all
they knew was that I was appointed to take the ship home.  For the rest,
I was almost as much of a stranger on board as himself, I said.  And at
the moment I felt it most acutely.  I felt that it would take very little
to make me a suspect person in the eyes of the ship’s company.

He had turned about meantime; and we, the two strangers in the ship,
faced each other in identical attitudes.

“Your ladder—” he murmured, after a silence.  “Who’d have thought of
finding a ladder hanging over at night in a ship anchored out here!  I
felt just then a very unpleasant faintness.  After the life I’ve been
leading for nine weeks, anybody would have got out of condition.  I
wasn’t capable of swimming round as far as your rudder-chains.  And, lo
and behold! there was a ladder to get hold of.  After I gripped it I said
to myself, ‘What’s the good?’  When I saw a man’s head looking over I
thought I would swim away presently and leave him shouting—in whatever
language it was.  I didn’t mind being looked at.  I—I liked it.  And then
you speaking to me so quietly—as if you had expected me—made me hold on a
little longer.  It had been a confounded lonely time—I don’t mean while
swimming.  I was glad to talk a little to somebody that didn’t belong to
the _Sephora_.  As to asking for the captain, that was a mere impulse.
It could have been no use, with all the ship knowing about me and the
other people pretty certain to be round here in the morning.  I don’t
know—I wanted to be seen, to talk with somebody, before I went on.  I
don’t know what I would have said. . . . ‘Fine night, isn’t it?’ or
something of the sort.”

“Do you think they will be round here presently?” I asked with some
incredulity.

“Quite likely,” he said, faintly.

He looked extremely haggard all of a sudden.  His head rolled on his
shoulders.

“H’m.  We shall see then.  Meantime get into that bed,” I whispered.
“Want help?  There.”

It was a rather high bed-place with a set of drawers underneath.  This
amazing swimmer really needed the lift I gave him by seizing his leg.  He
tumbled in, rolled over on his back, and flung one arm across his eyes.
And then, with his face nearly hidden, he must have looked exactly as I
used to look in that bed.  I gazed upon my other self for a while before
drawing across carefully the two green serge curtains which ran on a
brass rod.  I thought for a moment of pinning them together for greater
safety, but I sat down on the couch, and once there I felt unwilling to
rise and hunt for a pin.  I would do it in a moment.  I was extremely
tired, in a peculiarly intimate way, by the strain of stealthiness, by
the effort of whispering and the general secrecy of this excitement.  It
was three o’clock by now and I had been on my feet since nine, but I was
not sleepy; I could not have gone to sleep.  I sat there, fagged out,
looking at the curtains, trying to clear my mind of the confused
sensation of being in two places at once, and greatly bothered by an
exasperating knocking in my head.  It was a relief to discover suddenly
that it was not in my head at all, but on the outside of the door.
Before I could collect myself the words “Come in” were out of my mouth,
and the steward entered with a tray, bringing in my morning coffee.  I
had slept, after all, and I was so frightened that I shouted, “This way!
I am here, steward,” as though he had been miles away.  He put down the
tray on the table next the couch and only then said, very quietly, “I can
see you are here, sir.”  I felt him give me a keen look, but I dared not
meet his eyes just then.  He must have wondered why I had drawn the
curtains of my bed before going to sleep on the couch.  He went out,
hooking the door open as usual.

I heard the crew washing decks above me.  I knew I would have been told
at once if there had been any wind.  Calm, I thought, and I was doubly
vexed.  Indeed, I felt dual more than ever.  The steward reappeared
suddenly in the doorway.  I jumped up from the couch so quickly that he
gave a start.

“What do you want here?”

“Close your port, sir—they are washing decks.”

“It is closed,” I said, reddening.

“Very well, sir.”  But he did not move from the doorway and returned my
stare in an extraordinary, equivocal manner for a time.  Then his eyes
wavered, all his expression changed, and in a voice unusually gentle,
almost coaxingly:

“May I come in to take the empty cup away, sir?”

“Of course!”  I turned my back on him while he popped in and out.  Then I
unhooked and closed the door and even pushed the bolt.  This sort of
thing could not go on very long.  The cabin was as hot as an oven, too.
I took a peep at my double, and discovered that he had not moved, his arm
was still over his eyes; but his chest heaved; his hair was wet; his chin
glistened with perspiration.  I reached over him and opened the port.

“I must show myself on deck,” I reflected.

Of course, theoretically, I could do what I liked, with no one to say nay
to me within the whole circle of the horizon; but to lock my cabin door
and take the key away I did not dare.  Directly I put my head out of the
companion I saw the group of my two officers, the second mate barefooted,
the chief mate in long india-rubber boots, near the break of the poop,
and the steward half-way down the poop-ladder talking to them eagerly.
He happened to catch sight of me and dived, the second ran down on the
main-deck shouting some order or other, and the chief mate came to meet
me, touching his cap.

There was a sort of curiosity in his eye that I did not like.  I don’t
know whether the steward had told them that I was “queer” only, or
downright drunk, but I know the man meant to have a good look at me.  I
watched him coming with a smile which, as he got into point-blank range,
took effect and froze his very whiskers.  I did not give him time to open
his lips.

“Square the yards by lifts and braces before the hands go to breakfast.”

It was the first particular order I had given on board that ship; and I
stayed on deck to see it executed, too.  I had felt the need of asserting
myself without loss of time.  That sneering young cub got taken down a
peg or two on that occasion, and I also seized the opportunity of having
a good look at the face of every foremast man as they filed past me to go
to the after braces.  At breakfast time, eating nothing myself, I
presided with such frigid dignity that the two mates were only too glad
to escape from the cabin as soon as decency permitted; and all the time
the dual working of my mind distracted me almost to the point of
insanity.  I was constantly watching myself, my secret self, as dependent
on my actions as my own personality, sleeping in that bed, behind that
door which faced me as I sat at the head of the table.  It was very much
like being mad, only it was worse because one was aware of it.

I had to shake him for a solid minute, but when at last he opened his
eyes it was in the full possession of his senses, with an inquiring look.

“All’s well so far,” I whispered.  “Now you must vanish into the
bath-room.”

He did so, as noiseless as a ghost, and I then rang for the steward, and
facing him boldly, directed him to tidy up my stateroom while I was
having my bath—“and be quick about it.”  As my tone admitted of no
excuses, he said, “Yes, sir,” and ran off to fetch his dust-pan and
brushes.  I took a bath and did most of my dressing, splashing, and
whistling softly for the steward’s edification, while the secret sharer
of my life stood drawn up bolt upright in that little space, his face
looking very sunken in daylight, his eyelids lowered under the stern,
dark line of his eyebrows drawn together by a slight frown.

When I left him there to go back to my room the steward was finishing
dusting.  I sent for the mate and engaged him in some insignificant
conversation.  It was, as it were, trifling with the terrific character
of his whiskers; but my object was to give him an opportunity for a good
look at my cabin.  And then I could at last shut, with a clear
conscience, the door of my stateroom and get my double back into the
recessed part.  There was nothing else for it.  He had to sit still on a
small folding stool, half smothered by the heavy coats hanging there.  We
listened to the steward going into the bath-room out of the saloon,
filling the water-bottles there, scrubbing the bath, setting things to
rights, whisk, bang, clatter—out again into the saloon—turn the
key—click.  Such was my scheme for keeping my second self invisible.
Nothing better could be contrived under the circumstances.  And there we
sat; I at my writing-desk ready to appear busy with some papers, he
behind me, out of sight of the door.  It would not have been prudent to
talk in daytime; and I could not have stood the excitement of that queer
sense of whispering to myself.  Now and then glancing over my shoulder, I
saw him far back there, sitting rigidly on the low stool, his bare feet
close together, his arms folded, his head hanging on his breast—and
perfectly still.  Anybody would have taken him for me.

I was fascinated by it myself.  Every moment I had to glance over my
shoulder.  I was looking at him when a voice outside the door said:

“Beg pardon, sir.”

“Well!” . . . I kept my eyes on him, and so, when the voice outside the
door announced, “There’s a ship’s boat coming our way, sir,” I saw him
give a start—the first movement he had made for hours.  But he did not
raise his bowed head.

“All right.  Get the ladder over.”

I hesitated.  Should I whisper something to him?  But what?  His
immobility seemed to have been never disturbed.  What could I tell him he
did not know already? . . . Finally I went on deck.



