CHAPTER I


ONE day—and that day was many years ago now—I received a long, chatty
letter from one of my old chums and fellow-wanderers in Eastern waters.
He was still out there, but settled down, and middle-aged; I imagined
him—grown portly in figure and domestic in his habits; in short,
overtaken by the fate common to all except to those who, being specially
beloved by the gods, get knocked on the head early.  The letter was of
the reminiscent “do you remember” kind—a wistful letter of backward
glances.  And, amongst other things, “surely you remember old Nelson,” he
wrote.

Remember old Nelson!  Certainly.  And to begin with, his name was not
Nelson.  The Englishmen in the Archipelago called him Nelson because it
was more convenient, I suppose, and he never protested.  It would have
been mere pedantry.  The true form of his name was Nielsen.  He had come
out East long before the advent of telegraph cables, had served English
firms, had married an English girl, had been one of us for years, trading
and sailing in all directions through the Eastern Archipelago, across and
around, transversely, diagonally, perpendicularly, in semi-circles, and
zigzags, and figures of eights, for years and years.

There was no nook or cranny of these tropical waters that the enterprise
of old Nelson (or Nielsen) had not penetrated in an eminently pacific
way.  His tracks, if plotted out, would have covered the map of the
Archipelago like a cobweb—all of it, with the sole exception of the
Philippines.  He would never approach that part, from a strange dread of
Spaniards, or, to be exact, of the Spanish authorities.  What he imagined
they could do to him it is impossible to say.  Perhaps at some time in
his life he had read some stories of the Inquisition.

But he was in general afraid of what he called “authorities”; not the
English authorities, which he trusted and respected, but the other two of
that part of the world.  He was not so horrified at the Dutch as he was
at the Spaniards, but he was even more mistrustful of them.  Very
mistrustful indeed.  The Dutch, in his view, were capable of “playing any
ugly trick on a man” who had the misfortune to displease them.  There
were their laws and regulations, but they had no notion of fair play in
applying them.  It was really pitiable to see the anxious circumspection
of his dealings with some official or other, and remember that this man
had been known to stroll up to a village of cannibals in New Guinea in a
quiet, fearless manner (and note that he was always fleshy all his life,
and, if I may say so, an appetising morsel) on some matter of barter that
did not amount perhaps to fifty pounds in the end.

Remember old Nelson!  Rather!  Truly, none of us in my generation had
known him in his active days.  He was “retired” in our time.  He had
bought, or else leased, part of a small island from the Sultan of a
little group called the Seven Isles, not far north from Banka.  It was, I
suppose, a legitimate transaction, but I have no doubt that had he been
an Englishman the Dutch would have discovered a reason to fire him out
without ceremony.  In this connection the real form of his name stood him
in good stead.  In the character of an unassuming Dane whose conduct was
most correct, they let him be.  With all his money engaged in cultivation
he was naturally careful not to give even the shadow of offence, and it
was mostly for prudential reasons of that sort that he did not look with
a favourable eye on Jasper Allen.  But of that later.  Yes!  One
remembered well enough old Nelson’s big, hospitable bungalow erected on a
shelving point of land, his portly form, costumed generally in a white
shirt and trousers (he had a confirmed habit of taking off his alpaca
jacket on the slightest provocation), his round blue eyes, his straggly,
sandy-white moustache sticking out all ways like the quills of the
fretful porcupine, his propensity to sit down suddenly and fan himself
with his hat.  But there’s no use concealing the fact that what one
remembered really was his daughter, who at that time came out to live
with him—and be a sort of Lady of the Isles.

Freya Nelson (or Nielsen) was the kind of girl one remembers.  The oval
of her face was perfect; and within that fascinating frame the most happy
disposition of line and feature, with an admirable complexion, gave an
impression of health, strength, and what I might call unconscious
self-confidence—a most pleasant and, as it were, whimsical determination.
I will not compare her eyes to violets, because the real shade of their
colour was peculiar, not so dark and more lustrous.  They were of the
wide-open kind, and looked at one frankly in every mood.  I never did see
the long, dark eyelashes lowered—I dare say Jasper Allen did, being a
privileged person—but I have no doubt that the expression must have been
charming in a complex way.  She could—Jasper told me once with a
touchingly imbecile exultation—sit on her hair.  I dare say, I dare say.
It was not for me to behold these wonders; I was content to admire the
neat and becoming way she used to do it up so as not to conceal the good
shape of her head.  And this wealth of hair was so glossy that when the
screens of the west verandah were down, making a pleasant twilight there,
or in the shade of the grove of fruit-trees near the house, it seemed to
give out a golden light of its own.

She dressed generally in a white frock, with a skirt of walking length,
showing her neat, laced, brown boots.  If there was any colour about her
costume it was just a bit of blue perhaps.  No exertion seemed to
distress her.  I have seen her land from the dinghy after a long pull in
the sun (she rowed herself about a good deal) with no quickened breath
and not a single hair out of its place.  In the morning when she came out
on the verandah for the first look westward, Sumatra way, over the sea,
she seemed as fresh and sparkling as a dewdrop.  But a dewdrop is
evanescent, and there was nothing evanescent about Freya.  I remember her
round, solid arms with the fine wrists, and her broad, capable hands with
tapering fingers.

I don’t know whether she was actually born at sea, but I do know that up
to twelve years of age she sailed about with her parents in various
ships.  After old Nelson lost his wife it became a matter of serious
concern for him what to do with the girl.  A kind lady in Singapore,
touched by his dumb grief and deplorable perplexity, offered to take
charge of Freya.  This arrangement lasted some six years, during which
old Nelson (or Nielsen) “retired” and established, himself on his island,
and then it was settled (the kind lady going away to Europe) that his
daughter should join him.

As the first and most important preparation for that event the old fellow
ordered from his Singapore agent a Steyn and Ebhart’s “upright grand.”  I
was then commanding a little steamer in the island trade, and it fell to
my lot to take it out to him, so I know something of Freya’s “upright
grand.”  We landed the enormous packing-case with difficulty on a flat
piece of rock amongst some bushes, nearly knocking the bottom out of one
of my boats in the course of that nautical operation.  Then, all my crew
assisting, engineers and firemen included, by the exercise of much
anxious ingenuity, and by means of rollers, levers, tackles, and inclined
planes of soaped planks, toiling in the sun like ancient Egyptians at the
building of a pyramid, we got it as far as the house and up on to the
edge of the west verandah—which was the actual drawing-room of the
bungalow.  There, the case being ripped off cautiously, the beautiful
rosewood monster stood revealed at last.  In reverent excitement we
coaxed it against the wall and drew the first free breath of the day.  It
was certainly the heaviest movable object on that islet since the
creation of the world.  The volume of sound it gave out in that bungalow
(which acted as a sounding-board) was really astonishing.  It thundered
sweetly right over the sea.  Jasper Allen told me that early of a morning
on the deck of the _Bonito_ (his wonderfully fast and pretty brig) he
could hear Freya playing her scales quite distinctly.  But the fellow
always anchored foolishly close to the point, as I told him more than
once.  Of course, these seas are almost uniformly serene, and the Seven
Isles is a particularly calm and cloudless spot as a rule.  But still,
now and again, an afternoon thunderstorm over Banka, or even one of these
vicious thick squalls, from the distant Sumatra coast, would make a
sudden sally upon the group, enveloping it for a couple of hours in
whirlwinds and bluish-black murk of a particularly sinister aspect.
Then, with the lowered rattan-screens rattling desperately in the wind
and the bungalow shaking all over, Freya would sit down to the piano and
play fierce Wagner music in the flicker of blinding flashes, with
thunderbolts falling all round, enough to make your hair stand on end;
and Jasper would remain stock still on the verandah, adoring the back
view of her supple, swaying figure, the miraculous sheen of her fair
head, the rapid hands on the keys, the white nape of her neck—while the
brig, down at the point there, surged at her cables within a hundred
yards of nasty, shiny, black rock-heads.  Ugh!

And this, if you please, for no reason but that, when he went on board at
night and laid his head on the pillow, he should feel that he was as near
as he could conveniently get to his Freya slumbering in the bungalow.
Did you ever!  And, mind, this brig was the home to be—their home—the
floating paradise which he was gradually fitting out like a yacht to sail
his life blissfully away in with Freya.  Imbecile!  But the fellow was
always taking chances.

One day, I remember I watched with Freya on the verandah the brig
approaching the point from the northward.  I suppose Jasper made the girl
out with his long glass.  What does he do?  Instead of standing on for
another mile and a half along the shoals and then tacking for the
anchorage in a proper and seamanlike manner, he spies a gap between two
disgusting old jagged reefs, puts the helm down suddenly, and shoots the
brig through, with all her sails shaking and rattling, so that we could
hear the racket on the verandah.  I drew my breath through my teeth, I
can tell you, and Freya swore.  Yes!  She clenched her capable fists and
stamped with her pretty brown boot and said “Damn!”  Then, looking at me
with a little heightened colour—not much—she remarked, “I forgot you were
there,” and laughed.  To be sure, to be sure.  When Jasper was in sight
she was not likely to remember that anybody else in the world was there.
In my concern at this mad trick I couldn’t help appealing to her
sympathetic common sense.

“Isn’t he a fool?” I said with feeling.

“Perfect idiot,” she agreed warmly, looking at me straight with her
wide-open, earnest eyes and the dimple of a smile on her cheek.

“And that,” I pointed out to her, “just to save twenty minutes or so in
meeting you.”

We heard the anchor go down, and then she became very resolute and
threatening.

“Wait a bit.  I’ll teach him.”

She went into her own room and shut the door, leaving me alone on the
verandah with my instructions.  Long before the brig’s sails were furled,
Jasper came up three steps at a time, forgetting to say how d’ye do, and
looking right and left eagerly.

“Where’s Freya?  Wasn’t she here just now?”

When I explained to him that he was to be deprived of Miss Freya’s
presence for a whole hour, “just to teach him,” he said I had put her up
to it, no doubt, and that he feared he would have yet to shoot me some
day.  She and I were getting too thick together.  Then he flung himself
into a chair, and tried to talk to me about his trip.  But the funny
thing was that the fellow actually suffered.  I could see it.  His voice
failed him, and he sat there dumb, looking at the door with the face of a
man in pain.  Fact. . . . And the next still funnier thing was that the
girl calmly walked out of her room in less than ten minutes.  And then I
left.  I mean to say that I went away to seek old Nelson (or Nielsen) on
the back verandah, which was his own special nook in the distribution of
that house, with the kind purpose of engaging him in conversation lest he
should start roaming about and intrude unwittingly where he was not
wanted just then.

He knew that the brig had arrived, though he did not know that Jasper was
already with his daughter.  I suppose he didn’t think it was possible in
the time.  A father naturally wouldn’t.  He suspected that Allen was
sweet on his girl; the fowls of the air and the fishes of the sea, most
of the traders in the Archipelago, and all sorts and conditions of men in
the town of Singapore were aware of it.  But he was not capable of
appreciating how far the girl was gone on the fellow.  He had an idea
that Freya was too sensible to ever be gone on anybody—I mean to an
unmanageable extent.  No; it was not that which made him sit on the back
verandah and worry himself in his unassuming manner during Jasper’s
visits.  What he worried about were the Dutch “authorities.”  For it is a
fact that the Dutch looked askance at the doings of Jasper Allen, owner
and master of the brig _Bonito_.  They considered him much too
enterprising in his trading.  I don’t know that he ever did anything
illegal; but it seems to me that his immense activity was repulsive to
their stolid character and slow-going methods.  Anyway, in old Nelson’s
opinion, the captain of the _Bonito_ was a smart sailor, and a nice young
man, but not a desirable acquaintance upon the whole.  Somewhat
compromising, you understand.  On the other hand, he did not like to tell
Jasper in so many words to keep away.  Poor old Nelson himself was a nice
fellow.  I believe he would have shrunk from hurting the feelings even of
a mop-headed cannibal, unless, perhaps, under very strong provocation.  I
mean the feelings, not the bodies.  As against spears, knives, hatchets,
clubs, or arrows, old Nelson had proved himself capable of taking his own
part.  In every other respect he had a timorous soul.  So he sat on the
back verandah with a concerned expression, and whenever the voices of his
daughter and Jasper Allen reached him, he would blow out his cheeks and
let the air escape with a dismal sound, like a much tried man.

Naturally I derided his fears which he, more or less, confided to me.  He
had a certain regard for my judgment, and a certain respect, not for my
moral qualities, however, but for the good terms I was supposed to be on
with the Dutch “authorities.”  I knew for a fact that his greatest
bugbear, the Governor of Banka—a charming, peppery, hearty, retired
rear-admiral—had a distinct liking for him.  This consoling assurance
which I used always to put forward, made old Nelson (or Nielsen) brighten
up for a moment; but in the end he would shake his head doubtfully, as
much as to say that this was all very well, but that there were depths in
the Dutch official nature which no one but himself had ever fathomed.
Perfectly ridiculous.

On this occasion I am speaking of, old Nelson was even fretty; for while
I was trying to entertain him with a very funny and somewhat scandalous
adventure which happened to a certain acquaintance of ours in Saigon, he
exclaimed suddenly:

“What the devil he wants to turn up here for!”

Clearly he had not heard a word of the anecdote.  And this annoyed me,
because the anecdote was really good.  I stared at him.

“Come, come!” I cried.  “Don’t you know what Jasper Allen is turning up
here for?”

This was the first open allusion I had ever made to the true state of
affairs between Jasper and his daughter.  He took it very calmly.

“Oh, Freya is a sensible girl!” he murmured absently, his mind’s eye
obviously fixed on the “authorities.”  No; Freya was no fool.  He was not
concerned about that.  He didn’t mind it in the least.  The fellow was
just company for her; he amused the girl; nothing more.

When the perspicacious old chap left off mumbling, all was still in the
house.  The other two were amusing themselves very quietly, and no doubt
very heartily.  What more absorbing and less noisy amusement could they
have found than to plan their future?  Side by side on the verandah they
must have been looking at the brig, the third party in that fascinating
game.  Without her there would have been no future.  She was the fortune
and the home, and the great free world for them.  Who was it that likened
a ship to a prison?  May I be ignominiously hanged at a yardarm if that’s
true.  The white sails of that craft were the white wings—pinions, I
believe, would be the more poetical style—well, the white pinions, of
their soaring love.  Soaring as regards Jasper.  Freya, being a woman,
kept a better hold of the mundane connections of this affair.

But Jasper was elevated in the true sense of the word ever since the day
when, after they had been gazing at the brig in one of those decisive
silences that alone establish a perfect communion between creatures
gifted with speech, he proposed that she should share the ownership of
that treasure with him.  Indeed, he presented the brig to her altogether.
But then his heart was in the brig since the day he bought her in Manilla
from a certain middle-aged Peruvian, in a sober suit of black broadcloth,
enigmatic and sententious, who, for all I know, might have stolen her on
the South American coast, whence he said he had come over to the
Philippines “for family reasons.”  This “for family reasons” was
distinctly good.  No true _caballero_ would care to push on inquiries
after such a statement.

Indeed, Jasper was quite the _caballero_.  The brig herself was then all
black and enigmatical, and very dirty; a tarnished gem of the sea, or,
rather, a neglected work of art.  For he must have been an artist, the
obscure builder who had put her body together on lovely lines out of the
hardest tropical timber fastened with the purest copper.  Goodness only
knows in what part of the world she was built.  Jasper himself had not
been able to ascertain much of her history from his sententious,
saturnine Peruvian—if the fellow was a Peruvian, and not the devil
himself in disguise, as Jasper jocularly pretended to believe.  My
opinion is that she was old enough to have been one of the last pirates,
a slaver perhaps, or else an opium clipper of the early days, if not an
opium smuggler.

However that may be, she was as sound as on the day she first took the
water, sailed like a witch, steered like a little boat, and, like some
fair women of adventurous life famous in history, seemed to have the
secret of perpetual youth; so that there was nothing unnatural in Jasper
Allen treating her like a lover.  And that treatment restored the lustre
of her beauty.  He clothed her in many coats of the very best white paint
so skilfully, carefully, artistically put on and kept clean by his
badgered crew of picked Malays, that no costly enamel such as jewellers
use for their work could have looked better and felt smoother to the
touch.  A narrow gilt moulding defined her elegant sheer as she sat on
the water, eclipsing easily the professional good looks of any pleasure
yacht that ever came to the East in those days.  For myself, I must say I
prefer a moulding of deep crimson colour on a white hull.  It gives a
stronger relief besides being less expensive; and I told Jasper so.  But
no, nothing less than the best gold-leaf would do, because no decoration
could be gorgeous enough for the future abode of his Freya.

His feelings for the brig and for the girl were as indissolubly united in
his heart as you may fuse two precious metals together in one crucible.
And the flame was pretty hot, I can assure you.  It induced in him a
fierce inward restlessness both of activity and desire.  Too fine in
face, with a lateral wave in his chestnut hair, spare, long-limbed, with
an eager glint in his steely eyes and quick, brusque movements, he made
me think sometimes of a flashing sword-blade perpetually leaping out of
the scabbard.  It was only when he was near the girl, when he had her
there to look at, that this peculiarly tense attitude was replaced by a
grave devout watchfulness of her slightest movements and utterances.  Her
cool, resolute, capable, good-humoured self-possession seemed to steady
his heart.  Was it the magic of her face, of her voice, of her glances
which calmed him so?  Yet these were the very things one must believe
which had set his imagination ablaze—if love begins in imagination.  But
I am no man to discuss such mysteries, and it strikes me that we have
neglected poor old Nelson inflating his cheeks in a state of worry on the
back verandah.

I pointed out to him that, after all, Jasper was not a very frequent
visitor.  He and his brig worked hard all over the Archipelago.  But all
old Nelson said, and he said it uneasily, was:

“I hope Heemskirk won’t turn up here while the brig’s about.”

Getting up a scare about Heemskirk now!  Heemskirk! . . . Really, one
hadn’t the patience—



