CHAPTER X.

INTUITIONS, OR MORAL ACTS, NEVER OF A MIXED CHARACTER; THAT IS, PARTLY
RIGHT AND PARTLY WRONG.

WE are now prepared to consider the question, whether each moral act, or
exercise, is not always of a character purely unmixed? In other words,
whether every such act, or intention, is not always perfectly right or
perfectly wrong I would here be understood to speak of single acts, or
intuitions, in distinction from a series, which continues through some
definite period, as an hour or a day. Such series of acts may, of
course, be of a mixed character; that is, it may be made up of
individual acts, some of which are right and some wrong. But the
question is, can distinct, opposite, and contradictory elements, such as
sin and holiness, right and wrong, selfishness and benevolence, enter
into one and the same act No one will pretend that an individual is
virtuous at all, unless he _intends_ obedience to the moral law. The
question is, can an individual intend to obey and to disobey the law, in
one and the same act? On this question I remark,

1. That the principle established in the last Chapter really settles the
question. No one, to my knowledge, pretends, that, as far as sincerity
is concerned, the same moral act can be of a mixed character. Very few,
if any, will be guilty of the folly of maintaining, that an individual
can sincerely intend to obey and to disobey the law at one and the same
time. When such act is contemplated in this point of light, it is almost
universally admitted that it cannot be of a mixed character. But then
another test is applied--that of intensity. It is conceivable, at least,
it is said, that the intention might possess a higher degree of
intensity than it does possess. It is, therefore, pronounced defective.
On the same supposition, every moral act in existence might be
pronounced defective. For we can, at least, conceive, that it might
possess a higher degree of intensity. It has been abundantly established
in the last Chapter, however, that there is no such test of moral
actions as this, a test authorized either by reason or revelation.
Sincerity is the only standard by which to determine the character and
deserts of all moral acts and states. In the light of this standard, it
is intuitively evident, that no one act can combine such contradictory
and opposite elements as sin and holiness, right and wrong, an intention
to obey and to disobey the moral law.

2. The opinions and reasonings of distinguished philosophers and
theologians on the subject may be adduced in confirmation of the
doctrine under consideration. Let it be borne in mind, that if the same
act embraces such contradictory and opposite elements as sin and
holiness, it must be, in reality, opposed to itself, one element
constituting the act, being in harmony with the law, and in opposition
to the other element which is opposed to the law.

Now the remark of Edwards upon this subject demands our special
attention. "It is absurd," he says, "to suppose the same individual Will
to oppose itself in its present act; or the present choice to be
opposite to and resisting present choice; as absurd as it is to talk of
two contrary motions in the same moving body at the same time." Does not
the common sense of the race affirm the truth of this statement Sin and
holiness cannot enter into the same act, unless it embraces a serious
intention to obey and not to obey the moral law at the same time. Is not
this, in the language of Edwards, as "absurd as it is to talk of two
contrary motions in the same moving body at the same time."

Equally conclusive is the argument of Kant upon the same subject. Having
shown that mankind are divided into two classes, the morally good and
the morally evil; that the distinguishing characteristic of the former
is, that they have adopted the Moral law as their maxim, that is, that
it is their serious intention to comply with all the claims of the law;
and of the latter, that they have not adopted the law as their maxim; he
adds, "The sentiment of mankind is, therefore, never indifferent
relatively to the law, and he never can be neither good nor evil." Then
follows the paragraph to which special attention is invited. "In like
manner, mankind cannot be, in some points of character, morally good,
while he is, at the same time, in others evil; for, is he in any point
good, then the moral law is his maxim (that is, it is his serious
intention to obey the law in the length and breadth of its claims); but
is he likewise, at the same time, in some points bad, then quoad [as to]
these, the Moral law is not his maxim, (that is, in these particulars,
it is his intention not to obey the law). But since the law is one and
universal, and as it commands in one act of life, so in all, then the
maxim referring to it would be, at the same time universal and
particular, which is a contradiction;" (that is, it would be his
intention to obey the law universally, and at the same time, not to obey
it in certain particulars, one of the most palpable contradictions
conceivable.) To my mind the above argument has all the force of
demonstration. Let it be borne in mind, that no man is morally good at
all, unless it is his intention to obey the Moral law universally. This
being his intention, the law has no higher claims upon him. Its full
demands are, and must be, met in that intention. For what can the law
require more, than that the voluntary powers shall be in full harmony
with its demands, which is always true, when there is a sincere
intention to obey the law universally. Now, with this intention, there
can be nothing in the individual morally evil; unless there is, at the
same time, an intention not to obey the law in certain particulars; that
is, not to obey it universally. A mixed moral act, or intention,
therefore, is possible, only on this condition, that it shall embrace
these two contradictory elements--a serious determination to obey the
law universally, and a determination equally decisive, at the same time,
to disobey it in certain particulars; that is, not to obey it
universally. I leave it with the advocates of the doctrine of Mixed
Moral Action to dispose of this difficulty as they can.

3. If we could conceive of a moral act of a mixed character, the Moral
law could not recognize it as holy at all. It presents but one scale by
which to determine the character of moral acts, the command requiring us
to love with all the heart. It knows such acts only as conformed, or not
conformed, to this command. The mixed action, if it could exist, would,
in the light of the Moral law, be placed among the not-conformed, just
as much as those which are exclusively sinful. The Moral law does not
present two scales, according to one of which actions are classed as
conformed or not-conformed, and according to the other, as partly
conformed and partly not-conformed. Such a scale as this last is unknown
in the circle of revealed truth. The Moral law presents us but one
scale. Those acts which are in full conformity to its demands, it puts
down as holy. Those not thus conformed, it puts down as sinful; as holy
or sinful is the only light in which actions stand according to the law.

4. Mixed actions, if they could exist, are as positively prohibited by
the law, and must therefore be placed under the category of total
disobedience, just as much as those which are in themselves entirely
sinful. While the law requires us to love with _all_ the heart, it
positively prohibits everything short of this. The individual,
therefore, who puts forth an act of a mixed character, puts forth an act
as totally and positively prohibited as the man who puts forth a totally
sinful one. Both alike must be placed under the category of total
disobedience. A father requires his two sons to go to the distance of
ten rods, and positively prohibits their stopping short of the distance
required. One determines to go nine rods, and there to stop. The other
determines not to move at all. One has put forth an act of total
disobedience just as much as the other. So of all moral acts which stop
short of loving with all the heart.

5. A moral act of a mixed character cannot possibly proceed from that
regard to moral obligation which is an essential condition of the
existence of any degree of virtue at all. Virtue, in no degree, can
exist, except from a sacred regard to moral obligation. The individual
who thus regards moral obligation in one degree, will regard it equally
in all degrees. The individual, therefore, who, from such regard, yields
to the claims of the law at all, will and must conform to the full
measure of its demands. He cannot be in voluntary opposition to any one
demand of that law. A mixed moral act, then, cannot possibly proceed
from that regard to moral obligation which is the essential condition of
holiness in any degree. This leads me to remark,

6. That a moral act of a mixed character, if it could exist, could arise
from none other than the most purely selfish and wicked intention
conceivable. Three positions, we will suppose, are before the mind--a
state of perfect conformity to the law, a state of total disobedience,
and a third state combining the elements of obedience and disobedience.
By a voluntary act of moral election, an individual places himself in
the last state, in distinction from each of the others. What must have
been his intention in so doing? He cannot have acted from a regard to
moral rectitude. In that case, he would have elected the state of total
obedience. His intention must have been to secure, at the same time, the
reward of holiness and the "pleasures of sin"--a most selfish and wicked
state surely. The supposition of a moral act, that is, intention
combining the elements of holiness and sin--is as great an absurdity as
the supposition, that a circle has become a square, without losing any
of its properties as a circle.

7. I remark again that the doctrine of mixed moral action is
contradicted by the express teachings of inspiration. "Whosoever cometh
after me," says Christ, "and forsaketh not _all_ that he hath, he cannot
be my disciple." The Bible knows men only as the disciples, or not
disciples, of Christ. All who really comply with the condition above
named are His disciples. All others, however near their compliance, are
not His disciples, any more than those who have not conformed in any
degree. If an individual has really conformed to this condition, he has
surely done his entire duty. He has loved with all his heart. What other
meaning can we attach to the phrase, "forsaketh all that he hath?" All
persons who have not complied with this principle are declared to be
wholly without the circle of discipleship. What is this, but a positive
assertion, that a moral action of a mixed character is an impossibility?

Again. "No man can serve two masters." "Ye cannot serve God and mammon."
Let us suppose that we can put forth intentions of a mixed
character--intentions partly sinful and partly holy. So far as they are
in harmony with the law, we serve God. So far as they are not in harmony
with the law, we serve Mammon. Now, if all our moral exercises can be of
a mixed character, then it is true that, at every period of our lives,
we can serve God and Mammon. The service which we can render also to
each, may be in every conceivable degree. We may render, for example,
ninety-nine degrees of service to God and one to Mammon, or ninety-nine
to Mammon and one to God. Or our service may be equally divided between
the two. Can we conceive of a greater absurdity than this?

What also is the meaning of such declarations as this, "no fountain can
send forth both sweet water and bitter," if the heart of man may
exercise intentions combining such elements as sin and holiness?
Declarations of a similar kind abound in the Bible. They are surely
without meaning, if the doctrine of Mixed Moral Actions is true.

8. Finally. It may be questioned whether the whole range of error
presents a dogma of more pernicious tendency than the doctrine of Mixed
Moral Actions. It teaches moral agents that they may be selfish in all
their moral exercises, and yet have enough of moral purity mingled with
them to secure acceptance with the "Judge of all the earth." A man who
has adopted such a principle will almost never, whatever his course of
life may be, seem to himself to be destitute of real virtue. He will
always seem to himself to possess enough of it, to render his acceptance
with God certain. The kind of virtue which can mingle itself with
selfishness and sin in individual intentions or moral acts, may be
possessed, in different degrees, by the worst men on earth. If this be
assumed as real holiness--that holiness which will stand the ordeal of
eternity, who will, who should conceive himself destitute of a title to
heaven? Here is the fatal rock on which myriads of minds are wrecked for
ever. Let it ever be borne in mind, that the same fountain cannot, at
the same time and place, "send forth both sweet water and bitter." "Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon."

OBJECTIONS.

Two or three objections to the doctrine above established demand a
passing notice here.

AN ACT OF WILL MAY RESULT FROM A VARIETY OF MOTIVES.

1. It is said that the mind may act under the influence of a great
variety of motives at one and the same time. The same intention,
therefore, may be the result of different and opposite motives, and as a
consequence, combine the elements of good and evil. In reply, I remark,
that when the Will is in harmony with the Moral law, it respects the
good and rejects the bad, alike in _all_ the motives presented. The
opposite is true when it is not in harmony with the law. The same regard
or disregard for moral obligation which will induce an individual to
reject the evil and choose the good, or to make an opposite choice, in
respect to one motive, will induce the same in respect to all other
motives present at the same time. A mixed moral act can no more result
from a combination of motives, than different and opposite motions can
result in the same body at the same time, from forces acting upon it
from different directions.

LOVING WITH GREATER INTENSITY AT ONE TIME THAN ANOTHER.

2. It is said that we are conscious of loving our friends, and serving
God, with greater strength and intensity at one time than at another.
Yet our love, in all such instances, is real. Love, therefore, may be
real, and yet be greatly defective--that is, it may be real, and embrace
elements morally wrong. It is true, that love may exist in different
degrees, as far as the action of the Sensibility is concerned. It is not
so, however, with love in the form of intention--intention in harmony
with moral obligation, the only form of love demanded by the moral law.
Such intention, in view of the same degrees of light, and under the same
identical influences, cannot possess different degrees of intensity. The
Will always yields, when it really does yield at all to moral
obligation, with all the intensity it is, for the time being, capable
of, or the nature of the case demands.

MOMENTARY REVOLUTIONS OF CHARACTER.

3. On this theory, it is said, an individual may become perfectly good
and perfectly bad, for any indefinite number of instances, in any
definite period of time. This consequence, to say nothing of what is
likely to take place in fact, does, as far as possibility is concerned,
follow from this theory. But let us contemplate it, for a moment, in the
light of an example or two. An individual, from regard to moral
obligation, maintains perfect integrity of character, up to a given
period of time. Then, under the influence of temptation, he tells a
deliberate falsehood. Did his previous integrity so fuse itself into
that lie, as to make it partly good and partly bad?--as to make it
anything else than a _total_ falsehood? Did the prior goodness of David
make his acts of adultery and murder partly good and partly bad? Let the
advocate of mixed moral action extract the elements of moral goodness
from these acts if he can. He can just as well find these elements here,
as in any other acts of disobedience to the Moral law. "The
righteousness of the righteous cannot save him" from total sinfulness,
any more than from condemnation "in the day of his transgression."




