CHAPTER XIV.

LIBERTY AND SERVITUDE.

LIBERTY OF WILL AS OPPOSED TO MORAL SERVITUDE.

THERE are, among others, two senses of the term Liberty, which ought to
be carefully distinguished from each other. In the first sense, it
stands opposed to Necessity; in the second, to what is called Moral
Servitude. It is in the last sense that I propose to consider the
subject in the present Chapter. What, then, is Liberty as opposed to
Moral Servitude? _It is that state in which the action of Will is in
harmony with the Moral Law, with the idea of the right, the just, the
true, and the good, while all the propensities are held in perfect
subordination--a state in which the mind may purpose obedience to the
law of right with the rational hope of carrying that determination into
accomplishment_. This state all mankind agree in calling a state of
moral freedom. The individual who has attained to it, is not in
servitude to any propensity whatever. He "rules his own spirit." He is
the master of himself. He purposes the good, and performs it. He
resolves against the evil, and avoids it. "Greater," says the maxim of
ancient wisdom, "is such a man than he that taketh a city."

Moral Servitude, on the other hand, is _a state in which the Will is so
ensnared by the Sensibility, so habituated to subjection to the
propensities, that it has so lost the prerogative of self-control, that
it cannot resolve upon action in the direction of the law of right, with
any rational expectation of keeping that resolution_. The individual in
this condition "knows the good, and approves of it, yet follows the
bad." "The good that he would (purposes to do), he does not, but the
evil that he would not (purposes not to do), that he does." All men
agree in denominating this a state of Moral Servitude. Whenever an
individual is manifestly governed by appetite, or any other propensity,
by common consent, he is said to be a slave in respect to his
propensities.

The reason why the former state is denominated Liberty, and the latter
Servitude, is obvious. Liberty, as opposed to Servitude, is universally
regarded as a good in itself. As such, it is desired and chosen.
Servitude, on the other hand, may be submitted to, as the least of two
evils. Yet it can never be desired and chosen, as a good in itself.
Every man who is in a state of servitude, is there, in an important
sense, against his Will. The _state_ in which he is, is regarded as in
itself the greatest of evils, excepting those which would arise from a
vain attempt at a vindication of personal freedom.

The same principle holds true in respect to Moral Liberty and Servitude.
When any individual contemplates the idea of the voluntary power rising
to full dominion over impulse of every kind, and acting in sublime
harmony with the pure and perfect law of rectitude, as revealed in the
Intelligence, every one regards this as a state, of all others, the most
to be desired and chosen as a good in itself. To enter upon this state,
and to continue in it, is therefore regarded as a realization of the
idea of Liberty in the highest and best sense of the term. Subjection to
impulse, in opposition to the pure dictates of the Intelligence, to the
loss of the high prerogative of "ruling our own spirits," on the other
hand, is regarded by all men as in itself a state the most abject, and
least to be desired conceivable. The individual that is there, cannot
but despise his own image. He, of necessity, loathes and abhors himself.
Yet he submits to self-degradation rather than endure the pain and
effort of self-emancipation. No term but Servitude, together with others
of a kindred import, expresses the true conception of this state. No man
is in a state of Moral Servitude from choice--that is, from choice of
the state as a good in itself. The _state_ he regards as an evil in
itself. Yet, in the exercise of free choice, he is there, because he
submits to self-degradation rather than vindicate his right to freedom.

REMARKS.

MISTAKE OF GERMAN METAPHYSICIANS.

1. We notice a prominent and important mistake common to metaphysicians,
especially of the German school, in their Treatises on the Will. Liberty
of Will with them is Liberty as distinguished from Moral Servitude, and
not as distinguished from Necessity. Hence, in all their works, very
little light is thrown upon the great idea of Liberty, which lies at the
foundation of moral obligation, to wit: Liberty as distinguished from
Necessity. "A free Will," says Kant, "and a Will subjected to the Moral
Law, are one and identical." A more capital error in philosophy is not
often met with than this.

MORAL SERVITUDE OF THE RACE.

2. In the state of Moral Servitude above described, the Bible affirms
all men to be, until they are emancipated by the influence of the
Remedial System therein revealed--a truth affirmed by what every man
experiences in himself, and by the entire mass of facts which the
history of the race presents. Where is the individual that, unaided by
an influence out of himself, has ever attained to a dominion over his
own spirit? Where is the individual that, without such an influence, can
resolve upon acting in harmony with the law of pure benevolence, with
any rational hope of success? To meet this great want of human nature;
to provide an influence adequate to its redemption, from what the
Scriptures, with great propriety, call the "bondage of corruption," is a
fundamental design of the Remedial System.




CHAPTER XV.

LIBERTY AND DEPENDENCE.

COMMON IMPRESSION.

A VERY common impression exists,--an impression universal among those
who hold the doctrine of Necessity,--that the doctrine of Liberty, as
maintained in this Treatise, renders man, really, in most important
respects, independent of his Creator, and therefore, tends to induce in
the mind, that spirit of haughty independence which is totally opposite
and antagonistic to that spirit of humility and dependence which lies at
the basis of all true piety and virtue. If this is the real tendency of
this doctrine, it certainly constitutes an important objection against
it. If, on the other hand, we find in the nature of this doctrine,
essential elements totally destructive of the spirit of pride and
self-confidence, and tending most strongly to induce the opposite
spirit,--a spirit of humility and dependence upon the grace proffered in
the Remedial System; if we find, also, that the doctrine of Necessity,
in many fundamental particulars, lacks these benign tendencies, we have,
in such a case, the strongest evidence in favor of the former doctrine,
and against the latter. The object of the present Chapter, therefore, is
to _elucidate the tendency of the doctrine of Liberty to destroy the
spirit of pride, haughtiness, and self-dependence, and to induce the
spirit of humility and dependence upon Divine Grace_.

SPIRIT OF DEPENDENCE DEFINED.

Before proceeding directly to argue this question, we need to settle
definitely the meaning of the phrase _spirit of dependence_. The
_conviction_ of our dependence is one thing. The _spirit_ of dependence
is quite another. What is this spirit? In its exercise, the mind _rests
in voluntary dependence upon the grace of God_. The heart is fully set
upon doing the right, and avoiding the wrong, while the mind is in the
voluntary exercise of _trust_ in God for "grace whereby we may serve Him
acceptably." The _spirit_ of dependence, then, implies obedience
actually commenced. The question is, does the belief of the doctrine of
Liberty tend intrinsically to induce the exercise of this spirit? In
this respect, has it altogether a superiority over the doctrine of
Necessity?

DOCTRINE OF NECESSITY TENDS NOT TO INDUCE THE SPIRIT OF DEPENDENCE.

1. In accomplishing my object, I will first consider the tendency, in
this one respect, of the doctrine of Necessity. An individual, we will
suppose, finds himself under influences which induce him to sin, and
which consequently, if this doctrine is true, render it impossible for
him, without the interposition of Divine power, not to sin. A
consideration of his condition tends to _convince_ him, that is, to
induce the intellectual conviction, of his entire dependence upon Divine
grace. But the intellectual _conviction_ of our dependence, as above
shown, is one thing. The _spirit_ of dependence, which, as there stated,
consists in actually trusting the Most High for grace to do what he
requires, and implies actual obedience already commenced, is quite
another thing. Now the doctrine of Necessity has a tendency to produce
this _conviction_, but none to induce the _spirit_ of dependence:
inasmuch as with this conviction, it produces another equally strong, to
wit: that the creature, without a Divine interposition, will not, and
cannot, exercise the _spirit_ of dependence. In thus producing the
conviction, that, under present influences, the subject does not, and
cannot exercise that spirit, this doctrine tends exclusively to the
annihilation of that Spirit.

When an individual is in a state of actual obedience, the tendency of
this doctrine upon him is no better; since it produces the conviction,
that while a Divine influence, independently of ourselves, produces in
us a spirit of dependence, we shall and must exercise it; and that while
it does not produce that spirit, we do not and cannot exercise it. Where
is the tendency to induce a spirit of dependence, in such a conviction?
According to the doctrine of Necessity, nothing but the actual
interposition of Divine grace has any tendency to induce a spirit of
dependence. The _belief_ of this doctrine has no such tendency whatever.
The grand mistake of the Necessitarian here, consists in the assumption,
that, because his _doctrine has a manifest tendency to produce the_
CONVICTION _of dependence, it has a tendency equally manifest to induce
the_ SPIRIT _of dependence;_ when, in fact, it has no such tendency
whatever.

2. We will now contemplate the intrinsic tendencies of the doctrine of
Liberty to induce the spirit of humility and dependence. Every one will
see, at once, that the consciousness of Liberty cannot itself be a
ground of dependence, in respect to action, in favor of the right and in
opposition to the wrong: for the possession of such Liberty, as far as
the power itself is concerned, leaves us, at all times, equally liable
to do the one as the other. How can an equal liability to two distinct
and opposite courses, be a ground of assurance, that we shall choose the
one, and avoid the other? Thus the consciousness of Liberty tends
directly and intrinsically to a total annihilation of the spirit of
self-dependence.

Let us now contemplate our relation to the Most High. He knows perfectly
in what direction we shall, in our self-determination, exert our powers
under any influence and system of influences brought to bear upon us. It
is also in His power to subject us to any system of influences he
pleases. He has revealed to us the great truth, that if, in the exercise
of the spirit of dependence, we will trust Him for grace to do the good
and avoid the evil which He requires us to do and avoid, He will subject
us to a Divine influence, which shall for ever secure us in the one, and
against the other. The conviction, therefore, rises with full and
perfect distinctness in the mind, that, in the exercise of the spirit of
dependence, action in all future time, in the direction of purity and
bliss, is secure; and that, in the absence of this spirit, action, in
the opposite direction, is equally certain. In the belief of the
doctrine of Liberty, another truth becomes an omnipresent reality to our
minds, that the _exercise_ of this spirit, thus rendering our "calling
and election sure," is, at all times, practicable to us. What then is
the exclusive tendency of this doctrine? To destroy the spirit of
self-dependence, on the one hand, and to induce the exercise of the
opposite spirit, on the other. The doctrine of Necessity reveals the
_fact_ of dependence, but destroys the _spirit_, by the production of
the annihilating conviction, that we neither shall nor can exercise that
spirit, till God, in his sovereign dispensations, shall subject us to an
influence which renders it impossible for us not to exercise it. The
doctrine of Liberty reveals, with equal distinctness, the _fact_ of
dependence; and then, while it produces the hallowed conviction of the
perfect practicability of the exercise of the _spirit_ of dependence,
presents motives infinitely strong, not only to induce its exercise, but
to empty the mind wholly of everything opposed to it.

GOD CONTROLS ALL INFLUENCES UNDER WHICH CREATURES DO ACT.

3. While the existence and continuance of our powers of moral agency
depend wholly upon the Divine Will, and while the Most High knows, with
entire certainty, in what direction we shall exert our powers, under all
influences, and systems of influences, brought to bear upon us, all
these influences are entirely at his disposal. What tendency have such
convictions, together with the consciousness of Liberty, and ability to
exercise, or not to exercise, the spirit of dependence, but to induce
us, in the exercise of that spirit, to throw our whole being into the
petition, "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil?" If
God knows perfectly under what influences action in us shall be in the
direction of the right, or the wrong, and holds all such influences at
his own control, what attitude becomes us in the presence of the "High
and lofty One," but dependence and prayer?

DEPENDENCE ON ACCOUNT OF THE MORAL SERVITUDE OF THE WILL.

4. Finally, a consciousness of a state of Moral Servitude, together with
the conviction, that in the exercise of the spirit of dependence, we can
rise to the "Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God;" that in the absence
of this spirit, our Moral Servitude is perfectly certain; all these,
together with the conviction which the belief of the doctrine of Liberty
induces (to wit: that the exercise of the spirit of dependence is always
practicable to us), tends only to one result, to induce the exercise of
that spirit, and to the total annihilation of the opposite spirit.

While, therefore, the doctrine of Liberty sanctifies, in the mind, the
feeling of obligation to do the right and avoid the wrong, a feeling
which the doctrine of Necessity tends to annihilate, the former (an
effect which the latter cannot produce) tends only to the annihilation
of the spirit of pride and self-confidence, and to induce that spirit of
filial dependence which cries "Abba, Father!"




