CHAPTER XIII.

INFLUENCE OF THE WILL IN INTELLECTUAL JUDGMENTS.

MEN OFTEN VOLUNTARY IN THEIR OPINIONS.

IT is an old maxim, that the Will governs the understanding. It becomes
a very important inquiry with us, To what extent, and in what sense, is
this maxim true? It is undeniable, that, in many important respects,
mankind are voluntary in their opinions and judgments, and therefore,
responsible for them. We often hear the declaration, "You ought, or
ought not, to entertain such and such opinions, to form such and such
judgments." "You are bound to admit, or have no right to admit, such and
such things as true." Men often speak, also, of _pre-judging_ particular
cases, and thus incurring guilt. A question may very properly be asked
here, what are these opinions, judgments, admissions, pre-judgments,
&c.? Are they real affirmations of the Intelligence, or are they
exclusively phenomena of the Will?

ERROR NOT FROM THE INTELLIGENCE, BUT THE WILL.

The proposition which I lay down is this, _that the Intelligence, in its
appropriate exercise, can seldom if ever, make wrong affirmations; that
wrong opinions, admissions, pre-judgments, &c., are in most, if not all
instances, nothing else than phenomena, or assumptions of Will_. If the
Intelligence can make wrong affirmations, it is important to determine
in what department of its action such affirmations may be found.

PRIMARY FACULTIES CANNOT ERR.

Let us first contemplate the action of the _primary_ intellectual
faculties--Sense, or the faculty of _external_ perception;
Consciousness, the faculty of _internal_ observation; and Reason, the
faculty which gives us _necessary_ and _universal truths_. The two
former faculties give us phenomena external and internal. The latter
gives us the logical antecedents of phenomena, thus perceived and
affirmed, to wit: the ideas of substance, cause, space, time, &c. In the
action of these faculties, surely, real error is impossible.

SO OF THE SECONDARY FACULTIES.

Let us now contemplate the action of the secondary faculties, the
Understanding and Judgment. The former unites the elements given by the
three primary faculties into _notions_ of particular objects. The latter
classifies these notions according to qualities perceived. Here, also,
we find no place for wrong affirmations. The understanding can only
combine the elements actually given by the primary faculties. The
Judgment can classify only according to qualities actually perceived.
Thus I might go over the entire range of the Intelligence, and show,
that seldom, if ever, in its appropriate action, it can make wrong
affirmations.

ERROR, WHERE FOUND.--ASSUMPTION.

Where then is the place for error, for wrong opinions, and
pre-judgments? Let us suppose, that a number of individuals are
observing some object at a distance from them. No qualities are given
but those common to a variety of objects, such as a man, horse, ox, &c.
The perceptive faculty has deceived no one in this case. It has given
nothing but real qualities. The Understanding can only form a notion of
it, as an object possessing these particular qualities. The Judgment can
only affirm, that the qualities perceived are common to different
classes of objects, and consequently, that no affirmations can be made
as to what class the object perceived does belong. The Intelligence,
therefore, makes no false affirmations. Still the inquiry goes round.
"What is it?" One answers, "It is a man." That is my opinion. Another:
"It is a horse." That is my judgment. Another still says, "I differ from
you all. It is an ox." That is my notion. Now, what are these opinions,
judgments, and notions? Are they real affirmations of the Intelligence?
By no means. The Intelligence cannot affirm at all, under such
circumstances. They are nothing in reality, but mere _assumptions_ of
the Will. A vast majority of the so called opinions, beliefs, judgments,
and notions among men, and all where _error_ is found, are nothing but
assumptions of the Will.

Assumptions are sometimes based upon real affirmations of the
Intelligence, and sometimes not. Suppose the individuals above referred
to approach the object, till qualities are given which are peculiar to
the horse. The Judgment at once classifies the object accordingly. As
soon as this takes place, they all exclaim, "well, it is a horse." Here
are assumptions again, but assumptions based upon real affirmations of
the Intelligence. In the former instance we had assumptions based upon
no such affirmations.

False assumptions do not always imply moral guilt. Much of the necessary
business of life has no other basis than prudent or imprudent
_guessing_. When the farmer, for example, casts any particular seed into
the ground, it is only by balance of probabilities that he often
determines, as far as he does or can determine, what is best; and not
unfrequently is he necessitated to assume and act, when all
probabilities are so perfectly balanced, that he can find no reasons at
all for taking one course in distinction from another. Yet no moral
guilt is incurred when one is necessitated to act in some direction, and
when all available light has been sought and employed to determine the
direction which is best.

As false assumptions, however, often involve very great moral guilt, it
may be important to develope some of the distinguishing characteristics
of assumptions of this class.

1. All assumptions involve moral guilt, which are in opposition to the
real and positive affirmations of the Intelligence. As the Will may
assume in the absence of such affirmations, and in the direction of
them, so it may in opposition to them. When you have carried a man's
Intellect in favor of a given proposition, it is by no means certain
that you have gained his assent to its truth. He may still assume, that
all the evidence presented is inadequate, and consequently refuse to
admit its truth. When the Will thus divorces itself from the
Intelligence, guilt of no ordinary character is incurred. Men often
express their convictions of the guilt thus incurred, by saying to
individuals, "You are bound to admit that fact or proposition as true.
You are already convinced. What excuse have you for not yielding to that
conviction?" Yet individuals will often do fatal violence to their
intellectual and moral nature, by holding on to assumptions, in reality
known to be false.

2. Assumptions involve moral guilt which are formed without availing
ourselves of all the light within our reach as the basis of our
assumptions. For us to assume any proposition, or statement, to be true
or false, in the absence of affirmations of the Intelligence, as the
basis of such assumptions, when adequate light is available, involves
the same criminality, as assumptions in opposition to the Intelligence.
Hence we often have the expression in common life, "You had no right to
form a judgment under such circumstances. You were bound, before doing
it, to avail yourself of all the light within your reach."

3. _Positive_ assumptions, without intellectual affirmations as their
basis, equally positive, involve moral guilt of no ordinary character.
As remarked above, we are often placed in circumstances in which we are
necessitated to act in some direction, and to select some particular
course without any perceived reasons in favor of that one course in
distinction from another. Now while _action_ is proper in such a
condition, it is not proper to make a positive assumption that the
course selected is the best. Suppose, that all the facts before my mind
bearing upon the character of a neighbor, are equally consistent with
the possession, on his part, of a character either good or bad. I do
violence to my intellectual and moral nature, if, under such
circumstances, I make the assumption that his character is either the
one or the other, and especially, that it is the latter instead of the
former. How often do flagrant transgressions of moral rectitude occur in
such instances!

PRE-JUDGMENTS.

A few remarks are deemed requisite on this topic. A pre-judgment is an
assumption, that a proposition or statement is true or false, before the
facts, bearing upon the case, have been heard. Such assumptions are
generally classed under the term prejudice. Thus it is said of
individuals, that they are prejudiced in favor or against certain
persons, sentiments, or causes. The real meaning of such statements is,
that individuals have made assumptions in one direction or another,
prior to a hearing of the facts of the case, and irrespective of such
facts.

INTELLECT NOT DECEIVED IN PRE-JUDGMENTS.

It is commonly said, that such prejudices, or pre-judgments, blind the
mind to facts of one class, and render it quick to discern those of the
other, and thus lead to a real mis-direction of the Intelligence. This I
think is not a correct statement of the case. Pre-judgments may, and
often do, prevent all proper investigation of a subject. In this case,
the Intelligence is not deceived at all. In the absence of real data, it
can make no positive affirmations whatever.

So far also as pre-judgments direct attention from facts bearing upon
one side of a question, and to those bearing upon the other, the
Intelligence is not thereby deceived. All that it can affirm is the true
bearing of the facts actually presented. In respect to those not
presented, and consequently in respect to the real merits of the whole
case, it makes no affirmations. If an individual forms an opinion from a
partial hearing, that opinion is a mere assumption of Will, and nothing
else.

THE MIND HOW INFLUENCED BY PRE-JUDGMENTS.

But the manner in which pre-judgments chiefly affect the mind in the
hearing of a cause, still remains to be stated. In such pre-judgments,
or assumptions, an assumption of this kind is almost invariably
included, to wit: that all facts of whatever character bearing upon one
side of the question, are wholly indecisive, while all others bearing
upon the other side are equally decisive. In pre-judging, individuals do
not merely pre-judge the real merits of the case, but the character of
all the facts bearing upon it. They enter upon the investigation of a
given subject, with an inflexible determination to treat all the facts
and arguments they shall meet with, according to previous assumptions.
Let the clearest light poured upon one side of the question, and the
reply is, "After all, I am not convinced," while the most trivial
circumstances conceivable bearing upon the other side, will be seized
upon as perfectly decisive. In all this, we do not meet with the
operations of a deceived Intelligence, but of a "deceived heart," that
is, of a depraved Will, stubbornly bent upon verifying its own
unauthorized, pre-formed assumptions. Such assumptions can withstand any
degree of evidence whatever. The Intelligence did not give them
existence, and it cannot annihilate them. They are exclusively creatures
of Will, and by an act of Will, they must be dissolved, or they will
remain proof against all the evidence which the tide of time can roll
against them.

INFLUENCES WHICH INDUCE FALSE ASSUMPTIONS.

The influences which induce false and unauthorized assumptions, are
found in the strong action of the Sensibility, in the direction of the
appetites, natural affections, and the different propensities, as the
love of gain, ambition, party spirit, pride of character, of opinion,
&c. When the Will has long been habituated to act in the direction of a
particular propensity, how difficult it is to induce the admission, or
assumption, that action in that direction is wrong! The difficulty, in
such cases, does not, in most instances, lie in convincing the
Intelligence, but in inducing the Will to admit as true what the
Intelligence really affirms.

CASES IN WHICH WE ARE APPARENTLY, THOUGH NOT REALLY, MISLED BY THE
INTELLIGENCE.

As there are cases of this kind, it is important to mark some of their
characteristics. Among these I cite the following:

1. The qualities of a particular object, actually perceived, as in the
case above cited, may be common to a variety of classes which we know,
and also to others which we do not know. On the perception of such
qualities, the Intelligence will suggest those classes only which we
know, while the particular object perceived may belong to a class
unknown. If, in such circumstances, a positive assumption, as to what
class it does belong, is made, a wrong assumption must of necessity be
made. The _Intelligence_ in this case is not deceived. It places the
Will, however, in such a relation to the object, that if a positive
assumption is made, it must necessarily be a wrong one. In this manner,
multitudes of wrong assumptions arise.

2. When facts are before the mind, an _explanation_ of them is often
desired. In such circumstances, the Intelligence may suggest, in
explanation, a number of hypotheses, which hypotheses may be all alike
false. If a positive assumption is made in such a case, it must of
necessity be a false one; because it must be in the direction of some
one hypothesis before the mind at the time. Here, also, the Intelligence
necessitates a wrong assumption, if any is made. Yet it is not itself
deceived; because it gives no positive affirmations as the basis of
positive assumptions. In such circumstances, error very frequently
arises.

3. _Experience_ often occasions wrong assumptions, which are attributed
incorrectly to real affirmations of the Intelligence. A friend, for
example, saw an object which presented the external appearance of the
apple. He had never before seen those qualities, except in connection
with that class of objects. He assumed, at once, that it was a real
apple; but subsequently found that it was an artificial, and not a real
one. Was the Intelligence deceived in this instance? By no means. That
faculty had never affirmed, that those qualities which the apple
presents to the eye, never exist in connection with any other object,
and consequently, that the apple must have been present in the instance
given. _Experience_, and not a positive affirmation of the Intelligence,
led to the wrong assumption in this instance. The same principle holds
true, in respect to a vast number of instances that might be named.

4. Finally, the Intelligence may not only make positive affirmations in
the presence of qualities perceived, but it may affirm _hypothetically_,
that is, when a given proposition is _assumed_ as true, the Intelligence
may and will present the logical _antecedents_ and _consequents_ of that
assumption. If the assumption is false, such will be the character of
the antecedents and consequents following from it. An individual, in
tracing out these antecedents and consequents, however, may mistake the
hypothetical, for the real, affirmations of the Intelligence. One wrong
assumption in theology or philosophy, for example, may give an entire
system, all of the leading principles of which are likewise false. In
tracing out, and perfecting that system, how natural the assumption,
that one is following the _real_, and not the _hypothetical_,
affirmations of the Intelligence! From this one source an infinity of
error exists among men.

In an enlarged Treatise on mental science, the subject of the present
chapter should receive a much more extensive elucidation than could be
given to it in this connection. Few subjects would throw more clear
light over the domains of truth and error than this, if fully and
distinctly elucidated.

In conclusion, I would simply remark, that one of the highest
attainments in virtue which we can conceive an intelligent being to
make, consists in a continued and vigorous employment of the
Intelligence in search of the right, the just, the true, and the good,
in all departments of human investigation; and in a rigid discipline of
the Will, to receive and treat, as true and sacred, whatever the
Intelligence may present, as possessed of such characteristics, to the
full subjection of all impulses in the direction of unauthorized
assumptions.




