CHAPTER XVI.

FORMATION OF CHARACTER.

ELEMENT OF WILL IN FORMATION OF CHARACTER.

CHARACTER COMMONLY HOW ACCOUNTED FOR.

IN accounting for the existence and formation of peculiarities of
character, individual, social, and national, two elements only are
commonly taken into consideration, the _natural propensities_, and the
_circumstances and influences_ under which those propensities are
developed and controlled. The doctrine of Necessity permits us to take
nothing else into the account. Undoubtedly, these elements have very
great efficacy in determining character. In many instances, little else
need to be taken into consideration, in accounting for peculiarities of
character, as they exist around us, in individuals, communities, and
nations.

THE VOLUNTARY ELEMENT TO BE TAKEN INTO THE ACCOUNT.

In a vast majority of cases, however, another, and altogether a
different element, that of the Will, or voluntary element, must be taken
into the reckoning, or we shall find ourselves wholly unable to account
for peculiarities of mental and moral development, everywhere visible
around us. It is an old maxim, that "every man is the arbiter of his own
destiny." As character determines destiny, so the Will determines
character; and man is the arbiter of his own destiny, only as he is the
arbiter of his own character. The element of Free Will, therefore, must
be taken into the reckoning, if we would adequately account for the
peculiarities of character which the individual, social, and national
history of the race presents. Even where mental and moral developments
are as the propensities and external influences, still the voluntary
element must be reckoned in, if we would account for facts as they
exist. In a majority of instances, however, if the two elements under
consideration, and these only, are taken into the account, we shall find
our conclusions very wide from the truth.

AN EXAMPLE IN ILLUSTRATION.

I will take, in illustration of the above remarks, a single example--a
case with which I became so familiarly acquainted, that I feel perfectly
safe in vouching for the truth of the statements which I am about to
make. I knew a boy who, up to the age of ten or twelve years, was under
the influence of a most ungovernable temper--a temper easily and quickly
excited, and which, when excited, rendered him perfectly desperate.
Seldom, if ever, was he known to yield in a conflict, however superior
in strength his antagonist might be. Death was always deliberately
preferred to submission. During this period, he often reflected upon his
condition, and frequently wished that it was otherwise. Still, with
melancholy deliberation, he as often said to himself, I never can and
never shall subdue this temper. At the close of this period, as he was
reflecting upon the subject again, he made up his mind, with perfect
fixedness of purpose, that, to the control of that temper, he would
never more yield. The Will rose up in the majesty of its power, and
assumed the reins of self-government, in the respect under
consideration. From that moment, that temper almost never, even under
the highest provocations, obtained the control of the child. A total
revolution of mental developments resulted. He afterwards became as
distinguished for natural amiability and self-control, in respect to his
temper, as before he had been for the opposite spirit. This total
revolution took place from mere prudential considerations, without any
respect whatever to moral obligation.

Now suppose we attempt to account for these distinct and opposite
developments of character--developments exhibited by the same
individual, in these two periods--by an exclusive reference to natural
propensities and external influences. What a totally inadequate and
false account should we give of the facts presented! That individual is
just as conscious, that it was the element of Free Will that produced
this revolution, and that when he formed the determination which
resulted in that revolution, he might have determined differently, as he
is, or ever has been, of any mental states whatever. All the facts,
also, as they lie out before us, clearly indicate, that if we leave out
of the account the voluntary element, those facts must remain wholly
unexplained, or a totally wrong explanation of them must be given.

The same principle holds true in all other instances. Though natural
propensities and external influences greatly _modify_ mental
developments, still, the _distinguishing_ peculiarities of character, in
all instances, receive their form and coloring from the action of the
voluntary power. This is true, of the peculiarities of character
exhibited, not only by individuals, but communities and nations. We can
never account for facts as they are, until we contemplate man, not only
as possessed of Intelligence and Sensibility, but also of Free Will. All
the powers and susceptibilities must be taken into the account, if men
would know man as he is.

DIVERSITIES OF CHARACTER.

A few important definitions will close this Chapter.

A _decisive_ character exists, where the Will acts in harmony with
propensities strongly developed. When a number of propensities of this
kind exist, action, and consequently character, may be changeable, and
yet decisive.

_Unity_ and _decision_ of character result, when the Will steadily acts
in harmony with some one over-shadowing propensity.

Character is _fluctuating_ and _changeable_, when the Will surrenders
itself to the control of different propensities, each easily and highly
excited in the presence of its appropriate objects, and yet the
excitement but temporary. Thus, different propensities, in rapid
succession, take their turn in controlling the Will.

_Indecision_ and _feebleness_ of character result, when the Will
uniformly acts under the influence of the principle of _fear_ and
_caution_. To such a mind, in all important enterprises especially,
there is always "a lion in the way." Such a mind, therefore, is
continually in a state of distressing indecision when energetic action
is necessary to success.




