CHAPTER XI.

RELATION OF THE WILL TO THE INTELLIGENCE AND SENSIBILITY, IN ALL ACTS OR
STATES, MORALLY RIGHT OR WRONG.

THE Will, sustaining the relation it does to the Intelligence and
Sensibility, must yield itself to the control of one or the other of
these departments of our nature. In all acts and states morally right,
the Will is in harmony with the Intelligence, from respect to moral
obligation or duty; and all the desires and propensities, all the
impulses of the Sensibility, are held in strict subordination. In all
acts morally wrong, the Will is controlled by the Sensibility,
irrespective of the dictates of the Intelligence. Impulse, and not a
regard to the just, the right, the true and the good, is the law of its
action. In all such cases, as the impulses which control the Will are
various, the external forms through which the internal acts, or
intentions, will manifest themselves, will be equally diversified. Yet
the _spring_ of action is in all instances one and the same, impulse
instead of a regard to duty. Virtue does not consist in being controlled
by _amiable_, instead of _dissocial_ and _malign_ impulses, and in a
consequent exterior of a corresponding beauty and loveliness. It
consists in a voluntary harmony of intention with the just, the right,
the true and the good from a sacred respect to moral obligation, instead
of being controlled by mere impulse of any kind whatever. On the
principle above illustrated, I remark:

THOSE WHO ARE OR ARE NOT TRULY VIRTUOUS, HOW DISTINGUISHED.

1. That the real distinction between those who are truly virtuous, and
those who are not, now becomes apparent. It does not consist, in all
instances, in the mere exterior _form_ of action, but in the _spring_ or
_intention_ from which all such action proceeds. In most persons, and in
all, at different periods, the amiable and social propensities
predominate over the dissocial and malign. Hence much of the exterior
will be characterized by much that is truly beautiful and lovely. In
many, also, the impulsive power of conscience--that department of the
Sensibility which is correlated to the idea of right and wrong, and
impels to obedience to the Moral law--is strongly developed, and may
consequently take its turn in controlling the Will. In all such
instances, there will be the external forms of real virtue. It is one
thing, however, to put on the exterior of virtue from mere impulse, and
quite another, to do the same thing from an internal respect and sacred
regard for duty.

How many individuals, who may be now wearing the fairest forms of
virtue, will find within them, as soon as present impulses are
supplanted by the strong action of others, in opposition to rectitude,
no maxims of Will, in harmony with the law of goodness, to resist and
subject such impulses. Their conduct is in conformity to the
requirements of virtue, not from any internal intention to be in
universal harmony with moral obligation, but simply because, for the
time being, the strongest impulse happens to be in that direction. No
individual, it should ever be kept in mind, makes any approach to real
virtue, whatever impulses he may be controlled by, till, by a sealing
act of moral election, the Will is placed in harmony with the universal
law of duty, and all external action of a moral character proceeds from
this internal, all-controlling intention. Here we find the broad and
fundamental distinction between those who are truly virtuous, and those
who are not.

SELFISHNESS AND BENEVOLENCE.

2. We are also prepared to explain the real difference between
_Selfishness_ and _Benevolence_. The latter expresses and comprehends
all the forms of real virtue of every kind and degree. The former
comprehends and expresses the forms of vice or sin. Benevolence consists
in the full harmony of the Will or intention with the just, the right,
the true, and the good, from a regard to moral obligation. Selfishness
consists in voluntary subjection to _impulse_, irrespective of such
obligation. Whenever self-gratification is the law of action, there is
pure selfishness, whatever the character or direction of the impulse may
be. Selfishness has sometimes been very incorrectly defined, as a
supreme regard to our own interest or happiness. If this is a correct
definition, the drunkard is not selfish at all; for he sacrifices his
present and future happiness, to gratify a beastly appetite, and
destroys present peace in the act of self-gratification. If selfishness,
however, consists in mere subjection to impulse, how supreme his
selfishness at once appears! A mother who does not act from moral
obligation, when under the strong influence of maternal affection,
appears most distinguished in her assiduous care of her offspring. Now
let this affection be crossed by some plain question of duty, so that
she must violate the latter, or subject the former, and how soon will
selfishness manifest itself, in the triumph of impulse over duty! A gift
is not more effectual in blinding the eyes, than natural affection
uncontrolled by a regard to moral obligation. Men are just as selfish,
that is, as perfectly subject to the law of self-gratification, when
under the influence of the social and amiable propensities, as when
under that of the dissocial and malign, when, in both instances alike,
impulse is the law of action. Moral agents were made, and are required
to be, social and amiable, from higher principles than mere impulse.

COMMON MISTAKE.

3. I notice a mistake of fundamental importance into which many appear
to have fallen, in judging of the moral character of individuals. As we
have seen, when the Will is wholly controlled by the Sensibility
irrespective of moral obligation, the impulsive department of conscience
takes its turn, among the other propensities, in controlling the action
of the voluntary power. Now because, in all such instances, there are
the exterior forms of virtue, together with an apparently sincere
internal regard for the same, the presence of real virtue is
consequently inferred. Now before such a conclusion can be authorized,
one question needs to be determined, the _spring_ from which such
apparent virtues originate. They may arise from that regard to moral
obligation which constitutes real virtue. Or they may be the result
purely of excited Sensibility, which, in such instances happens to be in
the direction of the forms of virtue.

DEFECTIVE FORMS OF VIRTUE.

4. Another very frequent mistake bearing upon moral character deserves a
passing notice here. Men sometimes manifest, and doubtless with a
consciousness of inward sincerity, a very high regard for some one or
more particular principles of virtue, while they manifest an equal
disregard of all other principles. Every real reform, for example, has
its basis in some great principle of morality. Men often advocate, with
great zeal, such reforms, together with the principle on which they
rest. They talk of virtue, when called to defend that principle, of a
regard to moral obligation, together with the necessity of
self-sacrifice at the shrine of duty, as if respect for universal
rectitude commanded the entire powers of their being. Yet but a slight
observation will most clearly evince, that their regard for the right,
the true, and the good, is wholly circumscribed by this one principle.
Still, such persons are very likely to regard themselves as virtuous in
a very high degree. In reality, however, they have not made the first
approach to real virtue. Their respect for this one principle, together
with its specific applications, has its spring in some other department
of their nature, than a regard for what is right in itself. Otherwise
their respect for what is right, would be co-extensive with the entire
range of moral obligation.

SEC. II. TEST OF CONFORMITY TO MORAL PRINCIPLE.

In preceding chapters, the great truth has been fully established, that
the Moral law addresses its commands and prohibitions to the Will only,
and that moral obligation is predicable only of the action of the
voluntary power, other states being required, only as their existence
and character are conditioned on the right exercise of that power. From
this, it undeniably follows, that the Moral law, in all the length and
breadth of its requirements, finds its entire fulfilment within the
sphere of the Will. A question of great importance here presents itself:
By what test shall we determine whether the Will is, or is not, in full
harmony with the law? In the investigation of this question, we may
perhaps be thought to be intruding somewhat into the domain of Moral
Philosophy. Reasons of great importance, in the judgment of the writer,
however, demand its introduction here.

The Moral law is presented to us through two comprehensive precepts.
Yet, a moment's reflection will convince us that both these precepts
have their basis in one common principle, and are, in reality, the
enunciation of that one principle. The identical reason why we are bound
to love God with all the heart, requires us to love our neighbors as
ourselves. So the subject is presented by our Saviour himself. After
speaking of the first and great commandment, He adds, "the second is
like unto it," that is, it rests upon the same principle as the first.

Now the question is, What is this great principle, obedience to which
implies a full discharge of all obligation, actual and conceivable; the
principle which comprehends all other principles of the Moral law, and
of which each particular precept is only the enunciation of this one
common principle in its endlessly diversified applications? This
principle has been announced in forms somewhat different, by different
philosophers. I will present two or three of these forms. The first that
I notice is this.

_It shall be the serious intention of all moral agents to esteem and
treat all persons, interests, and objects according to their perceived
intrinsic and relative importance, and out of respect for their
intrinsic worth, or in obedience to the idea of duty, or moral
obligation._

Every one will readily apprehend, that the above is a correct
enunciation of the principle under consideration. It expresses the
fundamental reason why obedience to each and every moral principle is
binding upon us. The reason and only reason why we are bound to love God
with _all the heart_, is the intrinsic and relative importance of the
object presented to the mind in the contemplation of the Infinite and
Perfect. The reason why we are bound to love our neighbor as ourselves,
is the fact, that his rights and interests are apprehended, as of the
same value and sacredness as our own. In the intention under
consideration, all obligation, actual and conceivable, is really met.
God will occupy his appropriate place in the heart, and the creature
his. No real right or interest will be dis-esteemed, and each will
intentionally command that attention and regard which its intrinsic and
relative importance demands. Every moral agent is under obligation
infinite ever to be under the supreme control of such an intention, and
no such agent can be under obligation to be or to do anything more than
this.

The same principle has been announced in a form somewhat different by
Kant, to wit: "So act that thy maxim of Will (intention) might become
law in a system of universal moral obligation"--that is, let your
controlling intention be always such, that all Intelligents may properly
be required ever to be under the supreme control of the same intention.

By Cousin, the same principle is thus announced: "The moral principle
being universal, the sign, the external type by which a resolution may
be recognized as conformed to this principle, is the impossibility of
not erecting the immediate motive (intention) of the particular act or
resolution, into a maxim of universal legislation"--that is, we cannot
but affirm that every moral agent in existence is bound to act from the
same motive or intention.

It will readily be perceived, that each of these forms is really
identical with that above announced and illustrated. It is only when we
are conscious of the supreme control of the intention, to esteem and
treat all persons and interests according to their intrinsic and
relative importance, from respect to the idea of duty, that, in
conformity with the principle as announced by Kant, our maxim of Will
might become law in a system of universal legislation. When we are
conscious of the control of such an intention, it is impossible for us
not to affirm, according to the principle, as announced by Cousin, that
all Intelligents are bound always to be under the control of the same
intention. Two or three suggestions will close what I have to say on
this point.

COMMON MISTAKE.

1. We notice the fundamental mistake of many philosophers and divines in
treating of moral exercises, or states of mind. Such exercises are very
commonly represented as consisting wholly in excited states of the
Sensibility. Thus Dr. Brown represents all moral exercises and states as
consisting in emotions of a given character. One of the most
distinguished Professors of Theology in this country laid down this
proposition, as the basis of a course of lectures on Moral Philosophy,
that "everything right or wrong in a moral agent, consists exclusively
of right or wrong _feelings_"--feelings as distinguished from volitions
as phenomena of Will. Now precisely the reverse of the above proposition
is true, to wit: that _nothing_ right or wrong, in a moral agent,
consists in any states of the Sensibility irrespective of the action of
the Will. Who would dare to say, when he has particular emotions,
desires, or involuntary feelings, that the Moral law has no further
claim upon him, that all its demands are fully met in those feelings?
Who would dare to affirm, when he has any particular emotions, that all
moral agents in existence are bound to have those identical feelings? If
the demands of the Moral law are fully met in any states of the
Sensibility--which would be true, if everything right or wrong, in moral
agents, consists of right or wrong feelings--then all moral agents, at
all times, and under all circumstances, are bound to have these same
feelings. For what the law demands, at one time, it demands at all
times. All the foundations of moral obligation are swept away by the
theory under consideration.

LOVE AS REQUIRED BY THE MORAL LAW.

2. We are now prepared to state distinctly the _nature_ of that _love_
which is the "fulfilling of the law." It does not, as all admit, consist
in the mere external act. Nor does it consist, for reasons equally
obvious and universally admitted, in any mere _convictions_ of the
Intelligence. For reasons above assigned, it does not consist in any
states of the Sensibility. No man, when he is conscious of such
feelings, can affirm that all Intelligents are bound, under all
circumstances, to have the same feelings that he now has. This would be
true, if the love under consideration consists of such feelings. But
when, from, a regard to the idea of duty, the whole being is voluntarily
consecrated to the promotion, in the highest degree, of universal good
and when, in the pursuit of this end, there is a serious intention to
esteem and treat all beings and interests according to their intrinsic
and relative importance; _here_ is the love which is the fulfilling of
the law. Here is the intention by which all intelligents, in reference
to all interests and objects, are, at all times, bound to be controlled,
and which must be imposed, as universal law, upon such Intelligents in
every system of righteous moral legislation. Here is the intention, in
the exercise of which all obligation is fully met. Here, consequently,
is that love which is the fulfilling of the law. In a subsequent
Chapter, my design is to show that this is the view of the subject
presented in the Scriptures of truth. I now present it merely as a
necessary truth of the universal Intelligence.

IDENTITY OF CHARACTER AMONG ALL BEINGS MORALLY VIRTUOUS.

3. We now perceive clearly in what consists the real identity of moral
character, in all Intelligents of true moral rectitude. Their
occupations, forms of external deportment, and their internal
convictions and feelings, may be endlessly diversified. Yet one
omnipresent, all-controlling intention, an intention which is ever one
and identical, directs all their moral movements. It is the intention,
in the promotion of the highest good of universal being, to esteem and
treat all persons and interests according to their intrinsic and
relative importance, from regard to moral obligation. Thus moral virtue,
in all Intelligents possessed of it, is perfectly one and identical. In
this sense only are all moral agents capable of perfect identity of
character. They cannot all have, at all times, or perhaps at any time,
precisely the same thoughts and feelings. But they can all have, at all
times, one and the same intention. The omnipresent influence and control
of the intention above illustrated, constitutes a perfect identity of
character in God and all beings morally pure in existence. For this
reason, the supreme control of this intention implies, in all moral
agents alike, a perfect fulfilment of the law, a full discharge of all
obligation of every kind.




