BOOK IV

_The Decade of K‘e-foo_


ON THE COMPLETION OF A ROYAL PALACE

    On yonder banks a palace, lo! upshoots,
      The tender blue of southern hill behind;
    Firm-founded, like the bamboo's clamping roots;
      Its roof made pine-like, to a point defined.
    Fraternal love here bears its precious fruits,
      And unfraternal schemes be ne'er designed!

    Ancestral sway is his. The walls they rear,
      Five thousand cubits long; and south and west
    The doors are placed. Here will the king appear,
      Here laugh, here talk, here sit him down and rest.

    To mould the walls, the frames they firmly tie;
      The toiling builders beat the earth and lime.
    The walls shall vermin, storm, and bird defy;--
      Fit dwelling is it for his lordly prime.

    Grand is the hall the noble lord ascends;--
      In height, like human form most reverent, grand;
    And straight, as flies the shaft when bow unbends;
      Its tints, like hues when pheasant's wings expand.

    High pillars rise the level court around;
      The pleasant light the open chamber steeps;
    And deep recesses, wide alcoves, are found,
      Where our good king in perfect quiet sleeps.

    Laid is the bamboo mat on rush mat square;--
      Here shall he sleep, and, waking, say, "Divine
    What dreams are good? For bear and grizzly bear,
      And snakes and cobras, haunt this couch of mine."

    Then shall the chief diviner glad reply,
      "The bears foreshow that Heaven will send you sons.
    The snakes and cobras daughters prophesy.
      These auguries are all auspicious ones.

    "Sons shall be his--on couches lulled to rest.
      The little ones, enrobed, with sceptres play;
    Their infant cries are loud as stern behest;
      Their knees the vermeil covers shall display.
    As king hereafter one shall be addressed;
      The rest, our princes, all the States shall sway.

    "And daughters also to him shall be born.
      They shall be placed upon the ground to sleep;
    Their playthings tiles, their dress the simplest worn;
      Their part alike from good and ill to keep,
    And ne'er their parents' hearts to cause to mourn;
      To cook the food, and spirit-malt to steep."


THE CONDITION OF KING SEUEN'S FLOCKS

    Who dares to say your sheep are few?
      The flocks are all three hundred strong.
    Who dares despise your cattle too?
      There ninety, black-lipped, press along.
    Though horned the sheep, yet peaceful each appears;
    The cattle come with moist and flapping ears.

    These climb the heights, those drink the pool;
      Some lie at rest, while others roam.
    With rain-coats, and thin splint hats cool,
      And bearing food, your herdsmen come.
    In thirties, ranged by hues, the creatures stand;
    Fit victims they will yield at your command.

    Your herdsmen twigs and fagots bring,
      With prey of birds and beasts for food.
    Your sheep, untouched by evil thing,
      Approach, their health and vigor good.
    The herdsman's waving hand they all behold,
    And docile come, and pass into the fold.

    Your herdsmen dream;--fish take the place
      Of men; on banners falcons fly,
    Displacing snakes and tortoises.
      The augur tells his prophecy:--
    "The first betoken plenteous years; the change
    Of banners shows of homes a widening range."




BOOK V

_The Decade of Seaou Min_


A EUNUCH COMPLAINS OF HIS FATE

    A few fine lines, at random drawn,
    Like the shell-pattern wrought in lawn
      To hasty glance will seem.
    My trivial faults base slander's slime
    Distorted into foulest crime,
      And men me worthless deem.

    A few small points, pricked down on wood,
    May be made out a picture good
      Of the bright Southern Sieve.
    Who planned, and helped those slanderers vile,
    My name with base lies to defile?
      Unpitied, here I grieve.

    With babbling tongues you go about,
    And only scheme how to make out
      The lies you scatter round.
    Here me--Be careful what you say;
    People ere long your words will weigh,
      And liars you'll be found.

    Clever you are with changeful schemes!
    How else could all your evil dreams
      And slanders work their way?
    Men now believe you; by and by,
    The truth found out, each vicious lie
      Will ill for ill repay.

    The proud rejoice; the sufferer weeps.
    O azure Heaven, from out thy deeps
      Why look in silence down?
    Behold those proud men and rebuke;
    With pity on the sufferers look,
      And on the evil frown.

    Those slanderers I would gladly take,
    With all who help their schemes to make,
      And to the tigers throw.
    If wolves and tigers such should spare,
    I'd hurl them 'midst the freezing air,
      Where the keen north winds blow.
    And should the North compassion feel
    I'd fling them to great Heaven, to deal
      On them its direst woe.

    As on the sacred heights you dwell,
    My place is in the willow dell,
      One is the other near.
    Before you, officers, I spread
    These lines by me, poor eunuch, made.
      Think not Mang-tsze severe.


AN OFFICER DEPLORES THE MISERY OF THE TIME

    In the fourth month summer shines;
    In the sixth the heat declines.
    Nature thus grants men relief;
    Tyranny gives only grief.
    Were not my forefathers men?
    Can my suffering 'scape their ken?

    In the cold of autumn days
    Each plant shrivels and decays.
    Nature then is hard and stern;
    Living things sad lessons learn.
    Friends dispersed, all order gone,
    Place of refuge have I none.

    Winter days are wild and fierce;
    Rapid gusts each crevice pierce.
    Such is my unhappy lot,
    Unbefriended and forgot!
    Others all can happy be;
    I from misery ne'er am free.

    On the mountains are fine trees;
    Chestnuts, plum-trees, there one sees.
    All the year their forms they show;
    Stately more and more they grow.
    Noble turned to ravening thief!
    What the cause? This stirs my grief.

    Waters from that spring appear
    Sometimes foul, and sometimes clear,
    Changing oft as falls the rain,
    Or the sky grows bright again.
    New misfortunes every day
    Still befall me, misery's prey.

    Aid from mighty streams obtained,
    Southern States are shaped and drained.
    Thus the Keang and Han are thanked,
    And as benefactors ranked.
    Weary toil my vigor drains;
    All unnoticed it remains!

    Hawks and eagles mount the sky;
    Sturgeons in deep waters lie.
    Out of reach, they safely get,
    Arrow fear not, nor the net.
    Hiding-place for me there's none;
    Here I stay, and make my moan.

    Ferns upon the hills abound;
    _Ke_ and _e_ in marshy ground.
    Each can boast its proper place,
    Where it grows for use or grace.
    I can only sing the woe,
    Which, ill-starred, I undergo.


ON THE ALIENATION OF A FRIEND

    Gently and soft the east wind blows,
      And then there falls the pelting rain.
    When anxious fears pressed round you close,
      Then linked together were we twain.
    Now happy, and your mind at rest,
    You turn and cast me from your breast.

    Gently and soft the east wind blows,
      And then there comes the whirlwind wild.
    When anxious fears pressed round you close,
      Your bosom held me as a child.
    Now happy, and in peaceful state,
    You throw me off and quite forget.

    Gently and soft the east wind blows,
      Then round the rocky height it storms.
    Each plant its leaves all dying shows;
      The trees display their withered forms.
    My virtues great forgotten all,
    You keep in mind my faults, though small.




