BOOK I

_Decade of Luh Ming_


A FESTAL ODE

    With sounds of happiness the deer
      Browse on the celery of the meads.
    A nobler feast is furnished here,
      With guests renowned for noble deeds.
    The lutes are struck; the organ blows,
      Till all its tongues in movement heave.
    Each basket loaded stands, and shows
      The precious gifts the guests receive.
    They love me and my mind will teach,
    How duty's highest aim to reach.

    With sounds of happiness the deer
      The southern-wood crop in the meads,
    What noble guests surround me here,
      Distinguished for their worthy deeds!
    From them my people learn to fly
      Whate'er is mean; to chiefs they give
    A model and a pattern high;--
      They show the life they ought to live.
    Then fill their cups with spirits rare,
    Till each the banquet's joy shall share.

    With sounds of happiness the deer
      The salsola crop in the fields.
    What noble guests surround me here!
      Each lute for them its music yields.
    Sound, sound the lutes, or great or small,
      The joy harmonious to prolong;--
    And with my spirits rich crown all
      The cups to cheer the festive throng.
    Let each retire with gladdened heart,
    In his own sphere to play his part.


A FESTAL ODE COMPLIMENTING AN OFFICER

    On dashed my four steeds, without halt, without stay,
    Though toilsome and winding from Chow was the way.
    I wished to return--but the monarch's command
    Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;
        And my heart was with sadness oppressed.

    On dashed my four steeds; I ne'er slackened the reins.
    They snorted and panted--all white, with black manes.
    I wished to return, but our sovereign's command
    Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;--
        And I dared not to pause or to rest.

    Unresting the Filial doves speed in their flight,
    Ascending, then sweeping swift down from the height,
    Now grouped on the oaks. The king's high command
    Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;--
        And my father I left, sore distressed.

    Unresting the Filial doves speed in their flight,
    Now fanning the air and anon they alight
    On the medlars thick grouped. But our monarch's command
    Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;--
        Of my mother I thought with sad breast.

    My four steeds I harnessed, all white and black-maned,
    Which straight on their way, fleet and emulous strained.
    I wished to return; and now venture in song
    The wish to express, and announce how I long
        For my mother my care to attest.

     [NOTE.--Both Maou and Choo agree that this ode was composed in
     honor of the officer who narrates the story in it, although they
     say it was not written by the officer himself, but was put into
     his mouth, as it were, to express the sympathy of his entertainer
     with him, and the appreciation of his devotion to duty.]


THE VALUE OF FRIENDSHIP

    The woodmen's blows responsive ring,
      As on the trees they fall;
    And when the birds their sweet notes sing,
      They to each other call.
    From the dark valley comes a bird,
      And seeks the lofty tree.
    _Ying_ goes its voice, and thus it cries,
      "Companion, come to me."
    The bird, although a creature small,
      Upon its mate depends;
    And shall we men, who rank o'er all,
      Not seek to have our friends?
    All spirits love the friendly man,
      And hearken to his prayer.
    What harmony and peace they can
      Bestow, his lot shall share.

    _Hoo-hoo_ the woodmen all unite
      To shout, as trees they fell.
    They do their work with all their might;--
      What I have done I'll tell.
    I've strained and made my spirits clear,
      The fatted lambs I've killed.
    With friends who my own surname bear,
      My hall I've largely filled.
    Some may be absent, casually,
      And leave a broken line;
    But better this than absence by
      An oversight of mine.
    My court I've sprinkled and swept clean,
      Viands in order set,
    Eight dishes loaded stand with grain;
      There's store of fatted meat.
    My mother's kith and kin I'm sure
      I've widely called by name.
    That some be hindered better is
      Than I give cause for blame.

    On the hill-side the trees they fell,
      All working with good-will.
    I labor too, with equal zeal,
      And the host's part fulfil.
    Spirits I've set in order meet,
      The dishes stand in rows.
    The guests are here; no vacant seat
      A brother absent shows.
    The loss of kindly feeling oft
      From slightest things shall grow,
    Where all the fare is dry and spare,
      Resentments fierce may glow.
    My store of spirits is well strained,
      If short prove the supply,
    My messengers I straightway send,
      And what is needed buy.
    I beat the drums, and in the dance
      Lead joyously the train.
    Oh! good it is, when falls the chance
      The sparkling cup to drain.


THE RESPONSE TO A FESTAL ODE

    Heaven shields and sets thee fast.
    It round thee fair has cast
      Thy virtue pure.
    Thus richest joy is thine;--
    Increase of corn and wine,
    And every gift divine,
      Abundant, sure.

    Heaven shields and sets thee fast.
    From it thou goodness hast;
      Right are thy ways.
    Its choicest gifts 'twill pour,
    That last for evermore,
    Nor time exhaust the store
      Through endless days.

    Heaven shields and sets thee fast,
    Makes thine endeavor last
      And prosper well.
    Like hills and mountains high,
    Whose masses touch the sky;
    Like streams aye surging by;
      Thine increase swell!

    With rite and auspice fair,
    Thine offerings thou dost bear,
      And son-like give,
    The season's round from spring,
    To olden duke and king,
    Whose words to thee we bring:--
      "Forever live."

    The spirits of thy dead
    Pour blessings on thy head,
      Unnumbered sweet.
    Thy subjects, simple, good,
    Enjoy their drink and food.
    Our tribes of every blood
      Follow thy feet.

    Like moons that wax in light;
    Or suns that scale the height;
      Or ageless hill;
    Nor change, nor autumn know;
    As pine and cypress grow;
    The sons that from thee flow
      Be lasting still!


AN ODE OF CONGRATULATION

    The russet pear-tree stands there all alone;
    How bright the growth of fruit upon it shown!
    The King's affairs no stinting hands require,
    And days prolonged still mock our fond desire.
    But time has brought the tenth month of the year;
    My woman's heart is torn with wound severe.
    Surely my warrior lord might now appear!

    The russet pear-tree stands there all alone;
    How dense the leafy shade all o'er it thrown!
    The King's affairs require no slackening hand,
    And our sad hearts their feelings can't command.
    The plants and trees in beauty shine; 'tis spring.
    From off my heart its gloom I fain would fling.
    This season well my warrior home may bring!

    I climbed that northern hill, and medlars sought;
    The spring nigh o'er, to ripeness they were brought.
    "The King's affairs cannot be slackly done";--
    'Tis thus our parents mourn their absent son.
    But now his sandal car must broken be;
    I seem his powerful steeds worn out to see.
    Relief has gone! He can't be far from me!

    Alas! they can't have marched; they don't arrive!
    More hard it grows with my distress to strive.
    The time is passed, and still he is not here!
    My sorrows multiply; great is my fear.
    But lo! by reeds and shell I have divined,
    That he is near, they both assure my mind;--
    Soon at my side my warrior I shall find!


AN ODE ON THE RETURN OF THE TROOPS

    Forth from the city in our cars we drove,
      Until we halted at the pasture ground.
    The general came, and there with ardor strove
      A note of zeal throughout the host to sound.
      "Direct from court I come, by orders bound
    The march to hasten";--it was thus he spake.
      Then with the carriage-officers around,
    He strictly charged them quick despatch to make:--
    "Urgent the King's affairs, forthwith the field we take."

    While there we stopped, the second corps appeared,
      And 'twixt us and the city took its place.
    The guiding standard was on high upreared,
      Where twining snakes the tortoises embrace,
      While oxtails, crest-like, did the staff's top grace.
    We watched the sheet unfolding grandly wave;
      Each flag around showed falcons on its face.
    With anxious care looked on our leader brave;
    Watchful the carriage-officers appeared and grave.

    Nan Chung, our chief, had heard the royal call
      To go where inroad by Heen-yuns was made,
    And 'cross the frontier build a barrier wall.
      Numerous his chariots, splendidly arrayed!
      The standards--this where dragons were displayed,
    And that where snakes round tortoises were coiled--
      Terrific flew. "Northward our host," he said,
    "Heaven's son sends forth to tame the Heen-yun wild."
    Soon by this awful chief would all their tribes be foiled.

    When first we took the field, and northward went,
      The millet was in flower;--a prospect sweet.
    Now when our weary steps are homeward bent,
      The snow falls fast, the mire impedes our feet.
      Many the hardships we were called to meet,
    Ere the King's orders we had all fulfilled.
      No rest we had; often our friends to greet
    The longing came; but vain regrets we stilled;
    By tablets stern our hearts with fresh resolve were thrilled.

    "Incessant chirp the insects in the grass;
      All round about the nimble hoppers spring.
    From them our thoughts quick to our husbands pass,
      Although those thoughts our hearts with anguish wring.
      Oh! could we see them, what relief 'twould bring!
    Our hearts, rejoiced, at once would feel at rest."
      Thus did our wives, their case deploring, sing;
    The while our leader farther on had pressed,
    And smitten with his power the wild Jung of the west.

    The spring days now are lengthening out their light;
      The plants and trees are dressed in living green;
    The orioles resting sing, or wing their flight;
      Our wives amid the southern-wood are seen,
      Which white they bring, to feed their silkworms keen.
    Our host, returned, sweeps onwards to the hall,
      Where chiefs are questioned, shown the captives mean
    Nan Chung, majestic, draws the gaze of all,
    Proud o'er the barbarous foe his victories to recall.




