BOOK VII

_The Odes of Ch‘ing_


THE PEOPLE'S ADMIRATION FOR DUKE WOO

    The black robes well your form befit;
      When they are worn we'll make you new.
    Now for your court! oh! there we'll sit,
      And watch how you your duties do.
        And when we to our homes repair,
        We'll send to you our richest fare,
        Such is the love to you we bear!

    Those robes well with your virtue match;
      When they are worn we'll make you new.
    Now for your court! There will we watch,
      Well pleased, how you your duties do.
        And when we to our homes repair,
        We'll send to you our richest fare,
        Such is the love to you we bear!

    Those robes your character beseem;
      When they are worn we'll make you new.
    Now for your court! oh! there we deem
      It pleasure great your form to view.
        And when we to our homes repair,
        We'll send to you our richest fare,
        Such is the love to you we bear!


A WIFE CONSOLED BY HER HUSBAND'S ARRIVAL

    Cold is the wind, fast falls the rain,
      The cock aye shrilly crows.
    But I have seen my lord again;--
      Now must my heart repose.

    Whistles the wind, patters the rain,
      The cock's crow far resounds.
    But I have seen my lord again,
      And healed are my heart's wounds.

    All's dark amid the wind and rain,
      Ceaseless the cock's clear voice!
    But I have seen my lord again;--
      Should not my heart rejoice?


IN PRAISE OF SOME LADY

    There by his side in chariot rideth she,
    As lovely flower of the hibiscus tree,
    So fair her face; and when about they wheel,
    Her girdle gems of _Ken_ themselves reveal.
    For beauty all the House of Këang have fame;
    Its eldest daughter--she beseems her name.

    There on the path, close by him, walketh she,
    Bright as the blossom of hibiscus tree,
    And fair her face; and when around they flit,
    Her girdle gems a tinkling sound emit.
    Among the Këang she has distinguished place,
    For virtuous fame renowned, and peerless grace.


A MAN'S PRAISE OF HIS WIFE

    My path forth from the east gate lay,
    Where cloud-like moved the girls at play.
    Numerous are they, as clouds so bright,
    But not on them my heart's thoughts light.
    Dressed in a thin white silk, with coiffure gray,
    Is she, my wife, my joy in life's low way.

    Forth by the covering wall's high tower,
    I went, and saw, like rush in flower,
    Each flaunting girl. Brilliant are they,
    But not with them my heart's thoughts stay.
    In thin white silk, with head-dress madder-dyed,
    Is she, my sole delight, 'foretime my bride.


AN ENTREATY

    Along the great highway,
      I hold you by the cuff.
    O spurn me not, I pray,
      Nor break old friendship off.

    Along the highway worn,
      I hold your hand in mine.
    Do not as vile me scorn;
      Your love I can't resign.


A WOMAN SCORNING HER LOVER

    O dear! that artful boy
      Refuses me a word!
    But, Sir, I shall enjoy
      My food, though you're absurd!

    O dear! that artful boy
      My table will not share!
    But, Sir, I shall enjoy
      My rest, though you're not there!


A LADY MOURNS THE ABSENCE OF HER STUDENT LOVER

    You student, with the collar blue,
      Long pines my heart with anxious pain.
    Although I do not go to you,
      Why from all word do you refrain?

    O you, with girdle strings of blue,
      My thoughts to you forever roam!
    Although I do not go to you,
      Yet why to me should you not come?

    How reckless you, how light and wild,
      There by the tower upon the wall!
    One day, from sight of you exiled,
      As long as three long months I call.




