The Project Gutenberg eBook of Modern Atheism under its forms of Pantheism, Materialism, Secularism, Development, and Natural Laws
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Modern Atheism under its forms of Pantheism, Materialism, Secularism, Development, and Natural Laws

Author: James Buchanan


        
Release date: December 31, 2006 [eBook #20233]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20233

Credits: Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Karina Aleksandrova
        and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
        public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital
        Libraries.)






Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Karina Aleksandrova
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital
Libraries.)





Transcriber's Notes:

 1. Several misprints (including Greek) were corrected. A full list
    of corrections can be found at the end of the text.
    Misspelling and inconsistencies in the French quotations, unless
    otherwise noted, have been preserved.

 2. Footnotes have been renumbered and moved to the end of chapters.

 3. Footnote 138 had no footnote marker within the text; the reference
    was added in a possible place.

 4. Symbol of a hand pointing right has been replaced with a right
    arrow: ==>.




                 MODERN ATHEISM

               UNDER ITS FORMS OF

         PANTHEISM, MATERIALISM, SECULARISM,
            DEVELOPMENT, AND NATURAL LAWS.


                        BY

            JAMES BUCHANAN, D. D., LL. D.,

DIVINITY PROFESSOR IN "THE NEW COLLEGE," EDINBURGH, AND AUTHOR
      OF "THE OFFICE AND WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT," ETC.



                      BOSTON:
                _GOULD AND LINCOLN_,
                59 WASHINGTON STREET.
         NEW YORK: SHELDON, BLAKEMAN & CO.,
          CINCINNATI: GEORGE S. BLANCHARD.
                        1857.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856, by

                   _GOULD AND LINCOLN_,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.

                 Electro-Stereotyped by
                _G. J. STILES & COMPANY_,
               23 Congress Street, Boston.




PREFATORY NOTE.


The contents of this volume originally constituted about one half of a
work, entitled "Faith in God and Modern Atheism compared, in their
Essential Nature, Theoretic Grounds, and Practical Influence."
Simultaneously with the first issue of that work in Scotland, the five
principal chapters in this volume were published separately, accompanied
with the announcement that _each was complete in itself_. The hint thus
given by the author, has been acted upon by the present publishers. On
examining the whole work, it was found to be divided into four Sections.
Of these, the third was devoted exclusively to "_Modern Atheism_." It
embraced the five chapters already alluded to, together with a general
introduction and four shorter chapters. It appeared, in fact, to be a
complete treatise by itself; and it is now presented to the American
public in the conviction that such a work is peculiarly demanded by the
present state of religious opinion in this country.

The author is one of the most distinguished divines of the Free Church
of Scotland. In 1845, he was appointed Professor of Apologetic Theology
in the New College, Edinburgh; and, on the death of Dr. Chalmers, in
1847, he was translated to the Chair of Systematic Theology thus made
vacant. In the former position, it became his duty to prepare a complete
course of Lectures on Natural Religion. His work on "Faith in God," &c.,
contains, in an altered form, adapted to general readers, the substance
of those Lectures.

Respecting this work, the British press generally has spoken in the
highest terms. The distinguished geologist, Hugh Miller, says, in the
_Edinburgh Witness_: "It is one of, at once, the most readable and
solid which we have ever perused;" and the _News of the Churches_, the
organ of the Free Church, describes it as "a work of which nothing less
can be said than that, both in spirit and substance, style and argument,
it fixes irreversibly the name of its author as a leading classic in the
Christian literature of Britain." An American critic says: "His succinct
analysis of the doctrines held by the various schools of modern atheism
are admirable, and his criticisms on their doctrines original and
profound; while his arguments in defence of the Christian faith against
philosophical objectors are unsurpassed by those of any modern writer.
Clear, vigorous, logical, learned, and strong as a Titan, he fairly
vanquishes all antagonists by pure mental superiority; never
understating their views or evading their arguments, but meeting them in
all their force and _crushing_ them." Another critic says: "It is a
great argument for Theism and against Atheism, magnificent in its
strength, order, and beauty.... The style is lucid, grave, harmonious,
and every way commensurate with the dignity and importance of the
subject.... The chapter on Pantheism is admirable. Regarding it as 'the
most formidable rival of Christian Theism at the present day,' Dr.
Buchanan seems to have specially addressed himself to the task of
exposing and refuting this error. His statement of Spinoza's system is
beautifully clear."

The reader will find that there is no exaggeration in these encomiums.
Hugh Miller, always felicitous in his choice of words, has exactly
described the two leading characteristics of "Modern Atheism," by the
phrase "readable and solid." Every one who begins the book will find
himself drawn strongly onward to the end; and no one can rise from its
perusal without a conviction that it contains a weight of argument
against _all_ the forms of Atheism such as never before has been
combined in one book.

Should the reception of this volume by the public furnish sufficient
encouragement, it is the intention of the publishers to issue the
remainder of the work ("Faith in God," &c.), in uniform style.

     BOSTON, _December_, 1856.




CONTENTS.


                                                        PAGE

INTRODUCTION,                                              9


CHAPTER I.
MODERN ATHEISM,                                           15


