CHAPTER II


I had been having considerable trouble with my wings.  The day after I
helped the choir I made a dash or two with them, but was not lucky.
First off, I flew thirty yards, and then fouled an Irishman and brought
him down—brought us both down, in fact.  Next, I had a collision with a
Bishop—and bowled him down, of course.  We had some sharp words, and I
felt pretty cheap, to come banging into a grave old person like that,
with a million strangers looking on and smiling to themselves.

I saw I hadn’t got the hang of the steering, and so couldn’t rightly tell
where I was going to bring up when I started.  I went afoot the rest of
the day, and let my wings hang.  Early next morning I went to a private
place to have some practice.  I got up on a pretty high rock, and got a
good start, and went swooping down, aiming for a bush a little over three
hundred yards off; but I couldn’t seem to calculate for the wind, which
was about two points abaft my beam.  I could see I was going considerable
to looard of the bush, so I worked my starboard wing slow and went ahead
strong on the port one, but it wouldn’t answer; I could see I was going
to broach to, so I slowed down on both, and lit.  I went back to the rock
and took another chance at it.  I aimed two or three points to starboard
of the bush—yes, more than that—enough so as to make it nearly a
head-wind.  I done well enough, but made pretty poor time.  I could see,
plain enough, that on a head-wind, wings was a mistake.  I could see that
a body could sail pretty close to the wind, but he couldn’t go in the
wind’s eye.  I could see that if I wanted to go a-visiting any distance
from home, and the wind was ahead, I might have to wait days, maybe, for
a change; and I could see, too, that these things could not be any use at
all in a gale; if you tried to run before the wind, you would make a mess
of it, for there isn’t anyway to shorten sail—like reefing, you know—you
have to take it _all_ in—shut your feathers down flat to your sides.
That would _land_ you, of course.  You could lay to, with your head to
the wind—that is the best you could do, and right hard work you’d find
it, too.  If you tried any other game, you would founder, sure.

I judge it was about a couple of weeks or so after this that I dropped
old Sandy McWilliams a note one day—it was a Tuesday—and asked him to
come over and take his manna and quails with me next day; and the first
thing he did when he stepped in was to twinkle his eye in a sly way, and
say,—

“Well, Cap, what you done with your wings?”

I saw in a minute that there was some sarcasm done up in that rag
somewheres, but I never let on.  I only says,—

“Gone to the wash.”

“Yes,” he says, in a dry sort of way, “they mostly go to the wash—about
this time—I’ve often noticed it.  Fresh angels are powerful neat.  When
do you look for ’em back?”

“Day after to-morrow,” says I.

He winked at me, and smiled.

Says I,—

“Sandy, out with it.  Come—no secrets among friends.  I notice you don’t
ever wear wings—and plenty others don’t.  I’ve been making an ass of
myself—is that it?”

“That is about the size of it.  But it is no harm.  We all do it at
first.  It’s perfectly natural.  You see, on earth we jump to such
foolish conclusions as to things up here.  In the pictures we always saw
the angels with wings on—and that was all right; but we jumped to the
conclusion that that was their way of getting around—and that was all
wrong.  The wings ain’t anything but a uniform, that’s all.  When they
are in the field—so to speak,—they always wear them; you never see an
angel going with a message anywhere without his wings, any more than you
would see a military officer presiding at a court-martial without his
uniform, or a postman delivering letters, or a policeman walking his
beat, in plain clothes.  But they ain’t to _fly_ with!  The wings are for
show, not for use.  Old experienced angels are like officers of the
regular army—they dress plain, when they are off duty.  New angels are
like the militia—never shed the uniform—always fluttering and floundering
around in their wings, butting people down, flapping here, and there, and
everywhere, always imagining they are attracting the admiring eye—well,
they just think they are the very most important people in heaven.  And
when you see one of them come sailing around with one wing tipped up and
t’other down, you make up your mind he is saying to himself: ‘I wish Mary
Ann in Arkansaw could see me now.  I reckon she’d wish she hadn’t shook
me.’  No, they’re just for show, that’s all—only just for show.”

“I judge you’ve got it about right, Sandy,” says I.

“Why, look at it yourself,” says he.  “_You_ ain’t built for wings—no man
is.  You know what a grist of years it took you to come here from the
earth—and yet you were booming along faster than any cannon-ball could
go.  Suppose you had to fly that distance with your wings—wouldn’t
eternity have been over before you got here?  Certainly.  Well, angels
have to go to the earth every day—millions of them—to appear in visions
to dying children and good people, you know—it’s the heft of their
business.  They appear with their wings, of course, because they are on
official service, and because the dying persons wouldn’t know they were
angels if they hadn’t wings—but do you reckon they fly with them?  It
stands to reason they don’t.  The wings would wear out before they got
half-way; even the pin-feathers would be gone; the wing frames would be
as bare as kite sticks before the paper is pasted on.  The distances in
heaven are billions of times greater; angels have to go all over heaven
every day; could they do it with their wings alone?  No, indeed; they
wear the wings for style, but they travel any distance in an instant by
_wishing_.  The wishing-carpet of the Arabian Nights was a sensible
idea—but our earthly idea of angels flying these awful distances with
their clumsy wings was foolish.

“Our young saints, of both sexes, wear wings all the time—blazing red
ones, and blue and green, and gold, and variegated, and rainbowed, and
ring-streaked-and-striped ones—and nobody finds fault.  It is suitable to
their time of life.  The things are beautiful, and they set the young
people off.  They are the most striking and lovely part of their outfit—a
halo don’t _begin_.”

“Well,” says I, “I’ve tucked mine away in the cupboard, and I allow to
let them lay there till there’s mud.”

“Yes—or a reception.”

“What’s that?”

“Well, you can see one to-night if you want to.  There’s a barkeeper from
Jersey City going to be received.”

“Go on—tell me about it.”

“This barkeeper got converted at a Moody and Sankey meeting, in New York,
and started home on the ferry-boat, and there was a collision and he got
drowned.  He is of a class that think all heaven goes wild with joy when
a particularly hard lot like him is saved; they think all heaven turns
out hosannahing to welcome them; they think there isn’t anything talked
about in the realms of the blest but their case, for that day.  This
barkeeper thinks there hasn’t been such another stir here in years, as
his coming is going to raise.—And I’ve always noticed this peculiarity
about a dead barkeeper—he not only expects all hands to turn out when he
arrives, but he expects to be received with a torchlight procession.”

“I reckon he is disappointed, then.”

“No, he isn’t.  No man is allowed to be disappointed here.  Whatever he
wants, when he comes—that is, any reasonable and unsacrilegious thing—he
can have.  There’s always a few millions or billions of young folks
around who don’t want any better entertainment than to fill up their
lungs and swarm out with their torches and have a high time over a
barkeeper.  It tickles the barkeeper till he can’t rest, it makes a
charming lark for the young folks, it don’t do anybody any harm, it don’t
cost a rap, and it keeps up the place’s reputation for making all comers
happy and content.”

“Very good.  I’ll be on hand and see them land the barkeeper.”

“It is manners to go in full dress.  You want to wear your wings, you
know, and your other things.”

“Which ones?”

“Halo, and harp, and palm branch, and all that.”

“Well,” says I, “I reckon I ought to be ashamed of myself, but the fact
is I left them laying around that day I resigned from the choir.  I
haven’t got a rag to wear but this robe and the wings.”

“That’s all right.  You’ll find they’ve been raked up and saved for you.
Send for them.”

“I’ll do it, Sandy.  But what was it you was saying about unsacrilegious
things, which people expect to get, and will be disappointed about?”

“Oh, there are a lot of such things that people expect and don’t get.
For instance, there’s a Brooklyn preacher by the name of Talmage, who is
laying up a considerable disappointment for himself.  He says, every now
and then in his sermons, that the first thing he does when he gets to
heaven, will be to fling his arms around Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
kiss them and weep on them.  There’s millions of people down there on
earth that are promising themselves the same thing.  As many as sixty
thousand people arrive here every single day, that want to run straight
to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and hug them and weep on them.  Now mind
you, sixty thousand a day is a pretty heavy contract for those old
people.  If they were a mind to allow it, they wouldn’t ever have
anything to do, year in and year out, but stand up and be hugged and wept
on thirty-two hours in the twenty-four.  They would be tired out and as
wet as muskrats all the time.  What would heaven be, to _them_?  It would
be a mighty good place to get out of—you know that, yourself.  Those are
kind and gentle old Jews, but they ain’t any fonder of kissing the
emotional highlights of Brooklyn than you be.  You mark my words, Mr.
T.’s endearments are going to be declined, with thanks.  There are limits
to the privileges of the elect, even in heaven.  Why, if Adam was to show
himself to every new comer that wants to call and gaze at him and strike
him for his autograph, he would never have time to do anything else but
just that.  Talmage has said he is going to give Adam some of his
attentions, as well as A., I. and J.  But he will have to change his mind
about that.”

“Do you think Talmage will really come here?”

“Why, certainly, he will; but don’t you be alarmed; he will run with his
own kind, and there’s plenty of them.  That is the main charm of
heaven—there’s all kinds here—which wouldn’t be the case if you let the
preachers tell it.  Anybody can find the sort he prefers, here, and he
just lets the others alone, and they let him alone.  When the Deity
builds a heaven, it is built right, and on a liberal plan.”

Sandy sent home for his things, and I sent for mine, and about nine in
the evening we begun to dress.  Sandy says,—

“This is going to be a grand time for you, Stormy.  Like as not some of
the patriarchs will turn out.”

“No, but will they?”

“Like as not.  Of course they are pretty exclusive.  They hardly ever
show themselves to the common public.  I believe they never turn out
except for an eleventh-hour convert.  They wouldn’t do it then, only
earthly tradition makes a grand show pretty necessary on that kind of an
occasion.”

“Do they an turn out, Sandy?”

“Who?—all the patriarchs?  Oh, no—hardly ever more than a couple.  You
will be here fifty thousand years—maybe more—before you get a glimpse of
all the patriarchs and prophets.  Since I have been here, Job has been to
the front once, and once Ham and Jeremiah both at the same time.  But the
finest thing that has happened in my day was a year or so ago; that was
Charles Peace’s reception—him they called ‘the Bannercross Murderer’—an
Englishman.  There were four patriarchs and two prophets on the Grand
Stand that time—there hasn’t been anything like it since Captain Kidd
came; Abel was there—the first time in twelve hundred years.  A report
got around that Adam was coming; well, of course, Abel was enough to
bring a crowd, all by himself, but there is nobody that can draw like
Adam.  It was a false report, but it got around, anyway, as I say, and it
will be a long day before I see the like of it again.  The reception was
in the English department, of course, which is eight hundred and eleven
million miles from the New Jersey line.  I went, along with a good many
of my neighbors, and it was a sight to see, I can tell you.  Flocks came
from all the departments.  I saw Esquimaux there, and Tartars, Negroes,
Chinamen—people from everywhere.  You see a mixture like that in the
Grand Choir, the first day you land here, but you hardly ever see it
again.  There were billions of people; when they were singing or
hosannahing, the noise was wonderful; and even when their tongues were
still the drumming of the wings was nearly enough to burst your head, for
all the sky was as thick as if it was snowing angels.  Although Adam was
not there, it was a great time anyway, because we had three archangels on
the Grand Stand—it is a seldom thing that even one comes out.”

“What did they look like, Sandy?”

“Well, they had shining faces, and shining robes, and wonderful rainbow
wings, and they stood eighteen feet high, and wore swords, and held their
heads up in a noble way, and looked like soldiers.”

“Did they have halos?”

“No—anyway, not the hoop kind.  The archangels and the upper-class
patriarchs wear a finer thing than that.  It is a round, solid, splendid
glory of gold, that is blinding to look at.  You have often seen a
patriarch in a picture, on earth, with that thing on—you remember it?—he
looks as if he had his head in a brass platter.  That don’t give you the
right idea of it at all—it is much more shining and beautiful.”

“Did you talk with those archangels and patriarchs, Sandy?”

“Who—_I_?  Why, what can you be thinking about, Stormy?  I ain’t worthy
to speak to such as they.”

“Is Talmage?”

“Of course not.  You have got the same mixed-up idea about these things
that everybody has down there.  I had it once, but I got over it.  Down
there they talk of the heavenly King—and that is right—but then they go
right on speaking as if this was a republic and everybody was on a dead
level with everybody else, and privileged to fling his arms around
anybody he comes across, and be hail-fellow-well-met with all the elect,
from the highest down.  How tangled up and absurd that is!  How are you
going to have a republic under a king?  How are you going to have a
republic at all, where the head of the government is absolute, holds his
place forever, and has no parliament, no council to meddle or make in his
affairs, nobody voted for, nobody elected, nobody in the whole universe
with a voice in the government, nobody asked to take a hand in its
matters, and nobody _allowed_ to do it?  Fine republic, ain’t it?”

“Well, yes—it _is_ a little different from the idea I had—but I thought I
might go around and get acquainted with the grandees, anyway—not exactly
splice the main-brace with them, you know, but shake hands and pass the
time of day.”

“Could Tom, Dick and Harry call on the Cabinet of Russia and do that?—on
Prince Gortschakoff, for instance?”

“I reckon not, Sandy.”

“Well, this is Russia—only more so.  There’s not the shadow of a republic
about it anywhere.  There are ranks, here.  There are viceroys, princes,
governors, sub-governors, sub-sub-governors, and a hundred orders of
nobility, grading along down from grand-ducal archangels, stage by stage,
till the general level is struck, where there ain’t any titles.  Do you
know what a prince of the blood is, on earth?”

“No.”

“Well, a prince of the blood don’t belong to the royal family exactly,
and he don’t belong to the mere nobility of the kingdom; he is lower than
the one, and higher than t’other.  That’s about the position of the
patriarchs and prophets here.  There’s some mighty high nobility
here—people that you and I ain’t worthy to polish sandals for—and _they_
ain’t worthy to polish sandals for the patriarchs and prophets.  That
gives you a kind of an idea of their rank, don’t it?  You begin to see
how high up they are, don’t you? just to get a two-minute glimpse of one
of them is a thing for a body to remember and tell about for a thousand
years.  Why, Captain, just think of this: if Abraham was to set his foot
down here by this door, there would be a railing set up around that
foot-track right away, and a shelter put over it, and people would flock
here from all over heaven, for hundreds and hundreds of years, to look at
it.  Abraham is one of the parties that Mr. Talmage, of Brooklyn, is
going to embrace, and kiss, and weep on, when he comes.  He wants to lay
in a good stock of tears, you know, or five to one he will go dry before
he gets a chance to do it.”

“Sandy,” says I, “I had an idea that _I_ was going to be equals with
everybody here, too, but I will let that drop.  It don’t matter, and I am
plenty happy enough anyway.”

“Captain, you are happier than you would be, the other way.  These old
patriarchs and prophets have got ages the start of you; they know more in
two minutes than you know in a year.  Did you ever try to have a sociable
improving-time discussing winds, and currents and variations of compass
with an undertaker?”

“I get your idea, Sandy.  He couldn’t interest me.  He would be an
ignoramus in such things—he would bore me, and I would bore him.”

“You have got it.  You would bore the patriarchs when you talked, and
when they talked they would shoot over your head.  By and by you would
say, ‘Good morning, your Eminence, I will call again’—but you wouldn’t.
Did you ever ask the slush-boy to come up in the cabin and take dinner
with you?”

“I get your drift again, Sandy.  I wouldn’t be used to such grand people
as the patriarchs and prophets, and I would be sheepish and tongue-tied
in their company, and mighty glad to get out of it.  Sandy, which is the
highest rank, patriarch or prophet?”

“Oh, the prophets hold over the patriarchs.  The newest prophet, even, is
of a sight more consequence than the oldest patriarch.  Yes, sir, Adam
himself has to walk behind Shakespeare.”

“Was Shakespeare a prophet?”

“Of course he was; and so was Homer, and heaps more.  But Shakespeare and
the rest have to walk behind a common tailor from Tennessee, by the name
of Billings; and behind a horse-doctor named Sakka, from Afghanistan.
Jeremiah, and Billings and Buddha walk together, side by side, right
behind a crowd from planets not in our astronomy; next come a dozen or
two from Jupiter and other worlds; next come Daniel, and Sakka and
Confucius; next a lot from systems outside of ours; next come Ezekiel,
and Mahomet, Zoroaster, and a knife-grinder from ancient Egypt; then
there is a long string, and after them, away down toward the bottom, come
Shakespeare and Homer, and a shoemaker named Marais, from the back
settlements of France.”

“Have they really rung in Mahomet and all those other heathens?”

“Yes—they all had their message, and they all get their reward.  The man
who don’t get his reward on earth, needn’t bother—he will get it here,
sure.”

“But why did they throw off on Shakespeare, that way, and put him away
down there below those shoe-makers and horse-doctors and knife-grinders—a
lot of people nobody ever heard of?”

“That is the heavenly justice of it—they warn’t rewarded according to
their deserts, on earth, but here they get their rightful rank.  That
tailor Billings, from Tennessee, wrote poetry that Homer and Shakespeare
couldn’t begin to come up to; but nobody would print it, nobody read it
but his neighbors, an ignorant lot, and they laughed at it.  Whenever the
village had a drunken frolic and a dance, they would drag him in and
crown him with cabbage leaves, and pretend to bow down to him; and one
night when he was sick and nearly starved to death, they had him out and
crowned him, and then they rode him on a rail about the village, and
everybody followed along, beating tin pans and yelling.  Well, he died
before morning.  He wasn’t ever expecting to go to heaven, much less that
there was going to be any fuss made over him, so I reckon he was a good
deal surprised when the reception broke on him.”

“Was you there, Sandy?”

“Bless you, no!”

“Why?  Didn’t you know it was going to come off?”

“Well, I judge I did.  It was the talk of these realms—not for a day,
like this barkeeper business, but for twenty years before the man died.”

“Why the mischief didn’t you go, then?”

“Now how you talk!  The like of me go meddling around at the reception of
a prophet?  A mudsill like me trying to push in and help receive an awful
grandee like Edward J. Billings?  Why, I should have been laughed at for
a billion miles around.  I shouldn’t ever heard the last of it.”

“Well, who did go, then?”

“Mighty few people that you and I will ever get a chance to see, Captain.
Not a solitary commoner ever has the luck to see a reception of a
prophet, I can tell you.  All the nobility, and all the patriarchs and
prophets—every last one of them—and all the archangels, and all the
princes and governors and viceroys, were there,—and _no_ small fry—not a
single one.  And mind you, I’m not talking about only the grandees from
_our_ world, but the princes and patriarchs and so on from _all_ the
worlds that shine in our sky, and from billions more that belong in
systems upon systems away outside of the one our sun is in.  There were
some prophets and patriarchs there that ours ain’t a circumstance to, for
rank and illustriousness and all that.  Some were from Jupiter and other
worlds in our own system, but the most celebrated were three poets, Saa,
Bo and Soof, from great planets in three different and very remote
systems.  These three names are common and familiar in every nook and
corner of heaven, clear from one end of it to the other—fully as well
known as the eighty Supreme Archangels, in fact—where as our Moses, and
Adam, and the rest, have not been heard of outside of our world’s little
corner of heaven, except by a few very learned men scattered here and
there—and they always spell their names wrong, and get the performances
of one mixed up with the doings of another, and they almost always locate
them simply _in our solar system_, and think that is enough without going
into little details such as naming the particular world they are from.
It is like a learned Hindoo showing off how much he knows by saying
Longfellow lives in the United States—as if he lived all over the United
States, and as if the country was so small you couldn’t throw a brick
there without hitting him.  Between you and me, it does gravel me, the
cool way people from those monster worlds outside our system snub our
little world, and even our system.  Of course we think a good deal of
Jupiter, because our world is only a potato to it, for size; but then
there are worlds in other systems that Jupiter isn’t even a mustard-seed
to—like the planet Goobra, for instance, which you couldn’t squeeze
inside the orbit of Halley’s comet without straining the rivets.
Tourists from Goobra (I mean parties that lived and died there—natives)
come here, now and then, and inquire about our world, and when they find
out it is so little that a streak of lightning can flash clear around it
in the eighth of a second, they have to lean up against something to
laugh.  Then they screw a glass into their eye and go to examining us, as
if we were a curious kind of foreign bug, or something of that sort.  One
of them asked me how long our day was; and when I told him it was twelve
hours long, as a general thing, he asked me if people where I was from
considered it worth while to get up and wash for such a day as that.
That is the way with those Goobra people—they can’t seem to let a chance
go by to throw it in your face that their day is three hundred and
twenty-two of our years long.  This young snob was just of age—he was six
or seven thousand of his days old—say two million of our years—and he had
all the puppy airs that belong to that time of life—that turning-point
when a person has got over being a boy and yet ain’t quite a man exactly.
If it had been anywhere else but in heaven, I would have given him a
piece of my mind.  Well, anyway, Billings had the grandest reception that
has been seen in thousands of centuries, and I think it will have a good
effect.  His name will be carried pretty far, and it will make our system
talked about, and maybe our world, too, and raise us in the respect of
the general public of heaven.  Why, look here—Shakespeare walked
backwards before that tailor from Tennessee, and scattered flowers for
him to walk on, and Homer stood behind his chair and waited on him at the
banquet.  Of course that didn’t go for much _there_, amongst all those
big foreigners from other systems, as they hadn’t heard of Shakespeare or
Homer either, but it would amount to considerable down there on our
little earth if they could know about it.  I wish there was something in
that miserable spiritualism, so we could send them word.  That Tennessee
village would set up a monument to Billings, then, and his autograph
would outsell Satan’s.  Well, they had grand times at that reception—a
small-fry noble from Hoboken told me all about it—Sir Richard Duffer,
Baronet.”

“What, Sandy, a nobleman from Hoboken?  How is that?”

“Easy enough.  Duffer kept a sausage-shop and never saved a cent in his
life because he used to give all his spare meat to the poor, in a quiet
way.  Not tramps,—no, the other sort—the sort that will starve before
they will beg—honest square people out of work.  Dick used to watch
hungry-looking men and women and children, and track them home, and find
out all about them from the neighbors, and then feed them and find them
work.  As nobody ever saw him give anything to anybody, he had the
reputation of being mean; he died with it, too, and everybody said it was
a good riddance; but the minute he landed here, they made him a baronet,
and the very first words Dick the sausage-maker of Hoboken heard when he
stepped upon the heavenly shore were, ‘Welcome, Sir Richard Duffer!’  It
surprised him some, because he thought he had reasons to believe he was
pointed for a warmer climate than this one.”

                                * * * * *

All of a sudden the whole region fairly rocked under the crash of eleven
hundred and one thunder blasts, all let off at once, and Sandy says,—

“There, that’s for the barkeep.”

I jumped up and says,—

“Then let’s be moving along, Sandy; we don’t want to miss any of this
thing, you know.”

“Keep your seat,” he says; “he is only just telegraphed, that is all.”

“How?”

“That blast only means that he has been sighted from the signal-station.
He is off Sandy Hook.  The committees will go down to meet him, now, and
escort him in.  There will be ceremonies and delays; they won’t he coming
up the Bay for a considerable time, yet.  It is several billion miles
away, anyway.”

“_I_ could have been a barkeeper and a hard lot just as well as not,”
says I, remembering the lonesome way I arrived, and how there wasn’t any
committee nor anything.

“I notice some regret in your voice,” says Sandy, “and it is natural
enough; but let bygones be bygones; you went according to your lights,
and it is too late now to mend the thing.”

“No, let it slide, Sandy, I don’t mind.  But you’ve got a Sandy Hook
_here_, too, have you?”

“We’ve got everything here, just as it is below.  All the States and
Territories of the Union, and all the kingdoms of the earth and the
islands of the sea are laid out here just as they are on the globe—all
the same shape they are down there, and all graded to the relative size,
only each State and realm and island is a good many billion times bigger
here than it is below.  There goes another blast.”

“What is that one for?”

“That is only another fort answering the first one.  They each fire
eleven hundred and one thunder blasts at a single dash—it is the usual
salute for an eleventh-hour guest; a hundred for each hour and an extra
one for the guest’s sex; if it was a woman we would know it by their
leaving off the extra gun.”

“How do we know there’s eleven hundred and one, Sandy, when they all go
off at once?—and yet we certainly do know.”

“Our intellects are a good deal sharpened up, here, in some ways, and
that is one of them.  Numbers and sizes and distances are so great, here,
that we have to be made so we can _feel_ them—our old ways of counting
and measuring and ciphering wouldn’t ever give us an idea of them, but
would only confuse us and oppress us and make our heads ache.”

After some more talk about this, I says: “Sandy, I notice that I hardly
ever see a white angel; where I run across one white angel, I strike as
many as a hundred million copper-colored ones—people that can’t speak
English.  How is that?”

“Well, you will find it the same in any State or Territory of the
American corner of heaven you choose to go to.  I have shot along, a
whole week on a stretch, and gone millions and millions of miles, through
perfect swarms of angels, without ever seeing a single white one, or
hearing a word I could understand.  You see, America was occupied a
billion years and more, by Injuns and Aztecs, and that sort of folks,
before a white man ever set his foot in it.  During the first three
hundred years after Columbus’s discovery, there wasn’t ever more than one
good lecture audience of white people, all put together, in America—I
mean the whole thing, British Possessions and all; in the beginning of
our century there were only 6,000,000 or 7,000,000—say seven; 12,000,000
or 14,000,000 in 1825; say 23,000,000 in 1850; 40,000,000 in 1875.  Our
death-rate has always been 20 in 1000 per annum.  Well, 140,000 died the
first year of the century; 280,000 the twenty-fifth year; 500,000 the
fiftieth year; about a million the seventy-fifth year.  Now I am going to
be liberal about this thing, and consider that fifty million whites have
died in America from the beginning up to to-day—make it sixty, if you
want to; make it a hundred million—it’s no difference about a few
millions one way or t’other.  Well, now, you can see, yourself, that when
you come to spread a little dab of people like that over these hundreds
of billions of miles of American territory here in heaven, it is like
scattering a ten-cent box of homoeopathic pills over the Great Sahara and
expecting to find them again.  You can’t expect us to amount to anything
in heaven, and we _don’t_—now that is the simple fact, and we have got to
do the best we can with it.  The learned men from other planets and other
systems come here and hang around a while, when they are touring around
the Kingdom, and then go back to their own section of heaven and write a
book of travels, and they give America about five lines in it.  And what
do they say about us?  They say this wilderness is populated with a
scattering few hundred thousand billions of red angels, with now and then
a curiously complected _diseased_ one.  You see, they think we whites and
the occasional nigger are Injuns that have been bleached out or blackened
by some leprous disease or other—for some peculiarly rascally _sin_, mind
you.  It is a mighty sour pill for us all, my friend—even the modestest
of us, let alone the other kind, that think they are going to be received
like a long-lost government bond, and hug Abraham into the bargain.  I
haven’t asked you any of the particulars, Captain, but I judge it goes
without saying—if my experience is worth anything—that there wasn’t much
of a hooraw made over you when you arrived—now was there?”

“Don’t mention it, Sandy,” says I, coloring up a little; “I wouldn’t have
had the family see it for any amount you are a mind to name.  Change the
subject, Sandy, change the subject.”

“Well, do you think of settling in the California department of bliss?”

“I don’t know.  I wasn’t calculating on doing anything really definite in
that direction till the family come.  I thought I would just look around,
meantime, in a quiet way, and make up my mind.  Besides, I know a good
many dead people, and I was calculating to hunt them up and swap a little
gossip with them about friends, and old times, and one thing or another,
and ask them how they like it here, as far as they have got.  I reckon my
wife will want to camp in the California range, though, because most all
her departed will be there, and she likes to be with folks she knows.”

“Don’t you let her.  You see what the Jersey district of heaven is, for
whites; well, the Californian district is a thousand times worse.  It
swarms with a mean kind of leather-headed mud-colored angels—and your
nearest white neighbor is likely to be a million miles away.  _What a man
mostly misses_, _in heaven_, _is company_—company of his own sort and
color and language.  I have come near settling in the European part of
heaven once or twice on that account.”

“Well, why didn’t you, Sandy?”

“Oh, various reasons.  For one thing, although you _see_ plenty of whites
there, you can’t understand any of them, hardly, and so you go about as
hungry for talk as you do here.  I like to look at a Russian or a German
or an Italian—I even like to look at a Frenchman if I ever have the luck
to catch him engaged in anything that ain’t indelicate—but _looking_
don’t cure the hunger—what you want is talk.”

“Well, there’s England, Sandy—the English district of heaven.”

“Yes, but it is not so very much better than this end of the heavenly
domain.  As long as you run across Englishmen born this side of three
hundred years ago, you are all right; but the minute you get back of
Elizabeth’s time the language begins to fog up, and the further back you
go the foggier it gets.  I had some talk with one Langland and a man by
the name of Chaucer—old-time poets—but it was no use, I couldn’t quite
understand them, and they couldn’t quite understand me.  I have had
letters from them since, but it is such broken English I can’t make it
out.  Back of those men’s time the English are just simply foreigners,
nothing more, nothing less; they talk Danish, German, Norman French, and
sometimes a mixture of all three; back of _them_, they talk Latin, and
ancient British, Irish, and Gaelic; and then back of these come billions
and billions of pure savages that talk a gibberish that Satan himself
couldn’t understand.  The fact is, where you strike one man in the
English settlements that you can understand, you wade through awful
swarms that talk something you can’t make head nor tail of.  You see,
every country on earth has been overlaid so often, in the course of a
billion years, with different kinds of people and different sorts of
languages, that this sort of mongrel business was bound to be the result
in heaven.”

“Sandy,” says I, “did you see a good many of the great people history
tells about?”

“Yes—plenty.  I saw kings and all sorts of distinguished people.”

“Do the kings rank just as they did below?”

“No; a body can’t bring his rank up here with him.  Divine right is a
good-enough earthly romance, but it don’t go, here.  Kings drop down to
the general level as soon as they reach the realms of grace.  I knew
Charles the Second very well—one of the most popular comedians in the
English section—draws first rate.  There are better, of course—people
that were never heard of on earth—but Charles is making a very good
reputation indeed, and is considered a rising man.  Richard the
Lion-hearted is in the prize-ring, and coming into considerable favor.
Henry the Eighth is a tragedian, and the scenes where he kills people are
done to the very life.  Henry the Sixth keeps a religious-book stand.”

“Did you ever see Napoleon, Sandy?”

“Often—sometimes in the Corsican range, sometimes in the French.  He
always hunts up a conspicuous place, and goes frowning around with his
arms folded and his field-glass under his arm, looking as grand, gloomy
and peculiar as his reputation calls for, and very much bothered because
he don’t stand as high, here, for a soldier, as he expected to.”

“Why, who stands higher?”

“Oh, a _lot_ of people _we_ never heard of before—the shoemaker and
horse-doctor and knife-grinder kind, you know—clodhoppers from goodness
knows where that never handled a sword or fired a shot in their lives—but
the soldiership was in them, though they never had a chance to show it.
But here they take their right place, and Cæsar and Napoleon and
Alexander have to take a back seat.  The greatest military genius our
world ever produced was a brick-layer from somewhere back of Boston—died
during the Revolution—by the name of Absalom Jones.  Wherever he goes,
crowds flock to see him.  You see, everybody knows that if he had had a
chance he would have shown the world some generalship that would have
made all generalship before look like child’s play and ’prentice work.
But he never got a chance; he tried heaps of times to enlist as a
private, but he had lost both thumbs and a couple of front teeth, and the
recruiting sergeant wouldn’t pass him.  However, as I say, everybody
knows, now, what he _would_ have been,—and so they flock by the million
to get a glimpse of him whenever they hear he is going to be anywhere.
Cæsar, and Hannibal, and Alexander, and Napoleon are all on his staff,
and ever so many more great generals; but the public hardly care to look
at _them_ when _he_ is around.  Boom!  There goes another salute.  The
barkeeper’s off quarantine now.”

                                * * * * *

Sandy and I put on our things.  Then we made a wish, and in a second we
were at the reception-place.  We stood on the edge of the ocean of space,
and looked out over the dimness, but couldn’t make out anything.  Close
by us was the Grand Stand—tier on tier of dim thrones rising up toward
the zenith.  From each side of it spread away the tiers of seats for the
general public.  They spread away for leagues and leagues—you couldn’t
see the ends.  They were empty and still, and hadn’t a cheerful look, but
looked dreary, like a theatre before anybody comes—gas turned down.
Sandy says,—

“We’ll sit down here and wait.  We’ll see the head of the procession come
in sight away off yonder pretty soon, now.”

Says I,—

“It’s pretty lonesome, Sandy; I reckon there’s a hitch somewheres.
Nobody but just you and me—it ain’t much of a display for the barkeeper.”

“Don’t you fret, it’s all right.  There’ll be one more gun-fire—then
you’ll see.”

In a little while we noticed a sort of a lightish flush, away off on the
horizon.

“Head of the torchlight procession,” says Sandy.

It spread, and got lighter and brighter: soon it had a strong glare like
a locomotive headlight; it kept on getting brighter and brighter till it
was like the sun peeping above the horizon-line at sea—the big red rays
shot high up into the sky.

“Keep your eyes on the Grand Stand and the miles of seats—sharp!” says
Sandy, “and listen for the gun-fire.”

Just then it burst out, “Boom-boom-boom!” like a million thunderstorms in
one, and made the whole heavens rock.  Then there was a sudden and awful
glare of light all about us, and in that very instant every one of the
millions of seats was occupied, and as far as you could see, in both
directions, was just a solid pack of people, and the place was all
splendidly lit up!  It was enough to take a body’s breath away.  Sandy
says,—

“That is the way we do it here.  No time fooled away; nobody straggling
in after the curtain’s up.  Wishing is quicker work than travelling.  A
quarter of a second ago these folks were millions of miles from here.
When they heard the last signal, all they had to do was to wish, and here
they are.”

The prodigious choir struck up,—

    We long to hear thy voice,
    To see thee face to face.

It was noble music, but the uneducated chipped in and spoilt it, just as
the congregations used to do on earth.

The head of the procession began to pass, now, and it was a wonderful
sight.  It swept along, thick and solid, five hundred thousand angels
abreast, and every angel carrying a torch and singing—the whirring
thunder of the wings made a body’s head ache.  You could follow the line
of the procession back, and slanting upward into the sky, far away in a
glittering snaky rope, till it was only a faint streak in the distance.
The rush went on and on, for a long time, and at last, sure enough, along
comes the barkeeper, and then everybody rose, and a cheer went up that
made the heavens shake, I tell you!  He was all smiles, and had his halo
tilted over one ear in a cocky way, and was the most satisfied-looking
saint I ever saw.  While he marched up the steps of the Grand Stand, the
choir struck up,—

    “The whole wide heaven groans,
    And waits to hear that voice.”

There were four gorgeous tents standing side by side in the place of
honor, on a broad railed platform in the centre of the Grand Stand, with
a shining guard of honor round about them.  The tents had been shut up
all this time.  As the barkeeper climbed along up, bowing and smiling to
everybody, and at last got to the platform, these tents were jerked up
aloft all of a sudden, and we saw four noble thrones of gold, all caked
with jewels, and in the two middle ones sat old white-whiskered men, and
in the two others a couple of the most glorious and gaudy giants, with
platter halos and beautiful armor.  All the millions went down on their
knees, and stared, and looked glad, and burst out into a joyful kind of
murmurs.  They said,—

“Two archangels!—that is splendid.  Who can the others be?”

The archangels gave the barkeeper a stiff little military bow; the two
old men rose; one of them said, “Moses and Esau welcome thee!” and then
all the four vanished, and the thrones were empty.

The barkeeper looked a little disappointed, for he was calculating to hug
those old people, I judge; but it was the gladdest and proudest multitude
you ever saw—because they had seen Moses and Esau.  Everybody was saying,
“Did you see them?—I did—Esau’s side face was to me, but I saw Moses full
in the face, just as plain as I see you this minute!”

The procession took up the barkeeper and moved on with him again, and the
crowd broke up and scattered.  As we went along home, Sandy said it was a
great success, and the barkeeper would have a right to be proud of it
forever.  And he said we were in luck, too; said we might attend
receptions for forty thousand years to come, and not have a chance to see
a brace of such grand moguls as Moses and Esau.  We found afterwards that
we had come near seeing another patriarch, and likewise a genuine prophet
besides, but at the last moment they sent regrets.  Sandy said there
would be a monument put up there, where Moses and Esau had stood, with
the date and circumstances, and all about the whole business, and
travellers would come for thousands of years and gawk at it, and climb
over it, and scribble their names on it.




Footnotes:


{9}  The captain could not remember what this word was.  He said it was
in a foreign tongue.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXTRACT FROM CAPTAIN STORMFIELD'S
VISIT TO HEAVEN***


******* This file should be named 1044-0.txt or 1044-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/4/1044



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

