VII

CONTROLLING THE MIND

People say:  "One can't help one's thoughts."  But one can.  The
control of the thinking machine is perfectly possible.  And since
nothing whatever happens to us outside our own brain; since nothing
hurts us or gives us pleasure except within the brain, the supreme
importance of being able to control what goes on in that mysterious
brain is patent.  This idea is one of the oldest platitudes, but it is
a platitude whose profound truth and urgency most people live and die
without realising.  People complain of the lack of power to
concentrate, not witting that they may acquire the power, if they
choose.

And without the power to concentrate--that is to say, without the power
to dictate to the brain its task and to ensure obedience--true life is
impossible. Mind control is the first element of a full existence.

Hence, it seems to me, the first business of the day should be to put
the mind through its paces.  You look after your body, inside and out;
you run grave danger in hacking hairs off your skin; you employ a whole
army of individuals, from the milkman to the pig-killer, to enable you
to bribe your stomach into decent behaviour. Why not devote a little
attention to the far more delicate machinery of the mind, especially as
you will require no extraneous aid?  It is for this portion of the art
and craft of living that I have reserved the time from the moment of
quitting your door to the moment of arriving at your office.

"What?  I am to cultivate my mind in the street, on the platform, in
the train, and in the crowded street again?"  Precisely.  Nothing
simpler! No tools required!  Not even a book.  Nevertheless, the affair
is not easy.

When you leave your house, concentrate your mind on a subject (no
matter what, to begin with).  You will not have gone ten yards before
your mind has skipped away under your very eyes and is larking round
the corner with another subject.

Bring it back by the scruff of the neck.  Ere you have reached the
station you will have brought it back about forty times.  Do not
despair.  Continue. Keep it up.  You will succeed.  You cannot by any
chance fail if you persevere.  It is idle to pretend that your mind is
incapable of concentration. Do you not remember that morning when you
received a disquieting letter which demanded a very carefully-worded
answer?  How you kept your mind steadily on the subject of the answer,
without a second's intermission, until you reached your office;
whereupon you instantly sat down and wrote the answer?  That was a case
in which _you_ were roused by circumstances to such a degree of
vitality that you were able to dominate your mind like a tyrant. You
would have no trifling.  You insisted that its work should be done, and
its work was done.

By the regular practice of concentration (as to which there is no
secret--save the secret of perseverance) you can tyrannise over your
mind (which is not the highest part of _you_) every hour of the day,
and in no matter what place.  The exercise is a very convenient one.
If you got into your morning train with a pair of dumb-bells for your
muscles or an encyclopaedia in ten volumes for your learning, you would
probably excite remark.  But as you walk in the street, or sit in the
corner of the compartment behind a pipe, or "strap-hang" on the
Subterranean, who is to know that you are engaged in the most important
of daily acts?  What asinine boor can laugh at you?

I do not care what you concentrate on, so long as you concentrate. It
is the mere disciplining of the thinking machine that counts. But
still, you may as well kill two birds with one stone, and concentrate
on something useful.  I suggest--it is only a suggestion--a little
chapter of Marcus Aurelius or Epictetus.

Do not, I beg, shy at their names.  For myself, I know nothing more
"actual," more bursting with plain common-sense, applicable to the
daily life of plain persons like you and me (who hate airs, pose, and
nonsense) than Marcus Aurelius or Epictetus.  Read a chapter--and so
short they are, the chapters!--in the evening and concentrate on it the
next morning.  You will see.

Yes, my friend, it is useless for you to try to disguise the fact. I
can hear your brain like a telephone at my ear.  You are saying to
yourself:  "This fellow was doing pretty well up to his seventh
chapter.  He had begun to interest me faintly.  But what he says about
thinking in trains, and concentration, and so on, is not for me.  It
may be well enough for some folks, but it isn't in my line."

It is for you, I passionately repeat; it is for you.  Indeed, you are
the very man I am aiming at.

Throw away the suggestion, and you throw away the most precious
suggestion that was ever offered to you.  It is not my suggestion. It
is the suggestion of the most sensible, practical, hard-headed men who
have walked the earth.  I only give it you at second-hand. Try it.  Get
your mind in hand.  And see how the process cures half the evils of
life--especially worry, that miserable, avoidable, shameful
disease--worry!



VIII

THE REFLECTIVE MOOD

The exercise of concentrating the mind (to which at least half an hour
a day should be given) is a mere preliminary, like scales on the piano.
Having acquired power over that most unruly member of one's complex
organism, one has naturally to put it to the yoke. Useless to possess
an obedient mind unless one profits to the furthest possible degree by
its obedience.  A prolonged primary course of study is indicated.

Now as to what this course of study should be there cannot be any
question; there never has been any question.  All the sensible people
of all ages are agreed upon it.  And it is not literature, nor is it
any other art, nor is it history, nor is it any science. It is the
study of one's self.  Man, know thyself.  These words are so hackneyed
that verily I blush to write them. Yet they must be written, for they
need to be written.  (I take back my blush, being ashamed of it.)  Man,
know thyself.  I say it out loud.  The phrase is one of those phrases
with which everyone is familiar, of which everyone acknowledges the
value, and which only the most sagacious put into practice.  I don't
know why.  I am entirely convinced that what is more than anything else
lacking in the life of the average well-intentioned man of to-day is
the reflective mood.

We do not reflect.  I mean that we do not reflect upon genuinely
important things; upon the problem of our happiness, upon the main
direction in which we are going, upon what life is giving to us, upon
the share which reason has (or has not) in determining our actions, and
upon the relation between our principles and our conduct.

And yet you are in search of happiness, are you not?  Have you
discovered it?

The chances are that you have not.  The chances are that you have
already come to believe that happiness is unattainable.  But men have
attained it. And they have attained it by realising that happiness does
not spring from the procuring of physical or mental pleasure, but from
the development of reason and the adjustment of conduct to principles.

I suppose that you will not have the audacity to deny this.  And if you
admit it, and still devote no part of your day to the deliberate
consideration of your reason, principles, and conduct, you admit also
that while striving for a certain thing you are regularly leaving
undone the one act which is necessary to the attainment of that thing.

Now, shall I blush, or will you?

Do not fear that I mean to thrust certain principles upon your
attention.  I care not (in this place) what your principles are. Your
principles may induce you to believe in the righteousness of burglary.
I don't mind.  All I urge is that a life in which conduct does not
fairly well accord with principles is a silly life; and that conduct
can only be made to accord with principles by means of daily
examination, reflection, and resolution.  What leads to the permanent
sorrowfulness of burglars is that their principles are contrary to
burglary.  If they genuinely believed in the moral excellence of
burglary, penal servitude would simply mean so many happy years for
them; all martyrs are happy, because their conduct and their principles
agree.

As for reason (which makes conduct, and is not unconnected with the
making of principles), it plays a far smaller part in our lives than we
fancy.  We are supposed to be reasonable but we are much more
instinctive than reasonable. And the less we reflect, the less
reasonable we shall be.  The next time you get cross with the waiter
because your steak is over-cooked, ask reason to step into the
cabinet-room of your mind, and consult her.  She will probably tell you
that the waiter did not cook the steak, and had no control over the
cooking of the steak; and that even if he alone was to blame, you
accomplished nothing good by getting cross; you merely lost your
dignity, looked a fool in the eyes of sensible men, and soured the
waiter, while producing no effect whatever on the steak.

The result of this consultation with reason (for which she makes no
charge) will be that when once more your steak is over-cooked you will
treat the waiter as a fellow-creature, remain quite calm in a kindly
spirit, and politely insist on having a fresh steak.  The gain will be
obvious and solid.

In the formation or modification of principles, and the practice of
conduct, much help can be derived from printed books (issued at
sixpence each and upwards).  I mentioned in my last chapter Marcus
Aurelius and Epictetus. Certain even more widely known works will occur
at once to the memory. I may also mention Pascal, La Bruyere, and
Emerson.  For myself, you do not catch me travelling without my Marcus
Aurelius.  Yes, books are valuable.  But not reading of books will take
the place of a daily, candid, honest examination of what one has
recently done, and what one is about to do--of a steady looking at
one's self in the face (disconcerting though the sight may be).

When shall this important business be accomplished?  The solitude of
the evening journey home appears to me to be suitable for it.  A
reflective mood naturally follows the exertion of having earned the
day's living. Of course if, instead of attending to an elementary and
profoundly important duty, you prefer to read the paper (which you
might just as well read while waiting for your dinner) I have nothing
to say.  But attend to it at some time of the day you must. I now come
to the evening hours.



