II

THE DESIRE TO EXCEED ONE'S PROGRAMME

"But," someone may remark, with the English disregard of everything
except the point, "what is he driving at with his twenty-four hours a
day? I have no difficulty in living on twenty-four hours a day.  I do
all that I want to do, and still find time to go in for newspaper
competitions.  Surely it is a simple affair, knowing that one has only
twenty-four hours a day, to content one's self with twenty-four hours a
day!"

To you, my dear sir, I present my excuses and apologies.  You are
precisely the man that I have been wishing to meet for about forty
years.  Will you kindly send me your name and address, and state your
charge for telling me how you do it?  Instead of me talking to you, you
ought to be talking to me. Please come forward.  That you exist, I am
convinced, and that I have not yet encountered you is my loss.
Meanwhile, until you appear, I will continue to chat with my companions
in distress--that innumerable band of souls who are haunted, more or
less painfully, by the feeling that the years slip by, and slip by, and
slip by, and that they have not yet been able to get their lives into
proper working order.

If we analyse that feeling,  we shall perceive it to be, primarily, one
of uneasiness, of expectation, of looking forward, of aspiration.  It
is a source of constant discomfort, for it behaves like a skeleton at
the feast of all our enjoyments.  We go to the theatre and laugh; but
between the acts it raises a skinny finger at us.  We rush violently
for the last train, and while we are cooling a long age on the platform
waiting for the last train, it promenades its bones up and down by our
side and inquires:  "O man, what hast thou done with thy youth?  What
art thou doing with thine age?"  You may urge that this feeling of
continuous looking forward, of aspiration, is part of life itself, and
inseparable from life itself.  True!

But there are degrees.  A man may desire to go to Mecca.  His
conscience tells him that he ought to go to Mecca.  He fares forth,
either by the aid of Cook's, or unassisted; he may probably never reach
Mecca; he may drown before he gets to Port Said; he may perish
ingloriously on the coast of the Red Sea; his desire may remain
eternally frustrate.  Unfulfilled aspiration may always trouble him.
But he will not be tormented in the same way as the man who, desiring
to reach Mecca, and harried by the desire to reach Mecca, never leaves
Brixton.

It is something to have left Brixton.  Most of us have not left
Brixton.  We have not even taken a cab to Ludgate Circus and inquired
from Cook's the price of a conducted tour.  And our excuse to ourselves
is that there are only twenty-four hours in the day.

If we further analyse our vague, uneasy aspiration, we shall, I think,
see that it springs from a fixed idea that we ought to do something in
addition to those things which we are loyally and morally obliged to
do.  We are obliged, by various codes written and unwritten, to
maintain ourselves and our families (if any) in health and comfort, to
pay our debts, to save, to increase our prosperity by increasing our
efficiency.  A task sufficiently difficult!  A task which very few of
us achieve!  A task often beyond our skill! Yet, if we succeed in it,
as we sometimes do, we are not satisfied; the skeleton is still with us.

And even when we realise that the task is beyond our skill, that our
powers cannot cope with it, we feel that we should be less discontented
if we gave to our powers, already overtaxed, something still further to
do.

And such is, indeed, the fact.  The wish to accomplish something
outside their formal programme is common to all men who in the course
of evolution have risen past a certain level.

Until an effort is made to satisfy that wish, the sense of uneasy
waiting for something to start which has not started will remain to
disturb the peace of the soul. That wish has been called by many names.
It is one form of the universal desire for knowledge.  And it is so
strong that men whose whole lives have been given to the systematic
acquirement of knowledge have been driven by it to overstep the limits
of their programme in search of still more knowledge.  Even Herbert
Spencer, in my opinion the greatest mind that ever lived, was often
forced by it into agreeable little backwaters of inquiry.

I imagine that in the majority of people who are conscious of the wish
to live--that is to say, people who have intellectual curiosity--the
aspiration to exceed formal programmes takes a literary shape.  They
would like to embark on a course of reading. Decidedly the British
people are becoming more and more literary. But I would point out that
literature by no means comprises the whole field of knowledge, and that
the disturbing thirst to improve one's self--to increase one's
knowledge--may well be slaked quite apart from literature.  With the
various ways of slaking I shall deal later. Here I merely point out to
those who have no natural sympathy with literature that literature is
not the only well.



III

PRECAUTIONS BEFORE BEGINNING

Now that I have succeeded (if succeeded I have) in persuading you to
admit to yourself that you are constantly haunted by a suppressed
dissatisfaction with your own arrangement of your daily life; and that
the primal cause of that inconvenient dissatisfaction is the feeling
that you are every day leaving undone something which you would like to
do, and which, indeed, you are always hoping to do when you have "more
time"; and now that I have drawn your attention to the glaring,
dazzling truth that you never will have "more time," since you already
have all the time there is--you expect me to let you into some
wonderful secret by which you may at any rate approach the ideal of a
perfect arrangement of the day, and by which, therefore, that haunting,
unpleasant, daily disappointment of things left undone will be got rid
of!

I have found no such wonderful secret.  Nor do I expect to find it, nor
do I expect that anyone else will ever find it.  It is undiscovered.
When you first began to gather my drift, perhaps there was a
resurrection of hope in your breast.  Perhaps you said to yourself,
"This man will show me an easy, unfatiguing way of doing what I have so
long in vain wished to do."  Alas, no!  The fact is that there is no
easy way, no royal road.  The path to Mecca is extremely hard and
stony, and the worst of it is that you never quite get there after all.

The most important preliminary to the task of arranging one's life so
that one may live fully and comfortably within one's daily budget of
twenty-four hours is the calm realisation of the extreme difficulty of
the task, of the sacrifices and the endless effort which it demands.  I
cannot too strongly insist on this.

If you imagine that you will be able to achieve your ideal by
ingeniously planning out a time-table with a pen on a piece of paper,
you had better give up hope at once.  If you are not prepared for
discouragements and disillusions; if you will not be content with a
small result for a big effort, then do not begin.  Lie down again and
resume the uneasy doze which you call your existence.

It is very sad, is it not, very depressing and sombre?  And yet I think
it is rather fine, too, this necessity for the tense bracing of the
will before anything worth doing can be done.  I rather like it myself.
I feel it to be the chief thing that differentiates me from the cat by
the fire.

"Well," you say, "assume that I am braced for the battle.  Assume that
I have carefully weighed and comprehended your ponderous remarks; how
do I begin?"  Dear sir, you simply begin.  There is no magic method of
beginning.  If a man standing on the edge of a swimming-bath and
wanting to jump into the cold water should ask you, "How do I begin to
jump?" you would merely reply, "Just jump. Take hold of your nerves,
and jump."

As I have previously said, the chief beauty about the constant supply
of time is that you cannot waste it in advance.  The next year, the
next day, the next hour are lying ready for you, as perfect, as
unspoilt, as if you had never wasted or misapplied a single moment in
all your career.  Which fact is very gratifying and reassuring.  You
can turn over a new leaf every hour if you choose. Therefore no object
is served in waiting till next week, or even until to-morrow.  You may
fancy that the water will be warmer next week.  It won't.  It will be
colder.

But before you begin, let me murmur a few words of warning in your
private ear.

Let me principally warn you against your own ardour.  Ardour in
well-doing is a misleading and a treacherous thing.  It cries out
loudly for employment; you can't satisfy it at first; it wants more and
more; it is eager to move mountains and divert the course of rivers.
It isn't content till it perspires. And then, too often, when it feels
the perspiration on its brow, it wearies all of a sudden and dies,
without even putting itself to the trouble of saying, "I've had enough
of this."

Beware of undertaking too much at the start.  Be content with quite a
little. Allow for accidents.  Allow for human nature, especially your
own.

A failure or so, in itself, would not matter, if it did not incur a
loss of self-esteem and of self-confidence.  But just as nothing
succeeds like success, so nothing fails like failure.  Most people who
are ruined are ruined by attempting too much.  Therefore, in setting
out on the immense enterprise of living fully and comfortably within
the narrow limits of twenty-four hours a day, let us avoid at any cost
the risk of an early failure.  I will not agree that, in this business
at any rate, a glorious failure is better than a petty success.  I am
all for the petty success.  A glorious failure leads to nothing; a
petty success may lead to a success that is not petty.

So let us begin to examine the budget of the day's time. You say your
day is already full to overflowing.  How?  You actually spend in
earning your livelihood--how much?  Seven hours, on the average? And in
actual sleep, seven?  I will add two hours, and be generous. And I will
defy you to account to me on the spur of the moment for the other eight
hours.



