The Project Gutenberg eBook of How to Live on 24 Hours a Day
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: How to Live on 24 Hours a Day

Author: Arnold Bennett


        
Release date: August 1, 2000 [eBook #2274]
                Most recently updated: December 31, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/2274

Credits: Produced by Tony Adam.  HTML version by Al Haines.






Produced by Tony Adam.  HTML version by Al Haines.









How to Live on Twenty-Four Hours a Day


by

Arnold Bennett




PREFACE TO THIS EDITION

This preface, though placed at the beginning, as a preface must be,
should be read at the end of the book.

I have received a large amount of correspondence concerning this small
work, and many reviews of it--some of them nearly as long as the book
itself--have been printed.  But scarcely any of the comment has been
adverse.  Some people have objected to a frivolity of tone; but as the
tone is not, in my opinion, at all frivolous, this objection did not
impress me; and had no weightier reproach been put forward I might
almost have been persuaded that the volume was flawless!  A more
serious stricture has, however, been offered--not in the press, but by
sundry obviously sincere correspondents--and I must deal with it.  A
reference to page 43 will show that I anticipated and feared this
disapprobation.  The sentence against which protests have been made is
as follows:--"In the majority of instances he [the typical man] does
not precisely feel a passion for his business; at best he does not
dislike it.  He begins his business functions with some reluctance, as
late as he can, and he ends them with joy, as early as he can. And his
engines, while he is engaged in his business, are seldom at their full
'h.p.'"

I am assured, in accents of unmistakable sincerity, that there are many
business men--not merely those in high positions or with fine
prospects, but modest subordinates with no hope of ever being much
better off--who do enjoy their business functions, who do not shirk
them, who do not arrive at the office as late as possible and depart as
early as possible, who, in a word, put the whole of their force into
their day's work and are genuinely fatigued at the end thereof.

I am ready to believe it.  I do believe it.  I know it.  I always knew
it.  Both in London and in the provinces it has been my lot to spend
long years in subordinate situations of business; and the fact did not
escape me that a certain proportion of my peers showed what amounted to
an honest passion for their duties, and that while engaged in those
duties they were really _living_ to the fullest extent of which they
were capable.  But I remain convinced that these fortunate and happy
individuals (happier perhaps than they guessed) did not and do not
constitute a majority, or anything like a majority.  I remain convinced
that the majority of decent average conscientious men of business (men
with aspirations and ideals) do not as a rule go home of a night
genuinely tired.  I remain convinced that they put not as much but as
little of themselves as they conscientiously can into the earning of a
livelihood, and that their vocation bores rather than interests them.

Nevertheless, I admit that the minority is of sufficient importance to
merit attention, and that I ought not to have ignored it so completely
as I did do.  The whole difficulty of the hard-working minority was put
in a single colloquial sentence by one of my correspondents.  He wrote:
"I am just as keen as anyone on doing something to 'exceed my
programme,' but allow me to tell you that when I get home at six thirty
p.m. I am not anything like so fresh as you seem to imagine."

Now I must point out that the case of the minority, who throw
themselves with passion and gusto into their daily business task, is
infinitely less deplorable than the case of the majority, who go
half-heartedly and feebly through their official day.  The former are
less in need of advice "how to live."  At any rate during their
official day of, say, eight hours they are really alive; their engines
are giving the full indicated "h.p."  The other eight working hours of
their day may be badly organised, or even frittered away; but it is
less disastrous to waste eight hours a day than sixteen hours a day; it
is better to have lived a bit than never to have lived at all. The real
tragedy is the tragedy of the man who is braced to effort neither in
the office nor out of it, and to this man this book is primarily
addressed.  "But," says the other and more fortunate man, "although my
ordinary programme is bigger than his, I want to exceed my programme
too!  I am living a bit; I want to live more. But I really can't do
another day's work on the top of my official day."

The fact is, I, the author, ought to have foreseen that I should appeal
most strongly to those who already had an interest in existence.  It is
always the man who has tasted life who demands more of it.  And it is
always the man who never gets out of bed who is the most difficult to
rouse.

Well, you of the minority, let us assume that the intensity of your
daily money-getting will not allow you to carry out quite all the
suggestions in the following pages.  Some of the suggestions may yet
stand.  I admit that you may not be able to use the time spent on the
journey home at night; but the suggestion for the journey to the office
in the morning is as practicable for you as for anybody. And that
weekly interval of forty hours, from Saturday to Monday, is yours just
as much as the other man's, though a slight accumulation of fatigue may
prevent you from employing the whole of your "h.p." upon it.  There
remains, then, the important portion of the three or more evenings a
week.  You tell me flatly that you are too tired to do anything outside
your programme at night.  In reply to which I tell you flatly that if
your ordinary day's work is thus exhausting, then the balance of your
life is wrong and must be adjusted.  A man's powers ought not to be
monopolised by his ordinary day's work. What, then, is to be done?

The obvious thing to do is to circumvent your ardour for your ordinary
day's work by a ruse. Employ your engines in something beyond the
programme before, and not after, you employ them on the programme
itself.  Briefly, get up earlier in the morning.  You say you cannot.
You say it is impossible for you to go earlier to bed of a night--to do
so would upset the entire household.  I do not think it is quite
impossible to go to bed earlier at night.  I think that if you persist
in rising earlier, and the consequence is insufficiency of sleep, you
will soon find a way of going to bed earlier.  But my impression is
that the consequences of rising earlier will not be an insufficiency of
sleep.  My impression, growing stronger every year, is that sleep is
partly a matter of habit--and of slackness.  I am convinced that most
people sleep as long as they do because they are at a loss for any
other diversion. How much sleep do you think is daily obtained by the
powerful healthy man who daily rattles up your street in charge of
Carter Patterson's van?  I have consulted a doctor on this point.  He
is a doctor who for twenty-four years has had a large general practice
in a large flourishing suburb of London, inhabited by exactly such
people as you and me.  He is a curt man, and his answer was curt:

"Most people sleep themselves stupid."

He went on to give his opinion that nine men out of ten would have
better health and more fun out of life if they spent less time in bed.

Other doctors have confirmed this judgment, which, of course, does not
apply to growing youths.

Rise an hour, an hour and a half, or even two hours earlier; and--if
you must--retire earlier when you can.  In the matter of exceeding
programmes, you will accomplish as much in one morning hour as in two
evening hours.  "But," you say, "I couldn't begin without some food,
and servants."  Surely, my dear sir, in an age when an excellent
spirit-lamp (including a saucepan) can be bought for less than a
shilling, you are not going to allow your highest welfare to depend
upon the precarious immediate co-operation of a fellow creature!
Instruct the fellow creature, whoever she may be, at night.  Tell her
to put a tray in a suitable position over night. On that tray two
biscuits, a cup and saucer, a box of matches and a spirit-lamp; on the
lamp, the saucepan; on the saucepan, the lid--but turned the wrong way
up; on the reversed lid, the small teapot, containing a minute quantity
of tea leaves.  You will then have to strike a match--that is all.  In
three minutes the water boils, and you pour it into the teapot (which
is already warm).  In three more minutes the tea is infused.  You can
begin your day while drinking it.  These details may seem trivial to
the foolish, but to the thoughtful they will not seem trivial.  The
proper, wise balancing of one's whole life may depend upon the
feasibility of a cup of tea at an unusual hour.

A. B.



CONTENTS

PREFACE

     I  THE DAILY MIRACLE
    II  THE DESIRE TO EXCEED ONE'S PROGRAMME
   III  PRECAUTIONS BEFORE BEGINNING
    IV  THE CAUSE OF THE TROUBLE
     V  TENNIS AND THE IMMORTAL SOUL
    VI  REMEMBER HUMAN NATURE
   VII  CONTROLLING THE MIND
  VIII  THE REFLECTIVE MOOD
    IX  INTEREST IN THE ARTS
     X  NOTHING IN LIFE IS HUMDRUM
    XI  SERIOUS READING
   XII  DANGERS TO AVOID




I

THE DAILY MIRACLE

"Yes, he's one of those men that don't know how to manage. Good
situation.  Regular income.  Quite enough for luxuries as well as
needs.  Not really extravagant.  And yet the fellow's always in
difficulties.  Somehow he gets nothing out of his money.  Excellent
flat--half empty!  Always looks as if he'd had the brokers in.  New
suit--old hat!  Magnificent necktie--baggy trousers!  Asks you to
dinner:  cut glass--bad mutton, or Turkish coffee--cracked cup!  He
can't understand it.  Explanation simply is that he fritters his income
away.  Wish I had the half of it! I'd  show him--"

So we have most of us criticised, at one time or another, in our
superior way.

We are nearly all chancellors of the exchequer:  it is the pride of the
moment.  Newspapers are full of articles explaining how to live on
such-and-such a sum, and these articles provoke a correspondence whose
violence proves the interest they excite.  Recently, in a daily organ,
a battle raged round the question whether a woman can exist nicely in
the country on L85 a year.  I have seen an essay, "How to live on eight
shillings a week."  But I have never seen an essay, "How to live on
twenty-four hours a day."  Yet it has been said that time is money.
That proverb understates the case.  Time is a great deal more than
money.  If you have time you can obtain money--usually.  But though you
have the wealth of a cloak-room attendant at the Carlton Hotel, you
cannot buy yourself a minute more time than I have, or the cat by the
fire has.


Philosophers have explained space.  They have not explained time. It is
the inexplicable raw material of everything.  With it, all is possible;
without it, nothing.  The supply of time is truly a daily miracle, an
affair genuinely astonishing when one examines it.  You wake up in the
morning, and lo! your purse is magically filled with twenty-four hours
of the unmanufactured tissue of the universe of your life!  It is
yours.  It is the most precious of possessions.  A highly singular
commodity, showered upon you in a manner as singular as the commodity
itself!

For remark!  No one can take it from you.  It is unstealable.  And no
one receives either more or less than you receive.

Talk about an ideal democracy!  In the realm of time there is no
aristocracy of wealth, and no aristocracy of intellect.  Genius is
never rewarded by even an extra hour a day.  And there is no
punishment.  Waste your infinitely precious commodity as much as you
will, and the supply will never be withheld from you.  No mysterious
power will say:--"This man is a fool, if not a knave.  He does not
deserve time; he shall be cut off at the meter." It is more certain
than consols, and payment of income is not affected by Sundays.
Moreover, you cannot draw on the future.  Impossible to get into debt!
You can only waste the passing moment.  You cannot waste to-morrow; it
is kept for you.  You cannot waste the next hour; it is kept for you.

I said the affair was a miracle.  Is it not?

You have to live on this twenty-four hours of daily time.  Out of it
you have to spin health, pleasure, money, content, respect, and the
evolution of your immortal soul.  Its right use, its most effective
use, is a matter of the highest urgency and of the most thrilling
actuality.  All depends on that.  Your happiness--the elusive prize
that you are all clutching for, my friends!--depends on that. Strange
that the newspapers, so enterprising and up-to-date as they are, are
not full of "How to live on a given income of time," instead of "How to
live on a given income of money"!  Money is far commoner than time.
When one reflects, one perceives that money is just about the commonest
thing there is.  It encumbers the earth in gross heaps.

If one can't contrive to live on a certain income of money, one earns a
little more--or steals it, or advertises for it.  One doesn't
necessarily muddle one's life because one can't quite manage on a
thousand pounds a year; one braces the muscles and makes it guineas,
and balances the budget.  But if one cannot arrange that an income of
twenty-four hours a day shall exactly cover all proper items of
expenditure, one does muddle one's life definitely.  The supply of
time, though gloriously regular, is cruelly restricted.


Which of us lives on twenty-four hours a day?  And when I say "lives,"
I do not mean exists, nor "muddles through."  Which of us is free from
that uneasy feeling that the "great spending departments" of his daily
life are not managed as they ought to be? Which of us is quite sure
that his fine suit is not surmounted by a shameful hat, or that in
attending to the crockery he has forgotten the quality of the food?
Which of us is not saying to himself--which of us has not been saying
to himself all his life:  "I shall alter that when I have a little more
time"?

We never shall have any more time.  We have, and we have always had,
all the time there is.  It is the realisation of this profound and
neglected truth (which, by the way, I have not discovered) that has led
me to the minute practical examination of daily time-expenditure.



