V

TENNIS AND THE IMMORTAL SOUL

You get into the morning train with your newspaper, and you calmly and
majestically give yourself up to your newspaper.  You do not hurry.
You know you have at least half an hour of security in front of you.
As your glance lingers idly at the advertisements of shipping and of
songs on the outer pages, your air is the air of a leisured man,
wealthy in time, of a man from some planet where there are a hundred
and twenty-four hours a day instead of twenty-four.  I am an
impassioned reader of newspapers. I read five English and two French
dailies, and the news-agents alone know how many weeklies, regularly.
I am obliged to mention this personal fact lest I should be accused of
a prejudice against newspapers when I say that I object to the reading
of newspapers in the morning train. Newspapers are produced with
rapidity, to be read with rapidity. There is no place in my daily
programme for newspapers.  I read them as I may in odd moments. But I
do read them.  The idea of devoting to them thirty or forty consecutive
minutes of wonderful solitude (for nowhere can one more perfectly
immerse one's self in one's self than in a compartment full of silent,
withdrawn, smoking males) is to me repugnant.  I cannot possibly allow
you to scatter priceless pearls of time with such Oriental lavishness.
You are not the Shah of time. Let me respectfully remind you that you
have no more time than I have.  No newspaper reading in trains!  I have
already "put by" about three-quarters of an hour for use.

Now you reach your office.  And I abandon you there till six o'clock.
I am aware that you have nominally an hour (often in reality an hour
and a half) in the midst of the day, less than half of which time is
given to eating.  But I will leave you all that to spend as you choose.
You may read your newspapers then.

I meet you again as you emerge from your office.  You are pale and
tired. At any rate, your wife says you are pale, and you give her to
understand that you are tired.  During the journey home you have been
gradually working up the tired feeling.  The tired feeling hangs heavy
over the mighty suburbs of London like a virtuous and melancholy cloud,
particularly in winter.  You don't eat immediately on your arrival
home. But in about an hour or so you feel as if you could sit up and
take a little nourishment.  And you do.  Then you smoke, seriously; you
see friends; you potter; you play cards; you flirt with a book; you
note that old age is creeping on; you take a stroll; you caress the
piano.... By Jove! a quarter past eleven. You then devote quite forty
minutes to thinking about going to bed; and it is conceivable that you
are acquainted with a genuinely good whisky.  At last you go to bed,
exhausted by the day's work.  Six hours, probably more, have gone since
you left the office--gone like a dream, gone like magic, unaccountably
gone!

That is a fair sample case.  But you say:  "It's all very well for you
to talk. A man _is_ tired.  A man must see his friends.  He can't
always be on the stretch."  Just so.  But when you arrange to go to the
theatre (especially with a pretty woman) what happens? You rush to the
suburbs; you spare no toil to make yourself glorious in fine raiment;
you rush back to town in another train; you keep yourself on the
stretch for four hours, if not five; you take her home; you take
yourself home.  You don't spend three-quarters of an hour in "thinking
about" going to bed.  You go.  Friends and fatigue have equally been
forgotten, and the evening has seemed so exquisitely long (or perhaps
too short)!  And do you remember that time when you were persuaded to
sing in the chorus of the amateur operatic society, and slaved two
hours every other night for three months?  Can you deny that when you
have something definite to look forward to at eventide, something that
is to employ all your energy--the thought of that something gives a
glow and a more intense vitality to the whole day?

What I suggest is that at six o'clock you look facts in the face and
admit that you are not tired (because you are not, you know), and that
you arrange your evening so that it is not cut in the middle by a meal.
By so doing you will have a clear expanse of at least three hours.  I
do not suggest that you should employ three hours every night of your
life in using up your mental energy. But I do suggest that you might,
for a commencement, employ an hour and a half every other evening in
some important and consecutive cultivation of the mind.  You will still
be left with three evenings for friends, bridge, tennis, domestic
scenes, odd reading, pipes, gardening, pottering, and prize
competitions.  You will still have the terrific wealth of forty-five
hours between 2 p.m. Saturday and 10 a.m. Monday.  If you persevere you
will soon want to pass four evenings, and perhaps five, in some
sustained endeavour to be genuinely alive. And you will fall out of
that habit of muttering to yourself at 11.15 p.m., "Time to be thinking
about going to bed."  The man who begins to go to bed forty minutes
before he opens his bedroom door is bored; that is to say, he is not
living.

But remember, at the start, those ninety nocturnal minutes thrice a
week must be the most important minutes in the ten thousand and eighty.
They must be sacred, quite as sacred as a dramatic rehearsal or a
tennis match. Instead of saying, "Sorry I can't see you, old chap, but
I have to run off to the tennis club," you must say, "...but I have to
work."  This, I admit, is intensely difficult to say.  Tennis is so
much more urgent than the immortal soul.



VI

REMEMBER HUMAN NATURE

I have incidentally mentioned the vast expanse of forty-four hours
between leaving business at 2 p.m. on Saturday and returning to
business at 10 a.m. on Monday.  And here I must touch on the point
whether the week should consist of six days or of seven.  For many
years--in fact, until I was approaching forty--my own week consisted of
seven days.  I was constantly being informed by older and wiser people
that more work, more genuine living, could be got out of six days than
out of seven.

And it is certainly true that now, with one day in seven in which I
follow no programme and make no effort save what the caprice of the
moment dictates, I appreciate intensely the moral value of a weekly
rest.  Nevertheless, had I my life to arrange over again, I would do
again as I have done.  Only those who have lived at the full stretch
seven days a week for a long time can appreciate the full beauty of a
regular recurring idleness.  Moreover, I am ageing.  And it is a
question of age.  In cases of abounding youth and exceptional energy
and desire for effort I should say unhesitatingly:  Keep going, day in,
day out.

But in the average case I should say:  Confine your formal programme
(super-programme, I mean) to six days a week.  If you find yourself
wishing to extend it, extend it, but only in proportion to your wish;
and count the time extra as a windfall, not as regular income, so that
you can return to a six-day programme without the sensation of being
poorer, of being a backslider.

Let us now see where we stand.  So far we have marked for saving out of
the waste of days, half an hour at least on six mornings a week, and
one hour and a half on three evenings a week.  Total, seven hours and a
half a week.

I propose to be content with that seven hours and a half for the
present.  "What?" you cry.  "You pretend to show us how to live, and
you only deal with seven hours and a half out of a hundred and
sixty-eight!  Are you going to perform a miracle with your seven hours
and a half?"  Well, not to mince the matter, I am--if you will kindly
let me!  That is to say, I am going to ask you to attempt an experience
which, while perfectly natural and explicable, has all the air of a
miracle.  My contention is that the full use of those seven-and-a-half
hours will quicken the whole life of the week, add zest to it, and
increase the interest which you feel in even the most banal
occupations.  You practise physical exercises for a mere ten minutes
morning and evening, and yet you are not astonished when your physical
health and strength are beneficially affected every hour of the day,
and your whole physical outlook changed.  Why should you be astonished
that an average of over an hour a day given to the mind should
permanently and completely enliven the whole activity of the mind?

More time might assuredly be given to the cultivation of one's self.
And in proportion as the time was longer the results would be greater.
But I prefer to begin with what looks like a trifling effort.

It is not really a trifling effort, as those will discover who have yet
to essay it.  To "clear" even seven hours and a half from the jungle is
passably difficult.  For some sacrifice has to be made. One may have
spent one's time badly, but one did spend it; one did do something with
it, however ill-advised that something may have been.  To do something
else means a change of habits.

And habits are the very dickens to change!  Further, any change, even a
change for the better, is always accompanied by drawbacks and
discomforts.  If you imagine that you will be able to devote seven
hours and a half a week to serious, continuous effort, and still live
your old life, you are mistaken.  I repeat that some sacrifice, and an
immense deal of volition, will be necessary.  And it is because I know
the difficulty, it is because I know the almost disastrous effect of
failure in such an enterprise, that I earnestly advise a very humble
beginning. You must safeguard your self-respect. Self-respect is at the
root of all purposefulness, and a failure in an enterprise deliberately
planned deals a desperate wound at one's self-respect.  Hence I iterate
and reiterate: Start quietly, unostentatiously.

When you have conscientiously given seven hours and a half a week to
the cultivation of your vitality for three months--then you may begin
to sing louder and tell yourself what wondrous things you are capable
of doing.

Before coming to the method of using the indicated hours, I have one
final suggestion to make.  That is, as regards the evenings, to allow
much more than an hour and a half in which to do the work of an hour
and a half.  Remember the chance of accidents.  Remember human nature.
And give yourself, say, from 9 to 11.30 for your task of ninety minutes.



