IX

INTEREST IN THE ARTS

Many people pursue a regular and uninterrupted course of idleness in
the evenings because they think that there is no alternative to
idleness but the study of literature; and they do not happen to have a
taste for literature.  This is a great mistake.

Of course it is impossible, or at any rate very difficult, properly to
study anything whatever without the aid of printed books.  But if you
desire to understand the deeper depths of bridge or of boat-sailing you
would not be deterred by your lack of interest in literature from
reading the best books on bridge or boat-sailing. We must, therefore,
distinguish between literature, and books treating of subjects not
literary.  I shall come to literature in due course.

Let me now remark to those who have never read Meredith, and who are
capable of being unmoved by a discussion as to whether Mr. Stephen
Phillips is or is not a true poet, that they are perfectly within their
rights. It is not a crime not to love literature.  It is not a sign of
imbecility.  The mandarins of literature will order out to instant
execution the unfortunate individual who does not comprehend, say, the
influence of Wordsworth on Tennyson.  But that is only their impudence.
Where would they be, I wonder, if requested to explain the influences
that went to make Tschaikowsky's "Pathetic Symphony"?

There are enormous fields of knowledge quite outside literature which
will yield magnificent results to cultivators.  For example (since I
have just mentioned the most popular piece of high-class music in
England to-day), I am reminded that the Promenade Concerts begin in
August. You go to them.  You smoke your cigar or cigarette (and I
regret to say that you strike your matches during the soft bars of the
"Lohengrin" overture), and you enjoy the music.  But you say you cannot
play the piano or the fiddle, or even the banjo; that you know nothing
of music.

What does that matter?  That you have a genuine taste for music is
proved by the fact that, in order to fill his hall with you and your
peers, the conductor is obliged to provide programmes from which bad
music is almost entirely excluded (a change from the old Covent Garden
days!).

Now surely your inability to perform "The Maiden's Prayer" on a piano
need not prevent you from making yourself familiar with the
construction of the orchestra to which you listen a couple of nights a
week during a couple of months!  As things are, you probably think of
the orchestra as a heterogeneous mass of instruments producing a
confused agreeable mass of sound.  You do not listen for details
because you have never trained your ears to listen to details.

If you were asked to name the instruments which play the great theme at
the beginning of the C minor symphony you could not name them for your
life's sake.  Yet you admire the C minor symphony.  It has thrilled
you.  It will thrill you again.  You have even talked about it, in an
expansive mood, to that lady--you know whom I mean.  And all you can
positively state about the C minor symphony is that Beethoven composed
it and that it is a "jolly fine thing."

Now, if you have read, say, Mr. Krehbiel's "How to Listen to Music"
(which can be got at any bookseller's for less than the price of a
stall at the Alhambra, and which contains photographs of all the
orchestral instruments and plans of the arrangement of orchestras) you
would next go to a promenade concert with an astonishing
intensification of interest in it.  Instead of a confused mass, the
orchestra would appear to you as what it is--a marvellously balanced
organism whose various groups of members each have a different and an
indispensable function.  You would spy out the instruments, and listen
for their respective sounds.  You would know the gulf that separates a
French horn from an English horn, and you would perceive why a player
of the hautboy gets higher wages than a fiddler, though the fiddle is
the more difficult instrument.  You would _live_ at a promenade
concert, whereas previously you had merely existed there in a state of
beatific coma, like a baby gazing at a bright object.

The foundations of a genuine, systematic knowledge of music might be
laid. You might specialise your inquiries either on a particular form
of music (such as the symphony), or on the works of a particular
composer.  At the end of a year of forty-eight weeks of three brief
evenings each, combined with a study of programmes and attendances at
concerts chosen out of your increasing knowledge, you would really know
something about music, even though you were as far off as ever from
jangling "The Maiden's Prayer" on the piano.

"But I hate music!" you say.  My dear sir, I respect you.

What applies to music applies to the other arts.  I might mention Mr.
Clermont Witt's "How to Look at Pictures," or Mr. Russell Sturgis's
"How to Judge Architecture," as beginnings (merely beginnings) of
systematic vitalising knowledge in other arts, the materials for whose
study abound in London.

"I hate all the arts!" you say.  My dear sir, I respect you more and
more.

I will deal with your case next, before coming to literature.



X

NOTHING IN LIFE IS HUMDRUM

Art is a great thing.  But it is not the greatest.  The most important
of all perceptions is the continual perception of cause and effect--in
other words, the perception of the continuous development of the
universe--in still other words, the perception of the course of
evolution.  When one has thoroughly got imbued into one's head the
leading truth that nothing happens without a cause, one grows not only
large-minded, but large-hearted.

It is hard to have one's watch stolen, but one reflects that the thief
of the watch became a thief from causes of heredity and environment
which are as interesting as they are scientifically comprehensible; and
one buys another watch, if not with joy, at any rate with a philosophy
that makes bitterness impossible.  One loses, in the study of cause and
effect, that absurd air which so many people have of being always
shocked and pained by the curiousness of life.  Such people live amid
human nature as if human nature were a foreign country full of awful
foreign customs. But, having reached maturity, one ought surely to be
ashamed of being a stranger in a strange land!

The study of cause and effect, while it lessens the painfulness of
life, adds to life's picturesqueness.  The man to whom evolution is but
a name looks at the sea as a grandiose, monotonous spectacle, which he
can witness in August for three shillings third-class return.  The man
who is imbued with the idea of development, of continuous cause and
effect, perceives in the sea an element which in the
day-before-yesterday of geology was vapour, which yesterday was
boiling, and which to-morrow will inevitably be ice.

He perceives that a liquid is merely something on its way to be solid,
and he is penetrated by a sense of the tremendous, changeful
picturesqueness of life.  Nothing will afford a more durable
satisfaction than the constantly cultivated appreciation of this. It is
the end of all science.

Cause and effect are to be found everywhere.  Rents went up in
Shepherd's Bush.  It was painful and shocking that rents should go up
in Shepherd's Bush.  But to a certain point we are all scientific
students of cause and effect, and there was not a clerk lunching at a
Lyons Restaurant who did not scientifically put two and two together
and see in the (once) Two-penny Tube the cause of an excessive demand
for wigwams in Shepherd's Bush, and in the excessive demand for wigwams
the cause of the increase in the price of wigwams.

"Simple!" you say, disdainfully.  Everything--the whole complex
movement of the universe--is as simple as that--when you can
sufficiently put two and two together.  And, my dear sir, perhaps you
happen to be an estate agent's clerk, and you hate the arts, and you
want to foster your immortal soul, and you can't be interested in your
business because it's so humdrum.

Nothing is humdrum.

The tremendous, changeful picturesqueness of life is marvellously shown
in an estate agent's office.  What!  There was a block of traffic in
Oxford Street; to avoid the block people actually began to travel under
the cellars and drains, and the result was a rise of rents in
Shepherd's Bush!  And you say that isn't picturesque! Suppose you were
to study, in this spirit, the property question in London for an hour
and a half every other evening. Would it not give zest to your
business, and transform your whole life?

You would arrive at more difficult problems.  And you would be able to
tell us why, as the natural result of cause and effect, the longest
straight street in London is about a yard and a half in length, while
the longest absolutely straight street in Paris extends for miles.  I
think you will admit that in an estate agent's clerk I have not chosen
an example that specially favours my theories.

You are a bank clerk, and you have not read that breathless romance
(disguised as a scientific study), Walter Bagehot's "Lombard Street"?
Ah, my dear sir, if you had begun with that, and followed it up for
ninety minutes every other evening, how enthralling your business would
be to you, and how much more clearly you would understand human nature.

You are "penned in town," but you love excursions to the country and
the observation of wild life--certainly a heart-enlarging diversion.
Why don't you walk out of your house door, in your slippers, to the
nearest gas lamp of a night with a butterfly net, and observe the wild
life of common and rare moths that is beating about it, and co-ordinate
the knowledge thus obtained and build a superstructure on it, and at
last get to know something about something?

You need not be devoted to the arts, not to literature, in order to
live fully.

The whole field of daily habit and scene is waiting to satisfy that
curiosity which means life, and the satisfaction of which means an
understanding heart.

I promised to deal with your case, O man who hates art and literature,
and I have dealt with it.  I now come to the case of the person,
happily very common, who does "like reading."



