CHAPTER V

FREETHOUGHT IN GREECE


The highest of all the ancient civilizations, that of Greece,
was naturally the product of the greatest possible complex of
culture-forces; [396] and its rise to pre-eminence begins after
the contact of the Greek settlers in Æolia and Ionia with the higher
civilizations of Asia Minor. [397] The great Homeric epos itself stands
for the special conditions of Æolic and Ionic life in those colonies;
[398] even Greek religion, spontaneous as were its earlier growths, was
soon influenced by those of the East; [399] and Greek philosophy and
art alike draw their first inspirations from Eastern contact. [400]
Whatever reactions we may make against the tradition of Oriental
origins, [401] it is clear that the higher civilization of antiquity
had Oriental (including in that term Egyptian) roots. [402] At no point
do we find a "pure" Greek civilization. Alike the "Mycenæan" and the
"Minoan" civilizations, as recovered for us by modern excavators,
show a composite basis, in which the East is implicated. [403] And
in the historic period the connection remains obvious. It matters
not whether we hold the Phrygians and Karians of history to have
been originally an Aryan stock, related to the Hellenes, and thus
to have acted as intermediaries between Aryans and Semites, or to
have been originally Semites, with whom Greeks intermingled. [404]
On either view, the intermediaries represented Semitic influences,
which they passed on to the Greek-speaking races, though they in turn
developed their deities in large part on psychological lines common
to them and the Semites. [405]


    As to the obvious Asiatic influences on historic Greek
    civilization, compare Winwood Reade, The Martyrdom of Man, 1872,
    p. 64; Von Ihering, Vorgeschichte der Indo-Europäer, Eng. tr. ("The
    Evolution of the Aryan"), p. 73; Schömann, Griech. Alterthümer,
    2te Aufl. 1861, i, 10; E. Meyer, Gesch. des Alterth. ii, 155;
    A. Bertrand, Études de mythol. et d'archéol. grecques, 1858,
    pp. 40-41; Bury, introd. p. 3. It seems clear that the Egyptian
    influence is greatly overstated by Herodotos (ii. 49-52, etc.),
    who indeed avows that he is but repeating what the Egyptians
    affirm. The Egyptian priests made their claim in the spirit
    in which the Jews later made theirs. Herodotos, besides, would
    prefer an Egyptian to an Asiatic derivation, and so would his
    audience. But it must not be overlooked that there was an Egyptian
    influence in the "Minoan" period.


A Hellenistic enthusiasm has led a series of eminent scholars to carry
so far their resistance to the tradition of Oriental beginnings [406]
as to take up the position that Greek thought is "autochthonous." [407]
If it were, it could not conceivably have progressed as it did. Only
the tenacious psychological prejudice as to race-characters and racial
"genius" could thus long detain so many students at a point of view so
much more nearly related to supernaturalism than to science. It is safe
to say that if any people is ever seen to progress in thought, art, and
life, with measurable rapidity, its progress is due to the reactions of
foreign intercourse. The primary civilizations, or what pass for such,
as those of Akkad and Egypt, are immeasurably slow in accumulating
culture-material; the relatively rapid developments always involve
the stimulus of old cultures upon a new and vigorous civilization,
well-placed for social evolution for the time being. There is no
point in early Greek evolution, so far as we have documentary trace
of it, at which foreign impact or stimulus is not either patent or
inferrible. [408] In the very dawn of history the Greeks are found
to be a composite stock, [409] growing still more composite; and the
very beginnings of its higher culture are traced to the non-Grecian
people of Thrace, [410] who worshipped the Muses. As seen by Herodotos
and Thucydides, "the original Hellenes were a particular conquering
tribe of great prestige, which attracted the surrounding tribes to
follow it, imitate it, and call themselves by its name. The Spartans
were, to Herodotos, Hellenic; the Athenians, on the other hand,
were not. They were Pelasgian, but by a certain time 'changed into
Hellenes and learnt their language.' In historical times we cannot
really find any tribe of pure Hellenes in existence." [411] The later
supremacy of the Greek culture is thus to be explained in terms not
of an abnormal "Greek genius," [412] but of the special evolution of
intelligence in the Greek-speaking stock, firstly through constant
crossing with others, and secondarily through its furtherance by the
special social conditions of the more progressive Greek city-states,
of which conditions the most important were their geographical
dividedness and their own consequent competition and interaction. [413]


    The whole problem of Oriental "influence" has been obscured, and
    the solution retarded, by the old academic habit of discussing
    questions of mental evolution in vacuo. Even the reaction against
    idolatrous Hellenism proceeded without due regard to historical
    sequence; and the return reaction against that is still somewhat
    lacking in breadth of inference. There has been too much on
    one side of assumption as to early Oriental achievement; and
    too much tendency on the other to assume that the positing of
    an "influence" on the Greeks is a disparagement of the "Greek
    mind." The superiority of that in its later evolution seems too
    obvious to need affirming. But that hardly justifies so able a
    writer as Professor Burnet in concluding (Early Greek Philosophy,
    2nd ed. introd. pp. 22-23) that "the" Egyptians knew no more
    arithmetic than was learned by their children in the schools;
    or in saying (id. p. 26) that "the" Babylonians "studied and
    recorded celestial phenomena for what we call astrological
    purposes, not from any scientific interest." How can we have
    the right to say that no Babylonians had a scientific interest
    in the data? Such interest would in the nature of the case miss
    the popular reproduction given to astrological lore. But it might
    very well subsist.

    Professor Burnet, albeit a really original investigator, has
    not here had due regard to the early usage of collegiate or
    corporate culture, in which arcane knowledge was reserved for the
    few. Thus he writes (p. 26) concerning the Greeks that "it was not
    till the time of Plato that even the names of the planets were
    known." Surely they must have been "known" to some adepts long
    before: how else came they to be accepted? As Professor Burnet
    himself notes (p. 34), "in almost every department of life we find
    that the corporation at first is everything and the individual
    nothing. The peoples of the East hardly got beyond this stage at
    all: their science, such as it is, is anonymous, the inherited
    property of a caste or guild, and we still see clearly in some
    cases that it was once the same among the Hellenes." Is it not then
    probable that astronomical knowledge was so ordered by Easterns,
    and passed on to Hellenes?

    There still attaches to the investigation of early Greek philosophy
    the drawback that the philosophical scholars do not properly posit
    the question: What was the early Ionic Greek society like? How did
    the Hellenes relate to the older polities and cultures which they
    found there? Professor Burnet makes justifiable fun (p. 21, note)
    of Dr. Gomperz's theory of the influence of "native brides"; but he
    himself seems to argue that the Greeks could learn nothing from the
    men they conquered, though he admits (p. 20) their derivation of
    "their art and many of their religious ideas from the East." If
    religion, why not religious speculation, leading to philosophy
    and science? This would be a more fruitful line of inquiry than
    one based on the assumption that "the" Babylonians went one way
    and "the" Greeks another. After all, only a few in each race
    carried on the work of thought and discovery. We do not say that
    "the English" wrote Shakespeare. Why affirm always that "the"
    Greeks did whatever great Greeks achieved?

    On the immediate issue Professor Burnet incidentally concedes what
    is required. After arguing that the East perhaps borrowed more
    from the West than did the West from the East, he admits (p. 21):
    "It would, however, be quite another thing to say that Greek
    philosophy originated quite independently of Oriental influence."




§ 1

By the tacit admission of one of the ablest opponents of the theory
of foreign influence, Hellenic religion as fixed by Homer for the
Hellenic world was partly determined by Asiatic influences. Ottfried
Müller decided not only that Homer the man (in whose personality he
believed) was probably a Smyrnean, whether of Æolic or Ionic stock,
[414] but that Homer's religion must have represented a special
selection from the manifold Greek mythology, necessarily representing
his local bias. [415] Now, the Greek cults at Smyrna, as in the other
Æolic and Ionic cities of Asia Minor, would be very likely to reflect
in some degree the influence of the Karian or other Asiatic cults
around them. [416] The early Attic conquerors of Miletos allowed
the worship of the Karian Sun-God there to be carried on by the old
priests; and the Attic settlers of Ephesos in the same way adopted the
neighbouring worship of the Lydian Goddess (who became the Artemis
or "Great Diana" of the Ephesians), and retained the ministry of
the attendant priests and eunuchs. [417] Smyrna was apparently not
like these a mixed community, but one founded by Achaians from the
Peloponnesos; but the genera] Ionic and Æolic religious atmosphere,
set up by common sacrifices, [418] must have been represented in an
epic brought forth in that region. The Karian civilization had at
one time spread over a great part of the Ægean, including Delos and
Cyprus. [419] Such a civilization must have affected that of the Greek
conquerors, who only on that basis became civilized traders. [420]

It is not necessary to ask how far exactly the influence may have
gone in the Iliad: the main point is that even at that stage of
comparatively simple Hellenism the Asiatic environment, Karian
or Phoenician, counted for something, whether in cosmogony or in
furthering the process of God-grouping, or in conveying the cult of
Cyprian Aphrodite, [421] or haply in lending some characteristics to
Zeus and Apollo and Athênê, [422] an influence none the less real
because the genius of the poet or poets of the Iliad has given to
the whole Olympian group the artistic stamp of individuality which
thenceforth distinguishes the Gods of Greece from all others. Indeed,
the very creation of a graded hierarchy out of the independent local
deities of Greece, the marrying of the once isolated Pelasgic Hêrê
to Zeus, the subordination to him of the once isolated Athênê and
Apollo--all this tells of the influence of a Semitic world in which
each Baal had his wife, and in which the monarchic system developed on
earth had been set up in heaven. [423] But soon the Asiatic influence
becomes still more clearly recognizable. There is reason to hold
with Schrader that the belief in a mildly blissful future state,
as seen even in the Odyssey [424] and in the Theogony ascribed to
Hesiod, [425] is "a new belief which is only to be understood in
view of oriental tales and teaching." [426] In the Theogony, again,
the Semitic element increases, [427] Kronos being a Semitic figure;
[428] while Semelê, if not Dionysos, appears to be no less so. [429]
But we may further surmise that in Homer, to begin with, the conception
of Okeanos, the earth-surrounding Ocean-stream, as the origin of all
things, [430] comes from some Semitic source; and that Hesiod's more
complicated scheme of origins from Chaos is a further borrowing of
oriental thought--both notions being found in ancient Babylonian lore,
whence the Hebrews derived their combination of Chaos and Ocean in
the first verses of Genesis. [431] It thus appears that the earlier
oriental [432] influence upon Greek thought was in the direction
of developing religion, [433] with only the germ of rationalism
conveyed in the idea of an existence of matter before the Gods, [434]
which we shall later find scientifically developed. But the case is
obscure. Insofar as the Theogony, for instance, partly moralizes the
more primitively savage myths, [435] it may be that it represents
the spontaneous need of the more highly evolved race to give an
acceptable meaning to divine tales which, coming from another race,
have not a quite sacrosanct prescription, though the tendency is to
accept them. On the other hand, it may have been a further foreign
influence that gave the critical impulse.


    "It is plain enough that Homer and Hesiod represent, both
    theologically and socially, the close of a long epoch, and
    not the youth of the Greek world, as some have supposed. The
    real signification of many myths is lost to them, and so is
    the import of most of the names and titles of the elder Gods,
    which are archaic and strange, while the subordinate personages
    generally have purely Greek names" (Professor Mahaffy, History
    of Classical Greek Literature, 1880, i, 17).




§ 2

Whatever be the determining conditions, it is clear that the Homeric
epos stands for a new growth of secular song, distinct from the earlier
poetry, which by tradition was "either lyrical or oracular." The
poems ascribed to the pre-Homeric bards "were all short, and they
were all strictly religious. In these features they contrasted
broadly with the epic school of Homer. Even the hexameter metre
seems not to have been used in these old hymns, and was called a new
invention of the Delphic priests. [436] Still further, the majority
of these hymns are connected with mysteries apparently ignored by
Homer, or with the worship of Dionysos, which he hardly knew." [437]
Intermediate between the earlier religious poetry and the Homeric
epic, then, was a hexametric verse, used by the Delphic priesthood;
and to this order of poetry belongs the Theogony which goes under
the name of Hesiod, and which is a sample of other and older works,
[438] probably composed by priests. And the distinctive mark of the
Homeric epos is that, framed as it was to entertain feudal chiefs and
their courts, it turned completely away from the sacerdotal norm and
purpose. "Thus epic poetry, from having been purely religious, became
purely secular. After having treated men and heroes in subordination
to the Gods, it came to treat the Gods in relation to men. Indeed,
it may be said of Homer that in the image of man created he God." [439]


    As to the non-religiousness of the Homeric epics, there is a
    division of critical opinion. Meyer insists (Gesch. des Alt. ii,
    395) that, as contrasted with the earlier religious poetry, "the
    epic poetry is throughout secular (profan); it aims at charming
    its hearers, not at propitiating the Gods"; and he further sees in
    the whole Ionian mood a certain cynical disillusionment (id. ii,
    723). Cp. Benn, Philos. of Greece, p. 40, citing Hegel. E. Curtius
    (G. G. i, 126) goes so far as to ascribe a certain irony to the
    portraiture of the Gods (Ionian Apollo excepted) in Homer, and to
    trace this to Ionian levity. To the same cause he assigns the lack
    of any expression of a sense of stigma attaching to murder. This
    sense he holds the Greek people had, though Homer does not
    hint it. (Cp. Grote, i, 24, whose inference Curtius implicitly
    impugns.) Girard (Le Sentiment religieux en Grèce, 1869), on the
    contrary, appears to have no suspicion of any problem to solve,
    treating Homer as unaffectedly religious. The same view is taken
    by Prof. Paul Decharme. "On chercherait vainement dans l'Iliade et
    dans l'Odyssée les premières traces du scepticisme grec à l'égard
    des fables des dieux. C'est avec une foi entière en la réalité
    des événements mythiques que les poètes chantent les légendes ...;
    c'est en toute simplicité d'âme aussi que les auditeurs de l'épopée
    écoutent...." (La critique des traditions religieuses chez les
    grecs, 1904, p. 1.) Thus we have a kind of balance of contrary
    opinions, German against French. Any verdict on the problem must
    recognize on the one hand the possibilities of naïve credulity in
    an unlettered age, and on the other the probability of critical
    perception on the part of a great poet. I have seen both among
    Boers in South Africa. On the general question of the mood of
    the Homeric poems compare Gilbert Murray, Four Stages of Greek
    Religion, 1912, p. 77, and Hist. of Anc. Greek Lit. pp. 34, 35;
    and A. Benn, The Philosophy of Greece in Relation to the Character
    of its People, 1898, pp. 29-30.


Still, it cannot be said that in the Iliad there is any clear hint of
religious skepticism, though the Gods are so wholly in the likeness of
men that the lower deities fight with heroes and are worsted, while
Zeus and Hêrê quarrel like any earthly couple. In the Odyssey there
is a bare hint of possible speculation in the use of the word atheos;
but it is applied only in the phrase ouk atheei, "not without a
God," [440] in the sense of similar expressions in other passages
and in the Iliad. [441] The idea was that sometimes the Gods directly
meddled. When Odysseus accuses the suitors of not dreading the Gods,
[442] he has no thought of accusing them of unbelief. [443] Homer
has indeed been supposed to have exercised a measure of relative
freethought in excluding from his song the more offensive myths about
the Gods, [444] but such exclusion may be sufficiently explained on
the score that the epopees were chanted in aristocratic dwellings,
in the presence of womenkind, without surmising any process of doubt
on the poet's part.

On the other hand, it was inevitable that such a free treatment of
things hitherto sacred should not only affect the attitude of the
lay listener towards the current religion, but should react on the
religious consciousness. God-legends so fully thrust on secular
attention were bound to be discussed; and in the adaptations of
myth for liturgical purposes by Stesichoros (fl. circa 600 B.C.) we
appear to have the first open trace of a critical revolt in the
Greek world against immoral or undignified myths. [445] In his
work, it is fair to say, we see "the beginning of rationalism":
"the decisive step is taken: once the understanding criticizes the
sanctified tradition, it raises itself to be the judge thereof;
no longer the common tradition but the individual conviction is the
ground of religious belief." [446] Religious, indeed, the process
still substantially is. It is to preserve the credit of Helena as
a Goddess that Stesichoros repudiates the Homeric account of her,
[447] somewhat in the spirit in which the framers of the Hesiodic
theogony manipulated the myths without rejecting them, or the Hebrew
redactors tampered with their text. But in Stesichoros there is a new
tendency to reject the myth altogether; [448] so that at this stage
freethought is still part of a process in which religious feeling,
pressed by an advancing ethical consciousness, instinctively clears
its standing ground.

It is in Pindar, however (518-442 B.C.), that we first find such a
mental process plainly avowed by a believer. In his first Olympic
Ode he expressly declares the need for bringing afterthought to bear
on poetic lore, that so men may speak nought unfitting of the Gods;
and he protests that he will never tell the tale of the blessed ones
banqueting on human flesh. [449] In the ninth Ode he again protests
that his lips must not speak blasphemously of such a thing as strife
among the immortals. [450] Here the critical motive is ethical, though,
while repudiating one kind of scandal about the Gods, Pindar placidly
accepts others no less startling to the modern sense. His critical
revolt, in fact, is far from thoroughgoing, and suggests rather a
religious man's partial response to pressure from others than any
independent process of reflection. [451]


    "He [Pindar] was honestly attached to the national religion and to
    its varieties in old local cults. He lived a somewhat sacerdotal
    life, labouring in honour of the Gods, and seeking to spread a
    reverence for old traditional beliefs. He, moreover, shows an
    acquaintance with Orphic rites and Pythagorean mysteries, which
    led him to preach the doctrine of immortality, and of rewards
    and punishments in the life hereafter. [Note.--The most explicit
    fragment (thrênoi, 3), is, however, not considered genuine by
    recent critics.]... He is indeed more affected by the advance of
    freethinking than he imagines; he borrows from the neologians the
    habit of rationalizing myths, and explaining away immoral acts
    and motives in the Gods; but these things are isolated attempts
    with him, and have no deep effect upon his general thinking"
    (Mahaffy, Hist. of Greek Lit. i, 213-14).


For such a development we are not, of course, forced to assume a
foreign influence: mere progress in refinement and in mental activity
could bring it about; yet none the less it is probable that foreign
influence did quicken the process. It is true that from the beginnings
of the literary period Greek thought played with a certain freedom on
myth, partly perhaps because the traditions visibly came from various
races, and there was no strong priesthood to ossify them. After Homer
and Hesiod, men looked back to those poets as shaping theology to
their own minds. [452] But all custom is conservative, and Pindar's
mind had that general cast. On the other hand, external influence was
forthcoming. The period of Pindar and Æschylus [525-455 B.C.] follows
on one in which Greek thought, stimulated on all sides, had taken
the first great stride in its advance beyond all antiquity. Egypt
had been fully thrown open to the Greeks in the reign of Psammetichos
[453] (650 B.C.); and a great historian, who contends that the "sheer
inherent and expansive force" of "the" Greek intellect, "aided but
by no means either impressed or provoked from without," was the true
cause, yet concedes that intercourse with Egypt "enlarged the range
of their thoughts and observations, while it also imparted to them
that vein of mysticism which overgrew the primitive simplicity of the
Homeric religion," and that from Asia Minor in turn they had derived
"musical instruments and new laws of rhythm and melody," as well as
"violent and maddening religious rites." [454] And others making
similar à priori claims for the Greek intelligence are forced likewise
to admit that the mental transition between Homer and Herodotos cannot
be explained save in terms of "the influence of other creeds, and the
necessary operation of altered circumstances and relations." [455]
In the Persae of Æschylus we even catch a glimpse of direct contact
with foreign skepticism; [456] and again in the Agamemnon there is
a reference to some impious one who denied that the Gods deigned
to have care of mortals. [457] It seems unwarrantable to read as
"ridicule of popular polytheism" the passage in the same tragedy:
[458] "Zeus, whosoever he be; if this name be well-pleasing to
himself in invocation, by this do I name him." It may more fitly be
read [459] as an echo of the saying of Herakleitos that "the Wise
[= the Logos?] is unwilling and willing to be called by the name of
Zeus." [460] But in the poet's thought, as revealed in the Prometheus,
and in the Agamemnon on the theme of the sacrifice of Iphigeneia, there
has occurred an ethical judgment of the older creeds, an approach to
pantheism, a rejection of anthropomorphism, and a growth of pessimism
that tells of their final insufficiency.


    The leaning to pantheism is established by the discovery that
    the disputed lines, "Zeus is sky, earth, and heaven: Zeus is all
    things, yea, greater than all things" (Frag. 443), belonged to the
    lost tragedy of the Heliades (Haigh, Tragic Drama of the Greeks,
    1896, p. 88). For the pessimism see the Prometheus, 247-51. The
    anti-anthropomorphism is further to be made out from the lines
    ascribed to Æschylus by Justin Martyr (De Monarchia, c. 2)
    and Clemens Alexandrinus (Stromata, v, 14). They are expressly
    pantheistic; but their genuineness is doubtful. The story that
    Æschylus was nearly killed by a theatre audience on the score
    that he had divulged part of the mysteries in a tragedy (Haigh,
    The Attic Theatre, 1889, p. 316; Tragic Drama, pp. 49-50)
    does not seem to have suggested to Aristotle, who tells it
    (Nicomachean Ethics, iii, 2), any heterodox intention on the
    tragedian's part; but it is hard to see an orthodox believer
    in the author either of the Prometheus, wherein Zeus is posed
    as brutal might crucifying innocence and beneficence, or of
    the Agamemnon, where the father, perplexed in the extreme, can
    but fall back helplessly on formulas about the all-sufficiency
    of Zeus when called upon to sacrifice his daughter. Cp. Haigh,
    Tragic Drama, p. 86 sq. "Some critics," says Mr. Haigh (p. 88),
    "have been led to imagine that there is in Æschylus a double
    Zeus--the ordinary God of the polytheistic religion and the one
    omnipotent deity in whom he really believed. They suppose that he
    had no genuine faith in the credibility of the popular legends,
    but merely used them as a setting for his tragedies; and that his
    own convictions were of a more philosophical type," as seen in
    the pantheistic lines concerning Zeus. To this Mr. Haigh replies
    that it is "most improbable that there was any clear distinction
    in the mind of Æschylus" between the two conceptions of Zeus;
    going on, however, to admit that "much, no doubt, he regarded
    as uncertain, much as false. Even the name 'Zeus' was to him a
    mere convention." Mr. Haigh in this discussion does not attempt
    to deal with the problem of the Prometheus.

    The hesitations of the critics on this head are noteworthy. Karl
    Ottfried Müller, who is least himself in dealing with fundamental
    issues of creed, evades the problem (Lit. of Anc. Greece, 1847,
    p. 329) with the bald suggestion that "Æschylus, in his own
    mind, must have felt how this severity [of Zeus], a necessary
    accompaniment of the transition from the Titanic period to the
    government of the Gods of Olympus, was to be reconciled with the
    mild wisdom which he makes an attribute of Zeus in the subsequent
    ages of the world. Consequently, the deviation from right ... would
    all lie on the side of Prometheus." This nugatory plea--which is
    rightly rejected by Burckhardt (Griech. Culturgesch. ii, 25)--is
    ineffectually backed by the argument that the friendly Oceanides
    recur to the thought, "Those only are wise who humbly reverence
    Adrasteia (Fate)"--as if the positing of a supreme Fate were not
    a further belittlement of Zeus.

    Other critics are similarly evasive. Patin (Eschyle, éd. 1877,
    p. 250 sq.), noting the vagaries of past criticism, hostile and
    other, avowedly leaves the play an unsolved enigma, affirming only
    the commonly asserted "piety" of Æschylus. Girard (Le sentiment
    religieux en Grèce, pp. 425-29) does no better, while dogmatically
    asserting that the poet is "the Greek faithful to the faith of his
    fathers, which he interprets with an intelligent and emotional
    (émue) veneration." Meyer (iii, §§ 257-58) draws an elaborate
    parallel between Æschylus and Pindar, affirming in turn the "tiefe
    Frömmigkeit" of the former--and in turn leaves the enigma of the
    Prometheus unsolved. Professor Decharme, rightly rejecting the
    fanciful interpretations of Quinet and others who allegorize
    Prometheus into humanity revolting against superstition,
    offers a very unsatisfying explanation of his own (p. 107),
    which practically denies that there is any problem to solve.

    Prof. Mahaffy, with his more vivacious habit of thought, comes
    to the evaded issue. "How," he asks, "did the Athenian audience,
    who vehemently attacked the poet for divulging the mysteries,
    tolerate such a drama? And still more, how did Æschylus, a pious
    and serious thinker, venture to bring such a subject on the
    stage with a moral purpose?" The answers suggested are: (1) that
    in all old religions there are tolerated anomalous survivals;
    (2) that "a very extreme distortion of their Gods will not
    offend many who would feel outraged at any open denial of them";
    (3) that all Greeks longed for despotic power for themselves,
    and that "no Athenian, however he sympathized with Prometheus,
    would think of blaming Zeus for ... crushing all resistance to his
    will." But even if these answers--of which the last is the most
    questionable--be accepted, "the question of the poet's intention
    is far more difficult, and will probably never be satisfactorily
    answered." Finally, we have this summing-up: "Æschylus was, indeed,
    essentially a theologian ... but, what is more honourable and
    exceptional, he was so candid and honest a theologian that he did
    not approach men's difficulties for the purpose of refuting them
    or showing them weak and groundless. On the contrary, though an
    orthodox and pious man, though clearly convinced of the goodness
    of Providence, and of the profound truth of the religion of
    his fathers, he was ever stating boldly the contradictions and
    anomalies in morals and in myths, and thus naturally incurring
    the odium and suspicion of the professional advocates of religion
    and their followers. He felt, perhaps instinctively, that a vivid
    dramatic statement of these problems in his tragedies was better
    moral education than vapid platitudes about our ignorance, and
    about our difficulties being only caused by the shortness of our
    sight" (Hist. of Greek Lit. i, 260-61, 273-74).

    Here, despite the intelligent handling, the enigma is merely
    transferred from the great tragedian's work to his character: it is
    not solved. No solution is offered of the problem of the pantheism
    of the fragment above cited, which is quite irreconcilable with
    any orthodox belief in Greek religion, though such sayings are
    at times repeated by unthinking believers, without recognition
    of their bearing. That the pantheism is a philosophical element
    imported into the Greek world from the Babylonian through the early
    Ionian thinkers seems to be the historical fact (cp. Whittaker,
    as last cited): that the importation meant the dissolution of
    the national faith for many thinking men seems to be no less
    true. It seems finally permissible, then, to suggest that the
    "piety" of Æschylus was either discontinuous or a matter of
    artistic rhetoric and public spirit, and that the Prometheus is
    a work of profound and terrible irony, unburdening his mind of
    reveries that religion could not conjure away. The discussion
    on the play has unduly ignored the question of its date. It is,
    in all probability, one of the latest of the works of Æschylus
    (K. O. Müller, Lit. of Anc. Greece, p. 327; Haigh, Tragic Drama,
    p. 109). Müller points to the employment of the third actor--a
    late development--and Haigh to the overshadowing of the choruses
    by the dialogue; also to the mention (ll. 366-72) of the eruption
    of Etna, which occurred in 475 B.C. This one circumstance goes
    far to solve the dispute. Written near the end of the poet's life
    the play belongs to the latest stages of his thinking; and if it
    departs widely in its tone from the earlier plays, the reasonable
    inference is that his ideas had undergone a change. The Agamemnon,
    with its desolating problem, seems to be also one of his later
    works. Rationalism, indeed, does not usually emerge in old age,
    though Voltaire was deeply shaken in his theism by the earthquake
    of Lisbon; but Æschylus is unique even among men of genius; and
    the highest flight of Greek drama may well stand for an abnormal
    intellectual experience.


In this primary entrance of critical doubt into drama we have one of
the sociological clues to the whole evolution of Greek thought. It
has been truly said that the constant action of the tragic stage, the
dramatic putting of arguments and rejoinders, pros and cons--which
in turn was a fruit of the actual daily pleadings in the Athenian
dikastery--was a manifold stimulus alike to ethical feeling and
to intellectual effort, such as no other ancient civilization ever
knew. "The appropriate subject-matter of tragedy is pregnant not only
with ethical sympathy, but also with ethical debate and speculation,"
to an extent unapproached in the earlier lyric and gnomic poetry
and the literature of aphorism and precept. "In place of unexpanded
results, or the mere communication of single-minded sentiment, we
have even in Æschylus, the earliest of the great tragedians, a large
latitude of dissent and debate--a shifting point of view--a case
better or worse--and a divination of the future advent of sovereign
and instructed reason. It was through the intermediate stage of
tragedy that Grecian literature passed into the Rhetoric, Dialectics,
and Ethical speculation which marked the fifth century B.C." [461]

This development was indeed autochthonous, save insofar as the
germ of the tragic drama may have come from the East in the cult
of Dionysos, with its vinous dithyramb: the "Greek intellect"
assuredly did wonderful things at Athens, being placed, for a time,
in civic conditions peculiarly fitted for the economic evocation of
certain forms of genius. But the above-noted developments in Pindar
and in Æschylus had been preceded by the great florescence of early
Ionian philosophy in the sixth century, a growth which constrains
us to look once more to Asia Minor for a vital fructification of the
Greek inner life, of a kind that Athenian institutions could not in
themselves evoke. For while drama flourished supremely at Athens,
science and philosophy grew up elsewhere, centuries before Athens
had a philosopher of note; and all the notable beginnings of Hellenic
freethought occurred outside of Hellas proper.




§ 3

The Greeks varied from the general type of culture-evolution seen
in India, Persia, Egypt, and Babylon, and approximated somewhat to
that of ancient China, in that their higher thinking was done not by
an order of priests pledged to cults, but by independent laymen. In
Greece, as in China, this line of development is to be understood as a
result of early political conditions--in China, those of a multiplicity
of independent feudal States; in Greece, those of a multiplicity of
City States, set up first by the geographical structure of Hellas,
and reproduced in the colonies of Asia Minor and Magna Graecia by
reason of the acquired ideal and the normal state of commercial
competition. To the last, many Greek cults exhibited their original
character as the sacra of private families. Such conditions prevented
the growth of a priestly caste or organization. [462] Neither China
nor Pagan Greece was imperialized till there had arisen enough of
rationalism to prevent the rise of a powerful priesthood; and the
later growth of a priestly system in Greece in the Christian period
is to be explained in terms first of a positive social degeneration,
accompanying a complete transmutation of political life, and secondly
of the imposition of a new cult, on the popular plane, specially
organized on the model of the political system that adopted it. Under
imperialism, however, the two civilizations ultimately presented a
singular parallel of unprogressiveness.

In the great progressive period, the possible gains from the absence of
a priesthood are seen in course of realization. For the Greek-speaking
world in general there was no dogmatic body of teaching, no written
code of theology and moral law, no Sacred Book. [463] Each local
cult had its own ancient ritual, often ministered by priestesses,
with myths, often of late invention, to explain it; [464] only
Homer and Hesiod, with perhaps some of the now lost epics, serving
as a general treasury of myth-lore. The two great epopees ascribed
to Homer, indeed, had a certain Biblical status; and the Homerids
or other bards who recited them did what in them lay to make the
old poetry the standard of theological opinion; but they too lacked
organized influence, and could not hinder higher thinking. [465] The
special priesthood of Delphi, wielding the oracle, could maintain
their political influence only by holding their function above all
apparent self-seeking or effort at domination. [466] It only needed,
then, such civic conditions as should evolve a leisured class, with
a bent towards study, to make possible a growth of lay philosophy.

Those conditions first arose in the Ionian cities; because there first
did Greek citizens attain commercial wealth, [467] as a result of
adopting the older commercial civilization whose independent cities
they conquered, and of the greater rapidity of development which
belongs to colonies in general. [468] There it was that, in matters
of religion and philosophy, the comparison of their own cults with
those of their foreign neighbours first provoked their critical
reflection, as the age of primitive warfare passed away. And there
it was, accordingly, that on a basis of primitive Babylonian science
there originated with Thales of Miletos (fl. 586 B.C.), a Phoenician by
descent, [469] the higher science and philosophy of the Greek-speaking
race. [470]


    It is historically certain that Lydia had an ancient and close
    historical connection with Babylonian and Assyrian civilization,
    whether through the "Hittites" or otherwise (Sayce, Anc. Emp. of
    the East, 1884, pp. 217-19; Curtius, Griech. Gesch. i, 63, 207;
    Meyer, Gesch. des Alterth. i, 166, 277, 299, 305-10; Soury,
    Bréviaire de l'hist. du matérialisme, 1881, pp. 30, 37 sq. Cp. as
    to Armenia, Edwards, The Witness of Assyria, 1893, p. 144); and in
    the seventh century the commercial connection between Lydia and
    Ionia, long close, was presumably friendly up to the time of the
    first attacks of the Lydian Kings, and even afterwards (Herodotos
    i, 20-23), Alyattes having made a treaty of peace with Miletos,
    which thereafter had peace during his long reign. This brings us
    to the time of Thales (640-548 B.C.). At the same time, the Ionian
    settlers of Miletos had from the first a close connection with the
    Karians (Herod. i, 146, and above pp. 120-21), whose near affinity
    with the Semites, at least in religion, is seen in their practice
    of cutting their foreheads at festivals (id. ii, 61; cp. Grote,
    ed. 1888, i, 27, note; E. Curtius, i, 36, 42; Busolt, i, 33;
    and Spiegel, Eranische Alterthumskunde, i, 228). Thales was thus
    in the direct sphere of Babylonian culture before the conquest
    of Cyrus; and his Milesian pupils or successors, Anaximandros
    and Anaximenes, stand for the same influences. Herakleitos in
    turn was of Ephesus, an Ionian city in the same culture-sphere;
    Anaxagoras was of Klazomenai, another Ionian city, as had been
    Hermotimos, of the same philosophic school; the Eleatic school,
    founded by Xenophanes and carried on by Parmenides and the elder
    Zeno, come from the same matrix, Elea having been founded by
    exiles from Ionian Phokaia on its conquest by the Persians; and
    Pythagoras, in turn, was of the Ionian city of Samos, in the same
    sixth century. Finally, Protagoras and Demokritos were of Abdera,
    an Ionian colony in Thrace; Leukippos, the teacher of Demokritos,
    was either an Abderite, a Milesian, or an Elean; and Archelaos,
    the pupil of Anaxagoras and a teacher of Sokrates, is said to
    have been a Milesian. Wellhausen (Israel, p. 473 of vol. of
    Prolegomena, Eng. tr.) has spoken of the rise of philosophy
    on the "threatened and actual political annihilation of Ionia"
    as corresponding to the rise of Hebrew prophecy on the menace
    and the consummation of the Assyrian conquest. As regards Ionia,
    this may hold in the sense that the stoppage of political freedom
    threw men back on philosophy, as happened later at Athens. But
    Thales philosophized before the Persian conquest.




§ 4

Thales, like Homer, starts from the Babylonian conception of a
beginning of all things in water; but in Thales the immediate motive
and the sequel are strictly cosmological and neither theological
nor poetical, though we cannot tell whether the worship of a God
of the Waters may not have been the origin of a water-theory of the
cosmos. The phrase attributed to him, "that all things are full of
Gods," [471] clearly meant that in his opinion the forces of things
inhered in the cosmos, and not in personal powers who spasmodically
interfered with it. [472] It is probable that, as was surmised by
Plutarch, a pantheistic conception of Zeus existed for the Ionian
Greeks before Thales. [473] To the later doxographists he "seems to
have lost belief in the Gods." [474] From the mere second-hand and
often unintelligent statements which are all we have in his case,
it is hard to make sure of his system; but that it was pantheistic
[475] and physicist seems clear. He conceived that matter not only
came from but was resolvable into water; that all phenomena were
ruled by law or "necessity"; and that the sun and planets (commonly
regarded as deities) were bodies analogous to the earth, which he
held to be spherical but "resting on water." [476] For the rest, he
speculated in meteorology and in astronomy, and is credited with having
predicted a solar eclipse  [477]--a fairly good proof of his knowledge
of Chaldean science [478]--and with having introduced geometry into
Greece from Egypt. [479] To him, too, is ascribed a wise counsel to
the Ionians in the matter of political federation, [480] which, had
it been followed, might have saved them from the Persian conquest;
and he is one of the many early moralists who laid down the Golden
Rule as the essence of the moral law. [481] With his maxim, "Know
thyself," he seems to mark a broadly new departure in ancient thought:
the balance of energy is shifted from myth and theosophy, prophecy
and poesy, to analysis of consciousness and the cosmic process.

From this point Greek rationalism is continuous, despite reactions,
till the Roman conquest, Miletos figuring long as a general source
of skepticism. Anaximandros (610-547 B.C.), pupil and companion
of Thales, was like him an astronomer, geographer, and physicist,
seeking for a first principle (for which he may or may not have
invented the name [482]); rejecting the idea of a single primordial
element such as water; affirming an infinite material cause, without
beginning and indestructible, [483] with an infinite number of worlds;
and--still showing the Chaldean impulse--speculating remarkably on
the descent of man from something aquatic, as well as on the form and
motion of the earth (figured by him as a cylinder [484]), the nature
and motions of the solar system, and thunder and lightning. [485]
It seems doubtful whether, as affirmed by Eudemus, he taught the
doctrine of the earth's motion; but that this doctrine was derived
from the Babylonian schools of astronomy is so probable that it may
have been accepted in Miletos in his day. Only by inferring a prior
scientific development of remarkable energy can we explain the striking
force of the sayings of Anaximandros which have come down to us. His
doctrine of evolution stands out for us to-day like the fragment of a
great ruin, hinting obscurely of a line of active thinkers. The thesis
that man must have descended from a different species because, "while
other animals quickly found food for themselves, man alone requires
a long period of suckling: had he been originally such as he is now,
he could never have survived," is a quite masterly anticipation of
modern evolutionary science. We are left asking, how came an early
Ionian Greek to think thus, outgoing the assimilative power of the
later age of Aristotle? Only a long scientific evolution can readily
account for it; and only in the Mesopotamian world could such an
evolution have taken place. [486]

Anaximenes (fl. 548 B.C.), yet another Milesian, pupil or at least
follower in turn of Anaximandros, speculates similarly, making his
infinite and first principle the air, in which he conceives the earth
to be suspended; theorizes on the rainbow, earthquakes, the nature
and the revolution of the heavenly bodies (which, with the earth, he
supposed to be broad and flat); and affirms the eternity of motion and
the perishableness of the earth. [487] The Ionian thought of the time
seems thus to have been thoroughly absorbed in problems of natural
origins, and only in that connection to have been concerned with the
problems of religion. No dogma of divine creation blocked the way:
the trouble was levity of hypothesis or assent. Thales, following a
Semitic lead, places the source of all things in water. Anaximandros,
perhaps following another, but seeking a more abstract idea, posited
an infinite, the source of all things; and Anaximenes in turn reduces
that infinite to the air, as being the least material of things. He
cannot have anticipated the chemical conception of the reduction
of all solids to gases: the thesis was framed either à priori or in
adaptation of priestly claims for the deities of the elements; and
others were to follow with the guesses of earth and fire and heat and
cold. Still, the speculation is that of bold and far-grasping thinkers,
and for these there can have been no validity in the ordinary God-ideas
of polytheism.

There is reason to think that these early "schools" of thought
were really constituted by men in some way banded together, [488]
thus supporting each other against the conservatism of religious
ignorance. The physicians were so organized; the disciples of
Pythagoras followed the same course; and in later Greece we shall
find the different philosophic sects formed into societies or
corporations. The first model was probably that of the priestly
corporation; and in a world in which many cults were chronically
disendowed it may well have been that the leisured old priesthoods,
philosophizing as we have seen those of India and Egypt and Mesopotamia
doing, played a primary part in initiating the work of rational
secular thought.


    The recent work of Mr. F. M. Cornford, From Philosophy to Religion
    (1912), puts forth an interesting and ingenious theory to the
    effect that early Greek philosophy is a reduction to abstract
    terms of the practice of totemistic tribes. On this view, when
    the Gods are figured in Homer as subject to Moira (Destiny),
    there has taken place an impersonation of Nomos, or Law; and just
    as the divine cosmos or polity is a reflection of the earthly,
    so the established conception of the absolute compulsoriness of
    tribal law is translated into one of a Fate which overrules the
    Gods (p. 40 sq.). So, when Anaximandros posits the doctrine of
    four elements [he did not use the word, by the way; that comes
    later; see Burnet, ch. i, p. 56, citing Diels], "we observe that
    this type of cosmic structure corresponds to that of a totemic
    tribe containing four clans" (p. 62). On the other hand, the
    totemistic stage had long before been broken down. The "notion
    of the group-soul" had given rise to the notion of God (p. 90);
    and the primitive "magical group" had dissolved into a system of
    families (p. 93), with individual souls. On this prior accumulation
    of religious material early philosophy works (p. 138).

    It does not appear why, thus recognizing that totemism was at
    least a long way behind in Thales's day, Mr. Cornford should
    trace the Ionian four elements straight back to the problematic
    four clans of the totemistic tribe. Dr. Frazer gives him no data
    whatever for Aryan totemism; and the Ionian cities, like those
    of Mesopotamia and Egypt, belong to the age of commerce and of
    monarchies. It would seem more plausible, on Mr. Cornford's own
    premises, to trace the rival theories of the four elements to
    religious philosophies set up by the priests of four Gods of water,
    earth, air, and fire. If the early philosophers "had nothing but
    theology behind them" (p. 138), why not infer theologies for the
    old-established deities of Mesopotamia? Mr. Cornford adds to the
    traditional factors that of "the temperaments of the individual
    philosophers, which made one or other of those schemes the more
    congenial to them." Following Dr. F. H. Bradley, he pronounces
    that "almost all philosophic arguments are invented afterwards, to
    recommend, or defend from attack, conclusions which the philosopher
    was from the outset bent on believing before he could think of
    any arguments at all. That is why philosophical reasonings are
    so bad, so artificial, so unconvincing."

    Upon this very principle it is much more likely that the
    philosophic cults of water, earth, air, and fire originated in
    the worships of Gods of those elements, whose priests would tend
    to magnify their office. It is hard to see how "temperament"
    could determine a man's bias to an air-theory in preference to a
    water-theory. But if the priests of Ea the Water-God and those
    of Bel the God of Air had framed theories of the kind, it is
    conceivable that family or tribal ties and traditions might set
    men upon developing the theory quasi-philosophically when the
    alien Gods came to be recognized by thinking men as mere names
    for the elements. [489] (Compare Flaubert's Salammbô as to the
    probable rivalry of priests of the Sun and Moon.) A pantheistic
    view, again, arose as we saw among various priesthoods in the
    monarchies where syncretism arose out of political aggregations.


What is clear is that the religious or theistic basis had ceased to
exist for many educated Greeks in that environment. The old God-ideas
have disappeared, and a quasi-scientific attitude has been taken
up. It is apparently conditioned, perhaps fatally, by prior modes of
thought; but it operates in disregard of so-called religious needs,
and negates the normal religious conception of earthly government
or providence. Nevertheless, it was not destined to lead to the
rationalization of popular thought; and only in a small number of
cases did the scientific thinkers deeply concern themselves with the
enlightenment of the mass.

In another Ionian thinker of that age, indeed, we find alongside of
physical and philosophical speculation on the universe the most direct
and explicit assault upon popular religion that ancient history
preserves. Xenophanes of Kolophon (? 570-470), a contemporary
of Anaximandros, was forced by a Persian invasion or by some
revolution to leave his native city at the age of twenty-five; and
by his own account his doctrines, and inferribly his life, had gone
"up and down Greece"--in which we are to include Magna Graecia--for
sixty-seven years at the date of writing of one of his poems. [490]
This was presumably composed at Elea (Hyela or Velia), founded
about 536 B.C., on the western Italian coast, south of Paestum, by
unsubduable Phokaians seeking a new home after the Persian conquest,
and after they had been further defeated in the attempt to live as
pirates in Corsica. [491] Thither came the aged Xenophanes, perhaps
also seeking freedom. He seems to have lived hitherto as a rhapsode,
chanting his poems at the courts of tyrants as the Homerids did the
Iliad. It is hard indeed to conceive that his recitations included the
anti-religious passages which have come down to us; but his resort in
old age to the new community of Elea is itself a proof of a craving
and a need for free conditions of life. [492]

Setting out on his travels, doubtless, with the Ionian predilection for
a unitary philosophy, he had somewhere and somehow attained a pantheism
which transcended the concern for a "first principle"--if, indeed,
it was essentially distinct from the doctrine of Anaximandros. [493]
"Looking wistfully upon the whole heavens," says Aristotle, [494]
"he affirms that unity is God." From the scattered quotations which
are all that remain of his lost poem, On Nature (or Natural Things),
[495] it is hard to deduce any full conception of his philosophy;
but it is clear that it was monistic; and though most of his later
interpreters have acclaimed him as the herald of monotheism, it is only
in terms of pantheism that his various utterances can be reconciled. It
is clearly in that sense that Aristotle and Plato [496] commemorate
him as the first of the Eleatic monists. Repeatedly he speaks of
"the Gods" as well as of "God"; and he even inculcates the respectful
worship of them. [497] The solution seems to be that he thinks of the
forces and phenomena of Nature in the early way as Gods or Powers, but
resolves them in turn into a whole which includes all forms of power
and intelligence, but is not to be conceived as either physically or
mentally anthropomorphic. "His contemporaries would have been more
likely to call Xenophanes an atheist than anything else." [498]


    The common verdict of the historians of philosophy, who find
    in Xenophanes an early and elevated doctrine of "Monotheism,"
    is closely tested by J. Freudenthal, Ueber die Theologie des
    Xenophanes, 1886. As he shows, the bulk of them (cited by him,
    pp. 2-7) do violence to Xenophanes's language in making him
    out the proclaimer of a monotheistic doctrine to a polytheistic
    world. That he was essentially a pantheist is now recognized by
    a number of writers. Cp. Windelband, as cited, p. 48; Decharme,
    as cited, p. 46 sq. Bréton, Poésie philos. en Grèce, pp. 47,
    64 sq., had maintained the point, against Cousin, in 1882,
    before Freudenthal. But Freudenthal in turn glosses part of the
    problem in ascribing to Xenophanes an acceptance of polytheism
    (cp. Burnet, p. 142), which kept him from molestation throughout
    his life; whereas Anaxagoras, who had never attacked popular
    belief with the directness of Xenophanes, was prosecuted for
    atheism. Anaxagoras was of a later age, dwelling in an Athens in
    which popular prejudice took readily to persecution, and political
    malice resorted readily to religious pretences. Xenophanes
    could hardly have published with impunity in Periklean Athens
    his stinging impeachments of current God-ideas; and it remains
    problematic whether he ever proclaimed them in face of the
    multitude. It is only from long subsequent students that we get
    them as quotations from his poetry; there is no record of their
    effect on his contemporaries. That his God-idea was pantheistic
    is sufficiently established by his attacks on anthropomorphism,
    taken in connection with his doctrine of the All.


Whether as teaching meant for public currency or as a philosophic
message for the few, the pantheism of Xenophanes expressed itself in
an attack on anthropomorphic religion, no less direct and much more
ratiocinative than that of any Hebrew prophet upon idolatry. "Mortals,"
he wrote, in a famous passage, "suppose that the Gods are born, and
wear man's clothing, [499] and have voice and body. But if cattle
or lions had hands, so as to paint with their hands and make works
of art as men do, they would paint their Gods and give them bodies
like their own--horses like horses, cattle like cattle." And again:
"Ethiopians make their Gods black and snub-nosed; the Thracians say
theirs have reddish hair and blue eyes; so also they conceive the
spirits of the Gods to be like themselves." [500] On Homer and Hesiod,
the myth-singers, his attack is no less stringent: "They attributed
to the Gods all things that with men are of ill-fame and blame;
they told of them countless nefarious things--thefts, adulteries,
and deception of each other." [501] It is recorded of him further
that, like Epicurus, he absolutely rejected all divination. [502]
And when the Eleans, perhaps somewhat shaken by such criticism, asked
him whether they should sacrifice and sing a dirge to Leukothea,
the child-bereft Sea-Goddess, he bade them not to sing a dirge if
they thought her divine, and not to sacrifice if she were human. [503]

Beside this ringing radicalism, not yet out of date, the physics of
the Eleatic freethinker is less noticeable. His resort to earth as a
material first principle was but another guess or disguised theosophy
added to those of his predecessors, and has no philosophic congruity
with his pantheism. It is interesting to find him reasoning from
fossil-marks that what was now land had once been sea-covered, and
been left mud; and that the moon is probably inhabited. [504] Yet,
with all this alertness of speculation, Xenophanes sounds the note
of merely negative skepticism which, for lack of fruitful scientific
research, was to become more and more common in Greek thought: [505]
"no man," he avows in one verse, "knows truly anything, and no man
ever will." [506] More fruitful was his pantheism or pankosmism. "The
All (oulos)" he declared, "sees, thinks, and hears." [507]
"It was thus from Xenophanes that the doctrine of Pankosmism first
obtained introduction into Greek philosophy, recognizing nothing real
except the universe as an indivisible and unchangeable whole." [508]
His negative skepticism might have guarded later Hellenes against
baseless cosmogony-making if they had been capable of a systematic
intellectual development. His sagacity, too, appears in his protest
[509] against that extravagant worship of the athlete which from
first to last kept popular Greek life-philosophy unprogressive. But
here least of all was he listened to.

It is after a generation of such persistent questioning of Nature
and custom by pioneer Greeks that we find in Herakleitos of Ephesus
(fl. 500 B.C.)--still in the Ionian culture-sphere--a positive and
unsparing criticism of the prevailing beliefs. No sage among the
Ionians (who had already produced a series of powerful thinkers) left
a deeper impression than he of massive force and piercing intensity:
above all of the gnomic utterances of his age, his have the ring of
character and the edge of personality; and the gossiping Diogenes,
after setting out by calling him the most arrogant of men, concedes
that the brevity and weight of his expression are not to be matched. It
was due rather to this, probably, than to his metaphysic--though that
has an arresting quality--that there grew up a school of Herakliteans
calling themselves by his name. And though doubt attaches to some of
his sayings, and even to his date, there can be small question that
he was mordantly freethinking, though a man of royal descent. He has
stern sayings about "bringing forth untrustworthy witnesses to confirm
disputed points," and about eyes and ears being "bad witnesses for
men, when their souls lack understanding." [510] "What can be seen,
heard, and learned, this I prize," is one of his declarations; and
he is credited with contemning book-learning as having failed to
give wisdom to Hesiod, Pythagoras, Xenophanes, and Hekataios. [511]
The belief in progress, he roundly insists, stops progress. [512] From
his cryptic utterances it maybe gathered that he too was a pantheist;
[513] and from his insistence on the immanence of strife in all things,
[514] as from others of his sayings, that he was of the Stoic mood. It
was doubtless in resentment of immoral religion that he said [515]
Homer and Archilochos deserved flogging; as he is severe on the
phallic worship of Dionysos, [516] on the absurdity of prayer to
images, and on popular pietism in general. [517] One of his sayings,
êthos anthrôpô daimôn, [518] "character is a man's dæmon," seems
to be the definite assertion of rationalism in affairs as against
the creed of special providences.


    A confusion of tradition has arisen between the early Herakleitos,
    "the Obscure," and the similarly-named writer of the first century
    of our era, who was either one Herakleides or one using the
    name of Herakleitos. As the later writer certainly allegorized
    Homer--reducing Apollo to the Sun, Athenê to Thought, and so
    on--and claimed thus to free him from the charge of impiety,
    it seems highly probable that it is from him that the scholiast
    on the Iliad, xv, 18, cites the passage scolding the atheists
    who attacked the Homeric myths. The theme and the tone do not
    belong to 500 B.C., when only the boldest--as Herakleitos--would
    be likely to attack Homer, and when there is no other literary
    trace of atheism. Grote, however (i, 374, note), cites the
    passages without comment as referring to the early philosopher,
    who is much more probably credited, as above, with denouncing
    Homer himself. Concerning the later Herakleitos or Herakleides,
    see Dr. Hatch's Hibbert Lectures on The Influence of Greek Ideas
    and Usages upon the Christian Church, 1890, pp. 61, 62.

    But even apart from the confusion with the late Herakleides,
    there is difficulty in settling the period of the Ephesian
    thinker. Diogenes Laërtius states that he flourished about
    the 69th Olympiad (504-500 B.C.). Another account, preserved by
    Eusebius, places him in the 80th or 81st Olympiad, in the infancy
    of Sokrates, and for this date there are other grounds (Ueberweg,
    i, 40); but yet other evidences carry us back to the earlier. As
    Diogenes notes five writers of the name--two being poets, one a
    historian, and one a "serio-comic" personage--and there is record
    of many other men named Herakleitos and several Herakleides,
    there is considerable room for false attributions. The statement
    of Diogenes that the Ephesian was "wont to call opinion the
    sacred disease" (i, 6, § 7) is commonly relegated to the spurious
    sayings of Herakleitos, and it suggests the last mentioned of his
    namesakes. But see Max Müller, Hibbert Lectures on Indian Religion,
    p. 6, for the opinion that it is genuine, and that by "opinion"
    was meant "religion." The saying, says Dr. Müller, "seems to me
    to have the massive, full, and noble ring of Herakleitos." It is
    hardly for rationalists to demur.


Much discussion has been set up by the common attribution
to Herakleitos in antiquity of the doctrine of the ultimate
conflagration of all things. But for this there is no ground in any
actual passage preserved from his works; and it appears to have
been a mere misconception of his doctrine in regard to Fire. His
monistic doctrine was, in brief, that all the opposing and contrasted
things in the universe, heat and cold, day and night, evil and good,
imply each other, and exist only in the relation of contrast; and he
conceived fire as something in which opposites were solved. [519]
Upon this stroke of mysticism was concentrated the discussion
which might usefully have been turned on his criticism of popular
religion; his negative wisdom was substantially ignored, and his
obscure speculation, treated as his main contribution to thought,
was misunderstood and perverted.

A limit was doubtless soon set to free speech even in Elea; and the
Eleatic school after Xenophanes, in the hands of his pupil Parmenides
(fl. 500 B.C.), Zeno (fl. 464), Melissos of Samos (fl. 444), and
their successors, is found turning first to deep metaphysic and
then to verbal dialectic, to discussion on being and not being,
the impossibility of motion, and the trick-problem of Achilles and
the tortoise. It is conceivable that thought took these lines because
others were socially closed. Parmenides, a notably philosophic spirit
(whom Plato, meeting him in youth, felt to have "an exceptionally
wonderful depth of mind," but regarded as a man to be feared as well
as reverenced), [520] made short work of the counter-sense of not
being, but does not seem to have dealt at close quarters with popular
creeds. Melissos, a man of action, who led a successful sally to
capture the Athenian fleet, [521] was apparently the most pronounced
freethinker of the three named, [522] in that he said of the Gods
"there was no need to define them, since there was no knowledge of
them." [523] Such utterance could not be carried far in any Greek
community; and there lacked the spirit of patient research which
might have fruitfully developed the notable hypothesis of Parmenides
that the earth is spherical in form. [524] But he too was a loose
guesser, adding categories of fire and earth and heat and cold to the
formative and material "principles" of his predecessors; and where he
divagated weaker minds could not but lose themselves. From Melissos
and Parmenides there is accordingly a rapid descent in philosophy
to professional verbalism, popular life the while proceeding on the
old levels.

It was in this epoch of declining energy and declining freedom that
there grew up the nugatory doctrine, associated with the Eleatic
school, [525] that the only realities are mental, [526] a formula
which eluded at once the problems of Nature and the crudities
of religion, and so made its fortune with the idle educated
class. Meant to support the cause of reason, it was soon turned,
as every slackly-held doctrine must be, to a different account. In
the hands of Plato it developed into the doctrine of ideas, which in
the later Christian world was to play so large a part, as "Realism,"
in checking scientific thought; and in Greece it fatally fostered
the indolent evasion of research in physics. [527] Ultimately this
made for supernaturalism, which had never been discarded by the main
body even of rationalizing thinkers. [528] Thus the geographer and
historian Hekataios of Miletos (fl. 500 B.C.), living at the great
centre of rationalism, while rejecting the mass of Greek fables as
"ridiculous," and proceeding in a fashion long popular to translate
them into historical facts, yet affected, in the poetic Greek fashion,
to be of divine descent. [529] At the same time he held by such fables
as that of the floating island in the Nile and that of the supernormal
Hyperboreans. This blending of old and new habits of mind is indeed
perhaps the strongest ground for affirming the genuineness of his
fragments, which has been disputed. [530] But from his time forward
there are many signs of a broad movement of criticism, doubt, inquiry,
and reconstruction, involving an extensive discussion of historical
as well as religious tradition. [531] There had begun, in short,
for the rapidly-developing Greeks, a "discovery of man" such as is
ascribed in later times to the age of the Italian Renaissance. In the
next generation came the father of humanists, Herodotos, who implicitly
carries the process of discrimination still further than did Hekataios;
while Sophocles [496-405 B.C.], without ever challenging popular faith,
whether implicitly as did Æschylus, or explicitly as did Euripides,
"brought down the drama from the skies to the earth; and the drama
still follows the course which Sophocles first marked out for it. It
was on the Gods, the struggles of the Gods, and on destiny that
Æschylus dwelt; it is with man that Sophocles is concerned." [532]

Still, there was only to be a partial enlightenment of the race,
such as we have seen occurring, perhaps about the same period, in
India. Sophocles, even while dramatizing the cruel consequences of
Greek religion, never made any sign of being delivered from the
ordinary Greek conceptions of deity, or gave any help to wiser
thought. The social difference between Greece and the monarchic
civilizations was after all only one of degree: there, as elsewhere,
the social problem was finally unsolved; and the limits to Greek
progress were soon approached. But the evolution went far in many
places, and it is profoundly interesting to trace it.




§ 5

Compared with the early Milesians and with Xenophanes, the elusive
Pythagoras (fl. 540-510 B.C.) is not so much a rationalistic as a
theosophic freethinker; but to freethought his name belongs insofar
as the system connected with it did rationalize, and discarded
mythology. If the biographic data be in any degree trustworthy,
it starts like Milesian speculation from oriental precedents. [533]
Pythagoras was of Samos in the Ægean; and the traditions have it that
he was a pupil of Pherekydes the Syrian, and that before settling at
Krôton, in Italy, he travelled in Egypt, and had intercourse with the
Chaldean Magi. Some parts of the Pythagorean code of life, at least,
point to an eastern derivation.


    The striking resemblance between the doctrine and practice of the
    Pythagoreans and those of the Jewish Essenes has led Zeller to
    argue (Philos. der Griechen, Th. iii, Abth. 2) that the latter were
    a branch of the former. Bishop Lightfoot, on the other hand, noting
    that the Essenes did not hold the specially prominent Pythagorean
    doctrines of numbers and of the transmigration of souls, traces
    Essenism to Zoroastrian influence (Ed. of Colossians, App. on
    the Essenes, pp. 150-51; rep. in Dissertations on the Apostolic
    Age, 1892, pp. 369-72). This raises the issue whether both
    Pythagoreanism and Essenism were not of Persian derivation; and
    Dr. Schürer (Jewish People in the Time of Jesus, Eng. tr. Div. II,
    vol. ii, p. 218) pronounces in favour of an oriental origin for
    both. The new connection between Persia and Ionia just at or before
    the time of Pythagoras (fl. 530 B.C.) squares with this view;
    but it is further to be noted that the phenomenon of monasticism,
    common to Pythagoreans and Essenes, arises in Buddhism about the
    Pythagorean period; and as it is hardly likely that Buddhism
    in the sixth century B.C. reached Asia Minor, there remains
    the possibility of some special diffusion of the new ideal
    from the Babylonian sphere after the conquest by Cyrus, there
    being no trace of a Persian monastic system. The resemblances
    to Orphicism likewise suggest a Babylonian source, as does the
    doctrine of numbers, which is not Zoroastrian. As to Buddhism,
    the argument for a Buddhist origin of Essenism shortly before our
    era (cp. A. Lillie, Buddhism in Christendom and The Influence of
    Buddhism on Primitive Christianity; E. Bunsen, The Angel-Messiah;
    or, Buddhists, Essenes, and Christians--all three to be read
    with much caution) does not meet the case of the Pythagorean
    precedents for Essenism. Prof. Burnet (Early Greek Philos. 2nd
    ed. p. 102) notes close Indian parallels to Pythagoreanism,
    but overlooks the intermediate Persian parallels, and falls back
    very unnecessarily on the bald notion that "the two systems were
    independently evolved from the same primitive systems."


As regards the mystic doctrine that numbers are, as it were, the moving
principle in the cosmos--another thesis not unlikely to arise in that
Babylonian world whence came the whole system of numbers for the later
ancients [534]--we can but pronounce it a development of thought in
vacuo, and look further for the source of Pythagorean influence in
the moral and social code of the movement, in its science, in its
pantheism, [535] its contradictory dualism, [536] and perhaps in its
doctrine of transmigration of souls. On the side of natural science,
its absurdities [537] point to the fatal lack of observation which
so soon stopped progress in Greek physics and biology. [538] Yet in
the fields of astronomy, mathematics, and the science of sound the
school seems to have done good scientific work; being indeed praised
by the critical Aristotle for doing special service in that way. [539]
It is recorded that Philolaos, the successor of Pythagoras, was the
first to teach openly (about 460 B.C.) the doctrine of the motion
of the earth [540]--which, however, as above noted, was also said
to have been previously taught by Anaximandros [541] (from whom some
incline to derive the Pythagorean theory of numbers in general [542])
and by Hiketas or Iketas (or Niketas) of Syracuse. [543] Ekphantos,
of that city, is also credited with asserting the revolution of
the earth on its axis; and he too is grouped with the Pythagoreans,
though he seems to have had a pantheism of his own. [544] Philolaos
in particular is said to have been prosecuted for his teaching, [545]
which for many was a blasphemy; and it may be that this was the reason
of its being specially ascribed to him, though current in the East
long before his day. In the fragments ascribed to him is affirmed,
in divergence from other Pythagoreans, the eternity of the earth; and
in other ways he seems to have been an innovator. [546] In any case,
the Pythagorean conception of the earth's motion was a speculative
one, wide of the facts, and not identical with the modern doctrine,
save insofar as Pythagoras--or Philolaos--had rightly conceived the
earth as a sphere. [547]


    It is noteworthy, however, that in conjecturing that the whole
    solar system moves round a "central fire," Pythagoras carried his
    thought nearly as far as the moderns. The fanciful side of his
    system is seen in his hypothesis of a counter-earth (Anti-chthon)
    invented to bring up the number of celestial bodies in our system
    to ten, the "complete" number. (Berry, as cited.) Narrien (p. 163)
    misses this simple explanation of the idea.


As to politics, finally, it seems hard to solve the anomaly that
Pythagoras is pronounced the first teacher of the principle of
community of goods, [548] and that his adherents at Krôton formed an
aristocratic league, so detested by the people for its anti-democratism
that its members were finally massacred in their meeting-place,
their leader, according to one tradition, being slain with them,
while according to a better grounded account he had withdrawn
and died at Metapontion. The solution seems to be that the early
movement was in no way monastic or communistic; that it was, however,
a secret society; that it set up a kind of puritanism or "methodism"
which repelled conservative people; and that, whatever its doctrines,
its members were mostly of the upper class. [549] If they held by the
general rejection of popular religion attributed to Pythagoras, they
would so much the more exasperate the demos; for though at Krôton,
as in the other Grecian colonial cities, there was considerable
freedom of thought and speech, the populace can nowhere have been
freethinking. [550] In any case, it was after its political overthrow,
and still more in the Italian revival of the second century B.C.,
that the mystic and superstitious features of Pythagoreanism were
most multiplied; and doubtless the master's teachings were often much
perverted by his devotees. It was only too easy. He had laid down, as
so many another moralist, that justice consisted in reciprocity; but
he taught of virtue in terms of his theory of numbers [551]--a sure way
of putting conduct out of touch with reality. Thus we find some of the
later Pythagoreans laying it down as a canon that no story once fully
current concerning the Gods was to be disbelieved [552]--the complete
negation of philosophical freethought and a sharp contradiction of the
other view which represented the shade of Pythagoras as saying that he
had seen in Tartaros the shade of Homer hanged to a tree, and that of
Hesiod chained to a pillar of brass, for the monstrous things they had
ascribed to the Gods. [553] It must have taken a good deal of decadence
to bring an innovating sect to that pass; and even about 200 B.C. we
find the freethinking Ennius at Rome calling himself a Pythagorean;
[554] but the course of things in Magna Graecia was mostly downward
after the sixth century; the ferocious destruction of Sybaris by the
Krotoniates helping to promote the decline. [555] Intellectual life,
in Magna Graecia as in Ionia, obeyed the general tendency.


    An opposite view of the Pythagorean evolution is taken by
    Professor Burnet. He is satisfied that the long list of the
    Pythagorean taboos, which he rightly pronounces to be "of a
    thoroughly primitive type" (p. 105), and not at all the subtle
    "symbols" which they were latterly represented to be, were
    really the lore of Pythagoras. It is not easy thus to conceive a
    thinker of the great Ionian age as holding by thoroughly primitive
    superstitions. Perhaps the solution lies in Aristotle's statement
    that Pythagoras was first a mathematician, and only in later
    life a Pherekydean miracle-monger (Burnet, p. 107, note 3). He
    may actually have started the symbolic view of the taboos which
    he imposed.


Before the decadence comes, however, the phenomenon of rationalism
occurs on all sides in the colonial cities, older and younger alike;
and direct criticism of creed kept pace with the indirect. About
520 B.C. Theagenes of Rhegion, in Southern Italy, had begun for
the Greeks the process of reducing the unacceptable God-stories in
Homer and Hesiod--notably the battle of the Gods in the Iliad--to
mere allegories of the cosmic elements [556]--a device natural to
and practised by liberal conservatives in all religious systems
under stress of skeptical attack, and afterwards much employed in
the Hellenic world. [557] Soon the attack became more stringent. At
Syracuse we find the great comic dramatist Epicharmos, about 470
B.C., treating the deities on the stage in a spirit of such audacious
burlesque [558] as must be held to imply unbelief. Aristophanes, at
Athens, indeed, shows a measure of the same spirit while posing as
a conservative in religion; but Epicharmos was professedly something
of a Pythagorean and philosopher, [559] and was doubtless protected by
Hiero, at whose court he lived, against any religious resentment he may
have aroused. The story of Simonides's answer to Hiero's question as
to the nature of the Gods--first asking a day to think, then two days,
then four, then avowing that meditation only made the problem harder
[560]--points to the prevalent tone among the cultured.




§ 6

At last the critical spirit finds utterance, in the great Periklean
period, at Athens, but first by way of importation from Ionia,
where Miletos had fallen in the year 494. Anaxagoras of Klazomenai
(fl. 480-450 B.C.; d. 428) is the first freethinker historically
known to have been legally prosecuted and condemned [561] for his
freethought; and it was in the Athens of Perikles, despite Perikles's
protection, that the attack was made. Coming of the Ionian line
of thinkers, and himself a pupil of Anaximenes of Miletos, he held
firmly by the scientific view of the cosmos, and taught that the sun,
instead of being animated and a deity as the Athenians believed, was
"a red-hot mass many times larger than the Peloponnesos" [562]--and
the moon a fiery (or earthy) solid body having in it plains and
mountains and valleys--this while asserting that infinite mind was
the source and introducer of all the motion in the infinite universe;
[563] infinite in extent and infinitely divisible. This "materialistic"
doctrine as to the heavenly bodies was propounded, as Sokrates tells in
his defence, in books that in his day anyone could buy for a drachma;
and Anaxagoras further taught, like Theagenes, that the mythical
personages of the poets were mere abstractions invested with name
and gender. [564] Withal he was no brawler; and even in pious Athens,
where he taught in peace for many years, he might have died in peace
but for his intimacy with the most renowned of his pupils, Perikles.


    The question of the deity of the sun raised an interesting
    sociological question. Athenians saw no blasphemy in saying that
    Gê (Gaia) or Dêmêter was the earth: they had always understood as
    much; and the earth was simply for them a Goddess; a vast living
    thing containing the principle of life. They might similarly have
    tolerated the description of the sun as a kind of red-hot earth,
    provided that its divinity were not challenged. The trouble lay
    rather in the negative than in the positive assertion, though
    the latter must for many have been shocking, inasmuch as they had
    never been wont to think about the sun as they did about the earth.


It is told of Perikles (499-429 B.C.) by the pious Plutarch,
himself something of a believer in portents, that he greatly admired
Anaxagoras, from whom he "seems to have learned to despise those
superstitious fears which the common phenomena of the heavens produce
in those who, ignorant of their cause, and knowing nothing about
them, refer them all to the immediate action of the Gods." [565]
And even the stately eloquence and imperturbable bearing of the great
statesman are said to have been learned from the Ionian master, whom he
followed in "adorning his oratory with apt illustrations from physical
science." [566] The old philosopher, however, whom men called "Nous"
or Intelligence because of the part the name played in his teaching,
left his property to go to ruin in his devotion to ideas; and it is
told, with small probability, that at one time, old and indigent,
he covered his head with his robe and decided to starve to death;
till Perikles, hearing of it, hastened to beseech him to live to give
his pupil counsel. [567]

At length it occurred to the statesman's enemies to strike at him
through his guide, philosopher, and friend. They had already procured
the banishment of another of his teachers, Damon, as "an intriguer and
a friend of despotism"; [568] and one of their fanatics, Diopeithes,
a priest and a violent demagogue, [569] laid the way for an attack
on Anaxagoras by obtaining the enactment of a law that "prosecutions
should be laid against all who disbelieved in religion and held
theories of their own about things on high." [570] Anaxagoras was
thus open to indictment on the score alike of his physics and of his
mythology; though, seeing that his contemporary Diogenes of Apollonia
(who before Demokritos taught "nothing out of nothing: nothing
into nothing," and affirmed the sphericity of the earth) was also
in some danger of his life at Athens, [571] it is probable that the
prosecution was grounded on his physicist teaching. Saved by Perikles
from the death punishment, but by one account fined five talents,
[572] he either was exiled or chose to leave the intolerant city;
and he made his home at Lampsakos, where, as the story runs, he won
from the municipality the favour that every year the children should
have a holiday in the month in which he died. [573] It is significant
of his general originality that he was reputed the first Greek who
wrote a book in prose. [574]

Philosophically, however, he counted for less than he did as an
innovating rationalist. His doctrine of Nous amounted in effect to a
reaffirmation of deity; and he has been not unjustly described [575]
as the philosophic father of the dualistic deism or theism which,
whether from within or from without the Christian system, has been the
prevailing form of religious philosophy in the modern world. It was, in
fact, the only form of theistic philosophy capable of winning any wide
assent among religiously biassed minds; and it is the more remarkable
that such a theist should have been prosecuted because his notion of
deity was mental, and excluded the divinization of the heavenly bodies.

In the memorable episode of his expulsion from Athens we have a
finger-post to the road travelled later by Greek civilization. At
Athens itself the bulk of the free population was ignorant and bigoted
enough to allow of the law being used by any fanatic or malignant
partisan against any professed rationalist; and there is no sign
that Perikles dreamt of applying the one cure for the evil--the
systematic bestowal of rationalistic instruction on all. The fatal
maxim of ancient skepticism, that religion is a necessary restraint
upon the multitude, brought it about that everywhere, in the last
resort, the unenlightened multitude became a restraint upon reason and
freethought. [576] In the more aristocratically ruled colonial cities,
as we have seen, philosophic speech was comparatively free: it was
the ignorant Athenian democracy that brought religious intolerance
into Greek life, playing towards science, in form of law, the part
that the fanatics of Egypt and Palestine had played towards the
worshippers of other Gods than their own.

With a baseness of which the motive may be divided between the
instincts of faction and of faith, the anti-Periklean party carried
their attack yet further; and on their behalf a comic playwright,
Hermippos, brought a charge of impiety against the statesman's unwedded
wife, Aspasia. [577] There can be no doubt that that famous woman
cordially shared the opinions and ideals of her husband, joining as
she habitually did in the philosophic talk of his home circle. As a
Milesian she was likely enough to be a freethinker; and all that was
most rational in Athens acknowledged her culture and her charm. [578]
Perikles, who had not taken the risk of letting Anaxagoras come to
trial, himself defended Aspasia before the dikastery, his indignation
breaking through his habitual restraint in a passion of tears, which,
according to the jealous Æschines, [579] won an acquittal.

Placed as he was, Perikles could but guard his own head and heart,
leaving the evil instrument of a religious inquisition to subsist. How
far he held with Anaxagoras we can but divine. [580] There is probably
no truth in Plutarch's tale that "whenever he ascended the tribune
to speak he used first to pray to the Gods that nothing unfitted for
the occasion might fall from his lips." [581] But as a party leader
he, as a matter of course, observed the conventions; and he may have
reasoned that the prosecutions of Anaxagoras and Aspasia, like that
directed against Pheidias, stood merely for contemporary political
malice, and not for any lasting danger to mental freedom. However
that might be, Athens continued to remain the most aggressively
intolerant and tradition-mongering of Hellenic cities. So marked
is this tendency among the Athenians that for modern students
Herodotos, whose history was published in 445 B.C., is relatively
a rationalist in his treatment of fable, [582] bringing as he did
the spirit of Ionia into things traditional and religious. But even
Herodotos remains wedded to the belief in oracles or prophecies,
claiming fulfilment for those said to have been uttered by Bakis;
[583] and his small measure of spontaneous skepticism could avail
little for critical thought. To no man, apparently, did it occur to
resist the religious spirit by systematic propaganda: that, like the
principle of representative government, was to be hit upon only in a
later age. [584] Not by a purely literary culture, relating life merely
to poetry and myth, tradition and superstition, were men to be made
fit to conduct a stable society. And the spirit of pious persecution,
once generated, went from bad to worse, crowning itself with crime,
till at length the overthrow of Athenian self-government wrought a
forlorn liberty of scientific speech at the cost of the liberty of
political action which is the basis of all sound life.

Whatever may have been the private vogue of freethinking at Athens
in the Periklean period, it was always a popular thing to attack
it. Some years before or after the death of Perikles there came
to Athens the alien Hippo, the first specifically named atheist
[585] of Greek antiquity. The dubious tradition runs that his tomb
bore the epitaph: "This is the grave of Hippo, whom destiny, in
destroying him, has made the equal of the immortal Gods." [586] If,
as seems likely, he was the Hippo of Rhegion mentioned by Hippolytos,
[587] he speculated as to physical origins in the manner of Thales,
making water generate fire, and that in turn produce the world. [588]
But this is uncertain. Upon him the comic muse of Athens turned its
attacks very much as it did upon Socrates. The old comic poet Kratinos,
a notorious wine-bibber, produced a comedy called The Panoptai (the
"all-seers" or "all eyes"), in which it would appear that the chorus
were made to represent the disciples of Hippo, and to wear a mask
covered with eyes. [589] Drunkenness was a venial fault in comparison
with the presumption to speculate on physics and to doubt the sacred
lore of the populace. The end of the rule of ignorance was that a
theistic philosopher who himself discouraged scientific inquiry was
to pay a heavier penalty than did the atheist Hippo.




§ 7

While Athens was gaining power and glory and beauty without popular
wisdom, the colonial city of Abdera, in Thrace, founded by Ionians,
had like others carried on the great impulse of Ionian philosophy,
and had produced in the fifth century some of the great thinkers of
the race. Concerning the greatest of these, Demokritos, and the next
in importance, Protagoras, we have no sure dates; [590] but it is
probable that the second, whether older or younger, was influenced
by the first, who indeed has influenced all scientific philosophy
down to our own day. How much he learned from his master Leukippos
cannot now be ascertained. [591] The writings which went under
his name appear to have been the productions of the whole Abderite
school; [592] and Epicurus declared that Leukippos was an imaginary
person. [593] What passes for his teaching was constructive science
of cardinal importance; for it is the first clear statement of the
atomic theory; the substitution of a real for an abstract foundation of
things. Whoever were the originator of the theory, there is no doubt as
to the assimilation of the principle by Demokritos, who thus logically
continued the non-theistic line of thought, and developed one of the
most fruitful of all scientific principles. That this idea again is a
direct development from Babylonian science is not impossible; at least
there seems to be no doubt that Demokritos had travelled far and wide,
[594] whether or not he had been brought up, as the tradition goes,
by Persian magi; [595] and that he told how the cosmic views of
Anaxagoras, which scandalized the Athenians, were current in the
East. [596] But he stands out as one of the most original minds in
the whole history of thought. No Greek thinker, not Aristotle himself,
has struck so deep as he into fundamental problems; though the absurd
label of "the laughing philosopher," bestowed on him by some peculiarly
unphilosophic mind, has delayed the later recognition of his greatness,
clear as it was to Bacon. [597] The vital maxim, "Nothing from nothing:
nothing into nothing," derives substantially from him. [598]

His atomic theory, held in conjunction with a conception of
"mind-stuff" similar to that of Anaxagoras, may be termed the
high-water mark of ancient scientific thought; and it is noteworthy
that somewhat earlier in the same age Empedokles of Agrigentum,
another product of the freer colonial life, threw out a certain
glimmer of the Darwinian conception--perhaps more clearly attained
by Anaximandros--that adaptations prevail in nature just because the
adaptations fit organisms to survive, and the non-adapted perish. [599]
In his teaching, too, the doctrine of the indestructibility of
matter is clear and firm; [600] and the denial of anthropomorphic
deity is explicit. [601] But Empedokles wrought out no solid system:
"half-mystic and half-rationalist, he made no attempt to reconcile the
two inconsistent sides of his intellectual character"; [602] and his
explicit teaching of metempsychosis [603] and other Pythagoreanisms
gave foothold for more delusion than he ever dispelled. [604] On the
whole, he is one of the most remarkable personalities of antiquity,
moving among men with a pomp and gravity which made them think of
him as a God, denouncing their sacrifices, and no less their eating
of flesh; and checking his notable self-exaltation by recalling the
general littleness of men. But he did little to enlighten them; and
Aristotle passed on to the world a fatal misconception of his thought
by ascribing to him the notion of automatism where he was asserting a
"necessity" in terms of laws which he avowedly could not explain. [605]
Against such misconception he should have provided. Demokritos,
however, shunned dialectic and discussion, and founded no school;
[606] and although his atomism was later adopted by Epicurus, it was
no more developed on a basis of investigation and experiment than was
the biology of Empedokles. His ethic, though wholly rationalistic,
leant rather to quietism and resignation than to reconstruction,
[607] and found its application only in the later static message of
Epicurus. Greek society failed to set up the conditions needed for
progress beyond the point gained by its unguided forces.

Thus when Protagoras ventured to read, at the house of the freethinking
Euripides, a treatise of his own, beginning with the avowal that he
offered no opinion as to the existence of the Gods, life being too
short for the inquiry, [608] the remark got wind, and he had to fly
for his life, though Euripides and perhaps most of the guests were
very much of the same way of thinking. [609] In the course of his
flight, the tradition goes, the philosopher was drowned; [610] and
his book was publicly burned, all who possessed copies being ordered
by public proclamation to give them up--the earliest known instance
of "censorship of the press." [611] Partisan malice was doubtless
at work in his case as in that of Anaxagoras; for the philosophic
doctrine of Protagoras became common enough. It is not impossible,
though the date is doubtful, that the attack on him was one of the
results of the great excitement in Athens in the year 415 B.C. over
the sacrilegious mutilation of the figures of Hermes, the familial or
boundary-God, in the streets by night. It was about that time that the
poet Diagoras of Melos was proscribed for atheism, he having declared
that the non-punishment of a certain act of iniquity proved that
there were no Gods. [612] It has been surmised, with some reason,
that the iniquity in question was the slaughter of the Melians by
the Athenians in 416 B.C., [613] and the Athenian resentment in
that case was personal and political rather than religious. [614]
For some time after 415 the Athenian courts made strenuous efforts
to punish every discoverable case of impiety; and parodies of the
Eleusinian mysteries (resembling the mock Masses of Catholic Europe)
were alleged against Alkibiades and others. [615] Diagoras, who was
further charged with divulging the Eleusinian and other mysteries,
and with making firewood of an image of Herakles, telling the God thus
to perform his thirteenth labour by cooking turnips, [616] became
thenceforth one of the proverbial atheists of the ancient world,
[617] and a reward of a silver talent was offered for killing him,
and of two talents for his capture alive; [618] despite which he seems
to have escaped. But no antidote to the bane of fanaticism was found
or sought; and the most famous publicist in Athens was the next victim.

The fatality of the Athenian development is seen not only in
the direct hostility of the people to rational thought, but in
their loss of their hold even on their public polity. For lack
of political judgment, moved always by the passions which their
literary culture cherished, they so mishandled their affairs in the
long and demoralizing Peloponnesian war that they were at one time
cowed by their own aristocracy, on essentially absurd pretexts,
into abandoning the democratic constitution. Its restoration was
followed at the final crisis by another tyranny, also short-lived,
but abnormally bloody and iniquitous; and though the people at its
overthrow showed a moderation in remarkable contrast to the cruelty and
rapacity of the aristocrats, the effect of such extreme vicissitude
was to increase the total disposition towards civic violence and
coercion. And while the people menaced freethinking in religion,
the aristocracies opposed freethinking in politics. Thus under the
Thirty Tyrants all intellectual teaching was forbidden; and Kritias,
himself accused of having helped Alkibiades to parody the mysteries,
sharply interdicted the political rationalism of Sokrates, [619]
who according to tradition had been one of his own instructors.

It was a result of the general movement of mind throughout the
rest of the Hellenic world that freethinkers of culture were still
numerous. Archelaos of Miletos, the most important disciple of
Anaxagoras; according to a late tradition, the master of Sokrates;
and the first systematic teacher of Ionic physical science in Athens,
taught the infinity of the universe, grasped the explanation of
the nature of sound, and set forth on purely rationalistic lines
the social origin and basis of morals, thus giving Sokrates his
practical lead. [620] Another disciple of Anaxagoras, Metrodoros of
Lampsakos (not to be confounded with Metrodoros of Chios, and the
other Metrodoros of Lampsakos who was the friend of Epicurus, both
also freethinkers), carried out zealously his master's teaching as to
the deities and heroes of Homer, resolving them into mere elemental
combinations and physical agencies, and making Zeus stand for mind,
and Athenê for art. [621] And in the belles lettres of Athens itself,
in the dramas of Euripides [480-406 B.C.], who is said to have been
the ardent disciple of Anaxagoras, [622] to have studied Herakleitos,
[623] and to have been the friend of Sokrates and Protagoras, there
emerge traces enough of a rationalism not to be reconciled with the
old belief in the Gods. If Euripides has nowhere ventured on such
a terrific paradox as the Prometheus, he has in a score of passages
revealed a stress of skepticism which, inasmuch as he too uses all the
forms of Hellenic faith, [624] deepens our doubt as to the beliefs of
Æschylus. Euripides even gave overt proof of his unbelief, beginning
his Melanippe with the line: "Zeus, whoever Zeus be, for I know not,
save by report," an audacity which evoked a great uproar. In a later
production the passage was prudently altered; [625] but he never put
much check on his native tendency to analyse and criticize on all
issues--a tendency fostered, as we have seen, [626] by the constant
example of real and poignant dialectic in the Athenian dikastery, and
the whole drift of the Athenian stage. In his case the tendency even
overbalances the artistic process; [627] but it has the advantage of
involving a very bold handling of vital problems. Not satisfied with
a merely dramatic presentment of lawless Gods, Euripides makes his
characters impeach them as such, [628] or, again, declare that there
can be no truth in the "miserable tales of poets" which so represent
them. [629] Not content with putting aside as idle such a fable as
that of the sun's swerving from his course in horror at the crime of
Atreus, [630] and that of the Judgment of Paris, [631] he attacks
with a stringent scorn the whole apparatus of oracles, divination,
and soothsaying. [632] And if the Athenian populace cried out at
the hardy opening of the Melanippe, he nonetheless gave them again
and again his opinion that no man knew anything of the Gods. [633]
Of orthodox protests against freethinking inquiry he gives a plainly
ironical handling. [634] As regards his constructive opinions, we
have from him many expressions of the pantheism which had by his time
permeated the thought of perhaps most of the educated Greeks. [635]

Here again, as in the case of Æschylus, there arises the problem of
contradiction; for Euripides, too, puts often in the mouths of his
characters emphatic expressions of customary piety. The conclusion in
the two cases must be broadly the same--that whereas an unbelieving
dramatist may well make his characters talk in the ordinary way of
deity and of religion, it is unintelligible that a believing one should
either go beyond the artistic bounds of his task to make them utter an
unbelief which must have struck the average listener as strange and
noxious, or construct a drama of which the whole effect is to insist
on the odiousness of the action of the Supreme God. And the real
drift of Euripides is so plain that one modern and Christian scholar
has denounced him as an obnoxious and unbelieving sophist who abused
his opportunity as a producer of dramas under religious auspices to
"shake the ground-works of religion" [636] and at the same time of
morals; [637] while another and a greater scholar, less vehement in his
orthodoxy, more restrainedly condemns the dramatist for employing myths
in which he did not believe, instead of inventing fresh plots. [638]
Christian scholars are thus duly unready to give him credit for his
many-sided humanity, nobly illustrated in his pleas for the slave and
his sympathy with suffering barbarians. [639] Latterly the recognition
of Euripides's freethinking has led to the description of him as
"Euripides the Rationalist," in a treatise which represents him as a
systematic assailant of the religion of his day. Abating somewhat of
that thesis, which imputes more of system to the Euripidean drama than
it possesses, we may sum up that the last of the great tragedians of
Athens, and the most human and lovable of the three, was assuredly
a rationalist in matters of religion. It is noteworthy that he used
more frequently than any other ancient dramatist the device of a
deus ex machina to end a play. [640] It was probably because for him
the conception had no serious significance. [641] In the Alkestis its
[non-mechanical] use is one of the most striking instances of dramatic
irony in all literature. The dead Alkestis, who has died to save the
life of her husband, is brought back from the Shades by Herakles,
who figures as a brawling bully. Only the thinkers of the time could
realize the thought that underlay such a tragi-comedy.


    Dr. Verrall's Euripides the Rationalist, 1897, is fairly summed up
    by Mr. Haigh (Tragic Drama of the Greeks, pp. 262, 265, notes):
    "He considers that Euripides was a skeptic of the aggressive
    type, whose principal object in writing tragedy was to attack the
    State religion, but who, perceiving that it would be dangerous
    to pose as an open enemy, endeavoured to accomplish his ends by
    covert ridicule.... His plays ... contain in reality two separate
    plots--the ostensible and superficial plot, which was intended
    to satisfy the orthodox, and the rationalized modification which
    lay half concealed beneath it, and which the intelligent skeptic
    would easily detect." For objections to this thesis see Haigh, as
    cited; Jevons, Hist. of Greek Lit. p. 222, note; and Dr. Mozley's
    article in the Classical Review, Nov. 1895, pp. 407-13. As to the
    rationalism of Euripides in general see many of the passages cited
    by Bishop Westcott in his Essays in the Hist. of Relig. Thought
    in the West, 1891, pp. 102-27. And cp. Dickinson, The Greek View
    of Life, pp. 46-49; Grote, Hist. i, 346-48; Zeller, Socrates and
    the Socratic Schools, Eng. tr. 3rd ed. p. 231; Murray, Anc. Greek
    Lit. pp. 256, 264-66.

    Over the latest play of Euripides, the Bacchæ, as over one
    of the last plays of Æschylus, the Prometheus, there has been
    special debate. It was probably written in Macedonia (cp. ll.,
    408, 565), whither the poet had gone on the invitation of King
    Archelaos, when, according to the ancient sketch of his life,
    "he had to leave Athens because of the malicious exultation over
    him of nearly all the city." The trouble, it is conjectured, "may
    have been something connected with his prosecution for impiety,
    the charge on which Socrates was put to death a few years after"
    (Murray, Euripides translated into English Rhyming Verse, 1902,
    introd. essay, p. lii). Inasmuch as the play glorifies Dionysos,
    and the "atheist" Pentheus (l. 995) who resists him is slain by the
    maddened Bacchantes, led by his own mother, it is seriously argued
    that the drama "may be regarded as in some sort an apologia and
    an eirenicon, or as a confession on the part of the poet that
    he was fully conscious that in some of the simple legends of
    the popular faith there was an element of sound sense (!) which
    thoughtful men must treat with forbearance, resolved on using it,
    if possible, as an instrument for inculcating a truer morality,
    instead of assailing it with a presumptuous denial" (J. E. Sandys,
    The Bacchæ of Euripides, 1880, introd. pp. lxxv-vi). Here we have
    the conformist ethic of the average English academic brought to
    bear on, and ascribed to, the personality of the Greek dramatist.

    An academic of the same order, Prof. Mahaffy, similarly
    suggests that "among the half-educated Macedonian youth, with
    whom literature was coming into fashion, the poet may have
    met with a good deal of that insolent second-hand skepticism
    which is so offensive to a deep and serious thinker, and he
    may have wished to show them that he was not, as they doubtless
    hailed him, the apostle of this random speculative arrogance"
    (Euripides in Class. Writ. Ser. 1879, p. 85). As against the
    eminently "random" and "speculative arrogance" of this particular
    passage--a characteristic product of the obscurantist functions
    of some British university professors in matters of religion,
    and one which may fitly be pronounced offensive to honest men--it
    may be suggested on the other hand that, if Euripides got into
    trouble in Athens by his skepticism, he would be likely in
    Macedonia to encounter rather a greater stress of bigotry than
    a freethinking welcome, and that a non-critical presentment of
    the savage religious legend was forced on him by his environment.

    Much of the academic discussion on the subject betrays a singular
    slowness to accept the dramatic standpoint. Even Prof. Murray,
    the finest interpreter of Euripides, dogmatically pronounces
    (introd. cited p. lvii) that "there is in the Bacchæ real
    and heartfelt glorification of Dionysus," simply because of
    the lyrical exaltation of the Bacchic choruses. But lyrical
    exaltation was in character here above all other cases; and it
    was the dramatist's business to present it. To say that "again
    and again in the lyrics you feel that the Mænads are no longer
    merely observed and analysed: the poet has entered into them
    and they into him," is nothing to the purpose. That the words
    which fall from the Chorus or its Leader are at times "not the
    words of a raving Bacchante, but of a gentle and deeply musing
    philosopher," is still nothing to the purpose. The same could
    be said of Shakespeare's handling of Macbeth. What, in sooth,
    would the real words of a raving Bacchante be like? If Milton lent
    dignity to Satan in Puritan England, was Euripides to do less for
    Dionysos in Macedonia? That he should make Pentheus unsympathetic
    belongs to the plot. If he had made a noble martyr of the victim
    as well as an impassive destroyer of the God, he might have had
    to leave Macedonia more precipitately than he left Athens.

    Prof. Murray recognizes all the while that "Euripides never
    palliates things. He leaves this savage story as savage as he
    found it"; that he presents a "triumphant and hateful Dionysus,"
    who gives "a helpless fatalistic answer, abandoning the moral
    standpoint," when challenged by the stricken Agavê, whom the
    God has moved to dismember her own son; and that, in short,
    "Euripides is, as usual, critical or even hostile to the myth that
    he celebrates" (as cited, pp. liv-lvi). To set against these solid
    facts, as does Mr. Sandys (as cited, pp. lxxiii-iv), some passages
    in the choruses (ll. 395, 388, 427, 1002), and in a speech of
    Dionysos (1002), enouncing normal platitudes about the wisdom of
    thinking like other people and living a quiet life, is to strain
    very uncritically the elastic dramatic material. So far from being
    "not entirely in keeping" with the likely sentiments of a chorus of
    Asiatic women, the first-cited passages--telling that cleverness
    is not wisdom, and that true wisdom acquiesces in the opinions
    of ordinary people--are just the kind of mock-modest ineptitudes
    always current among the complacent ignorant; and the sage language
    ascribed to the heartless God is simply a presentment of deity
    in the fashion in which all Greeks expected to have it presented.

    The fact remains that the story of the Bacchæ, in which the
    frenzied mother helps to tear to pieces her own son, and the God
    can but say it is all fated, is as revolting to the rational moral
    sense as the story of the Prometheus. If this be an eirenicon,
    it is surely the most ironical in literary history. To see
    in the impassive delineation of such a myth an acceptance
    by the poet of popular "sound sense," and "a desire to put
    himself right with the public in matters on which he had been
    misunderstood," seems possible only to academics trained to a
    particular handling of the popular creed of their own day. This
    view, first put forward by Tyrwhitt (Conjecturæ in Æschylum,
    etc. 1822), was adopted by Schoone (p. 20 of his ed. cited
    by Sandys). Lobeck, greatly daring wherever rationalism was
    concerned, suggested that Euripides actually wrote against the
    rationalists of his time, in commendation of the Bacchic cult,
    and to justify the popular view in religious matters as against
    that of the cultured (Aglaophamus--passages quoted by Sandys,
    p. lxxvi). Musgrave, following Tyrwhitt, makes the play out
    to be an attack on Kritias, Alkibiades, and other freethinkers,
    including even Sokrates! K. O. Müller, always ineptly conventional
    in such matters, finds Euripides in this play "converted into a
    positive believer, or, in other words, convinced that religion
    should not be exposed to the subtilties of reasoning; that the
    understanding of man cannot subvert ancestral traditions which
    are as old as time," and so on; and in the Polonius-platitudes
    of Tiresias and the worldly-wise counsels of Cadmus he finds
    "great impressiveness" (Hist. Lit. Anc. Greece, p. 379).

    The bulk of the literature of the subject, in short, suggests
    sombre reflections on the moral value of much academic
    thinking. There are, however, academic suffrages on the side of
    common sense. Mr. Haigh (Tragic Drama of the Greeks, pp. 313-14)
    gently dismisses the "recantation" theory; Hartung points out
    (Euripides restitutus, 1844, ii, 542, cited by Sandys) that
    Euripides really treats the legend of Pentheus very much as
    he treats the myth of Hippolytos thirty years earlier, showing
    no change of moral attitude. E. Pfander (cited by Sandys) took
    a similar view; as did Mr. Tyrrell in his edition of the play
    (1871), though the latter persisted in taking the commonplaces
    of the chorus about true wisdom (395) for the judgments of
    the dramatist. Euripides could hardly have been called "the
    philosopher of the stage" (Athenæus, iv, 48) on the strength
    of sentiments which are common to the village wiseacres of all
    ages. The critical method which ascribes to Euripides a final
    hostility to rationalism would impute to Shakespeare the religion
    of Isabella in Measure for Measure, when the talk of the Duke as a
    friar counselling a condemned man is wholly "pagan" or unbelieving.

    In his admirable little book, Euripides and his Age (1913),
    Prof. Murray repeats his account of the Bacchæ with some additions
    and modifications. He adheres to the "heartfelt glorification
    of Dionysus," but adds (p. 188): "No doubt it is Dionysus
    in some private sense of the poet's own ... some spirit of
    ... inspiration and untrammelled life. The presentation is not
    consistent, however magical the poetry." As to the theory that
    "the veteran free-lance of thought ... now saw the error of his
    ways and was returning to orthodoxy," he pronounces that "Such
    a view strikes us now as almost childish in its incompetence"
    (p. 190). He also reminds us that "the whole scheme of the play
    is given by the ancient ritual.... All kinds of small details
    which seemed like ... rather fantastic invention on the part
    of Euripides are taken straight from Æschylus or the ritual,
    or both.... The Bacchæ is not free invention; it is tradition"
    (pp. 182-84). And in sum: "It is well to remember that, for all
    his lucidity of language, Euripides is not lucid about religion"
    (p. 190).

    In conclusion we may ask, How could he be? He wrote plays for the
    Greek stage, which had its very roots in religious tradition, and
    was run for the edification of a crudely believing populace. It is
    much that in so doing Euripides could a hundred times challenge
    the evil religious ethic given him for his subject-matter; and
    his lasting vogue in antiquity showed that he had a hold on the
    higher Greek conscience which no other dramatist ever possessed.


But while Euripides must thus have made a special appeal to the
reflecting minority even in his own day, it is clear that he was not
at first popular with the many; and his efforts, whatever he may have
hoped to achieve, could not suffice to enlighten the democracy. The
ribald blasphemies of his enemy, the believing Aristophanes,
[642] could avail more to keep vulgar religion in credit than the
tragedian's serious indictment could effect against it; and they served
at the same time to belittle Euripides for the multitude in his own
day. Aristophanes is the typical Tory in religion; non-religious
himself, like Swift, he hates the honestly anti-religious man; and
he has the crowd with him. The Athenian faith, as a Catholic scholar
remarks, [643] "was more disposed to suffer the buffooneries of a
comedian than the serious negation of a philosopher." The average
Greek seemed to think that the grossest comic impiety did no harm,
where serious negation might cause divine wrath. [644] And so there
came no intellectual salvation for Athens from the drama which was
her unique achievement. The balance of ignorance and culture was
not changed. Evidently there was much rationalism among the studious
few. Plato in the Laws [645] speaks both of the man-about-town type of
freethinker and of those who, while they believe in no Gods, live well
and wisely and are in good repute. But with Plato playing the superior
mind and encouraging his fellow-townsmen to believe in the personality
of the sun, moon, and planets, credulity could easily keep the upper
hand. [646] The people remained politically unwise and religiously
superstitious, the social struggle perpetuating the division between
leisure and toil, even apart from the life of the mass of slaves;
while the eternal pre-occupation of militarism left even the majority
of the upper class at the intellectual level natural to military life
in all ages. There came, however, a generation of great intellectual
splendour following on that of the supreme development of drama just
before the fall of Greek freedom. Athens had at last come into the
heritage of Greek philosophic thought; and to the utterance of that
crowning generation the human retrospect has turned ever since. This
much of renown remains inalienable from the most renowned democracy
of the ancient world.




§ 8

The wide subject of the teaching of Sokrates, Plato, and Aristotle must
here be noticed briefly, with a view only to our special inquiry. All
three must be inscribed in any list of ancient freethinkers; and
yet all three furthered freethought only indirectly, the two former
being in different degrees supernaturalists, while the last touched
on religious questions only as a philosopher, avoiding all question
of practical innovation.


    The same account holds good of the best of the so-called Sophists,
    as Gorgias the Sicilian (? 485-380), who was a nihilistic skeptic;
    Hippias of Elis, who, setting up an emphatic distinction between
    Nature and Convention, impugned the political laws and prejudices
    which estranged men of thought and culture; and Prodikos of Kos
    (fl. 435), author of the fable of Herakles at the Parting of
    the Ways, who seems to have privately criticized the current
    Gods as mere deifications of useful things and forces, and
    was later misconceived as teaching that the things and forces
    were Gods. Cp. Cicero, De nat. Deorum, i, 42; Sextus Empiricus,
    Adv. Mathematicos, ix, 52; Ueberweg, vol. i, p. 78; Renouvier, i,
    291-93. Cicero saw very well that if men came to see in Dêmêtêr
    merely a deification of corn or bread, in Dionysos wine, in
    Hephaistos fire, and in Poseidon only water, there was not much
    left in religion. On the score of their systematic skepticism,
    that is, their insistence on the subjectivity of all opinion,
    Prof. Drews pronounces the Sophists at once the "Aufklärer"
    and the Pragmatists of ancient Greece (Gesch. des Monismus,
    p. 209). But their thought was scarcely homogeneous.


1. Sokrates [468-399] was fundamentally and practically a freethinker,
insofar as in most things he thought for himself, definitely turning
away from the old ideal of mere transmitted authority in morals. [647]
Starting in all inquiries from a position of professed ignorance, he
at least repudiated all dogmatics. [648] Being, however, preoccupied
with public life and conduct, he did not carry his critical thinking
far beyond that sphere. In regard to the extension of solid science,
one of the prime necessities of Greek intellectual life, he was quite
reactionary, drawing a line between the phenomena which he thought
intelligible and traceable and those which he thought past finding
out. "Physics and astronomy, in his opinion, belonged to the divine
class of phenomena in which human research was insane, fruitless,
and impious." [649] Yet at the same time he formulated, apparently
of his own motion, the ordinary design argument. [650] The sound
scientific view led up to by so many previous thinkers was set forth,
even in religious phraseology, by his great contemporary Hippokrates,
[651] and he opposed it. While partially separating himself in practice
from the popular worships, he held by the belief in omens, though not
in all the ordinary ones; and in one of the Platonic dialogues he is
made to say he holds by the ordinary versions of all the myths, on
the ground that it is a hopeless task to find rational explanations
for them. [652] He hoped, in short, to rationalize conduct without
seeking to rationalize creed--the dream of Plato and of a thousand
religionists since.

He had indeed the excuse that the myth-rationalizers of the time
after Hekataios, following the line of least psychic resistance, like
those of England and Germany in the eighteenth century, explained
away myths by reducing them to hypothetical history, thus asking
credence for something no better verified than the myth itself. But
the rationalizers were on a path by which men might conceivably have
journeyed to a truer science; and Sokrates, by refusing to undertake
any such exploration, [653] left his countrymen to that darkening
belief in tradition which made possible his own execution. There
was in his cast of mind, indeed--if we can at all accept Plato's
presentment of him--something unfavourable to steady conviction. He
cannot have had any real faith in the current religion; yet he never
explicitly dissented. In the Republic he accepts the new festival
to the Thracian Goddess Bendis; and there he is made by Plato to
inculcate a quite orthodox acceptance of the Delphic oracle as the
source of all religious practice. But it is impossible to say how much
of the teaching of the Platonic Sokrates is Sokratic. And as to Plato
there remains the problem of how far his conformities were prudential,
after the execution of Sokrates for blasphemy.


    The long-debated issue as to the real personality of Sokrates
    is still open. It is energetically and systematically handled
    by Prof. August Döring in Die Lehre des Sokrates als sociales
    Reformsystem (1895), and by Dr. Hubert Röck in Der unverfälschte
    Sokrates (1903). See, in particular, Döring, pp. 51-79, and
    Röck, pp. 357-96. From all attempts to arrive at a conception
    of a consistent Sokrates there emerges the impression that the
    real Sokrates, despite a strong critical bent of mind, had no
    clearly established body of opinions, but was swayed in different
    directions by the itch for contradiction which was the driving
    power of his dialectic. For the so-called Sokratic "method" is
    much less a method for attaining truth than one for disturbing
    prejudice. And if in Plato's hands Sokrates seldom reaches a
    conclusion that his own method might not overthrow, we are not
    entitled to refuse to believe that this was characteristic of
    the man.


Concerning Sokrates we have Xenophon's circumstantial account [654]
of how he reasoned with Aristodemos, "surnamed the Little," who
"neither prayed nor sacrificed to the Gods, nor consulted any oracle,
and ridiculed those who did." Aristodemos was a theist, believing in
a "Great Architect" or "Artist," or a number of such powers--on this
he is as vague as the ancient theists in general--but does not think
the heavenly powers need his devotions. Sokrates, equally vague as
to the unity or plurality of the divine, puts the design argument in
the manner familiar throughout the ages, [655] and follows it up with
the plea, among others, that the States most renowned for wisdom and
antiquity have always been the most given to pious practices, and that
probably the Gods will be kind to those who show them respect. The
whole philosopheme is pure empiricism, on the ordinary plane of
polytheistic thought, and may almost be said to exhibit incapacity
for the handling of philosophic questions, evading as it does even
the elementary challenge of Aristodemos, against whom Sokrates parades
pious platitudes without a hint of "Sokratic" analysis. Unless such a
performance were regarded as make-believe, it is difficult to conceive
how Athenian pietists could honestly arraign Sokrates for irreligion
while Aristodemos and others of his way of thinking went unmolested.

Taken as illustrating the state of thought in the Athenian community,
the trial and execution of Sokrates for "blasphemy" and "corrupting
the minds of the young" go far to prove that there prevailed among the
upper class in Athens nearly as much hypocrisy in religious matters
as exists in the England of to-day. Doubtless he was liable to death
from the traditionally orthodox Greek point of view, [656] having
practically turned aside from the old civic creed and ideals; but
then most educated Athenians had in some degree done the same. [657]
Euripides, as we have seen, is so frequently critical of the old
theology and mythology in his plays that he too could easily have been
indicted; and Aristophanes, who attacked Euripides in his comedies
as scurrilously as he did Sokrates, would no doubt have been glad to
see him prosecuted. [658] The psychology of Aristophanes, who freely
ridiculed and blasphemed the Gods in his own comedies while reviling
all men who did not believe in them, is hardly intelligible save
in the light of parts of the English history of our own time, when
unbelieving indifferentists on the Conservative side have been seen
ready to join in turning the law against a freethinking publicist
for purely party ends. In the case of Sokrates the hostility was
ostensibly democratic, for, according to Æschines, Sokrates was
condemned because he had once given lessons to Kritias, [659] one
of the most savage and unscrupulous of the Thirty Tyrants. Inasmuch
as Kritias had become entirely alienated from Sokrates, and had even
put him to silence, such a ground of hostility would only be a fresh
illustration of that collective predilection of men to a gregarious
iniquity which is no less noteworthy in the psychology of groups
than their profession of high moral standards. And such proclivities
are always to be reckoned with in such episodes. Anytos, the leading
prosecutor, seems to have been a typical bigot, brainless, spiteful,
and thoroughly self-satisfied. Not only party malice, however, but
the individual dislikes which Sokrates so industriously set up,
[660] must have counted for much in securing the small majority
of the dikastery that pronounced him guilty--281 to 276; and his
own clear preference for death over any sort of compromise did the
rest. [661] He was old, and little hopeful of social betterment;
and the temperamental obstinacy which underlay his perpetual and
pertinacious debating helped him to choose a death that he could easily
have avoided. But the fact remains that he was not popular; that the
mass of the voters as well as of the upper class disliked his constant
cross-examination of popular opinion, [662] which must often have led
logical listeners to carry on criticism where he left off; and that
after all his ratiocination he left Athens substantially irrational, as
well as incapable of justice, on some essential issues. His dialectic
method has done more to educate the later world than it did for Greece.


    Upon the debate as to the legal punishability of Sokrates turns
    another as to the moral character of the Athenians who forced
    him to drink the hemlock. Professor Mahaffy, bent on proving
    the superiority of Athenian culture and civilization to those
    of Christendom, effectively contrasts the calm scene in the
    prison-chamber of Sokrates with the hideous atrocities of the
    death penalty for treason in the modern world and the "gauntness
    and horror of our modern executions" (Social Life in Greece,
    3rd. ed. pp. 262-69); and Mr. Bleeckly (Socrates and the Athenians,
    1884, pp. 55-63) similarly sets against the pagan case that of the
    burning of heretics by the Christian Church, and in particular the
    auto da fé at Valladolid in 1559, when fifteen men and women--the
    former including the conscientious priests who had proposed to
    meet the hostility of Protestant dissent in the Netherlands by
    reforms in the Church: the latter including delicately-nurtured
    ladies of high family--were burned to death before the eyes of
    the Princess Regent of Spain and the aristocracy of Castile. It
    is certainly true that this transaction has no parallel in the
    criminal proceedings of pagan Athens. Christian cruelty has been as
    much viler than pagan, culture for culture, as the modern Christian
    environment is uglier than the Athenian. Before such a test the
    special pleaders for the civilizing power of Christianity can
    but fall back upon alternative theses which are the negation of
    their main case. First we are told that "Christianity humanizes
    men"; next that where it does not do so it is because they are
    too inhuman to be made Christians.

    But while the orthodoxy of pagan Athens thus comes very well off
    as against the frightful crime-roll of organized Christianity,
    the dispassionate historian must nonetheless note the dehumanizing
    power of religion in Athens as in Christendom. The pietists of
    Athens, in their less brutish way, were as hopelessly denaturalized
    as those of Christian Europe by the dominion of a traditional
    creed, held as above reason. It matters not whether or not we
    say with Bishop Thirlwall (Hist. of Greece, 2nd ed. iv, 556) that
    "there never was a case in which murder was more clearly committed
    under the forms of legal procedure than in the trial of Socrates,"
    or press on the other side the same writer's admission that in
    religious matters in Athens "there was no canon, no book by which
    a doctrine could be tried; no living authority to which appeal
    could be made for the decision of religious controversies." The
    fact that Christendom had "authorities" who ruled which of two
    sets of insane dogmas brought death upon its propounder, does
    not make less abominable the slaying of Bruno and Servetus,
    or the immeasurable massacre of less eminent heretics. But the
    less formalized homicides sanctioned by the piety of Periklean
    Athens remain part of the proof that unreasoning faith worsens
    men past calculation. If we slur over such deeds by generalities
    about human frailty, we are but asserting the impossibility
    of rationally respecting human nature. If, putting aside all
    moral censure, we are simply concerned to trace and comprehend
    causation in human affairs, we have no choice but to note how
    upon occasion religion on one hand, like strong drink on another,
    can turn commonplace men into murderers.


In view of the limitations of Sokrates, and the mental measure of
those who voted for putting him to death, it is not surprising that
through all Greek history educated men (including Aristotle) continued
to believe firmly in the deluge of Deukalion [663] and the invasion of
the Amazons [664] as solid historical facts. Such beliefs, of course,
are on all fours with those current in the modern religious world
down till the present century: we shall, in fact, best appraise the
rationality of Greece by making such comparisons. The residual lesson
is that where Greek reason ended, modern social science had better
be regarded as only beginning. Thukydides, the greatest of all the
ancient historians, and one of the great of all time, treated human
affairs in a spirit so strictly rationalistic that he might reasonably
be termed an atheist on that score even if he had not earned the name
as a pupil of Anaxagoras. [665] But his task was to chronicle a war
which proved that the Greeks were to the last children of instinct for
the main purposes of life, and that the rule of reason which they are
credited with establishing [666] was only an intermittent pastime. In
the days of Demosthenes we still find them politically consulting the
Pythian oracle, despite the consciousness among educated men that the
oracle is a piece of political machinery. We can best realize the stage
of their evolution by first comparing their public religious practice
with that of contemporary England. No one now regards the daily prayers
of the House of Commons as more than a reverent formality. But Nikias
at Syracuse staked the fortunes of war on the creed of omens. We can
perhaps finally conceive with fair accuracy the subordination of Greek
culture and politics to superstition by likening the thought-levels
of pre-Alexandrian Athens to those of England under Cromwell.

2. The decisive measure of Greek accomplishment is found in the career
of Plato [429-347]. One of the great prose writers of the world, he
has won by his literary genius--that is, by his power of continuous
presentation as well as by his style--no less than by his service to
supernaturalist philosophy in general, a repute above his deserts as a
thinker. In Christian history he is the typical philosopher of Dualism,
[667] his prevailing conception of the universe being that of an
inert Matter acted on or even created by a craftsman-God, the "Divine
Artificer," sometimes conceived as a Logos or divine Reason, separately
personalized. Thus he came to be par excellence the philosopher of
theism, as against Aristotle and those of the Pythagoreans who affirmed
the eternity of the universe. [668] In the history of freethought
he figures as a man of genius formed by Sokrates and reflecting
his limitations, developing the Sokratic dialectic on the one hand
and finally emphasizing the Sokratic dogmatism to the point of utter
bigotry. If the Athenians are to be condemned for putting Sokrates to
death, it must not be forgotten that the spirit, if not the letter, of
the Laws drawn up by Plato in his old age fully justified them. [669]
That code, could it ever have been put in force, would have wrought
the death of every honest freethinker as well as most of the ignorant
believers within its sphere. Alone among the great serious writers of
Greece does he implicate Greek thought in the gospel of intolerance
passed on to modern Europe from antiquity. It is recorded of him [670]
that he wished to burn all the writings of Demokritos that he could
collect, and was dissuaded only on the score of the number of copies.

What was best in Plato, considered as a freethinker, was his early love
of ratiocination, of "the rendering and receiving of reasons." Even
in his earlier dialogues, however, there are signs enough of an
arbitrary temper, as well as of an inability to put science in place
of religious prejudice. The obscurantist doctrine which he put in
the mouth of Sokrates in the Phædrus was also his own, as we gather
from the exposition in the Republic. In that brilliant performance he
objects, as so many believers and freethinkers had done before him,
to the scandalous tales in the poets concerning the Gods and the sons
of Gods; but he does not object to them as being untrue. His position
is that they are unedifying. [671] For his own part he proposes that
his ideal rulers frame new myths which shall edify the young: in his
Utopia it is part of the business of the legislator to choose the right
fictions; [672] and the systematic imposition of an edifying body of
pious fable on the general intelligence is part of his scheme for the
regeneration of society. [673] Honesty is to be built up by fraud,
and reason by delusion. What the Hebrew Bible-makers actually did,
Plato proposed to do. The one thing to be said in his favour is that
by thus telling how the net is to be spread in the sight of the bird
he put the decisive obstacle--if any were needed--in the way of his
plan. It is, indeed, inconceivable that the author of the Republic
and the Laws dreamt that either polity as a whole would ever come
into existence. His plans of suppressing all undesirable poetry,
arranging community of women, and enabling children to see battles,
are the fancy-sketches of a dilettant. He had failed completely as a
statesman in practice; as a schemer he does not even posit the first
conditions of success.


    As to his practical failure see the story of his and his pupils'
    attempts at Syracuse (Grote, History, ix, 37-123). The younger
    Dionysios, whom they had vainly attempted to make a model ruler,
    seems to have been an audacious unbeliever to the extent of
    plundering the temple of Persephone at Lokris, one of Jupiter in
    the Peloponnesos, and one of Æsculapius at Epidaurus. Clement of
    Alexandria (Protrept. c. 4) states that he plundered "the statue
    of Jupiter in Sicily." Cicero (De nat. Deorum, iii, 33, 34) and
    Valerius Maximus (i, 1) tell the story of the elder Dionysios;
    but of him it cannot be true. In his day the plunder of the
    temples of Dêmêtêr and Persephone in Sicily by the Carthaginians
    was counted a deadly sin. See Freeman, History of Sicily, iv,
    125-47, and Story of Sicily, pp. 176-80. In Cicero's dialogue it
    is noted that after all his impieties Dionysios [the elder, of
    whom the stories are mistakenly told] died in his bed. Athenæus,
    however, citing the biographer Klearchos, tells that the younger
    Dionysios, after being reduced to the rôle of a begging priest
    of Kybelê, ended his life very miserably (xii, 60).


Nonetheless, the prescription of intolerance in the Laws [674] classes
Plato finally on the side of fanaticism, and, indeed, ranks him with
the most sinister figures on that side, since his earlier writing
shows that he would be willing to punish men alike for repeating
stories which they believed, and for rejecting what he knew to be
untruths. [675] By his own late doctrine he vindicated the slayers of
his own friend. His psychology is as strange as that of Aristophanes,
but strange with a difference. He seems to have practised "the will
to believe" till he grew to be a fanatic on the plane of the most
ignorant of orthodox Athenians; and after all that science had done
to enlighten men on that natural order the misconceiving of which had
been the foundation of their creeds, he inveighs furiously in his old
age against the impiety of those who dared to doubt that the sun and
moon and stars were deities, as every nurse taught her charges. [676]
And when all is said, his Gods satisfy no need of the intelligence;
for he insists that they only partially rule the world, sending the few
good things, but not the many evil [677]--save insofar as evil may be
a beneficent penalty and discipline. At the same time, while advising
the imprisonment or execution of heretics who did not believe in the
Gods, Plato regarded with even greater detestation the man who taught
that they could be persuaded or propitiated by individual prayer and
sacrifice. [678] Thus he would have struck alike at the freethinking
few and at the multitude who held by the general religious beliefs of
Greece, dealing damnation on all save his own clique, in a way that
would have made Torquemada blench. [679] In the face of such teaching
as this, it may well be said that "Greek philosophy made incomparably
greater advances in the earlier polemic period [of the Ionians]
than after its friendly return to the poetry of Homer and Hesiod"
[680]--that is, to their polytheistic basis. It is to be said for
Plato, finally, that his embitterment at the downward course of things
in Athens is a quite intelligible source for his own intellectual
decadence: a very similar spectacle being seen in the case of our own
great modern Utopist, Sir Thomas More. But Plato's own writing bears
witness that among the unbelievers against whom he declaimed there
were wise and blameless citizens; [681] while in the act of seeking to
lay a religious basis for a good society he admitted the fundamental
immorality of the religious basis of the whole of past Greek life.

3. Aristotle [384-322], like Sokrates, albeit in a very different way,
rendered rather an indirect than a direct service to Freethought. Where
Sokrates gave the critical or dialectic method or habit, "a process of
eternal value and of universal application," [682] Aristotle supplied
the great inspiration of system, partly correcting the Sokratic
dogmatism on the possibilities of science by endless observation and
speculation, though himself falling into scientific dogmatism only too
often. That he was an unbeliever in the popular and Platonic religion
is clear. Apart from the general rationalistic tenor of his works,
[683] there was a current understanding that the Peripatetic school
denied the utility of prayer and sacrifice; [684] and though the
essentially partisan attempt of the anti-Macedonian party to impeach
him for impiety may have turned largely on his hyperbolic hymn to his
dead friend Hermeias (who was a eunuch, and as such held peculiarly
unworthy of being addressed as on a level with semi-divine heroes),
[685] it could hardly have been undertaken at all unless he had given
solider pretexts. The threatened prosecution he avoided by leaving the
city, dying shortly afterwards. Siding as he did with the Macedonian
faction, he had put himself out of touch with the democratic instincts
of the Athenians, and so doubly failed to affect their thinking. But
nonetheless the attack upon him by the democrats was a political
stratagem. The prosecution for blasphemy had now become a recognized
weapon in politics for all who had more piety than principle, and
perhaps for some who had neither. And Aristotle, well aware of the
temper of the population around him, had on the whole been so guarded
in his utterance that a fantastic pretext had to be fastened on for
his undoing.


    Prof. Bain (Practical Essays, p. 273), citing Grote's remark on the
    "cautious prose compositions of Aristotle," comments thus: "That is
    to say, the execution of Sokrates was always before his eyes; he
    had to pare his expressions so as not to give offence to Athenian
    orthodoxy. We can never know the full bearings of such a disturbing
    force. The editors of Aristotle complain of the corruption of
    his text: a far worse corruption lies behind. In Greece Sokrates
    alone had the courage of his opinions. While his views as to a
    future life, for example, are plain and frank, the real opinion
    of Aristotle on the question is an insoluble problem." (See,
    however, the passage in the Metaphysics cited below.)

    The opinion of Grote and Bain as to Aristotle's caution is fully
    coincided in by Lange, who writes (Gesch. des Mater. i, 63):
    "More conservative than Plato and Sokrates, Aristotle everywhere
    seeks to attach himself as closely as possible to tradition, to
    popular notions, to the ideas embodied in common speech, and his
    ethical postulates diverge as little as may be from the customary
    morals and laws of Greek States. He has therefore been at all times
    the favourite philosopher of conservative schools and movements."


It is clear, nevertheless, if we can be sure of his writings,
that he was a monotheist, but a monotheist with no practical
religion. "Excluding such a thing as divine interference with Nature,
his theology, of course, excludes the possibility of revelation,
inspiration, miracles, and grace." [686] In a passage in the
Metaphysics, after elaborating his monistic conception of Nature,
he dismisses in one or two terse sentences the whole current religion
as a mass of myth framed to persuade the multitude, in the interest of
law and order. [687] His influence must thus have been to some extent,
at least, favourable to rational science, though unhappily his own
science is too often a blundering reaction against the surmises of
earlier thinkers with a greater gift of intuition than he, who was
rather a methodizer than a discoverer. [688] What was worst in his
thinking was its tendency to apriorism, which made it in a later age
so adaptable to the purposes of the Roman Catholic Church. Thus his
doctrines of the absolute levity of fire and of nature's abhorrence
of a vacuum set up a hypnotizing verbalism, and his dictum that the
earth is the centre of the universe was fatally helpful to Christian
obscurantism. For the rest, while guiltless of Plato's fanaticism,
he had no scheme of reform whatever, and was as far as any other
Greek from the thought of raising the mass by instruction. His own
science, indeed, was not progressive, save as regards his collation of
facts in biology; and his political ideals were rather reactionary;
his clear perception of the nature of the population problem leaving
him in the earlier attitude of Malthus, and his lack of sympathetic
energy making him a defender of slavery when other men had condemned
it. [689] He was in some aspects the greatest brain of the ancient
world; and he left it, at the close of the great Grecian period,
without much faith in man, while positing for the modern world its
vaguest conception of Deity. Plato and Aristotle between them had
reduced the ancient God-idea to a thin abstraction. Plato would not
have it that God was the author of evil, thus leaving evil unaccounted
for save by sorcery. Aristotle's God does nothing at all, existing
merely as a potentiality of thought. And yet upon those positions were
to be founded the theisms of the later world. Plato had not striven,
and Aristotle had failed, to create an adequate basis for thought in
real science; and the world gravitated back to religion.


    [In previous editions I remarked that "the lack of fresh science,
    which was the proximate cause of the stagnation of Greek thought,
    has been explained like other things as a result of race qualities:
    'the Athenians,' says Mr. Benn (The Greek Philosophers, i, 42),
    'had no genius for natural science: none of them were ever
    distinguished as savans.... It was, they thought, a miserable
    trifling [and] waste of time.... Pericles, indeed, thought
    differently....' On the other hand, Lange decides (i, 6) "that
    with the freedom and boldness of the Hellenic spirit was combined
    ... the talent for scientific deduction. These contrary views,"
    I observed, "seem alike arbitrary. If Mr. Benn means that other
    Hellenes had what the Athenians lacked, the answer is that only
    special social conditions could have set up such a difference,
    and that it could not be innate, but must be a mere matter of
    usage." Mr. Benn has explained to me that he does not dissent from
    this view, and that I had not rightly gathered his from the passage
    I quoted. In his later work, The Philosophy of Greece considered
    in relation to the character and history of its people (1898),
    he has pointed out how, in the period of Hippias and Prodikos,
    "at Athens in particular young men threw themselves with ardour
    into the investigation of" problems of cosmography, astronomy,
    meteorology, and comparative anatomy (p. 138). The hindering
    forces were Athenian bigotry (pp. 113-14, 171) and the mischievous
    influence of Sokrates (pp. 165, 173).

    Speaking broadly, we may say that the Chaldeans were forward in
    astronomy because their climate favoured it to begin with, and
    religion and their superstitions did so later. Hippokrates of Kos
    became a great physician because, with natural capacity, he had
    the opportunity to compare many practices. The Athenians failed
    to carry on the sciences, not because the faculty or the taste
    was lacking among them, but because their political and artistic
    interests, for one thing, preoccupied them--e.g., Sokrates and
    Plato; and because, for another, their popular religion, popularly
    supported, menaced the students of physics. But the Ionians,
    who had savans, failed equally to progress after the Alexandrian
    period; the explanation being again not stoppage of faculty, but
    the advent of conditions unfavourable to the old intellectual
    life, which in any case, as we saw, had been first set up by
    Babylonian contacts. (Compare, on the ethnological theorem of
    Cousin, G. Bréton, Essai sur la poésie philos. en Grèce, p. 10.) On
    the other hand, Lange's theory of gifts "innate" in the Hellenic
    mind in general is the old racial fallacy. Potentialities are
    "innate" in all populations, according to their culture stage,
    and it was their total environment that specialized the Greeks
    as a community.]




§ 9

The overthrow of the "free" political life of Athens was followed by
a certain increase in intellectual activity, the result of throwing
back the remaining store of energy on the life of the mind. By this
time an almost open unbelief as to the current tales concerning the
Gods would seem to have become general among educated people, the
withdrawal of the old risk of impeachment by political factions being
so far favourable to outspokenness. It is on record that the historian
Ephoros (of Cumæ in Æolia: fl. 350 B.C.), who was a pupil of Isocrates,
openly hinted in his work at his disbelief in the oracle of Apollo, and
in fabulous traditions generally. [690] In other directions there were
similar signs of freethought. The new schools of philosophy founded
by Zeno the Stoic (fl. 280: d. 263 or 259) and Epicurus (341-270),
whatever their defects, compare not ill with those of Plato and
Aristotle, exhibiting greater ethical sanity and sincerity if less
metaphysical subtlety. Of metaphysics there had been enough for the
age: what it needed was a rational philosophy of life. But the loss
of political freedom, although thus for a time turned to account,
was fatal to continuous progress. The first great thinkers had all
been free men in a politically free environment: the atmosphere of
cowed subjection, especially after the advent of the Romans, could
not breed their like; and originative energy of the higher order
soon disappeared. Sane as was the moral philosophy of Epicurus, and
austere as was that of Zeno, they are alike static or quietist, [691]
the codes of a society seeking a regulating and sustaining principle
rather than hopeful of new achievement or new truth. And the universal
skepticism of Pyrrho has the same effect of suggesting that what is
wanted is not progress, but balance. It is significant that he, who
carried the Sokratic profession of Nescience to the typical extreme of
doctrinal Nihilism, was made high-priest of his native town of Elis,
and had statues erected in his honour. [692]

Considered as freethinkers, all three men tell at once of the critical
and of the reactionary work done by the previous age. Pyrrho, the
universal doubter, appears to have taken for granted, with the whole
of his followers, such propositions as that some animals (not insects)
are produced by parthenogenesis, that some live in the fire, and that
the legend of the Phoenix is true. [693] Such credences stood for
the arrest of biological science in the Sokratic age, with Aristotle,
so often mistakenly, at work; while, on the other hand, the Sokratic
skepticism visibly motives the play of systematic doubt on the
dogmas men had learned to question. Zeno, again, was substantially a
monotheist; Epicurus, adopting but not greatly developing the science
of Demokritos, [694] turned the Gods into a far-off band of glorious
spectres, untroubled by human needs, dwelling for ever in immortal
calm, neither ruling nor caring to rule the world of men. [695] In
coming to this surprising compromise, Epicurus, indeed, probably did
not carry with him the whole intelligence even of his own school. His
friend, the second Metrodoros of Lampsakos, seems to have been the most
stringent of all the censors of Homer, wholly ignoring his namesake's
attempts to clear the bard of impiety. "He even advised men not to be
ashamed to confess their utter ignorance of Homer, to the extent of not
knowing whether Hector was a Greek or a Trojan." [696] Such austerity
towards myths can hardly have been compatible with the acceptance of
the residuum of Epicurus. That, however, became the standing creed of
the sect, and a fruitful theme of derision to its opponents. Doubtless
the comfort of avoiding direct conflict with the popular beliefs had
a good deal to do with the acceptance of the doctrine.

This strange retention of the theorem of the existence of
anthropomorphic Gods, with a flat denial that they did anything in the
universe, might be termed the great peculiarity of average ancient
rationalism, were it not that what makes it at all intelligible for
us is just the similar practice of modern non-Christian theists. The
Gods of antiquity were non-creative, but strivers and meddlers and
answerers of prayer; and ancient rationalism relieved them of their
striving and meddling, leaving them no active or governing function
whatever, but for the most part cherishing their phantasms. The God of
modern Christendom had been at once a creator and a governor, ruling,
meddling, punishing, rewarding, and hearing prayer; and modern theism,
unable to take the atheistic or agnostic plunge, relieves him of all
interference in things human or cosmic, but retains him as a creative
abstraction who somehow set up "law," whether or not he made all things
out of nothing. The psychological process in the two cases seems to
be the same--an erection of æsthetic habit into a philosophic dogma,
and an accommodation of phrase to popular prejudice.

Whatever may have been the logical and psychological crudities
of Epicureanism, however, it counted for much as a deliverance of
men from superstitious fears; and nothing is more remarkable in the
history of ancient philosophy than the affectionate reverence paid to
the founder's memory [697] on this score through whole centuries. The
powerful Lucretius sounds his highest note of praise in telling how
this Greek had first of all men freed human life from the crashing
load of religion, daring to pass the flaming ramparts of the world,
and by his victory putting men on an equality with heaven. [698]
The laughter-loving Lucian two hundred years later grows gravely
eloquent on the same theme. [699] And for generations the effect of the
Epicurean check on orthodoxy is seen in the whole intellectual life of
the Greek world, already predisposed in that direction. [700] The new
schools of the Cynics and the Cyrenaics had alike shown the influence
in their perfect freedom from all religious preoccupation, when they
were not flatly dissenting from the popular beliefs. Antisthenes,
the founder of the former school (fl. 400 B.C.), though a pupil of
Sokrates, had been explicitly anti-polytheistic, and an opponent of
anthropomorphism. [701] Aristippos of Cyrene, also a pupil of Socrates,
who a little later founded the Hedonic or Cyrenaic sect, seems to have
put theology entirely aside. One of the later adherents of the school,
Theodoros, was like Diagoras labelled "the Atheist" [702] by reason
of the directness of his opposition to religion; and in the Rome of
Cicero he and Diagoras are the notorious atheists of history. [703]
To Theodoros, who had a large following, is attributed an influence
over the thought of Epicurus, [704] who, however, took the safer
position of a verbal theism. The atheist is said to have been menaced
by Athenian law in the time of Demetrius Phalereus, who protected him;
and there is even a story that he was condemned to drink hemlock; [705]
but he was not of the type that meets martyrdom, though he might go
far to provoke it. [706] Roaming from court to court, he seems never
to have stooped to flatter any of his entertainers. "You seem to me,"
said the steward of Lysimachos of Thrace to him on one occasion,
"to be the only man who ignores both Gods and kings." [707]

In the same age the same freethinking temper is seen in Stilpo of
Megara (fl. 307), of the school of Euclides, who is said to have
been brought before the Areopagus for the offence of saying that
the Pheidian statue of Athênê was "not a God," and to have met
the charge with the jest that she was in reality not a God but a
Goddess; whereupon he was exiled. [708] The stories told of him make
it clear that he was an unbeliever, usually careful not to betray
himself. Euclides, too, with his optimistic pantheism, was clearly a
heretic; though his doctrine that evil is non-ens [709] later became
the creed of some Christians. Yet another professed atheist was the
witty Bion of Borysthenes, pupil of Theodoros, of whom it is told,
in a fashion familiar to our own time, that in sickness he grew pious
through fear. [710] Among his positions was a protest or rather satire
against the doctrine that the Gods punished children for the crimes of
their fathers. [711] In the other schools, Speusippos (fl. 343), the
nephew of Plato, leant to monotheism; [712] Strato of Lampsakos, the
Peripatetic (fl. 290), called "the Naturalist," taught sheer pantheism,
anticipating Laplace in declaring that he had no need of the action
of the Gods to account for the making of the world; [713] Dikaiarchos
(fl. 326-287), another disciple of Aristotle, denied the existence
of separate souls, and the possibility of foretelling the future;
[714] and Aristo and Cleanthes, disciples of Zeno, varied likewise in
the direction of pantheism; the latter's monotheism, as expressed in
his famous hymn, being one of several doctrines ascribed to him. [715]

Contemporary with Epicurus and Zeno and Pyrrho, too, was Evêmeros
(Euhemerus), whose peculiar propaganda against Godism seems to imply
theoretic atheism. As an atheist he was vilified in a manner familiar
to modern ears, the Alexandrian poet Callimachus labelling him an
"arrogant old man vomiting impious books." [716] His lost work, of
which only a few extracts remain, undertook to prove that all the
Gods had been simply famous men, deified after death; the proof,
however, being by way of a fiction about old inscriptions found in
an imaginary island. [717] As above noted, [718] the idea may have
been borrowed from skeptical Phoenicians, the principle having already
been monotheistically applied by the Bible-making Jews, [719] though,
on the other hand, it had been artistically and to all appearance
uncritically acted on in the Homeric epopees. It may or may not then
have been by way of deliberate or reasoning Evêmerism that certain
early Greek and Roman deities were transformed, as we have seen, into
heroes or hetairai. [720] In any case, the principle seems to have had
considerable vogue in the later Hellenistic world; but with the effect
rather of paving the way for new cults than of setting up scientific
rationalism in place of the old ones. Quite a number of writers like
Palaiphatos, without going so far as Evêmeros, sought to reduce myths
to natural possibilities and events, by way of mediating between the
credulous and the incredulous. [721] Their method is mostly the naïf
one revived by the Abbé Banier in the eighteenth century of reducing
marvels to verbal misconceptions. Thus for Palaiphatos the myth of
Kerberos came from the facts that the city Trikarenos was commonly
spoken of as a beautiful and great dog; and that Geryon, who lived
there, had great dogs called Kerberoi; Actæon was "devoured by his
dogs" in the sense that he neglected his affairs and wasted his time
in hunting; the Amazons were shaved men, clad as were the women in
Thrace, and so on. [722] Palaiphatos and the Herakleitos who also
wrote De Incredibilibus agree that Pasiphae's bull was a man named
Tauros; and the latter writer similarly explains that Scylla was a
beautiful hetaira with avaricious hangers-on, and that the harpies
were ladies of the same profession. If the method seems childish, it
is to be remembered that as regards the explanation of supernatural
events it was adhered to by German theologians of a century ago;
and that its credulity in incredulity is still to be seen in the
current view that every narrative in the sacred books is to be taken
as necessarily standing for a fact of some kind.

One of the inferrible effects of the Evêmerist method was to facilitate
for the time the adoption of the Egyptian and eastern usage of deifying
kings. It has been plausibly argued that this practice stands not
so much for superstition as for skepticism, its opponents being
precisely the orthodox believers, and its promoters those who had
learned to doubt the actuality of the traditional Gods. Evêmerism
would clinch such a tendency; and it is noteworthy that Evêmeros
lived at the court of Kassander (319-296 B.C.) in a period in which
every remaining member of the family of the deified Alexander had
perished, mostly by violence; while the contemporary Ptolemy I of
Egypt received the title of Sotêr, "Saviour," from the people of
Rhodes. [723] It is to be observed, however, that while in the next
generation Antiochus I of Syria received the same title, and his
successor Antiochus II that of Theos, "God," the usage passes away;
Ptolemy III being named merely Evergetês, "the Benefactor" (of the
priests), and even Antiochus III only "the Great." Superstition was
not to be ousted by a political exploitation of its machinery. [724]

In Athens the democracy, restored in a subordinate form by Kassander's
opponent, Demetrius Poliorkêtes (307 B.C.), actually tried to put
down the philosophic schools, all of which, but the Aristotelian in
particular, were anti-democratic, and doubtless also comparatively
irreligious. Epicurus and some of his antagonists were exiled within a
year of his opening his school (306 B.C.); but the law was repealed in
the following year. [725] Theophrastos, the head of the Aristotelian
school, was indicted in the old fashion for impiety, which seems to
have consisted in denouncing animal sacrifice. [726] These repressive
attempts, however, failed; and no others followed at Athens in that
era; though in the next century the Epicureans seem to have been
expelled from Lythos in Crete and from Messenê in the Peloponnesos,
nominally for their atheism, in reality probably on political
grounds. [727] Thus Zeno was free to publish a treatise in which,
besides far out-going Plato in schemes for dragooning the citizens into
an ideal life, he proposed a State without temples or statues of the
Gods or law courts or gymnasia. [728] In the same age there is trace of
"an interesting case of rationalism even in the Delphic oracle." [729]
The people of the island of Astypalaia, plagued by hares or rabbits,
solemnly consulted the oracle, which briefly advised them to keep
dogs and take to hunting. About the same time we find Lachares,
temporarily despot at Athens, plundering the shrine of Pallas of its
gold. [730] Even in the general public there must have been a strain of
surviving rationalism; for among the fragments of Menander (fl. 300),
who, in general, seems to have leant to a well-bred orthodoxy, [731]
there are some speeches savouring of skepticism and pantheism. [732]

It was in keeping with this general but mostly placid and non-polemic
latitudinarianism that the New Academy, the second birth, or rather
transformation, of the Platonic school, in the hands of Arkesilaos
and the great Carneades (213-129), and later of the Carthaginian
Clitomachos, should be marked by that species of skepticism thence
called Academic--a skepticism which exposed the doubtfulness of current
religious beliefs without going the Pyrrhonian length of denying that
any beliefs could be proved, or even denying the existence of the Gods.


    For the arguments of Carneades against the Stoic doctrine of
    immortality see Cicero, De natura Deorum, iii, 12, 17; and for
    his argument against theism see Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Math. ix,
    172, 183. Mr. Benn pronounces this criticism of theology "the most
    destructive that has ever appeared, the armoury whence religious
    skepticism ever since has been supplied" (The Philosophy of
    Greece, etc., p. 258). This seems an over-statement. But it is
    just to say, as does Mr. Whittaker (Priests, Philosophers, and
    Prophets, 1911, p. 60; cp. p. 86), that "there has never been
    a more drastic attack than that of Carneades, which furnished
    Cicero with the materials for his second book, On Divination";
    and, as does Prof. Martha (Études Morales sur l'antiquité, 1889,
    p. 77), that no philosophic or religious school has been able to
    ignore the problems which Carneades raised.


As against the essentially uncritical Stoics, the criticism of
Carneades is sane and sound; and he has been termed by judicious
moderns "the greatest skeptical mind of antiquity" [733] and "the Bayle
of Antiquity"; [734] though he seems to have written nothing. [735]
There is such a concurrence of testimony as to the victorious power
of his oratory and the invincible skill of his dialectic [736] that
he must be reckoned one of the great intellectual and rationalizing
forces of his day, triumphing as he did in the two diverse arenas
of Greece and Rome. His disciple and successor Clitomachos said of
him, with Cicero's assent, that he had achieved a labour of Hercules
"in liberating our souls as it were of a fierce monster, credulity,
conjecture, rash belief." [737] He was, in short, a mighty antagonist
of thoughtless beliefs, clearing the ground for a rational life;
and the fact that he was chosen with Diogenes the Peripatetic and
Critolaos the Stoic to go to Rome to plead the cause of ruined
Athens, mulcted in an enormous fine, proved that he was held
in high honour at home. Athens, in short, was not at this stage
"too superstitious." Unreasoning faith was largely discredited by
philosophy.

On this basis, in a healthy environment, science and energy might
have reared a constructive rationalism; and for a time astronomy, in
the hands of Aristarchos of Samos (third century B.C.), Eratosthenes
of Cyrene, the second keeper of the great Alexandrian library (2nd
cent. B.C.), and above all of Hipparchos of Nikaia, who did most of
his work in the island of Rhodes, was carried to a height of mastery
which could not be maintained, and was re-attained only in modern
times. [738] Thus much could be accomplished by "endowment of research"
as practised by the Ptolemies at Alexandria; and after science had
declined with the decline of their polity, and still further under
Roman rule, the new cosmopolitanism of the second century of the
empire reverted to the principle of intelligent evocation, producing
under the Antonines the "Second" School of Alexandria.

But the social conditions remained fundamentally bad; and the earlier
greatness was never recovered. "History records not one astronomer
of note in the three centuries between Hipparchos and Ptolemy"; and
Ptolemy (fl. 140 C.E.) not only retrograded into astronomical error,
but elaborated on oriental lines a baseless fabric of astrology. [739]
Other science mostly decayed likewise. The Greek world, already led
to lower intellectual levels by the sudden ease and wealth opened
up to it through the conquests of Alexander and the rule of his
successors, was cast still lower by the Roman conquest. Pliny,
extolling Hipparchos with little comprehension of his work, must
needs pronounce him to have "dared a thing displeasing to God" in
numbering the stars for posterity. [740] In the air of imperialism,
stirred by no other, original thought could not arise; and the mass
of the Greek-speaking populations, rich and poor, gravitated to the
level of the intellectual [741] and emotional life of more or less
well-fed slaves. In this society there rapidly multiplied private
religious associations--thiasoi, eranoi, orgeones--in which men and
women, denied political life, found new bonds of union and grounds of
division in cultivating worships, mostly oriental, which stimulated
the religious sense and sentiment. [742]

Such was the soil in which Christianity took root and flourished;
while philosophy, after the freethinking epoch following on the
fall of Athenian power, gradually reverted to one or other form
of mystical theism or theosophy, of which the most successful was
the Neo-Platonism of Alexandria. [743] When the theosophic Julian
rejoiced that Epicureanism had disappeared, [744] he was exulting in
a symptom of the intellectual decline that made possible the triumph
of the faith he most opposed. Christianity furthered a decadence
thus begun under the auspices of pagan imperialism; and "the fifth
century of the Christian era witnessed an almost total extinction of
the sciences in Alexandria" [745]--an admission which disposes of the
dispute as to the guilt of the Arabs in destroying the great library.

Here and there, through the centuries, the old intellectual flame burns
whitely enough: the noble figure of Epictetus in the first century of
the new era, and that of the brilliant Lucian in the second, in their
widely different ways remind us that the evolved faculty was still
there if the circumstances had been such as to evoke it. Menippos in
the first century B.C. had played a similar part to that of Lucian,
in whose freethinking dialogues he so often figures; but with less
of subtlety and intellectuality. Lucian's was indeed a mind of the
rarest lucidity; and the argumentation of his dialogue Zeus Tragædos
covers every one of the main aspects of the theistic problem. There
is no dubiety as to his atheistic conclusion, which is smilingly
implicit in the reminder he puts in the mouth of Hermes, that,
though a few men may adopt the atheistic view, "there will always be
plenty of others who think the contrary--the majority of the Greeks,
the ignorant many, the populace, and all the barbarians." But the
moral doctrine of Epictetus is one of endurance and resignation;
and the almost unvarying raillery of Lucian, making mere perpetual
sport of the now moribund Olympian Gods, was hardly better fitted
than the all-round skepticism of the school of Sextus Empiricus to
inspire positive and progressive thinking.

This latter school, described by Cicero as dispersed and extinct
in his day, [746] appears to have been revived in the first century
by Ænesidemos, who taught at Alexandria. [747] It seems to have been
through him in particular that the Pyrrhonic system took the clear-cut
form in which it is presented at the close of the second century by
the accomplished Sextus "Empiricus"--that is, the empirical (i.e.,
experiential) physician, [748] who lived at Alexandria and Athens
(fl. 175-205 C.E.). As a whole, the school continued to discredit
dogmatism without promoting knowledge. Sextus, it is true, strikes
acutely and systematically at ill-founded beliefs, and so makes for
reason; [749] but, like the whole Pyrrhonian school, he has no idea
of a method which shall reach sounder conclusions. As the Stoics
had inculcated the control of the passions as such, so the skeptics
undertook to make men rise above the prejudices and presuppositions
which swayed them no less blindly than ever did their passions. But
Sextus follows a purely skeptical method, never rising from the
destruction of false beliefs to the establishment of true. His aim is
ataraxia, a philosophic calm of non-belief in any dogmatic affirmation
beyond the positing of phenomena as such; and while such an attitude
is beneficently exclusive of all fanaticism, it unfortunately never
makes any impression on the more intolerant fanatic, who is shaken only
by giving him a measure of critical truth in place of his error. And
as Sextus addressed himself to the students of philosophy, not to
the simple believers in the Gods, he had no wide influence. [750]
Avowedly accepting the normal view of moral obligations while rejecting
dogmatic theories of their basis, the doctrine of the strict skeptics
had the effect, from Pyrrho onwards, of giving the same acceptance
to the common religion, merely rejecting the philosophic pretence
of justifying it. Taken by themselves, the arguments against current
theism in the third book of the Hypotyposes [751] are unanswerable;
but, when bracketed with other arguments against the ordinary belief
in causation, they had the effect of leaving theism on a par with
that belief. Against religious beliefs in particular, therefore,
they had no wide destructive effect.

Lucian, again, thought soundly and sincerely on life; his praise
of the men whose memories he respected, as Epicurus and Demonax (if
the Life of Demonax attributed to him be really his), is grave and
heartfelt; and his ridicule of the discredited Gods was perfectly
right so far as it went. It is certain that the unbelievers and the
skeptics alike held their own with the believers in the matter of
right living. [752] In the period of declining pagan belief, the maxim
that superstition was a good thing for the people must have wrought
a quantity and a kind of corruption that no amount of ridicule of
religion could ever approach. Polybius (fl. 150 B.C.) agrees with
his complacent Roman masters that their greatness is largely due
to the carefully cultivated superstition of their populace, and
charges with rashness and folly those who would uproot the growth;
[753] and Strabo, writing under Tiberius--unless it be a later
interpolator of his work--confidently lays down the same principle
of governmental deceit, [754] though in an apparently quite genuine
passage he vehemently protests the incredibility of the traditional
tales about Apollo. [755] So far had the doctrine evolved since Plato
preached it. But to countervail it there needed more than a ridicule
which after all reached only the class who had already cast off the
beliefs derided, leaving the multitude unenlightened. The lack of the
needed machinery of enlightenment was, of course, part of the general
failure of the Græco-Roman civilization; and no one man's efforts could
have availed, even if any man of the age could have grasped the whole
situation. Rather the principle of esoteric enlightenment, the ideal
of secret knowledge, took stronger hold as the mass grew more and more
comprehensively superstitious. Even at the beginning of the Christian
era the view that Homer's deities were allegorical beings was freshly
propounded in the writings of Herakleides and Cornutus (Phornutus);
but it served only as a kind of mystical Gnosis, on all fours with
Christian Gnosticism, and was finally taken up by Neo-Platonists,
who were no nearer rationalism for adopting it. [756]

So with the rationalism to which we have so many uneasy or hostile
allusions in Plutarch. We find him resenting the scoffs of Epicureans
at the doctrine of Providence, and recoiling from the "abyss of
impiety" [757] opened up by those who say that "Aphrodite is simply
desire, and Hermes eloquence, and the Muses the arts and sciences,
and Athênê wisdom, and Dionysos merely wine, Hephaistos fire, and
Dêmêtêr corn"; [758] and in his essay On Superstition he regretfully
recognizes the existence of many rational atheists, confessing that
their state of mind is better than that of the superstitious who abound
around him, with their "impure purifications and unclean cleansings,"
their barbaric rites, and their evil Gods. But the unbelievers, with
their keen contempt for popular folly, availed as little against it as
Plutarch himself, with his doctrine of a just mean. The one effectual
cure would have been widened knowledge; and of such an evolution the
social conditions did not permit.

To return to a state of admiration for the total outcome of Greek
thought, then, it is necessary to pass from the standpoint of
simple analysis to that of comparison. It is in contrast with the
relatively slight achievement of the other ancient civilizations
that the Greek, at its height, still stands out for posterity as a
wonderful growth. That which, tried by the test of ideals, is as a
whole only one more tragic chapter in the record of human frustration,
yet contains within it light and leading as well as warning; and
for long ages it was as a lost Paradise to a darkened world. It has
been not untruly said that "the Greek spirit is immortal, because
it was free": [759] free not as science can now conceive freedom,
but in contrast with the spiritual bondage of Jewry and Egypt, the
half-barbaric tradition of imperial Babylon, and the short flight
of mental life in Rome. Above all, it was ever in virtue of the
freedom that the high things were accomplished; and it was ever the
falling away from freedom, the tyranny either of common ignorance
or of mindless power, that wrought decadence. There is a danger,
too, of injustice in comparing Athens with later States. When a high
authority pronounces that "the religious views of the Demos were of
the narrowest kind," [760] he is not to be gainsaid; but the further
verdict that "hardly any people has sinned more heavily against the
liberty of science" is unduly lenient to Christian civilization. The
heaviest sins of that against science, indeed, lie at the door of
the Catholic Church; but to make that an exoneration of the modern
"peoples" as against the ancient would be to load the scales. And
even apart from the Catholic Church, which practically suppressed
all science for a thousand years, the attitude of Protestant leaders
and Protestant peoples, from Luther down to the second half of the
nineteenth century, has been one of hatred and persecution towards
all science that clashed with the sacred books. [761] In the Greek
world there was more scientific discussion in the three hundred
years down to Epicurus than took place in the whole of Christian
Europe in thirteen hundred; and the amount of actual violence used
towards innovators in the pagan period, though lamentable enough,
was trifling in comparison with that recorded in Christian history,
to say nothing of the frightful annals of witch-burning, to which
there is no parallel in civilized heathen history. The critic, too,
goes on to admit that, while "Sokrates, Anaxagoras, and Aristotle
fell victims in different degrees to the bigotry of the populace,"
"of course their offence was political rather than religious. They
were condemned not as heretics, but as innovators in the state
religion." And, as we have seen, all three of the men named taught in
freedom for many years till political faction turned popular bigotry
against them. The true measure of Athenian narrowness is not to be
reached, therefore, without keeping in view the long series of modern
outrages and maledictions against the makers and introducers of new
machinery, and the multitude of such episodes as the treatment of
Priestley in Christian Birmingham, little more than a century ago. On
a full comparison the Greeks come out not ill.

It was, in fact, impossible that the Greeks should either stifle
or persecute science or freethought as it was either stifled or
persecuted by ancient Jews (who had almost no science by reason of
their theology) or by modern Christians, simply because the Greeks
had no anti-scientific hieratic literature. It remains profoundly
significant for science that the ancient civilization which on the
smallest area evolved the most admirable life, which most completely
transcended all the sources from which it originally drew, and left a
record by which men are still charmed and taught, was a civilization
as nearly as might be without Sacred Books, without an organized
priesthood, and with the largest measure of democratic freedom that
the ancient world ever saw.







