CHAPTER XIII

THE RISE OF MODERN FREETHOUGHT


§ 1. THE ITALIAN INFLUENCE

The negative bearing of the Reformation on freethought is made clear by
the historic fact that the new currents of thought which broadly mark
the beginning of the "modern spirit" arose in its despite, and derive
originally from outside its sphere. It is to Italy, where the political
and social conditions thus far tended to frustrate the Inquisition,
that we trace the rise alike of modern deism, modern Unitarianism,
modern pantheism, modern physics, and the tendency to rational
atheism. The deistic way of thinking, of course, prevailed long
before it got that name; and besides the vogue of Averroïsm we have
noted the virtual deism of More's Utopia (1516). The first explicit
mention of deism noted by Bayle, however, is in the epistle dedicatory
to the second and expanded edition of the Instruction Chrétienne of
the Swiss Protestant Viret (1563), where professed deists are spoken
of as a new species bearing a new name. On the admission of Viret,
who was the friend and bitter disciple of Calvin, they rejected all
revealed religion, but called themselves deists by way of repudiating
atheism; some keeping a belief in immortality, some rejecting it. In
the theological manner he goes on to call them all execrable atheists,
and to say that he has added to his treatise on their account an
exposition of natural religion grounded on the "Book of Nature";
stultifying himself by going on to say that he has also dealt with
the professed atheists. [2132] Of the deists he admits that among
them were men of the highest repute for science and learning. Thus
within ten years of the burning of Servetus we find privately avowed
deism and atheism in the area of French-speaking Protestantism.

Doubtless the spectacle of Protestant feuds and methods would go
far to foster such unbelief; but though, as we have seen, there were
aggressive Unitarians in Germany before 1530, who, being scholars,
may or may not have drawn on Italian thought, thereafter there is
reason to look to Italy as the source of the propaganda. Thence came
the two Sozzini, the founders of Socinianism, of whom Lelio, the uncle
of Fausto, travelled much in northern Europe (including England)
between 1546 and 1552. [2133] As the earlier doctrine of Servetus
shows clear affinities to that of the Sozzini, and his earlier books
were much read in Italy between 1532 and 1540, he may well have given
them their impulse. [2134] It is evidently to Servetus that Zanchi
referred when he wrote to Bullinger in 1565 that "Spain bore the hens,
Italy hatched the eggs, and we now hear the chickens piping." [2135]
Before Socinianism had taken form it was led up to, as we have seen, in
the later writings of the ex-monk Bernardino Ochino (1487-1564), who,
in the closing years of a much chequered career, combined mystical
and Unitarian tendencies with a leaning to polygamy and freedom
of divorce. [2136] His influence was considerable among the Swiss
Protestants, though they finally expelled him for his heresies. From
Geneva or from France, in turn, apparently came some of the English
freethought of the middle period of the sixteenth century; [2137]
for in 1562 Speaker Williams in the House of Commons, in a list of
misbelievers, speaks of "Pelagians, Libertines, Papists, and such
others, leaving God's commandments to follow their own traditions,
affections, and minds" [2138]--using theologically the foreign term,
which never became naturalized in English in its foreign sense. It was
about the year 1563, again, that Roger Ascham wrote his Scholemaster,
wherein are angrily described, as a species new in England, men who,
"where they dare," scorn both Protestant and Papist, "rejecting
scripture, and counting the Christian mysteries as fables." [2139]
He describes them as "atheoi in doctrine"; adding, "this last word is
no more unknowne now to plane Englishe men than the Person was unknown
somtyme in England, untill some Englishe man took peines to fetch that
develish opinion out of Italie." [2140] The whole tendency he connects
in a general way with the issue of many new translations from the
Italian, mentioning in particular Petrarch and Boccaccio. Among good
Protestants his view was general; and so Lord Burghley in his Advice to
his Son writes: "Suffer not thy sons to pass the Alps, for they shall
learn nothing there but pride, blasphemy, and atheism." As it happened,
his grandson the second Earl of Exeter, and his great-grandson Lord
Roos, went to Rome, and became not atheists but Roman Catholics.

Such episodes should remind us that in that age of ignorance and
superstition the Church had always an immense advantage. Those
who, like Gentillet in his raging Discours, commonly known as the
Contre-Machiavel (1576), ascribed to "atheism" and the teaching of
Machiavelli all the crimes and oppressions wrought by Catholics,
[2141] were ludicrously perverting the facts. Massacres in churches,
which are cited by Gentillet as impossible to believing Catholics,
were wrought, as we have seen, on the largest scale by the Church
in the thirteenth century. So, when Scaliger calls the Italians
of his day "a set of atheists," we are to understand it rather of
"the hypocrisy than of the professed skepticism of the time." [2142]
But rationalism and semi-rationalism did prevail in Italy more than
in any other country. [2143]

Like the old Averroïsm, the new pietistic Unitarianism persisted
in Italy and radiated thence afresh when it had flagged in other
lands. The exploded Unitarian tradition [2144] runs that the doctrine
arose in the year 1546 among a group of more than forty learned men who
were wont to assemble in secret at Vicenza, near Venice. Claudius of
Savoy, however, emphatically gave out his anti-Trinitarian doctrine at
Berne in 1534, after having been imprisoned at Strasburg and banished
thence; [2145] and Ochino and Lelio Sozzini left Italy in 1543. But
there seems to have been a continuous evolution of Unitarian heresy
in the south after the German movement had ceased. Giorgio Biandrata,
whom we have seen flying to Poland from Geneva, had been seized by the
Inquisition at Pavia for such opinion. Still it persisted. In 1562
Giulio Guirlando of Treviso, and in 1566 Francesco Saga of Rovigo,
were burned at Venice for anti-Trinitarianism. Giacomo Aconzio too,
who dedicated his Stratagems of Satan (Basel, 1565) to Queen Elizabeth,
and who pleaded notably for the toleration of heresy, [2146] was a
decided latitudinarian. [2147]

It is remarkable that the whole ferment occurs in the period of the
Catholic Reaction, the Council of Trent, and the subjection of Italy,
when the papacy was making its great effort to recover its ground. It
would seem that in the compulsory peace which had now fallen on
Italian life men's thoughts turned more than ever to mental problems,
as had happened in Greece after the rise of Alexander's empire. The
authority of the Church was outwardly supreme; the Jesuits had
already begun to do great things for education; [2148] the revived
Inquisition was everywhere in Italy; its prisons, as we have seen,
were crowded with victims of all grades during a whole generation;
Pius V and the hierarchy everywhere sought to enforce decorum in life;
the "pagan" academies formed on the Florentine model were dissolved;
and classic culture rapidly decayed with the arts, while clerical
learning flourished, [2149] and a new religious music began with
Palestrina. Yet on the death of Paul IV the Roman populace burned the
Office of the Inquisition to the ground and cast the pope's statue
into the Tiber; [2150] and in that age (1548) was born Giordano Bruno,
one of the types of modern freethought.

The great service of Italy to modern freethought, however, was to come
later, in respect of the impulse given to the scientific spirit by
Bruno, Vanini, and Galileo. On the philosophical or critical side, the
Italy of the middle of the sixteenth century left no enduring mark on
European thought, though her serious writers were numerous. Aconzio had
published, before his De Stratagematibus Satanæ, a treatise De Methodo,
sive recta investigandarum tradendarumque scientiarum ratione (Basel,
1558), wherein he pleads strenuously for a true logical method as the
one way to real knowledge of things. In this he anticipates Bacon, as
did, still earlier, Mario Nizolio in his Antibarbarus sive de veris
principiis et vera ratione philosophandi contra pseudo-philosophos
(Parma, 1553). Nizolio's main effort is towards the discrediting of
Aristotle, whom, like so many in the generation following, he regarded
as the great bulwark of scholastic obscurantism. He insists that
all knowledge must proceed from sensation, which alone has immediate
certainty; and thus stands for direct scientific observation as against
tradition and verbalism. But Ludovicus Vives had before him (in his
De causis corruptarum artium, Antwerp, 1531) claimed that the true
Aristotelian went direct to nature, as Aristotle himself had done;
and Nizolio did nothing in practical science to substantiate his
polemic against the logic-choppers.

He and Aconzio in effect cancel each other. Each had glimpsed a
truth, one seeing the need for a right method in inference, the
other protesting against the idea that abstract reasoning could lead
to knowledge; but neither made good his argument by any treasure
trove of fact. Another writer of the same decade, Gomez Pereira,
joined in the revolt against Aristotelianism, publishing in 1554 his
Margarita Antoniana, wherein, in advance of Descartes, he maintained
the absence of sensation in brutes. [2151] For the rest, he championed
freedom in speculation, denying that authority should avail save in
matters of faith. But he too failed to bring forth fruits meet for
freedom. Neither by abstract exposition of right methods of reasoning,
nor by abstract attacks on wrong methods, could any vital impulse
yet be given to thought. What was lacking was the use of reason
upon actual problems, whether of human or of natural science. All
the while Europe was anchored to ancient delusion, historical and
scientific. Even as the horrors of age-long religious war could alone
drive men to something like toleration in the religious life, there
was needed the impact of actual discovery to win them to science as
against scholasticism. And rational thinking on the religion which
resisted all new science was to be still later of attainment, save
for the nameless men who throughout the ages of faith rejected the
creeds without publishing their unbelief. Of these Italy had always
a large sprinkling.




§ 2. SPAIN

The fact that sixteenth-century Spain could be charged, on the
score of Servetus, with producing the "hen" of Socinianism, is an
important reminder of the perpetuity of variation and of the fatality
of environment. The Portuguese Sanchez, whom we shall find laying new
potential foundations of skepticism in France alongside of Montaigne,
could neither have acquired nor propounded his philosophy in his
native land. But it is to be noted that an elder contemporary of
Sanchez, living and dying in Spain, was able, in the generation after
Servetus, to make a real contribution to the revival of freethought,
albeit under shelter of a firm profession of orthodoxy.

No book of the kind, perhaps, had a wider European popularity than
the Examen de Ingenios para las ciencias of Huarte de San Juan,
otherwise Juan Huarte y Navarro (c. 1530-1592). Like Servetus and
Sanchez and many another, Huarte had his bias to reason fostered by a
medical training; and it is as a "natural philosopher" that he stands
for a rational study of causation. As a pioneer of exact science,
indeed, he counts for next to nothing. Taking as his special theme
the divergences of human faculty, he does but found himself on the à
priori system of "humours" and "temperatures" passed on by Aristotle
to Galen and Hippocrates, inconsistently affirming on the one hand
that the "characters" not only of whole nations but of the inhabitants
of provinces are determined by their special climates and aliments,
and on the other hand that individual faculty is determined by the
proportions of hot and cold, moist and dry "temperatures" in the
parents. Apart from his insistence on the functions of the brain,
and from broadly rational deliverances as to the kinds of faculty
which determine success in theology and law, arms and arts, his
"science" is naught. Dealing with an obscure problem, he brought
to it none of the exact inductiveness which alone had yielded true
knowledge in the simpler field of astronomy. In virtue, however,
either of his confidence in affirmation or of his stand for rational
inquiry, or of both, Huarte's book, published in 1575, went the
round of Europe. Translated into Italian in 1582 (or earlier; new
rendering 1600), it was thence rendered into English by Richard Carew
in 1594. [2152] A French version appeared in 1598, and two others
in 1661 and 1671. A later English translation, from the original,
was produced in 1698; and Lessing thought the book worth putting into
German in 1785.

The rationalistic importance of Huarte lies in his insistence on the
study of "second causes" and his protest against the burking of all
inquiry by a reference to deity. On this head he anticipates much of
the polemic of Bacon. The explanation of all processes and phenomena
by the will of God, he observes, "is so ancient a manner of talk, and
the natural philosophers have so often refuted it, that the seeking to
take the same away were superfluous, neither is it convenient.... But
I have often gone about to consider the reason and the cause whence
it may grow that the vulgar sort is so great friend to impute all
things to God, and to reave them from Nature, and do so abhor the
natural means." [2153] His solution is the impatience of men over the
complexity of Nature, their spiritual arrogance, their indolence,
and their piety. For himself, he pronounces, as Middleton did in
England nearly two centuries later, that "God doth no longer those
unwonted things of the New Testament; and the reason is, for that on
his behalf he hath performed all necessary diligence that men might
not pretend ignorance. And to think that he will begin anew to do
the like miracles ... is an error very great.... God speaks once
(saith Job) and turns not to a second replial." [2154]

Only thus could the principle of natural causation be affirmed in the
Spain of Philip II. Huarte is careful to affirm miracles while denying
their recurrence; and throughout he writes as a good Scripturist and
Catholic. But he sticks to his naturalist thesis that "Nature makes
able," and avows that "natural philosophers laugh at such as say,
This is God's doing, without assigning the order and discourse of
the particular causes whence they may spring." [2155] The fact that
the book was dedicated to Philip tells of royal protection, without
which the author could hardly have escaped the Inquisition. Years
after, we shall find Lilly in England protesting on the stage against
the conception of Natura naturans; and Bacon powerfully reaffirming
Huarte's doctrine, with the same reservations. The Spaniard must have
counted for something as a pleader for elementary reason, if Bacon did.

But this is practically the only important contribution from Spain to
the intellectual renascence then going on in Europe. As we have seen,
it was not that Spaniards had any primordial bias to dogmatism and
persecution: it was simply that their whole socio-political evolution,
largely determined by Spanish discovery and dominion in the New World,
set up institutions and forces which became specially powerful to stamp
out freethought. The work of progress was done in lands where lack
of external dominion left on the one hand a greater fund of variant
energy, and on the other made for a lesser power of repression on
the part of Church and State.




§ 3. FRANCE

While Italy continues to be reputed throughout the sixteenth century
a hotbed of freethinking, styled "atheism," it appears to have been
in France, alongside of the wars of religion, that positive unbelief,
as distinct from scripturalist Unitarianism, made most new headway
among laymen. It was in France that the forces of change had greatest
play. The mere contact with Italy which began with the invasion of
Charles VII in 1494 meant a manifold moral and mental influence,
affecting French literature and life alike; and the age of strife and
destruction which set in with the first Huguenot wars could not but
be one of disillusionment for multitudes of serious men. We have seen
as much in the work of Bonaventure des Periers and Rabelais; but the
spread of radical unbelief is to be traced, as is usual in the ages
of faith, by the books written against it. Already in 1552 we have
seen Guillaume Postell publishing his book, Contra Atheos. [2156]
Unbelief increasing, there is published in 1564 an Atheomachie by
one De Bourgeville; but the Massacre must have gone far to frustrate
him. In 1581 appears another Atheomachie, ou réfutation des erreurs
et impiétés des Athéistes, Libertins, etc., issued at Geneva, but
bearing much on French life; and in the same year is issued the
long-time popular work of the Huguenot Philippe de Mornay, De la
vérité de la religion Chrestienne, Contre les Athées, Epicuriens,
Payens, Juifs, Mahumedistes, et autres Infidèles. [2157] In both the
Epistle Dedicatory (to Henry of Navarre) and the Preface the author
speaks of the great multiplication of unbelief, the refutation of
which he declares to be more needful among Christians than it ever
had been among the heathen. But, like most of the writers against
atheism in that age, he declares [2158] that there are no atheists
save a few young fools and utterly bad men, who turn to God as soon as
they fall sick. The reputed atheists of antiquity are vindicated as
having denied not the principle of deity but the false Gods of their
age--this after the universality of a belief in Gods in all ages had
been cited as one of the primary proofs of God's existence. In this
fashion is compiled a book of nine hundred pages, ostensibly for
the confutation of a few fools and knaves, described as unworthy of
serious consideration. Evidently the unbelief of de Mornay's day was
a more vigorous growth than he affected to think; and his voluminous
performance was followed by others. In 1586, Christophe Cheffontaines
published his Epitome novæ illustrationis Christianae Fidei adversus
Impios, Libertinos et Atheos; and still skepticism gained ground,
having found new abettors.

First came the Portuguese Francisco Sanchez (1552-1623?), born in
Portugal, but brought as a child to Bordeaux, which seems to have
been a place of refuge for many fugitive heretics from both sides of
the Peninsula. Sanchez has recorded that in his early youth he had no
bias to incredulity of any kind; but at some stage of his adolescence
he travelled in Italy and spent some time at Rome. The result was not
that special disbelief in Christianity which was proverbially apt
to follow, but a development on his part of philosophic skepticism
properly so-called, which found expression in a Latin treatise entitled
Quod Nihil Scitur--"That Nothing is Known." Composed as early as 1576,
in the author's twenty-fourth year, the book was not published till
1581, a year after the first issue of the Essais of Montaigne. It is
natural to surmise that while Sanchez was at Bordeaux he may have known
something of his famous contemporary; but though Montaigne is likely
to have read the Quod Nihil Scitur in due course, he nowhere speaks of
it; and in 1576 Sanchez was a Professor of Medicine at Montpellier,
then a town of Huguenot leanings. Soon he left it for Toulouse, the
hotbed of Catholic fanaticism, where he contrived to live out his
long life in peace, despite his production of a Pyrrhonist treatise
and of a remarkable Latin poem (1578) on the comet of 1577. The Quod
Nihil Scitur is a skeptical flank attack on current science, in no
way animadverting on religion, as to which he professed orthodoxy:
the poem is a frontal attack on the whole creed of astrology, then
commonly held by Averroïsts and Aristotelians, as well as by orthodox
Catholics. Yet he seems never to have been molested. It would seem as
if a skepticism which ostensibly disallowed all claims to "natural"
knowledge, while avowedly recognizing "spiritual," was then as later
thought to make rather for faith than against it. That such virtual
Pyrrhonism as that of Sanchez can ever have ministered to religious
zeal is not indeed to be supposed: it is rather as a weapon against
the confidence of the "Naturalist" that the skeptical method has
always recommended itself to the calculating priest. And inasmuch as
astrology could be, and was, held by a non-religious theory, though
many Christians added it to their creed, a polemic against that was
the least dangerous form of rationalizing then possible. At all times
there had been priests who so reasoned, though, as we have seen in
dealing with the men of the Protestant Reformation, the belief in
astral influences is too closely akin to the main line of religious
tradition to be capable of ejection on religious grounds.

With his hostility to credulous hopes and fears in the sphere of
Nature, Sanchez is naturally regarded as a forerunner and helper
of freethought. But there is nothing to show that his work had
any effect in undermining the most formidable of all the false
beliefs of Christendom. [2159] Like so many others of his age,
he flouted Aristotelean scholasticism, but was perforce silent as
to the verbalisms and sophistries of simple theology. It may fairly
be inferred that his poem on the comet of 1577 helped to create that
current of reasoned disbelief [2160] which we find throwing up almost
identical expressions in Montaigne, Shakespeare, and Molière, [2161]
concerning the folly of connecting the stars with human affairs. But
a skepticism which left untouched the main matter of the creeds could
not affect conduct in general; and while Sanchez passed unchecked the
watchdogs of the Inquisition, the fiery Bruno and Vanini were in his
day to meet their fiery death at its hands--the latter in Toulouse,
perhaps under the eyes of Sanchez. Having resigned his professorship
of medicine, he seems to have lived to a ripe age, dying in 1623.

Probably those very deaths availed more for the rousing of critical
thought than did the dialectic of the Pyrrhonist. To the life of
the reason may with perfect accuracy be applied the claim so often
made for that of religion--that it feeds on feeling and is rooted in
experience. Revolt from the cruelties and follies of faith plays a
great part in the history of freethought. In the greatest French writer
of that age, a professed Catholic, but in mature life averse alike
to Catholic and to Protestant bigotry, the shock of the Massacre of
Saint Bartholomew can be seen disintegrating once for all the spirit
of faith. Montaigne typifies the kind of skepticism produced in an
unscientific age by the practical demonstration that religion can
avail immeasurably more for evil than for good. [2162] A few years
before the Massacre he had translated for his dying father [2163] the
old Theologia Naturalis of Raymond of Sebonde; and we know from the
later Apology in the Essays that freethinking contemporaries declared
the argument of Raymond to be wholly insufficient. [2164] It is clear
from the same essay that Montaigne felt as much; though the gist of
his polemic is a vehement attack upon all forms of confident opinion,
religious and anti-religious alike. "In replying to arguments of so
opposite a tenour, Montaigne leaves Christianity, as well as Raimond
Sebonde, without a leg to stand upon. He demolishes the arguments of
Sebonde with the rest of human presumption, and allows Christianity,
neither held by faith nor provable by reason, to fall between
the two stools." [2165] The truth is that Montaigne's skepticism
was the product of a mental evolution spread over at least twenty
years. In his youth his vivid temperament kept him both credulous
and fanatical, so much so that in 1562 he took the reckless oath
prescribed by the Catholic Parlement of Paris. As he avows with
his incomparable candour, he had been in many things peculiarly
susceptible to outside influences, being always ready to respond to
the latest pressure; [2166] and the knowledge of his susceptibility
made him self-distrustful. But gradually he found himself. Beginning
to recoil from the ferocities and iniquities of the League, he yet
remained for a time hotly anti-Protestant; and it seems to have
been his dislike of Protestant criticism that led him to run amuck
against reason, at the cost of overthrowing the treatise he had set
out to defend. The common end of such petulant skepticism is a plunge
into uneasy yet unreasoning faith; but, though Montaigne professed
Catholicism to the end, the sheer wickedness of the Catholic policy
made it impossible for him to hold sincerely to the creed any more
than to the cause. [2167] Above all things he hated cruelty. [2168]
It was the Massacre that finally made Montaigne renounce public life;
[2169] it must have affected likewise his working philosophy.

That philosophy was not, indeed, an original construction: he found
it to his hand partly in the deism of his favourite Seneca; partly in
the stoical ethic of Epictetus, then so much appreciated in France;
and partly in the Hypotyposes of Sextus Empiricus, of which the Latin
translation is known to have been among his books; from which he took
several of the mottoes inscribed on his library ceiling, [2170] and
from which he frequently quotes towards the end of his Apology. The
body of ideas compacted on these bases cannot be called a system: it
was not in Montaigne's nature to frame a logical scheme of thought;
and he was far from being the philosophic skeptic he set out to be
[2171] by way of confounding at once the bigots and the atheists. He
was essentially ondoyant et divers, as he freely admitted. As he put
it in a passage added to the later editions of the Essais, [2172]
he was a kind of métis, belonging neither to the camp of ignorant
faith nor to that of philosophic conviction, whether believing or
unbelieving. He early avows that, had he written what he thought and
knew of the affairs of his times, he would have published judgments "à
mon gré mesme et selon raison," in his opinion true and reasonable, but
"illégitimes et punissables." [2173] Again, "whatsoever is beyond the
compass of custom, we deem likewise to be beyond the compass of reason,
God knows how unreasonably, for the most part." [2174] Yet in the next
breath he will exclaim at those who demand changes. Often he comments
keenly on the incredible readiness of men to go to war over trifles;
but in another mood he accuses the nobility of his day of unwillingness
to take up arms "except upon some urgent and extreme necessity." [2175]
In the same page he will tell us that he is "easily carried away by
the throng," and that he is yet "not very easy to change, forsomuch
as I perceive a like weakness in contrary opinions." [2176] "I am
very easily to be directed by the world's public order," [2177] is
the upshot of his easy meditations. And a conformist he remained in
practice to the last, always bearing himself dutifully towards Mother
Church, and generally observing the proprieties, though he confesses
that he "made it a conscience to eat flesh upon a fish day." [2178]


    His conformities, verbal and practical, have set certain
    Catholics upon proving his orthodoxy, though his Essays are
    actually prohibited by the Church. A Benedictine, Dom Devienne,
    published in 1773 a Dissertation sur la Religion de Montaigne,
    of which the main pleas are that the Essais often affirm the
    divinity of the Christian faith; that the essayist received
    the freedom of the city of Rome under the eyes of the pope; and
    that his epitaph declared his orthodoxy! A generation later, one
    Labouderie undertook to set forth Le Christianisme de Montaigne
    in a volume of 600 pages (1819). This apologist has the courage
    to face the protest of Pascal: "Montaigne puts everything in a
    doubt so universal and so general that, doubting even whether
    he doubts, his uncertainty turns upon itself in a perpetual and
    unresting circle.... It is in this doubt which doubts of itself,
    and in this ignorance which is ignorant of itself, that the essence
    of his opinion consists.... In a word, he is a pure Pyrrhonist"
    (Pensées, supp. to Pt. i, art. 11). The reply of the apologist
    is that Montaigne never extends his skepticism to "revelation,"
    but on the contrary declares that revelation alone gives man
    certainties (work cited, p. 127).

    That is of course merely the device of a hundred skeptics of the
    Middle Ages; the old shibboleth of a "twofold truth" modified
    by a special disparagement of reason, with no attempt to meet
    the rejoinder that, if reason has no certainties, there can be
    no certainty that revelation is what it claims to be. When the
    apologist concludes that Montaigne's aim en froissant la raison
    humaine is to "oblige men to recognize the need of a revelation
    to fix his incertitudes," it suffices to answer that Montaigne in
    so many words declares at the outset of the Apologie de Raimond
    Sebonde that he knows nothing of theology, which is equivalent
    to saying that he is not a student of the Bible. As a matter of
    fact he never quotes it!


In the last and most characteristic essay of all, discoursing at large
Of Experience, he makes the most daring attack on laws in general,
as being always arbitrary and often irrational, and not seldom more
criminal than the offences they punish. After a planless discourse
of diseases and diets, follies of habit and follies of caprice, the
wisdom of self-rule and the wisdom of irregularity, he contrives to
conclude at once that we should make the best of everything and that
"only authority is of force with men of common reach and understanding,
and is of more weight in a strange language"--a plea for Catholic
ritual. Yet in the same page he pronounces that "Supercelestial
opinions and under-terrestrial manners are things that amongst us I
have ever seen to be of singular accord."

There is no final recognition here of religion as even a useful
factor in life. In point of fact Montaigne's whole habit of mind
is perfectly fatal to orthodox religion; and it is clear that,
despite his professions of conformity, he did not hold the Christian
beliefs. [2179] He was simply a deist. Again and again he points to
Sokrates as the noblest and wisest of men; there is no reference to
Jesus or any of the saints. Whatever he might say in the Apology, in
the other essays he repeatedly reveals a radical unbelief. The essay
on Custom strikes at the root of all orthodoxy, with its thrusts
at "the gross imposture of religions, wherewith so many worthy and
sufficient men have been besotted and drunken," and its terse avowal
that "miracles are according to the ignorance wherein we are by
nature, and not according to nature's essence." [2180] Above all, he
rejected the great superstition of the age, the belief in witchcraft;
and, following the lead of Wier, [2181] suggested a medical view of
the cases of those who professed wizardry. [2182] This is the more
remarkable because his rubber-ball fashion of following impulsions
and rebounding from certainty made him often disparage other men's
certainties of disbelief just because they were certainties. Declaring
that he prefers above all things qualified and doubtful propositions,
[2183] he makes as many confident assertions of his own as any man
ever did. But the effect of the whole is a perpetual stimulus to
questioning. His function in literature was thus to set up a certain
mental atmosphere, [2184] and this the extraordinary vitality of
his utterance enabled him to do to an incalculable extent. He had
the gift to disarm or at least to baffle hostility, to charm kings,
[2185] to stand free between warring factions. No book ever written
conveys more fully the sensation of a living voice; and after three
hundred years he has as friendly an audience as ever.


    Owen notes (French Skeptics, p. 446; cp. Champion, pp. 168-69)
    that, though the papal curia requested Montaigne to alter certain
    passages in the Essays, "it cannot be shown that he erased or
    modified a single one of the points." Sainte-Beuve, indeed, has
    noted many safeguarding clauses added to the later versions of
    the essay on Prayers (i, 56): but they really carry further the
    process of doubt. M. Champion has well shown how the profession of
    personal indecision and mere self-portraiture served as a passport
    for utterances which would have brought instant punishment on an
    author who showed any clear purpose. As it was, nearly a century
    passed before the Essais were placed upon the Roman Index Librorum
    Prohibitorum (1676).

    To the orthodox of his own day Montaigne seems to have given entire
    satisfaction. Thus Florimond de Boemond, in his Antichrist (2e
    éd. 1599, p. 4), begins his apologetic with a skeptical argument,
    which he winds up by referring the reader with eulogy to the
    Apologie of Montaigne. The modern resort to the skeptical method
    in defence of traditional faith seems to date from this time. See
    Prof. Fortunat Strowski, Histoire du sentiment religieux en France
    au xviie siècle; 1907, i, 55, note. (De Montaigne à Pascal.)


The momentum of such an influence is seen in the work of Charron
(1541-1603), Montaigne's friend and disciple. The Essais had
first appeared in 1580; the expanded and revised issue in 1588;
and in 1601 there appeared Charron's De la Sagesse, which gives
methodic form and as far as was permissible a direct application to
Montaigne's naturalistic principles. Charron's is a curious case of
mental evolution. First a lawyer, then a priest, he became a highly
successful popular preacher and champion of the Catholic League;
and as such was favoured by the notorious Marguerite (the Second
[2186]) of Navarre. On the assassination of the Duke of Guise by
order of Henri III he delivered an indignant protest from the pulpit,
of which, however, he rapidly repented. [2187] Becoming the friend
of Montaigne in 1586, he shows already in 1593, in his Three Truths,
the influence of the essayist's skepticism, [2188] though Charron's
book was expressly framed to refute, first, the atheists; second,
the pagans, Jews, Mohammedans; and, third, the Christian heretics
and schismatics. The Wisdom, published only eight years later, is a
work of a very different cast, proving a mental change. Even in the
first work "the growing teeth of the skeptic are discernible beneath
the well-worn stumps of the believer"; [2189] but the second almost
testifies to a new birth. Professedly orthodox, it was yet recognized
at once by the devout as a "seminary of impiety," [2190] and brought
on its author a persecution that lasted till his sudden death from
apoplexy, which his critics pronounced to be a divine dispensation. In
the second and rearranged edition, published a year after his death,
there are some modifications; but they are so far from essential [2191]
that Buckle found the book as it stands a kind of pioneer manual of
rationalism. [2192] Its way of putting all religions on one level,
as being alike grounded on bad evidence and held on prejudice, is
only the formal statement of an old idea, found, like so many others
of Charron's, in Montaigne; but the didactic purpose and method
turn the skeptic's shrug into a resolute propaganda. So with the
formal and earnest insistence that true morality cannot be built on
religious hopes and fears--a principle which Charron was the first to
bring directly home to the modern intelligence, [2193] as he did the
principle of development in religious systems. [2194] Attempting as it
does to construct a systematic practical philosophy of life, the book
puts aside so positively the claims of the theologians, [2195] and
so emphatically subordinates religion to the rule of natural reason,
[2196] that it constitutes a virtual revolution in public doctrine
for Christendom. As Montaigne is the effective beginner of modern
literature, so is Charron the beginner of modern secular teaching. He
is a Naturalist, professing theism; and it is not surprising to find
that for a time his book was even more markedly than Montaigne's the
French "freethinker's breviary."


    Strowski, as cited, pp. 164-65, 183 sq., founding on Garasse and
    Mersenne. Strowski at first pronounces Charron "in reality only a
    collector of commonplaces" (p. 166); but afterwards obliviously
    confesses (p. 191) that "his audacities are astonishing,"
    and explains that "he formulates, perhaps without knowing
    it, a whole doctrine of irreligion which outgoes the man and
    the time--a thought stronger than the thinker!" And again he
    forgetfully speaks of "cette critique hardie et méthodique,
    j'allais écrire scientifique" (p. 240). All this would be a new
    form of commonplace.


It was only powerful protection that could save such a book from
proscription; but Charron and his book had the support at once of Henri
IV and the President Jeannin--the former a proved indifferentist to
religious forms; the latter the author of the remark that a peace with
two religions was better than a war which had none. Such a temper had
become predominant even among professed Catholics, as may be gathered
from the immense popularity of the Satyre Menippée (1594). Ridiculing
as it did the insensate fanaticism of the Catholic League, that
composition was naturally described as the work of atheists; but there
seems to have been no such element in the case, the authors being
all Catholics of good standing, and some of them even having a record
for zeal. [2197] The Satyre was in fact the triumphant revolt of the
humorous common sense of France against the tyranny of fanaticism,
which it may be said to have overthrown at one stroke, [2198] inasmuch
as it made possible the entry of Henri into Paris. By a sudden appeal
to secular sanity and the sense of humour it made the bulk of the
Catholic mass ashamed of its past course. [2199] On the other hand,
it is expressly testified by the Catholic historian De Thou that all
the rich and the aristocracy held the League in abomination. [2200]
In such an atmosphere rationalism must needs germinate, especially
when the king's acceptance of Catholicism dramatized the unreality
of the grounds of strife.

After the assassination of the king in 1610, the last of the bloody
deeds which had kept France on the rack of uncertainty in religion's
name for three generations, the spirit of rationalism naturally did
not wane. In the Paris of the early seventeenth century, doubtless, the
new emancipation came to be associated, as "libertinism," with licence
as well as with freethinking. In the nature of the case there could be
no serious and free literary discussion of the new problems either of
life or belief, save insofar as they had been handled by Montaigne and
Charron; and, inasmuch as the accounts preserved of the freethought
of the age are almost invariably those of its worst enemies, it is
chiefly their side of the case that has been presented. Thus in 1623
the Jesuit Father François Garasse published a thick quarto of over
a thousand pages, entitled La Doctrine Curieuse des Beaux Esprits
de ce temps, ou prétendus tels, in which he assails the "libertins"
of the day with an infuriated industry. The eight books into which
he divides his treatise proceed upon eight alleged maxims of the
freethinkers, which run as follows:--


    I. There are very few good wits [bons Esprits] in the world;
    and the fools, that is to say, the common run of men, are not
    capable of our doctrine; therefore it will not do to speak freely,
    but in secret, and among trusting and cabalistic souls.

    II. Good wits [beaux Esprits] believe in God only by way of form,
    and as a matter of public policy (par Maxime d'Etat).

    III. A bel Esprit is free in his belief, and is not readily to
    be taken in by the quantity of nonsense that is propounded to
    the simple populace.

    IV. All things are conducted and governed by Destiny, which
    is irrevocable, infallible, immovable, necessary, eternal, and
    inevitable to all men whomsoever.

    V. It is true that the book called the Bible, or the Holy
    Scripture, is a good book (un gentil livre), and contains a lot of
    good things; but that a bon esprit should be obliged to believe
    under pain of damnation all that is therein, down to the tail of
    Tobit's dog, does not follow.

    VI. There is no other divinity or sovereign power in the world but
    Nature, which must be satisfied in all things, without refusing
    anything to our body or senses that they desire of us in the
    exercise of their natural powers and faculties.

    VII. Supposing there be a God, as it is decorous to admit, so
    as not to be always at odds with the superstitious, it does not
    follow that there are creatures which are purely intellectual
    and separated from matter. All that is in Nature is composite,
    and therefore there are neither angels nor devils in the world,
    and it is not certain that the soul of man is immortal.

    VIII. It is true that to live happily it is necessary to extinguish
    and drown all scruples; but all the same it does not do to appear
    impious and abandoned, for fear of offending the simple or losing
    the support of the superstitious.


This is obviously neither candid [2201] nor competent writing; and as
it happens there remains proof, in the case of the life of La Mothe le
Vayer, that "earnest freethought in the beginning of the seventeenth
century afforded a point d'appui for serious-minded men, which neither
the corrupt Romanism nor the narrow Protestantism of the period could
furnish." [2202] Garasse's own doctrine was that "the true liberty
of the mind consists in a simple and docile (sage) belief in all that
the Church propounds, indifferently and without distinction." [2203]
The later social history of Catholic France is the sufficient comment
on the efficacy of such teaching to regulate life. In any case the
new ideas steadily gained ground; and on the heels of the treatise of
Garasse appeared that of Marin Mersenne, L'impieté des Déistes, Athées
et Libertins de ce temps combattue, avec la refutation des opinions
de Charron, de Cardan, de Jordan Brun, et des quatraines du Déiste
(1624). In a previous treatise, Quæstiones celeberrimæ in Genesim
... in quo volumine Athei et Deisti impugnantur et expugnantur (1623),
Mersenne set agoing the often-quoted assertion that, while atheists
abounded throughout Europe, they were so specially abundant in France
that in Paris alone there were some fifty thousand. Even taking the
term "atheist" in the loosest sense in which such writers used it,
the statement was never credited by any contemporary, or by its author;
but neither did anyone doubt that there was an unprecedented amount of
unbelief. The Quatraines du Déiste, otherwise L'Antibigot, was a poem
of one hundred and six stanzas, never printed, but widely circulated
in manuscript in its day. It is poor poetry enough, but its doctrine
of a Lucretian God who left the world to itself sufficed to create
a sensation, and inspired Mersenne to write a poem in reply. [2204]
Such were the signs of the times when Pascal was in his cradle.


    Mersenne's statistical assertion was made in two sheets of the
    Quæstiones Celeberrimæ, "qui ont été supprimé dans la plupart
    des exemplaires, à cause, sans doute, de leur exagération"
    (Bouillier, Hist. de la philos. cartésienne, 1854, i, 28, where
    the passage is cited). The suppressed sheets included a list of
    the "atheists" of the time, occupying five folio columns. (Julian
    Hibbert, Plutarchus and Theophrastus on Superstition, etc., 1828;
    App. Catal. of Works written against Atheism, p. 3; Prosper
    Marchand, Lettre sur le Cymbalum Mundi, in éd. Bibliophile
    Jacob, 1841, p. 17, note; Prof. Strowski, De Montaigne à Pascal,
    1907, p. 138 sq.) Mersenne himself, in the preface to his book,
    stultifies his suppressed assertion by declaring that the impious
    in Paris boast falsely of their number, which is really small,
    unless heretics be reckoned as atheists. Garasse, writing against
    them, all the while professed to know only five atheists, three
    of them Italians (Strowski, as cited).



                             END OF VOL. I.







NOTES


[1] Cp. Lechler, Geschichte des englischen Deismus, 1841, p. 458;
A. S. Farrar, Critical History of Freethought, 1862, p. 588; Larousse's
Dictionnaire, art. Libre Pensée; Sayous, Les déistes anglais et le
Christianisme, 1882, p. 203.

[2] Jesus is made to apply it either to his disciples or to willing
followers in Matt. xvii, 17, where the implication seems to be that
lack of faith alone prevents miraculous cures. So with apistia in
Matt. xiii, 58. In the Epistles, a pagan as such is apistos--e.g.,
1 Cor. vi, 6. Here the Vulgate has infideles: in Matt. xiii, 58,
the word is incredulitatem.

[3] Cp. Luke xii, 46; Tit. i, 15; Rev. xxi, 8.

[4] In the prologue to the first print of the old (1196) Revelation
of the Monk of Evesham, 1482.

[5] Bayle, Dictionnaire, art. Viret, Note D.

[6] Essais, liv. iii. ch. 12. Édit. Firmin-Didot, 1882, ii, 518.

[7] See F. T. Perrens, Les Libertins en France au xviie Siècle, 1896,
Introd. § 11, for a good general view of the bearings of the word. It
stood at times for simple independence of spirit, apart from religious
freethinking. Thus Madame de Sevigné (Lettre à Mme. de Grignan,
28 juin, 1671) writes: "Je suis libertine, plus que vous."

[8] Stähelin, Johannes Calvin, 1863, i, 383 sq.; Perrens as cited,
pp. 5-6; Mosheim, Eccles. Hist., 13 Cent., part ii, ch. v, §§ 9-12,
and notes; 14 Cent., part ii, ch. v, §§ 3-5; 16 Cent., § 3, part ii,
ch. ii. §§ 38-42.

[9] A. Bossert, Calvin, 1906. p. 151.

[10] Burckhardt, Renaissance in Italy, Eng. tr. ed. 1892, p. 542, note.

[11] Answer to Sir T. More, Parker Soc. rep. 1850, pp. 53-54.

[12] Controversy with Harding, Parker Soc. rep. of Works, 1845, i, 305.

[13] Paradise Lost, i, 582; Samson Agonistes, 221.

[14] The New Inn, 1628-9, Act iii. Sc. 2.

[15] The New English Dictionary gives instances in 1526 and 1552.

[16] If Mr. Froude's transcript of a manuscript can here be relied
on. History, ed. 1870, x, 545. (Ed. 1872, xi, 199.)

[17] Four Questions Propounded (pref. to Acts and Monuments).

[18] Answer to the Bishop of Winchester, Parker Soc. rep., p. 129.

[19] Works, ed. 1850, ii, 752.

[20] B. V, ch. i, § 3. Works, i, 429.

[21] De civitate Dei, xx, 30, end; xxi, 5, beginn., etc.

[22] Religio Medici, 1642, pt. i. §§ 19, 20.

[23] Essay II, Of Scepticism and Certainty (rep. of reply to Thomas
White, app. to Scepsis Scientifica in 1665) in Glanvill's collected
Essays on Several Important Subjects in Philosophy and Religion,
1676, pp. 38, 44.

[24] Plus Ultra: or, The Progress and Advancement of Knowledge since
the Days of Aristotle, 1668, p. 146.

[25] History of the Royal Society, 1667, p. 73. Describing the
beginnings of the Society, Sprat remarks that Oxford had at that time
many members "who had begun a free way of reasoning" (p. 53).

[26] Buckle, Introd. to Hist. of Civ. in Eng., 1-vol. ed. p. 211.

[27] Sprat, p. 375 (printed as 367).

[28] Id., p. 83. The French Academy had the same rule.

[29] Some of Sprat's uses of the term have a very general sense, as
when he writes (p. 87) that "Amsterdam is a place of Trade without the
mixture of men of freer thoughts." The latter is an old application,
as in "the free sciences" or "the liberal arts."

[30] Cited by Archbishop Trench, The Study of Words, 19th ed., p. 230,
from the Clarendon State Papers, App. Vol. III, p. 40.

[31] Art. Rationalismus and Supernaturalismus in Herzog and Plitt's
Real-Encyk. für prot. Theol. und Kirche, 1883. xii, 509.

[32] Philosophical Works of Bacon, ed. Ellis and Spedding, iii,
583. See the same saying quoted among the Apophthegms given in
Tenison's Baconiana (Routledge's ed. of Works, p. 895).

[33] Every Man in his Humour (1598), Act iii, sc. 3.

[34] Some Familiar Letters between Mr. Locke and Several of his
Friends, 1708, p. 190.

[35] Id. p. 133.

[36] Ed. Rotterdam, 1686. p. 195.

[37] B. II, pt. ii, § 1.

[38] Ch. on Logic, cited by Professor Fowler in his ed. of the Novum
Organum, 1878, introd. p. 118.

[39] §§ 3 and 4.

[40] Letters, 1746, p. 5.

[41] Orig. ed. iii, 305, 306, 311; ed. J. M. R., 1900, ii, 349, 353.

[42] Nos. 12, 111, 135.

[43] Cp. Johnson on A. Philips in Lives of the Poets. Swift, too,
issued his Free Thoughts upon the Present State of Affairs in 1714.

[44] Thus Bentley, writing as Phileleutherus Lipsiensis against
Collins, claims to have been "train'd up and exercis'd in Free Thought
from my youth." Dr. Samuel Clarke somewhere makes a similar statement;
and the point is raised by Berkeley in his Minute Philosopher,
Dial. i, § 10. One of the first replies to Collins, A Letter to the
Free-thinkers, By a Layman, dated February 24, 1712-13, likewise
insists on the right of believers to the title, declaring that
"a free-thinker may be the best or worst of men." Shaftesbury on
the other side protests that the passion of orthodoxy "holds up the
intended chains and fetters and declares its resolution to enslave"
(Characteristics, iii. 305; ed. 1900, ii, 345). Later, the claim of
Bentley and Clarke became common; and one tract on Christian evidences,
A Layman's Faith, 1732, whose author shows not a grain of the critical
spirit, professes to be written "by a Freethinker and a Christian."

[45] Written in 1898.

[46] Cp. Hauréau, Histoire de la philosophie scolastique,
ed. 1870-1872, i, 543-46.

[47] Second ed. with enlarged Appendix (of authorities and references),
1808, 2 vols.

[48] Farrar, pref., p. x; Riddle, p. 99; Van Mildert, i, 105, etc.

[49] Van Mildert even recast his first manuscript. See the Memoir of
Joshua Watson, 1863, p. 35.

[50] Cp. W. A. Schmidt, Geschichte der Denk- und Glaubensfreiheit im
ersten Jahrhundert der Kaiserherrschaft und des Christenthums, 1847,
pp. 12-13.

[51] Its legitimacy on that side is expressly contended for by
Professor William James in his volume The Will to Believe (1897),
the positions of which were criticized by the present writer in the
University Magazine, April and June, 1897.

[52] Bryce, The Holy Roman Empire, 8th ed., p. 135.

[53] A religious basis for sexual licence is of course a common feature
in non-Christian religions also. Classic instances are well known. As
to sexual promiscuity in an "intensely religious" savage community,
see Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884, p. 290.

[54] E. B. Tylor, Anthropology, 1881, p. 439. Cp. Lang, Custom and
Myth, ed. 1893, p. 72; J. G. Frazer, Lectures on the Early History
of the Kingship, 1905, pp. 85-87.

[55] Theal, The Beginning of South African History, 1902, p. 57. See
also the Rev. J. Macdonald, Light in Africa, 1890, p. 192.

[56] Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians,
5th ed. 1871, i, 280, note.

[57] Life of Mr. Yukichi Fukuzawa, Tokyo, 1902, pp. 48-53, 56-69.

[58] See Tylor, Primitive Culture, 3rd ed. i, 71, as to savage
conservatism in handicraft; but compare his Researches into the Early
History of Mankind, 1865, p. 160, as to countervailing forces.

[59] E.g., in the first chapter of Saint-Simon's Mémoires, the account
of the French soldiers who at the siege of Namur burned and broke
the images of Saint Médard for sending so much rain. Cp. Irvine,
Letters on Sicily, 1813, p. 72; and Ramage, Wanderings through Italy,
ed. 1868, p. 113. Constant, De la religion, 1824, vol. i, ptie. ii,
p. 34, gives a number of Christian instances.

[60] Rev. J. B. Stair, Old Samoa, 1897, pp. 181-82.

[61] Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Mathematicos, ix, 14, 29; Pseudo-Plutarch,
De placitis philosophorum, i, 7; Lactantius, De ira Dei, x, 47;
Cicero, De natura Deorum, i, 42; Augustine, De civitate Dei, iv,
32. It is noteworthy that the skeptic Sextus rejects the opinion as
absurd, even as does the high-priest Cotta in Cicero.

[62] Vico was one of the first, after Sextus Empiricus and his modern
commentator Fabricius, to insist (following the saying of Petronius,
Primus in orbe deos fecit timor) that "False religions were founded
not by the imposture of some, but by the credulity of all" (Scienza
Nuova [1725], lib. i, prop. 40). Yet when denying (id., De' Principii,
ed. 1852, p. 114) the assertions of travellers as to tribes without
religion, he insisted that they were mere fictions planned to sell
the authors' books--here imputing fraud as lightly as others had done
in the case of the supposed founders of religions.

[63] E.g., the Elizabethan play Selimus (Huth Lib. ed. of Greene,
vol. xiv, ed. Grosart), dated 1594, vv. 258-262. (In "Temple
Dramatists" ed., vv. 330-334.) See also below, vol. ii, ch. xiii.

[64] On the principle of self-expression in religion, cp. Feuerbach,
Das Wesen der Religion, in Werke, ed. 1846-1849, i, 413, 445, 498, etc.

[65] Bishop Thirlwall, History of Greece, ed. 1839, i, 186,
204. Cp. Curtius, Griechische Geschichte, 1858, i, 389.

[66] Tiele, Outlines of the Hist. of Religions, Eng. tr.,
p. 96. Cp. Robertson Smith, The Old Testament in the Jewish Church,
2nd ed., p. 141, note.

[67] Spencer and Gillen, The Northern Tribes of Central Australia,
1904, pp. 258, 347, 366, 373, 492.

[68] See the article by E. J. Glave, of Stanley's force, on
"Fetishism in Congoland," in the Century Magazine, April, 1891,
p. 836. Compare F. Schultze, Der Fetischismus, 1871, pp. 137, 141,
142, 144, etc.; Theal, The Beginning of South African History, 1902,
pp. 49, 52; Kranz, Natur- und Kulturleben der Zulus, 1880, pp. 110,
113-14; Moffat, Missionary Labours, 35th thous., pp. 69, 81-84;
A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-Speaking Peoples, 1887, pp. 125-29, 137-39, 142;
Sir G. S. Robertson, The Káfirs of the Hindu-Kush, ed. 1899, pp. 405,
417; E. Rae, The White Sea Peninsula, 1881, p. 149; Turner, Samoa,
1884, p. 272. It is certain that the wizards of contemporary savage
races are frequently killed as impostors by their own people. See
below, p. 35.

[69] Tylor, Anthropology, p. 406; Primitive Culture, 3rd ed., i, 38.

[70] The fact that this phenomenon occurs everywhere among primitives,
from the South Seas to Lapland, should be noted in connection with
the latterly revived claims of so-called "Mysticism."

[71] Cp. E. Rae, The White Sea Peninsula, 1881, pp. 149, 263.

[72] Glave, article cited, pp. 835-36.

[73] Cp. Max Müller, Natural Religion, 1889, p. 133; Anthropological
Religion, 1892, p. 150; Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2nd ed. ii,
358 sq.

[74] Compare Bishop Butler's Charge to the Clergy of Durham, and Bishop
Wordsworth On Religious Restoration in England, 1854, p. 75, etc.

[75] P. von Bradke, Dyâus Asura, Ahura Mazda, und die Asuras,
Halle. 1885, p. 115.

[76] Rig-Veda, x, 121 (as translated by Muir, Müller, Dutt, and von
Bradke); and x, 82 (Dutt's rendering). It is to be noted that the
refrain "Who is the God whom we should worship?" is entirely different
in Ludwig's rendering of x, 121. [Bertholet's Religionsgeschichtliches
Lesebuch (1908) compiled on the principle that "the best translations
are good enough for us," follows the rendering of Muir, Müller, Dutt,
and von Bradke (p. 165).] Cp. Max Müller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 302,
and Natural Religion, pp. 227-229, citing R. V., viii, 100, 3, etc.,
for an apparently undisputed case of skepticism. See again Langlois's
version of vi, 7, iii, 3 (p. 459). He cannot diverge much more from
the German and English translators than they do from each other.

[77] Junod, as above cited, pp. 341, 343, 350, 388. Cp. Dalton,
as cited, p. 115.

[78] E. Rae, The White Sea Peninsula, 1881, pp. 146-7.

[79] On the other hand, there might be genuine defect of knowledge of
the religion of others of the tribe. This is said to occur in thousands
of cases in Christian countries: why not also among savages? See the
express testimony of Sir G. S. Robertson, The Káfirs of the Hindu-Kush,
ed. 1899, pp. 377, 409.

[80] E.g., Moffat, Missionary Labours, end of ch. xvi and beginning
of ch. xix.

[81] See Dr. Gasquet, The Great Pestilence, 1893.

[82] Missionary Labours, ch. xix: stereo. ed. pp. 81, 82. It is
noteworthy that the women were the first to avow unbelief in an
unsuccessful rainmaker (Id. p. 84).

[83] Missionary Labours, as cited, p. 85.

[84] Cp. Schultze, Der Fetischismus, 1871, pp. 155-56; A. H. Keane,
Man, Past and Present, 1900, p. 49; Thurston, Castes and Tribes of
Southern India, 1909, i, 86.

[85] Travels in Southern Africa in the Years 1803-1806, 1815, ii,
61. Cp. Rev. J. Macdonald, Light in Africa, 1890, p. 192, as to
the compulsion on men of superior intelligence to play the wizard,
by reason of the common connection of wizardry with any display of
mental power. There is no more tragical aspect in the life-conditions
of primitive peoples.

[86] The Lake Regions of Central Africa, 1860, ii, 351.

[87] Turner, Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884,
pp. 304-305. Cp. Herodotos, iv, 68, as to the slaying of "false
prophets" among the Scythians; and i, 128, as to the impaling of the
Magi by Astyages.

[88] Paul Kollmann, The Victoria Nyanza, 1899, p. 168.

[89] Sir A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-Speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast,
1887, p. 127.

[90] E.g., an aged female relative of the writer, quite orthodox
in all her habits, and devout to the extent of calling the Book of
Esther "Godless" because the word "God" does not occur in it, yet
at a pinch declared that she had "never heard of Providence putting
a boll of meal inside anybody's door." Her daughter-in-law, also of
quite religious habits, quoted the saying with a certain sense of its
audacity, but endorsed it, as she had cause to do. Yet both regularly
practised prayer and asserted divine beneficence.

[91] See B. Seeman, "Fiji and the Fijians," in Galton's Vacation
Tourists, 1862, pp. 275-76, as to the terrorism resorted to by Fijian
priests against unbelievers. "Punishment was sure to overtake the
skeptic, let his station in life be what it might"--i.e., supernatural
punishment was threatened, and the priests were not likely to let it
fail. Cp. Basil Thomson, The Fijians: A Study of the Decay of Custom,
1909, introd., p. xi: "The reformers of primitive races never lived
long: if they were low-born they were clubbed, and that was the end of
them and their reforms; if they were chiefs, and something happened
to them, either by disease or accident, men saw therein the figure
of an offended deity; and obedience to the existing order of things
became stronger than before." Cp. Pagan Christs, 2nd ed., pp. 60-62,
as to kings who wished to put down human sacrifices.

[92] See Pagan Christs, 2nd ed., pp. 1-2.

[93] E. J. Glave, art. cited, p. 825. Cp. Lubbock, Prehistoric Times,
pp. 582, 594.

[94] Cp. the Rev. J. Macdonald, Light in Africa, 1890, pp. 222-23,
as to the "universal suspicion" which falls upon tribesmen of
rationalistic and anti-superstitious tendencies, making them "almost
doubt their own sanity."

[95] Sir H. H. Johnston, The River Congo, ed. 1805, p. 289. Cp. Moffat,
as cited above.

[96] Colenso, The Pentateuch, vol. i, pref. p. vii; introd. p. 9.

[97] Spencer, Principles of Sociology, iii, § 583.

[98] W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 1831, iv, 30-31, 126-28.

[99] Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands, compiled from the
communications of W. Mariner, by John Martin, M.D., 3rd ed. 1827,
i, 289-300, 306-307, 338-39; ii, 27-28, 83-86, 134. Mariner, who saw
much of the priests, found no reason to suspect them of any systematic
deception. See ii, 129. But his narrative leaves small room for doubt
as to the procedure of the priest of Toobo Totai.

[100] Dr. A. Kropf, Das Volk der Xosa-Kaffern in östlichen Südafrika,
Berlin, 1899, pp. 203-204. Dr. Kropf, a missionary of forty years'
experience, states that many of the Kaffirs latterly disbelieve
in their sorcerers; but this may be partly a result of missionary
teaching--not so much the religious as the scientific. See the
testimony of the Rev. J. Macdonald, Life in Africa, 1890, pp. 47-48.

[101] Rev. J. Macdonald, Life in Africa, pp. 225-26.

[102] It is clear that in the Christianization of Europe much use
was made of the argument that the best lands had fallen to the
Christian peoples. See the epistle of Bishop Daniel of Winchester
to St. Boniface (Ep. lxvii) cited in Schlegel's note to Mosheim,
Reid's ed. of Murdock's translation, p. 262.

[103] Bede, Eccles. Hist., ii, 13.

[104] Cp. A. H. Mann in Social England, illustr. ed., i, 217.

[105] Teutonic Mythology, Eng. trans. 1882, i, 7.

[106] Crichton and Wheaton, Scandinavia, 1837, i, 198, note. Compare
Dr. Ph. Schweitzer, Geschichte der Skandinavischen Litteratur, i, 25:
"In the higher circles [in the pagan period] from an early date (schon
lange) unbelief and even contempt of religion flourished ... probably
never reaching the lower grades of the people." See also C. F. Allen,
Histoire de Danemark, French trans., Copenhagen, 1878, i, 55.

[107] Æneid, vii, 648; x, 773, 880. Mezentius does not deny that Gods
exist: see x, 743.

[108] Sir G. S. Robertson, The Káfirs of the Hindu-Kush, ed. 1899,
p. 379.

[109] Professor T. Clifford Allbutt, Harveian Oration on Science and
Medieval Thought, 1901, p. 82.

[110] Mr. Basil Thomson, in the able introduction to his excellent work
on The Fijians, speaks of primitive reformers (p. xi) as "rare souls
born before their time." But there is no special "time" for reformers,
who, as such, must be in advance of their average contemporaries.

[111] Garcilasso, 1. viii, c. 8; 1. ix, c. 10; Herrera, Dec. v, 1. iv,
c. 4. See the passages in Réville's Hibbert Lectures, pp. 162-65.

[112] Prescott, Conquest of Mexico, Kirk's ed., pp. 81 sq., 91-93,
97; H. H. Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific States, v, 427-29;
Clavigero, History of Mexico, Eng. tr. ed. 1807, B. iv, §§ 4, 15;
vii. § 42.

[113] See the author's Pagan Christs, 2nd ed. pp. 60-62,
361. Cp. Lafcadio Hearn, Japan, 1904, pp. 313-14.

[114] Cp. T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, ed. 1870, i, 231; Turner,
Samoa a Hundred Years Ago, 1884, p. 202.

[115] "A long time elapses between each step that their [missionaries']
stations advance: and when they do it invariably is under the influence
of some chief that they are even then led on." Dalton, Narrative of
an Explorer in Tropical South Africa, ed. 1891, p. 102.

[116] See Professor Sully's Studies of Childhood, 1895.

[117] Rev. S. Smith, Church Work among the Deaf and Dumb, 1875, cited
by Spencer, Principles of Sociology, iii, § 583. Cp. the testimony
cited there from Dr. Kitto, Lost Senses, p. 200.

[118] Die griechischen Culte und Mythen, 1887, pp. 263, 276, 277,
etc. What is true as regards the thesis is that some of the central
insanities of religion, such as the cult of human sacrifice, seem to
have been propagated in all directions from an Asiatic centre. See
the author's Pagan Christs, 2nd ed. pp. 273, 292, 343, 354, 362,
etc. Cp. the Rev. D. Macdonald's Asiatic Origin of the Oceanic
Languages, Luzac & Co., 1894; the Nubische Grammatik of Lepsius,
1880; and Terrien de Lacouperie, Western Origin of the Early Chinese
Civilization, 1894, pp. 134, 362-63.

[119] Dr. Andrew White, A History of the Warfare of Science with
Theology in Christendom, 1896, i, 23.

[120] Dr. B. Seeman, Viti, 1862, pp. 179-82.

[121] Cp. Lang (Myth, Ritual, and Religion, i, 91) as to the
contemptuous disbelief of savages in Christian myths. Mr. Lang
observes that this shows savages and civilized men to have "different
standards of credulity." That, however, does not seem to be the true
inference. Each order of believer accepts the myths of his own creed,
and derides others.

[122] Cp. Decharme, La Critique des trad. relig. chez les Grecs,
1904, p. 121.

[123] The same process will be recorded later in the case of the
intercourse of Crusaders and Saracens; and in the seventeenth century
it is noted by La Bruyère (Caractères, ch. xvi, Des esprits forts,
par. 3) as occurring in his day. The anonymous English author of an
essay on The Agreement of the Customs of the East Indians with those of
the Jews (1705, pp. 152-53) naïvely endorses La Bruyère. Macaulay's
remark to the Edinburgh electors, on the view taken of sectarian
strifes by a man who in India had seen the worship of the cow, is
well known.

[124] Cp. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 96, 121-22; Robertson Smith,
Religion of the Semites, p. 74; Tiele, Egyptian Religion, p. 36;
and Outlines, p. 52.

[125] Cp. Tiele, Outlines, pp. 109-110, and Fischer, Heidenthum und
Offenbarung, p. 59. Professor Max Müller's insistence that the lines of
Vedic religion could not have been "crossed by trains of thought which
started from China, from Babylon, or from Egypt" (Physical Religion,
p. 251), does not affect the hypothesis put above. The Professor
admits (p. 250) the exact likeness of the Babylonian fire-cult to
that of Agni.

[126] But cp. Müller, Anthropolog. Relig., p. 164, as to possible
later developments; and see above, pp. 45-47, as to the many cases in
which conquering races have actually adopted the Gods of the conquered.

[127] Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, ii (2nd ed.), 372, 379, 384.

[128] Id. p. 395.

[129] Max Müller, Selected Essays, 1881, ii, 207-208.

[130] Cp. Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda, 1894, pp. 94, 98-99;
Ghosha, Hist. of Hindu Civ. as illust. in the Vedas, Calcutta, 1889,
pp. 190-91; Max Müller, Phys. Relig., 1891, pp. 197-98.

[131] Max Müller, Selected Essays, ii, 237.

[132] Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, v, 268.

[133] Max Müller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 302, citing R. V., viii, 100,
3; and ii, 12, 5. The first passage runs: "If you wish for strength,
offer to Indra a hymn of praise: a true hymn, if Indra truly exist;
for some one says, Indra does not exist! Who has seen him? Whom shall
we praise?" The hymn of course asseverates his existence.

[134] Cp. Rig-Veda, i, 164, 46; x, 90 (cited by Ghosa, pp. 191,
198); viii, 10 (cited by Müller, Natural Religion, pp. 227-29);
and x, 82, 121, 129 (cited by Romesh Chunder Dutt, Hist. of Civ. in
Anc. India, ed. 1893, i, 95-97); Muir, Sanskrit Texts, v, 353 sq.;
Tiele, Outlines, p. 125; Weber, Hist. of Ind. Lit., Eng. trans.,
p. 5; Max Müller, Hibbert Lectures, ed. 1880, pp. 298-304, 310, 315;
Phys. Relig., p. 187; Barth, Religions of India, Eng. trans., p. 8;
Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii, 354.

[135] Barth, Religions of India, pp. 26, 31, citing Rig-Veda, v, 3,
1; i, 164, 46; viii, 68, 2. The phrase as to Agni is common in the
Brâhmanas, but is not yet so in the Vedas. The second text cited is
rendered by Müller: "That which is one the sages speak of in many
ways--they call it Agni, Yama, Mâtarisvan" (Selected Essays, 1881,
ii, 240).

[136] Colebrooke's Miscellaneous Essays, ed. 1873, i, 375-76. Weber
(Ind. Lit., pp. 27, 137, 236, 284-85) has advanced the view that
the adherents of this doctrine, who gradually became stigmatized as
heretics, were the founders or beginners of Buddhism. But the view
that the universe is a self-existent totality appears to enter into the
Brahmans' Sankhya teaching, which is midway between the popular Nyaya
system and the esoteric Vedânta (Ballantyne, Christianity Contrasted
with Hindu Philosophy, 1859, pp. xviii, 59, 61). As to the connection
between the Sankhya system and Buddhism, see Oldenberg, Der Buddha,
sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde, 3te Aufl., Excurs, pp. 443.

[137] H. H. Wilson, Works, 1862-71, ii, 346.

[138] Weber, Hist. Ind. Lit., p. 236.

[139] Ballantyne, pp. 58, 61; Major Jacob, Manual of Hindu Pantheism,
1881, p. 13.

[140] Cp. Max Müller, Chips from a German Workshop, ed. 1880, i,
228-232, and Banerjea's Dialogues on the Hindu Philosophy, p. 73,
cited by Major Jacob, Hindu Pantheism, p. 13.

[141] Jacob, as cited, p. 3.

[142] Max Müller, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 340-41. Cp. Barth, Religions
of India, p. 81.

[143] Müller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 139.

[144] Cp. Weber, Hist. Ind. Lit., p. 28.

[145] Id. pp. 28, 220-22.

[146] Max Müller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 139, note, citing Panini, iv,
4, 60.

[147] Apparently belonging to the later or middle Buddhist
period. Müller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 141.

[148] On these cp. Müller, p. 139, note; Garbe, Philos. of Anc. India,
Eng. tr. 2nd ed. Chicago, 1899, p. 25; and Weber, Ind. Lit. p. 246,
note, with the very full research of Professor Rhys Davids, Dialogues
of the Buddha, 1899, pp. 166-72.

[149] Müller, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 140-41. Cp. Garbe. p. 28.

[150] Garbe, as cited.

[151] Rhys Davids, Dialogues of the Buddha, p. 171.

[152] Id. pp. 169-71.

[153] Id. p. 172.

[154] Id. ib.

[155] Trans. in English by Cowell and Gough, 1882.

[156] Garbe, as cited, p. 25.

[157] See Müller, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 141-42, citing Burnouf.

[158] Müller, Hibbert Lectures, p. 310.

[159] Bk. I, Stories ii, 7, 8, 16; vii. 180.

[160] Bk. I, 11, 40; St. ii, 32.

[161] St. vi. 162.

[162] Major Jacob, as cited, preface.

[163] Müller, Psychol. Relig., pp. 95, 97, 126; Lect. on the Vedânta
Philos., 1894, p. 32.

[164] Chunder Dutt, Hist. of Civ. in Anc. India, as cited, i, 112-13.

[165] Rhys Davids, trans. of Dialogues of the Buddha, p. 166. Cp. his
Buddhism, p. 143, as to Buddhist censures of an extravagant skepticism
which denied every religious theory. In one of the Dialogues (ii,
25, p. 74) a contemporary sophist is cited as flatly denying a future
state. Mr. Lillie, however (Buddhism in Christendom, 1887, p. 187),
contends as against Professor Rhys Davids that the Upanishads were only
"whispered to pupils who had gone through a severe probation."

[166] Prof. Weber (Hist. Ind. Lit., p. 4) says the peoples of the
Punjaub never at all submitted to the Brahmanical rule and caste
system. But the subject natives there must at the outset have been
treated as an inferior order. Cp. Tiele, Outlines, p. 120 and refs.;
and Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 23.

[167] Cp. Weber, Hist. Ind. Lit., pp. 236, 284-85; Max Müller,
Chips, i, 228-32; Kuenen, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 258-64; and the
general discussion of the problem in the author's Pagan Christs,
2nd ed. pp. 239-63.

[168] Brahmanism had itself been by this time influenced by aboriginal
elements, even to the extent of affecting its language. Weber, as
cited, p. 177. Cp. Müller, Anthrop. Relig., p. 164.

[169] Major Jacob, as cited, p. 12.

[170] I.e., "the enlightened," a title given to sages in
general. Weber, p. 284.

[171] Weber, Hist. Ind. Lit., pp. 179, 299; Müller, Natural Religion,
p. 299.

[172] See Senart, Essai sur la légende de Buddha, 2e édit., p. 297 ff.

[173] Cp. Weber, pp. 286-87, 303.

[174] See Weber, pp. 301, 307; also Rhys Davids, Buddhism, pp. 43,
83, etc.

[175] Tiele, Outlines, p. 117.

[176] Cp. Weber, Hist. Ind. Lit., pp. 27, 284-87; Max Müller, Natural
Religion, p. 555; Jacobi, as there cited; Tiele, Outlines, pp. 135-36;
Rhys Davids, American Lectures on Buddhism, pp. 115-16; Buddhism,
p. 84; and the author's Pagan Christs, pt. ii, ch. ii, §§ 8-13.

[177] Weber, Hist. Ind. Lit., pp. 4, 39.

[178] Barth, Religions of India, p. 146.

[179] Rhys Davids, Buddhism, pp. 35, 79, 99.

[180] Cp. Pagan Christs, pp. 248-50.

[181] Rhys Davids, trans. of Dialogues, pp. 188-89; Amer. Lec. on
Buddhism, 1896, pp. 127-34; Hibbert Lectures, 1881, p. 109; Buddhism,
pp. 95, 98-99.

[182] Max Müller, Selected Essays, 1881, ii, 295.

[183] As the context in Professor Müller's work shows, these phrases
are inaccurate.

[184] Cp. Weber, Ind. Lit., p. 289, note; and Banerjea, Dialogues on
the Hindu Philosophy, p. 520, cited by Major Jacob, pp. 29-30.

[185] See Muir, Sanskrit Texts, iv, 50 (cited by Jacob, pp. 30-31),
as to the Brahman view of the licence ascribed to Krishna. And see
iii, 32 (cited by Jacob, p. 14), as to a remarkable disparagement of
Vedism in the Bhagavat Gita.

[186] Müller, Selected Essays, ii, 363: H. H. Wilson, as last cited,
ii, 368 sq.

[187] See this brought out in a strikingly dramatic way in Mr. Dennis
Hird's novel, The Believing Bishop.

[188] Cp. Dr. A. Jeremias, Monotheistische Strömungen innerhalb der
Babylonischen Religion, 1904, p. 44--a very candid research.

[189] The Hammurabi Code, by Chilperic Edwards, 1904, pp. 67, 68, 70
(§§ 240, 249, 266). The invocations of named Gods by Hammurabi at the
close of the code, however, suggest that the force of the word was
"a God." Cp. p. 76 with what follows; and see note on p. 93. On this
question compare Jeremias, as cited, pp. 39, 43.

[190] Maspero, Hist. anc. des peup. de l'orient, 4e éd. p. 139; Sayce,
Hib. Lect., pp. 121, 213, 215; E. Meyer, Gesch. des Alt., i (1884),
161 (§ 133); iii (1901), 167 sq. (§ 103).

[191] Sayce, pp. 219, 344; Lenormant, Chaldean Magic, Eng. ed. p. 127.

[192] Jastrow, Religions of Babylonia and Assyria, 1898, p. 318.

[193] Jastrow, p. 187; Sayce, pp. 128, 267-68. Cp. Kuenen, Religion of
Israel, Eng. tr., i, 91; Menzies, History of Religion, 1895, p. 171;
Gunkel, Israel und Babylonien, 1903, p. 30; Jeremias, as cited,
pp. 5-6.

[194] Meyer, iii, 168; Jastrow, p. 79; Sayce, p. 331 sq., 367 sq.;
Lenormant, Chaldean Magic, p. 112; Jeremias, pp. 7-23.

[195] Sayce, p. 305. Cp. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites,
p. 452.

[196] Jastrow, p. 190, note, p. 319; Sayce, pp. 191-92, 367; Lenormant,
pp. 112, 113, 119, 133; Jeremias, p. 26.

[197] Tiele, Outlines, p. 78; Sayce, Ancient Empires of the East,
pp. 152-53; Rawlinson, Five Great Monarchies, 2nd ed. iii, 13; Maspero,
p. 139.

[198] Strabo, xvi, c. 1, § 6.

[199] Cp. Rawlinson, Five Great Monarchies, i, 110; iii, 12-13.

[200] Hibbert Lectures, p. 385.

[201] Meyer, iii, § 103; Sayce, pp. 192, 345.

[202] Cp. Jastrow, p. 662; Sayce, p. 78; and Tiele, Hist. Comparée,
p. 209. It seems probable that human sacrifice was latterly restricted
to the case of criminals.

[203] Cp. Meyer, iii, 173.

[204] Meyer, i, 187, and note.

[205] Cp. T. G. Pinches, The Old Testament in the Light of the
Hist. Records of Assyria and Babylonia, 1902, pp. 161-63.

[206] Jastrow, pp. 187, 256; Sayce, pp. 316, 320, 322, 327; Meyer,
i, 183; Lenormant, p. 110; Jeremias, p. 5.

[207] Sayce, pp. 326, 341; cp. Jastrow, p. 317.

[208] Meyer, i, 599; Sayce, Hib. Lect., pp. 85-91; Anc. Emp. of the
East, p. 245.

[209] Meyer, iii, § 57.

[210] Herod. i, 131.

[211] Jer. xi, 13, etc.

[212] Ezek. chs. vi, viii.

[213] Cp. the recent literature on the recovered Code of Hammurabi.

[214] Herod. i, 101.

[215] Id. iii, 79.

[216] Cp. Grote, History of Greece, pt. ii, ch. 33 (ed. 1888, iii,
442), note.

[217] Meyer, Gesch. des Alt., i, 505 (§ 417), 542 (§ 451), 617 (§
515); Tiele, Outlines, p. 164.

[218] Herod. i, 130.

[219] Cp. Herod. iii, 94, 98; Grote, vol. iii, p. 448.

[220] Meyer, as cited, i, 505, 530 (§ 439); Tiele, Outlines, pp. 163,
165.

[221] Meyer, i, 528 (§ 438).

[222] Darmesteter, The Zendavesta (S. B. E. ser.), vol. i, introd.,
p. lx (1st ed.).

[223] Rawlinson, Religions of the Anc. World, p. 105; Meyer, §§
417, 450-51.

[224] Meyer, i, 507 (§ 418).

[225] Cp. Meyer, i, 506-508; Renan, as cited by him, p. 508;
Darmesteter, as cited, cc. iv-ix, 2nd ed.; Tiele, Outlines, p. 165.

[226] Meyer, i, 520 (§ 428).

[227] Meyer, i, 524 (§ 433); Tiele, Outlines, p. 178; Darmesteter,
Ormazd et Ahriman, 1877, pp. 7-18.

[228] Meyer, i, § 450 (p. 541).

[229] Tiele, Outlines, p. 167. Cp. Lenormant (Chaldean Magic, p. 229),
who attributes the heresy to immoral Median Magi; and Spiegel (Avesta,
1852, i, 271), who considers it a derivation from Babylon.

[230] Le Page Renouf, Hibbert Lectures on Relig. of Anc. Egypt,
2nd ed. p. 92; Wiedemann, Religion of the Ancient Egyptians,
Eng. tr. 1897, p. 109. Cp. p. 260. Renouf (pp. 93-103) supplies an
interesting analysis.

[231] Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. i, 83; Wiedemann, as cited, p. 103 sq.

[232] Cp. Major Glyn Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, 1906,
pp. 354, 417, 433.

[233] Wiedemann, as cited, p. 136.

[234] Meyer, p. 81 (§ 66); Tiele, Hist. of the Egypt. Relig. Eng. tr.,
pp. 119, 154.

[235] Le Page Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. p. 240.

[236] Meyer, Geschichte des Alten Egyptens, in Oncken's series,
1877, B. iii, Kap. 3, p. 249; Gesch. des Alt. i. 109; Tiele,
Egypt. Relig. pp. 149, 151, 157; Maspero, Hist. anc. des peuples de
l'orient, 4é ed., pp. 278-80; Le Page Renouf, as cited, pp. 215-30;
Wiedemann, pp. 12, 13, 301; Erman, Handbook of Egyptian Religion,
Eng. tr. 1907, p. 57.

[237] Erman, pp. 59, 60.

[238] Tiele, Egypt. Rel. pp. 153, 155, 156.

[239] Tiele, p. 157.

[240] Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter, 1884;
1 Hälfte, pp. 90-91; Kuenen, Religion of Israel, Eng. trans. i,
395-97; Tiele, pp. 226-30; Erman, pp. 71, 103-105.

[241] Cp. Wiedemann, p. 302.

[242] Tiele, pp. 114, 118, 154. Cp. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums,
i, 101-102 (§ 85). Wiedemann, p. 260.

[243] Dr. Wallis Budge, Egyptian Magic, 1899, end.

[244] Tiele, p. 157. Cp. p. 217.

[245] Cp. Maspero, as cited, pp. 274-76.

[246] Meyer, i, 72.

[247] Maspero's spelling.

[248] Von Bissing's spelling.

[249] De Garis Davies, The Tombs of Amarna.

[250] Maspero (Hist. anc. des peuples de l'orient, ed. 1905, p. 251)
says he respected also Osiris and Horus.

[251] Brugsch, Egypt under the Pharaohs, ed. 1891, p. 216. Maspero
(as cited, p. 250) recognizes no such revolt.

[252] Maspero, Hist. anc. de l'orient, 7e éd. pp. 248-54; Brugsch,
Hist. of Egypt under the Pharaohs, Eng. trans. ed. 1891, ch. x;
Meyer, Geschichte des alten Aegyptens, B. iii, Kap. 4, 5; Gesch. des
Alterthums, i, 271-74; Tiele, pp. 161-65; Flinders Petrie, History
of Egypt, iii (1905), 10; Wiedemann, pp. 35-39; Erman, pp. 61-70;
L. W. King and H. H. Hall, Egypt and Western Asia in the Light of
Recent Discoveries, 1907, pp. 383-87; F. W. von Bissing, Geschichte
Aegyptens in Umriss, 1904, pp. 52-53.

[253] Tiele, p. 144; Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. i, 135.

[254] "We do not find magic predominant [in the tales] until the
Ptolemaic age. At that time the physical magic of the early times
reappears in full force" (Petrie, Religion and Conscience in Ancient
Egypt, 1898, p. 29. Cp. Maspero, p. 286; Budge, Egyptian Magic,
pp. 64, 233).

[255] Petrie, Hist. iii, 174-75, 180.

[256] Tiele, pp. 180-82; Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. i, 140-43.

[257] Tiele, pp. 184-85, 196, 217.

[258] Herodotos, ii, 48, 60-64, etc. Cp. Maspero, p. 286.

[259] "The Osiride and Cosmic Gods rose in importance as time went
on, while the Abstract Gods continually sank on the whole. This
agrees with the general idea that the imported Gods have to yield
their position gradually to the older and more deeply-rooted faiths"
(Petrie, as last cited, p. 95).

[260] The familiar narrative of Herodotos is put in doubt by the
monuments. Sayce, Ancient Empires, p. 246. But cp. Meyer, i, 611
(§ 508).

[261] Tiele, p. 158.

[262] See figures 209, 212, 221, 235, 242, 249, 250, in Sharpe's
Hist. of Egypt, 7th ed.

[263] Cp. Sharpe, ii, 287-95; Budge, Egyptian Magic, p. 64.

[264] Compare the orthodox view of Bishop Westcott, Essays in the
History of Religious Thought in the West, 1891, pp. 197-200.

[265] These fights had not ceased even in the time of Julian (Sharpe,
ii, 280). Cp. Juvenal, Sat. xv, 33 sq.

[266] Metamorphoses, B., xi.

[267] Cp. Lane, Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians, passim.

[268] Cp. Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. i, 232-33.

[269] Meyer, i, 237.

[270] Put by Canon Rawlinson, History of Phoenicia, 1889, p. 321.

[271] As to the universality of this tendency, see Meyer, ii, 97.

[272] Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, i, 251, § 209; Tiele, Outlines,
p. 84; Histoire comparée des anciennes religions, Fr. tr. pp. 320-21.

[273] Rawlinson, Phoenicia, p. 340; Sayce, Anc. Emp. p. 204; Menzies,
Hist. of Relig. p. 168.

[274] Præparatio Evangelica, B. i, c. 9-10.

[275] Meyer, i, 249.

[276] Cp. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 159, as to Persian methods of
the same kind.

[277] Div. Inst. i, 23.

[278] E. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, ii, 104, 105.

[279] As to Greek instances, cp. Bury, Hist. of Greece, ed. 1906,
pp. 53, 55, 65, 92, 104; and as to Roman, see Ettore Pais, Ancient
Legends of Roman History, Eng. trans. 1906, ch. x, where it is shown
that Virginia and Lucretia are primarily ancient Latin divinities; and
(ch. vii) that both Numa and Servius Tullius are probably in the same
case, Servius Rex being in all likelihood the servus rex Nemorensis of
the Arician grove, round whom turns the research of Dr. J. G. Frazer's
Golden Bough; while tullius is an old Latin word for a spring. See also
ch. iv as to Acca Larentia, another Goddess reduced by the historians
to the status of a hetaira, as was Flora. Horatius Cocles (id. p. 157)
is also a God reduced to a hero.

[280] So Sayce, Ancient Empires, p. 204.

[281] Sayce, Ancient Empires, p. 202.

[282] Legge, Religions of China, 1880, pp. 11, 16; Douglas,
Confucianism and Taouism, 1879, pp. 12, 82.

[283] Menzies, History of Religion, p. 158.

[284] Legge, pp. 12, 19, 23, 25, 26; Tiele, Outlines, p. 27; Douglas,
p. 79.

[285] Legge, Religions of China, p. 142.

[286] See the citations made by Legge, p. 5.

[287] Id. p. 139; cp. Menzies, p. 109.

[288] Legge, p. 140; cp. p. 117; Douglas, p. 81.

[289] Legge, Religions, p. 117; Life and Teachings of Confucius,
4th ed. p. 101; Douglas, p. 68; Tiele, Outlines, p. 29.

[290] Tiele, p. 31; Legge, Religions, p. 143.

[291] Tiele, pp. 31-32; Douglas, pp. 68, 84. But cp. Legge, Religions,
pp. 123, 127.

[292] Legge, Life and Teachings, pp. 100-101.

[293] Douglas, pp. 179, 184.

[294] See the author's Pagan Christs, pp. 214-22.

[295] Pauthier, Chine Moderne, p. 351. There is a tradition that
Lao-Tsze took his doctrine from an ancient sage who flourished
before 1120 B.C.; and he himself (Tau Teh King, trans. by Chalmers,
The Speculations of Lao-Tsze, 1868, ch. 41) cites doctrine as to Tau
from "those who have spoken (before me)." Cp. cc. 22, 41, 62, 65, 70.

[296] Cp. E. J. Simcox, Primitive Civilizations, 1894, ii, 18.

[297] Pauthier, p. 358; Chalmers, pp. 14, 37.

[298] Legge, Religions, p. 137.

[299] Tau Teh King, as cited, pp. 38. 49, ch. 49, 63; Pauthier,
p. 358; Legge, p. 223.

[300] Analects, xxv, 36; Legge, Religions, p. 143; Life and Teachings,
p. 113; Douglas, p. 144.

[301] Legge, Religions, p. 164. We do find, however, an occasional
allusion to deity, as in the phrase "the Great Architect" (Chalmers'
trans. 1868. ch. lxxiv, p. 57), and "Heaven" is spoken of in a somewhat
personalized sense. Still, Mr. Chalmers complains (p. xv) that Lao-Tsze
did not recognize a personal God, but put "an indefinite, impersonal,
and unconscious Tau" above all things (ch. iv).

[302] F. H. Balfour, Art. "A Philosopher who Never Lived," in Leaves
from my Chinese Scrap-book, 1887, p. 83 sq.

[303] Id. pp. 86-90.

[304] Id. p. 134.

[305] Legge, Religions of China, p. 147; Tiele, Outlines, p. 33.

[306] Legge, Life and Works of Mencius, 1875, pp. 29, 50, 77, etc.

[307] Tiele, p. 33.

[308] Legge, Life and Works of Mencius, pp. 44, 47, 56, 57, etc.

[309] Miss Simcox, Primitive Civilizations, ii, 36-37, following
Chavannes.

[310] Legge's Mencius, p. 49; cp. p. 48.

[311] Cp. Legge's Mencius, pp. 47, 131; Chalmers' Lao-Tsze, pp. 23,
28, 53, 58 (chs. xxx, xxxi, xxxvi, lxvii, lxxiv); Douglas, Taouism,
chs. ii, iii.

[312] Legge, Religions of China, p. 147. The ruler in question seems
to have been of non-Chinese descent. E. H. Parker, China, 1901, p. 18.

[313] Legge, Religions of China, p. 159.

[314] Id. p. 60.

[315] Tiele, p. 37.

[316] Douglas, p. 222.

[317] Id. p. 239.

[318] Tiele, p. 35; Douglas, p. 287. Taouism, however, has a rather
noteworthy ethical code. See Douglas, ch. vi. It has to be noted that
the translations of the Tâo Têh King have varied to a disquieting
degree. Cp. Drews, Gesch. des Monismus, p. 121.

[319] Details are given in the author's Pagan Christs, pt. iv.

[320] Nadaillac (L'Amérique préhistorique, 1883, pp. 273-84) gives
them little of this credit, pronouncing them at once cruel and
degenerate. He credits them, however, with being the first makers of
roads and aqueducts in Central America, and cites the record of their
free public hospitals, maintained by the sacerdotal kings. Prescott,
on the other hand, overstated the bloodlessness of their religion
(Conquest of Mexico, Kirk's ed. 1890, p. 41 and ed. note).

[321] Réville, Hibbert Lectures, On the Native Religions of Mexico
and Peru, 1884, pp. 62-67.

[322] J. G. Müller, Geschichte der Amerikanischen Urreligionen,
ed. 1867, pp. 577-90; H. H. Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific
States, iii, 279. (Passage cited in author's Pagan Christs,
pp. 402-403; where is also noted Dr. Tylor's early view, discarded
later, that Quetzalcoatl was a real personage.)

[323] Cp. Prescott, as cited.

[324] Réville, p. 66.

[325] J. G. Müller, as cited, pp. 473-74; Réville, p. 46. Dr. Réville
speaks of the worship of the unifying deity as pretty much "effaced"
by that of the lower Gods. It seems rather to have been a priestly
effort to syncretize these. Still, such an effacement did take place,
as we have seen, in Central Asia in ancient times, after a syncretic
idea had been reached (above, p. 45). As to the alleged monotheism of
King Netzahuatl (or Netzahualcoyotl), of Tezcuco, mentioned above,
p. 39, see Lang, Making of Religion, p. 270, note, and p. 282;
Prescott, Conquest of Mexico, as cited, p. 92; and J. G. Müller,
as cited, pp. 473-74, 480.

[326] As to the capabilities of the Aztec language, see Bancroft,
Native Races, ii, 727-28 (quoted in Pagan Christs, p. 416, note).

[327] Refs. above, p. 41. Cp. Lang, Making of Religion, p. 270,
note, and p. 282; J. G. Müller, as cited, pp. 473-74; and Nadaillac,
as cited, p. 289.

[328] The Christianized descendant of the Tezcucan kings, Ixtilxochitl,
who wrote their history, adds the words, "Cause of Causes"--a very
unlikely formula in the place and circumstances.

[329] Above, p. 41. Cp. Lang, as last cited, pp. 263, 282.

[330] Cp. Kirk's ed. of Prescott's Conquest of Peru, 1889, p. 44;
Réville, p. 189-90; Lang, as cited below.

[331] Réville, p. 152, citing Garcilasso. See same page for a story
of resistance to the invention of an alphabet.

[332] Réville, p. 50. citing Torquemada, 1. viii, c. 20. end.

[333] History of the Affairs of New Spain, French trans. 1880,
1. vi, ch. 7, pp. 342-43. Cp. Prescott, Conquest of Mexico, Kirk's
ed. pp. 31, 33.

[334] Prescott, p. 34.

[335] "The priest says, 'the spirit is hungry.' the fact being that he
himself is hungry. He advises the killing of an animal" (Max Müller,
Anthropological Religion, p. 307).

[336] On the general tendency cp. Chantepie de la Saussaye, Manual
of the Science of Religion, pp. 77-84.

[337] In the windows of the shop of the S. P. C. K., in London,
may be often seen large displays of reproduced Madonna-pictures,
by Catholic artists, at popular prices.

[338] Compare the author's Pagan Christs, pp. 66-95.

[339] Jud. xvii, xviii.

[340] Gen. xxxi, 19, 34, 35.

[341] Compare Hugo Winckler, Geschichte Israels, i, 56-58.

[342] Compare Tiele, Outlines, p. 87; Hist. comp. des
anc. relig. p. 342 sq.; Kuenen, Relig. of Israel, iii, 35, 44,
398. Winckler (Gesch. Israels, i, 34-38) pronounces the original
Semitic Yahu, and the Yahweh evolved from him, to have been each a
"Wetter-Gott."

[343] The word is applied to the apparition of Samuel in the story
of the Witch of Endor (1 Sam. xxviii, 13).

[344] The unlearned reader may here be reminded that in Gen. i the
Hebrew word translated "God" is "Elohim" and that the phrase in
Gen. ii rendered "the Lord God" in our versions is in the original
"Yah-weh-Elohim." The first chapter, with its plural deity, is,
however, probably the later as well as the more dignified narrative,
and represents the influence of Babylonian quasi-science. See,
for a good general account of the case, The Witness of Assyria, by
C. Edwards, 1893, ch. ii. Cp. Wellhausen, Proleg. to Hist. of Israel,
Eng. tr. pp. 196-308; E. J. Fripp, Composition of the Book of Genesis,
1892, passim; Driver, Introd. to the Lit. of the Old Test. 1891,
pp. 18-19.

[345] Winckler, Gesch. Isr. i, 29-30.

[346] Cp. Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. i, 398.

[347] See the myth of the offerings put in it by the Philistines
(1 Sam. vi).

[348] 1 Sam. iii, 3. Cp. ch. ii, 12-22. Contrast Lev. xvi, 2, ff.

[349] 1 Sam. iv, 3-11. Cp. v. vii, 2.

[350] 2 Sam. vi.

[351] 1 Kings xii, 28; Hosea viii, 4-6. Cp. Jud. viii. 27; Hosea
viii, 5.

[352] Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 196. But see above, p. 79.

[353] 11th cent. B.C.

[354] 2 Kings xviii, 4, 22; xxiii, 48.

[355] 2 Kings xxiii.

[356] Jer. i, 18; iii, 16; vi, 13; vii, 4-22; viii, 8; xviii, 18;
xx, 1, 2; xxiii, 11.

[357] Jer. ii, 28; xi, 13.

[358] So Kuenen, vol. i. App. i to Ch. 1.

[359] Amos v, 21, 22.

[360] Hosea ii, 11; vi, 6.

[361] Isa. i, 11-14.

[362] Mic. vi, 6-8.

[363] Cp. M. Müller, Nat. Rel. pp. 560-61; Psychol. Rel. pp. 30-32;
Wellhausen, Israel, p. 465. If the Moabite Stone be genuine--and it
is accepted by Stade (Gesch. des Volkes Israel, in Oncken's Series,
1881, i, 86) and by most contemporary scholars--the Hebrew alphabetic
writing is carried back to the ninth century B.C. An account of the
Stone is given in The Witness of Assyria, by C. Edwards, ch. xi. See
again Mommsen, Hist. of Rome, bk. i, ch. 14, Eng. tr. 1894, i, 280,
for a theory of the extreme antiquity of the alphabet.

[364] Dr. Cheyne (Art. Amos in Encyc. Biblica) gives some good reasons
for attaching little weight to such objections, but finally joins in
calling Amos "a surprising phenomenon."

[365] Driver, Introd. to Lit. of Old Test. ch. vi, § 2 (p. 290,
ed. 1891). Cp. Kuenen, Relig. of Israel, i, 86; and Robertson Smith,
art. Joel, in Encyc. Brit.

[366] Cp. Wellhausen, Israel, p. 501; Driver, ch. vii (1st ed. pp. 352
sq., esp. pp. 355, 361, 362, 365); Stade, Gesch. des Volkes Israel,
i, 85.

[367] E.g. Ps. l, 8-15; li, 16-17, where v. 19 is obviously a priestly
addition, meant to countervail vv. 16, 17.

[368] Cp. Kuenen, i, 156; Wellhausen, Prolegomena, p. 139; Israel,
p. 478.

[369] As to a possible prehistoric connection of Hebrews and
Perso-Aryans, see Kuenen, i, 254, discussing Tiele and Spiegel, and
iii, 35, 44, treating of Tiele's view, set forth in his Godsdienst
van Zarathustra, that fire-worship was the original basis of
Yahwism. Cp. Land's views, discussed by Kuenen, p. 398; and Renan,
Hist. des langues sémit. p. 473.

[370] Cheyne, Introd. to Isaiah, Prol. pp. xxx, xxxviii, following
Kosters.

[371] There is a cognate dispute as to the condition of the Samaritans
at the time of the Return. Stade (Gesch. den Volkes Israel,
i, 602) holds that they were numerous and well-placed. Winckler
(Alttestamentliche Untersuchungen, 1892, p. 107) argues that, on the
contrary, they were poor and unorganized, and looked to the Jews for
help. So also E. Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. iii (1901), 214.

[372] Cp. Rowland Williams, The Hebrew Prophets, ii (1871), 38. This
translator's rendering of the phrase cited by Zephaniah runs:
"Neither good does the eternal nor evil."

[373] Cp. E. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, iii, 216.

[374] Mal. ii, 17; iii, 13. Cp. ii, 8, 11.

[375] Cp. Jer. xxxiii, 24; xxxviii, 19.

[376] Eccles. iii, 19-21.

[377] Ch. v. Renan's translation lends lucidity.

[378] Driver, Introduction, p. 378. Prof. Dillon (Skeptics of the
Old Testament, p. 155) goes so far as to pronounce Agur a "Hebrew
Voltaire," which is somewhat of a straining of the few words he has
left. Cp. Dr. Moncure Conway, Solomon and Solomonic Literature, 1899,
p. 55. In any case, Agur belongs to an age of "advanced religious
reflection" (Cheyne, Job and Solomon, p. 152).

[379] Driver, Introduction, p. 378.

[380] Biscoe, Hist. of the Acts of the Apostles, ed. 1829, p. 80,
following Selden and Lightfoot.

[381] S. Schechter, Studies in Judaism, 1896, p. 189, citing Sanhedrin,
386, and Pseudo-Jonathan to Gen. iv, 8. Cp. pp. 191-92, citing a
mention of Epicurus in the Mishna.

[382] The familiar phrase in the Psalms (xiv, i; liii, 1), "The fool
hath said in his heart, there is no God," supposing it to be evidence
for anything, clearly does not refer to any reasoned unbelief. Atheism
could not well be quite so general as the phrase, taken literally,
would imply.

[383] Cp. W. R. Sorley, Jewish Christians and Judaism, 1881,
p. 9; Robertson Smith, Old Test. in the Jewish Ch. ed. 1892,
pp. 48-49. These writers somewhat exaggerate the novelty of the view
they accept. Cp. Biscoe, History of the Acts, ed. 1829, p. 101.

[384] Wisdom, c. 2.

[385] Cp. the implications in Ecclesiasticus, vi, 4-6; xvi, 11-12,
as to the ethics of many believers.

[386] Kuenen, ii, 242-43.

[387] Kalisch, Comm. on Leviticus, xxv, 8, pt. ii, p. 548.

[388] In the Wisdom of Solomon, iii, 13; iv, 1, the old desire for
offspring is seen to be in part superseded by the newer belief in
personal immortality.

[389] Schechter, Studies in Judaism, 1896, p. 216. Compare pp. 193-94.

[390] See Supernatural Religion, 6th ed. i, 97-100, 103-21; Mosheim,
Comm. on Christ. Affairs before Constantine, Vidal's tr. i, 70;
Schürer, Jewish People in the Time of Jesus, Eng. tr. Div. II,
vol. iii, p. 152.

[391] Sat. xiv, 96-106.

[392] Cp. Horace, 1 Sat. v, 100.

[393] Rev. A. Edersheim, History of the Jewish Nation after the
Destruction of Jerusalem, 1856, p. 462, citing the Avoda Sara, a
treatise directed against idolatry! Other Rabbinical views cited by
Dr. Edersheim as being in comparison "sublime" are no great improvement
on the above--e.g., the conception of deity as "the prototype of
the high priest, and the king of kings,"--"who created everything
for his own glory." With all this in view, Dr. Edersheim thought
it showed "spiritual decadence" in Philo Judæus to speak of Persian
magi and Indian gymnosophists in the same laudatory tone as he used
of the Essenes, and to attend "heathenish theatrical representations"
(p. 372).

[394] See Ps. xc, 2; Prov. viii, 22, 26.

[395] This is seen persisting in the lore of the Neo-Platonist writer
Sallustius Philosophus (4th c.), De Diis et Mundo, c. 7, though quite
unscientifically held.

[396] Cp. Tiele, Outlines, pp. 205, 207, 212.

[397] Cp. E. Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, ii, 533.

[398] Cp. K. O. Müller, Literature of Ancient Greece, ed. 1847, p. 77.

[399] Duncker, Gesch. des Alterth. 2 Aufl. iii, 209-10, 252-54,
319 sq.; E. Meyer, Gesch. des Alterth. ii, 181, 365, 369, 377, 380,
535 (see also ii, 100, 102, 105, 106, 115 note, etc.); W. Christ,
Gesch. der griech. Lit. 3te Aufl. p. 12; Gruppe, Die griech. Culte
und Mythen, 1887, p. 165 sq.

[400] E. Curtius, Griech. Gesch. i, 28, 29, 35, 40, 41, 101, 203,
etc.; Meyer, ii, 369.

[401] See the able and learned essay of S. Reinach, Le Mirage
Orientate, reprinted from L'Anthropologie, 1893. I do not find that
its arguments affect any of the positions here taken up. See pp. 40-41.

[402] Meyer, ii. 369; Benn, The Philosophy of Greece, 1898, p. 42.

[403] Cp. Bury, History of Greece, ed. 1906, pp. vi, 10, 27, 32-34,
40, etc.; Burrows, The Discoveries in Crete, 1907, ch. ix; Maisch,
Manual of Greek Antiquities, Eng. tr. §§ 8, 9, 10, 60; H. R. Hall,
The Oldest Civilization of Greece, 1901, pp. 31, 32.

[404] Cp. K. O. Müller, Hist. of the Doric Race, Eng. tr. 1830, i,
8-10; Busolt, Griech. Gesch. 1885, i, 33; Grote, Hist. of Greece,
10-vol. ed. 1888, iii, 3-5, 35-44; Duncker, iii, 136, n.; E. Meyer,
Gesch. des Alterthums, i, 299-310 (§§ 250-58); E. Curtius, i, 29;
Schömann, Griech. Alterthümer, as cited, i, 2-3, 89; Burrows, ch. ix.

[405] Cp. Meyer, ii, 97; and his art. "Baal" in Roscher's
Ausführl. Lex. Mythol. i, 2867.

[406] The fallacy of this tradition, as commonly put, was well shown
by Renouvier long ago--Manuel de philosophie ancienne, 1844, i,
3-13. Cp. Ritter, as cited below.

[407] Cp. on one side, Ritter, Hist. of Anc. Philos. Eng. tr. i,
151; Renan, Études d'hist. religieuse, pp. 47-48; Zeller, Hist. of
Greek Philos. Eng. tr. 1881, i, 43-49; and on the other, Ueberweg,
Hist. of Philos. Eng. tr. i, 31, and the weighty criticism of Lange,
Gesch. des Materialismus, i, 126-27 (Eng. tr. i, 9, note 5).

[408] Cp. Curtius, i, 125; Bury, introd. and ch. i.

[409] Cp. Bury, as cited.

[410] As to the primary mixture of "Pelasgians" and Hellenes,
cp. Busolt, i, 27-32; Curtius, i, 27; Schömann, i, 3-4; Thirlwall,
Hist. of Greece, ed. 1839, i, 51-52, 116. K. O. Müller (Doric Race,
Eng. tr. i, 10) and Thirlwall, who follows him (i, 45-47), decide
that the Thracians cannot have been very different from the Hellenes
in dialect, else they could not have influenced the latter as they
did. This position is clearly untenable, whatever may have been
the ethnological facts. It would entirely negate the possibility of
reaction between Greeks, Kelts, Egyptians, Semites, Romans, Persians,
and Hindus.

[411] Murray, Four Stages of Greek Religion, 1912, p. 59.

[412] Cp. Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. ii, 583.

[413] The question is discussed at some length in the author's
Evolution of States, 1912.

[414] Lit. of Anc. Greece, pp. 41-47. The discussion of the Homeric
problem is, of course, alien to the present inquiry.

[415] Introd. to Scientif. Mythol. Eng. tr. pp. 180, 181,
291. Cp. Curtius, i, 126.

[416] Cp. Curtius, i, 107, as to the absence in Homer of any
distinction between Greeks and barbarians; and Grote, 10-vol. ed. 1888,
iii, 37-38, as to the same feature in Archilochos.

[417] Duncker, Gesch. des Alt., as cited, iii. 209-10; pp. 257,
319 sq. Cp. K. O. Müller, as last cited, pp. 181, 193; Curtius, i,
43-49, 53, 54, 107, 365, 373, 377, etc.; Grote, iii, 39-41; and Meyer,
ii, 104.

[418] Duncker, iii, 214; Curtius, i, 155, 121; Grote, iii, 279-80.

[419] Busolt, Griech. Gesch. 1885, i, 171-72. Cp. pp. 32-34; and
Curtius, i, 42.

[420] On the general question cp. Gruppe, Die griechischen Culte und
Mythen, pp. 151 ff., 157, 158 ff., 656 ff., 672 ff.

[421] Preller, Griech. Mythol. 2 Aufl. i, 260; Tiele, Outlines, p. 211;
R. Brown, Jr., Semit. Influ. in Hellenic Mythol. 1898, p. 130; Murray,
Hist. of Anc. Greek Lit. p. 35; H. R. Hall, Oldest Civilization of
Greece, 1901, p. 290.

[422] See Tiele, Outlines, pp. 210, 212. Cp., again, Curtius,
Griech. Gesch. i, 95, as to the probability that the "twelve Gods"
were adjusted to the confederations of twelve cities; and again p. 126.

[423] "Even the title 'king' (Anax) seems to have been borrowed by the
Greek from Phrygian.... It is expressly recorded that tyrannos is a
Lydian word. Basileus ('king') resists all attempts to explain it as a
purely Greek formation, and the termination assimilates it to certain
Phrygian words." (Prof. Ramsay, in Encyc. Brit. art. Phrygia). In
this connection note the number of names containing Anax (Anaximenes,
Anaximandros, Anaxagoras, etc.) among the Ionian Greeks.

[424] iv, 561 sq.

[425] It is now agreed that this is merely a guess. The document,
further, has been redacted and interpolated.

[426] Prehist. Antiq. of the Aryan Peoples, Eng. tr. p. 423. Wilamowitz
holds that the verses Od. xi, 566-631, are interpolations made later
than 600 B.C.

[427] Tiele, Outlines, p. 209; Preller, p. 263.

[428] Meyer says on the contrary (Gesch. des Alt. ii, 103, Anm.) that
"Kronos is certainly a Greek figure"; but he cannot be supposed to
dispute that the Greek Kronos cult is grafted on a Semitic one.

[429] Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 54, 181. Cp. Cox, Mythol. of the
Aryan Nations, p. 260, note. It has not, however, been noted in the
discussions on Semelê that Semlje is the Slavic name for the Earth
as Goddess. Ranke, History of Servia, Eng. tr. p. 43.

[430] Iliad, xiv, 201, 302.

[431] Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 367 sq.; Ancient Empires,
p. 158. Note p. 387 in the Lectures as to the Assyrian influence,
and p. 391 as to the Homeric notion in particular. Cp. W. Christ,
Gesch. der griech. Literatur, § 68.

[432] It is unnecessary to examine here the view of Herodotos that
many of the Greek cults were borrowed from Egypt. Herodotos reasoned
from analogies, with no exact historical knowledge. But cp. Renouvier,
Manuel, i, 67, as to probable Egyptian influence.

[433] Cp. Meyer, ii, §§ 453-60, as to the eastern initiative of
Orphic theology.

[434] It is noteworthy that the traditional doctrine associated with
the name of Orpheus included a similar materialistic theory of the
beginning of things. Athenagoras, Apol. c. 19. Cp. Renouvier, Manuel
de philos. anc. i, 69-72; and Meyer, ii, 743.

[435] Cp. Meyer, ii, 726. As to the oriental elements in Hesiod see
further Gruppe, Die griechischen Culte und Mythen, 1887, pp. 577,
587, 589, 593.

[436] Cp. however, Bury (Hist. of Greece, pp. 6, 65), who assumes that
the Greeks brought the hexameter with them to Hellas. Contrast Murray,
Four Stages, p. 61.

[437] Mahaffy, History of Classical Greek Literature, 1880, i, 15.

[438] Id. p. 16. Cp. W. Christ, as cited, p. 79.

[439] Mahaffy, pp. 16-17.

[440] Od. xviii, 352.

[441] Od. vi, 240; Il. v, 185.

[442] Od. xxii, 39.

[443] In Od. xiv, 18, antitheoi means not "opposed to the Gods,"
but "God-like," in the ordinary Homeric sense of noble-looking
or richly attired, as men in the presence of the Gods. Cp. vi,
241. Yet a Scholiast on a former passage took it in the sense
of God-opposing. Clarke's ed. in loc. Liddell and Scott give no
use of atheos, in the sense of denying the Gods, before Plato
(Apol. 26 C. etc.), or in the sense of ungodly before Pindar
(P. iv, 288) and Æschylus (Eumen. 151). For Sophocles it has the
force of "God-forsaken"--Oedip. Tyr. 254 (245), 661 (640), 1360
(1326). Cp. Electra, 1181 (1162). But already before Plato we find the
terms apistos and atheos, "faithless" or "infidel" and "atheist,"
used as terms of moral aspersion, quite in the Christian manner
(Euripides, Helena, 1147), where there is no question of incredulity.

[444] Cp. Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion, 2nd ed. i, 14-15. and
cit. there from Professor Jebb.

[445] Cp. Meyer, Gesch. des Alterthums, ii, 724-27; Grote, as cited,
i, 279-81.

[446] Meyer, ii, 724, 727.

[447] The tradition is confused. Stesichoros is said first to have
aspersed Helen, whereupon she, as Goddess, struck him with blindness:
thereafter he published a retractation, in which he declared that she
had never been at Troy, an eidolon or phantasm taking her name; and
on this his sight was restored. We can but divine through the legend
the probable reality, the documents being lost. See Grote, as cited,
for the details. For the eulogies of Stesichoros by ancient writers,
see Girard, Sentiment religieux en Grèce, 1869, pp. 175-79.

[448] Cp. Meyer (1901), iii. § 244.

[449] Ol. i, 42-57, 80-85.

[450] Ol. ix, 54-61.

[451] He dedicated statues to Zeus, Apollo, and Hermes. Pausanias,
ix, 16, 17.

[452] Herodot. ii. 53.

[453] A ruler of Libyan stock, and so led by old Libyan connections to
make friends with Greeks. He reigned over fifty years, and the Greek
connection grew very close. Curtius, i, 344-45. Cp. Grote, i, 144-55.

[454] Grote, 10-vol. ed. 1888, i, 307, 326, 329, 413. Cp. i, 27-30;
ii, 52; iii, 39-41, etc.

[455] K. O. Müller, Introd. to Mythology, p. 192.

[456] "Then one [of the Persians] who before had in nowise believed
in [or, recognized the existence of] the Gods, offered prayer and
supplication, doing obeisance to Earth and Heaven" (Persae, 497-99).

[457] Agamemnon, 370-372. This is commonly supposed to be a reference
to Diagoras the Melian (below, p. 159).

[458] Agam. 170-72 (160-62).

[459] So Whittaker, Priests, Philosophers, and Prophets, 1911,
pp. 42-43.

[460] So Buckley, in Bohn trans. of Æschylus, p. 100. He characterizes
as a "skeptical formula" the phrase "Zeus, whoever he may be"; but
goes on to show that such formulas were grounded on the Semitic notion
that the true name of God was concealed from man.

[461] Grote, ed. 1888, vii, 8-21. See the whole exposition of the
exceptionally interesting 67th chapter.

[462] Cp. Meyer, ii, 431; K. O. Müller, Introd. to Mythol. pp. 189-92;
Duncker, p. 340; Curtius, i, 384; Thirlwall, i, 200-203; Burckhardt,
Griech. Culturgesch. 1898, ii. 19. As to the ancient beginnings of a
priestly organization, see Curtius, i, 92-94, 97. As to the effects of
its absence, see Heeren, Polit. Hist. of Anc. Greece, Eng. tr. 1829,
pp. 59-63; Burckhardt, as cited, ii, 31-32; Meyer, as last cited;
Zeller, Philos. der Griechen, 3te Aufl. i, 44 sq. Lange's criticism
of Zeller's statement (Gesch. des Materialismus, 3te Aufl. i, 124-26,
note 2) practically concedes the proposition. The influence of a
few powerful priestly families is not denied. The point is that they
remained isolated.

[463] Cp. K. O. MÜller, Introd. to Mythol. p. 195; Curtius, i, 387,
389, 392; Duncker, iii, 519-21, 563; Thirlwall, i, 204; Barthélemy
St. Hilaire, préf. to tr. of Metaphys. of Aristotle, p. 14. Professor
Gilbert Murray, noting that Homer and Hesiod treated the Gods as
elements of romance, or as facts to be catalogued, asks: "Where is
the literature of religion: the literature which treated the Gods as
Gods? It must," he adds, "have existed"; and he holds that we "can
see that the religious writings were both early and multitudinous"
(Hist. of Anc. Greek Lit. p. 62; cp. Meyer and Mahaffy as cited
above, pp. 125-26. "Writings" is not here to be taken literally;
the early hymns were unwritten). The priestly hymns and oracles
and mystery-rituals in question were never collected; but perhaps
we may form some idea of their nature from the "Homeridian" and
Orphic hymns to the Gods, and those of the Alexandrian antiquary
Callimachus. It is further to be inferred that they enter into the
Hesiodic Theogony. (Decharme, p. 3, citing Bergk.)

[464] Meyer, ii, 426; Curtius, i, 390-91, 417; Thirlwall, i, 204;
Grote, i, 48-49.

[465] Meyer, ii, 410-14.

[466] Cp. Curtius, i, 392-400, 416; Duncker, iii, 529.

[467] Curtius, i, 112; Meyer, ii, 366.

[468] Curtius, i, 201, 204, 205, 381; Grote, iii, 5; Lange, Gesch. des
Materialismus, 3te Aufl. i, 23 (Eng. tr. i, 23).

[469] Herodotos, i, 170; Diogenes Laërtius, Thales, ch. i.

[470] On the essentially anti-religious rationalism of the whole
Ionian movement, cp. Meyer, ii, 753-57.

[471] The First Philosophers of Greece, by A. Fairbanks, 1898, pp. 2,
3, 6. This compilation usefully supplies a revised text of the ancient
philosophic fragments, with a translation of these and of the passages
on the early thinkers by the later, and by the epitomists. A good
conspectus of the remains of the early Greek thinkers is supplied
also in Grote's Plato and the other Companions of Sokrates, ch. i;
and a valuable critical analysis of the sources in Prof. J. Burnet's
Early Greek Philosophy.

[472] Cp. Lange, Gesch. des Mat. i, 126 (Eng. tr. i, 8, n.). Mr. Benn
(The Greek Philosophers, i, 8) and Prof. Decharme (p. 39) seem to read
this as a profession of belief in deities in the ordinary sense. But
cp. R. W. Mackay, The Progress of the Intellect, 1850, i, 338. Burnet
(ch. i, § 11) doubts the authenticity of this saying, but thinks it
"extremely probable that Thales did say that the magnet and amber
had souls."

[473] Mackay, as cited, p. 331.

[474] Fairbanks, p. 4.

[475] Diogenes Laërtius, Thales, ch. 9.

[476] Fairbanks, pp. 3, 7.

[477] Herodotos, i, 74.

[478] Cp. Burnet, Early Greek Philos. 2nd. ed. introd. § 3. To Thales
is ascribed by the Greeks the "discovery" of the constellation Ursus
Major. Diog. ch. 2. As it was called "Phoenike" by the Greeks, his
knowledge would be of Phoenician derivation. Cp. Humboldt, Kosmos,
Bohn tr. iii, 160.

[479] Diog. Laërt. ch. 3. On this cp. Burnet, introd. § 6.

[480] Herod. i, 170. Cp. Diog. Laërt. ch. 3.

[481] Diog. Laërt. ch. 9.

[482] Cp. Burnet, p. 57.

[483] Fairbanks, pp. 9-10. Mr. Benn (Greek Philosophers, i, 9)
decides that the early philosophers, while realizing that ex nihilo
nihil fit, had not grasped the complementary truth that nothing can be
annihilated. But even if the teaching ascribed to Anaximandros be set
aside as contradictory (since he spoke of generation and destruction
within the infinite), we have the statement of Diogenes Laërtius
(bk. ix, ch. 9, § 57) that Diogenes of Apollonia, pupil of Anaximenes,
gave the full Lucretian formula.

[484] Diogenes Laërtius, however (ii, 2), makes him agree with Thales.

[485] Fairbanks, pp. 9-16. Diogenes makes him the inventor of
the gnomon and of the first map and globe, as well as a maker of
clocks. Cp. Grote, i, 330, note.

[486] See below, p. 158, as to Demokritos' statement concerning the
Eastern currency of scientific views which, when put by Anaxagoras,
scandalized the Greeks.

[487] Fairbanks, pp. 17-22.

[488] See Windelband, Hist. of Anc. Philos. Eng. tr. 1900, p. 25,
citing Diels and Wilamowitz-Möllendorf. Cp. Burnet, introd. § 14.

[489] It will be observed that Mr. Cornford's book, though somewhat
loosely speculative is very freshly suggestive. It is well worth
study, alongside of the work of Prof. Burnet, by those interested in
the scientific presentation of the evolution of thought.

[490] Diog. Laërt. ix, 19; Fairbanks, p. 76.

[491] Herodotos, i, 163-67; Grote, iii, 421; Meyer, ii, § 438.

[492] Cp. Guillaume Bréton, Essai sur la poésie philosophique
en Grèce, 1882, pp. 23-25. The life period of Xenophanes is
still uncertain. Meyer (ii, § 466) and Windelband (Hist. of
Anc. Philos. Eng. tr. p. 47) still adhere to the chronology which puts
him in the century 570-470, making him a young man at the foundation
of Elea.

[493] Cousin, developed by G. Bréton, work cited, p. 31 sq., traces
Xenophanes's doctrine of the unity of things to the school of
Pythagoras. It clearly had antecedents. But Xenophanes is recorded
to have argued against Pythagoras as well as Thales and Epimenides
(Diog. Laërt. ix, 2, §§ 18, 20).

[494] Metaphysics, i, 5; cp. Fairbanks, pp. 79-80.

[495] One of several so entitled in that age. Cp. Burnet, introd. § 7.

[496] Metaph., as cited; Plato, Soph. 242 D.

[497] Long fragment in Athenæus, xi, 7; Burnet, p. 130.

[498] Burnet, p. 141.

[499] Cp. Burnet, p. 131.

[500] Fairbanks, p. 67, Fr. 5, 6; Clem. Alex. Stromata, bk. v,
Wilson's tr. ii, 285-86. Cp. bk. vii, c. 4.

[501] Fairbanks, Fr. 7.

[502] Cicero, De divinatione, i, 3, 5; Aetius, De placitis reliquiæ,
in Fairbanks, p. 85.

[503] Aristotle, Rhetoric, ii, 23, § 27. A similar saying is attributed
to Herakleitos, on slight authority (Fairbanks, p. 54).

[504] Cicero, Academica, ii, 39; Lactantius, Div. Inst. iii,
23. Anaxagoras and Demokritos held the same view. Diog. Laërt, bk. ii,
ch. iii, iv (§ 8); Pseudo-Plutarch, De placitis philosoph. ii, 25.

[505] Cp. Mackay, Progress of the Intellect, i, 340.

[506] Diog. Laërt. in life of Pyrrho, bk. ix, ch. xi, 8 (§ 72). The
passage, however, is uncertain. See Fairbanks, p. 70.

[507] Fairbanks. Fr. 1. Fairbanks translates with Zeller: "The whole
[of God]." Grote: "The whole Kosmos, or the whole God." It should
be noted that the original in Sextus Empiricus (Adv. Math. ix, 144)
is given without the name of Xenophanes, and the ascription is modern.

[508] Grote, as last cited, p. 18.

[509] Fairbanks, Fr. 19. In Athenæus, x, 413.

[510] Polybius, iv, 40; Sextus Empiricus, Adversus Mathematicos,
viii, 126; Fairbanks, pp. 25, 27; Frag. 4, 14. Cp. 92, 111, 113.

[511] Diog. Laërt. ix, i, 2.

[512] Fairbanks, Fr. 134.

[513] Id. Frag. 36, 67.

[514] Id. Frag. 43, 44, 46, 62.

[515] Diog. Laërt. last cited. This saying is by some ascribed to the
later Herakleides (see Fairbanks, Fr. 119 and note); but it does not
seem to be in his vein, which is wholly pro-Homeric.

[516] Clem. Alex. Protrept. ch. 2, Wilson's tr. p. 41. The passage is
obscure, but Mr. Fairbanks's translation (Fr. 127) is excessively so.

[517] Clemens, as cited, p.32; Fairbanks, Fr. 124, 125,
130. Cp. Burnet, p. 139.

[518] Fairbanks, Fr. 21.

[519] Cp. Burnet, pp. 175-90.

[520] Theaetetus, 180 D. See good estimates of Parmenides in Benn's
Greek Philosophers, i, 17-19, and Philosophy of Greece in Relation to
the Character of its People, pp. 83-95; in J. A. Symonds's Studies of
the Greek Poets, 3rd ed. 1893, vol. i, ch. 6; and in Zeller, i, 580 sq.

[521] Plutarch, Perikles, ch. 26.

[522] Mr. Benn finally gives very high praise to Melissos
(Philos. of Greece, pp. 91-92); as does Prof. Burnet (Early
Gr. Philos. p. 378). He held strongly by the Ionian conception of
the eternity of matter. Fairbanks, p. 125.

[523] Diog. Laërt. bk. ix, ch. iv, 3 (§ 24).

[524] Diog. Laërt. ix, 3 (§ 21).

[525] As to this see Windelband, Hist. Anc. Philos. pp. 91-92.

[526] Cp. Mackay, Progress of the Intellect, i. 340.

[527] "The difference between the Ionians and Eleatæ was this:
the former endeavoured to trace an idea among phenomena by aid
of observation; the latter evaded the difficulty by dogmatically
asserting the objective existence of an idea" (Mackay, as last cited).

[528] Cp. Mackay, i, 352-53, as to the survival of veneration of the
heavenly bodies in the various schools.

[529] Grote, i, 350.

[530] Meyer, ii, 9, 759 (§§ 5, 465).

[531] Id. §§ 6, 466.

[532] Jevons, Hist. of Greek Lit. 1886, p. 210.

[533] Compare Meyer, ii, § 502, as to the close resemblances between
Pythagoreanism and Orphicism.

[534] Meyer, i, 186; ii, 635.

[535] Fairbanks, pp. 145, 151, 155, etc.

[536] Id. p. 143.

[537] Id. p. 154.

[538] Prof. Burnet insists (introd. p. 30) that "the" Greeks must
be reckoned good observers because their later sculptors were so. As
well say that artists make the best men of science.

[539] Metaph. i, 5; Fairbanks, p. 136. "It is quite safe to attribute
the substance of the First Book of Euclid to Pythagoras." Burnet,
Early Greek Philos. 2nd ed. p. 117.

[540] Diog. Laërt. Philolaos (bk. viii, ch. 7).

[541] L. U. K. Hist. of Astron. p. 20; A. Berry's Short Hist. of
Astron. 1898, p. 25; Narrien's Histor. Acc. of the Orig. and Prog. of
Astron. 1850, p. 163.

[542] See Benn, Greek Philosophers, i, 11.

[543] Diog. Laërt. in life of Philolaos; Cicero, Academica, ii,
39. Cicero, following Theophrastus, is explicit as to the teaching
of Hiketas.

[544] Hippolytos, Ref. of all Heresies, i, 13. Cp. Renouvier, Manuel
de la philos. anc. i, 201, 205, 238-39.

[545] Pseudo-Plutarch, De Placitis Philosoph. iii, 13, 14.

[546] Ueberweg, i, 49. Cp. Tertullian (Apol. ch. 11), who says
Pythagoras taught that the world was uncreated; and the contrary
statement of Aetius (in Fairbanks, pp. 146-47).

[547] Berry, Short Hist. of Astron. pp. 22, 25. The question is ably
handled by Renouvier, Manuel, i, 199-205.

[548] Diog. Laërt., viii, i, 8.

[549] The whole question is carefully sifted by Grote, iv,
76-94. Prof. Burnet (Early Greek Philos. 2nd ed. pp. 96-98) sums up
that the Pythagorean Order was an attempt to overrule or supersede
the State.

[550] Cp. Burnet, p. 97, note 3. Prof. Burnet speaks of the Pythagorean
Order as a "new religion" appealing to the people rather than the
aristocrats, who were apt to be "freethinking." But on the next page he
pictures the "plain man" as resenting precisely the religious neology
of the movement. The evidence for the adhesion of aristocrats seems
pretty strong.

[551] Fairbanks, p. 143.

[552] Grote, Plato and the Other Companions of Socrates, ed. 1885,
iv, 163.

[553] Diog. Laërt. bk. viii, ch. i, 19 (§ 21).

[554] Ennius, Fragmenta, ed. Hesselius, 1707, pp. 1, 4-7; Horace,
Epist. ii, 1, 52; Persius, Sat. vi.

[555] Grote, History, iv, 97.

[556] Scholiast on Iliad, xx, 67; Tatian, Adv. Græcos, c. 48 (31);
W. Christ, Gesch. der griech. Literatur, 3te Aufl. p. 63; Grote,
ch. xvi (i, 374).

[557] See above, p. 145.

[558] K. O. Müller, Dorians, Eng. tr. ii, 365-68; Mommsen, Hist. of
Rome, Eng. tr. ed. 1894, iii, 113.

[559] Grote. i, 338, note.

[560] Cicero, De natura Deorum, i, 22.

[561] Philolaos, as we saw, is said to have been prosecuted, but is
not said to have been condemned.

[562] Fairbanks, pp. 245, 255, 261; Diog. Laërt. bk. ii, ch. iii, 4
(§ 8).

[563] Fairbanks, pp. 230-45. Cp. Grote, Plato, i, 54, and Ueberweg,
i, 66, as to nature of the Nous of Anaxagoras.

[564] Grote, i, 374; Hesychius, s.v. Agamemnona;
cp. Diog. Laërt. bk. ii, ch. iii, 7 (§ 11); Tatian, Adv. Græcos,
c. 37 (21).

[565] Plutarch, Perikles, ch. 6.

[566] Id. chs. 5, 8.

[567] Id. c. 16. The old man is said to have uttered the reproach:
"Perikles, those who want to use a lamp supply it with oil."

[568] Plutarch, Perikles, ch. 4.

[569] Cp. Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. iv, 277.

[570] Plutarch, Perikles, ch. 32.

[571] Diog. Laërt. bk. ix, ch. ix (§ 57), citing the Defence of
Sokrates by Demetrius Phalereus.

[572] Id. bk. ii, ch. iii, 9 (§ 12), citing Sotion. Another writer of
philosophers' lives, Hermippus (same cit.), said he had been thrown
into prison; and yet a third, Hieronymus, said he was released out
of pity because of his emaciated appearance when produced in court
by Perikles.

[573] Diog. Laërt. last cit. 10 (§ 14).

[574] Id. 8 (§ 11).

[575] Drews, Gesch. des Monismus im Altertum, p. 205.

[576] Even in the early progressive period "the same time which
set up rationalism developed a deep religious influence in the
masses." (Meyer, Gesch. des Alt. ii, 728. Cp. iii, 425; also Grote,
vii, 30; and Benn, Philosophy of Greece, 1898, pp. 69-70.)

[577] Plutarch, Perikles, ch. 32.

[578] Cp. Grote, v, 24; Curtius, ii, 208-209.

[579] Plutarch, as cited. Plutarch also states, however, that the
only occasion on which Perikles gave way to emotion in public was
that of the death of his favourite son.

[580] Holm (Griechische Geschichte, ii, 335) decides that Perikles
sought to Ionise his fellow Athenians; and Dr. Burnet, coinciding
(Early Greek Philosophy, 1892, p. 277), suggests that he and Aspasia
brought Anaxagoras to Athens with that aim.

[581] Perikles, ch. 8.

[582] "Der Kleinasiatische Rationalist Herodot" is the exaggerated
estimate of A. Bauer, in Ilberg's Neue Jahrbücher für das klassische
Altertum, ix (1902), 235, following Eduard Meyer (iv, § 448), who,
however (§ 447), points to the lack of scientific thought or training
in Herodotos as in Thukydides. Ignorance of Nature remained a Greek
characteristic.

[583] Bk. viii, ch. 77. Cp. viii, 20, 96; ix, 43.

[584] Cp. Meyer, iv, § 446, as to the inadequacy of Athenian culture,
and the unchanging ignorance of the populace on matters of physical
science.

[585] Plutarch, Against the Stoics, ch. 31; Simplicius, Physica, i, 6.

[586] Clem. Alex. Protrept. c. 4.

[587] Refutation of all Heresies, i, 14.

[588] Cp. Aristotle, Metaphysics, i, 3; De anima, i, 2.

[589] Decharme, Critique des trad. relig. p. 137, citing scholiast
on Aristoph., Clouds, 96.

[590] See the point discussed by Lange, Geschichte des Materialismus,
3te Aufl. i, 128-29, 131-32, notes 10 and 31 (Eng. tr. i, 15,
39). Ritter and Preller say "Protagoras floret circa a. 450-430";
"Democritus natus circa a. 460 floret a. 430-410, obit. circa a. 357."

[591] Cp. Ueberweg, i, 68-69; Renouvier, Manuel de la philos. anc. i,
238.

[592] Burnet, p. 381.

[593] Diog. Laërt. x, 13.

[594] Lange, i, 10-11 (tr. p. 17); Clem. Alex. Stromata, i, 15;
Diog. Laërt. bk. ix, § 35.

[595] On this also see Lange, i, 128 (tr. p. 15, note).

[596] Diog. Laërt. bk. ix, ch. vii, 2 (§ 34). Cp. Renouvier, i, 239-41.

[597] See in particular the De principiis atque originibus (Works,
Routledge's 1-vol. ed. 1905, pp. 649-50).

[598] Meyer, who dwells on his scientific shortcomings (Gesch. des
Alt. v. § 910), makes no account of this, his vital doctrine.

[599] Fairbanks, pp. 189-91. The idea is not put by Empedokles with any
such definiteness as is suggested by Lange, i, 23-25 (tr. pp. 33-35),
and Ueberweg, Hist. of Philos. Eng. tr. i, 62, n. But Ueberweg's
exposition is illuminating.

[600] Fairbanks, pp. 136, 169.

[601] Id. p. 201.

[602] Benn, i, 28.

[603] Fairbanks, p. 205.

[604] See a good study of Empedokles in J. A. Symonds' Studies of the
Greek Poets, 3rd ed. 1893, vol. i, ch. 7; and another in Renouvier,
Manuel, i, 163-82.

[605] Cp. Grote, Plato, i, 73, and note.

[606] Cp. Renouvier, i, 239-62; Lange, p. 11 (tr. p. 17).

[607] Cp. Meyer, § 911.

[608] Diogenes Laërtius, bk. ix, ch. viii, § 3 (51); cp. Grote, vii,
49, note.

[609] For a defence of Protagoras against Plato, see Grote, vii, 43-54.

[610] Sextus Empiricus, Adversus Mathematicos, ix, 56.

[611] Beckmann, History of Inventions, Eng. tr. 1846, ii, 513.

[612] Diod. Sic. xiii, 6; Hesychius, cit. in Cudworth, ed. Harrison,
i, 131.

[613] Ueberweg, i, 80; Thukydides, v, 116. The bias of Sextus
Empiricus is further shown in his account of Diagoras as moved in
his denunciation by an injury to himself.

[614] It is told by Sextus Empiricus (Adv. Math. ix, 53) that Diagoras
is said to have invented the dithyramb (in praise of Iacchos), and
to have begun a poem with the words, "All things come by the daimon
and fortune." But Sextus writes with a fixed skeptical bias.

[615] Grote, vi, 13, 32, 33, 42-45.

[616] Athenagoras, Apol., ch. 4; Clem. Alex., Protrept. ch. 2. See
the documentary details in Meyer, iv, 105.

[617] Cicero, De natura Deorum, i, 1, 23, 42; iii, 37 (the last
reference gives proof of his general rationalism); Lactantius, De irâ
Dei, c. 9. In calling Sokrates "the Melian," Aristophanes (Clouds,
830) was held to have virtually called him "the atheist."

[618] Diod. xiii, 6; Suidas, s.v. Diagoras; Aristophanes, Birds,
1073. It is noteworthy that in their fury against Diagoras the
Athenians put him on a level of common odium with the "tyrants"
of past history. Cp. Burckhardt, Griechische Culturgeschichte, i, 355.

[619] Grote, vi, 476-77. As to the freethinking of Kritias, see Sextus
Empiricus, Adv. Math. ix, 54. According to Xenophon (Memorabilia, i,
2), Kritias made his decree in revenge for Sokrates's condemnation
of one of his illicit passions. Prof. Decharme (pp. 122-24) gives a
good account of him.

[620] Diog. Laërt. bk. ii, ch. iv; Hippolytos, Refutation of all
Heresies, i, 8; Renouvier, Manuel, i, 233-37.

[621] Cp. Cudworth, Intellectual System, ed. Harrison, i, 32;
Renouvier, Manuel, i, 233, 289; ii, 268, 292; Tatian, Adv. Græcos,
c. 48 (31); Diog. Laërt. bk. ii, ch. iii, 7 (§ 11); Grote, i, 374,
395, note; Hatch, Infl. of Greek Ideas, p. 60.

[622] Haigh, Tragic Drama of the Greeks, p. 206. Cp. Burnett, p. 278.

[623] Diog. Laërt. bk. ii (§ 22).

[624] "He never so utterly abandoned the religion of his country as to
find it impossible to acquiesce in at least some part of traditional
religion." Jevons, Hist. of Greek Lit. 1886. p. 222.

[625] Haigh, The Attic Theatre, 1889, p. 316.

[626] Above, p. 133.

[627] "He had also acquired in no small degree that love of dexterous
argumentation and verbal sophistry which was becoming fashionable in
the Athens of the fifth century. Not unfrequently he exhibits this
dexterity when it is clearly out of place." Haigh, Tragic Drama of
the Greeks, p. 235. Cp. Jevons, Hist. of Greek Lit. p. 223. Schlegel
is much more censorious.

[628] Ion., 436-51, 885-922; Andromache, 1161-65; Electra, 1245-46;
Hercules Furens, 339-47; Iphigenia in Tauris, 35, 711-15.

[629] Hercules Furens, 344, 1341-46; Iphigenia in Tauris, 380-91.

[630] Electra, 737-45.

[631] Troades, 969-90.

[632] Ion, 374-78, 685; Helena, 744-57; Iphigenia in Tauris, 570-75;
Electra, 400; Phoenissæ, 772; Fragm. 793; Bacchæ, 255-57; Hippolytus,
1059. It is noteworthy that even Sophocles (OEd. Tyr., 387) makes a
character taunt Tiresias the soothsayer with venality.

[633] Philoctetes, fr. 793; Helena, 1137-43; Bellerophon, fr. 288.

[634] Bacchæ, 200-203.

[635] Helena, 1013; Fragm. 890, 905, 935; Troades, 848-88.

[636] A. Schlegel, Lectures on Dramatic Literature, Bohn tr. p. 117.

[637] This charge is on a par with that of Hygiainon, who accused
Euripides of impiety on the score that one of his characters makes
light of oaths. Aristotle, Rhetoric, iii, 15.

[638] K. O. Müller, Hist. of the Lit. of Anc. Greece, 1847, p. 359. The
complaint is somewhat surprising from such a source. The only play
with an entirely invented plot mentioned by Aristotle is Agathon's
Flower (Aristotle, Poetic, ix); and such plays would not have been
eligible for representation at the great festivals.

[639] Cp. Jevons, Hist. of Greek Lit. pp. 223-24.

[640] Haigh. The Attic Theatre, p. 191. Cp. Müller, pp. 362-64.

[641] See, however, the æsthetic theorem of Prof. Murray, Euripides
and his Age, pp. 221-27.

[642] It seems arguable that the aversion of Aristophanes to Euripides
was primarily artistic, arising in dislike of some of the features of
his style. On this head his must be reckoned an expert judgment. The
old criticism found in Euripides literary vices; the new seems to
ignore the issue. But a clerical scholar pronounces that "Aristophanes
was the most unreasoning laudator temporis acti. Genius and poet as he
was, he was the sworn foe to intellectual progress." Hence his hatred
of Euripides and his championship of Æschylus. (Rev. Dr. W. W. Merry,
introd. to Clar. Press ed. of The Frogs, 1892.)

[643] Girard, Essai sur Thucydide, 1884, pp. 258-59.

[644] Cp. Haigh, The Attic Theatre, p. 315. In the same way
Ktesilochos, the pupil of Apelles, could with impunity make Zeus
ridiculous by exhibiting him pictorially in child-bed, bringing forth
Dionysos (Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxxv, 40. § 15).

[645] Bk. x, ad init.

[646] Cp. Benn, Philos. of Greece, p. 171.

[647] Zeller, Socrates and the Socratic Schools, Eng. tr. 3rd
ed. p. 227: Hegel, as there cited Grote, Plato, ed. 1885, i, 423.

[648] Cp. Owen, Evenings with the Skeptics, i, 181 sq., 291, 293,
299, etc.

[649] Grote, History, i, 334; Xenophon, Memorabilia, i, 1, §§ 6-9.

[650] Cp. Benn. The Philosophy of the Greeks, 1898, p. 160.

[651] Grote, i, 334-35; Hippocrates, De Aeribus, Aquis, Locis, c. 22
(49).

[652] Plato, Phædrus, Jowett's tr. 3rd ed. i. 434; Grote, History,
i, 393.

[653] Compare, however, the claim made for him, as promoting
"objectivity," by Prof. Drews, Gesch. des Monismus im Altertum,
1913. P. 213.

[654] Memorabilia, i, 4.

[655] "The predominatingly theistic character of philosophy ever since
has been stamped on it by Socrates, as it was stamped on Socrates by
Athens" (Benn, Philos. of Greece, p. 168).

[656] Zeller, Socrates and the Socratic Schools, as cited, p. 231. The
case against Sokrates is bitterly urged by Forchhammer, Die Athenen und
Sokrates, 1837; see in particular pp. 8-11. Cp. Grote, Hist. vii, 81.

[657] "Had not all the cultivated men of the time passed through
a school of rationalism which had entirely pulled to pieces the
beliefs and the morals of their ancestors?" Zeller, as last cited,
pp. 231-33. Cp. Haigh, Tragic Drama, p. 261.

[658] See Aristophanes's Frogs, 888-94.

[659] Æschines, Timarchos, cited by Thirlwall, iv, 277. Cp. Xenophon,
Mem. i, 2.

[660] "Nothing could well be more unpopular and obnoxious than
the task which he undertook of cross-examining and convicting of
ignorance every distinguished man whom he could approach." Grote,
vii. 95. Cp. pp. 141-44. Cp. also Trevelyan's Life of Macaulay,
ed. 1881, p. 316: and Renouvier, Manuel de la philos. anc. 1, iv,
§ iii. See also, however, Benn, Phil. of Greece, pp. 162-63. For a
view of Sokrates's relations to his chief accuser, which partially
vindicates or whitewashes the latter, see Prof. G. Murray's Anc. Greek
Lit. pp. 176-77. There is a good monograph by H. Bleeckly, Socrates
and the Athenians: An Apology, 1884, which holds the balances fairly.

[661] On the desire of Sokrates to die see Grote, vii, 152-64.

[662] The assertion of Plutarch that after his death the prosecutors of
Sokrates were socially excommunicated, and so driven to hang themselves
(Moralia: Of Envy and Hatred), is an interesting instance of moral
myth-making. It has no historic basis; though Diogenes (ii, 23 §
43) and Diodorus Siculus (xiv, 37), late authorities both, allege
an Athenian reaction in Sokrates' favour. Probably the story of the
suicide of Judas was framed in imitation of Plutarch's.

[663] Grote, History, i, 94.

[664] Id. i, 194. Not till Strabo do we find this myth disbelieved;
and Strabo was surprised to find most men holding by the old story
while admitting that the race of Amazons had died out. Id. p. 197.

[665] Life of Thukydides, by Marcellinus, ch. 22, citing
Antyllas. Cp. Girard, Essai sur Thucydide, p. 239; and the prefaces
of Hobbes and Smith to their translations.

[666] Girard, p. 3.

[667] "His writings," remarks Dr. Hatch, "contain the seeds of nearly
all that afterwards grew up on Christian soil" (Influence of Greek
Ideas and Usages upon the Christian Church, 1890, p. 182).

[668] Clem. Alex. Stromata, v, 14; Fairbanks, pp. 146-47; Grote,
Plato, ch. 38.

[669] Cp. Grote, Plato, iv, 162, 381. Professor Bain, however
(Practical Essays, 1884, p. 273), raises an interesting question by
his remark, as to the death of Sokrates: "The first person to feel
the shock was Plato. That he was affected by it to the extent of
suppressing his views on the higher questions we can infer with the
greatest probability. Aristotle was equally cowed."

[670] Diog. Laër. bk. ix, ch. vii, § 8 (40).

[671] Republic, bk. ii, 377, to iii, 393; Jowett's tr. 3rd ed. iii,
60 sq., 68 sq. In bk. x, it is true, he does speak of the poets as
unqualified by knowledge and training to teach truth (Jowett's tr. iii,
311 sq.); but Plato's "truth" is not objective, but idealistic,
or rather fictitious-didactic.

[672] Id. Jowett. pp. 59, 69, etc.

[673] Id. bk. iii; Jowett, pp. 103-105.

[674] Laws, x; Jowett, v, 295-98.

[675] Received myths are forbidden; and the preferred fictions are
to be city law. Cp. the Laws, ii, iii; Jowett, v, 42, 79.

[676] Laws, Jowett's tr. 3rd ed. v, 271-72. Cp. the comment of Benn,
i, 271-72.

[677] Republic, bk. ii, 379; Jowett, iii, 62.

[678] Laws, x, 906-907, 910; Jowett, v, 293-94, 297-98.

[679] On the inconsistency of the whole doctrine see see Grote's Plato,
iv, 379-97.

[680] Ueberweg, Hist. of Philos. Eng. tr. i, 25. Cp. Lange, Geschichte
des Materialismus, i, 38-39 (tr. i, 52-54), and the remarkable verdict
of Bacon (De Augmentis, bk. iii, ch. 4; Works, 1-vol. ed. 1905, p. 471;
cp. Advancement of Learning, bk. ii, p. 96) as to the superiority
of the natural philosophy of Demokritos over those of Plato and
Aristotle. Bacon immediately qualifies his verdict; but he repeats
it, as regards both Aristotle and Plato, in the Novum Organum, bk. i,
aph. 96. See, however, Mr. Benn's final eulogy of Plato as a thinker,
i, 273, and Murray's Anc. Greek Lit. pp. 311-13.

[681] Laws, x, 908; Jowett, v, 295.

[682] Grote, History, vii, 168.

[683] Cp. Grote, Aristotle, 2nd ed. p. 10.

[684] Origen, Against Celsus, ii, 13; cp. i, 65; iii, 75; vii, 3.

[685] Grote, Aristotle, p. 13.

[686] Benn, Greek Philosophers, i, 352. Mr. Benn refutes Sir A. Grant's
view that Aristotle's creed was a "vague pantheism"; but that phrase
loosely conveys the idea of its non-religiousness. It might be called a
Lucretian monotheism. Cp. Benn, i, 294; and Drews, Gesch. des Monismus,
p. 257.

[687] Metaphysics, xi (xii), 8, 13 (p. 1074, b). The passage is so
stringent as to raise the question how he came to run the risk in this
one case. It was probably a late writing, and he may have taken it
for granted that the Metaphysics would never be read by the orthodox.

[688] Cp. the severe criticisms of Benn, vol. i, ch. vi; Berry,
Short Hist. of Astron. p. 33; and Lange, Ges. des Mater. i, 61-68,
and notes, citing Eucken and Cuvier. Aristotle's science is very
much on a par with that of Bacon, who saw his imperfections, but fell
into the same kinds of error. Both insisted on an inductive method;
and both transgressed from it. See, however, Lange's summary, p. 69,
also p. 7, as to the unfairness of Whewell; and ch. v of Soury's
Bréviaire de l'histoire du Matérialisme, 1881, especially end.

[689] Politics, i, 2.

[690] Strabo, bk. ix, ch. iii, § 11. Strabo reproaches Ephoros with
repeating the current legends all the same; but it seems clear that
he anticipated the critical tactic of Gibbon.

[691] As to the Stoics, cp. Zeller, § 34, 4; Benn, The Philosophy of
Greece, pp. 255-56. As to Epicurus, cp. Benn, p. 261.

[692] Diog. Laërt. bk. ix, ch. xi, 5, § 64. The lengthy notice given
by Diogenes shows the impression Pyrrho's teaching made. See a full
account of it, so far as known, in the Rev. J. Owen's Evenings with
the Skeptics, 1881, i, 287 sq., and the monograph of Zimmerman,
there cited.

[693] These propositions occur in the first of the ten Pyrrhonian
tropoi or modes (Diog. Laërt. bk. ix, ch. xi, 9), of which the
authorship is commonly assigned to Ænesidemos (fl. 80-50). Cp. Owen,
Evenings with the Skeptics, i, 290, 322-23. But as given by Diogenes
they seem to derive from the early Pyrrhonian school.

[694] Thus, where Democritos pronounced the sun to be of vast size,
Epicurus held it to be no larger than it seemed (Cicero, De Finibus, i,
6)--a view also loosely ascribed to Herakleitos (Diog. Laërt. bk. ix,
ch. i, 6, § 7). See, however, Wallace's Epicureanism ("Ancient
Philosophies" series), 1889, pp. 176 sq., 186 sq., 266, as to the
scientific merits of the system.

[695] The Epicurean doctrine on this and other heads is chiefly to be
gathered from the great poem of Lucretius. Prof. Wallace's excellent
treatise gives all the clues. See p. 202 as to the Epicurean God-idea.

[696] Grote, History, i, 395, note; Plutarch, Non posse suaviter vivi
sec. Epicur.

[697] Compare Wallace, Epicureanism, pp. 64-71, and ch. xi; and
Mackintosh, On the Progress of Ethical Philosophy, 4th ed. p. 29.

[698] De rerum natura, i, 62-79.

[699] Alexander seu Pseudomantis, cc. 25, 38, 47, 61, cited by Wallace,
pp. 249-50.

[700] The repute of the Epicureans for irreligion appears in the
fact that when Romanized Athens had consented to admit foreigners
to the once strictly Athenian mysteries of Eleusis, the Epicureans
were excluded.

[701] Cicero, De natura Deorum, i, 13; Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromata,
v, 14; Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Mathematicos, ix, 51, 55.

[702] Diog. Laërt. bk ii, ch. viii, §§ 7, 11-14 (86, 97-100). He was
also nicknamed "the God." Id. and ch. xii, 5 (§ 116).

[703] Cicero, De natura Deorum, i, 1, 23, 42.

[704] Diogenes, as last cited, § 12 (97).

[705] Id. §§ 15, 16 (101-102).

[706] Professor Wallace's account of the court of Lysimachos of Thrace
as a "favourite resort of emancipated freethinkers" (Epicureanism,
p. 42) is hardly borne out by his authority, Diogenes Laërtius, who
represents Lysimachos as unfriendly towards Theodoros. Hipparchia
the Cynic, too, opposed rather than agreed with the atheist.

[707] Diog., last cit. Cp. Cicero, Tusculans, ii, 43. Philo Judæus
(Quod Omnis Probus Liber, c. 18; cp. Plutarch, De Exilio, c. 16) has
a story of his repelling taunts about his banishment by comparing
himself to Hercules, who was put ashore by the alarmed Argonauts
because of his weight. But he is further made to boast extravagantly,
and in doing so to speak as a believer in myths and deities. The
testimony has thus little value.

[708] Diog. bk. ii, ch. xii, § 5 (116).

[709] Id. ch. x, § 2 (106).

[710] Id. ch. xii, § 5 (117) and bk. iv, ch. vii, §§ 4, 9, 10 (52,
54, 55).

[711] Plutarch, De defectu orac. ch. 19. Bion seems to have made an
impression on Plutarch, who often quotes him, though it be but to
contradict him.

[712] Cicero, De natura Deorum, i, 13.

[713] Id. ib.; Academics, iv, 38.

[714] Cicero, Tusculans, i, 10, 31; Academics, ii, 39; and refs. in
ed. Davis.

[715] Sir A. Grant's tr. of the hymn is given in Capes's Stoicism
("Chief Ancient Philosophies" series), 1880, p. 41; and the Greek
text by Mahaffy, Greek Life and Thought, p. 262. Cp. Cicero, De
nat. Deor. i, 14.

[716] Pseudo-Plutarch, De placitis philosoph. i, 7.

[717] Eusebius, Præp. Evang. bk. ii, ch. 2; Plutarch, Isis and Osiris,
ch. 23.

[718] P. 80.

[719] It may be noted that Diogenes of Babylon, a follower of
Chrysippos, applied the principle to Greek mythology. Cicero, De
nat. Deor. i, 15.

[720] Above, p. 80, note 4.

[721] See Grote, i, 371-74 and notes.

[722] Palaiphatos, De Incredibilibus: De Actæone, De Geryone, De
Cerbero, De Amazonibus, etc.

[723] E. R. Bevan (art. "The Deification of Kings in the Greek Cities"
in Eng. Histor. Rev. Oct. 1901, p. 631) argues that the practice was
not primarily eastern, but Greek. See, however, Herodotos, vii, 136;
Arrian, Anabas. Alexand. iv, 11; Q. Curtius, viii, 5-8; and Plutarch,
Artaxerxes, ch. 22, as to the normal attitude of the Greeks, even as
late as Alexander.

[724] See Plutarch, Isis and Osiris, chs. 22, 23, for the later
Hellenistic tone on the subject of apotheosis apart from the official
practice of the empire.

[725] Gibbon, ch. xl. Bohn ed. iv, 353, and note.

[726] Mahaffy, Greek Life, pp. 133-35; Diog. Laërt. bk. ii, ch. v,
5 (§ 38).

[727] Wallace, Epicureanism (pp. 245-46), citing Suidas, s.v. Epicurus.

[728] Diogenes Laërtius, bk. vii, ch. i, 28 (§ 33); cp. Origen,
Against Celsus, bk. i, ch. 5; Clemens Alex, Stromata, bk. v, ch. ii.

[729] Mahaffy, as cited, p. 135, n.; Athenæus, ix, 63 (p. 400).

[730] (297 B.C.) Burckhardt, Griechische Culturgeschichte, i, 213;
Pausanias, i, 29.

[731] Cp. G. Guizot, Ménandre, 1855, pp. 324-27, and App.

[732] Cp. Guizot, pp. 327-31, and the fragments cited by Justin Martyr,
De Monarchia, ch. 5.

[733] Whittaker, as cited, p. 85.

[734] Martha, as cited, p. 78.

[735] Diog. Laërt. bk. iv, ch. ix, 8 (§ 65).

[736] Diog. Laërt. bk. iv, ch. ix, 4, 5 (§ 63); Noumenios in
Euseb. Præp. Evang. xiv, 8; Cicero, De Oratore, ii, 38; Lucilius,
cited by Lactantius, Div. Inst.

[737] Cicero, Academics, ii, 34.

[738] Berry, Short Hist. of Astron. pp. 34-62; Narrien,
Histor. Account, as cited, ch. xi; L. U. K. Hist. of Astron. ch. vi. It
is noteworthy that Hipparchos, like so many of his predecessors,
had some of his ideas from Babylonia. Strabo, prooem., § 9.

[739] Ptolemy normally lumps unbelief in religion with all the vices
of character. Cp. the Tetrabiblos, iii, 18 (paraphrase of Proclus).

[740] Hist. Nat. ii, 26.

[741] Lucian's dialogue Philopseudes gives a view of the superstitions
of average Greeks in the second century of our era. Cp. Mr. Williams's
note to the first Dialogue of the Dead, in his tr. p. 87.

[742] See M. Foucart's treatise, Des assoc. relig. chez les Grecs,
1873, 2e ptie.

[743] On the early tendency to orthodox conformity among the
unbelieving Alexandrian scholars, see Mahaffy, Greek Life and Thought,
pp. 260-61.

[744] Frag. cited by Wallace, p. 258.

[745] Rev. Baden Powell, Hist. of Nat. Philos. 1834, p. 79.

[746] De Oratore, iii, 17; De Finibus, ii, 12, 13.

[747] See Saisset, Le Scepticisme, 1865, pp. 22-27, for a careful
discussion of dates.

[748] His own claim was to be of the "methodical" school. Hypotyp. i,
34.

[749] See his doctrine expounded by Owen, Evenings with the Skeptics,
i, 332 sq.

[750] Cp. Owen, p. 349.

[751] These seem to be derived from Carneades. Cp. Ueberweg, i, 217.

[752] "The general character of the Greek Skeptics from Sokrates to
Sextos is quite unexceptionable" (Owen, Evenings, i, 352).

[753] Polybius, bk. vi, ch. lvi. Cp. bk. xvi, Frag. 5 (12), where
he speaks impatiently of the miracle-stories told of certain cults,
and, repeating his opinion that some such stories are useful for
preserving piety among the people, protests that they should be kept
within bounds.

[754] Bk. i, ch. ii, § 8. Plutarch (Isis and Osiris, ch. 8) puts the
more decent principle that all the apparent absurdities have good
occult reasons.

[755] Bk. ix, ch. iii, § 12. Cp. bk. x, ch. iii, § 23. The hand of
an interpolator frequently appears in Strabo (e.g., bk. ix, ch. ii,
§ 40; ch. iii, § 5); and the passage cited in bk. i is more in the
style of the former than of the latter.

[756] See Dr. Hatch, Influence of Greek Ideas upon the Christian
Church, 1890, pp. 60-64, notes; also above, pp. 143 and 161, note.

[757] De defect. orac. c. 19; Isis and Osiris, ch. 67.

[758] De Amore, c. 13; Isis and Osiris, chs. 66, 67; and De
defect. orac. c. 13.

[759] Schmidt, Gesch. der Denk- und Glaubensfreiheit im erst. Jahr.,
1847, p. 22.

[760] Burnet, Early Greek Philos. 1892, p. 276. Cp. 2nd ed. p. 294.

[761] It is to be presumed that Dr. Burnet, when penning his estimate,
had not in memory such a record as Dr. A. D. White's History of the
Warfare between Science and  Theology.

[762] Mommsen, History of Rome, bk. i, ch. 14 (Eng. tr. 1894,
vol. i, pp. 282-83). Mommsen's view of the antiquity of writing
among the Latins (p. 280) is highly speculative. He places its
introduction about or before 1000 B.C.; yet he admits that they got
their alphabet from the Greeks, and he can show no Greek contacts
for that period. Cp. pp. 167-68 (ch. x). Schwegler (Römische
Geschichte, 1853, i, 36) more reasonably places the period after
that of the Etruscan domination, while recognizing the Greek origin
of the script. Cp. Ettore Pais, Ancient Legends of Roman History,
Eng. tr. 1906, pp. 26-28; Pelham, Outlines of Roman History, 1893,
p. 32.

[763] Schwegler, i, ch. i, § 12; Teuffel, Hist. of Roman
Lit. ed. Schwabe, Eng. tr. 1900, i, 100-101, 104-10.

[764] Teuffel, i, 110-11.

[765] Mommsen, bk. ii, ch. 8. Eng. tr. ii, 70. Such creation of deities
by mere abstraction of things and functions had been the rule in the
popular as distinguished from the civic religion. Cp. Augustine, De
civitate Dei, iv, 16, 23; vi, 9, etc. It was the concomitant of the
tendency noted by Livy: adeo minimis etiam rebus prava religio inserit
deos (xxvii, 23). But the practice was not peculiar to the Romans,
for among the Greeks were Gods or Goddesses of Wealth, Peace, Mercy,
Shame, Fortune, Rumour, Energy, Action, Persuasion, Consolation,
Desire, Yearning, Necessity, Force, etc. See Pausanias passim. The
inference is that the more specific deities in all religions, with
personal names, are the product of sacerdotal institutions or of
poetic or other art. M. Boissier (i, 5), like Ihne, takes it for
granted that the multitude of deified abstractions had no legends;
but this is unwarranted. They may have had many; but there were no
poets to sing, or priests to preserve and ritualize them.

[766] De natura Deorum, i, 42.

[767] Mr. Schuckburgh (History of Rome, 1894, p. 401, note) cites
a translated passage in his fragments (Cicero, De Div. ii, 50; De
nat. Deorum, iii, 32), putting the Epicurean view that the Gods clearly
did not govern human affairs, "which he probably would have softened
if he had not agreed with it." Cp. Mommsen, iii, 113 (bk. ii, ch. 13).

[768] Fragmenta, ed. Hesselius, p. 226; Cicero, De Divinatione, i, 58.

[769] Mommsen, i, 301; ii, 71; iii, 117 (bk. i, ch. 15; bk. ii, ch. 8;
bk. iii, ch. 13). Cicero, De Div. i, 41.

[770] Livy, xxix, 18. Dr. Warde Fowler (Religious Experience of the
Roman People, p. 346) censures Mr. Heitland for calling Livy's story
"an interesting romance" (Hist. of Rom. Rep. ii, 229 note); remarking
that "it is the fashion now to reject as false whatever is surprising,"
and adding (p. 347): "It is certain, from the steps taken by the
government  ... that it is in the main a true account." It may suffice
to ask whether Dr. Fowler believes in all or any of the prodigia
mentioned by Livy because the government "took steps" about them.

[771] Cp. Boissier, La religion romaine, i, 39, 346.

[772] Teuffel, i, 122.

[773] Aulus Gellius (xv, 11) says the edict was de philosophis et de
rhetoribus Latinis, but the senatus-consultum, as given by him, does
not contain the adjective; and he goes on to tell that aliquot deinde
annis post--really sixty-nine years later--the censors fulminated
against homines qui NOVUM genus disciplinæ instituerunt ... eos sibi
nomen imposuisse Latinas rhetoras. The former victims, then, were
presumably Greek. Cp. Shuckburgh, p. 520; and Long, Decline of the
Roman Republic, 1866, ii, 146. Professor Pelham (Outlines of Roman
History, 1893, p. 179, note) mistakenly cites the senatus-consultum
as containing the word "Latini." The reading Latinis in Gellius's
own phrase has long been suspected. See ed. Frederic and Gronov, 1706.

[774] Plutarch, Cato, c. 22.

[775] Cicero, De. Repub., passim, ed. Halm.

[776] Polybius, xxxii, 10.

[777] Suetonius, De claris rhetoribus.

[778] See in Cicero, De Oratore, iii, 24, the account by the censor
Crassus of his reasons for preferring the Greek rhetors.

[779] Valerius Maximus, i, 3, 1.

[780] The culture history of the republican period, as partially
recovered by recent archæology, shows a process of dissolution and
replacement from a remote period. Cp. Ettore Pais, Ancient Legends
of Roman History, Eng. tr. 1906, ch. ii, notably p. 18.

[781] De rerum natura, i, 50-135; cp. v, 1166.

[782] ii, 646-50 (the passage cited by Mr. Gladstone in the House
of Commons in one of the Bradlaugh debates, with a confession of its
noble beauty); and again ii, 1090-1105, and iii, 18-22.

[783] See Christianity and Mythology, pp. 52-57.

[784] See the account of the doctrine of the high-priest Scaevola,
preserved by Augustine, De civ. Dei, iv, 27. He and Varro (id. iv,
31; vi, 5-7) agreed in rejecting the current myths, but insisted on
the continued civic acceptance of them. On the whole question compare
Boissier, La religion romaine, i, 47-63.

[785] Thus the satirist Lucilius, who ridiculed the popular beliefs,
was capable, in his capacity of patriot, of crying out against the lack
of respect shown to religion and the Gods (Boissier, pp. 51-52). The
purposive insincerity set up in their thinking by such men must,
of course, have been injurious to character.

[786] Cp. the De Divinatione, i, 2.

[787] E.g., Mr. A. J. Balfour's Foundations of Belief.

[788] Tusc. Disp. i, 26.

[789] De Divinatione, ii, 33, 34, cp. ii, 12; and De nat. Deorum,
i, 22. It is not surprising that in a later age, when the remaining
pagans had no dialectic faculty left, the Christian Fathers, by using
Cicero as a weapon against the cults, could provoke them into calling
him impious (Arnobius, Adv. Gentes, iii, 6, 7).

[790] De Divinatione, ii, 22.

[791] Boissier, i, 58.

[792] De nat. Deorum, ii, 1.

[793] Boissier, p. 59.

[794] "It seems to me that, on the whole, among the educated and
the rich, the indifferent must have been in the majority" (Boissier,
p. 61).

[795] Id. p. 59.

[796] Cp. Long, Decline of Roman Republic, i, 438; ii, 38-40. Long
remarks that Domitius, the accuser of Scaurus (who had prevented his
election to the college of augurs), "used the name of religion for the
purpose of damaging a political enemy; and the trick has been repeated,
and is repeated, up to the present day. The Romans must have kept
records of many of these trials. They were the great events of the
times ...; and so we learn that three tribes voted against Scaurus,
and thirty-two voted for him; but in each of these thirty-two tribes
there was only a small majority of votes (pauca puncta) in favour
of Scaurus."

[797] See Long, i, 56, for a cynical estimate of the mode of
manipulation of the Sibylline and other sacred books.

[798] Sallust, Bellum Catilin. c. 51.

[799] Suetonius, Julius, cc. 59, 77; Cicero, De Divinatione, ii,
24. Cp. Merivale, History of the Romans under the Empire, ed. 1865,
ii, 424.

[800] Plutarch, Sulla, c. 29; Marius, c. 16. Long (Decline of Roman
Republic, ii, 369) says of Sulla that, "though he could rob a temple
when he wanted money, he believed in the religion of his time. We
should call him superstitious; and a man who is superstitious is
capable of any crime, for he believes that the Gods can be conciliated
by prayers and presents."

[801] Compare the fears which grew upon Cromwell in his last days.

[802] Pompeius, on the other hand, had many seers in his camp; but
after his overthrow expressed natural doubts about Providence. Cicero,
De Div. ii, 24, 47; Plutarch, Pompeius, c. 75.

[803] Boissier, i, 73.

[804] See Augustine's citation from Varro, De civ. Dei, vi,
2. Cp. Sueton. Aug. 29.

[805] The only record to the contrary is the worthless scandal as
to his "suppers of the Twelve Gods" (Sueton. Aug. 70). The statement
of W. A. Schmidt that "none of the Julians was orthodox" (Geschichte
der Denk- und Glaubensfreiheit im ersten Jahrhundert, 1847, p. 175)
is somewhat overstrained.

[806] Dio Cassius, lii, 36.

[807] E.g., his encouragement of a new college of priests founded in
his honour. Dio, xliv, 6.

[808] Sueton. Julius, 44, 56. The first public library actually
opened in Rome was founded by Asinius Pollio under Augustus, and was
placed in the forecourt of the temple of Liberty: Augustus founded
two others; Tiberius a fourth, in his palace; Vespasian a fifth, in
the temple of Peace; Domitian a sixth, on the Capitol. W. A. Schmidt,
Gesch. der Denk- und Glaubensfreiheit, pp. 151-52, and refs.

[809] Boissier, pp. 67-108; Suetonius, Aug. xxix-xxxi.

[810] L'Abbé Beurlier, Le Culte Impérial, 1891, introd. and ch. 1;
Boissier, ch. 2. Cp. p. 185, note, above.

[811] It would seem that the occasion on which he enraged the Senate
by not rising to receive them (Sueton. Jul. 78) was that on which
they came to announce that they had made him a God, Jupiter Julius,
with a special temple and a special priest. See Long, Decline of the
Roman Republic, v, 418. He might very well have intended to rebuke
their baseness. But cp. Boissier, i, 122, citing Dio, xlvi, 6.

[812] iii, 46; x, 40; xliii, 13.

[813] 1 Sat. v, 98-103.

[814] As to the conflict between Horace's bias and his policy,
cp. Boissier, i. 193-201.

[815] E.g., Carm. iii, 6.

[816] Fasti, v, 673-92.

[817] Fasti, ii, 61-66.

[818] Fasti, iv, 204. The preceding phrase, pro magno teste vetustas
creditur, certainly has an ironic ring.

[819] Æneid, vi, 724-27.

[820] Cp. Boissier, i, 228-29.

[821] Georgics, ii, 490, 493. Diderot originated the idea that
the first of these lines and the two which follow it in Virgil had
reference to Lucretius. Grimm, Correspondance Littéraire, ed. 1829-30,
vi, 21-25. It is acquiesced in by W. Warde Fowler, Social Life at
Rome in the Age of Cicero, 1909, p. 327. Sellar (Roman Poets of the
Augustan Age: Virgil, 1877. p. 201) is doubtful on the point.

[822] Cp. Boissier, i, 193.

[823] Boissier, ii, 84-92.

[824] Ep. xcv.

[825] Suetonius, Jul. 88.

[826] The same note occurs in Virgil, Æneid, vi, 719-21.

[827] Hist. Nat. ii, 1, 5 (7). Pliny identifies nature and deity:
"Per quæ declaratur haud dubie naturæ potentia, idque esse quod Deum
vocamus" (last cit., end).

[828] Hist. nat. vii, 55 (56). Cp. Boissier, i, 300.

[829] Id. pp. 301-303.

[830] See the praiseworthy treatise of Mr. J. A. Farrer, Paganism
and Christianity, 1891, chs. 5, 6, and 7.

[831] "... vires religionis, ad quas maxime etiamnum caligat humanum
genus." Hist. nat. xxx, 1.

[832] Above, p. 188.

[833] Primus in orbe deos fecit timor. Frag. 22, ed. Burmanni. The
whole passage is noteworthy. See also his Satyricon, c. 137, as to
his estimate of sacerdotal sincerity.

[834] Thebaid, iii, 661.

[835] Porphyry, Epistle to Anebo (with Jamblichus). Chaeremon, however,
is said to have regarded comets as divine portents. Origen, Ag. Celsus,
bk. i, ch. 59.

[836] Prof. C. Martha, Les moralistes sous l'empire romain, ed. 1881,
p. 341.

[837] W. A. Schmidt, who cites this act (Geschichte der Denk- und
Glaubensfreiheit, pp. 31-33) as the beginning of the end of free
speech in Rome, does not mention the detail given by Dio (xliv,
10), that Cæsar suspected the tribunes of having set on some of
the people to hail him as king. But the unproved suspicion does not
justify his course, which was a bad lapse of judgment, even if the
suspicion were just. From this point a conspiracy against his life
was natural. Cp. Long, Decline of the Roman Republic, v, 432-33. as
to the facts.

[838] See W. A. Schmidt, pp. 34-108, for a careful analysis of the
evolution. As to the book-censure, see pp. 101-104.

[839] Suetonius, Tiberius, c. 28.

[840] Id. c. 61.

[841] Annals, i, 73. That such a phrase should have been written by an
emperor in an official letter, and yet pass unnoticed through antiquity
save in one historical work, recovered only in the Renaissance, is
one of the minor improbabilities that give colour to the denial of
the genuineness of the Annals.

[842] Tiberius, c. 69.

[843] Petronius, Satyricon, ad init.

[844] In the Annals (xiv, 50) it is stated that the book attacked
senators and pontiffs; that it was condemned to be burned, and
Vejento to be exiled; and that the book was much sought and read
while forbidden; but that it fell into oblivion when all were free
to read it. Here, again, there is no other ancient testimony. Vejento
is heard of, however, in Juvenal, iv, 113, 123-29.

[845] Philostratus, Life of Apollonius, iv. 47.

[846] Cp. Schmidt, pp. 346-47.

[847] Suetonius, Domitian, c. 10.

[848] Cp. Schmidt, p. 157.

[849] Suetonius, Tiberius, c. 36; Josephus, Antiquities, xviii, 3,
§§ 4, 5. Josephus specifies isolated pretexts, which Suetonius does
not mention. They are not very probable.

[850] Who destroyed 2,000 copies of prophetical books. Suetonius,
Aug. c. 31.

[851] See, in the next chapter, as to the rationalistic mythology
of Macrobius.

[852] Cp. Propertius, ii, 14, 27 sqq.; iii, 23, 19-20; iv, 3, 38;
Tibullus, iv, 1, 18-23; Juvenal, as before cited, and xv, 133, 142-46.

[853] Plato, 2 Alcib.; Cicero, Pro Cluentio, c. 68; Horace, Carm. iii,
23, 17; Ovid, Heroides, Acont. Cydipp. 191-92; Persius, Sat. ii,
69; Seneca, De Beneficiis, i, 6. Cp. Diod. Sic. xii, 20; Varro,
in Arnobius, Adv. Gentes, vii, 1.

[854] 1 Sat. iii, 96-98. Cp. Cicero, De Finibus, iv, 19, 27, 28;
Matt. v. 19-28; James, ii, 10. Lactantius, again (Div. Inst. iii,
23). denounces the doctrine of the equality of offences as laid down
by Zeno, giving no sign of knowing that it is also set forth in his
own sacred books.

[855] On Seneca's moral teaching, cp. Martha, Les Moralistes sous
l'empire romain, pp. 57-66; Boissier, La religion romaine, ii,
80-82. M. Boissier further examines fully the exploded theory that
Seneca received Christian teaching. On this compare Bishop Lightfoot,
Dissertations on the Apostolic Age, pp. 237-92.

[856] Seneca was so advanced in his theoretic ethic as to consider
all war on a level with homicide. Epist. xcv, 30.

[857] It is to be noted that preaching had begun among the moralists
of Rome in the first century, and was carried on by the priests
of Isis in the second; and that in Egypt monasticism had long been
established. Martha, as cited, p. 67; Boissier, i, 356-59. Cp. Mosheim,
2 Cent. pt. ii, c. iii, §§ 13, 14, as to monasticism.

[858] Mt. xxii, 39; Mk. xii, 31.

[859] Talmud, tract. Sabbath, 306.

[860] Mk. xii, 32.

[861] Lk. xviii, 20.

[862] See the impressive argument of Dr. Moncure Conway in his Solomon
and Solomonic Literature, 1899, ch. xviii.

[863] See Dr. Nicholson's The Gospel According to the Hebrews, 1879,
p. 77. Cp. Conway, p. 222. Dr. Nicholson insists that at least the word
"sacrificing" must be spurious, because "it is surely impossible that
Jesus ever uttered this threat"!

[864] Cp. the author's Christianity and Mythology, pt. iii. div. ii,
§ 6.

[865] The Book of the Secrets of Enoch, known as the "Slavonic Enoch,"
ch. xliv, 1 (Eng. tr. 1896, pp. 60, 67).

[866] See the author's Pagan Christs, pt. ii.

[867] Above, p. 215.

[868] Hosea, vi, 6; Psalms, xl, 6, 7; Ecclesiastes, v, 1.

[869] Talmud, Yoma-Derech Eretz; Midrash, Vayikra-Rabba, xxvii,
11 and 12.

[870] Ch. lii (p. 69).

[871] Luke xiii, 4.

[872] Cp. Conway, Solomon and Solomonic Literature, 1899, pp. 57,
201, 219.

[873] John iv, 21.

[874] E.g., Plato, Crito, Jowett's tr. 3rd ed. ii, 150; Seneca, De
Ira, ii, 32. Valerius Maximus (iv, 2, 4) even urges the returning of
benefits for injuries.

[875] It is impossible to find in the whole patristic literature a
single display of the "love" in question. In all early Christian
history there is nothing to represent it save the attitude of
martyrs towards their executioners--an attitude seen often in pagan
literature. (E.g., Ælian, Var. Hist. xii, 49.)

[876] 1 Thess. v, 21.

[877] 2 Cor. xi, 4; Gal. i, 6.

[878] Cp. Rom. ix, 14-21.

[879] 2 Cor. x, 5. Needless to say, such an expression savours strongly
of late invention; but in any case it tells of the attitude of the
Christian teachers of the second century.

[880] 1 Cor. vii, 20-24 (where the phrase translated in English
"use it rather" unquestionably means "rather continue" = remain a
slave. Cp. Eph. vi, 5, and Variorum Teacher's Bible in loc.).

[881] Rom. xiii, 1. Cp. 1 Peter ii, 13-14; Tit. iii, 1. The anti-Roman
spirit in the Apocalypse is Judaic, not Gentile-Christian; the book
being of Jewish origin.

[882] James ii, 21.

[883] 1 Cor. xv, 12.

[884] The Apology of Athenagoras (2nd c.) is rather a defence of
monotheism than a Christian document; hence, no doubt, its speedy
neglect by the Church.

[885] Justin Martyr, 1 Apol. c. 5; Min. Felix, Octavius, c. 10.

[886] "The inhabitants of Coelesyria, Idumea, and Judea are principally
influenced by Aries and Ares, and are generally audacious, atheistical,
and treacherous" (Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, ii, 3--Paraphrase of Proclus).

[887] Cp. Tertullian, De Idolatria, passim, and Ad Scapulam, c. 5.

[888] For the refusal to worship men as Gods they had, of course,
abundant pagan precedent. See above, p. 186, note.

[889] E.g., Tertullian, De Testimonio Animæ, c. 1; Arnobius,
Adversus Gentes, i, 41, etc.; Lactantius, Divine Institutes, c. xv;
Epit. c. vii.

[890] Cp. J. A. Farrer, Paganism and Christianity, ch. vii.

[891] Irenæus, Against Heresies, i, 26. Cp. Hagenbach, Lehrbuch der
Dogmengeschichte, 3te Aufl. § 23, 4 (p. 37), as to Cerinthus.

[892] 1 Tim. vi, 20. The word persistently translated "oppositions"
is a specific term in Gnostic lore. Cp. R. W. Mackay, Rise and Progress
of Christianity, 1854, p. 115, note.

[893] Cp. Harnack, Outlines of the History of Dogma, Mitchell's
trans. p. 77 (ch. vi), p. 149 (bk. ii, ch. vi); Gieseler, Comp. of
Eccles. Hist. i, § 63, Eng. tr. i, 234, as to the attitude of Origen.

[894] The term "Gnostic," often treated as if applicable only to
heretical sects, was adopted by Clemens of Alexandria as an honourable
title. Cp. Gieseler, p. 241, as cited.

[895] Mosheim, Eccles. Hist. 2 Cent. pt. ii, ch. i, §§ 4-12. Cp.,
however, Abbé Cognat, Clément d'Alexandrie, 1859, pp. 421-23, and
Ueberweg, i, 239, as to the obscurity resting on the original teaching
of Ammonios.

[896] Cp. Gieseler, Compendium, i, § 52 (tr. vol. i, p. 162).

[897] Id. §§ 54, 55, pp. 186-90.

[898] E. H. 3 Cent. pt. ii, ch. i, §§ 2-4.

[899] As to the earlier latitudinarianism, cp. Gieseler, as cited,
p. 166.

[900] Gieseler, § 55.

[901] Mosheim, E. H. 3 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, §§ 1-7; Gieseler,
as cited, § 53, pp. 162-65; Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. vi, 19;
B. Saint-Hilaire, De l'école d'Alexandrie, 1845, p. 7; Baur,
Ch. Hist. Eng. tr. ii, 3-8. But cp. Cognat, Clément d'Alexandrie,
l. v, ch. v.

[902] Cp. Mosheim on Origen, Comm. de rebus Christ. ante Const. §§ 27,
28, summarized in Schlegel's note to Ec. Hist. Reid's ed. pp. 100-101;
Gieseler, § 63; Renan, Marc-Aurèle, pp. 114, 140. Dr. Hatch (Influence
of Greek Ideas on the Christian Church, pp. 82-83) notes that the
allegorical method, which began in a tendency towards rationalism,
came later to be typically orthodox.

[903] "Gnosis was an attempt to convert Christianity into philosophy;
to place it in its widest relation to the universe, and to incorporate
with it the ideas and feelings approved by the best intelligence of
the times." Mackay, Rise and Progress of Christianity, p. 109. But
cp. the per contra on p. 110: "it was but a philosophy in fetters,
an effort of the mind to form for itself a more systematic belief in
its own prejudices." Again (p. 115): "a reaction towards freethought
was the essence of Gnosis." So also Robins, A Defence of the Faith,
1862, pt. i, pp. 4-5, 153.

[904] This view could be supported by the Platonists from Plato, Laws,
bk. x. Cp. Chaignet, La vie et les écrits de Platon, 1871, p. 422;
and Milman, Hist. of Christianity, bk. ii, ch. v, ed. Paris, 1840,
i, 288. It is explicitly set forth by Plutarch, I. and O., cc. 45-49.

[905] On the subject in general cp. Mosheim, E. H. 2 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. v; also his Commentaries on the Affairs of the Christians before
Constantine, Eng. tr. vol. ii; Harnack, Outlines of the Hist. of Dogma,
ch. iv; King, The Gnostics and their Remains; Mackay, Rise and Progress
of Christianity, pt. iii, §§ 10, 11, 12; Renan, L'Église Chrétienne,
chs. ix, x; Milman, Hist. of Christianity, bk. ii, ch. v; Lardner,
Hist. of Heretics, in Works, ed. 1835, vol. viii; Baur, Church History,
pt. iii; Jeremie, Hist. of the Chr. Church in 2nd and 3rd Cent.,
ch. v (in Encyc. Metropolitana).

[906] "Mysticism itself is but an insane rationalism" (Hampden,
Bampton Lect. on Scholastic Philosophy, 3rd ed. intr. p. liii). It may
be described as freethought without regard to evidence--that "lawless
thought" which Christian polemists are wont to ascribe to rationalists.

[907] Gieseler, §§ 61, 86 (pp. 228, 368, 370).

[908] In the fourth century and later, however, the gospel of
asceticism won great orthodox vogue through the writings of the
so-called Dionysius the Areopagite. Cp. Mosheim, 4 Cent. pt. ii,
c. iii, § 12; Westcott, Religious Thought in the West, 1891,
pp. 190-91.

[909] Compare the process by which the Talmudic system unified
Judaism. Wellhausen, Israel, as cited, pp. 541-42; Milman, History
of Christianity, bk. ii, ch. 4, ed. Paris, 1840, i, 276.

[910] "There is good reason to suppose that the Christian bishops
multiplied sacred rites for the sake of rendering the Jews and the
pagans more friendly to them" (Mosheim, E. H. 2 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. iv. Cp. ch. iii, § 17; ch. iv, §§ 3-7; 4 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. iii, §§ 1-3; ch. iv, §§ 1-2; 5 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, §
2). This generalization is borne out by nearly every other Church
historian. Cp. Harnack, Outlines, pt. ii, bk. i, ch. i; Milman, bk. iv,
ch. 5, pp. 367-74; Gieseler. §§ 98, 99, 101, 104; Renan, Marc-Aurèle,
3e edit. p. 630. Baur, Church History, Eng. tr. ii, 285-89.

[911] Gieseler, § 87, p. 373; Hagenbach, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte,
3te Aufl. § 108.

[912] Eusebius, v, 28; Gieseler, § 60, p. 218.

[913] Cp. Gieseler, §§ 80-83, pp. 328-53; Harnack, Outlines, pt. ii,
bk. i, esp. pp. 201-202.

[914] One being another Theodotos, a money-changer.

[915] Eusebius, as last cited. The sect was accused of altering the
gospels to suit its purposes. The charge could probably be made with
truth against every sect in turn, as against the Church in general.

[916] In the end the doctrine declared orthodox was the opposite
of what had been declared orthodox in the Sabellian and other
controversies (Mosheim, 4 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 9); and all the while
"the Arians and the orthodox embraced the same theology in substance"
(Murdock, note on Mosheim, Reid's ed. p. 161). An eminent modern
Catholic, however, has described Arianism as "a deistic doctrine which
had not the courage to bury itself in the fecund obscurities of dogma"
(Ozanam, La Civilisation chrétienne chez les Francs, 1849, p. 35).

[917] Gieseler, § 83. p. 345.

[918] Cp. the author's Short History of Christianity, 2nd
ed. pp. 176-81.

[919] "Pelagianism is Christian rationalism" (Harnack, Outlines,
pt. ii, bk. ii, ch. iv, § 3, p.364).

[920] He was first a Manichean; later an anti-Manichean, denying
predestination; later, as an opponent of the Pelagians, an assertor
of predestination. Cp. Mackay, Rise and Progress of Christianity,
pt. v, § 15. As to his final Manicheanism, see Milman, Hist. of Latin
Christianity, 3rd ed. i, 152.

[921] Cp. Harnack, Outlines, pt. ii, bk. ii, ch. v, § 1 (p. 386).

[922] Cp. Hampden, Bampton Lectures on The Scholastic Philosophy,
1848, pp. xxxv-xxxvi, and refs.

[923] Sokrates, Eccles. Hist. bk. vii, ch. 15.

[924] Epist. 93. Cp. Schlegel's notes on Mosheim, in Reid's
ed. pp. 159, 198; Rev. W. R. Clarke, Saint Augustine, pp. 86-87
(a defence); Milman, History of Latin Christianity, bk. ii,
ch. ii, 3rd. ed. i, 163; Boissier, La fin du paganisme, 2e édit. i,
69-79. Harnack's confused and contradictory estimate of Augustine
(Outlines, pt. ii, bk ii, chs. iii, iv) ignores this issue. He
notes, however (pp. 362-63), some of Augustine's countless
self-contradictions.

[925] Milman, Hist. of Christianity, bk. iii, ch. viii; ed. cited,
ii, 182, 188, and note. For the views of Ambrose see p. 184. In Gaul,
St. Martin put down the old shrines by brute force. Id. p. 179.

[926] Cp. Beugnot, Histoire de la destruction du paganisme en Occident,
1835, i, 430.

[927] De errore profanarum religionum, end.

[928] See it translated in full by Lardner in his Testimonies of
Ancient Heathens, ch. xlix. Works, ed. 1835, vol. viii.

[929] Lardner, as cited, pp. 25-27.

[930] As to the high character of Libanius, who used his influence
to succour his Christian friends in the reign of Julian, see Lardner,
pp. 15-17.

[931] Milman, Hist. of Christianity, bk. iii, ch. vi; vol. ii,
p. 131. See the passage there cited from the Funeral Oration of
Libanius On Julian, as to Christians building houses with temple
stones; also the further passages, pp. 129, 161, 212, of Mr. King's
tr. of the Oration in his Julian the Emperor (Bohn Lib.).

[932] Ammianus, xxii, 4.

[933] Gibbon, ch. xlvii. Bohn ed. v, 211-52, 264, 268, 272. Mosheim,
passim.

[934] Milman, as cited, p. 178.

[935] De Testimonio Animæ, c. 2; De Ira Dei.

[936] Tertullian, as cited, c. 3.

[937] B. vi, ch. 28.

[938] On the Mysteries, bk. x, ch. 2.

[939] Cp. Minucius Felix (2nd c.), Octavius, c. 5.

[940] De consensu evangelistarum, i, 10.

[941] De civ. Dei, xxi, 2, 5-7.

[942] Id. i, 14.

[943] Id. xxi, 11.

[944] See the citations in Abailard's Sic et non, § 1. Quod fides
humanis rationibus sit adstruenda, et contra.

[945] De Gubernatione Dei, l. 4.

[946] See Renan, L'Église Chrétienne, p. 493. As to Crescens, the
enemy of Justin Martyr (2 Apol. c. 3), see id. p. 492. Cp. Arnobius,
Adversus Gentes, passim, as to pagan objections. What remains of
Porphyry will be found in Lardner's Testimonies of the Heathen,
ch. xxxvii. Cp. Baur, Church History, Eng. tr. ii, 179-87.

[947] The Controversy between Jason and Papiscus regarding Christ,
mentioned by Origen (Ag. Celsus, bk. iv, ch. 4), seems to have been
of the same nature.

[948] Origen repeatedly calls him an Epicurean; but this is obviously
false. The Platonizing Christian would not admit that a Platonist
was anti-Christian.

[949] Origen places him in the reign of Hadrian; but the internal
evidence is all against that opinion. Kain dates the treatise 177-78.

[950] Cp. Renan, Marc-Aurèle, 3e édit. pp. 346-71.

[951] B. i, cc. 24, 25.

[952] B. i, cc. 28, 32.

[953] c. 32.

[954] cc. 37, 39.

[955] B. ii, c. 26.

[956] B. ii, c. 78.

[957] B. ii, c. 49.

[958] B. ii, c. 30.

[959] B. iii, c. 1.

[960] B. iv, cc. 23-30, 54-60, 74.

[961] Cp. A. Kind, Teleologie und Naturalismus in der altchristlichen
Zeit, 1875; Soury, Bréviaire de l'histoire du Matérialisme, pp. 331-40.

[962] B. i, chs. 9-11; iii, 44.

[963] Cp. Renan, Marc-Aurèle, pp. 373-77.

[964] Christian excisions have been suspected in the Peregrinus,
§ 11 (Bernays, Lucian und die Kyniker, 1879, p. 107). But see
Mr. J. M. Cotterill's Peregrinus Proteus, Edinburgh, 1879, for a
theory of the spuriousness of the treatise, which is surmised to be
a fabrication of Henri Etienne.

[965] Logoi Philaletheis, known only from the reply of Eusebius, Contra
Hiroclem. Hierocles made much of Apollonius of Tyana, as having greatly
outdone Jesus in miracles, while ranking simply as a God-beloved man.

[966] Methodius, Eusebius, Apollinaris, and Philostorgius.

[967] Cod. Justin. De Summa Trinitate. l. I, tit. i, c. 3.

[968] Citations are given by Baur, Ch. Hist. ii, 180 sq.

[969] Cp. Mackay, Rise and Progress of Christianity, p. 160. Chrysostom
(De Mundi Creatione, vi, 3) testifies that Porphyry "led many away
from the faith." He ably anticipated the "higher criticism" of the
Book of Daniel. See Baur, as cited. Porphyry, like Celsus, powerfully
retorted on the Old Testament the attacks made by Christians on the
immorality of pagan myths, and contemned the allegorical explanations
of the Christian writers as mere evasions. The pagan explanations of
pagan myths, however, were of the same order.

[970] Gieseler, § 106, ii, 75. Cp. Mosheim, 4 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii,
§ 22.

[971] Gieseler, § 106, vol. ii, p. 74; Mosheim, 4 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. iii, § 2; and Schlegel's note in Reid's ed. p. 152.

[972] Milman, Hist. of Chr. bk. iii, ch. xi (ii, 268-70); Mosheim,
5 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, § 14; Gilly, Vigilantius and his Times,
1844, pp. 8, 389 sq., 470 sq. As to Jerome's persecuting ferocity
see also Gieseler, ii, 65 note. For a Catholic polemic on Jerome's
side see Amedée Thierry, Saint Jérome, 2e édit. pp. 141, 363-66.

[973] See a good account of the works of Macrobius in Prof. Dill's
Roman Society in the last Century of the Western Empire, bk. i, ch. iv.

[974] Philostorgius, Eccles. Hist. Epit. bk. viii, ch. x.

[975] By Justinian in 529. The banished thinkers were protected by
Chosroes in Persia, who secured them permission to return (Gibbon,
Bohn ed. iv. 355-56; Finlay, Hist. of Greece, ed. Tozer, i, 277,
287). Theodosius II had already forbidden all public lectures by
independent teachers (id. pp. 282-83).

[976] Theodosius I, Arcadius, and Theodosius II (379-450) successively
passed laws forbidding and persecuting paganism (Finlay. i,
286; Beugnot. Hist. de la destr. du paganisme en occident, i, 350
sq.). Mithraism was suppressed in the same period (Jerome, Epist. cvii,
ad Laetam, Sokrates, Eccles. Hist. bk. v, ch. xvi). It is to be
remembered that Constans and Constantius, the sons of Constantine,
had commenced, at least on paper, to persecute paganism as soon as
their father's new creed was sufficiently established (Cod. Theod. xvi,
10, 2, 4), and this with the entire approval of the whole Church. It
was not their fault that it subsisted till the time of Theodosius II
(cp. Gieseler, § 75, pp. 306-308; and Beugnot, i, 138-48). On the
edict of Theodosius I see Milman, bk. iii, ch. viii; ed. cited, p. 186.

[977] In S. Babylam, contra Julianum, c. ii. Cp. his Hom. iv on 1st
Cor. Eng. tr. 1839, p. 42.

[978] There is also a suggestion in one passage of Chrysostom (Hom. in
1 Cor. vi, 2, 3) that some Christians tended to doubt the actuality
of apostolic miracles, seeing that no miracles took place in their
own day.

[979] Præparatio Evangelica, xv, 61.

[980] Div. Inst. iii, 3.

[981] Id. iii, 24.

[982] Topographia, lib. v, cited by Murdock in note on Mosheim. 5
Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, § 5, Reid's ed. p. 192. Cp. same ed. p. 219,
note; and Gibbon, Bohn ed. iv, 259; v, 319.

[983] , ii, 65, 71.

[984] See Schlegel's note on Mosheim. 4 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 19.

[985] The first name came from Anomoios, "unlike-natured (to
the Father)," that being their primary doctrinal heresy concerning
Jesus. The second seems to have been a euphemism of their own making,
with the sense of "holding the good law."

[986] Jerome, Adv. Vigilantium, cc. 9, 11.

[987] Epiphanius, Adv. Hæres. lxx, § 6.

[988] Cp. Augustine, De Civ. Dei, viii, 15-19; xxi, 6; De
Trinitate, iii, 12, 13 (7, 8); Epist. cxxxviii, 18-20; Sermo cc,
in Epiph. Dom. ii; Jerome, Vita S. Hilarion, cc. 6, 37.

[989] Mosheim, E. H. 2 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, §§ 8, 15; 3 Cent. pt. i,
ch. i, § 5; pt. ii, ch. iii, §§ 10, 11; 4 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii,
§§ 3, 16; Gieseler, § 63, p. 235; Waddington, Hist. of the Church,
1833, pp. 38-39; Milman, Hist. of Chr. bk. iv, ch. iii, ed. cited,
ii, 337. Cp. Mackay, Rise and Progress of Christianity, pp. 11-12.

[990] Cp. the explicit admissions of Mosheim, E. H. 2 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. iii, § 16; 3 Cont. pt. ii, ch. ii, §§ 4, 6; 4 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. ii, § 8; ch. iii, § 17; Gieseler, § 103, vol. ii, p. 56. It is to
be noted, however, that even the martyrs were at times bad characters
who sought in martyrdom remission for their sins (Gieseler, § 74,
p. 206; De Wette, as there cited).

[991] Cp. Gieseler, ii, 67-68.

[992] Epist. vii, 5; xcv, 33. Cp. Cicero, Tusculans, ii, 17.

[993] Cp. the Bohn ed. of Gibbon, note by clerical editor, iii, 359.

[994] The express declaration of Salvian, De Gubernatione Dei,
l. 6. On the general question compare Mr. Farrer's Paganism and
Christianity, ch. x; Milman, as last cited, p. 331; and Gieseler,
ii, 71, note 6. The traditional view that the games were suppressed
by Honorius, though accepted by Gibbon and by Professor Dill (Roman
Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire, 2nd ed. p. 56),
appears to be an error. Cp. Beugnot, Destr. du Paganisme, ii, 25;
Finlay, Hist. of Greece, i, 236.

[995] As to the specially cruel use of judicial torture by the later
Inquisition, see H. C. Lea, Superstition and Force, 3rd ed. p. 452.

[996] Lavollée, as cited, p. 92. Cp. St. Chrysostom's Picture of his
Age, p. 112, and the admissions of Milman, bk. iv, ch. i.

[997] As to the spirit of hatred roused by controversy among believers,
see Gieseler, § 104, vol. ii, pp. 64-67; and Ullmann's Gregory of
Nazianzum, Eng. tr. 1851, pp. 177-80.

[998] H. Fraser Stewart, Boethius: An Essay, 1891, pp. 100-101.

[999] Cp. Beugnot, Destruction du Paganisme, ii, 282-83.

[1000] Id. p. 159. Mr. Stewart in another passage (p. 106) argues that
"The Consolation is intensely artificial"--this by way of explaining
that it was a deliberate exercise, not representing the real or normal
state of its author's mind. Yet he has finally to avow (p. 107) that
"it remains a very noble book"--a character surely incompatible with
intense artificiality.

[1001] This is the view of Maurice (Medieval Philosophy, 2nd ed. 1859,
pp. 14-16), who decides that Boethius was neither a Christian nor a
"pagan"--i.e., a believer in the pagan Gods. This is simply to say that
he was a rationalist--a "pagan philosopher," like Aristotle. But, as
is noted by Prof. Bury (ed. of Gibbon, iv. 199), Boethius's authorship
of a book, De sancta trinitate, et capita quædam dogmatica, et librum
contra Nestorium, is positively asserted in the Anecdoton Holderi
(ed. by Usener, Leipzig, 1877, p. 4), a fragment found in a 10th
century MS.

[1002] The strict meaning of this term, given by Mohammed ("the true
religion with God is Islam"; Sura, iii, 17), is "submission"--such
being the attitude demanded by the Prophet. "Moslem" or "Muslim"
means one who accepts Islam. Koran means strictly, not "book," but
"reading" or recitation.

[1003] Rodwell's tr. of the Koran, ed. 1861, pref. p. xv.

[1004] Sale, Preliminary Discourse to tr. of the Koran, ed. 1833, i,
42; Muir's Life of Mohammad, ed. Weir, 1912, p. 78. Cp. Freeman,
History and Conquests of the Saracens, 1856, p. 35. The late
Prof. Palmer, in introd. to his tr. of the Koran (Sacred Books of
the East series), i, p. xv, says that "By far the greater number had
ceased to believe in anything at all"; but this is an extravagance,
confuted by himself in other passages--e.g. p. xi.

[1005] These generalizations are always matched, and cancelled, by
others from the same sources. Thus Prof. D. B. Macdonald writes of
"the always flighty and skeptical Arabs," and, a few pages later, of
the God-fearing fatalism "of all Muslim thought, the faith to which
the Semite ever returns in the end." Development of Muslim Theology,
etc. (in "Semitic Series"), New York, 1903, pp. 122, 126.

[1006] The word means either convert or pervert; in Heb. and
Syr. "heretic"; in Arabic, "orthodox." It must not be confounded with
Hanyfite, the name of an orthodox sect, founded by one Hanyfa.

[1007] See Rodwell's tr. of the Koran, ed. 1861, pref. pp. xvi,
xvii; and Sura, xvi (lxxiii in Rodwell's chron. arrangement), v. 121,
p. 252, note 2.

[1008] Sprenger, Das Leben und die Lehre des Mohammad, 1861-65, i,
83 sq. Cp. p. 60 sq.

[1009] Rodwell, p. 497, note to Sura iii (xcvii) 19; and pref. p. xvi;
Caussin de Perceval, Essai sur l'histoire des Arabes avant l'Islamisme,
1847, i, 321-26; Nicholson, Lit. Hist. of the Arabs, pp. 69, 149. "To
the great mass of the citizens of Mecca the new doctrine was simply
the Hanyfism to which they had become accustomed; and they did not at
first trouble themselves at all about the matter." Palmer, introd. to
tr. of Koran, i, p. xxiv. Cp. Sprenger, as cited, i, 46-60, 65.

[1010] The word Hanyf or Hanif recurs in Sura ii, 129; iii,
60, 89; iv, 124; vi, 79, 162; x, 105, xvi, 121; xxii, 32; xxx,
29. Cp. H. Derenbourg, La science des religions et l'Islamisme, 1886,
pp. 42-43. Palmer's translation, marred as it unfortunately is by
slanginess, is on such points specially trustworthy. Rodwell's does
not always indicate the use of the word Hanyf; but the German version
of Ullmann, the French of Kanimirski, and Sale's, do not indicate
it at all. Sprenger (p. 43) derives the Hanyfs from Essenes who had
almost lost all knowledge of the Bible. Cp. p. 67. Prof. Macdonald
writes that the word "is of very doubtful derivation. But we have
evidence from heathen Arab poetry that these Hanifs were regarded as
much the same as Christian monks, and that the term hanif was used
as a synonym for rahib, monk." Work cited, p. 125.

[1011] Sprenger, as cited, p. 13.

[1012] Cp. Sale's Prelim. Discourse, as cited, i, 38; and Palmer,
introd. p. xv; and Nicholson, pp. 139-40.

[1013] Al Mostaraf, cited by Pococke, Specimen Histor. Arab. p. 136;
Sale, Prelim. Disc. as cited, p. 45.

[1014] Cp. Nicholson, pp. 155-56 and refs.

[1015] Sale, as cited, pp. 39-41.

[1016] Palmer, introd. to his Haroun Alraschid, 1882,
p. 14. Cp. Derenbourg, La science des religions et l'Islamisme, p. 44,
controverting Kuenen.

[1017] Hibbert Lectures, On National and Universal Religions, ed. 1901,
p. 21 and Note II.

[1018] Id. p. 31.

[1019] Nicholson, Lit. Hist. of the Arabs, p. 145.

[1020] Rodwell, note to Sura xcvi (R. i), 10.

[1021] Sprenger estimates that at his death the number really converted
to his doctrine did not exceed a thousand. Cp. Nicholson, pp. 153-58.

[1022] Renan ascribes the idea wholly to Omar. Études d'histoire
et de critique, ed. 1862, p. 250. The faithful have preserved a sly
saying that "Omar was many a time of a certain opinion, and the Koran
was then revealed accordingly." Nöldeko, Enc. Brit. art. on Koran,
in Sketches from Eastern History, 1892, p. 28. On the other hand,
Sedillot decides (Histoire des Arabes, 1854. p. 60) that "in Mohammed
it is the political idea that dominates." So Nicholson (p. 169): "At
Medina the days of pure religious enthusiasm have passed away for ever,
and the prophet is overshadowed by the statesman." Cp. pp. 173, 175.

[1023] On the measure of racial unity set up by Abyssinian attacks
as well as by the pretensions of the Byzantine and Persian empires,
see Sedillot, pp. 30, 38. Cp. Van Vloten, Recherches sur la domination
arabe, Amsterdam, 1894. pp. 1-4. 7.

[1024] Professor Stanilas Guyard, La Civilisation Musulmane, 1884,
p. 22.

[1025] Cp. Renan, Études, pp. 257-66; Hauri, Der Islam in seinem
Einfluss auf das Leben seiner Bekenner, 1882, pp. 64-65; Nicholson,
p. 235. It was at Medina that a strict Mohammedanism first arose.

[1026] Nicholson, pp. 178-79, and ref.

[1027] Hauri, Der Islam, p. 64.

[1028] Cp. Montesquieu, Grandeur et décadence des Romains, ch. 22.

[1029] Nicholson, p 190.

[1030] Id. p. 199.

[1031] Van Vloten, p. 70 and passim.

[1032] Prof. Guyard, as cited, pp. 16, 51; C. E. Oelsner, Des effets
de la religion de Mohammed, etc., 1810, p. 130.

[1033] Guyard, p. 21; Palmer, Haroun Alraschid, introd. p. 19.

[1034] The alleged destruction of the library of Alexandria by Omar
is probably a myth, arising out of a story of Omar's causing some
Persian books to be thrown into the water. See Prof. Bury's notes in
his ed. of Gibbon, v, 452-54. Cp. Oelsner, as cited, pp. 142-43.

[1035] Sura, vi, 25, 29; xix, 67; xxvii, 68-70; liv, 2; lxxxiii,
10-13. According to lviii, 28, however, some polytheists denied the
future state.

[1036] Cp. Renan, Études d'histoire et de critique, pp. 232-34.

[1037] Renan, as cited, p. 232.

[1038] Id. p. 235. Renan and Sprenger conflict on this point, the
former having regard, apparently, to the bulk of the poetry, the
latter to parts of it.

[1039] Sedillot, p. 39. One of these was Zaid. Nicholson, p. 149.

[1040] See the passage (Sura ii) cited with praise by the sympathetic
Mr. Bosworth Smith in his Mohammed and Mohammedanism, 2nd ed. p. 181;
where also delighted praise is given to the "description of
Infidelity" in Sura xxiv, 39-40. The "infidels" in question were
simply non-Moslems.

[1041] The Flight (of the Prophet to Medina from Mecca, in 622),
from which begins the Mohammedan era.

[1042] Sale, as cited, p. 160.

[1043] Weil, Geschichte der Chalifen, ii, 261-64; Dugat, Histoire des
philosophes et des théologiens Mussulmans, 1878, pp. 48-55; H. Steiner,
Die Mu`taziliten, oder die Freidenker im Islam, 1865, pp. 49-50;
Guyard, p. 36; Sale, p. 161 (sec. viii); Nicholson, p. 222 sq. The
term Motazila broadly means "dissenter," or "belonging to a sect."

[1044] Steiner, p. 1.

[1045] Palmer, Introd. to Haroun Alraschid, p. 14.

[1046] As to the Persian influence on Arab thought, cp. A. Müller,
Der Islam, i, 469; Palmer, as last cited; Weil, Geschichte der
Chalifen, ii, 114 ff.; Nicholson, p. 220; Van Vloten, Recherches sur
la domination arabe, p. 43. Van Vloten's treatise is a lucid sketch of
the socio-political conditions set up in Persia by the Arab conquest.

[1047] Weil, ii, 261.

[1048] G. Dugat, Histoire des philosophes et des théologiens
Mussulmans, p. 44; Sale, pp. 161, 174-78.

[1049] Dugat, p. 55; Steiner, p. 4; Sale, p. 162.

[1050] "Motazilism represents in Islam a Protestantism of the
shade of Schleiermacher" (Renan, Averroès et l'Averroïsme, 3e
ed. p. 104). Cp. Syed Ameer Ali, Crit. Exam. of Life of Mohammed,
pp. 300-308; Sale, p. 161.

[1051] Dugat, pp. 28, 44; Guyard, p. 36; Steiner, pp. 24-25; Renan,
Averroès, p. 101. The Kadarites, as Sale notes (pp. 164-65), are really
an older group than the Motazilites, so-called, their founder having
rejected predestination before Wasil did. Kuenen (Hibbert Lect. p. 47)
writes as if all the Motazilites were maintained of freewill, but
they varied. See Prof. Macdonald, as cited, p. 135 sq.

[1052] Sale, pp. 165, 172-73.

[1053] For a view of the various schools of Sifatites see Sale,
pp. 166-74.

[1054] Guyard, pp. 37-38; G. D. Osborn, The Khalifs of Baghdad, 1878,
p. 134.

[1055] Steiner, p. 16. Major Osborn (work cited, p. 136) attributes
their rise to the influence of Eastern Christianity, but gives
no proof.

[1056] Guyard, p. 40. Cp. Sale, p. 176; Van Vloten, p. 43.

[1057] Dugat, p. 34. Thus the orthodox sect of Hanyfites were called
by one writer followers of reason, since they relied rather on their
judgment than on tradition.

[1058] Steiner, p. 5; Nicholson, p. 370.

[1059] Steiner, pp. 5, 9, 88-89; Sale, p. 161; Macdonald, p. 140.

[1060] Sedillot, Hist. des Arabes, p. 335; Prof. A. Müller, Der Islam
(in Oncken's series), i, 470; Ueberweg, i, 402.

[1061] Ueberweg, p. 403; Weil, Gesch. der Chalifen, ii, 281.

[1062] For an orthodox account of the beginnings of freethinking
(called zendekism) see Weil, ii, 214. Cp. p. 261; also Tabari's
Chronicle, pt. v, ch. xcvii; and Renan, Averroès, p. 103. Already,
among the Ommayade Khalifs, Yezid III held the Motazilite tenet of
freewill. Weil, p. 260.

[1063] Nicholson, pp. 372, 375. The name zendek (otherwise spelt
zindiq) seems to have originally meant a Manichæan. Browne,
Literary History of Persia, ii (1906), 295; Nicholson, p. 375 and
ref. Macdonald, p. 134, thinks it literally meant "initiate."

[1064] Steiner, p. 8. An association called "Brethren of Purity"
or "Sincere Brethren" seem to have carried Motazilism far, though
they aimed at reconciling philosophy with orthodoxy. They were
in effect the encyclopedists of Arab science. Ueberweg, i, 411;
Nicholson, p. 370 sq. See Dr. F. Dieterici, Die Naturanschauung und
Naturphilosophie der Araber im 10ten Jahrhundert, aus den schriften
der lautern Brüder, 1861, Vorrede, p. viii, and Flügel, as there
cited. Flügel dates the writings of the Brethren about 970; but the
association presumably existed earlier. Cp. Renan, Averroès, p. 104;
and S. Lane-Poole's Studies in a Mosque, 1893, ch. vi, as to their
performance. Prof. Macdonald is disposed to regard them as "part of
the great Fatimid propaganda which honeycombed the ground everywhere
under the Sunnite Abassids," but admits that the Fatimid movement is
"the great mystery of Muslim history" (pp. 165-70).

[1065] Sale, pp. 82-83, note.

[1066] He made five pilgrimages to Mecca, and died on the last,
thus attaining to sainthood.

[1067] Weil, Gesch. der Chalifen, ii, 81; Dugat, pp. 59-61; A. Müller,
Der Islam, i. 470; Macdonald, p. 134. In Mansour's reign was born Al
Allaf, "Sheikh of the Motazilites."

[1068] Dugat, p. 62. The Hâyetians, who had Unitarian Christian
leanings, also held by metempsychosis. Sale, p. 163.

[1069] Nicholson, p. 371 and refs.

[1070] Dugat, p. 71. He persecuted Zendeks in general. Nicholson,
pp. 373-74.

[1071] Id. p. 72; Sale, pp. 184-85; Tabari's Chronicle, pt. v,
ch. xcvii, Zotenberg's tr. 1874, iv, 447-53. Tabari notes (p. 448)
that all the Moslem theologians agree in thinking zendekism much worse
than any of the false religions, since it rejects all and denies God
as well as the Prophet.

[1072] Cp. Steiner, pp. 55 sq., 66 sq.; Ueberweg, Hist. of Philos.,
i, 405.

[1073] Dugat, p. 76. See Sale, pp. 82-83, 162-63, as to the champions
of this principle.

[1074] Sale, p. 83; Macdonald, p. 150.

[1075] Dugat, p. 79; Osborn, The Khalifs of Baghdad, p. 195.

[1076] Palmer, Haroun Alraschid, p. 82. They were really theists.

[1077] Weil, Geschichte der Chalifen, ii, 215, 261, 280; A. Müller,
Der Islam, pp. 514-15. "It was believed that he was at heart a
zindiq." Nicholson, p. 368.

[1078] Dugat, pp. 85-96.

[1079] Prof. Macdonald, as cited, p. 154.

[1080] Dugat, p. 83.

[1081] See extract by Major Osborn, Khalifs, p. 250.

[1082] Osborn, Khalifs, p. 249.

[1083] Macdonald, pp. 154-58, 167.

[1084] Nicholson, pp. 358-59. He it was who first caused to be measured
a degree of the earth's surface. The attempt was duly denounced as
atheistic by a leading theologian, Takyuddin. Montucla, Hist. des
Mathématiques, éd. Lalande, i, 355 sq.; Draper, Conflict of Religion
and Science, p. 109.

[1085] A. Müller, Der Islam, i, 509 sq.; Weil, Gesch. der Chalifen,
ii, 280 ff.

[1086] Dugat, pp. 105-11; Sale, p. 82. Apart from this one issue,
general tolerance seems to have prevailed. Osborn, Khalifs, p. 265.

[1087] Dugat, p. 112; Steiner, p. 79. According to Abulfaragius,
Motawakkel had the merit of leaving men free to believe what they
would as to the creation of the Koran. Sale, p. 82.

[1088] A good analysis is given by Dugat, pp. 337-48.

[1089] The whole of Aristotle, except, apparently, the Politics,
had been translated in the time of the philosopher Avicenna (fl. 1000).

[1090] Macdonald, pp. 200, 205-206.

[1091] Steiner, Die Mu'taziliten, pp. 10-11, following Gazzali (Al
Gazel); Weil, Gesch. der Chalifen, iii, 72.

[1092] Guyard, pp. 41-42; Renan, Averroès, pp. 104-5; Macdonald,
p. 186 sq. The cultivators of Kalâm were called Motecallemîn.

[1093] Ueberweg, i, 405, 414; Steiner, p. 11; Whewell, Hist. of the
Inductive Sciences, 3rd ed. i, 193-94. Compare the laudatory account
of Al Gazzali by Prof. Macdonald (pt. iii, ch. iv), who pronounces
him "certainly the most sympathetic figure in the history of Islam"
(p. 215).

[1094] Hence, among other things, a check on the practice of
anatomy, religious feeling being opposed to it under Islam as under
Christianity. Dugat, pp. 62-63.

[1095] Dugat, pp. 123-28.

[1096] Browne, Literary History of Persia, ii (1906), 290, 293;
R. A. Nicholson, Literary History of the Arabs, 1907, p. 318.

[1097] Browne, as cited, p. 292. Cp. Von Kremer, Culturgeschichte
des Orients, 1875-77, ii, 386-95; Macdonald, p. 199.

[1098] Dugat, p. 167; Weil, iii, 72.

[1099] Dugat, pp. 164-68.

[1100] Nicholson, pp. 314-15.

[1101] The Diwan of Abu'l-Ala, by Henry Baerlein, 1908, st. 36. Cp. 1,
37, 41, 42, 53, 81, 86, 94, and the extracts given by Nicholson,
pp. 316-23.

[1102] Weil, ii, 215.

[1103] Decline and Fall, ch. lvii. Bohn ed. vi, 382, and
note. Cp. E. H. Whinfield, The Quatrains of Omar Khayyám, 1882, p. 4.

[1104] See the preface to Fitzgerald's translation of the Rubáiyát.

[1105] In one quatrain, of doubtful authenticity, is the line "Khayyám,
who longtime stitched the tents of learning" (Whinfield, xxxviii),
which excludes the idea of literal handicraft.

[1106] J. K. M. Shirazi, Life of Omar Al-Khayyámi, ed. 1895, pp. 30-41.

[1107] Id. pp. 51, 58.

[1108] Id. p. 54.

[1109] Id. p. 56.

[1110] Id. p. 59.

[1111] Id. pp. 62-63.

[1112] Id. p. 93.

[1113] Id. pp. 59-61.

[1114] Id. pp. 69-76, 86-88.

[1115] Cited in introd. to Dole's variorum ed. of the Rubáiyát, 1896,
i, p. xix. Cp. Macdonald, p. 199.

[1116] "Dost thou desire to taste eternal bliss?
        Vex thine own heart, but never vex another." (Whinfield, vi.)

            "Seek not the Kaaba, rather seek a heart." (Id. vii.)

This note is often repeated. E.g. xxxii, li.

[1117] See in the very competent translation of Mrs. H. M. Cadell
(who remarked that "Fitzgerald has rather written a poem upon Omar
than translated him"), quatrains 12, 14, 15, 20, 28, 29, 42, 45, 48,
51d, 85, 88b, 133, 141, 143. etc.; in the artistically turned version
of Mr. A. H. Talbot, which follows very faithfully the literal prose
translation of Mr. Heron-Allen, Nos. 1, 3, 15, 18, 19, 24, 33, 41,
45, 59, 72, 91, 115, 123, 148; and in Whinfield's version, Nos. 10,
25, 32, 41, 45, 46, 62, 68, 77, 84, 87, 104, 105, 111, 113, 118, 142,
144, 148, 151, 157, 161, 179, 195, 200, 201, 203, 216.

[1118] Shirazi, pp. 102-108. Early in the thirteenth century he
was denounced by a Sufi mystic as an "unhappy philosopher, atheist,
and materialist." Browne, Lit. Hist. of Persia, ii, 250. Abu'l-Ala,
of course, was similarly denounced.

[1119] Whinfield, cited by Browne, pp. 109-110.

[1120] Cp. Mrs. Cadell, The Rub'yat of Omar Khayam, 1899. Garnett's
introd. pp. xvii, xviii-xxi, xxiv, and Shirazi, as cited, pp. 79-80.

[1121] Fitzgerald's pref. 4th ed. p. xiii; Whinfield,
No. 147. Cp. quatrains cited in art. Sufiism, in Relig. Systems of
the World, 2nd ed. pp. 325-26.

[1122] Cp. Whinfield, p. 86, note on No. 147.

[1123] Guyard, as cited, p. 42. But cp. Ueberweg, i, 411; Nicholson,
pp. 233-34.

[1124] It is not impossible, Max Müller notwithstanding, that the
name may have come originally from the Greek sophoi, "the wise,"
though it is usually connected with sufi = the woollen robe worn
by the Sufite. There are other etymologies. Cp. Fraser, Histor. and
Descrip. Account of Persia, 1834, p. 323, note; Dugat, p. 326; and
art. Sufiism in Relig. Systems of the World, 2nd ed. p. 315. On the
Sufi system in general see also Max Müller, Psychol. Relig. Lect. vi.

[1125] Cp. Renan, Averroès, p. 293, as to Sufi latitudinarianism.

[1126] Guyard, p. 44; Relig. Systems, p. 319.

[1127] Hafiz in his own day was reckoned impious by many. Cp. Malcolm,
Sketches of Persia, 1827, ii, 100.

[1128] Fitzgerald's pref. p. x.

[1129] Yet he was disposed to put to death those who claimed mystic
intercourse with Deity. Sale, pp. 177-78.

[1130] Whose Salaman and Absal, tr. by Fitzgerald, is so little
noticed in comparison with the Rubáiyát of Omar.

[1131] E. C. Browne, in Religious Systems, as cited, p. 321; Dugat,
p. 331.

[1132] Shirazi, pp. 22-28; Fitzgerald's pref. following Mirkhond;
Fraser, Persia, p. 329.

[1133] Cp. Dugat, p. 336; Syed Ameer Ali, pp. 311-15; Gobineau,
Les religions et les philosophies dans l'Asie centrale, 2e édit. p. 68.

[1134] Sale, p. 176. The same doctrine is fairly ancient in
India. (Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, v, 313, note.) A belief that
hell-fire will not be eternal was held among the Motazilite sect of
Jâhedhians. Sale, p. 164. The Thamamians, again, held that at the
resurrection all infidels, idolaters, atheists, Jews, Christians,
Magians, and heretics, shall be reduced to dust. Id. ib.

[1135] Cp. Renan, Averroès, p. 101. Cp. p. 172.

[1136] Renan's tr. in Averroès, p. 166. The wording of the last phrase
suggests a misconstruction.

[1137] Cp. p. 172.

[1138] Renan, Averroès, pp. 104-107.

[1139] Steiner, Die Mu'taziliten, p. 6.

[1140] Ueberweg, i, 412; Renan, Averroès, pp. 44, 96.

[1141] E. G. Browne, Lit. Hist. of Persia, ii, 107.

[1142] Whom he pronounced a pagan and an infidel. Hauréau, II, i, 29.

[1143] Cp. Renan, Averroès, pp. 57, 96-98; Whewell, Hist. of the
Inductive Sciences, 3rd. ed. I, 193. Renan, following Degenerando
(cp. Whewell, as cited), credits Gazzali with anticipating Hume's
criticism of the idea of causation; but Gazzali's position is that
of dogmatic theism, not of naturalism. See Lewes, Hist. of Philos.,
4th ed. ii, 57.

[1144] Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, Ptie II, i, 35.

[1145] Cp. Seignobos, Hist. de la Civ. ii, 58; Stanley Lane-Poole, The
Moors in Spain, pref.; Milman, Latin Christianity, 4th ed. ix. 108-18;
U. R. Burke, History of Spain, i, ch. 16; Baden Powell, as cited,
pp. 94-104; Gebhart, Origines de la Renaissance en Italie, 1879,
pp. 185-89; and post, ch. x.

[1146] Baden Powell, Hist. of Nat. Philos. 1834, p. 97; Whewell,
Hist. of the Induct. Sciences, 3rd ed. ii. 273-74.

[1147] Dr. L. Leclerc, Hist. de la Médecine Arabe, 1876, i, 462;
Dr. E. von Meyer, Hist. of Chemistry, Eng. tr. 2nd ed. p. 28.

[1148] Cp. Buckle, Introd. to Hist. of Civ. in England,
1-vol. ed. p. 70.

[1149] Lane-Poole, The Moors in Spain, p. 73.

[1150] Properly Morabethin--men of God or of religion; otherwise
known as "Marabouts."

[1151] Sedillot, p. 298.

[1152] Cp. Dozy, Hist. des Musulmans d'Espagne, iii, 248-86; Ueberweg,
i, 415.

[1153] Renan, Averroès, pp. 98-99.

[1154] Ueberweg. i. 415; Renan, Averroès, pp. 32, 99.

[1155] Renan, Averroès, p. 99.

[1156] Renan, Averroès, p. 145.

[1157] Id. pp. 156-58.

[1158] Id. pp. 159-60.

[1159] Renan, Averroès, pp. 160-62.

[1160] Ueberweg, i, 416; Steiner, p. 6; Renan, Averroès, p. 162 sq.

[1161] Ueberweg, i, 460; Renan, pp. 258, 275.

[1162] Renan, Averroès, p. 169, and references.

[1163] Id. pp. 165-66.

[1164] Id. p. 5. Cp. the Avertissement, p. iii.

[1165] Renan, Averroès, pp. 31-36. Renan surmises that the popular
hostility to the philosophers, which was very marked, was largely
due to the element of the conquered Christians, who were noted for
their neglect of astronomy and natural science.

[1166] Cp. Ueberweg. i. 415-17.

[1167] Cp. Flint, History of the Philosophy of History, ed. 1893,
vol. i, p. 169.

[1168] Cp. Flint, p. 129, as to their hostility to him.

[1169] Huth, Life and Writings of Buckle, ii, 171.

[1170] Ricaut, Present State of the Ottoman Empire, 1686, p. 245.

[1171] Dugat, p. 59. The Ameer Ali Syed, Moulvi, M.A., LL.B., whose
Critical Examination of the Life and Teachings of Mohammed appeared
in 1873, writes as a Motazilite of a moderate type.

[1172] Macdonald, pp. 120, 196, 286.

[1173] A. Franck, Études Orientales, 1861, pp. 241-48, citing the
Dabistan.

[1174] Gobineau, Les religions et les philosophies dans l'Asie
centrale, 2e édit. ch. v; J. K. M. Shirazi, Life of Omar Khayyámi,
ed. 1905, p. 102. The latter writer notes, however, that "the cultured
classes, who ought to know better, are at no pains to dissipate the
existing religious prejudice against one [Omar] of whose reputation
every Persian may well feel proud." "At the present time ... the
name of Omar is no less execrated by the Shi-ite mob in Persia than
it was in his own day." Id. p. 108.

[1175] Fraser, Persia, p. 330. This writer (p. 239) describes Sufiism
as "the superstition of the freethinker," and as "often assumed as
a cloak to cover entire infidelity."

[1176] E.g., Dr. Wills, The Land of the Lion and the Sun, ed. 1891,
p. 339.

[1177] Smith and Dwight, Missionary Researches in Armenia, 1834,
p. 340. Cp. Rev. H. Southgate, Tour through Armenia, etc. 1840, ii,
153; and Morier's Hadji Baba of Ispahan (1824), ch. xlvii, near end.

[1178] Fraser, Persia, p. 331; Malcolm, Sketches of Persia, ii, 108;
Gobineau, as cited, ch. v.

[1179] H. Vambéry, Der Islam im neunzehnten Jahrhundert,
1875, pp. 32-33. Vambéry further remarks: "The half-fanatical,
half-freethinking tone of Persians has often surprised me in my
controversies with the most zealous Schiites."

[1180] As to the rise of this sect see Gobineau, as cited, pp. 141-358;
E. G. Browne's The Episode of the Bâb; and his lecture on Bâbism in
Religious Systems of the World. Cp. Renan, Les Apôtres, pp. 378-81.

[1181] H. Arakélian, Mémoire sur Le Bâbisme en Perse, in the Actes
du Premier Congrès International d'Histoire des Religions, Paris,
1902, 2 Ptie. Fasc. i.

[1182] Gobineau, pp. 167 sq.; 180 sq.; Arakélian, p. 94.

[1183] Lane, Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians, 5th ed. 1871,
i, 349, 356. "There are, I believe," says Lane (writing originally
in 1836), "very few professed Muslims who are really unbelievers;
and these dare not openly avow their unbelief through fear of losing
their heads for their apostacy. I have heard of two or three such who
have been rendered so by long and intimate intercourse with Europeans;
and have met with one materialist, who has often had long discussions
with me."

[1184] Id. ii, 309. (Suppl. III, "Of Late Innovations in Egypt.")

[1185] See the documents reproduced by Max Müller, Introd. to the
Science of Religion, ed. 1882, App. 1.

[1186] Id. pp. 214, 216.

[1187] Id. pp. 210, 217, 224, 225.

[1188] Id. pp. 224, 226.

[1189] Id. pp. 226, 229.

[1190] Guyard, p. 45; Steiner, p. 5, note; Lane, The Modern Egyptians,
ed. 1871, i. 137-38. Cp. Spencer, Study of Sociology, ch. xii, p. 292;
Bosworth Smith, Mohammed and Mohammedanism, 2nd ed. pp. 315-19.

[1191] Derenbourg, p. 72; Steiner, p. 1; Lane, i, 79.

[1192] Cp. Bosworth Smith, Mohammed and Mohammedanism, Lectures I and
IV; Canon Isaac Taylor, address to Church Congress at Wolverhampton,
1887, and letters to Times, Oct. and Nov. 1887. On the other or
anti-Mohammedan side see Canon Robinson, Hausaland, 3rd ed. 1900,
p. 186 sq.--a somewhat obviously prejudiced argument. See pp. 190-91.

[1193] Sir Harry H. Johnston, History of the Colonization of Africa
by Alien Races, 1899, p. 283.

[1194] This label has been applied by scholars to the seventh,
eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries. One writer, who supposes it to
cover the period from 500 to 1400, and protests, is attacking only
a misconception. (M. A. Lane, The Level of Social Motion, New York,
1902., p. 232.) The Renaissance is commonly reckoned to begin about
the end of the fourteenth century (cp. Symonds, Age of the Despots,
ch. i). But the whole period from the fall of the Roman Empire to the
fall of Constantinople, or to the Reformation, is broadly included
in the "Middle Ages."

[1195] Essai sur les Moeurs, ch. xlv.

[1196] According to which God predestinated good, but merely foreknew
evil.

[1197] For Leo's contacts with the Saracens see Finlay, Hist. of
Greece, ed. Tozer, ii, 14-20, 24, 31-32, 34-35, 37, etc., and compare
p. 218. See also Hardwick, Church History: Middle Age, 1833, p. 78,
note 2; and Waddington, History of the Church, 1833, p. 187, note.

[1198] Kurtz, Hist. of the Chr. Church, Eng. tr. i, 252.

[1199] Kurtz, p. 253.

[1200] As to his hostility to letters see Gibbon, ch. liii--Bohn
ed. vi, 228. Of course the other side were not any more
liberal. Cp. Finlay, ii, 222.

[1201] Gieseler, ii, 202. Per. III, Div. I, pt. i, § 1. In the next
century this was said to have gone in some churches to the point of
rejection of Christ. Id. p. 207, note 28.

[1202] Id. pp. 205, 207; Finlay, ii, 195.

[1203] Neander, Hist. of Chr. Church, Bohn tr. v, 289; vi, 266.

[1204] On their connection at this time with the culture-movement of
the Khalifate of Mamoun, see Finlay, ii, 224-25; Gibbon, ch. liii--Bohn
ed. vi, 228-29.

[1205] Finlay, ii, 181, note. The enemies of Photius accused him
of lending himself to the emperor's buffooneries. Neander, vi,
303-304. Cp. Mosheim, 9 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, § 7; and Gibbon,
ch. xxxiii--ed. cited, vi, 229. Finlay declares (p. 222) that no
Greek of the intellectual calibre of Photius, John the Grammarian,
and Leo the Mathematician, has since appeared.

[1206] Neander, vi, 280.

[1207] Finlay, ii, 174-75, 180.

[1208] Hardwick, Church History: Middle Age, 1853, p. 85. It is
noteworthy that the "heathen" Magyars held the Mazdean dualistic
principle, and that their evil power was named Armanyos (=
Ahrimanes). Mailáth, Geschichte der Magyaren, 1828, i, 25-26.

[1209] Gibbon, ch. liv; Mosheim, 9 Cent. pt. ii, ch. 5; Gieseler,
Per. III, Div. I, pt. i, § 3; G. S. Faber, The Ancient Vallenses
and Waldenses, 1838, pp. 32-60. Some fresh light is thrown on the
Paulician doctrines by the discovery of the old Armenian book,
The Key of Truth, edited and translated by F. C. Conybeare, Oxford,
1898. It belonged to the Armenian sect of Thonraki, or Thonrakians,
or Thondrakians--people of the village of Thondrac (Neander, vi,
347)--founded by one Sembat, originally a Paulician, in the ninth
century (Hardwick, Church History: Middle Age, p. 201; Neander, last
cit.). For a criticism of Mr. Conybeare's theories see the Church
Quarterly Review, Jan. 1899, Art. V.

[1210] Gieseler, Per. III, §§ 45, 46, vol. ii, pp. 489, 492; Hardwick,
p. 86. The sect of Euchites, also anti-priestly, seem to have joined
them. Faber denies any Manichean element.

[1211] Gibbon, as cited, vi, 241.

[1212] Gibbon, vi, 242; Hardwick, pp. 88-90.

[1213] Gibbon, vi, 245, and note; Finlay, ii, 60.

[1214] Despite the express decision, the use of statues proper
(agalmata) gradually disappeared from the Greek Church, the disuse
finally creating a strong antipathy, while pictures and ikons remained
in reverence (Tozer's note to Finlay, ii, 165; cp. Waddington, History
of the Church, 1833, p. 190, note). It is probable that the sheer loss
of artistic skill counted for much in the change. Cp. Milman, Latin
Christianity, bk. xiv, ch. ix; 4th ed. ix, 308-12. It is noteworthy
that, whereas in the struggle over images their use was for two long
periods legally abolished, it was in both cases restored by empresses
Irene and Theodora.

[1215] Hardwick, p. 80, note; Neander, vi, 340.

[1216] Cp. Kurtz, His. of the Chr. Church, Eng. tr. i, 271.

[1217] Gibbon, vi, 246; Finlay, iii, 64; Mosheim, 10 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. v.

[1218] Finlay, iii, 66.

[1219] Gibbon, as cited; R. Lane Poole, Illustrations of the History
of Medieval Thought, 1884, pp. 91-96; Mosheim, 11 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v.

[1220] Finlay, iii, 67-68; Mosheim, 12 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, §
2. Hardwick, pp. 302-305; Kurtz, i, 270-73.

[1221] Gieseler, Per. III, Div. II, pt. iii, § 46.

[1222] Gibbon, vi, 249, note; Poole, p. 91, note; De Potter, L'Esprit
de L'Église, 1821, vi, 16, note.

[1223] Boniface, Ep. lxvi, cited by Poole, p. 23; Reid's Mosheim,
p. 263, note 3; Neander, Hist. of the Christian Church, Bohn tr. v,
86-67; Hardwick, p. 23.

[1224] For excellent accounts of both see Mr. Poole's Illustrations,
pp. 28-50. As to Claudius cp. Monastier, Hist. of the Vaudois Church,
Eng. tr. 1848, pp. 13-42, and Faber, The Ancient Vallenses, bk. iii,
ch. iv.

[1225] See Mr. Poole's Illustrations, pp. 46-48, for an account of
the privileges then accorded to Jews.

[1226] This is not incompatible with their having opposed both Saracens
(Claudius in actual war) and Jews, as Christian bishops.

[1227] Poole, Illustrations, p. 37.

[1228] This when the Church found its account in adopting all such
usages. Lea, Superstition and Force, pp. 242, 280, etc. It is to be
noted, however, that one Council, that of Valence, 855, perhaps under
the influence of Agobard's teaching, published a canon prohibiting all
duels, and praying the emperor to abolish them. Cited by Waddington,
History of the Church, 1833, p. 242, note, from Fleury.

[1229] De Grandine et tonitruis, c. 3; and De imaginibus, c. 13,
cited by Reuter.

[1230] "He had the clearest head in the whole ninth century; and as an
influence (Mann der Tendenz) is above comparison" (Reuter, Gesch. der
religiösen Aufklärung im Mittelalter, i, 24). As to his acute handling
of the thorny question of reason and authority see Reuter, i, 40-41.

[1231] Poole, pp. 50-52.

[1232] Noack, Philosophie-Geschichtliches Lexikon, s. v. Rabanus. As
to the doubtful works in which Rabanus coincides with Scotus Erigena,
cp. Poole, p. 336; Noack, as cited; Ueberweg, i, 367-68.

[1233] Ueberweg, pp. 366, 371; Poole, pp. 99, 101, 336.

[1234] Ueberweg, pp. 356-65. That there was, however, an Irish
scholasticism as early as the eighth century is shown by Mosheim,
8 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, § 6, note 3. Cp. Huber, Johannes Scotus
Erigena, 1861, p. 428 sq.; Taillandier, Scot Erigène et la philosophie
scolastique, 1843, p. 198.

[1235] Lea, as cited, p. 280.

[1236] "The learned and freethinking guest of Charles le Chauve,"
Hardwick calls him, p. 176. It needed the protection of Charles to
save him from the orthodox, Hincmar included. See Ampère, Histoire
littéraire de la France, 1840, iii, 94-95, as to the anger against him.

[1237] See the whole argument summarized by Huber, p. 59 sq.

[1238] Cp. Poole, Illustrations, pp. 61, 63, 65; Neander, Bohn
tr. vi, 198 sq.; and the present writer's introd. to Shaftesbury's
Characteristics, ed. 1900, p. xxxiv. And see above, p. 184.

[1239] De divisione Naturæ, l. v; De Prædestinatione, c. 17; Poole,
pp. 71-72; Neander, vi, 198-99; Huber, as cited, p. 405.

[1240] In the treatise On the Division of Nature. See the extracts
given in the Cabinet Cyclopædia survey of Europe in the Middle Ages,
ii, 266-68. They prove, says the author of the survey, "that John
Erigena had none of the spirit of Christianity."

[1241] Poole, pp. 64, 76.

[1242] S. Robins, A Defence of the Faith, 1862, pp. 25-26.

[1243] Huber, pp. 435-40.

[1244] Cp. Neander, Hist. of the Chr. Church, Bohn tr. vi, 192.

[1245] De Corpore et Sanguine Domini, rep. Oxford, 1838, cc. 8-16,
29, 56, 72-76, etc.

[1246] C. 19: "Non sicut quidam volunt, anima sola hoc mysterio
pascitur." Neander, vi, 210.

[1247] Hardwick, pp. 178, 181; Neander, vi, 217.

[1248] Cp. Neander, vi, 219.

[1249] Poole, p. 69.

[1250] C. 6: "Ineptas quæstiunculas et aniles pæne fabulas Scotorumque
pultes." Neander, vi, 207.

[1251] Neander, vi, 219, citing Mabillon, Analecta, i, 207.

[1252] Compare the Gemma Ecclesiastica of Giraldus Cambrensis for an
inside view of the avarice of the clergy in his day.

[1253] Neander, Hist. of the Chr. Church, v, 187. See the whole section
for a good account of the general economic and moral evolution. Neander
repeatedly (pp. 186-87) insists on the "magical" element in the
doctrine of the mass, as established by Gregory the Great.

[1254] See Neander, as cited, v, 183. The point was well put some
centuries later by the Italian story-teller Masuccio, an orthodox
Catholic but a vehement anti-clericalist, in a generalization
concerning the monks: "The best punishment for them would be for
God to abolish Purgatory; they would then receive no more alms, and
would be forced to go back to their spades." Cited by Burckhardt,
The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy, Eng. tr. 1892, p. 461.

[1255] Neander, vi, 182. Rabanus Maurus distinctly belied him on this
score. (Id. p. 183.)

[1256] Formerly, only the saved had been spoken of as prædestinati,
the reprobate being called præsciti. Neander, vi, 181.

[1257] Neander, vi, 187. Cp. Hampden, Bampton Lectures on The
Scholastic Philosophy, 3rd ed. p. 418; and Ampère, Histoire littéraire
de France, 1840, iii, 92.

[1258] Poole, p. 103. Cp. Neander, vi, 225.

[1259] Neander, vi, 237-38.

[1260] Id. pp. 255-56.

[1261] Id. p. 257.

[1262] Id. p. 258. As to the wide extent of the discussion see Reuter,
Geschichte der religiösen Aufklärung im Mittelalter, i, 112.

[1263] In 945, however, Atto, Bishop of Verceil, is found complaining
that some people from the Italian border had introduced heresies.

[1264] Mosheim, 10 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 3; Poole, Illustrations,
p. 91.

[1265] Hardwick, p. 203.

[1266] Kurtz, History of the Christian Church, Eng. tr. 1868, i, 435.

[1267] Hénault, Abrégé chronologique, ann. 1022; Neander, Hist. of
the Chr. Relig. and Church, Eng. tr. Bohn ed. vi, 349 sq.; Mosheim, 10
Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 3; De Potter, L'Esprit de l'Église, vi, 18-19;
Poole, pp. 96-98; Lea, History of the Inquisition, i, 104, 108-109,
218; Gieseler, Per. III, Div. ii, § 46. The contemporary accounts
say nothing as to the heretics being Manicheans. Neander, p. 350, note.

[1268] Cp. Murdock's note on Mosheim, Reid's ed. p. 386; Monastier,
Hist. of the Vaudois Church, p. 33; Waddington, p. 356; Hardwick,
p. 203, note, and p. 207.

[1269] De Potter, pp. 20-21; Gieseler, as cited, p. 497; Lea, i,
104, 109.

[1270] Mosheim, as last cited, § 4; Gieseler, ii, 496 (§ 46); Hardwick,
pp. 203, 204.

[1271] Mosheim. 11 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 2, and Murdock's notes;
12 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, §§ 4, 5.

[1272] Hardwick, p. 306; Kurtz, i, 433. The derivation through
the Italian is however disputed. Cp. Murdock's note to Mosheim,
Reid's ed. p. 385, and Gieseler, ii, 486. The Chazari, a Turkish
(Crimean) people, partly Christian and partly Moslem in the ninth
century (Gieseler, as cited), may have given the name of Gazzari, as
Bulgar gave Bougre; and the German Ketzer may have come directly from
Chazar. The Christianity of the Chazars, influenced by neighbourhood
with Islam, seems to have been a very free syncretism.

[1273] Cp. Gieseler, Per. III, §§ 24, 34; Abbé Queant, Gerbert, ou
Sylvestre II, 1868, pp. 3-5, citing Chevé, Histoire des papes, t. ii,
and Baronius, Annales, ad ann. 900, n. 1; Mosheim, 9 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. ii, §§ 1-4; with his and Murdock's refs.; 10 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. ii, §§ 1, 2; 11 Cent. pt. ii, ch. ii, § 1; ch. iii, §§ 1-3;
12 Cent. pt. ii, ch. ii, § 1; 13 Cent. pt. ii, ch. ii, §§ 1-7. The
authorities are often eminent Churchmen, as Agobard, Ratherius,
Bernard, and Gregory VIII.

[1274] See Mosheim, 8 Cent. pt. ii, ch. ii, § 5, note z. Cp. Duruy,
Hist. de France, ii, 170.

[1275] Cp. Prof. Abdy, Lectures on Feudalism, 1890, p. 72.

[1276] Mosheim, 12 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 6.

[1277] Cp. Morin, Origines de la démocratie, 3e éd. pp. 164-65;
Mosheim, 10 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, § 3.

[1278] Morin, p. 168. Compare, on the whole communal movement, Duruy,
Hist. de France, ch. xxi, and Michelet.

[1279] Gieseler, Per. III, § 46, end; Lea, i, 109, 218.

[1280] Monastier, Hist. of the Vaudois Ch., p. 32; Lea, i, 110.

[1281] Bryce, The Holy Roman Empire, 8th ed. p. 134. See p. 135 for a
list of John's offences; and cp. p. 85 as to other papal records. For
a contemporary account of Pope Honorius II (d. 1130) see Milman,
Latin Christianity, iii, 448-49.

[1282] Hallam, Middle Ages, 11th ed. ii, 174.

[1283] Cp. Müller, Allgemeine Geschichte, B. xiv, Cap. 17.

[1284] Bryce, p. 152.

[1285] "Janus," The Pope and the Councils, Eng. tr. pp. 178-79.

[1286] Cp. Heeren, Essai sur l'influence des Croisades, 1808, p. 172.

[1287] Sir G. Cox, The Crusades, p. 111.

[1288] Cp. Lea, i, 111.

[1289] Id. p. 115.

[1290] Hardwick, p. 310; Lea, i, 68; Reuter, Gesch. der religiösen
Aufklärung im Mittelalter, i, 148-49; Mosheim, as last cited, § 7.

[1291] Cp. Motley, Rise of the Dutch Republic, ed. 1863, p. 36.

[1292] Mosheim, 12 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, §§ 7-9, and varior. notes;
Monastier, pp. 38-41, 43-47; Milman, Latin Christianity, v, 384-90.

[1293] Hardwick, p. 267; Mosheim, as last cited, § 10; Monastier,
p. 49.

[1294] Hardwick, p. 204, note; Kurtz, i, 433. Cp. the Transactions
of the New Shakespeare Society, 1875-76, pt. ii, p. 313; Mosheim, 11
Cent. pt. ii, ch. ii, § 13, and note; Milman, Latin Christianity, v,
401. On the sects in general see De Potter, vi, 217-310; and Cantù,
Gli Eretici d'Italia, 1865, i, 149-53.

[1295] Lea, i, 115.

[1296] Id. pp. 117-18.

[1297] Id. p. 119.

[1298] Kurtz, i, 435; Lea, i, 119.

[1299] Hardwick, p. 308, note; Murdock's note to Mosheim, p. 426;
Monastier, pp. 106-107.

[1300] Lea, i, 124.

[1301] Id. p. 126.

[1302] Id. pp. 127-28.

[1303] Kitchin, History of France, 4th ed. 1889, i, 286; citing
Chron. de St. Denis, p. 350. The Annales Victoriani at Philip's death
(1223) pronounce him ecclesiarum et religionarum personarum amator
et fautor (Hénault's Abrégé Chronologique). Among the many Cathari
put to death in his reign was Nicholas, the most famous painter in
France--burned at Braine in 1204. Lea, i, 131.

[1304] Lea, i, 113-14. Cp. Ranke, Hist. of the Popes,
Eng. tr. 1-vol. ed. p. 13.

[1305] Cp. Hardwick, p. 312; Mosheim, 12 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, §
11, and notes in Reid's ed.; Monastier, Hist. of the Vaudois Church,
Eng. tr. 1848, pp. 12-29; Faber, The Ancient Vallenses and Albigenses,
pp. 28, 284, etc. As Vigilantius took refuge in the Cottian Alps,
his doctrine may have survived there, as argued by Monastier (p. 10)
and Faber (p. 290). The influence of Claudius of Turin, as they further
contend, might also come into play. On the whole subject see Gieseler,
Per. III, Div. iii, § 88.

[1306] Cp. Mosheim with Faber, bk. iii, chs. iii, viii; Hardwick,
as cited; and Monastier, pp. 53-82. Waddington, p. 353, holds Mosheim
to be in error; and there are some grounds for dating the Waldensian
heresy before Waldus, who flourished 1170-1180 (id. p. 354). Waldus had
to flee from France, and finally died in Bohemia, 1197 (Kurtz, i, 439).

[1307] Cp. Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, i, 73-88. Waldensian theology
varied from time to time.

[1308] Between 1153 and 1191 there were ten popes, three of them
anti-popes. Celestine III held the chair from 1191 to 1198; and
Innocent III from the latter year to 1216.

[1309] De Potter, vi, 26; Lea, i, 115.

[1310] Lea, i, 290.

[1311] De Potter, vi, 28.

[1312] See Bartoli, Storia della Letteratura Italiana, 1878, i,
262, note, also his I Precursori del Renascimento, 1877, p. 37. In
this section and in the next chapter I am indebted for various clues
to the Rev. John Owen's Skeptics of the Italian Renaissance. As to
the Goliards generally, see that work, pp. 38-45; Bartoli, Storia,
cap. viii; Milman, Latin Christianity, bk. xiv, ch. iv; and Gebhart,
Les Origines de la Renaissance en Italie, 1879, pp. 125-26. The name
Goliard came from the type-name Golias, used by many satirists.

[1313] Bartoli, Storia, i, 271-79. Cp. Schlegel's note to Mosheim,
Reid's ed. p. 332, following Ratherius; and Gebhart, as cited. Milman
(4th ed. ix, 189) credits the Goliards with "a profound respect for
sacred things, and freedom of invective against sacred persons." This
shows an imperfect knowledge of much of their work.

[1314] C. Lenient, La Satire en France au moyen âge, 1859, pp. 38-39.

[1315] Owen, as cited, pp. 43, 45; Bartoli, Storia, i, 293.

[1316] Disparagement of the serf is a commonplace of medieval
literature. Langlois, La Vie en France au moyen âge, 1908, p. 169,
and note; Lanson, Hist. de la litt. française, p. 96. At this point
the semi-aristocratic jongleurs and the writers of bourgeois bias, such
as some of the contributors to Reynard the Fox, coincided. The Renart
stories are at once anti-aristocratic, anti-clerical, and anti-demotic.

[1317] C. Lenient, La Satire en France, p. 115. Lenient cites from
Erasmus's letters (Sept. 1, 1528) a story of a German burned alive
in his time for venting the same idea.

[1318] Langlois, as cited, pp. 30-68.

[1319] Cp. Langlois, pp. 107, 129, 263, etc. C. Lenient, as cited,
p. 115.

[1320] Rev. Joseph Berington, Literary History of the Middle Ages,
ed. 1846, p. 229. Cp. Owen, p. 43.

[1321] Owen, p. 43; Bartoli, Storia, i, 295, as to the French fabliaux.

[1322] Labitte, La divine comédie avant Dante, in Charpentier ed. of
Dante, pp. 133-34.

[1323] Aucassin and Nicolette, tr. by Eugene Mason, p. 6.

[1324] Sismondi, Literature of Southern Europe, Eng. tr. i, 74-95.

[1325] Id. p. 76.

[1326] Zeller, Histoire d'Italie, 1853, p. 152; Renan, Averroès,
p. 184.

[1327] "The Troubadours in truth were freethinkers" (Owen, Italian
Skeptics, p. 48). Cp. Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, ii, 2; and
Hardwick, p. 274, note 4, as to the common animus against the papacy.

[1328] Heeren, Essai sur l'influence des Croisades, French tr. 1808,
p. 174, note; Owen, Italian Skeptics, p. 44, note.

[1329] Abbé Queant, Gerbert, ou Sylvestre II, 1868, pp. 30-31.

[1330] Sismondi, as cited, p. 82; Owen, pp. 66, 68; Mosheim, 11
Cent. pt. ii, ch. i, § 4; 12 Cent. pt. ii, ch. i, § 9, and Reid's
note to § 8; Hampden, Bampton Lectures, p. 446. The familiar record
that Gerbert, afterwards Pope Sylvester II, studied in Spain among
the Arabs (Ueberweg, i, 369) has of late years been discredited
(Olleris, Vie de Gerbert, 1867, chs. ii and xxv; Ueberweg, p. 430;
Poole, Illustrations, p. 88); but its very currency depended on
the commonness of some such proceeding in his age. In any case,
the teaching he would receive at the Spanish monastery of Borel
would owe all its value to Saracen culture. Cp. Abbé Queant, Gerbert,
pp. 26-32. The greatness of the service he rendered to northern Europe
in introducing the Arabic numerals is expressed in the legend of his
magical powers. Compare the legends as to Roger Bacon.

[1331] Sismondi, p. 83.

[1332] Cp. G. H. Lewes, The Spanish Drama, 1846, pp. 11-14; Littré,
Études sur les barbares et le moyen âge, 3e édit. p. 356.

[1333] See the passages cited by Owen, p. 58.

[1334] Cp. Bartoli, Storia, pp. 200-202.

[1335] Gebhart, Les Origines de la Renaissance, pp. 4, 17; Renan,
Averroès et l'Averroïsme, pp. 145, 183, 185; Libri, Hist. des
sciences mathématiques en Italie, i, 153; Michelet, Hist. de France,
t. vii, Renaissance, introd. note du § vii; Hauréau, Hist. de la
philos. scolastique, i, 382. Cp. Franck, Études Orientales, 1861,
p. 357.

[1336] As to the Pope's character compare Sismondi, Hist. of the
Crusades against the Albigenses (Eng. tr. from vols. vi and vii of his
Histoire des Français), p. 10; Hallam, Europe during the Middle Ages,
11th ed. ii, 198; Mosheim, 13 Cent. pt. ii, ch. ii, §§ 6-8.

[1337] As to previous acts of inquisition and persecution by
Pope Alexander III (noted above) see Llorente, Hist. Crit. de
l'Inquisition en Espagne, French tr. 2e édit. i, 27-30, and Lea,
History of the Inquisition, i, 118. Cp. Gieseler, Per. III, Div. iii,
§ 89 (Amer. ed. ii, 564).

[1338] Hardwick, p. 309; Lea, i, 145.

[1339] Sismondi, Crusades against the Albigenses, p. 21.

[1340] On the previous history of indulgences see Lea, History of the
Inquisition, i, 41-47; De Potter, Esprit de l'Église, vii, 22-39. For
the later developments cp. Lea's Studies in Church History, 1869,
p. 450; Vieusseux, History of Switzerland, 1840, pp. 121, 125.

[1341] Sismondi, Crusades, pp. 28-29.

[1342] Id. p. 23.

[1343] Lea, i, 149.

[1344] For a modern Catholic defence of the whole proceedings see
the Comte de Montalembert's Histoire de Sainte Elisabeth de Hongrie,
13e édit. intr. pp. 35-40.

[1345] Sismondi, Crusades, p. 35, and refs.; Lea, i, 154.

[1346] Sismondi, pp. 36-37, and refs.

[1347] Id. pp. 37-43.

[1348] Id. pp. 21, 41. Cp. p. 85 as to later treachery towards
Saracens; and p. 123 as to the deeds of the Bishop of Toulouse. See
again pp. 140-42 as to the massacre of Marmande.

[1349] As to the international character of the crusade see Sismondi,
Crusades, p. 53.

[1350] Sismondi, p. 62 sq.

[1351] Pp. 77, 78.

[1352] Pp. 74, 75.

[1353] P. 87. "The worship of the reformed Albigenses had everywhere
ceased" (p. 115). Cp. p. 116 as to the completeness of the final
massacres. It is estimated (Monastier, p. 115, following De la
Mothe-Langon) that a million Albigenses were slain in the first half
of the thirteenth century. The figures are of course speculative.

[1354] Cp. Lea, ii, 159; Lenient, La Satire en France an moyen âge,
1859, p. 43.

[1355] Lea, vol. ii, ch. i.

[1356] Sismondi, pp. 115, 117.

[1357] Id. p. 133.

[1358] Id. pp. 235-39; Lea, ii, 247, 259, 319, 347, 429, etc.

[1359] Sismondi, p. 236; Llorente, as cited, i, 60-64; Lea, ii, 200.

[1360] Matthew Paris records that in 1249 four hundred and forty-three
heretics were burned in Saxony and Pomerania. Previously multitudes
had been burned by the Inquisitor Conrad, who was himself finally
murdered in revenge. He was the confessor of Saint Elizabeth of
Hungary, and he taught her among other things, "Be merciful to your
neighbour," and "Do to others whatsoever you would that they should do
to you." See his praises recorded by Montalembert, as cited, vol. i,
ch. x. Cp. Gieseler, Per. III, Div. iii, § 89 (ii, 567).

[1361] Lea, ii, 204. This was the "peace-maker" described by Dr. Lea
as--in that capacity--"so worthy a disciple of the Great Teacher of
divine love" (i, 240).

[1362] Ueberweg, i, 366; Poole, pp. 99, 100.

[1363] As to the verbal confusion of Aristotle's theory see Ueberweg.

[1364] Id. i, 160.

[1365] Id. i, 375.

[1366] Cp. Mosheim's note, Reid's ed. p. 388.

[1367] Ueberweg, i, 374.

[1368] Poole, p. 104, note; Milman, Latin Christianity, 4th ed. i, 54.

[1369] Hampden, Bampton Lectures, On the Scholastic Philosophy, 1848,
p. 71.

[1370] Mosheim, as cited, and refs.

[1371] Hampden, p. 70.

[1372] A. S. Farrar, Crit. Hist. of Freethought, 1862, p. 111. Farrar
adds: "'Neque enim quaero intelligere ut credam, set credo ut
intelligam' are the words of the Realist Anselm (Prolog. i, 43,
ed. Gerberon): 'Dubitando ad inquisitionem venimus; inquirendo
veritatem percipimus' are those of the Nominalist Abailard (Sic et Non,
p. 16, ed. Cousin)."

[1373] Cp. Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, i, ch. 19,
as to orthodoxy among both Nominalists and Realists.

[1374] Hampden, pp. 70, 449.

[1375] Cp. Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, iii, 550.

[1376] Poole, Illustr. of the Hist. of Medieval Thought, pp. 104-105.

[1377] Præfatio in Monologium.

[1378] As to the various classes of doubters known to Anselm see
Reuter, Gesch. der religiösen Aufklärung im Mittelalter, i, 129-31,
and refs. Anselm writes: Fides enim nostra contra impios ratione
defenda est. Epist. ii, 41.

[1379] Ueberweg, i, 381.

[1380] See it in Ueberweg, i, 384-85; cp. Ch. de Rémusat, Saint
Anselme, 1853, pp. 61-62; Dean Church, Saint Anselm, ed. 1888,
pp. 86-87. As to previous instances of Anselm's argument cp. Poole,
Illustrations, p. 338 sq.

[1381] Cp. Ueberweg, i, 379-80.

[1382] Cited by Hampden, Bampton Lect. p. 443.

[1383] Metalogicus, vii, 2; Poole, p. 223.

[1384] Gemma Ecclesiastica, Distinctio i, c. 51; Works, ed. Brewer,
Rolls Series, ii, 148-49; pref. p. xxxv.

[1385] Cp. Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, Ptie. II (1880),
i, 61. Hauréau points out that Simon's writings are strictly orthodox,
whatever his utterances may have been.

[1386] Distinctio, ii, c. 24; pp. liv, 285.

[1387] Cp. Pearson, Hist. of England during the Early and Middle Ages,
ii, 504.

[1388] The Saynt Graal, ed. Furnivall, 1861, pp. 7, 84; History of
the Holy Grail, ed. Furnivall, 1874, pp. 5-7; Pearson, as cited,
i, 606-607.

[1389] Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, i, 1870, p. 502.

[1390] Poole, pp. 141-42.

[1391] "Humanas ac philosophicas rationes requirebant; et plus quæ
intelligi quam quæ dici possent efflagitabant" (Historia calamitatum
mearum, ed. Gréard, p. 36).

[1392] Id. ib.

[1393] Ueberweg, i, 387.

[1394] Ueberweg, i, 391. Cp. Milman, Latin Christianity, ix, 111.

[1395] Ueberweg, i, 394-95.

[1396] Hampden, Bampton Lect. pp. 420-21.

[1397] Poole, p. 175. It is not impossible that, as Sismondi suggests
(Histoire des Français, ed. 1823, v, 294-96), Abailard was persecuted
mainly because of the dangerous anti-papal movement maintained in Italy
for fifteen years (1139-1155) by his doctrinally orthodox pupil, Arnold
of Brescia. But Hampden (p. 40), agreeing with Guizot (Hist. de Civ. en
Europe; Hist. mod. Leçon 6), pronounces that "there was no sympathy
between the efforts of the Italian Republics to obtain social liberty,
and those within the Church to recover personal freedom of thought."

[1398] Poole, pp. 117-23, 169.

[1399] Ueberweg, i, 398.

[1400] Poole, p. 173.

[1401] Cp. Poole, p. 153. It is difficult to doubt that the series
of patristic deliverances against reason in the first section of Sic
et Non was compiled by Abailard in a spirit of dissent.

[1402] Cp. Hardwick, p. 279; and see p. 275, note, for Bernard's
dislike of his demand for clearness: "Nihil videt per speculum et in
aenigmate, sed facie ad faciem omnia intuetur."

[1403] Poole, p. 161. Cp. Dr. Hastings Rashdall on the "pious
scurrility" of Bernard. The Universities of Europe in the Middle
Ages, 1895, i, 57, note. Contrast the singularly laudatory account
of St. Bernard given by two contemporary Positivists, Mr. Cotter
Morison in his Life and Times of St. Bernard, and Mr. F. Harrison
in his essay on that work in his Choice of Books. The subject is
discussed in the present writer's paper on "The Ethics of Propaganda"
in Essays in Ethics.

[1404] Erdmann, History of Philosophy, Eng. tr. 3rd ed. i, 325.

[1405] Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, i (1872), 534-46.

[1406] Id. citing the Polycraticus, l. vii, c. 2.

[1407] Polycraticus, l. vii, c. 7.

[1408] Cp. Poole, pp. 220-22; the extracts of Hampden, pp. 438-43;
and the summing-up of Hauréau. Hist. de la philos. scolastique, i
(1870), 357.

[1409] Historia calamitatum, as cited. Cp. p. 10 for Abailard's own
opinion of Anselm of Laon, whom he compares to a leafy but fruitless
tree.

[1410] Matthew Paris, sub. ann. 1201. There is a somewhat
circumstantial air about this story, Simon's reply being made to begin
humorously with a Jesule. Jesule! Matthew, however, tells on this
item the story of Simon's miraculous punishment which Giraldus tells
on a quite different text. Matthew is indignant with the scholastic
arrogance which has led many to "suppress" the miracle.

[1411] Ueberweg, i, 419, 430; Hampden, p. 443 sq. Cp. Renan, Averroès,
p. 173 sq.

[1412] Ueberweg, i, 418. The Karaïtes may be described as Jewish
Protestants or Puritans. Cp. Schechter, Studies in Judaism, 1896,
pp. 252-54.

[1413] Schechter (as cited, pp. 197, 417) gives two sets of dates,
the second being 1135-1204.

[1414] For a good survey of the medieval Hebrew thought in general
see Joel, Beiträge zur Gesch. der Philos. 1876; and as to Maimonides
see A. Franck's Études Orientales, 1861; Hauréau, Hist. de la
philos. scolastique, Ptie II, i, 41-46; and Renan, Averroès,
pp. 177-82.

[1415] Schechter, Studies in Judaism, pp. 422-23.

[1416] Id. p. 208.

[1417] Ueberweg, i, 428; Schechter, p. 424.

[1418] Renan, Averroès, p. 183.

[1419] Schechter, pp. 83-85.

[1420] Hauréau pronounces (II, i, 29-34) that Avicebron should be
ranked among the most sincere and resolute of pantheists. His chief
work was the Fons vitæ.

[1421] Renan, Averroès, pp. 100, 175.

[1422] Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, c. 8, ad init.

[1423] Mémoires de Joinville, ed. 1871, ii, 16.

[1424] Renan, Averroès, pp. 222-24.

[1425] Huber, Johannes Scotus Erigena, p. 435; Christlieb, Leben und
Lehre des Johannes Scotus Erigena, 1860, p. 438. Copies of John's
writings were found in the hands of the sectaries of Amalrich and
David; and in 1226 the writings in question were condemned and burnt
accordingly. Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, i, 175.

[1426] Ueberweg, i, 388, 431; Milman, Latin Christianity, ix, 112-14;
Renan, p. 223; Hahn, Geschichte der Ketzer im Mittelalter, 1845-50,
iii, 176-92.

[1427] Mosheim, 13 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 12.

[1428] Poole, p. 225; Ueberweg, i, 431.

[1429] Lecky's description (Rationalism in Europe, ed. 1887, i, 48)
of Averroïsm as a "stern and uncompromising infidelity" is hopelessly
astray.

[1430] Summa Theologica, Prima Secundae, Quæst. LXXXV, Art. 6. Compare
Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, i, 189, for a trace of
the idea of natura naturans in John Scotus and Heiric, in the ninth
century.

[1431] Renan, p. 236 sq.

[1432] Cp. Reuter, Gesch. der religiösen Aufklärung im Mittelalter,
ii, 130.

[1433] Milman, Latin Christianity, 4th ed. ix, 133.

[1434] Robins. A Defence of the Faith, 1862, pt. i, pp. 38-39. Compare
Rashdall, Universities in the Middle Ages, i, 264; and Maurice,
Medieval Philosophy, 2nd ed. pp. 188-90. It is noteworthy that the
Summa of Thomas was a favourite study of Descartes, who read hardly
any other theologian.

[1435] Cp. Milman, ix, 143.

[1436] See the comments of Giraldus Cambrensis in the proem to
his Speculum Ecclesiæ Brewer's ed. in Rolls Series, i. 9; and
pref. pp. xii-xiii.

[1437] Cp. Renan. Averroès, p. 267, as to the polemic of William
of Auvergne.

[1438] Renan, pp. 567-68.

[1439] Id. pp. 269-71, and refs.

[1440] Renan, pp. 273-75, and refs.; Ueberweg, i, 460, and refs.;
Maywald, Die Lehre von der zweifachen Wahrheit, 1871, p. 11; Lange,
i, 182 (tr. i, 218).

[1441] Of John XXI, who had in 1276 condemned the doctrine of a
twofold truth.

[1442] Cp. Gebhart, Origines de la Renaissance, pp. 29-44. And see
above, p. 308.

[1443] Berington, Lit. Hist. of the Middle Ages, p. 245. See above,
p. 310.

[1444] See the Summa of the Inquisitor Bartholomæus Fumus, Venet. 1554,
s.v. Infidelitas, fol. 261, § 5; and the Summa of Thomas, Secunda
Secundæ, Quæst. X, Art. 2.

[1445] It is sometimes described as a formidable product of doubt;
and again by M. de Rémusat as "consecrated to controversy rather than
to skepticism." Cp. Pearson, Hist. of England in the Early and Middle
Ages, 1867, i. 609. The view in the text seems the just mean. Cp. Lea,
Hist. of the Inquisition, i. 57. In itself the book is for a modern
reader a mere collection of the edifying contradictions of theologians;
but such a collection must in any age have been a perplexity to faith;
and it is not surprising that it remained unpublished until edited
by Cousin (see the Ouvrages inédits, intr. pp. clxxxv-ix). That
writer justly sums up that such antinomies "condamnent l'esprit à un
doute salutaire." The Rev. A. S. Farrar pronounces that "the critical
independence of Nominalism, in a mind like that of Abailard, represents
the destructive action of freethought, partly as early Protestantism,
partly as skepticism" (Crit. Hist. of Freethought, p. 12).

[1446] Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, i, 421-22, 556-58, 575; U. Burke,
Hist. of Spain, Hume's ed. 1900, ii, 351-52. For a detailed description
of the methods of ecclesiastical torture, Burke refers to the treatise,
De Catholicis Institutionibus, by Simancas, Bishop of Beja, Rome,
1575, tit. lxv, De Tormentis, p. 491 sq.

[1447] Torture was inflicted on witnesses in England in 1311, by
special inquisitors, under the mandate of Clement V, in defiance of
English law; and under Edward II it was used in England as elsewhere
against the Templars.

[1448] Istorie fiorentine, iv, 29.

[1449] See below, p. 325.

[1450] Villari, Two First Centuries of Florentine History,
Eng. tr. 1901, pp. 110-12.

[1451] Reuter, Gesch. der religiösen Aufklärung im Mittelalter, i, 167.

[1452] Id. i, 164-66.

[1453] The Moslems were inclined to regard him as of their creed
"because educated in Sicily." Cantù, Gli Eretici d'Italia, 1865, i, 66.

[1454] See Gieseler, as cited below; and Reid's Mosheim, p. 437, note.

[1455] Milman, Latin Christianity, vi, 150; Lea, Hist. of the
Inquisition, i, 221.

[1456] Milman, vi, 150, 158.

[1457] Renan, Averroès, p. 289.

[1458] Renan, Averroès, pp. 205-10. Michael Scotus may have been, like
John Scotus, an Irishman, but his refusal to accept the archbishopric
of Cashel, on the ground that he did not know the native language,
makes this doubtful. The identification of him with a Scottish knight,
Sir Michael Scott, still persisted in by some scholars on the strength
of Sir Walter Scott's hasty note to The Lay of the Last Minstrel,
is destitute of probability. See the Rev. J. Wood Brown's Inquiry
into the Life and Legend of Michael Scot, 1897, pp. 160-61, 175-76.

[1459] Inferno, xx, 515-17.

[1460] Cantù, Gli Eretici d'Italia, i, 65-66; the Pope's letter,
as cited; Renan, Averroès, pp. 287-91, 296.

[1461] See the verdict of Gieseler, Eng. tr. iii (1853), p. 103, note.

[1462] Milman, vi, 158-59.

[1463] Id. p. 154. Cp. the author's Evolution of States, 1912, p. 382.

[1464] G. Villani, Istorie fiorentine, vi, 46.

[1465] Mosheim, 13 Cent. pt. i, ch. ii, § 2, citing in particular
Moneta's Summa contra Catharos et Valdenses, lib. V, cc. 4, 11, 15;
Tempier (bishop of Paris), Indiculum Errorum (1272) in the Bibliotheca
Patrum Maxima, t. xxv; Bulæus, Hist. Acad. Paris, iii, 433--as to the
Averroïsts at Paris, described above, p. 319. Cp. Renan, Averroès,
pp. 230-31, citing William of Auvergne, and pp. 283, 285; Ozanam,
Dante, 6e édit. pp. 86, 101, 111-12; Gebhart, Origines de la Renais,
pp. 79-81; Lange, i, 182 (tr. i, 218); Sharon Turner, Hist. of England
during the Middle Ages, 2nd ed. v, 136-38.

[1466] Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, iii, 560-61.

[1467] Perrens, La civilisation florentine du 13e au 16e siècle,
1892, p. 101. Above, p. 322.

[1468] Inferno, Canto x, 14-15, 118.

[1469] Ottavio Ubaldini, d. 1273, of whom the commentators tell that
he said that if there were such a thing as a soul he had lost his
for the cause of the Ghibellines.

[1470] As to whom see Renan, Averroès, p. 285, note; Gebhart,
Renaissance, p. 81. His son Guido, "the first friend and the companion
of all the youth of Dante," was reputed an atheist (Decameron, vi,
9). Cp. Cesare Balbo, Vita di Dante, ed. 1853, pp. 48-49. But see Owen,
Skeptics of the Ital. Renais., p. 138, note.

[1471] In the Convito, ii, 9, he writes that, "among all the
bestialities, that is the most foolish, the most vile, the most
damnable, which believes no other life to be after this life." Another
passage (iv, 5) heaps curses on the "most foolish and vile beasts
... who presume to speak against our Faith."

[1472] Cp. Ozanam, Dante, 6e édit. pp. 111-12, as to anti-Christian
movements.

[1473] Lecky, Rationalism in Europe, i, 83, note; Renan, Averroès,
pp. 326-27; Cantù, Gli Eretici d'Italia, i, 177. and note 13 on p. 196.

[1474] Cp. Labitte, La Divine Comédie avant Dante, as cited, p. 139.

[1475] Michelet argues that Italy was "anti-Dantesque" in the
Renaissance (Hist. de France, vii, Intr. § 9 and App.), but he
exaggerates the common disregard of the Commedia.

[1476] As to an element of doubt, even in Dante, concerning Divine
government, see Burckhardt, p. 497. But the attempt made by some
critics to show that the "sins" to which Dante confessed had been
intellectual--i.e., heresies--falls to the ground. See Döllinger,
Studies in European History, Eng. tr. 1890, pp. 87-90; and cp. Cantù,
Gli Eretici d'Italia, i, 144 sq. on the whole question.

[1477] Cesare Balbo, Vita di Dante, ed. 1853, pp. 416-17, 433.

[1478] Cantù. Eretici d' Italia, i, 153. Cantù gives an account of
the trial process.

[1479] G. Villani, x, 39. It is to be noted that the horoscope of Jesus
was cast by several professed believers, as Albertus Magnus and Pierre
d'Ailli, Cardinal and Bishop of Cambrai, as well as by Cardan. See
Bayle, art. Cardan, note Q; and cp. Renan, Averroès, p. 326.

[1480] Cp. Owen, pp. 128, 135-42; Hallam, Lit. Hist., i, 141-42;
Milman, bk. xiv, ch. v, end.

[1481] Decam., Gior. i, nov. 2.

[1482] Gior. i, nov. 3.

[1483] Dr. Marcus Landau, Die Quellen des Dekameron, 2te Aufl. 1884,
p. 182.

[1484] The story is recorded to have been current among the
Motecallemîn--a party kindred to the Motazilites--in Bagdad. Renan,
Averroès, p. 293, citing Dozy. Renan thinks it may have been of Jewish
origin. Id. p. 294, note.

[1485] Schechter, Studies in Judaism, 1896, pp. 207-208.

[1486] It is found some time before Boccaccio in the Cento Novelle
antiche (No. 72 or 73) in a simpler form; but Landau (p. 183) thinks
Boccaccio's immediate source was the version of Busone da Gubbio
(b. 1280), who had improved on the version in the Cento Novelle,
while Boccaccio in turn improved on him by treating the Jew more
tolerantly. Bartoli (I Precursori del Boccaccio, 1876, pp. 26-28)
disputes any immediate debt to Busone; as does Owen, Skeptics of the
Ital. Renais., p. 29, note.

[1487] Burckhardt (Renaissance in Italy, p. 493, note) points out that
Boccaccio is the first to name the Christian religion, his Italian
predecessors avoiding the idea; and that in one eastern version the
story is used polemically against the Christians.

[1488] Owen, p. 142, and refs.

[1489] Id. pp. 143-45. He was even so far terrorized by the menaces
of a monk (who appeared to him to have occult knowledge of some of
his secrets) as to propose to give up his classical studies; and
would have done so but for Petrarch's dissuasion. Petrarch's letter
(Epist. Senil., i, 5) is translated (Lett. xii) by M. Develay,
Lettres de Péttrarque à Boccace.

[1490] Gasquet, The Great Pestilence, 1893, pp. 28, 32, 37, and refs.

[1491] Id. pp. 11, 41.

[1492] Probably 25,000 in England alone, including monks. Id. p. 204.

[1493] Id. pp. 205-208, 213, 216.

[1494] Below, § 11.

[1495] As to his anti-clericalism, cp. Gebhart, Orig. de la Renais.,
p. 71, and ref.; Owen, p. 113.

[1496] Cp. Rashdall, Universities in the Middle Ages, i, 264.

[1497] See the exposition of Owen, pp. 109-28. and refs. on p. 113.

[1498] Renan, Averroès, p. 328.

[1499] Méziéres, Pétrarque, 1868, p. 362.

[1500] It is to be noted that in his opposition to the scholastics
he had predecessors. Cp. Gebhart, Orig. de la Renais., p. 65.

[1501] Owen, p. 113. It is to be remembered that Dante also (Convito,
ii, 8, 9; iii, 14; iv, 7) exalts Reason; but he uses the word in the
old sense of mere mentality--the thinking as distinguished from the
sensuous element in man; and he was fierce against all resort to reason
as against faith. Petrarch was of course more of a rationalist. As to
his philosophic skepticism, see Owen, p. 120. He drew the line only
at doubting those things "in which doubt is sacrilege." Nevertheless
he grounded his belief in immortality not on the Christian creed,
but on the arguments of the pagans (Burckhardt, p. 546).

[1502] Epist. sine titulo, cited by Renan, Averroès, p. 299. For the
phrases put in Averroës' mouth by Christians, see pp. 294-98.

[1503] Inferno, iv, 144.

[1504] Renan, Averroès, pp. 301-15.

[1505] Id. pp. 333-37; Cantù, Gli Eretici d'ltalia, i, 176 and refs.

[1506] Renan, pp. 326-27.

[1507] Id. pp. 318-20.

[1508] Justinger, cited in The Pope and the Council, Eng. tr. p. 298.

[1509] Hardwick, p. 357, note.

[1510] Cp. Bonnechose, Reformers before the the Reformation,
Eng. tr. 1844, i, 40-43.

[1511] "Janus" (i.e. Döllinger), The Pope and the Council, Eng. tr. 2nd
ed. 1869, pp. 292-95. This weighty work, sometimes mistakenly ascribed
to Huber, who collaborated in it, was recast by commission and
posthumously published as Das Papstthum, by J. Friedrich, München,
1892.

[1512] Hallam, Middle Ages, 11th ed. ii, 218; Lea, Hist. of the
Inquis., i, 5-34; Gieseler, § 90 (ii, 572); Freytag, Bilder aus der
deutschen Vergangenheit, 4te aufl. ii, 318-19.

[1513] The Pope and the Council, p. 220. For proofs see same work,
pp. 220-34.

[1514] "La satire est la plus complète manifestation de la pensée
libre au moyen âge. Dans ce monde ou le dogmatisme impitoyable au
sein de l'Église et de l'école frappe comme hérétique tout dissident,
l'esprit critique n'a pas trouvé de voie plus sûre, plus rapide et plus
populaire, que la parodie" (Lenient, La Satire en France au moyen âge,
1859, p. 14).

[1515] Cp. Lenient, as cited, p. 21.

[1516] See in Symonds's Renaissance in Italy, vol. i (Age of the
Despots), ed. 1897, pp. 361-69, and Appendix IV, on "Religious
Revivals in Medieval Italy." Those revivals occurred from time to
time after Savonarola.

[1517] Cp. Villari, Machiavelli, i, 138.

[1518] Gieseler, Per. III. Div. iii, § 90; Lea, Hist. of Inquis.,
ii, 319-20.

[1519] Kurtz, i, 435-36.

[1520] Lea, i, 320-21. Cp. Ullmann, Reformers before the Reformation,
Eng. tr. ii, 15-22; and Mosheim, 13 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 11, and
notes. The doctrine of the treatise De Novem Rupibus is that of an
educated thinker, and is in parts strongly antinomian, but always on
pantheistic grounds.

[1521] Lea, i, 323-24.

[1522] Cp. Reuter, Gesch. der religiösen Aufklärung, ii, 240-49.

[1523] Mosheim, 13 Cent. pt. ii, ch. ii, §§ 40-43, and notes; ch. v,
§ 9. The names Beguin and Beghard seem to have been derived from the
old German verb beggan, to beg. In the Netherlands, Beguine was a
name for women; and Beghard for men.

[1524] See the record in Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, bk. iii,
chs. i-iii.

[1525] Praised in the Roman de la Rose, Eng. vers. in Skeat's Chaucer,
i, 244; Bell's ed. iv, 228. William was answered by the Dominican
Thomas Aquinas.

[1526] See Biog. Introd. to ed. of the Philobiblon by E. C. Thomas,
1888, pp. xliii-xlvii.

[1527] C. 4, Querimonia librorum contra clericos jam promotos; C. 5,
... contra religiosos possessionatos; C. 6, ... contra religiosos
mendicantes.

[1528] Ed. Thomas, as cited, pp. xlvi-vii.

[1529] Cp. Mosheim, 13 C. pt. ii, ch. ii, §§ 18-40; Hallam, Middle
Ages, ch. vii, pt. 2; Gebhart, Origines de la Renais., p. 42;
Berington, Lit. Hist. of the Middle Ages, p. 244; Lea, Hist. of
Inq., bk. iii, ch. i. The special work of the Dominicans was the
establishment everywhere of the Inquisition. Mosheim, as last cited,
ch. v, §§ 3-6, and notes; Lea, ii, 200-201; Milman, Latin Christianity,
ix, 155-56; Llorente, Hist. Crit. de l'Inquis. en Espagne, as cited,
i, 49-55, 68, etc.

[1530] As to the development of the Beguines from an original basis of
charitable co-operation see Ullmann, Reformers before the Reformation,
ii, 13; Lea, ii, 351.

[1531] Lea, iii, 10.

[1532] See the thirteenth-century memoirs of Fra Salimbene, Eng. tr. in
T. K. L. Oliphant's The Duke and the Scholar, 1875, pp. 98, 103-104,
108-10, 116, 130.

[1533] The Introduction to the book, probably written by the Franciscan
Gerhard, made St. Francis the angel of Rev. xiv, 6; and the ministers
of the new order were to be his friars. Mosheim, 13 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. ii, §§ 33-36, and notes. Cp. Lea, as cited; and Hahn, Gesch. der
Ketzer im Mittelalter, 1845-50, iii, 72-175--a very full account of
Joachim's teaching.

[1534] Lea, iii, 20-25.

[1535] Le Clerc, Hist. Litt. de la France, xx, 230; Milman, Latin
Christianity, ix, 155.

[1536] Averroès, pp. 259-60.

[1537] Cp. Mosheim, 14 Cent. pt. ii, ch. iii, § 5; and Burnet's
Letters, ed. Rotterdam, 1686, p. 31.

[1538] Cp. Milman, Latin Christianity, ix, 75-76.

[1539] Lea, iii, 104.

[1540] Hardwick, p. 316; Lea, iii, 109; Mosheim, 12 Cent. pt. ii,
ch. v, §§ 14-16. A sect of Apostolici had existed in Asia Minor in
the fourth century. Kurtz, i, 242. Cp. Lea, i, 109, note. Those of
the twelfth century were vehemently opposed by St. Bernard.

[1541] Lea, iii, 109-19.

[1542] Lea, p. 121; Kurtz, i, 437; Hardwick, p. 315, note; Mosheim,
13 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, § 14, and note. See Dante, Inferno, xxviii,
55-60, as to Dolcino.

[1543] Lea, p. 125.

[1544] As to the external movements connected with Joachim's Gospel
see Mosheim, 13 Cent. pt. ii, ch. v, §§ 13-15. They were put down by
sheer bloodshed. Cp. Ueberweg, i, 431; Lea, pp. 25-26, 86.

[1545] Hist. de France, vol. x; La Réforme, ed. 1884, p. 333.

[1546] See the author's notes to his ed. of Buckle (Routledge), 1904,
pp. 539, 547.

[1547] U. R. Burke, History of Spain, Hume's ed. i, 109-10.

[1548] McCrie, Reformation in Spain, ed. 1856, p. 41; Burke, as cited,
ii, 55-56.

[1549] Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, i, 81.

[1550] Burke, i, 218.

[1551] Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, ii, 54-55.

[1552] Id. ii, 58.

[1553] Lea, iii, 560.

[1554] Personally he discouraged heresy-hunting. Burke, ii, 66.

[1555] Burke, i, 268-73; Dunham, Hist. of Spain and Portugal, 1832,
iv, 260.

[1556] Lea, iii, 24.

[1557] Burke, ii, 65.

[1558] Lea, ii, 183.

[1559] Id. i, 221.

[1560] Burke, ii, 66-67.

[1561] Lea, iii, 85-86.

[1562] Id. pp. 52-53; McCrie, Reformation in Spain, p. 20.

[1563] Bonet-Maury, Les Précurseurs de la Réforme, 1904, pp. 114-19.

[1564] Lea, iii, 86.

[1565] Burke, ii, 57.

[1566] Id. ii, 62-63.

[1567] Lea, iii, 564.

[1568] Id. ii, 187-88.

[1569] Lea, ii, 287; Burke, ii, 67-69.

[1570] Burke, ii, 77, citing Lafuente, ix, 233.

[1571] Id. citing Bergenroth, Calendar, etc. i, 37.

[1572] Even as late as 1591, in Aragon, when in a riot against the
Inquisition the Inquisitors barely escaped with their lives. Burke,
ii, 80, note.

[1573] Id. pp. 81-82.

[1574] There had previously been sharp social persecution by the
Cortès, in 1480, on "anti-Semitic" grounds, the Jews being then
debarred from all the professions, and even from commerce. They were
thus driven to usury by Christians, who latterly denounce the race for
usuriousness. Cp. Michelet, Hist. de France, x, ed. 1884, p. 15, note.

[1575] The number has been put as high as 800,000. Cp. F. D. Mocatta,
The Jews and the Inquisition, 1877, p. 54; E. La Rigaudière,
Hist. des Perséc. Relig. en Espagne, 1860, pp. 112-14; Prescott,
Hist. of Ferdinand and Isabella, Kirk's ed. 1889, p. 323; and refs. in
ed. of Buckle cited, p. 541.

[1576] Llorente, Hist. Crit. de l'Inquis. en Espagne, ed. 1818, i,
280. As to Llorente's other estimates, which are of doubtful value,
cp. Prescott's note, ed. cited, p. 746. But as to Llorente's general
credit, see the vindication of U. R. Burke, ii, 85-87.

[1577] Llorente, i, 281.

[1578] McCrie, Reformation in Spain, ch. viii.

[1579] Cp. La Rigaudière, pp. 309-14; Buckle, as cited, pp. 514, 570;
U. R. Burke, i, 59, 85.

[1580] Cp. Émile Charles, Roger Bacon, Paris, 1861, p. 23.

[1581] Cp. Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, Ptie. ii, 1880,
vol. ii, p. 79.

[1582] This sum of libri has been taken by English writers to stand
for English "pounds." It may however have represented Parisian livres.

[1583] Prof. Brewer, Introd. to Opera Inedita of Roger Bacon, 1859,
pp. xiv-xxiii.

[1584] Id. p. xlvi.

[1585] Id. p. xxx, sq.

[1586] Id. pp. liv-lv.

[1587] Compendium Philosophiæ, cap. i, in Op. Ined., pp. 398-401.

[1588] Id. p. 401. Cp. p. 412 as to the multitude of theologians at
Paris banished for sodomy.

[1589] Id. p. 422.

[1590] Id. cc. ii-v, pp. 404-32.

[1591] Brewer, p. xciii, note, cites this in an extract from
the Chronicle of Antoninus, Archbishop of Florence, a late
writer of the fifteenth century, who "gives no authority for his
statement." Dr. Bridges, however, was enabled by M. Sabatier to
trace the passage back to the MS. Chronica xxiv Generalium Ordinis
Minorum, which belongs to the first half of the fourteenth century;
and the passage, as M. Sabatier remarks, has all the appearance of
being an extract from the official journal of this Order. (Bridges,
The "Opus Majus" of Roger Bacon, Suppl. vol. 1900, p. 158.)

[1592] "Il etait né rebelle." "Le mépris systématique de l'autorité,
voilà vraiment ce qu'il professe." (Hauréau, Ptie. II, ii, 76, 85.)

[1593] See the sympathetic accounts of Baden Powell, Hist. of
Nat. Philos. 1834, pp. 100-12; White, Warfare of Science with Theology,
i, 379-91.

[1594] Erdmann, History of Philosophy, Eng. tr. 3rd ed. i, 476.

[1595] Humboldt, Examen Crit. de l'hist. de la Géographie, 1836-39,
i, 64-70, gives the passages in the Opus Majus and the Imago Mundi,
and paraphrase of the latter in Columbus's letter to Ferdinand
and Isabella from Jamaica (given also in P. L. Ford's Writings of
Christopher Columbus, 1892, p. 199 sq.). Cp. Ellis's note to Francis
Bacon's Temporis Partus Masculus, in Ellis and Spedding's ed. of
Bacon's Works, iii, 534. It should be remembered in this connection
that Columbus found believers, in the early stage of his undertaking,
only in two friars, one a Franciscan and one a Dominican. See Ford's
ed. of the Writings, p. 107.

[1596] Cp. Hauréau, Ptie. II, ii, 95.

[1597] Opus Majus, Pars ii, cap. 5.

[1598] Renan, Averroès, p. 263. Bacon mentions Averroës in the Opus
Majus, P. i, cc. 6, 15; P. ii, c. 13; ed. Bridges, iii (1900), 14, 33,
67. In the passage last cited he calls him "homo solidae sapientiae,
corrigens multa priorum et addens multa, quamvis corrigendus sit in
aliquibus, et in multis complendus."

[1599] See the careful notice by Prof. Adamson in Dict. of
Nat. Biog. Cp. Milman, Latin Christianity, ix, 152-60; Lewes, Hist. of
Philos. ii, 77-87.

[1600] Two Englishmen, the Carmelite John of Baconthorpe (d. 1346)
and Walter Burleigh, were among the orthodox Averroïsts; the latter
figuring as a Realist against William of Occam.

[1601] Legend of Good Women, ll. 1039-43; Parliament of Fowls,
ll. 199-200.

[1602] Prologue to the Canterbury Tales, 438 (440).

[1603] Id. 653-61 (655-63). Cp. Tale of the Wife of Bath; 1-25.

[1604] Legend of Good Women, prol. ll. 1-9; Knight's Tale, ll. 1951-56
(2809-14 of MS. group A).

[1605] The notion connects with the spurious Ploughman's Tale and
Pilgrim's Tale, as to which see Lounsbury, as cited, i, 460-73;
ii, 460-69.

[1606] Vision of Piers Ploughman, ll. 5809 sq. Wright's ed. i, 179-80.

[1607] Chaucer's Boece, B. I. Prose iv. ll. 223-26, in Skeat's
Student's Chaucer.

[1608] Mosheim, 14 Cent. Pt. ii, ch. ii, § 36, and note. Cp. Green,
Short History of the English People, ch. v, § 3, ed. 1881, p. 235.

[1609] Cp. Green, Short Hist. ch. v, § 5; Massingberd, The English
Reformation, p. 171.

[1610] Cited by Lechler, Wycliffe and his English Precursors,
Eng. tr. 1-vol. ed. p. 440.

[1611] Cp. Prof. Montagu Burrows, Wiclif's Place in History, 1884,
p. 49. Maitland (Eight Essays, 1852) suggested derivation from the
movement of Abbot Joachim and others of that period.

[1612] Wilkins' Concilia, ii, 124.

[1613] Cp. Vaughan, as cited by Hardwick, Church History: Middle Age,
p. 402.

[1614] Hardwick, pp. 417, 418. The doctrine of purgatory was, however,
soon renounced by the Lollards (id. p. 420).

[1615] See the passages cited in Lewis's Life of Wiclif, ed. 1820,
pp. 224-25. Cp. Burrows, as cited, p. 19; Le Bas, Life of Wiclif,
1832, pp. 357-59.

[1616] Lechler, Wycliffe and his Eng. Precursors, pp. 371-76; Hardwick,
p. 412.

[1617] Cp. Green, Short History, ch. v, § 4.

[1618] Lechler, p. 236. It forms bk. vi of Wiclif's theological Summa.

[1619] Baxter, in his address "To the doubting and unbelieving
readers" prefixed to his Reasons of the Christian Religion, 1667,
names Savonarola, Campanella, Ficinus, Vives, Mornay, Grotius,
Cameron, and Micraelius as defenders of the faith, but no writer of
the fourteenth century.

[1620] Cp. Le Bas, pp. 342-43; and Hardwick, Church Hist.: Middle Age,
p. 415.

[1621] Lechler, p. 236.

[1622] Blunt, Reformation of the Church of England, 1892, i, 284,
and refs.

[1623] It is noteworthy that French culture affected the very
vocabulary of Dante, as it did that of his teacher, Brunetto
Latini. Cp. Littré, Etudes sur les barbares et le moyen âge, 3e
édit. pp. 399-400. The influence of French literature is further seen
in Boccaccio, and in Italian literature in general from the thirteenth
to the fifteenth century. Gebhart, pp. 209-21.

[1624] Saintsbury, Short Hist. of French Lit. 1882, p. 57.

[1625] Passage not translated in the old Eng. version.

[1626] Cp. Lenient, pp. 159-60.

[1627] Lenient, p. 169.

[1628] This declaration, as it happens, is put in the mouth of
"False-Seeming," but apparently with no ironical intention.

[1629] Lanson, Hist. de la litt. française, p. 132.

[1630] Id. p. 135.

[1631] Duruy, Hist. de France, ed. 1880, i, 440-41; Gebhart, Orig. de
la Renais. pp. 2, 19, 24-29, 32-35, 41-50; Le Clerc and Renan,
Hist. Litt. de la France au XIVe Siècle, i, 4; ii, 123; Littré,
Études, as cited, pp. 424-29.

[1632] Duruy, i, 409 sq., 449; Gebhart, pp. 35-41; Morin, Origines
de la Démocratie: La France au moyen âge, 3e édit. 1865, p. 304 sq.

[1633] Cp. Michelet, Hist. de France, vii, Renaissance, Introd. §
ii. Between the thirteenth and the fifteenth centuries, he insists,
"le jour baisse horriblement."

[1634] Ozanam, Dante, 6e édit. pp. 47, 78, 108-10.

[1635] Littré, Études, as cited, pp. 411-13.

[1636] Le Clerc, as cited, p. 259; Gebhart, pp. 48-49.

[1637] Sir James F. Stephen, Horæ Sabbaticæ, 1892, i, 42.

[1638] The Italians said of the French Pope Clement VI (1342-52)
that he had small religion. M. Villani, Cronica, iii, 43 (ed. 1554).

[1639] Cp. Dr. T. Arnold, Lect. on Mod. Hist. 4th ed. pp. 111-18;
Buckle, 3 vol. ed. i, 326-27 (1-vol. ed. p. 185); Stephen, as cited,
i, 121. "It is hardly too much to say that Comines's whole mind was
haunted at all times and at every point by a belief in an invisible
and immensely powerful and artful man whom he called God" (last cited).

[1640] Buckle, i, 329 (1-vol. ed. p. 186).

[1641] Buckle, ii, 133 (1-vol. ed. p. 361); Hallam, Middle Ages, iii,
395-96. Religious ceremonies were attached to the initiation of knights
in the 13th century. Seignobos, Hist. de la Civilisation, ii, 15.

[1642] Duruy, i, 368, 373-74. Cp. J. Jolly, Philippe le Bel, 1869,
l. iii, ch. iv, p. 249. It is to be remembered that Philippe had
for years been sorely pressed for money to retrieve his military
disasters. See H. Hervieu, Recherches sur les premiers états généraux,
1879, pp. 89 sq., 99 sq. He used his ill-gotten gains to restore the
currency, which he had debased. Id. pp. 101-102.

[1643] Hauréau, Hist. de la philos. scolastique, Ptie II, vol. ii,
359-60.

[1644] Poole, Illustrations, p. 265. Cp. Villari, Life and Times
of Machiavelli, ii, 64-67; Tullo Massarani, Studii di politica e di
storia, 2a ed. 1899, pp. 112-13; Neander, Ch. Hist. Eng. tr. 1855,
ix, 33.

[1645] Poole, pp. 266-76. Cp. Hardwick, Church History, Middle Age,
1853, pp. 346-47.

[1646] Ueberweg, i, 461-62.

[1647] "His (Occam's) philosophy is that of centuries later." (Milman,
Latin Christianity, ix, 148. Cp. pp. 150-51.)

[1648] Cp. Hardwick, p. 377, and Rettberg, as there cited.

[1649] Milman, Latin Christianity, ix, 75-76; Mosheim, 14 C. pt. ii,
ch. iii, § 5. As to his religious bigotry, see Milman, p. 142, notes.

[1650] Ueberweg, i, 460-64; cp. Poole, Illustrations, pp. 275-81.

[1651] James Mill, Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind,
ed. 1869, i, 250-51.

[1652] Cp. Ueberweg, p. 464. Mr. Poole's judgment (p. 280) that
Occam "starts from the point of view of a theologian" hardly does
justice to his attitude towards theology. Occam had indeed to profess
acceptance of theology; but he could not well have made less account
of its claims.

[1653] Ueberweg, pp. 465-66.

[1654] Id. p. 466.

[1655] Id. ib.

[1656] Poole, p. 281.

[1657] Ullmann, Reformers before the Reformation, i, 37, citing John
of Goch, De libertate Christiana, lib. i, cc. 17, 18. Compare the
Averroïst propositions of 1269-1277, given above, pp. 319-20.

[1658] Lange, Gesch. des Materialismus, i, 187-88 (Eng. tr. i, 225-26).

[1659] Reuter, Gesch. der religiösen Aufklärung im Mittelalter, i, 164.

[1660] Gervinus, Gesch. der deutschen Dichtung, 5te Ausg. i,
489-99. Even in the period before the Minnesingers the clerical
poetry had its anti-clerical side. Id. p. 194. Towards the end of the
12th century Nigellus Wireker satirized the monks in his Brunellus,
seu speculum stultorum. Menzel, Gesch. der Deutschen, Cap. 252. See
Menzel's note, before cited, for a remarkable outbreak of anti-clerical
if not anti-Christian satire, in the form of sculpture in an ancient
carving in the Strasburg Cathedral.

[1661] Reuter, Gesch. der relig. Aufklärung, ii, 62-63; Gervinus, i,
523; ii, 69; Kurtz, Gesch. der deutschen Litteratur, 1853, i, 428,
col. 2.

[1662] Milman, Latin Chr., ix, 125. Albert was an Aristotelian--a
circumstance which makes sad havoc of Menzel's proposition (Geschichte,
Cap. 251) that the "German spirit" did not take naturally to
Aristotle. Menzel puts the fact and the theory on opposite pages.

[1663] Milman, Latin Christianity, ix, 258. Cp. p. 261.

[1664] For a full account of Eckhart's teaching see Dr. A. Lasson's
monograph (§ 106) in Ueberweg's Hist. of Philos., i, 467-84; also
Ullmann, Reformers before the Ref., ii, 23-31. Cp. Lea, Hist. of
Inquis., ii, 354-59, 362-69, as to the sects. As to Tauler, see
Milman, ix, 255-56. He opposed the more advanced pantheism of the
Beghards. Id. p. 262.

[1665] In the 400 years following its publication there were published
over 6,000 separate editions.

[1666] Bk. i, ch. ii, 1, 2.

[1667] Bk. i, ch. iii. 1, 2.

[1668] Id. § 5.

[1669] J. A. Symonds writes that in the age of Dante, Petrarch,
and Boccaccio "what we call the Renaissance had not yet arrived"
(Renaissance in Italy: Age of the Despots, ed. 1897, p. 9).

[1670] Cp. Renan, Averroès, 3e édit. pp. 280-82, 295; Lewes, Hist. of
Philos., 4th ed. ii, 67; Reuter, Gesch. der relig. Aufklärung im
Mittelalter, i, 139-41. It is noteworthy that the troubadour, Austore
d'Orlac, in cursing the crusades and the clergy who promoted them,
suggests that the Christians should turn Moslems, seeing that God is
on the side of the unbelievers (Gieseler, Per. III. Div. III, § 58,
note 1).

[1671] Cp. Burckhardt, Civ. of the Renais. in Italy, Eng. tr. ed. 1892,
pp. 490, 492.

[1672] Id. p. 333.

[1673] Hardwick, p. 354, note.

[1674] Cp. Hardwick, p. 361; "Janus," The Pope and the Council, p. 308.

[1675] Burckhardt, p. 497, note.

[1676] Villari, Life and Times of Machiavelli, Eng. tr. 3rd ed. vol. i,
introd. p. 115. Cp. Burckhardt, pp. 35, 226.

[1677] As to its history see "Janus," The Pope and the Council,
p. 131 sq.

[1678] Villari, as last cited, pp. 98, 108.

[1679] It is noteworthy, however, that he did not detect, or at least
did not declare, the spuriousness of the text of the three witnesses
(Hallam, Lit. of Europe, iii, 58, note). Here the piety of Alfonso,
who knew his Bible by heart, may have restrained him.

[1680] See the passages transcribed by Hallam, Lit. of Europe, i, 148.

[1681] Villari, as last cited, pp. 98-101.

[1682] Cp. Gebhart, Renaissance en Italie, pp. 72-73; Burckhardt,
pp. 458-65; Lea, Hist. of the Inquisition, i, 5-4. "The authors of
the most scandalous satires were themselves mostly monks or benficed
priests." (Burckhardt, p. 465.)

[1683] Burckhardt, pp. 451-61; J. A. Symonds, Renaissance in Italy:
The Age of the Despots, ed. 1897, p. 359; Villari, Life of Machiavelli,
i, 153.

[1684] See it well analysed by Owen, pp. 147-60. Cp. Hallam,
Lit. of Europe, i, 199. M. Perrens describes Pulci as "emancipated
from all belief"; but holds that he "bantered the faith without the
least design of attacking religion" (La Civilisation florentine,
p. 151). But cp. Villari, Life of Machiavelli, i, 159-60.

[1685] Owen, p. 160. So also Hunt, and the editor of the Parnaso
Italiano, there cited.

[1686] Below, § 4.

[1687] Above, p. 361.

[1688] Lea, ii, 271-72. Cp. pp. 282-84.

[1689] Burckhardt, p. 502.

[1690] Id. p. 500.

[1691] Id. p. 502.

[1692] Id. p. 503, note.

[1693] Cp. R. C. Christie's essay, "Pomponatius--a Skeptic," in
his Selected Essays and Papers, 1902, pp. 131-32; Renan, Averroès,
pp. 345-352.

[1694] Comm. in Aristot. de Gen. et Corr., lib. i, fol. 29 G. cited
by Ellis in note on Bacon, who quotes a version of the phrase in the
De Augmentis, B. v, end. As to Nifo see Nourrisson, Machiavel, 1875,
ch. xii.

[1695] As to ribald blasphemies by the Roman clergy see Erasmus,
Epist. xxvi, 34 (ed. le Clerc), cited by Hardwick, Church History:
Middle Age, p. 378, note.

[1696] Lit. Hist. of Europe, i, 142. Following Eichhorn, Hallam notes
vindications by Marsilio Ficino, Alfonso de Spina (a converted Jew),
Æneas Sylvius, and Pico di Mirandola; observing that the work of the
first-named "differs little from modern apologies of the same class."

[1697] Cp. Ranke, History of the Popes, Bohn tr. ed. 1908, i, 58.

[1698] Epist. above cited; Burigni, Vie d'Erasme, 1757, i, 148-49.

[1699] Paul Canensius, cited by Ranke.

[1700] This view seems to solve the mystery as to Perugino's
creed. Vasari (ed. Milanesi, iii, 589) calls him "persona di assai poca
religione." Mezzanotte (Della vita di P. Vanucci, etc. 1836, p. 172
sq.) indignantly rejects the statement, but notes that in Ciatti's
MS. annals of Perugia, ad ann. 1524, the mind of the painter is said to
have been come una tavola rasa in religious matters. Mezzanotte holds
that Pietro has been there confounded with a later Perugian painter.

[1701] Leonardo da Vinci, Frammenti letterari e filosofici, trascelti
par Dr. Edmondo Solmi. Firenze, 1900. Pensieri sulla scienza, 19, 20.

[1702] Ib. 14, 22, 23, 24, 92.

[1703] Ib. 36-38, 41.

[1704] Some of the humanists called him unlettered (omo senza lettere),
and he calls them gente stolta, a foolish tribe.

[1705] Ib. 44, 46, 47, 48, 58, 60, 63, etc.

[1706] Ib. 45.

[1707] Ib. 30.

[1708] Ib. 57.

[1709] Ib. 66. Cp. 67-69.

[1710] Id. Pensieri sulla natura. 80-86.

[1711] Shortly after Leonardo we find Girolamo Fracastorio (1483-1553)
developing the criticism further, and in particular disposing of the
futile formula, resorted to by the scientific apriorists of the time,
that the "plastic force of nature" created fossils like other things.

[1712] Id. Pensieri sulla morale, passim.

[1713] Ib. 7.

[1714] Ib. 44, 45.

[1715] Ib. 46, 47.

[1716] Cp. Burckhardt, pp. 524, 541, notes; Villari, Life of
Machiavelli, i, 124. "It was easy to see by his words that he hoped
for the restoration of the pagan religion" (Id. Life of Savonarola,
Eng. tr. p. 51).

[1717] Only a few fragments of it survive. Villari, Life of Savonarola,
p. 51.

[1718] Carriere, Philos. Weltanschauung der Reformationszeit, 1847,
p. 13.

[1719] Cp. Villari, Life of Machiavelli, i, 128-34.

[1720] Cp. Perrens, Hist. de Florence (1434-1531), i, 258.

[1721] Id. p. 257. Cp. Villari, Machiavelli, i, 132; Savonarola, p. 60.

[1722] "Of the majority of the twenty-two languages he was supposed to
have studied, he knew little more than the alphabet and the elements
of grammar" (Villari, Machiavelli, i, 135). As to Pico's character,
which was not saintly, see Perrens, Histoire, as cited, i, 561-62.

[1723] Cp. Greswell, Memoirs of Politianus, Picus, etc. 2nd ed. 1805,
235; McCrie, The Reformation in Italy, ed. 1856, p. 33, note.

[1724] Greswell, pp. 330-31.

[1725] Cp. K. M. Sauer, Gesch. der italien. Litteratur, 1883, p. 109;
Villari, Machiavelli, i, 138.

[1726] Villari, Machiavelli, i, 133.

[1727] Greswell, pp. 331-32.

[1728] Discorsi sopra Tito Livio, i, 12.

[1729] Istorie fiorentine, liv. i; Discorsi, i, 12.

[1730] Discorsi, ii, 2.

[1731] For another point of view see Owen, as cited, p. 167.

[1732] In the Italian translation of Bacon's essays, made for Bacon
in 1618 by an English hand, Machiavelli is branded in one passage as
an impio, and in another his name is dropped. See Routledge ed. of
Bacon's Works, pp. 749, 751. The admiring Paolo Giovio called him
irrisor et atheos; and Cardinal Pole said the Prince was so full of
every kind of irreligion that it might have been written by the hand
of Satan (Nourrisson, Machiavel, 1875, p. 4).

[1733] Burckhardt, pp. 499-500. Cp. Owen, pp. 165-68. It is thus
impossible to be sure of the truth of the statement of Gregorovius
(Lucrezia Borgia, Eng. tr. 1904, p. 25) that "There were no women
skeptics or freethinkers; they would have been impossible in the
society of that day." Where dissimulation of unbelief was necessarily
habitual, there may have been some women unbelievers as well as
many men.

[1734] Owen's characterization of Machiavelli's Asino d'oro as a
"satire on the freethought of his age" (p. 177) will not stand
investigation. See his own note, p. 178.

[1735] Discorsi, i, 56.

[1736] As we saw, Polybius in his day took a similar view, coming
as he did from Greece, where military failure had followed on a
certain growth of unbelief. Machiavelli was much influenced by
Polybius. Villari, ii, 9.

[1737] Cp. Tullo Massarani, Studii di letteratura e d'arte, 1809,
p. 96.

[1738] Discorsi, i, 15.

[1739] Id. i, 11, end.

[1740] Villari, ii, 93-94.

[1741] Burckhardt, p. 464; Owen, p. 180, and refs.

[1742] Owen, p. 181. See the whole account of Guicciardini's rather
confused opinions.

[1743] Though Italy had most of what scientific knowledge
existed. Burckhardt, p. 292.

[1744] "A man might at the same time be condemned as a heretic in Spain
for affirming, and in Italy for denying, the reality of the witches'
nightly rides" (The Pope and the Council, p. 258).

[1745] The Pope and the Council, pp. 249-61. It was another Spina
who wrote on the other side.

[1746] F. Fiorentino, Pietro Pomponazzi, 1868, p. 30.

[1747] Owen, pp. 197-98; Renan, Averroès, pp. 353-62; Christie,
as cited, p. 133.

[1748] Cp. Owen, pp. 201, 218; Lange, i, 183-87 (tr. i, 220-25). He,
however, granted that the mass of mankind, "brutish and materialized,"
needed the belief in heaven and hell to moralize them (Christie,
pp. 140-41).

[1749] This principle, though deriving from Averroïsm, and condemned,
as we have seen, by Pope John XXI, had been affirmed by so high
an orthodox authority as Albertus Magnus. Cp. Owen, pp. 211-12,
note. While thus officially recognized, it was of course denounced
by the devout when they saw how it availed to save heretics from
harm. Mr. Owen has well pointed out (p. 238) the inconsistency of
the believers who maintain that faith is independent of reason, and
yet denounce as blasphemous the profession to believe by faith what
is not intelligible by philosophy.

[1750] Owen, pp. 209, note. "Son école est une école de laïques. de
médecins, d'esprits forts, de libres penseurs" (Bouillier, Hist. de
la philos. cartèsienne, 1854, i, 3).

[1751] Owen. p. 210; Christie, p. 151.

[1752] Christie, pp. 141-47.

[1753] Id. p. 149.

[1754] Burckhardt, p. 291.

[1755] Gebhart, pp. 59-63; Burckhardt, p. 211.

[1756] Cp. Burckhardt, p. 291.

[1757] Burckhardt, pp. 279-80; Villari, Life of Machiavelli,
pp. 106-107.

[1758] Burckhardt, pt. iii, ch. xi.

[1759] Dr. Rashdall, The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages,
1895, i, 265. Cp. Renan, Averroès, Avert.

[1760] Schechter, Studies in Judaism, pp. 213, 420-21.

[1761] Notice of Bonaventure Desperiers, by Bibliophile Jacob
[i.e. Lacroix], in 1841 ed. of Cymbalum Mundi, etc.

[1762] For a solution of the enigma of the title see the Clef of Eloi
Johanneau in ed. cited, p. 83. Cymbalum mundi was a nickname given
in antiquity to (among others) an Alexandrian grammarian called
Didymus--the name of doubting Thomas in the gospel. The book is
dedicated by Thomas Du Clevier à son ami Pierre Tyrocan, which is
found to be, with one letter altered (perhaps by a printer's error),
an anagram for Thomas Incrédule à son ami Pierre Croyant, "Unbelieving
Thomas to his friend Believing Peter." Clef cited, pp. 80-85.

[1763] Origen, Against Celsus, vi, 78.

[1764] The readiness of piety in all ages to invent frightful deaths
for unbelievers must be remembered in connection with this and other
records. Cp. Notice cited, p. xx, and note. The authority for this is
Henri Estienne, Apologie pour Hérodote, liv. i, chs. 18, end, and 26.

[1765] So Charles Nodier, cited in the Notice by Bibliophile Jacob,
pp. xxiii-xxiv. The English translator of 1723 professed to see no
unbelief in the book.

[1766] Perrens, Les Libertins en France au XVIIe siècle, 1896, p. 41.

[1767] Notice historique in Bibliophile Jacob's ed. of Rabelais,
1841; Stapfer, Rabelais, pp. 6, 10; W. F. Smith, biog. not. to his
trans. of Rabelais, 1893, i, p. xxii.

[1768] Rathery, notice biog. to ed. of Burgaud des Marets, i,
12. Jacob's account of his relations with his friends Budé and Amy
at this stage is erroneous. See Rathery, p. 14.

[1769] Le Double, Rabelais anatomiste et physiologiste, 1889, pp. 12,
425; and pref. by Professor Duval, p. xiii; Stapfer, p. 42; A. Tilley,
François Rabelais, 1907, pp. 74-76.

[1770] In the same year he was induced to publish what turned out to
be two spurious documents purporting to be ancient Roman remains. See
Heulhard, Rabelais légiste, and Jacob, Notice, p. xviii.

[1771] Rathery, p. 23.

[1772] Jacob, p. xix.

[1773] As to this see Tilley, p. 53.

[1774] See it at the end of the ed. of Bibliophile Jacob.

[1775] Cp. Stapfer, pp. 24-25; Rathery, p. 26.

[1776] Rathery, p. 30.

[1777] Cp. Jacob, Notice, p. xxxviii; Smith, ii, 524.

[1778] Rathery, p. 71; Stapfer, pp. 42-43.

[1779] Stapfer, p. 53.

[1780] Jacob, p. xxxix.

[1781] Rathery, pp. 44-49. The notion of Lacroix, that Rabelais
visited England, has no evidence to support it. Cp. Rathery, p. 49,
and Smith, p. xxiii.

[1782] Cp. Jacob, p. lx. Ramus himself, for his attacks on the
authority of Aristotle, was called an atheist. Cp. Waddington, Ramus,
sa vie, etc., 1855, p. 126.

[1783] See the list in the avertissement of M. Burgaud des Marets
to éd. Firmin Didot. Cp. Stapfer, pp. 63, 64. For example, the
"theologian" who makes the ludicrous speech in Liv. i, ch. xix, becomes
(chs. 18 and 20) a "sophist"; and the sorbonistes, sorbonicoles,
and sorbonagres of chs. 20 and 21 become mere maistres, magistres,
and sophistes likewise.

[1784] It is doubtful whether Rabelais wrote the whole of the notice
prefixed to the next edition, in which this attack was made; but it
seems clear that he "had a hand in it" (Tilley, François Rabelais,
p. 87).

[1785] R. Christie, Étienne Dolet, pp. 369-72. Christie, in his
vacillating way, severely blames Dolet, and then admits that the
book may have been printed while Dolet was in prison, and that in
any case there was no malice in the matter. This point, and the
persistent Catholic calumnies against Dolet, are examined by the
author in art. "The Truth about Étienne Dolet," in National Reformer,
June 2 and 9, 1889.

[1786] Epistre, pref. to Liv. iv. Ed. Jacob, p. 318.

[1787] Cp. W. F. Smith's trans. of Rabelais, 1893, ii, p. x. In this
book, however, other hands have certainly been at work. Rabelais left
it unfinished.

[1788] Jacob, Notice, p. lxiii; Stapfer, p. 76.

[1789] So Rathery, p. 60; and Stapfer, p. 78. Jacob, p. lxii, says
he resigned only one. Rathery makes the point clear by giving a copy
of the act of resignation as to Meudon.

[1790] A Discourse ... against Nicholas Machiavel, Eng. tr. (1577),
ed. 1608, Epist. ded. p. 2.

[1791] Liv. iv, ch. xliii.

[1792] Liv. iii, ch. xxiii.

[1793] Liv. iv, ch. xlv-xlviii.

[1794] Liv. iv, ch. xlix sq.

[1795] Liv. iv, ch. xxxii.

[1796] Prof. Stapfer, Rabelais, sa personne, son génie, son oeuvre,
1889, pp. 365-68. Cp. the Notice of Bibliophile Jacob, ed. 1841 of
Rabelais, pp. lvii-lviii; and Perrens, Les Libertins, p. 39. In his
youth he affirmed the doctrine. Stapfer, p. 23.

[1797] Cp. René Millet, Rabelais, 1892, pp. 172-80.

[1798] Liv. iii, ch. xxxvi.

[1799] The description of him by one French biographer, M. Boulmier
(Estienne Dolet, 1857), as "le Christ de la pensée libre" is a
gross extravagance. Dolet was substantially orthodox, and even
anti-Protestant, though he denounced the cruel usage of Protestants.

[1800] Wallace (Antitrinitarian Biography, 1850, ii. 2) asserts
that Dolet "not only became a convert to the opinions of Servetus,
but a zealous propagator of them." For this there is not a shadow
of evidence.

[1801] Cp. Voltaire, Lettres sur Rabelais, etc. i.

[1802] Cp. author's art. above cited; R. C. Christie, Étienne Dolet,
2nd ed. 1890, p. 100; Octave Galtier, Étienne Dolet (N.D.), pp. 66,
94, etc.

[1803] Christie, as cited, pp. 50-58, 105-106; Galtier, p. 26 sq.

[1804] It is to this that Rabelais alludes (ii, 5) when he tells
how at Toulouse they "stuck not to burn their regents alive like
red herrings."

[1805] Christie, p. 80.

[1806] Liv. iii, ch. xxix.

[1807] Christie, p. 86.

[1808] One of his enemies wrote of him that prison was his
country--patria Doleti.

[1809] Procès d'Estienne Dolet, Paris, 1836, p. 11; Galtier, pp. 65-70;
Christie, pp. 389-90.

[1810] Procès, p. viii.; Galtier, p. 78.

[1811] Galtier, p. 101 sq.; Christie, p. 461.

[1812] A modern French judge, the President Baudrier, was found to
affirm that the laws, though "unduly severe," were "neither unduly
nor unfairly pressed" against Dolet! Christie, p. 471.

[1813] Concerning whom see Christie, as cited, pp. 29 01.

[1814] Tilley, as last cited, p. 69.

[1815] Christie, p. 317.

[1816] Christie, as cited, pp. 465-67; Lutteroth, La Reformation en
France pendant sa première période, 1850, pp. 39-40; Prof. H. M. Baird,
Rise of the Huguenots, 1880, i, 240 sq.

[1817] Perrens, Les Libertins, p. 43; Patin, Lettres,
ed. Reveillé-Parise, 1846, i, 210.

[1818] Wriothesley's Chronicle (Camden Society, 1875), pp. 107-108.

[1819] Nodier, quoted by Bibliophile Jacob in ed. of Cymbalum Mundi,
as cited, p. xviii.

[1820] Cp. Brantome, Des dames illustres, OEuvres, ed. 1838, ii, 186.

[1821] Bayle, Dictionnaire, art. Marguerite de Navarre (the First),
notes F and G.

[1822] Bayle, note N. Cp. Nodier, as cited, p. xix, as to the
collaboration of Desperiers and others.

[1823] Bayle, art. Ronsard, note D.

[1824] Garasse, La Doctrine Curieuse des Beaux Esprits de ce Temps,
1623, pp. 126-27. Ronsard replied to the charge in his poem, Des
misères du temps.

[1825] Bayle, art. Ronsard, note O. Cp. Perrens, Les Libertins, p. 43.

[1826] MS. 1588. First printed in 1841 by Guhrauer, again in 1857 by
L. Noack.

[1827] As before noted, he was one of the first to use the
word. Cp. Lechler, Geschichte des englischen Deismus, pp. 31, 455,
notes.

[1828] Bayle, art. Bodin, note O. Cp. Renan, Averroès, 3e édit. p. 424;
and the Lettres de Gui Patin, iii, 679 (letter of 27 juillet, 1668),
cited by Perrens, Les Libertins, p. 43. Leibnitz, in an early
letter to Jac. Thomasius, speaks of the MS. of the Colloquium,
then in circulation, as proving its writer to be "the professed
enemy of the Christian religion," adding: "Vanini's dialogues are a
trifle in comparison." (Philosophische Schriften, ed. Gerhardt, i,
26; Martineau, Study of Spinoza, p. 77.) Carriere, however, notes
(Weltanschauung, p. 317) that in later years Leibnitz learned to
prize Bodin's treatise highly.

[1829] Cp. Lecky, Rationalism in Europe, i, 66, 87-91. In the
République too he has a chapter on astrology, to which he leans
somewhat.

[1830] République, Liv. iv, ch. ii.

[1831] Id. Liv. iv, ch. vii. "Bodin in this sophistry was undoubtedly
insincere" (Hallam, Lit. of Europe, ii, 159).

[1832] Cp. Perrens, Les Libertins. p. 43.

[1833] Cp. Villemain, Vie de L'Hopital, in Études de l'hist. moderne,
1846. pp. 363-68, 428.

[1834] Buckle (3-vol. ed. ii, 10; 1-vol. ed. p. 291) errs in
representing L'Hopital as the only statesman of the time who dreamt of
toleration. It is to be noted, on the other hand, that the Huguenots
themselves protested against any toleration of atheists or Anabaptists;
and even the reputed freethinker Gabriel Naudé, writing his Science
des Princes, ou Considérations politiques sur les Coups d'état, in
1639, defended the massacre on political grounds (Owen, Skeptics of
the French Renaissance, p. 470, note). Bodin implicitly execrated
it. Cp. Hallam, Lit. of Europe, ii, 162.

[1835] Villemain, p. 429.

[1836] Garasse, Doctrine Curieuse, pp. 125~26; Mémoires de Garasse,
ed. Ch. Nisard, 1860, pp. 77-78; Perrens, p. 43.

[1837] Bibliophile Jacob, Introd. to Beroalde de Verville.

[1838] Estienne's full title is: L'Introduction au traité de la
conformité des merveilles, anciennes avec les modernes: ou, Traité
préparatif à l'Apologie pour Hérodote.

[1839] Apologie pour Hérodote, ed. 1607, pp. 97, 249 (liv. i, chs. xiv,
xviii.) Cymbalum Mundi, ed. Bibliophile Jacob, pp. xx, 13.

[1840] The index was specially framed to call attention to these
items. The entry, "Fables des dieux des payens cousines germaines
des legendes des saints," is typical.

[1841] Bayle, Dictionnaire, art. Castalion; Hallam, Lit. of Europe, ii,
81; Lecky, Rationalism in Europe, ii, 46-49. Hallam finds Castalio's
letter to the Duke of Wirtemberg "cautious"; but Lecky quotes some
strong expressions from what he describes as the preface of Martin
Bellius (Castalio's pseudonym) to Cluten's De Haereticis persequendis,
ed. 1610. Castalio died in 1563. As to his translations from the Bible,
see Bayle's note.

[1842] Hallam, ii, 83; McCrie, Reformation in Italy, ed. 1856, p. 231.

[1843] Even Stähelin (Johannes Calvin, ii, 303) condemns Calvin's
action and tone towards Castalio, though he makes the significant
remark that the latter "treated the Bible pretty much as any other
book."

[1844] Hatch, Hibbert Lectures, p. 169.

[1845] Burckhardt, p. 195.

[1846] Prof. Fortunat Strowski, Histoire du sentiment religieux en
France au 17e siècle, Ptie i, De Montaigne à Pascal, 1907, pp. 19-23.

[1847] "Du Vair ne songe pas au Médiateur; s'il y a dans son traité
des allusions à Notre Seigneur, le nom de Jésus-Christ ne s'y trouve,
je crois bien, pas une fois. Il songe encore moins aux pieux adjuvants
qui excitent l'imagination; pas un mot de l'invocation des saints,
pas un mot des sacrements" (Strowski, as cited, p. 78).

[1848] Cp. Prof. Thorold Rogers, Economic Interpretation of History,
p. 83.

[1849] In 1387 the Lollards were denounced under that name by the
Bishop of Worcester as "eternally damned sons of Antichrist."

[1850] See the Repressor, Babington's ed. in the Rolls Series, 1860,
