CHAPTER XII.


She was occasionally worried, however this might be, by the impression
that these sacrifices, great as they were, were nothing to those that
his own passion had imposed; if indeed it was not rather the passion of
his confederate, which had caught him up and was whirling him round
like a great steam-wheel. He was at any rate in the strong grip of a
dizzy splendid fate; the wild wind of his life blew him straight before
it. Didn’t she catch in his face at times, even through his smile and
his happy habit, the gleam of that pale glare with which a bewildered
victim appeals, as he passes, to some pair of pitying eyes? He perhaps
didn’t even himself know how scared he was; but _she_ knew. They were
in danger, they were in danger, Captain Everard and Lady Bradeen: it
beat every novel in the shop. She thought of Mr. Mudge and his safe
sentiment; she thought of herself and blushed even more for her tepid
response to it. It was a comfort to her at such moments to feel that in
another relation—a relation supplying that affinity with her nature
that Mr. Mudge, deluded creature, would never supply—she should have
been no more tepid than her ladyship. Her deepest soundings were on two
or three occasions of finding herself almost sure that, if she dared,
her ladyship’s lover would have gathered relief from “speaking” to her.
She literally fancied once or twice that, projected as he was toward
his doom, her own eyes struck him, while the air roared in his ears, as
the one pitying pair in the crowd. But how could he speak to her while
she sat sandwiched there between the counter-clerk and the sounder?

She had long ago, in her comings and goings made acquaintance with Park
Chambers and reflected as she looked up at their luxurious front that
_they_, of course, would supply the ideal setting for the ideal speech.
There was not an object in London that, before the season was over, was
more stamped upon her brain. She went roundabout to pass it, for it was
not on the short way; she passed on the opposite side of the street and
always looked up, though it had taken her a long time to be sure of the
particular set of windows. She had made that out finally by an act of
audacity that at the time had almost stopped her heart-beats and that
in retrospect greatly quickened her blushes. One evening she had
lingered late and watched—watched for some moment when the porter, who
was in uniform and often on the steps, had gone in with a visitor. Then
she followed boldly, on the calculation that he would have taken the
visitor up and that the hall would be free. The hall _was_ free, and
the electric light played over the gilded and lettered board that
showed the names and numbers of the occupants of the different floors.
What she wanted looked straight at her—Captain Everard was on the
third. It was as if, in the immense intimacy of this, they were, for
the instant and the first time, face to face outside the cage. Alas!
they were face to face but a second or two: she was whirled out on the
wings of a panic fear that he might just then be entering or issuing.
This fear was indeed, in her shameless deflexions, never very far from
her, and was mixed in the oddest way with depressions and
disappointments. It was dreadful, as she trembled by, to run the risk
of looking to him as if she basely hung about; and yet it was dreadful
to be obliged to pass only at such moments as put an encounter out of
the question.

At the horrible hour of her first coming to Cocker’s he was always—it
was to be hoped—snug in bed; and at the hour of her final departure he
was of course—she had such things all on her fingers’-ends—dressing for
dinner. We may let it pass that if she couldn’t bring herself to hover
till he was dressed, this was simply because such a process for such a
person could only be terribly prolonged. When she went in the middle of
the day to her own dinner she had too little time to do anything but go
straight, though it must be added that for a real certainty she would
joyously have omitted the repast. She had made up her mind as to there
being on the whole no decent pretext to justify her flitting casually
past at three o’clock in the morning. That was the hour at which, if
the ha’penny novels were not all wrong, he probably came home for the
night. She was therefore reduced to the vainest figuration of the
miraculous meeting toward which a hundred impossibilities would have to
conspire. But if nothing was more impossible than the fact, nothing was
more intense than the vision. What may not, we can only moralise, take
place in the quickened muffled perception of a young person with an
ardent soul? All our humble friend’s native distinction, her refinement
of personal grain, of heredity, of pride, took refuge in this small
throbbing spot; for when she was most conscious of the objection of her
vanity and the pitifulness of her little flutters and manoeuvres, then
the consolation and the redemption were most sure to glow before her in
some just discernible sign. He did like her!




CHAPTER XIII.


He never brought Cissy back, but Cissy came one day without him, as
fresh as before from the hands of Marguerite, or only, at the season’s
end, a trifle less fresh. She was, however, distinctly less serene. She
had brought nothing with her and looked about with impatience for the
forms and the place to write. The latter convenience, at Cocker’s, was
obscure and barely adequate, and her clear voice had the light note of
disgust which her lover’s never showed as she responded with a “There?”
of surprise to the gesture made by the counter-clerk in answer to her
sharp question. Our young friend was busy with half a dozen people, but
she had dispatched them in her most businesslike manner by the time her
ladyship flung through the bars this light of re-appearance. Then the
directness with which the girl managed to receive the accompanying
missive was the result of the concentration that had caused her to make
the stamps fly during the few minutes occupied by the production of it.
This concentration, in turn, may be described as the effect of the
apprehension of imminent relief. It was nineteen days, counted and
checked off, since she had seen the object of her homage; and as, had
he been in London, she should, with his habits, have been sure to see
him often, she was now about to learn what other spot his presence
might just then happen to sanctify. For she thought of them, the other
spots, as ecstatically conscious of it, expressively happy in it.

But, gracious, how handsome _was_ her ladyship, and what an added price
it gave him that the air of intimacy he threw out should have flowed
originally from such a source! The girl looked straight through the
cage at the eyes and lips that must so often have been so near as
own—looked at them with a strange passion that for an instant had the
result of filling out some of the gaps, supplying the missing answers,
in his correspondence. Then as she made out that the features she thus
scanned and associated were totally unaware of it, that they glowed
only with the colour of quite other and not at all guessable thoughts,
this directly added to their splendour, gave the girl the sharpest
impression she had yet received of the uplifted, the unattainable
plains of heaven, and yet at the same time caused her to thrill with a
sense of the high company she did somehow keep. She was with the absent
through her ladyship and with her ladyship through the absent. The only
pang—but it didn’t matter—was the proof in the admirable face, in the
sightless preoccupation of its possessor, that the latter hadn’t a
notion of her. Her folly had gone to the point of half believing that
the other party to the affair must sometimes mention in Eaton Square
the extraordinary little person at the place from which he so often
wired. Yet the perception of her visitor’s blankness actually helped
this extraordinary little person, the next instant, to take refuge in a
reflexion that could be as proud as it liked. “How little she knows,
how little she knows!” the girl cried to herself; for what did that
show after all but that Captain Everard’s telegraphic confidant was
Captain Everard’s charming secret? Our young friend’s perusal of her
ladyship’s telegram was literally prolonged by a momentary daze: what
swam between her and the words, making her see them as through rippled
shallow sunshot water, was the great, the perpetual flood of “How much
_I_ know—how much _I_ know!” This produced a delay in her catching
that, on the face, these words didn’t give her what she wanted, though
she was prompt enough with her remembrance that her grasp was, half the
time, just of what was _not_ on the face. “Miss Dolman, Parade Lodge,
Parade Terrace, Dover. Let him instantly know right one, Hôtel de
France, Ostend. Make it seven nine four nine six one. Wire me
alternative Burfield’s.”

The girl slowly counted. Then he was at Ostend. This hooked on with so
sharp a click that, not to feel she was as quickly letting it all slip
from her, she had absolutely to hold it a minute longer and to do
something to that end. Thus it was that she did on this occasion what
she never did—threw off a “Reply paid?” that sounded officious, but
that she partly made up for by deliberately affixing the stamps and by
waiting till she had done so to give change. She had, for so much
coolness, the strength that she considered she knew all about Miss
Dolman.

“Yes—paid.” She saw all sorts of things in this reply, even to a small
suppressed start of surprise at so correct an assumption; even to an
attempt the next minute at a fresh air of detachment. “How much, with
the answer?” The calculation was not abstruse, but our intense observer
required a moment more to make it, and this gave her ladyship time for
a second thought. “Oh just wait!” The white begemmed hand bared to
write rose in sudden nervousness to the side of the wonderful face
which, with eyes of anxiety for the paper on the counter, she brought
closer to the bars of the cage. “I think I must alter a word!” On this
she recovered her telegram and looked over it again; but she had a new,
an obvious trouble, and studied it without deciding and with much of
the effect of making our young woman watch her.

This personage, meanwhile, at the sight of her expression, had decided
on the spot. If she had always been sure they were in danger her
ladyship’s expression was the best possible sign of it. There was a
word wrong, but she had lost the right one, and much clearly depended
on her finding it again. The girl, therefore, sufficiently estimating
the affluence of customers and the distraction of Mr. Buckton and the
counter-clerk, took the jump and gave it. “Isn’t it Cooper’s?”

It was as if she had bodily leaped—cleared the top of the cage and
alighted on her interlocutress. “Cooper’s?”—the stare was heightened by
a blush. Yes, she had made Juno blush.

This was all the greater reason for going on. “I mean instead of
Burfield’s.”

Our young friend fairly pitied her; she had made her in an instant so
helpless, and yet not a bit haughty nor outraged. She was only
mystified and scared. “Oh, you know—?”

“Yes, I know!” Our young friend smiled, meeting the other’s eyes, and,
having made Juno blush, proceeded to patronise her. “_I’ll_ do it”—she
put out a competent hand. Her ladyship only submitted, confused and
bewildered, all presence of mind quite gone; and the next moment the
telegram was in the cage again and its author out of the shop. Then
quickly, boldly, under all the eyes that might have witnessed her
tampering, the extraordinary little person at Cocker’s made the proper
change. People were really too giddy, and if they _were_, in a certain
case, to be caught, it shouldn’t be the fault of her own grand memory.
Hadn’t it been settled weeks before?—for Miss Dolman it was always to
be “Cooper’s.”




