CHAPTER VI.


She met Mrs. Jordan when she could, and learned from her more and more
how the great people, under her gentle shake and after going through
everything with the mere shops, were waking up to the gain of putting
into the hands of a person of real refinement the question that the
shop-people spoke of so vulgarly as that of the floral decorations. The
regular dealers in these decorations were all very well; but there was
a peculiar magic in the play of taste of a lady who had only to
remember, through whatever intervening dusk, all her own little tables,
little bowls and little jars and little other arrangements, and the
wonderful thing she had made of the garden of the vicarage. This small
domain, which her young friend had never seen, bloomed in Mrs. Jordan’s
discourse like a new Eden, and she converted the past into a bank of
violets by the tone in which she said “Of course you always knew my one
passion!” She obviously met now, at any rate, a big contemporary need,
measured what it was rapidly becoming for people to feel they could
trust her without a tremor. It brought them a peace that—during the
quarter of an hour before dinner in especial—was worth more to them
than mere payment could express. Mere payment, none the less, was
tolerably prompt; she engaged by the month, taking over the whole
thing; and there was an evening on which, in respect to our heroine,
she at last returned to the charge. “It’s growing and growing, and I
see that I must really divide the work. One wants an associate—of one’s
own kind, don’t you know? You know the look they want it all to
have?—of having come, not from a florist, but from one of themselves.
Well, I’m sure _you_ could give it—because you _are_ one. Then we
_should_ win. Therefore just come in with me.”

“And leave the P.O.?”

“Let the P.O. simply bring you your letters. It would bring you lots,
you’d see: orders, after a bit, by the score.” It was on this, in due
course, that the great advantage again came up: “One seems to live
again with one’s own people.” It had taken some little time (after
their having parted company in the tempest of their troubles and then,
in the glimmering dawn, finally sighted each other again) for each to
admit that the other was, in her private circle, her only equal, but
the admission came, when it did come, with an honest groan; and since
equality was named, each found much personal profit in exaggerating the
other’s original grandeur. Mrs. Jordan was ten years the older, but her
young friend was struck with the smaller difference this now made: it
had counted otherwise at the time when, much more as a friend of her
mother’s, the bereaved lady, without a penny of provision and with
stopgaps, like their own, all gone, had, across the sordid landing on
which the opposite doors of the pair of scared miseries opened and to
which they were bewilderedly bolted, borrowed coals and umbrellas that
were repaid in potatoes and postage-stamps. It had been a questionable
help, at that time, to ladies submerged, floundering, panting, swimming
for their lives, that they were ladies; but such an advantage could
come up again in proportion as others vanished, and it had grown very
great by the time it was the only ghost of one they possessed. They had
literally watched it take to itself a portion of the substance of each
that had departed; and it became prodigious now, when they could talk
of it together, when they could look back at it across a desert of
accepted derogation, and when, above all, they could together work up a
credulity about it that neither could otherwise work up. Nothing was
really so marked as that they felt the need to cultivate this legend
much more after having found their feet and stayed their stomachs in
the ultimate obscure than they had done in the upper air of mere
frequent shocks. The thing they could now oftenest say to each other
was that they knew what they meant; and the sentiment with which, all
round, they knew it was known had well-nigh amounted to a promise not
again to fall apart.

Mrs. Jordan was at present fairly dazzling on the subject of the way
that, in the practice of her fairy art, as she called it, she more than
peeped in—she penetrated. There was not a house of the great kind—and
it was of course only a question of those, real homes of luxury—in
which she was not, at the rate such people now had things, all over the
place. The girl felt before the picture the cold breath of
disinheritance as much as she had ever felt it in the cage; she knew
moreover how much she betrayed this, for the experience of poverty had
begun, in her life, too early, and her ignorance of the requirements of
homes of luxury had grown, with other active knowledge, a depth of
simplification. She had accordingly at first often found that in these
colloquies she could only pretend she understood. Educated as she had
rapidly been by her chances at Cocker’s, there were still strange gaps
in her learning—she could never, like Mrs. Jordan, have found her way
about one of the “homes.” Little by little, however, she had caught on,
above all in the light of what Mrs. Jordan’s redemption had materially
made of that lady, giving her, though the years and the struggles had
naturally not straightened a feature, an almost super-eminent air.
There were women in and out of Cocker’s who were quite nice and who yet
didn’t look well; whereas Mrs. Jordan looked well and yet, with her
extraordinarily protrusive teeth, was by no means quite nice. It would
seem, mystifyingly, that it might really come from all the greatness
she could live with. It was fine to hear her talk so often of dinners
of twenty and of her doing, as she said, exactly as she liked with
them. She spoke as if, for that matter, she invited the company. “They
simply give me the table—all the rest, all the other effects, come
afterwards.”




CHAPTER VII.


“Then you _do_ see them?” the girl again asked.

Mrs. Jordan hesitated, and indeed the point had been ambiguous before.
“Do you mean the guests?”

Her young friend, cautious about an undue exposure of innocence, was
not quite sure. “Well—the people who live there.”

“Lady Ventnor? Mrs. Bubb? Lord Rye? Dear, yes. Why they _like_ one.”

“But does one personally _know_ them?” our young lady went on, since
that was the way to speak. “I mean socially, don’t you know?—as you
know _me_.”

“They’re not so nice as you!” Mrs. Jordan charmingly cried. “But I
_shall_ see more and more of them.”

Ah this was the old story. “But how soon?”

“Why almost any day. Of course,” Mrs. Jordan honestly added, “they’re
nearly always out.”

“Then why do they want flowers all over?”

“Oh that doesn’t make any difference.” Mrs. Jordan was not philosophic;
she was just evidently determined it _shouldn’t_ make any. “They’re
awfully interested in my ideas, and it’s inevitable they should meet me
over them.”

Her interlocutress was sturdy enough. “What do you call your ideas?”

Mrs. Jordan’s reply was fine. “If you were to see me some day with a
thousand tulips you’d discover.”

“A thousand?”—the girl gaped at such a revelation of the scale of it;
she felt for the instant fairly planted out. “Well, but if in fact they
never do meet you?” she none the less pessimistically insisted.

“Never? They _often_ do—and evidently quite on purpose. We have grand
long talks.”

There was something in our young lady that could still stay her from
asking for a personal description of these apparitions; that showed too
starved a state. But while she considered she took in afresh the whole
of the clergyman’s widow. Mrs. Jordan couldn’t help her teeth, and her
sleeves were a distinct rise in the world. A thousand tulips at a
shilling clearly took one further than a thousand words at a penny; and
the betrothed of Mr. Mudge, in whom the sense of the race for life was
always acute, found herself wondering, with a twinge of her easy
jealousy, if it mightn’t after all then, for _her_ also, be
better—better than where she was—to follow some such scent. Where she
was was where Mr. Buckton’s elbow could freely enter her right side and
the counter-clerk’s breathing—he had something the matter with his
nose—pervade her left ear. It was something to fill an office under
Government, and she knew but too well there were places commoner still
than Cocker’s; but it needed no great range of taste to bring home to
her the picture of servitude and promiscuity she couldn’t but offer to
the eye of comparative freedom. She was so boxed up with her young men,
and anything like a margin so absent, that it needed more art than she
should ever possess to pretend in the least to compass, with any one in
the nature of an acquaintance—say with Mrs. Jordan herself, flying in,
as it might happen, to wire sympathetically to Mrs. Bubb—an approach to
a relation of elegant privacy. She remembered the day when Mrs. Jordan
_had_, in fact, by the greatest chance, come in with fifty-three words
for Lord Rye and a five-pound note to change. This had been the
dramatic manner of their reunion—their mutual recognition was so great
an event. The girl could at first only see her from the waist up,
besides making but little of her long telegram to his lordship. It was
a strange whirligig that had converted the clergyman’s widow into such
a specimen of the class that went beyond the sixpence.

Nothing of the occasion, all the more, had ever become dim; least of
all the way that, as her recovered friend looked up from counting, Mrs.
Jordan had just blown, in explanation, through her teeth and through
the bars of the cage: “I _do_ flowers, you know.” Our young woman had
always, with her little finger crooked out, a pretty movement for
counting; and she had not forgotten the small secret advantage, a
sharpness of triumph it might even have been called, that fell upon her
at this moment and avenged her for the incoherence of the message, an
unintelligible enumeration of numbers, colours, days, hours. The
correspondence of people she didn’t know was one thing; but the
correspondence of people she did had an aspect of its own for her even
when she couldn’t understand it. The speech in which Mrs. Jordan had
defined a position and announced a profession was like a tinkle of
bluebells; but for herself her one idea about flowers was that people
had them at funerals, and her present sole gleam of light was that
lords probably had them most. When she watched, a minute later, through
the cage, the swing of her visitor’s departing petticoats, she saw the
sight from the waist down; and when the counter-clerk, after a mere
male glance, remarked, with an intention unmistakeably low, “Handsome
woman!” she had for him the finest of her chills: “She’s the widow of a
bishop.” She always felt, with the counter-clerk, that it was
impossible sufficiently to put it on; for what she wished to express to
him was the maximum of her contempt, and that element in her nature was
confusedly stored. “A bishop” was putting it on, but the
counter-clerk’s approaches were vile. The night, after this, when, in
the fulness of time, Mrs. Jordan mentioned the grand long talks, the
girl at last brought out: “Should _I_ see them?—I mean if I _were_ to
give up everything for you.”

Mrs. Jordan at this became most arch. “I’d send you to all the
bachelors!”

Our young lady could be reminded by such a remark that she usually
struck her friend as pretty. “Do _they_ have their flowers?”

“Oceans. And they’re the most particular.” Oh it was a wonderful world.
“You should see Lord Rye’s.”

“His flowers?”

“Yes, and his letters. He writes me pages on pages—with the most
adorable little drawings and plans. You should see his diagrams!”




