CHAPTER II.


It was always rather quiet at Cocker’s while the contingent from
Ladle’s and Thrupp’s and all the other great places were at luncheon,
or, as the young men used vulgarly to say, while the animals were
feeding. She had forty minutes in advance of this to go home for her
own dinner; and when she came back and one of the young men took his
turn there was often half an hour during which she could pull out a bit
of work or a book—a book from the place where she borrowed novels, very
greasy, in fine print and all about fine folks, at a ha’penny a day.
This sacred pause was one of the numerous ways in which the
establishment kept its finger on the pulse of fashion and fell into the
rhythm of the larger life. It had something to do, one day, with the
particular flare of importance of an arriving customer, a lady whose
meals were apparently irregular, yet whom she was destined, she
afterwards found, not to forget. The girl was _blasée;_ nothing could
belong more, as she perfectly knew, to the intense publicity of her
profession; but she had a whimsical mind and wonderful nerves; she was
subject, in short, to sudden flickers of antipathy and sympathy, red
gleams in the grey, fitful needs to notice and to “care,” odd caprices
of curiosity. She had a friend who had invented a new career for
women—that of being in and out of people’s houses to look after the
flowers. Mrs. Jordan had a manner of her own of sounding this allusion;
“the flowers,” on her lips, were, in fantastic places, in happy homes,
as usual as the coals or the daily papers. She took charge of them, at
any rate, in all the rooms, at so much a month, and people were quickly
finding out what it was to make over this strange burden of the
pampered to the widow of a clergyman. The widow, on her side, dilating
on the initiations thus opened up to her, had been splendid to her
young friend, over the way she was made free of the greatest houses—the
way, especially when she did the dinner-tables, set out so often for
twenty, she felt that a single step more would transform her whole
social position. On its being asked of her then if she circulated only
in a sort of tropical solitude, with the upper servants for picturesque
natives, and on her having to assent to this glance at her limitations,
she had found a reply to the girl’s invidious question. “You’ve no
imagination, my dear!”—that was because a door more than half open to
the higher life couldn’t be called anything but a thin partition. Mrs.
Jordan’s imagination quite did away with the thickness.

Our young lady had not taken up the charge, had dealt with it
good-humouredly, just because she knew so well what to think of it. It
was at once one of her most cherished complaints and most secret
supports that people didn’t understand her, and it was accordingly a
matter of indifference to her that Mrs. Jordan shouldn’t; even though
Mrs. Jordan, handed down from their early twilight of gentility and
also the victim of reverses, was the only member of her circle in whom
she recognised an equal. She was perfectly aware that her imaginative
life was the life in which she spent most of her time; and she would
have been ready, had it been at all worth while, to contend that, since
her outward occupation didn’t kill it, it must be strong indeed.
Combinations of flowers and green-stuff, forsooth! What _she_ could
handle freely, she said to herself, was combinations of men and women.
The only weakness in her faculty came from the positive abundance of
her contact with the human herd; this was so constant, it had so the
effect of cheapening her privilege, that there were long stretches in
which inspiration, divination and interest quite dropped. The great
thing was the flashes, the quick revivals, absolute accidents all, and
neither to be counted on nor to be resisted. Some one had only
sometimes to put in a penny for a stamp and the whole thing was upon
her. She was so absurdly constructed that these were literally the
moments that made up—made up for the long stiffness of sitting there in
the stocks, made up for the cunning hostility of Mr. Buckton and the
importunate sympathy of the counter-clerk, made up for the daily deadly
flourishy letter from Mr. Mudge, made up even for the most haunting of
her worries, the rage at moments of not knowing how her mother did “get
it.”

She had surrendered herself moreover of late to a certain expansion of
her consciousness; something that seemed perhaps vulgarly accounted for
by the fact that, as the blast of the season roared louder and the
waves of fashion tossed their spray further over the counter, there
were more impressions to be gathered and really—for it came to
that—more life to be led. Definite at any rate it was that by the time
May was well started the kind of company she kept at Cocker’s had begun
to strike her as a reason—a reason she might almost put forward for a
policy of procrastination. It sounded silly, of course, as yet, to
plead such a motive, especially as the fascination of the place was
after all a sort of torment. But she liked her torment; it was a
torment she should miss at Chalk Farm. She was ingenious and uncandid,
therefore, about leaving the breadth of London a little longer between
herself and that austerity. If she hadn’t quite the courage in short to
say to Mr. Mudge that her actual chance for a play of mind was worth
any week the three shillings he desired to help her to save, she yet
saw something happen in the course of the month that in her heart of
hearts at least answered the subtle question. This was connected
precisely with the appearance of the memorable lady.




CHAPTER III.


She pushed in three bescribbled forms which the girl’s hand was quick
to appropriate, Mr. Buckton having so frequent a perverse instinct for
catching first any eye that promised the sort of entertainment with
which she had her peculiar affinity. The amusements of captives are
full of a desperate contrivance, and one of our young friend’s
ha’pennyworths had been the charming tale of _Picciola_. It was of
course the law of the place that they were never to take no notice, as
Mr. Buckton said, whom they served; but this also never prevented,
certainly on the same gentleman’s own part, what he was fond of
describing as the underhand game. Both her companions, for that matter,
made no secret of the number of favourites they had among the ladies;
sweet familiarities in spite of which she had repeatedly caught each of
them in stupidities and mistakes, confusions of identity and lapses of
observation that never failed to remind her how the cleverness of men
ends where the cleverness of women begins. “Marguerite, Regent Street.
Try on at six. All Spanish lace. Pearls. The full length.” That was the
first; it had no signature. “Lady Agnes Orme, Hyde Park Place.
Impossible to-night, dining Haddon. Opera to-morrow, promised Fritz,
but could do play Wednesday. Will try Haddon for Savoy, and anything in
the world you like, if you can get Gussy. Sunday Montenero. Sit Mason
Monday, Tuesday. Marguerite awful. Cissy.” That was the second. The
third, the girl noted when she took it, was on a foreign form:
“Everard, Hôtel Brighton, Paris. Only understand and believe. 22nd to
26th, and certainly 8th and 9th. Perhaps others. Come. Mary.”

Mary was very handsome, the handsomest woman, she felt in a moment, she
had ever seen—or perhaps it was only Cissy. Perhaps it was both, for
she had seen stranger things than that—ladies wiring to different
persons under different names. She had seen all sorts of things and
pieced together all sorts of mysteries. There had once been one—not
long before—who, without winking, sent off five over five different
signatures. Perhaps these represented five different friends who had
asked her—all women, just as perhaps now Mary and Cissy, or one or
other of them, were wiring by deputy. Sometimes she put in too much—too
much of her own sense; sometimes she put in too little; and in either
case this often came round to her afterwards, for she had an
extraordinary way of keeping clues. When she noticed she noticed; that
was what it came to. There were days and days, there were weeks
sometimes, of vacancy. This arose often from Mr. Buckton’s devilish and
successful subterfuges for keeping her at the sounder whenever it
looked as if anything might arouse; the sounder, which it was equally
his business to mind, being the innermost cell of captivity, a cage
within the cage, fenced oft from the rest by a frame of ground glass.
The counter-clerk would have played into her hands; but the
counter-clerk was really reduced to idiocy by the effect of his passion
for her. She flattered herself moreover, nobly, that with the
unpleasant conspicuity of this passion she would never have consented
to be obliged to him. The most she would ever do would be always to
shove off on him whenever she could the registration of letters, a job
she happened particularly to loathe. After the long stupors, at all
events, there almost always suddenly would come a sharp taste of
something; it was in her mouth before she knew it; it was in her mouth
now.

To Cissy, to Mary, whichever it was, she found her curiosity going out
with a rush, a mute effusion that floated back to her, like a returning
tide, the living colour and splendour of the beautiful head, the light
of eyes that seemed to reflect such utterly other things than the mean
things actually before them; and, above all, the high curt
consideration of a manner that even at bad moments was a magnificent
habit and of the very essence of the innumerable things—her beauty, her
birth, her father and mother, her cousins and all her ancestors—that
its possessor couldn’t have got rid of even had she wished. How did our
obscure little public servant know that for the lady of the telegrams
this was a bad moment? How did she guess all sorts of impossible
things, such as, almost on the very spot, the presence of drama at a
critical stage and the nature of the tie with the gentleman at the
Hôtel Brighton? More than ever before it floated to her through the
bars of the cage that this at last was the high reality, the bristling
truth that she had hitherto only patched up and eked out—one of the
creatures, in fine, in whom all the conditions for happiness actually
met, and who, in the air they made, bloomed with an unwitting
insolence. What came home to the girl was the way the insolence was
tempered by something that was equally a part of the distinguished
life, the custom of a flowerlike bend to the less fortunate—a dropped
fragrance, a mere quick breath, but which in fact pervaded and
lingered. The apparition was very young, but certainly married, and our
fatigued friend had a sufficient store of mythological comparison to
recognise the port of Juno. Marguerite might be “awful,” but she knew
how to dress a goddess.

Pearls and Spanish lace—she herself, with assurance, could see them,
and the “full length” too, and also red velvet bows, which, disposed on
the lace in a particular manner (she could have placed them with the
turn of a hand) were of course to adorn the front of a black brocade
that would be like a dress in a picture. However, neither Marguerite
nor Lady Agnes nor Haddon nor Fritz nor Gussy was what the wearer of
this garment had really come in for. She had come in for Everard—and
that was doubtless not his true name either. If our young lady had
never taken such jumps before it was simply that she had never before
been so affected. She went all the way. Mary and Cissy had been round
together, in their single superb person, to see him—he must live round
the corner; they had found that, in consequence of something they had
come, precisely, to make up for or to have another scene about, he had
gone off—gone off just on purpose to make them feel it; on which they
had come together to Cocker’s as to the nearest place; where they had
put in the three forms partly in order not to put in the one alone. The
two others in a manner, covered it, muffled it, passed it off. Oh yes,
she went all the way, and this was a specimen of how she often went.
She would know the hand again any time. It was as handsome and as
everything else as the woman herself. The woman herself had, on
learning his flight, pushed past Everard’s servant and into his room;
she had written her missive at his table and with his pen. All this,
every inch of it, came in the waft that she blew through and left
behind her, the influence that, as I have said, lingered. And among the
things the girl was sure of, happily, was that she should see her
again.




