CHAPTER V


Léon strode ahead as if he knew exactly where he was going; the sobs of
Madame were still faintly audible, and no one uttered a word. A dog
barked furiously in a courtyard as they went by; then the church clock
struck two, and many domestic clocks followed or preceded it in piping
tones. And just then Berthelini spied a light. It burned in a small
house on the outskirts of the town, and thither the party now directed
their steps.

“It is always a chance,” said Léon.

The house in question stood back from the street behind an open space,
part garden, part turnip-field; and several outhouses stood forward
from either wing at right angles to the front. One of these had
recently undergone some change. An enormous window, looking towards the
north, had been effected in the wall and roof, and Léon began to hope
it was a studio.

“If it’s only a painter,” he said with a chuckle, “ten to one we get as
good a welcome as we want.”

“I thought painters were principally poor,” said Stubbs.

“Ah!” cried Léon, “you do not know the world as I do. The poorer the
better for us!”

And the trio advanced into the turnip-field.

The light was in the ground floor; as one window was brightly
illuminated and two others more faintly, it might be supposed that
there was a single lamp in one corner of a large apartment; and a
certain tremulousness and temporary dwindling showed that a live fire
contributed to the effect. The sound of a voice now became audible; and
the trespassers paused to listen. It was pitched in a high, angry key,
but had still a good, full, and masculine note in it. The utterance was
voluble, too voluble even to be quite distinct; a stream of words,
rising and falling, with ever and again a phrase thrown out by itself,
as if the speaker reckoned on its virtue.

Suddenly another voice joined in. This time it was a woman’s; and if
the man were angry, the woman was incensed to the degree of fury. There
was that absolutely blank composure known to suffering males; that
colourless unnatural speech which shows a spirit accurately balanced
between homicide and hysterics; the tone in which the best of women
sometimes utter words worse than death to those most dear to them. If
Abstract Bones-and-Sepulchre were to be endowed with the gift of
speech, thus, and not otherwise, would it discourse. Léon was a brave
man, and I fear he was somewhat sceptically given (he had been educated
in a Papistical country), but the habit of childhood prevailed, and he
crossed himself devoutly. He had met several women in his career. It
was obvious that his instinct had not deceived him, for the male voice
broke forth instantly in a towering passion.

The undergraduate, who had not understood the significance of the
woman’s contribution, pricked up his ears at the change upon the man.

“There’s going to be a free fight,” he opined.

There was another retort from the woman, still calm but a little
higher.

“Hysterics?” asked Léon of his wife. “Is that the stage direction?”

“How should I know?” returned Elvira, somewhat tartly.

“Oh, woman, woman!” said Léon, beginning to open the guitar-case. “It
is one of the burdens of my life, Monsieur Stubbs; they support each
other; they always pretend there is no system; they say it’s nature.
Even Madame Berthelini, who is a dramatic artist!”

“You are heartless, Léon,” said Elvira; “that woman is in trouble.”

“And the man, my angel?” inquired Berthelini, passing the ribbon of his
guitar. “And the man, _m’amour_?”

“He is a man,” she answered.

“You hear that?” said Léon to Stubbs. “It is not too late for you. Mark
the intonation. And now,” he continued, “what are we to give them?”

“Are you going to sing?” asked Stubbs.

“I am a troubadour,” replied Léon. “I claim a welcome by and for my
art. If I were a banker could I do as much?”

“Well, you wouldn’t need, you know,” answered the undergraduate.

“Egad,” said Léon, “but that’s true. Elvira, that is true.”

“Of course it is,” she replied. “Did you not know it?”

“My dear,” answered Léon impressively, “I know nothing but what is
agreeable. Even my knowledge of life is a work of art superiorly
composed. But what are we to give them? It should be something
appropriate.”

Visions of “Let dogs delight” passed through the undergraduate’s mind;
but it occurred to him that the poetry was English and that he did not
know the air. Hence he contributed no suggestion.

“Something about our houselessness,” said Elvira.

“I have it,” cried Léon. And he broke forth into a song of Pierre
Dupont’s:—

“Savez-vous où gite,
Mai, ce joli mois?”


Elvira joined in; so did Stubbs, with a good ear and voice, but an
imperfect acquaintance with the music. Léon and the guitar were equal
to the situation. The actor dispensed his throat-notes with prodigality
and enthusiasm; and, as he looked up to heaven in his heroic way,
tossing the black ringlets, it seemed to him that the very stars
contributed a dumb applause to his efforts, and the universe lent him
its silence for a chorus. That is one of the best features of the
heavenly bodies, that they belong to everybody in particular; and a man
like Léon, a chronic Endymion who managed to get along without
encouragement, is always the world’s centre for himself.

He alone—and it is to be noted, he was the worst singer of the
three—took the music seriously to heart, and judged the serenade from a
high artistic point of view. Elvira, on the other hand, was preoccupied
about their reception; and, as for Stubbs, he considered the whole
affair in the light of a broad joke.

“Know you the lair of May, the lovely month?” went the three voices in
the turnip-field.

The inhabitants were plainly fluttered; the light moved to and fro,
strengthening in one window, paling in another; and then the door was
thrown open, and a man in a blouse appeared on the threshold carrying a
lamp. He was a powerful young fellow, with bewildered hair and beard,
wearing his neck open; his blouse was stained with oil-colours in a
harlequinesque disorder; and there was something rural in the droop and
bagginess of his belted trousers.

From immediately behind him, and indeed over his shoulder, a woman’s
face looked out into the darkness; it was pale and a little weary,
although still young; it wore a dwindling, disappearing prettiness,
soon to be quite gone, and the expression was both gentle and sour, and
reminded one faintly of the taste of certain drugs. For all that, it
was not a face to dislike; when the prettiness had vanished, it seemed
as if a certain pale beauty might step in to take its place; and as
both the mildness and the asperity were characters of youth, it might
be hoped that, with years, both would merge into a constant, brave, and
not unkindly temper.

“What is all this?” cried the man.




