CHAPTER VI


Léon had his hat in his hand at once. He came forward with his
customary grace; it was a moment which would have earned him a round of
cheering on the stage. Elvira and Stubbs advanced behind him, like a
couple of Admetus’s sheep following the god Apollo.

“Sir,” said Léon, “the hour is unpardonably late, and our little
serenade has the air of an impertinence. Believe me, sir, it is an
appeal. Monsieur is an artist, I perceive. We are here three artists
benighted and without shelter, one a woman—a delicate woman—in evening
dress—in an interesting situation. This will not fail to touch the
woman’s heart of Madame, whom I perceive indistinctly behind Monsieur
her husband, and whose face speaks eloquently of a well-regulated mind.
Ah! Monsieur, Madame—one generous movement, and you make three people
happy! Two or three hours beside your fire—I ask it of Monsieur in the
name of Art—I ask it of Madame by the sanctity of womanhood.”

The two, as by a tacit consent, drew back from the door.

“Come in,” said the man.

“Entrez, Madame,” said the woman.

The door opened directly upon the kitchen of the house, which was to
all appearance the only sitting-room. The furniture was both plain and
scanty; but there were one or two landscapes on the wall handsomely
framed, as if they had already visited the committee-rooms of an
exhibition and been thence extruded. Léon walked up to the pictures and
represented the part of a connoisseur before each in turn, with his
usual dramatic insight and force. The master of the house, as if
irresistibly attracted, followed him from canvas to canvas with the
lamp. Elvira was led directly to the fire, where she proceeded to warm
herself, while Stubbs stood in the middle of the floor and followed the
proceedings of Léon with mild astonishment in his eyes.

“You should see them by daylight,” said the artist.

“I promise myself that pleasure,” said Léon. “You possess, sir, if you
will permit me an observation, the art of composition to a T.”

“You are very good,” returned the other. “But should you not draw
nearer to the fire?”

“With all my heart,” said Léon.

And the whole party was soon gathered at the table over a hasty and not
an elegant cold supper, washed down with the least of small wines.
Nobody liked the meal, but nobody complained; they put a good face upon
it, one and all, and made a great clattering of knives and forks. To
see Léon eating a single cold sausage was to see a triumph; by the time
he had done he had got through as much pantomime as would have sufficed
for a baron of beef, and he had the relaxed expression of the
over-eaten.

As Elvira had naturally taken a place by the side of Léon, and Stubbs
as naturally, although I believe unconsciously, by the side of Elvira,
the host and hostess were left together. Yet it was to be noted that
they never addressed a word to each other, nor so much as suffered
their eyes to meet. The interrupted skirmish still survived in
ill-feeling; and the instant the guests departed it would break forth
again as bitterly as ever. The talk wandered from this to that
subject—for with one accord the party had declared it was too late to
go to bed; but those two never relaxed towards each other; Goneril and
Regan in a sisterly tiff were not more bent on enmity.

It chanced that Elvira was so much tired by all the little excitements
of the night, that for once she laid aside her company manners, which
were both easy and correct, and in the most natural manner in the world
leaned her head on Léon’s shoulder. At the same time, fatigue
suggesting tenderness, she locked the fingers of her right hand into
those of her husband’s left; and, half closing her eyes, dozed off into
a golden borderland between sleep and waking. But all the time she was
not aware of what was passing, and saw the painter’s wife studying her
with looks between contempt and envy.

It occurred to Léon that his constitution demanded the use of some
tobacco; and he undid his fingers from Elvira’s in order to roll a
cigarette. It was gently done, and he took care that his indulgence
should in no other way disturb his wife’s position. But it seemed to
catch the eye of the painter’s wife with a special significancy. She
looked straight before her for an instant, and then, with a swift and
stealthy movement, took hold of her husband’s hand below the table.
Alas! she might have spared herself the dexterity. For the poor fellow
was so overcome by this caress that he stopped with his mouth open in
the middle of a word, and by the expression of his face plainly
declared to all the company that his thoughts had been diverted into
softer channels.

If it had not been rather amiable, it would have been absurdly droll.
His wife at once withdrew her touch; but it was plain she had to exert
some force. Thereupon the young man coloured and looked for a moment
beautiful.

Léon and Elvira both observed the byplay, and a shock passed from one
to the other; for they were inveterate match-makers, especially between
those who were already married.

“I beg your pardon,” said Léon suddenly. “I see no use in pretending.
Before we came in here we heard sounds indicating—if I may so express
myself—an imperfect harmony.”

“Sir—” began the man.

But the woman was beforehand.

“It is quite true,” she said. “I see no cause to be ashamed. If my
husband is mad I shall at least do my utmost to prevent the
consequences. Picture to yourself, Monsieur and Madame,” she went on,
for she passed Stubbs over, “that this wretched person—a dauber, an
incompetent, not fit to be a sign-painter—receives this morning an
admirable offer from an uncle—an uncle of my own, my mother’s brother,
and tenderly beloved—of a clerkship with nearly a hundred and fifty
pounds a year, and that he—picture to yourself!—he refuses it! Why? For
the sake of Art, he says. Look at his art, I say—look at it! Is it fit
to be seen? Ask him—is it fit to be sold? And it is for this, Monsieur
and Madame, that he condemns me to the most deplorable existence,
without luxuries, without comforts, in a vile suburb of a country town.
O non!” she cried, “non—je ne me tairai pas—c’est plus fort que moi! I
take these gentlemen and this lady for judges—is this kind? is it
decent? is it manly? Do I not deserve better at his hands after having
married him and”—(a visible hitch)—“done everything in the world to
please him.”

I doubt if there were ever a more embarrassed company at a table; every
one looked like a fool; and the husband like the biggest.

“The art of Monsieur, however,” said Elvira, breaking the silence, “is
not wanting in distinction.”

“It has this distinction,” said the wife, “that nobody will buy it.”

“I should have supposed a clerkship—” began Stubbs.

“Art is Art,” swept in Léon. “I salute Art. It is the beautiful, the
divine; it is the spirit of the world, and the pride of life. But—” And
the actor paused.

“A clerkship—” began Stubbs.

“I’ll tell you what it is,” said the painter. “I am an artist, and as
this gentleman says, Art is this and the other; but of course, if my
wife is going to make my life a piece of perdition all day long, I
prefer to go and drown myself out of hand.”

“Go!” said his wife. “I should like to see you!”

“I was going to say,” resumed Stubbs, “that a fellow may be a clerk and
paint almost as much as he likes. I know a fellow in a bank who makes
capital water-colour sketches; he even sold one for seven-and-six.”

To both the women this seemed a plank of safety; each hopefully
interrogated the countenance of her lord; even Elvira, an artist
herself!—but indeed there must be something permanently mercantile in
the female nature. The two men exchanged a glance; it was tragic; not
otherwise might two philosophers salute, as at the end of a laborious
life each recognised that he was still a mystery to his disciples.

Léon arose.

“Art is Art,” he repeated sadly. “It is not water-colour sketches, nor
practising on a piano. It is a life to be lived.”

“And in the meantime people starve!” observed the woman of the house.
“If that’s a life, it is not one for me.”

“I’ll tell you what,” burst forth Léon; “you, Madame, go into another
room and talk it over with my wife; and I’ll stay here and talk it over
with your husband. It may come to nothing, but let’s try.”

“I am very willing,” replied the young woman; and she proceeded to
light a candle. “This way if you please.” And she led Elvira upstairs
into a bedroom. “The fact is,” said she, sitting down, “that my husband
cannot paint.”

“No more can mine act,” replied Elvira.

“I should have thought he could,” returned the other; “he seems
clever.”

“He is so, and the best of men besides,” said Elvira; “but he cannot
act.”

“At least he is not a sheer humbug like mine; he can at least sing.”

“You mistake Léon,” returned his wife warmly. “He does not even pretend
to sing; he has too fine a taste; he does so for a living. And, believe
me, neither of the men are humbugs. They are people with a
mission—which they cannot carry out.”

“Humbug or not,” replied the other, “you came very near passing the
night in the fields; and, for my part, I live in terror of starvation.
I should think it was a man’s mission to think twice about his wife.
But it appears not. Nothing is their mission but to play the fool. Oh!”
she broke out, “is it not something dreary to think of that man of
mine? If he could only do it, who would care? But no—not he—no more
than I can!”

“Have you any children?” asked Elvira.

“No; but then I may.”

“Children change so much,” said Elvira, with a sigh.

And just then from the room below there flew up a sudden snapping chord
on the guitar; one followed after another; then the voice of Léon
joined in; and there was an air being played and sung that stopped the
speech of the two women. The wife of the painter stood like a person
transfixed; Elvira, looking into her eyes, could see all manner of
beautiful memories and kind thoughts that were passing in and out of
her soul with every note; it was a piece of her youth that went before
her; a green French plain, the smell of apple-flowers, the far and
shining ringlets of a river, and the words and presence of love.

“Léon has hit the nail,” thought Elvira to herself. “I wonder how.”

The how was plain enough. Léon had asked the painter if there were no
air connected with courtship and pleasant times; and having learnt what
he wished, and allowed an interval to pass, he had soared forth into

“O mon amante,
O mon désir,
Sachons cueillir
L’heure charmante!”


“Pardon me, Madame,” said the painter’s wife, “your husband sings
admirably well.”

“He sings that with some feeling,” replied Elvira, critically, although
she was a little moved herself, for the song cut both ways in the upper
chamber; “but it is as an actor and not as a musician.”

“Life is very sad,” said the other; “it so wastes away under one’s
fingers.”

“I have not found it so,” replied Elvira. “I think the good parts of it
last and grow greater every day.”

“Frankly, how would you advise me?”

“Frankly, I would let my husband do what he wished. He is obviously a
very loving painter; you have not yet tried him as a clerk. And you
know—if it were only as the possible father of your children—it is as
well to keep him at his best.”

“He is an excellent fellow,” said the wife.


They kept it up till sunrise with music and all manner of good
fellowship; and at sunrise, while the sky was still temperate and
clear, they separated on the threshold with a thousand excellent wishes
for each other’s welfare. Castel-le-Gâchis was beginning to send up its
smoke against the golden East; and the church bell was ringing six.

“My guitar is a familiar spirit,” said Léon, as he and Elvira took the
nearest way towards the inn, “it resuscitated a Commissary, created an
English tourist, and reconciled a man and wife.”

Stubbs, on his part, went off into the morning with reflections of his
own.

“They are all mad,” thought he, “all mad—but wonderfully decent.”


THE END


Printed by Spottiswoode, Ballantyne & Co. Ltd.
Colchester, London & Eton, England




