CHAPTER IV


To the west of Castel-le-Gâchis four rows of venerable lime-trees
formed, in this starry night, a twilit avenue with two side aisles of
pitch darkness. Here and there stone benches were disposed between the
trunks. There was not a breath of wind; a heavy atmosphere of perfume
hung about the alleys; and every leaf stood stock-still upon its twig.
Hither, after vainly knocking at an inn or two, the Berthelinis came at
length to pass the night. After an amiable contention, Léon insisted on
giving his coat to Elvira, and they sat down together on the first
bench in silence. Léon made a cigarette, which he smoked to an end,
looking up into the trees, and, beyond them, at the constellations, of
which he tried vainly to recall the names. The silence was broken by
the church bell; it rang the four quarters on a light and tinkling
measure; then followed a single deep stroke that died slowly away with
a thrill; and stillness resumed its empire.

“One,” said Léon. “Four hours till daylight. It is warm; it is starry;
I have matches and tobacco. Do not let us exaggerate, Elvira—the
experience is positively charming. I feel a glow within me; I am born
again. This is the poetry of life. Think of Cooper’s novels, my dear.”

“Léon,” she said fiercely, “how can you talk such wicked, infamous
nonsense? To pass all night out-of-doors—it is like a nightmare! We
shall die.”

“You suffer yourself to be led away,” he replied soothingly. “It is not
unpleasant here; only you brood. Come, now, let us repeat a scene.
Shall we try Alceste and Célimène? No? Or a passage from the ‘Two
Orphans’? Come, now, it will occupy your mind; I will play up to you as
I never have played before; I feel art moving in my bones.”

“Hold your tongue,” she cried, “or you will drive me mad! Will nothing
solemnise you—not even this hideous situation?”

“Oh, hideous!” objected Léon. “Hideous is not the word. Why, where
would you be? ‘Dites, la jeune belle, où voulez-vous aller?’” he
carolled. “Well, now,” he went on, opening the guitar-case, “there’s
another idea for you—sing. Sing ‘Dites, la jeune belle!’ It will
compose your spirits, Elvira, I am sure.”

And without waiting an answer he began to strum the symphony. The first
chords awoke a young man who was lying asleep upon a neighbouring
bench.

“Hullo!” cried the young man, “who are you?”

“Under which king, Bezonian?” declaimed the artist. “Speak or die!”

Or if it was not exactly that, it was something to much the same
purpose from a French tragedy.

The young man drew near in the twilight. He was a tall, powerful,
gentlemanly fellow, with a somewhat puffy face, dressed in a grey tweed
suit, with a deer-stalker hat of the same material; and as he now came
forward he carried a knapsack slung upon one arm.

“Are you camping out here too?” he asked, with a strong English accent.
“I’m not sorry for company.”

Léon explained their misadventure; and the other told them that he was
a Cambridge undergraduate on a walking tour, that he had run short of
money, could no longer pay for his night’s lodging, had already been
camping out for two nights, and feared he should require to continue
the same manœuvre for at least two nights more.

“Luckily, it’s jolly weather,” he concluded.

“You hear that, Elvira,” said Léon. “Madame Berthelini,” he went on,
“is ridiculously affected by this trifling occurrence. For my part, I
find it romantic and far from uncomfortable; or at least,” he added,
shifting on the stone bench, “not quite so uncomfortable as might have
been expected. But pray be seated.”

“Yes,” returned the undergraduate, sitting down, “it’s rather nice than
otherwise when once you’re used to it; only it’s devilish difficult to
get washed. I like the fresh air and these stars and things.”

“Aha!” said Léon, “Monsieur is an artist.”

“An artist?” returned the other, with a blank stare. “Not if I know
it!”

“Pardon me,” said the actor. “What you said this moment about the orbs
of heaven—”

“Oh, nonsense!” cried the Englishman. “A fellow may admire the stars
and be anything he likes.”

“You have an artist’s nature, however, Mr.—I beg your pardon; may I,
without indiscretion, inquire your name?” asked Léon.

“My name is Stubbs,” replied the Englishman.

“I thank you,” returned Léon. “Mine is Berthelini—Léon Berthelini,
ex-artist of the theatres of Montrouge, Belleville, and Montmartre.
Humble as you see me, I have created with applause more than one
important _rôle_. The Press were unanimous in praise of my Howling
Devil of the Mountains, in the piece of the same name. Madame, whom I
now present to you, is herself an artist, and I must not omit to state,
a better artist than her husband. She also is a creator; she created
nearly twenty successful songs at one of the principal Parisian
music-halls. But, to continue, I was saying you had an artist’s nature,
Monsieur Stubbs, and you must permit me to be a judge in such a
question. I trust you will not falsify your instincts; let me beseech
you to follow the career of an artist.”

“Thank you,” returned Stubbs, with a chuckle. “I’m going to be a
banker.”

“No,” said Léon, “do not say so. Not that. A man with such a nature as
yours should not derogate so far. What are a few privations here and
there, so long as you are working for a high and noble goal?”

“This fellow’s mad,” thought Stubbs; “but the woman’s rather pretty,
and he’s not bad fun himself, if you come to that.” What he said was
different. “I thought you said you were an actor?”

“I certainly did so,” replied Léon. “I am one, or, alas! I was.”

“And so you want me to be an actor, do you?” continued the
undergraduate. “Why, man, I could never so much as learn the stuff; my
memory’s like a sieve; and as for acting, I’ve no more idea than a
cat.”

“The stage is not the only course,” said Léon. “Be a sculptor, be a
dancer, be a poet or a novelist; follow your heart, in short, and do
some thorough work before you die.”

“And do you call all these things _art_?” inquired Stubbs.

“Why, certainly!” returned Léon. “Are they not all branches?”

“Oh! I didn’t know,” replied the Englishman. “I thought an artist meant
a fellow who painted.”

The singer stared at him in some surprise.

“It is the difference of language,” he said at last. “This Tower of
Babel, when shall we have paid for it? If I could speak English you
would follow me more readily.”

“Between you and me, I don’t believe I should,” replied the other. “You
seem to have thought a devil of a lot about this business. For my part,
I admire the stars, and like to have them shining—it’s so cheery—but
hang me if I had an idea it had anything to do with art! It’s not in my
line, you see. I’m not intellectual; I have no end of trouble to scrape
through my exams., I can tell you! But I’m not a bad sort at bottom,”
he added, seeing his interlocutor looked distressed even in the dim
starshine, “and I rather like the play, and music, and guitars, and
things.”

Léon had a perception that the understanding was incomplete. He changed
the subject.

“And so you travel on foot?” he continued. “How romantic! How
courageous! And how are you pleased with my land? How does the scenery
affect you among these wild hills of ours?”

“Well, the fact is,” began Stubbs—he was about to say that he didn’t
care for scenery, which was not at all true, being, on the contrary,
only an athletic undergraduate pretension; but he had begun to suspect
that Berthelini liked a different sort of meat, and substituted
something else—“The fact is, I think it jolly. They told me it was no
good up here; even the guide-book said so; but I don’t know what they
meant. I think it is deuced pretty—upon my word, I do.”

At this moment, in the most unexpected manner, Elvira burst into tears.

“My voice!” she cried. “Léon, if I stay here longer I shall lose my
voice!”

“You shall not stay another moment,” cried the actor. “If I have to
beat in a door, if I have to burn the town, I shall find you shelter.”

With that he replaced the guitar, and comforting her with some
caresses, drew her arm through his.

“Monsieur Stubbs,” said he, taking of his hat, “the reception I offer
you is rather problematical; but let me beseech you to give us the
pleasure of your society. You are a little embarrassed for the moment;
you must, indeed, permit me to advance what may be necessary. I ask it
as a favour; we must not part so soon after having met so strangely.”

“Oh, come, you know,” said Stubbs, “I can’t let a fellow like you—” And
there he paused, feeling somehow or other on a wrong tack.

“I do not wish to employ menaces,” continued Léon, with a smile; “but
if you refuse, indeed I shall not take it kindly.”

“I don’t quite see my way out of it,” thought the undergraduate; and
then, after a pause, he said, aloud and ungraciously enough, “All
right. I—I’m very much obliged, of course.” And he proceeded to follow
them, thinking in his heart, “But it’s bad form, all the same, to force
an obligation on a fellow.”




