CHAPTER III


The “Black Head” presented not a single chink of light upon the street,
and the carriage gate was closed.

“This is unprecedented,” observed Léon. “An inn closed by five minutes
after eleven! And there were several commercial travellers in the café
up to a late hour. Elvira, my heart misgives me. Let us ring the bell.”

The bell had a potent note; and being swung under the arch it filled
the house from top to bottom with surly, clanging reverberations. The
sound accentuated the conventual appearance of the building; a wintry
sentiment, a thought of prayer and mortification, took hold upon
Elvira’s mind; and, as for Léon, he seemed to be reading the stage
directions for a lugubrious fifth act.

“This is your fault,” said Elvira: “this is what comes of fancying
things!”

Again Léon pulled the bell-rope; again the solemn tocsin awoke the
echoes of the inn; and ere they had died away, a light glimmered in the
carriage entrance, and a powerful voice was heard upraised and
tremulous with wrath.

“What’s all this?” cried the tragic host through the spars of the gate.
“Hard upon twelve, and you come clamouring like Prussians at the door
of a respectable hotel? Oh!” he cried, “I know you now! Common singers!
People in trouble with the police! And you present yourselves at
midnight like lords and ladies? Be off with you!”

“You will permit me to remind you,” replied Léon, in thrilling tones,
“that I am a guest in your house, that I am properly inscribed, and
that I have deposited baggage to the value of four hundred francs.”

“You cannot get in at this hour,” returned the man. “This is no
thieves’ tavern, for mohocks and night rakes and organ-grinders.”

“Brute!” cried Elvira, for the organ-grinders touched her home.

“Then I demand my baggage,” said Léon, with unabated dignity.

“I know nothing of your baggage,” replied the landlord.

“You detain my baggage? You dare to detain my baggage?” cried the
singer.

“Who are you?” returned the landlord. “It is dark—I cannot recognise
you.”

“Very well, then—you detain my baggage,” concluded Léon. “You shall
smart for this. I will weary out your life with persecutions; I will
drag you from court to court; if there is justice to be had in France,
it shall be rendered between you and me. And I will make you a
by-word—I will put you in a song—a scurrilous song—an indecent song—a
popular song—which the boys shall sing to you in the street, and come
and howl through these spars at midnight!”

He had gone on raising his voice at every phrase, for all the while the
landlord was very placidly retiring; and now, when the last glimmer of
light had vanished from the arch, and the last footstep died away in
the interior, Léon turned to his wife with a heroic countenance.

“Elvira,” said he, “I have now a duty in life. I shall destroy that man
as Eugène Sue destroyed the concierge. Let us come at once to the
Gendarmerie and begin our vengeance.”

He picked up the guitar-case, which had been propped against the wall,
and they set forth through the silent and ill-lighted town with burning
hearts.

The Gendarmerie was concealed beside the telegraph office at the bottom
of a vast court, which was partly laid out in gardens; and here all the
shepherds of the public lay locked in grateful sleep. It took a deal of
knocking to waken one; and he, when he came at last to the door, could
find no other remark but that “it was none of his business.” Léon
reasoned with him, threatened him, besought him; “here,” he said, “was
Madame Berthelini in evening dress—a delicate woman—in an interesting
condition”—the last was thrown in, I fancy, for effect; and to all this
the man-at-arms made the same answer:

“It is none of my business,” said he.

“Very well,” said Léon, “then we shall go to the Commissary.” Thither
they went; the office was closed and dark; but the house was close by,
and Léon was soon swinging the bell like a madman. The Commissary’s
wife appeared at a window. She was a thread-paper creature, and
informed them that the Commissary had not yet come home.

“Is he at the Maire’s?” demanded Léon.

She thought that was not unlikely.

“Where is the Maire’s house?” he asked.

And she gave him some rather vague information on that point.

“Stay you here, Elvira,” said Léon, “lest I should miss him by the way.
If, when I return, I find you here no longer, I shall follow at once to
the Black Head.”

And he set out to find the Maire’s. It took him some ten minutes
wandering among blind lanes, and when he arrived it was already
half-an-hour past midnight. A long white garden wall overhung by some
thick chestnuts, a door with a letter-box, and an iron bell-pull, that
was all that could be seen of the Maire’s domicile. Léon took the
bell-pull in both hands, and danced furiously upon the side-walk. The
bell itself was just upon the other side of the wall, it responded to
his activity, and scattered an alarming clangour far and wide into the
night.

A window was thrown open in a house across the street, and a voice
inquired the cause of this untimely uproar.

“I wish the Maire,” said Léon.

“He has been in bed this hour,” returned the voice.

“He must get up again,” retorted Léon, and he was for tackling the
bell-pull once more.

“You will never make him hear,” responded the voice. “The garden is of
great extent, the house is at the farther end, and both the Maire and
his housekeeper are deaf.”

“Aha!” said Léon, pausing. “The Maire is deaf, is he? That explains.”
And he thought of the evening’s concert with a momentary feeling of
relief. “Ah!” he continued, “and so the Maire is deaf, and the garden
vast, and the house at the far end?”

“And you might ring all night,” added the voice, “and be none the
better for it. You would only keep me awake.”

“Thank you, neighbour,” replied the singer. “You shall sleep.”

And he made off again at his best pace for the Commissary’s. Elvira was
still walking to and fro before the door.

“He has not come?” asked Léon.

“Not he,” she replied.

“Good,” returned Léon. “I am sure our man’s inside. Let me see the
guitar-case. I shall lay this siege in form, Elvira; I am angry; I am
indignant; I am truculently inclined; but I thank my Maker I have still
a sense of fun. The unjust judge shall be importuned in a serenade,
Elvira. Set him up—and set him up.”

He had the case opened by this time, struck a few chords, and fell into
an attitude which was irresistibly Spanish.

“Now,” he continued, “feel your voice. Are you ready? Follow me!”

The guitar twanged, and the two voices upraised, in harmony and with a
startling loudness, the chorus of a song of old Béranger’s:—

“Commissaire! Commissaire!
Colin bat sa ménagère.”


The stones of Castel-le-Gâchis thrilled at this audacious innovation.
Hitherto had the night been sacred to repose and nightcaps; and now
what was this? Window after window was opened; matches scratched, and
candles began to flicker; swollen sleepy faces peered forth into the
starlight. There were the two figures before the Commissary’s house,
each bolt upright, with head thrown back and eyes interrogating the
starry heavens; the guitar wailed, shouted, and reverberated like half
an orchestra; and the voices, with a crisp and spirited delivery,
hurled the appropriate burden at the Commissary’s window. All the
echoes repeated the functionary’s name. It was more like an entr’acte
in a farce of Molière’s than a passage of real life in
Castel-le-Gâchis.

The Commissary, if he was not the first, was not the last of the
neighbours to yield to the influence of music, and furiously throw open
the window of his bedroom. He was beside himself with rage. He leaned
far over the window-sill, raving and gesticulating; the tassel of his
white night-cap danced like a thing of life: he opened his mouth to
dimensions hitherto unprecedented, and yet his voice, instead of
escaping from it in a roar, came forth shrill and choked and tottering.
A little more serenading, and it was clear he would be better
acquainted with the apoplexy.

I scorn to reproduce his language; he touched upon too many serious
topics by the way for a quiet story-teller. Although he was known for a
man who was prompt with his tongue, and had a power of strong
expression at command, he excelled himself so remarkably this night
that one maiden lady, who had got out of bed like the rest to hear the
serenade, was obliged to shut her window at the second clause. Even
what she had heard disquieted her conscience; and next day she said she
scarcely reckoned as a maiden lady any longer.

Léon tried to explain his predicament, but he received nothing but
threats of arrest by way of answer.

“If I come down to you!” cried the Commissary.

“Aye,” said Léon, “do!”

“I will not!” cried the Commissary.

“You dare not!” answered Léon.

At that the Commissary closed his window.

“All is over,” said the singer. “The serenade was perhaps ill-judged.
These boors have no sense of humour.”

“Let us get away from here,” said Elvira, with a shiver. “All these
people looking—it is so rude and so brutal.” And then giving way once
more to passion—“Brutes!” she cried aloud to the candle-lit
spectators—“brutes! brutes! brutes!”

“Sauve qui peut,” said Léon. “You have done it now!”

And taking the guitar in one hand and the case in the other, he led the
way with something too precipitate to be merely called precipitation
from the scene of this absurd adventure.




