CHAPTER IX
TELLS HOW NORTHMOUR CARRIED OUT HIS THREAT


I should have the greatest difficulty to tell you what followed next
after this tragic circumstance. It is all to me, as I look back upon
it, mixed, strenuous, and ineffectual, like the struggles of a sleeper
in a nightmare. Clara, I remember, uttered a broken sigh and would have
fallen forward to earth, had not Northmour and I supported her
insensible body. I do not think we were attacked; I do not remember
even to have seen an assailant; and I believe we deserted Mr.
Huddlestone without a glance. I only remember running like a man in a
panic, now carrying Clara altogether in my own arms, now sharing her
weight with Northmour, now scuffling confusedly for the possession of
that dear burden. Why we should have made for my camp in the Hemlock
Den, or how we reached it, are points lost for ever to my recollection.
The first moment at which I became definitely sure, Clara had been
suffered to fall against the outside of my little tent, Northmour and I
were tumbling together on the ground, and he, with contained ferocity,
was striking for my head with the butt of his revolver. He had already
twice wounded me on the scalp; and it is to the consequent loss of
blood that I am tempted to attribute the sudden clearness of my mind.

I caught him by the wrist.

“Northmour,” I remember saying, “you can kill me afterwards. Let us
first attend to Clara.”

He was at that moment uppermost. Scarcely had the words passed my lips,
when he had leaped to his feet and ran towards the tent; and the next
moment, he was straining Clara to his heart and covering her
unconscious hands and face with his caresses.

“Shame!” I cried. “Shame to you, Northmour!”

And, giddy though I still was, I struck him repeatedly upon the head
and shoulders.

He relinquished his grasp, and faced me in the broken moonlight.

“I had you under, and I let you go,” said he; “and now you strike me!
Coward!”

“You are the coward,” I retorted. “Did she wish your kisses while she
was still sensible of what she wanted? Not she! And now she may be
dying; and you waste this precious time, and abuse her helplessness.
Stand aside, and let me help her.”

He confronted me for a moment, white and menacing; then suddenly he
stepped aside.

“Help her then,” said he.

I threw myself on my knees beside her, and loosened, as well as I was
able, her dress and corset; but while I was thus engaged, a grasp
descended on my shoulder.

“Keep your hands off her,” said Northmour fiercely. “Do you think I
have no blood in my veins?”

“Northmour,” I cried, “if you will neither help her yourself, nor let
me do so, do you know that I shall have to kill you?”

“That is better!” he cried. “Let her die also, where’s the harm? Step
aside from that girl! and stand up to fight”

“You will observe,” said I, half rising, “that I have not kissed her
yet.”

“I dare you to,” he cried.

I do not know what possessed me; it was one of the things I am most
ashamed of in my life, though, as my wife used to say, I knew that my
kisses would be always welcome were she dead or living; down I fell
again upon my knees, parted the hair from her forehead, and, with the
dearest respect, laid my lips for a moment on that cold brow. It was
such a caress as a father might have given; it was such a one as was
not unbecoming from a man soon to die to a woman already dead.

“And now,” said I, “I am at your service, Mr. Northmour.”

But I saw, to my surprise, that he had turned his back upon me.

“Do you hear?” I asked.

“Yes,” said he, “I do. If you wish to fight, I am ready. If not, go on
and save Clara. All is one to me.”

I did not wait to be twice bidden; but, stooping again over Clara,
continued my efforts to revive her. She still lay white and lifeless; I
began to fear that her sweet spirit had indeed fled beyond recall, and
horror and a sense of utter desolation seized upon my heart. I called
her by name with the most endearing inflections; I chafed and beat her
hands; now I laid her head low, now supported it against my knee; but
all seemed to be in vain, and the lids still lay heavy on her eyes.

“Northmour,” I said, “there is my hat. For God’s sake bring some water
from the spring.”

Almost in a moment he was by my side with the water. “I have brought it
in my own,” he said. “You do not grudge me the privilege?”

“Northmour,” I was beginning to say, as I laved her head and breast;
but he interrupted me savagely.

“Oh, you hush up!” he said. “The best thing you can do is to say
nothing.”

I had certainly no desire to talk, my mind being swallowed up in
concern for my dear love and her condition; so I continued in silence
to do my best towards her recovery, and, when the hat was empty,
returned it to him, with one word—“More.” He had, perhaps, gone several
times upon this errand, when Clara reopened her eyes.

“Now,” said he, “since she is better, you can spare me, can you not? I
wish you a good night, Mr. Cassilis.”

And with that he was gone among the thicket. I made a fire, for I had
now no fear of the Italians, who had even spared all the little
possessions left in my encampment; and, broken as she was by the
excitement and the hideous catastrophe of the evening, I managed, in
one way or another—by persuasion, encouragement, warmth, and such
simple remedies as I could lay my hand on—to bring her back to some
composure of mind and strength of body.

Day had already come, when a sharp “Hist!” sounded from the thicket. I
started from the ground; but the voice of Northmour was heard adding,
in the most tranquil tones: “Come here, Cassilis, and alone; I want to
show you something.”

I consulted Clara with my eyes, and, receiving her tacit permission,
left her alone, and clambered out of the den. At some distance of I saw
Northmour leaning against an elder; and, as soon as he perceived me, he
began walking seaward. I had almost overtaken him as he reached the
outskirts of the wood.

“Look,” said he, pausing.

A couple of steps more brought me out of the foliage. The light of the
morning lay cold and clear over that well-known scene. The pavilion was
but a blackened wreck; the roof had fallen in, one of the gables had
fallen out; and, far and near, the face of the links was cicatrised
with little patches of burnt furze. Thick smoke still went straight
upwards in the windless air of the morning, and a great pile of ardent
cinders filled the bare walls of the house, like coals in an open
grate. Close by the islet a schooner yacht lay to, and a well-manned
boat was pulling vigorously for the shore.

“The _Red Earl_!” I cried. “The _Red Earl_ twelve hours too late!”

“Feel in your pocket, Frank. Are you armed?” asked Northmour.

I obeyed him, and I think I must have become deadly pale. My revolver
had been taken from me.

“You see I have you in my power,” he continued. “I disarmed you last
night while you were nursing Clara; but this morning—here—take your
pistol. No thanks!” he cried, holding up his hand. “I do not like them;
that is the only way you can annoy me now.”

He began to walk forward across the links to meet the boat, and I
followed a step or two behind. In front of the pavilion I paused to see
where Mr. Huddlestone had fallen; but there was no sign of him, nor so
much as a trace of blood.

“Graden Floe,” said Northmour.

He continued to advance till we had come to the head of the beach.

“No farther, please,” said he. “Would you like to take her to Graden
House?”

“Thank you,” replied I; “I shall try to get her to the minister’s at
Graden Wester.”

The prow of the boat here grated on the beach, and a sailor jumped
ashore with a line in his hand.

“Wait a minute, lads!” cried Northmour; and then lower and to my
private ear: “You had better say nothing of all this to her,” he added.

“On the contrary!” I broke out, “she shall know everything that I can
tell.”

“You do not understand,” he returned, with an air of great dignity. “It
will be nothing to her; she expects it of me. Good-bye!” he added, with
a nod.

I offered him my hand.

“Excuse me,” said he. “It’s small, I know; but I can’t push things
quite so far as that. I don’t wish any sentimental business, to sit by
your hearth a white-haired wanderer, and all that. Quite the contrary:
I hope to God I shall never again clap eyes on either one of you.”

“Well, God bless you, Northmour!” I said heartily.

“Oh, yes,” he returned.

He walked down the beach; and the man who was ashore gave him an arm on
board, and then shoved off and leaped into the bows himself. Northmour
took the tiller; the boat rose to the waves, and the oars between the
thole-pins sounded crisp and measured in the morning air.

They were not yet half-way to the _Red Earl_, and I was still watching
their progress, when the sun rose out of the sea.

One word more, and my story is done. Years after, Northmour was killed
fighting under the colours of Garibaldi for the liberation of the
Tyrol.




A LODGING FOR THE NIGHT
A STORY OF FRANCIS VILLON


It was late in November 1456. The snow fell over Paris with rigorous,
relentless persistence; sometimes the wind made a sally and scattered
it in flying vortices; sometimes there was a lull, and flake after
flake descended out of the black night air, silent, circuitous,
interminable. To poor people, looking up under moist eyebrows, it
seemed a wonder where it all came from. Master Francis Villon had
propounded an alternative that afternoon, at a tavern window: was it
only Pagan Jupiter plucking geese upon Olympus? or were the holy angels
moulting? He was only a poor Master of Arts, he went on; and as the
question somewhat touched upon divinity, he durst not venture to
conclude. A silly old priest from Montargis, who was among the company,
treated the young rascal to a bottle of wine in honour of the jest and
the grimaces with which it was accompanied, and swore on his own white
beard that he had been just such another irreverent dog when he was
Villon’s age.

The air was raw and pointed, but not far below freezing; and the flakes
were large, damp, and adhesive. The whole city was sheeted up. An army
might have marched from end to end and not a footfall given the alarm.
If there were any belated birds in heaven, they saw the island like a
large white patch, and the bridges like slim white spars, on the black
ground of the river. High up overhead the snow settled among the
tracery of the cathedral towers. Many a niche was drifted full; many a
statue wore a long white bonnet on its grotesque or sainted head. The
gargoyles had been transformed into great false noses, drooping towards
the point. The crockets were like upright pillows swollen on one side.
In the intervals of the wind, there was a dull sound of dripping about
the precincts of the church.

The cemetery of St. John had taken its own share of the snow. All the
graves were decently covered; tall white housetops stood around in
grave array; worthy burghers were long ago in bed, benightcapped like
their domiciles; there was no light in all the neighbourhood but a
little peep from a lamp that hung swinging in the church choir, and
tossed the shadows to and fro in time to its oscillations. The clock
was hard on ten when the patrol went by with halberds and a lantern,
beating their hands; and they saw nothing suspicious about the cemetery
of St. John.

Yet there was a small house, backed up against the cemetery wall, which
was still awake, and awake to evil purpose, in that snoring district.
There was not much to betray it from without; only a stream of warm
vapour from the chimney-top, a patch where the snow melted on the roof,
and a few half-obliterated footprints at the door. But within, behind
the shuttered windows, Master Francis Villon the poet, and some of the
thievish crew with whom he consorted, were keeping the night alive and
passing round the bottle.

A great pile of living embers diffused a strong and ruddy glow from the
arched chimney. Before this straddled Dom Nicolas, the Picardy monk,
with his skirts picked up and his fat legs bared to the comfortable
warmth. His dilated shadow cut the room in half; and the firelight only
escaped on either side of his broad person, and in a little pool
between his outspread feet. His face had the beery, bruised appearance
of the continual drinker’s; it was covered with a network of congested
veins, purple in ordinary circumstances, but now pale violet, for even
with his back to the fire the cold pinched him on the other side. His
cowl had half fallen back, and made a strange excrescence on either
side of his bull neck. So he straddled, grumbling, and cut the room in
half with the shadow of his portly frame.

On the right, Villon and Guy Tabary were huddled together over a scrap
of parchment; Villon making a ballade which he was to call the “Ballade
of Roast Fish,” and Tabary spluttering admiration at his shoulder. The
poet was a rag of a man, dark, little, and lean, with hollow cheeks and
thin black locks. He carried his four-and-twenty years with feverish
animation. Greed had made folds about his eyes, evil smiles had
puckered his mouth. The wolf and pig struggled together in his face. It
was an eloquent, sharp, ugly, earthly countenance. His hands were small
and prehensile, with fingers knotted like a cord; and they were
continually flickering in front of him in violent and expressive
pantomime. As for Tabary, a broad, complacent, admiring imbecility
breathed from his squash nose and slobbering lips: he had become a
thief, just as he might have become the most decent of burgesses, by
the imperious chance that rules the lives of human geese and human
donkeys.

At the monk’s other hand, Montigny and Thevenin Pensete played a game
of chance. About the first there clung some flavour of good birth and
training, as about a fallen angel; something long, lithe, and courtly
in the person; something aquiline and darkling in the face. Thevenin,
poor soul, was in great feather: he had done a good stroke of knavery
that afternoon in the Faubourg St. Jacques, and all night he had been
gaining from Montigny. A flat smile illuminated his face; his bald head
shone rosily in a garland of red curls; his little protuberant stomach
shook with silent chucklings as he swept in his gains.

“Doubles or quits?” said Thevenin. Montigny nodded grimly.

“_Some may prefer to dine in state_,” wrote Villon, “_On bread and
cheese on silver plate_. Or—or—help me out, Guido!”

Tabary giggled.

“_Or parsley on a golden dish_,” scribbled the poet.

The wind was freshening without; it drove the snow before it, and
sometimes raised its voice in a victorious whoop, and made sepulchral
grumblings in the chimney. The cold was growing sharper as the night
went on. Villon, protruding his lips, imitated the gust with something
between a whistle and a groan. It was an eerie, uncomfortable talent of
the poet’s, much detested by the Picardy monk.

“Can’t you hear it rattle in the gibbet?” said Villon. “They are all
dancing the devil’s jig on nothing, up there. You may dance, my
gallants, you’ll be none the warmer! Whew! what a gust! Down went
somebody just now! A medlar the fewer on the three-legged
medlar-tree!—I say, Dom Nicolas, it’ll be cold to-night on the St.
Denis Road?” he asked.

Dom Nicolas winked both his big eyes, and seemed to choke upon his
Adam’s apple. Montfaucon, the great grisly Paris gibbet, stood hard by
the St. Denis Road, and the pleasantry touched him on the raw. As for
Tabary, he laughed immoderately over the medlars; he had never heard
anything more light-hearted; and he held his sides and crowed. Villon
fetched him a fillip on the nose, which turned his mirth into an attack
of coughing.

“Oh, stop that row,” said Villon, “and think of rhymes to ‘fish’.”

“Doubles or quits,” said Montigny doggedly.

“With all my heart,” quoth Thevenin.

“Is there any more in that bottle?” asked the monk.

“Open another,” said Villon. “How do you ever hope to fill that big
hogshead, your body, with little things like bottles? And how do you
expect to get to heaven? How many angels, do you fancy, can be spared
to carry up a single monk from Picardy? Or do you think yourself
another Elias—and they’ll send the coach for you?”

“_Hominibus impossibile_,” replied the monk, as he filled his glass.

Tabary was in ecstasies.

Villon filliped his nose again.

“Laugh at my jokes, if you like,” he said.

“It was very good,” objected Tabary.

Villon made a face at him. “Think of rhymes to ‘fish’,” he said. “What
have you to do with Latin? You’ll wish you knew none of it at the great
assizes, when the devil calls for Guido Tabary, clericus—the devil with
the hump-back and red-hot finger-nails. Talking of the devil,” he added
in a whisper, “look at Montigny!”

All three peered covertly at the gamester. He did not seem to be
enjoying his luck. His mouth was a little to a side; one nostril nearly
shut, and the other much inflated. The black dog was on his back, as
people say, in terrifying nursery metaphor; and he breathed hard under
the gruesome burden.

“He looks as if he could knife him,” whispered Tabary, with round eyes.

The monk shuddered, and turned his face and spread his open hands to
the red embers. It was the cold that thus affected Dom Nicolas, and not
any excess of moral sensibility.

“Come now,” said Villon—“about this ballade. How does it run so far?”
And beating time with his hand, he read it aloud to Tabary.

They were interrupted at the fourth rhyme by a brief and fatal movement
among the gamesters. The round was completed, and Thevenin was just
opening his mouth to claim another victory, when Montigny leaped up,
swift as an adder, and stabbed him to the heart. The blow took effect
before he had time to utter a cry, before he had time to move. A tremor
or two convulsed his frame; his hands opened and shut, his heels
rattled on the floor; then his head rolled backward over one shoulder
with the eyes wide open; and Thevenin Pensete’s spirit had returned to
Him who made it.

Everyone sprang to his feet; but the business was over in two twos. The
four living fellows looked at each other in rather a ghastly fashion;
the dead man contemplating a corner of the roof with a singular and
ugly leer.

“My God!” said Tabary; and he began to pray in Latin.

Villon broke out into hysterical laughter. He came a step forward and
ducked a ridiculous bow at Thevenin, and laughed still louder. Then he
sat down suddenly, all of a heap, upon a stool, and continued laughing
bitterly as though he would shake himself to pieces.

Montigny recovered his composure first.

“Let’s see what he has about him,” he remarked; and he picked the dead
man’s pockets with a practised hand, and divided the money into four
equal portions on the table. “There’s for you,” he said.

The monk received his share with a deep sigh, and a single stealthy
glance at the dead Thevenin, who was beginning to sink into himself and
topple sideways of the chair.

“We’re all in for it,” cried Villon, swallowing his mirth. “It’s a
hanging job for every man jack of us that’s here—not to speak of those
who aren’t.” He made a shocking gesture in the air with his raised
right hand, and put out his tongue and threw his head on one side, so
as to counterfeit the appearance of one who has been hanged. Then he
pocketed his share of the spoil, and executed a shuffle with his feet
as if to restore the circulation.

Tabary was the last to help himself; he made a dash at the money, and
retired to the other end of the apartment.

Montigny stuck Thevenin upright in the chair, and drew out the dagger,
which was followed by a jet of blood.

“You fellows had better be moving,” he said, as he wiped the blade on
his victim’s doublet.

“I think we had,” returned Villon with a gulp. “Damn his fat head!” he
broke out. “It sticks in my throat like phlegm. What right has a man to
have red hair when he is dead?” And he fell all of a heap again upon
the stool, and fairly covered his face with his hands.

Montigny and Dom Nicolas laughed aloud, even Tabary feebly chiming in.

“Cry baby,” said the monk.

“I always said he was a woman,” added Montigny with a sneer. “Sit up,
can’t you?” he went on, giving another shake to the murdered body.
“Tread out that fire, Nick!”

But Nick was better employed; he was quietly taking Villon’s purse, as
the poet sat, limp and trembling, on the stool where he had been making
a ballade not three minutes before. Montigny and Tabary dumbly demanded
a share of the booty, which the monk silently promised as he passed the
little bag into the bosom of his gown. In many ways an artistic nature
unfits a man for practical existence.

No sooner had the theft been accomplished than Villon shook himself,
jumped to his feet, and began helping to scatter and extinguish the
embers. Meanwhile Montigny opened the door and cautiously peered into
the street. The coast was clear; there was no meddlesome patrol in
sight. Still it was judged wiser to slip out severally; and as Villon
was himself in a hurry to escape from the neighbourhood of the dead
Thevenin, and the rest were in a still greater hurry to get rid of him
before he should discover the loss of his money, he was the first by
general consent to issue forth into the street.

The wind had triumphed and swept all the clouds from heaven. Only a few
vapours, as thin as moonlight, fleeting rapidly across the stars. It
was bitter cold; and by a common optical effect, things seemed almost
more definite than in the broadest daylight. The sleeping city was
absolutely still: a company of white hoods, a field full of little
Alps, below the twinkling stars. Villon cursed his fortune. Would it
were still snowing! Now, wherever he went, he left an indelible trail
behind him on the glittering streets; wherever he went he was still
tethered to the house by the cemetery of St. John; wherever he went he
must weave, with his own plodding feet, the rope that bound him to the
crime and would bind him to the gallows. The leer of the dead man came
back to him with a new significance. He snapped his fingers as if to
pluck up his own spirits, and choosing a street at random, stepped
boldly forward in the snow.

Two things preoccupied him as he went: the aspect of the gallows at
Montfaucon in this bright windy phase of the night’s existence, for
one; and for another, the look of the dead man with his bald head and
garland of red curls. Both struck cold upon his heart, and he kept
quickening his pace as if he could escape from unpleasant thoughts by
mere fleetness of foot. Sometimes he looked back over his shoulder with
a sudden nervous jerk; but he was the only moving thing in the white
streets, except when the wind swooped round a corner and threw up the
snow, which was beginning to freeze, in spouts of glittering dust.

Suddenly he saw, a long way before him, a black clump and a couple of
lanterns. The clump was in motion, and the lanterns swung as though
carried by men walking. It was a patrol. And though it was merely
crossing his line of march, he judged it wiser to get out of eyeshot as
speedily as he could. He was not in the humour to be challenged, and he
was conscious of making a very conspicuous mark upon the snow. Just on
his left hand there stood a great hotel, with some turrets and a large
porch before the door; it was half-ruinous, he remembered, and had long
stood empty; and so he made three steps of it and jumped into the
shelter of the porch. It was pretty dark inside, after the glimmer of
the snowy streets, and he was groping forward with outspread hands,
when he stumbled over some substance which offered an indescribable
mixture of resistances, hard and soft, firm and loose. His heart gave a
leap, and he sprang two steps back and stared dreadfully at the
obstacle. Then he gave a little laugh of relief. It was only a woman,
and she dead. He knelt beside her to make sure upon this latter point.
She was freezing cold, and rigid like a stick. A little ragged finery
fluttered in the wind about her hair, and her cheeks had been heavily
rouged that same afternoon. Her pockets were quite empty; but in her
stocking, underneath the garter, Villon found two of the small coins
that went by the name of whites. It was little enough; but it was
always something; and the poet was moved with a deep sense of pathos
that she should have died before she had spent her money. That seemed
to him a dark and pitiable mystery; and he looked from the coins in his
hand to the dead woman, and back again to the coins, shaking his head
over the riddle of man’s life. Henry V. of England, dying at Vincennes
just after he had conquered France, and this poor jade cut off by a
cold draught in a great man’s doorway, before she had time to spend her
couple of whites—it seemed a cruel way to carry on the world. Two
whites would have taken such a little while to squander; and yet it
would have been one more good taste in the mouth, one more smack of the
lips, before the devil got the soul, and the body was left to birds and
vermin. He would like to use all his tallow before the light was blown
out and the lantern broken.

While these thoughts were passing through his mind, he was feeling,
half mechanically, for his purse. Suddenly his heart stopped beating; a
feeling of cold scales passed up the back of his legs, and a cold blow
seemed to fall upon his scalp. He stood petrified for a moment; then he
felt again with one feverish movement; and then his loss burst upon
him, and he was covered at once with perspiration. To spendthrifts
money is so living and actual—it is such a thin veil between them and
their pleasures! There is only one limit to their fortune—that of time;
and a spendthrift with only a few crowns is the Emperor of Rome until
they are spent. For such a person to lose his money is to suffer the
most shocking reverse, and fall from heaven to hell, from all to
nothing, in a breath. And all the more if he has put his head in the
halter for it; if he may be hanged to-morrow for that same purse, so
dearly earned, so foolishly departed! Villon stood and cursed; he threw
the two whites into the street; he shook his fist at heaven; he
stamped, and was not horrified to find himself trampling the poor
corpse. Then he began rapidly to retrace his steps towards the house
beside the cemetery. He had forgotten all fear of the patrol, which was
long gone by at any rate, and had no idea but that of his lost purse.
It was in vain that he looked right and left upon the snow: nothing was
to be seen. He had not dropped it in the streets. Had it fallen in the
house? He would have liked dearly to go in and see; but the idea of the
grisly occupant unmanned him. And he saw besides, as he drew near, that
their efforts to put out the fire had been unsuccessful; on the
contrary, it had broken into a blaze, and a changeful light played in
the chinks of door and window, and revived his terror for the
authorities and Paris gibbet.

He returned to the hotel with the porch, and groped about upon the snow
for the money he had thrown away in his childish passion. But he could
only find one white; the other had probably struck sideways and sunk
deeply in. With a single white in his pocket, all his projects for a
rousing night in some wild tavern vanished utterly away. And it was not
only pleasure that fled laughing from his grasp; positive discomfort,
positive pain, attacked him as he stood ruefully before the porch. His
perspiration had dried upon him; and though the wind had now fallen, a
binding frost was setting in stronger with every hour, and be felt
benumbed and sick at heart. What was to be done? Late as was the hour,
improbable as was success, he would try the house of his adopted
father, the chaplain of St. Benoît.

He ran there all the way, and knocked timidly. There was no answer. He
knocked again and again, taking heart with every stroke; and at last
steps were heard approaching from within. A barred wicket fell open in
the iron-studded door, and emitted a gush of yellow light.

“Hold up your face to the wicket,” said the chaplain from within.

“It’s only me,” whimpered Villon.

“Oh, it’s only you, is it?” returned the chaplain; and he cursed him
with foul unpriestly oaths for disturbing him at such an hour, and bade
him be off to hell, where he came from.

“My hands are blue to the wrist,” pleaded Villon; “my feet are dead and
full of twinges; my nose aches with the sharp air; the cold lies at my
heart. I may be dead before morning. Only this once, father, and before
God I will never ask again!”

“You should have come earlier,” said the ecclesiastic coolly. “Young
men require a lesson now and then.” He shut the wicket and retired
deliberately into the interior of the house.

Villon was beside himself; he beat upon the door with his hands and
feet, and shouted hoarsely after the chaplain.

“Wormy old fox!” he cried. “If I had my hand under your twist, I would
send you flying headlong into the bottomless pit.”

A door shut in the interior, faintly audible to the poet down long
passages. He passed his hand over his mouth with an oath. And then the
humour of the situation struck him, and he laughed and looked lightly
up to heaven, where the stars seemed to be winking over his
discomfiture.

What was to be done? It looked very like a night in the frosty streets.
The idea of the dead woman popped into his imagination, and gave him a
hearty fright; what had happened to her in the early night might very
well happen to him before morning. And he so young! and with such
immense possibilities of disorderly amusement before him! He felt quite
pathetic over the notion of his own fate, as if it had been some one
else’s, and made a little imaginative vignette of the scene in the
morning when they should find his body.

He passed all his chances under review, turning the white between his
thumb and forefinger. Unfortunately he was on bad terms with some old
friends who would once have taken pity on him in such a plight. He had
lampooned them in verses, he had beaten and cheated them; and yet now,
when he was in so close a pinch, he thought there was at least one who
might perhaps relent. It was a chance. It was worth trying at least,
and he would go and see.

On the way, two little accidents happened to him which coloured his
musings in a very different manner. For, first, he fell in with the
track of a patrol, and walked in it for some hundred yards, although it
lay out of his direction. And this spirited him up; at least he had
confused his trail; for he was still possessed with the idea of people
tracking him all about Paris over the snow, and collaring him next
morning before he was awake. The other matter affected him very
differently. He passed a street corner, where, not so long before, a
woman and her child had been devoured by wolves. This was just the kind
of weather, he reflected, when wolves might take it into their heads to
enter Paris again; and a lone man in these deserted streets would run
the chance of something worse than a mere scare. He stopped and looked
upon the place with an unpleasant interest—it was a centre where
several lanes intersected each other; and he looked down them all one
after another, and held his breath to listen, lest he should detect
some galloping black things on the snow or hear the sound of howling
between him and the river. He remembered his mother telling him the
story and pointing out the spot, while he was yet a child. His mother!
If he only knew where she lived, he might make sure at least of
shelter. He determined he would inquire upon the morrow; nay, he would
go and see her too, poor old girl! So thinking, he arrived at his
destination—his last hope for the night.

The house was quite dark, like its neighbours; and yet after a few
taps, he heard a movement overhead, a door opening, and a cautious
voice asking who was there. The poet named himself in a loud whisper,
and waited, not without some trepidation, the result. Nor had he to
wait long. A window was suddenly opened, and a pailful of slops
splashed down upon the doorstep. Villon had not been unprepared for
something of the sort, and had put himself as much in shelter as the
nature of the porch admitted; but for all that, he was deplorably
drenched below the waist. His hose began to freeze almost at once.
Death from cold and exposure stared him in the face; he remembered he
was of phthisical tendency, and began coughing tentatively. But the
gravity of the danger steadied his nerves. He stopped a few hundred
yards from the door where he had been so rudely used, and reflected
with his finger to his nose. He could only see one way of getting a
lodging, and that was to take it. He had noticed a house not far away,
which looked as if it might be easily broken into, and thither he
betook himself promptly, entertaining himself on the way with the idea
of a room still hot, with a table still loaded with the remains of
supper, where he might pass the rest of the black hours, and whence he
should issue, on the morrow, with an armful of valuable plate. He even
considered on what viands and what wines he should prefer; and as he
was calling the roll of his favourite dainties, roast fish presented
itself to his mind with an odd mixture of amusement and horror.

“I shall never finish that ballade,” he thought to himself; and then,
with another shudder at the recollection, “Oh, damn his fat head!” he
repeated fervently, and spat upon the snow.

The house in question looked dark at first sight; but as Villon made a
preliminary inspection in search of the handiest point of attack, a
little twinkle of light caught his eye from behind a curtained window.

“The devil!” he thought. “People awake! Some student or some saint,
confound the crew! Can’t they get drunk and lie in bed snoring like
their neighbours? What’s the good of curfew, and poor devils of
bell-ringers jumping at a rope’s end in bell-towers? What’s the use of
day, if people sit up all night? The gripes to them!” He grinned as he
saw where his logic was leading him. “Every man to his business, after
all,” added he, “and if they’re awake, by the Lord, I may come by a
supper honestly for this once, and cheat the devil.”

He went boldly to the door and knocked with an assured hand. On both
previous occasions, he had knocked timidly and with some dread of
attracting notice; but now when he had just discarded the thought of a
burglarious entry, knocking at a door seemed a mighty simple and
innocent proceeding. The sound of his blows echoed through the house
with thin, phantasmal reverberations, as though it were quite empty;
but these had scarcely died away before a measured tread drew near, a
couple of bolts were withdrawn, and one wing was opened broadly, as
though no guile or fear of guile were known to those within. A tall
figure of a man, muscular and spare, but a little bent, confronted
Villon. The head was massive in bulk, but finely sculptured; the nose
blunt at the bottom, but refining upward to where it joined a pair of
strong and honest eyebrows; the mouth and eyes surrounded with delicate
markings, and the whole face based upon a thick white beard, boldly and
squarely trimmed. Seen as it was by the light of a flickering
hand-lamp, it looked perhaps nobler than it had a right to do; but it
was a fine face, honourable rather than intelligent, strong, simple,
and righteous.

“You knock late, sir,” said the old man in resonant, courteous tones.

Villon cringed, and brought up many servile words of apology; at a
crisis of this sort, the beggar was uppermost in him, and the man of
genius hid his head with confusion.

“You are cold,” repeated the old man, “and hungry? Well, step in.” And
he ordered him into the house with a noble enough gesture.

“Some great seigneur,” thought Villon, as his host, setting down the
lamp on the flagged pavement of the entry, shot the bolts once more
into their places.

“You will pardon me if I go in front,” he said, when this was done; and
he preceded the poet upstairs into a large apartment, warmed with a pan
of charcoal and lit by a great lamp hanging from the roof. It was very
bare of furniture: only some gold plate on a sideboard; some folios;
and a stand of armour between the windows. Some smart tapestry hung
upon the walls, representing the crucifixion of our Lord in one piece,
and in another a scene of shepherds and shepherdesses by a running
stream. Over the chimney was a shield of arms.

“Will you seat yourself,” said the old man, “and forgive me if I leave
you? I am alone in my house to-night, and if you are to eat I must
forage for you myself.”

No sooner was his host gone than Villon leaped from the chair on which
he had just seated himself, and began examining the room, with the
stealth and passion of a cat. He weighed the gold flagons in his hand,
opened all the folios, and investigated the arms upon the shield, and
the stuff with which the seats were lined. He raised the window
curtains, and saw that the windows were set with rich stained glass in
figures, so far as he could see, of martial import. Then he stood in
the middle of the room, drew a long breath, and retaining it with
puffed cheeks, looked round and round him, turning on his heels, as if
to impress every feature of the apartment on his memory.

“Seven pieces of plate,” he said. “If there had been ten, I would have
risked it. A fine house, and a fine old master, so help me all the
saints!”

And just then, hearing the old man’s tread returning along the
corridor, he stole back to his chair, and began humbly toasting his wet
legs before the charcoal pan.

His entertainer had a plate of meat in one hand and a jug of wine in
the other. He set down the plate upon the table, motioning Villon to
draw in his chair, and going to the sideboard, brought back two
goblets, which he filled.

“I drink to your better fortune,” he said, gravely touching Villon’s
cup with his own.

“To our better acquaintance,” said the poet, growing bold. A mere man
of the people would have been awed by the courtesy of the old seigneur,
but Villon was hardened in that matter; he had made mirth for great
lords before now, and found them as black rascals as himself. And so he
devoted himself to the viands with a ravenous gusto, while the old man,
leaning backward, watched him with steady, curious eyes.

“You have blood on your shoulder, my man,” he said. Montigny must have
laid his wet right hand upon him as he left the house. He cursed
Montigny in his heart.

“It was none of my shedding,” he stammered.

“I had not supposed so,” returned his host quietly.

“A brawl?”

“Well, something of that sort,” Villon admitted with a quaver.

“Perhaps a fellow murdered?”

“Oh no, not murdered,” said the poet, more and more confused. “It was
all fair play—murdered by accident. I had no hand in it, God strike me
dead!” he added fervently.

“One rogue the fewer, I dare say,” observed the master of the house.

“You may dare to say that,” agreed Villon, infinitely relieved. “As big
a rogue as there is between here and Jerusalem. He turned up his toes
like a lamb. But it was a nasty thing to look at. I dare say you’ve
seen dead men in your time, my lord?” he added, glancing at the armour.

“Many,” said the old man. “I have followed the wars, as you imagine.”

Villon laid down his knife and fork, which he had just taken up again.

“Were any of them bald?” he asked.

“Oh yes, and with hair as white as mine.”

“I don’t think I should mind the white so much,” said Villon. “His was
red.” And he had a return of his shuddering and tendency to laughter,
which he drowned with a great draught of wine. “I’m a little put out
when I think of it,” he went on. “I knew him—damn him! And then the
cold gives a man fancies—or the fancies give a man cold, I don’t know
which.”

“Have you any money?” asked the old man.

“I have one white,” returned the poet, laughing. “I got it out of a
dead jade’s stocking in a porch. She was as dead as Cæsar, poor wench,
and as cold as a church, with bits of ribbon sticking in her hair. This
is a hard world in winter for wolves and wenches and poor rogues like
me.”

“I,” said the old man, “am Enguerrand de la Feuillée, seigneur de
Brisetout, bailly du Patatrac. Who and what may you be?”

Villon rose and made a suitable reverence. “I am called Francis
Villon,” he said, “a poor Master of Arts of this university. I know
some Latin, and a deal of vice. I can make chansons, ballades, lais,
virelais, and roundels, and I am very fond of wine. I was born in a
garret, and I shall not improbably die upon the gallows. I may add, my
lord, that from this night forward I am your lordship’s very obsequious
servant to command.”

“No servant of mine,” said the knight; “my guest for this evening, and
no more.”

“A very grateful guest,” said Villon politely; and he drank in dumb
show to his entertainer.

“You are shrewd,” began the old man, tapping his forehead, “very
shrewd; you have learning; you are a clerk; and yet you take a small
piece of money off a dead woman in the street. Is it not a kind of
theft?”

“It is a kind of theft much practised in the wars, my lord.”

“The wars are the field of honour,” returned the old man proudly.
“There a man plays his life upon the cast; he fights in the name of his
lord the king, his Lord God, and all their lordships the holy saints
and angels.”

“Put it,” said Villon, “that I were really a thief, should I not play
my life also, and against heavier odds?”

“For gain, but not for honour.”

“Gain?” repeated Villon with a shrug. “Gain! The poor fellow wants
supper, and takes it. So does the soldier in a campaign. Why, what are
all these requisitions we hear so much about? If they are not gain to
those who take them, they are loss enough to the others. The
men-at-arms drink by a good fire, while the burgher bites his nails to
buy them wine and wood. I have seen a good many ploughmen swinging on
trees about the country, ay, I have seen thirty on one elm, and a very
poor figure they made; and when I asked some one how all these came to
be hanged, I was told it was because they could not scrape together
enough crowns to satisfy the men-at-arms.”

“These things are a necessity of war, which the low-born must endure
with constancy. It is true that some captains drive over hard; there
are spirits in every rank not easily moved by pity; and indeed many
follow arms who are no better than brigands.”

“You see,” said the poet, “you cannot separate the soldier from the
brigand; and what is a thief but an isolated brigand with circumspect
manners? I steal a couple of mutton chops, without so much as
disturbing people’s sleep; the farmer grumbles a bit, but sups none the
less wholesomely on what remains. You come up blowing gloriously on a
trumpet, take away the whole sheep, and beat the farmer pitifully into
the bargain. I have no trumpet; I am only Tom, Dick, or Harry; I am a
rogue and a dog, and hanging’s too good for me—with all my heart; but
just you ask the farmer which of us he prefers, just find out which of
us he lies awake to curse on cold nights.”

“Look at us two,” said his lordship. “I am old, strong, and honoured.
If I were turned from my house to-morrow, hundreds would be proud to
shelter me. Poor people would go out and pass the night in the streets
with their children, if I merely hinted that I wished to be alone. And
I find you up, wandering homeless, and picking farthings off dead women
by the wayside! I fear no man and nothing; I have seen you tremble and
lose countenance at a word. I wait God’s summons contentedly in my own
house, or, if it please the king to call me out again, upon the field
of battle. You look for the gallows; a rough, swift death, without hope
or honour. Is there no difference between these two?”

“As far as to the moon,” Villon acquiesced. “But if I had been born
lord of Brisetout, and you had been the poor scholar Francis, would the
difference have been any the less? Should not I have been warming my
knees at this charcoal pan, and would not you have been groping for
farthings in the snow? Should not I have been the soldier, and you the
thief?”

“A thief!” cried the old man. “I a thief! If you understood your words,
you would repent them.”

Villon turned out his hands with a gesture of inimitable impudence. “If
your lordship had done me the honour to follow my argument!” he said.

“I do you too much honour in submitting to your presence,” said the
knight. “Learn to curb your tongue when you speak with old and
honourable men, or some one hastier than I may reprove you in a sharper
fashion.” And he rose and paced the lower end of the apartment,
struggling with anger and antipathy. Villon surreptitiously refilled
his cup, and settled himself more comfortably in the chair, crossing
his knees and leaning his head upon one hand and the elbow against the
back of the chair. He was now replete and warm; and he was in nowise
frightened for his host, having gauged him as justly as was possible
between two such different characters. The night was far spent, and in
a very comfortable fashion after all; and he felt morally certain of a
safe departure on the morrow.

“Tell me one thing,” said the old man, pausing in his walk. “Are you
really a thief?”

“I claim the sacred rights of hospitality,” returned the poet. “My
lord, I am.”

“You are very young,” the knight continued.

“I should never have been so old,” replied Villon, showing his fingers,
“if I had not helped myself with these ten talents. They have been my
nursing mothers and my nursing fathers.”

“You may still repent and change.”

“I repent daily,” said the poet. “There are few people more given to
repentance than poor Francis. As for change, let somebody change my
circumstances. A man must continue to eat, if it were only that he may
continue to repent.”

“The change must begin in the heart,” returned the old man solemnly.

“My dear lord,” answered Villon, “do you really fancy that I steal for
pleasure? I hate stealing, like any other piece of work or of danger.
My teeth chatter when I see a gallows. But I must eat, I must drink, I
must mix in society of some sort. What the devil! Man is not a solitary
animal—_Cui Deus fæminam tradit_. Make me king’s pantler—make me abbot
of St. Denis; make me bailly of the Patatrac; and then I shall be
changed indeed. But as long as you leave me the poor scholar Francis
Villon, without a farthing, why, of course, I remain the same.”

“The grace of God is all-powerful.”

“I should be a heretic to question it,” said Francis. “It has made you
lord of Brisetout and bailly of the Patatrac; it has given me nothing
but the quick wits under my hat and these ten toes upon my hands. May I
help myself to wine? I thank you respectfully. By God’s grace, you have
a very superior vintage.”

The lord of Brisetout walked to and fro with his hands behind his back.
Perhaps he was not yet quite settled in his mind about the parallel
between thieves and soldiers; perhaps Villon had interested him by some
cross-thread of sympathy; perhaps his wits were simply muddled by so
much unfamiliar reasoning; but whatever the cause, he somehow yearned
to convert the young man to a better way of thinking, and could not
make up his mind to drive him forth again into the street.

“There is something more than I can understand in this,” he said at
length. “Your mouth is full of subtleties, and the devil has led you
very far astray; but the devil is only a very weak spirit before God’s
truth, and all his subtleties vanish at a word of true honour, like
darkness at morning. Listen to me once more. I learned long ago that a
gentleman should live chivalrously and lovingly to God, and the king,
and his lady; and though I have seen many strange things done, I have
still striven to command my ways upon that rule. It is not only written
in all noble histories, but in every man’s heart, if he will take care
to read. You speak of food and wine, and I know very well that hunger
is a difficult trial to endure; but you do not speak of other wants;
you say nothing of honour, of faith to God and other men, of courtesy,
of love without reproach. It may be that I am not very wise—and yet I
think I am—but you seem to me like one who has lost his way and made a
great error in life. You are attending to the little wants, and you
have totally forgotten the great and only real ones, like a man who
should be doctoring a toothache on the Judgment Day. For such things as
honour and love and faith are not only nobler than food and drink, but
indeed I think that we desire them more, and suffer more sharply for
their absence. I speak to you as I think you will most easily
understand me. Are you not, while careful to fill your belly,
disregarding another appetite in your heart, which spoils the pleasure
of your life and keeps you continually wretched?”

Villon was sensibly nettled under all this sermonising. “You think I
have no sense of honour!” he cried. “I’m poor enough, God knows! It’s
hard to see rich people with their gloves, and you blowing in your
hands. An empty belly is a bitter thing, although you speak so lightly
of it. If you had had as many as I, perhaps you would change your tune.
Any way I’m a thief—make the most of that—but I’m not a devil from
hell, God strike me dead. I would have you to know I’ve an honour of my
own, as good as yours, though I don’t prate about it all day long, as
if it was a God’s miracle to have any. It seems quite natural to me; I
keep it in its box till it’s wanted. Why now, look you here, how long
have I been in this room with you? Did you not tell me you were alone
in the house? Look at your gold plate! You’re strong, if you like, but
you’re old and unarmed, and I have my knife. What did I want but a jerk
of the elbow and here would have been you with the cold steel in your
bowels, and there would have been me, linking in the streets, with an
armful of gold cups! Did you suppose I hadn’t wit enough to see that?
And I scorned the action. There are your damned goblets, as safe as in
a church; there are you, with your heart ticking as good as new; and
here am I, ready to go out again as poor as I came in, with my one
white that you threw in my teeth! And you think I have no sense of
honour—God strike me dead!”

The old man stretched out his right arm. “I will tell you what you
are,” he said. “You are a rogue, my man, an impudent and a
black-hearted rogue and vagabond. I have passed an hour with you. Oh!
believe me, I feel myself disgraced! And you have eaten and drunk at my
table. But now I am sick at your presence; the day has come, and the
night-bird should be off to his roost. Will you go before, or after?”

“Which you please,” returned the poet, rising. “I believe you to be
strictly honourable.” He thoughtfully emptied his cup. “I wish I could
add you were intelligent,” he went on, knocking on his head with his
knuckles. “Age, age! the brains stiff and rheumatic.”

The old man preceded him from a point of self-respect; Villon followed,
whistling, with his thumbs in his girdle.

“God pity you,” said the lord of Brisetout at the door.

“Good-bye, papa,” returned Villon with a yawn. “Many thanks for the
cold mutton.”

The door closed behind him. The dawn was breaking over the white roofs.
A chill, uncomfortable morning ushered in the day. Villon stood and
heartily stretched himself in the middle of the road.

“A very dull old gentleman,” he thought. “I wonder what his goblets may
be worth.”




THE SIRE DE MALÉTROIT’S DOOR


Denis de Beaulieu was not yet two-and-twenty, but he counted himself a
grown man, and a very accomplished cavalier into the bargain. Lads were
early formed in that rough, warfaring epoch; and when one has been in a
pitched battle and a dozen raids, has killed one’s man in an honourable
fashion, and knows a thing or two of strategy and mankind, a certain
swagger in the gait is surely to be pardoned. He had put up his horse
with due care, and supped with due deliberation; and then, in a very
agreeable frame of mind, went out to pay a visit in the grey of the
evening. It was not a very wise proceeding on the young man’s part. He
would have done better to remain beside the fire or go decently to bed.
For the town was full of the troops of Burgundy and England under a
mixed command; and though Denis was there on safe-conduct, his
safe-conduct was like to serve him little on a chance encounter.

It was September 1429; the weather had fallen sharp; a flighty piping
wind, laden with showers, beat about the township; and the dead leaves
ran riot along the streets. Here and there a window was already lighted
up; and the noise of men-at-arms making merry over supper within, came
forth in fits and was swallowed up and carried away by the wind. The
night fell swiftly; the flag of England, fluttering on the spire-top,
grew ever fainter and fainter against the flying clouds—a black speck
like a swallow in the tumultuous, leaden chaos of the sky. As the night
fell the wind rose, and began to hoot under archways and roar amid the
tree-tops in the valley below the town.

Denis de Beaulieu walked fast and was soon knocking at his friend’s
door; but though he promised himself to stay only a little while and
make an early return, his welcome was so pleasant, and he found so much
to delay him, that it was already long past midnight before he said
good-bye upon the threshold. The wind had fallen again in the
meanwhile; the night was as black as the grave; not a star, nor a
glimmer of moonshine, slipped through the canopy of cloud. Denis was
ill-acquainted with the intricate lanes of Chateau Landon; even by
daylight he had found some trouble in picking his way; and in this
absolute darkness he soon lost it altogether. He was certain of one
thing only—to keep mounting the hill; for his friend’s house lay at the
lower end, or tail, of Chateau Landon, while the inn was up at the
head, under the great church spire. With this clue to go upon he
stumbled and groped forward, now breathing more freely in open places
where there was a good slice of sky overhead, now feeling along the
wall in stifling closes. It is an eerie and mysterious position to be
thus submerged in opaque blackness in an almost unknown town. The
silence is terrifying in its possibilities. The touch of cold window
bars to the exploring hand startles the man like the touch of a toad;
the inequalities of the pavement shake his heart into his mouth; a
piece of denser darkness threatens an ambuscade or a chasm in the
pathway; and where the air is brighter, the houses put on strange and
bewildering appearances, as if to lead him farther from his way. For
Denis, who had to regain his inn without attracting notice, there was
real danger as well as mere discomfort in the walk; and he went warily
and boldly at once, and at every corner paused to make an observation.

He had been for some time threading a lane so narrow that he could
touch a wall with either hand, when it began to open out and go sharply
downward. Plainly this lay no longer in the direction of his inn; but
the hope of a little more light tempted him forward to reconnoitre. The
lane ended in a terrace with a bartizan wall, which gave an out-look
between high houses, as out of an embrasure, into the valley lying dark
and formless several hundred feet below. Denis looked down, and could
discern a few tree-tops waving and a single speck of brightness where
the river ran across a weir. The weather was clearing up, and the sky
had lightened, so as to show the outline of the heavier clouds and the
dark margin of the hills. By the uncertain glimmer, the house on his
left hand should be a place of some pretensions; it was surmounted by
several pinnacles and turret-tops; the round stern of a chapel, with a
fringe of flying buttresses, projected boldly from the main block; and
the door was sheltered under a deep porch carved with figures and
overhung by two long gargoyles. The windows of the chapel gleamed
through their intricate tracery with a light as of many tapers, and
threw out the buttresses and the peaked roof in a more intense
blackness against the sky. It was plainly the hotel of some great
family of the neighbourhood; and as it reminded Denis of a town house
of his own at Bourges, he stood for some time gazing up at it and
mentally gauging the skill of the architects and the consideration of
the two families.

There seemed to be no issue to the terrace but the lane by which he had
reached it; he could only retrace his steps, but he had gained some
notion of his whereabouts, and hoped by this means to hit the main
thoroughfare and speedily regain the inn. He was reckoning without that
chapter of accidents which was to make this night memorable above all
others in his career; for he had not gone back above a hundred yards
before he saw a light coming to meet him, and heard loud voices
speaking together in the echoing narrows of the lane. It was a party of
men-at-arms going the night round with torches. Denis assured himself
that they had all been making free with the wine-bowl, and were in no
mood to be particular about safe-conducts or the niceties of chivalrous
war. It was as like as not that they would kill him like a dog and
leave him where he fell. The situation was inspiriting but nervous.
Their own torches would conceal him from sight, he reflected; and he
hoped that they would drown the noise of his footsteps with their own
empty voices. If he were but fleet and silent, he might evade their
notice altogether.

Unfortunately, as he turned to beat a retreat, his foot rolled upon a
pebble; he fell against the wall with an ejaculation, and his sword
rang loudly on the stones. Two or three voices demanded who went
there—some in French, some in English; but Denis made no reply, and ran
the faster down the lane. Once upon the terrace, he paused to look
back. They still kept calling after him, and just then began to double
the pace in pursuit, with a considerable clank of armour, and great
tossing of the torchlight to and fro in the narrow jaws of the passage.

Denis cast a look around and darted into the porch. There he might
escape observation, or—if that were too much to expect—was in a capital
posture whether for parley or defence. So thinking, he drew his sword
and tried to set his back against the door. To his surprise, it yielded
behind his weight; and though he turned in a moment, continued to swing
back on oiled and noiseless hinges, until it stood wide open on a black
interior. When things fall out opportunely for the person concerned, he
is not apt to be critical about the how or why, his own immediate
personal convenience seeming a sufficient reason for the strangest
oddities and resolutions in our sublunary things; and so Denis, without
a moment’s hesitation, stepped within and partly closed the door behind
him to conceal his place of refuge. Nothing was further from his
thoughts than to close it altogether; but for some inexplicable
reason—perhaps by a spring or a weight—the ponderous mass of oak
whipped itself out of his fingers and clanked to, with a formidable
rumble and a noise like the falling of an automatic bar.

The round, at that very moment, debouched upon the terrace and
proceeded to summon him with shouts and curses. He heard them ferreting
in the dark corners; the stock of a lance even rattled along the outer
surface of the door behind which he stood; but these gentlemen were in
too high a humour to be long delayed, and soon made off down a
corkscrew pathway which had escaped Denis’s observation, and passed out
of sight and hearing along the battlements of the town.

Denis breathed again. He gave them a few minutes’ grace for fear of
accidents, and then groped about for some means of opening the door and
slipping forth again. The inner surface was quite smooth, not a handle,
not a moulding, not a projection of any sort. He got his finger-nails
round the edges and pulled, but the mass was immovable. He shook it, it
was as firm as a rock. Denis de Beaulieu frowned and gave vent to a
little noiseless whistle. What ailed the door? he wondered. Why was it
open? How came it to shut so easily and so effectually after him? There
was something obscure and underhand about all this, that was little to
the young man’s fancy. It looked like a snare; and yet who could
suppose a snare in such a quiet by-street and in a house of so
prosperous and even noble an exterior? And yet—snare or no snare,
intentionally or unintentionally—here he was, prettily trapped; and for
the life of him he could see no way out of it again. The darkness began
to weigh upon him. He gave ear; all was silent without, but within and
close by he seemed to catch a faint sighing, a faint sobbing rustle, a
little stealthy creak—as though many persons were at his side, holding
themselves quite still, and governing even their respiration with the
extreme of slyness. The idea went to his vitals with a shock, and he
faced about suddenly as if to defend his life. Then, for the first
time, he became aware of a light about the level of his eyes and at
some distance in the interior of the house—a vertical thread of light,
widening towards the bottom, such as might escape between two wings of
arras over a doorway. To see anything was a relief to Denis; it was
like a piece of solid ground to a man labouring in a morass; his mind
seized upon it with avidity; and he stood staring at it and trying to
piece together some logical conception of his surroundings. Plainly
there was a flight of steps ascending from his own level to that of
this illuminated doorway; and indeed he thought he could make out
another thread of light, as fine as a needle and as faint as
phosphorescence, which might very well be reflected along the polished
wood of a handrail. Since he had begun to suspect that he was not
alone, his heart had continued to beat with smothering violence, and an
intolerable desire for action of any sort had possessed itself of his
spirit. He was in deadly peril, he believed. What could be more natural
than to mount the staircase, lift the curtain, and confront his
difficulty at once? At least he would be dealing with something
tangible; at least he would be no longer in the dark. He stepped slowly
forward with outstretched hands, until his foot struck the bottom step;
then he rapidly scaled the stairs, stood for a moment to compose his
expression, lifted the arras and went in.

He found himself in a large apartment of polished stone. There were
three doors; one on each of three sides; all similarly curtained with
tapestry. The fourth side was occupied by two large windows and a great
stone chimney-piece, carved with the arms of the Malétroits. Denis
recognised the bearings, and was gratified to find himself in such good
hands. The room was strongly illuminated; but it contained little
furniture except a heavy table and a chair or two, the hearth was
innocent of fire, and the pavement was but sparsely strewn with rushes
clearly many days old.

On a high chair beside the chimney, and directly facing Denis as he
entered, sat a little old gentleman in a fur tippet. He sat with his
legs crossed and his hands folded, and a cup of spiced wine stood by
his elbow on a bracket on the wall. His countenance had a strongly
masculine cast; not properly human, but such as we see in the bull, the
goat, or the domestic boar; something equivocal and wheedling,
something greedy, brutal, and dangerous. The upper lip was inordinately
full, as though swollen by a blow or a toothache; and the smile, the
peaked eyebrows, and the small, strong eyes were quaintly and almost
comically evil in expression. Beautiful white hair hung straight all
round his head, like a saint’s, and fell in a single curl upon the
tippet. His beard and moustache were the pink of venerable sweetness.
Age, probably in consequence of inordinate precautions, had left no
mark upon his hands; and the Malétroit hand was famous. It would be
difficult to imagine anything at once so fleshy and so delicate in
design; the taper, sensual fingers were like those of one of Leonardo’s
women; the fork of the thumb made a dimpled protuberance when closed;
the nails were perfectly shaped, and of a dead, surprising whiteness.
It rendered his aspect tenfold more redoubtable, that a man with hands
like these should keep them devoutly folded in his lap like a virgin
martyr—that a man with so intense and startling an expression of face
should sit patiently on his seat and contemplate people with an
unwinking stare, like a god, or a god’s statue. His quiescence seemed
ironical and treacherous, it fitted so poorly with his looks.

Such was Alain, Sire de Malétroit.

Denis and he looked silently at each other for a second or two.

“Pray step in,” said the Sire de Malétroit. “I have been expecting you
all the evening.”

He had not risen, but he accompanied his words with a smile and a
slight but courteous inclination of the head. Partly from the smile,
partly from the strange musical murmur with which the Sire prefaced his
observation, Denis felt a strong shudder of disgust go through his
marrow. And what with disgust and honest confusion of mind, he could
scarcely get words together in reply.

“I fear,” he said, “that this is a double accident. I am not the person
you suppose me. It seems you were looking for a visit; but for my part,
nothing was further from my thoughts—nothing could be more contrary to
my wishes—than this intrusion.”

“Well, well,” replied the old gentleman indulgently, “here you are,
which is the main point. Seat yourself, my friend, and put yourself
entirely at your ease. We shall arrange our little affairs presently.”

Denis perceived that the matter was still complicated with some
misconception, and he hastened to continue his explanations.

“Your door . . . ” he began.

“About my door?” asked the other, raising his peaked eyebrows. “A
little piece of ingenuity.” And he shrugged his shoulders. “A
hospitable fancy! By your own account, you were not desirous of making
my acquaintance. We old people look for such reluctance now and then;
and when it touches our honour, we cast about until we find some way of
overcoming it. You arrive uninvited, but believe me, very welcome.”

“You persist in error, sir,” said Denis. “There can be no question
between you and me. I am a stranger in this countryside. My name is
Denis, damoiseau de Beaulieu. If you see me in your house, it is only—”

“My young friend,” interrupted the other, “you will permit me to have
my own ideas on that subject. They probably differ from yours at the
present moment,” he added with a leer, “but time will show which of us
is in the right.”

Denis was convinced he had to do with a lunatic. He seated himself with
a shrug, content to wait the upshot; and a pause ensued, during which
he thought he could distinguish a hurried gabbling as of prayer from
behind the arras immediately opposite him. Sometimes there seemed to be
but one person engaged, sometimes two; and the vehemence of the voice,
low as it was, seemed to indicate either great haste or an agony of
spirit. It occurred to him that this piece of tapestry covered the
entrance to the chapel he had noticed from without.

The old gentleman meanwhile surveyed Denis from head to foot with a
smile, and from time to time emitted little noises like a bird or a
mouse, which seemed to indicate a high degree of satisfaction. This
state of matters became rapidly insupportable; and Denis, to put an end
to it, remarked politely that the wind had gone down.

The old gentleman fell into a fit of silent laughter, so prolonged and
violent that he became quite red in the face. Denis got upon his feet
at once, and put on his hat with a flourish.

“Sir,” he said, “if you are in your wits, you have affronted me
grossly. If you are out of them, I flatter myself I can find better
employment for my brains than to talk with lunatics. My conscience is
clear; you have made a fool of me from the first moment; you have
refused to hear my explanations; and now there is no power under God
will make me stay here any longer; and if I cannot make my way out in a
more decent fashion, I will hack your door in pieces with my sword.”

The Sire de Malétroit raised his right hand and wagged it at Denis with
the fore and little fingers extended.

“My dear nephew,” he said, “sit down.”

“Nephew!” retorted Denis, “you lie in your throat;” and he snapped his
fingers in his face.

“Sit down, you rogue!” cried the old gentleman, in a sudden, harsh
voice, like the barking of a dog. “Do you fancy,” he went on, “that
when I had made my little contrivance for the door I had stopped short
with that? If you prefer to be bound hand and foot till your bones
ache, rise and try to go away. If you choose to remain a free young
buck, agreeably conversing with an old gentleman—why, sit where you are
in peace, and God be with you.”

“Do you mean I am a prisoner?” demanded Denis.

“I state the facts,” replied the other. “I would rather leave the
conclusion to yourself.”

Denis sat down again. Externally he managed to keep pretty calm; but
within, he was now boiling with anger, now chilled with apprehension.
He no longer felt convinced that he was dealing with a madman. And if
the old gentleman was sane, what, in God’s name, had he to look for?
What absurd or tragical adventure had befallen him? What countenance
was he to assume?

While he was thus unpleasantly reflecting, the arras that overhung the
chapel door was raised, and a tall priest in his robes came forth and,
giving a long, keen stare at Denis, said something in an undertone to
Sire de Malétroit.

“She is in a better frame of spirit?” asked the latter.

“She is more resigned, messire,” replied the priest.

“Now the Lord help her, she is hard to please!” sneered the old
gentleman. “A likely stripling—not ill-born—and of her own choosing,
too? Why, what more would the jade have?”

“The situation is not usual for a young damsel,” said the other, “and
somewhat trying to her blushes.”

“She should have thought of that before she began the dance. It was
none of my choosing, God knows that: but since she is in it, by our
Lady, she shall carry it to the end.” And then addressing Denis,
“Monsieur de Beaulieu,” he asked, “may I present you to my niece? She
has been waiting your arrival, I may say, with even greater impatience
than myself.”

Denis had resigned himself with a good grace—all he desired was to know
the worst of it as speedily as possible; so he rose at once, and bowed
in acquiescence. The Sire de Malétroit followed his example and limped,
with the assistance of the chaplain’s arm, towards the chapel door. The
priest pulled aside the arras, and all three entered. The building had
considerable architectural pretensions. A light groining sprang from
six stout columns, and hung down in two rich pendants from the centre
of the vault. The place terminated behind the altar in a round end,
embossed and honeycombed with a superfluity of ornament in relief, and
pierced by many little windows shaped like stars, trefoils, or wheels.
These windows were imperfectly glazed, so that the night air circulated
freely in the chapel. The tapers, of which there must have been half a
hundred burning on the altar, were unmercifully blown about; and the
light went through many different phases of brilliancy and
semi-eclipse. On the steps in front of the altar knelt a young girl
richly attired as a bride. A chill settled over Denis as he observed
her costume; he fought with desperate energy against the conclusion
that was being thrust upon his mind; it could not—it should not—be as
he feared.

“Blanche,” said the Sire, in his most flute-like tones, “I have brought
a friend to see you, my little girl; turn round and give him your
pretty hand. It is good to be devout; but it is necessary to be polite,
my niece.”

The girl rose to her feet and turned towards the new comers. She moved
all of a piece; and shame and exhaustion were expressed in every line
of her fresh young body; and she held her head down and kept her eyes
upon the pavement, as she came slowly forward. In the course of her
advance, her eyes fell upon Denis de Beaulieu’s feet—feet of which he
was justly vain, be it remarked, and wore in the most elegant
accoutrement even while travelling. She paused—started, as if his
yellow boots had conveyed some shocking meaning—and glanced suddenly up
into the wearer’s countenance. Their eyes met; shame gave place to
horror and terror in her looks; the blood left her lips; with a
piercing scream she covered her face with her hands and sank upon the
chapel floor.

“That is not the man!” she cried. “My uncle, that in not the man!”

The Sire de Malétroit chirped agreeably. “Of course not,” he said; “I
expected as much. It was so unfortunate you could not remember his
name.”

“Indeed,” she cried, “indeed, I have never seen this person till this
moment—I have never so much as set eyes upon him—I never wish to see
him again. Sir,” she said, turning to Denis, “if you are a gentleman,
you will bear me out. Have I ever seen you—have you ever seen me—before
this accursed hour?”

“To speak for myself, I have never had that pleasure,” answered the
young man. “This is the first time, messire, that I have met with your
engaging niece.”

The old gentleman shrugged his shoulders.

“I am distressed to hear it,” he said. “But it is never too late to
begin. I had little more acquaintance with my own late lady ere I
married her; which proves,” he added with a grimace, “that these
impromptu marriages may often produce an excellent understanding in the
long-run. As the bridegroom is to have a voice in the matter, I will
give him two hours to make up for lost time before we proceed with the
ceremony.” And he turned towards the door, followed by the clergyman.

The girl was on her feet in a moment. “My uncle, you cannot be in
earnest,” she said. “I declare before God I will stab myself rather
than be forced on that young man. The heart rises at it; God forbids
such marriages; you dishonour your white hair. Oh, my uncle, pity me!
There is not a woman in all the world but would prefer death to such a
nuptial. Is it possible,” she added, faltering—“is it possible that you
do not believe me—that you still think this”—and she pointed at Denis
with a tremor of anger and contempt—“that you still think _this_ to be
the man?”

“Frankly,” said the old gentleman, pausing on the threshold, “I do. But
let me explain to you once for all, Blanche de Malétroit, my way of
thinking about this affair. When you took it into your head to
dishonour my family and the name that I have borne, in peace and war,
for more than three-score years, you forfeited, not only the right to
question my designs, but that of looking me in the face. If your father
had been alive, he would have spat on you and turned you out of doors.
His was the hand of iron. You may bless your God you have only to deal
with the hand of velvet, mademoiselle. It was my duty to get you
married without delay. Out of pure goodwill, I have tried to find your
own gallant for you. And I believe I have succeeded. But before God and
all the holy angels, Blanche de Malétroit, if I have not, I care not
one jack-straw. So let me recommend you to be polite to our young
friend; for upon my word, your next groom may be less appetising.”

And with that he went out, with the chaplain at his heels; and the
arras fell behind the pair.

The girl turned upon Denis with flashing eyes.

“And what, sir,” she demanded, “may be the meaning of all this?”

“God knows,” returned Denis gloomily. “I am a prisoner in this house,
which seems full of mad people. More I know not; and nothing do I
understand.”

“And pray how came you here?” she asked.

He told her as briefly as he could. “For the rest,” he added, “perhaps
you will follow my example, and tell me the answer to all these
riddles, and what, in God’s name, is like to be the end of it.”

She stood silent for a little, and he could see her lips tremble and
her tearless eyes burn with a feverish lustre. Then she pressed her
forehead in both hands.

“Alas, how my head aches!” she said wearily—“to say nothing of my poor
heart! But it is due to you to know my story, unmaidenly as it must
seem. I am called Blanche de Malétroit; I have been without father or
mother for—oh! for as long as I can recollect, and indeed I have been
most unhappy all my life. Three months ago a young captain began to
stand near me every day in church. I could see that I pleased him; I am
much to blame, but I was so glad that any one should love me; and when
he passed me a letter, I took it home with me and read it with great
pleasure. Since that time he has written many. He was so anxious to
speak with me, poor fellow! and kept asking me to leave the door open
some evening that we might have two words upon the stair. For he knew
how much my uncle trusted me.” She gave something like a sob at that,
and it was a moment before she could go on. “My uncle is a hard man,
but he is very shrewd,” she said at last. “He has performed many feats
in war, and was a great person at court, and much trusted by Queen
Isabeau in old days. How he came to suspect me I cannot tell; but it is
hard to keep anything from his knowledge; and this morning, as we came
from mass, he took my hand in his, forced it open, and read my little
billet, walking by my side all the while. When he had finished, he gave
it back to me with great politeness. It contained another request to
have the door left open; and this has been the ruin of us all. My uncle
kept me strictly in my room until evening, and then ordered me to dress
myself as you see me—a hard mockery for a young girl, do you not think
so? I suppose, when he could not prevail with me to tell him the young
captain’s name, he must have laid a trap for him: into which, alas! you
have fallen in the anger of God. I looked for much confusion; for how
could I tell whether he was willing to take me for his wife on these
sharp terms? He might have been trifling with me from the first; or I
might have made myself too cheap in his eyes. But truly I had not
looked for such a shameful punishment as this! I could not think that
God would let a girl be so disgraced before a young man. And now I have
told you all; and I can scarcely hope that you will not despise me.”

Denis made her a respectful inclination.

“Madam,” he said, “you have honoured me by your confidence. It remains
for me to prove that I am not unworthy of the honour. Is Messire de
Malétroit at hand?”

“I believe he is writing in the salle without,” she answered.

“May I lead you thither, madam?” asked Denis, offering his hand with
his most courtly bearing.

She accepted it; and the pair passed out of the chapel, Blanche in a
very drooping and shamefast condition, but Denis strutting and ruffling
in the consciousness of a mission, and the boyish certainty of
accomplishing it with honour.

The Sire de Malétroit rose to meet them with an ironical obeisance.

“Sir,” said Denis, with the grandest possible air, “I believe I am to
have some say in the matter of this marriage; and let me tell you at
once, I will be no party to forcing the inclination of this young lady.
Had it been freely offered to me, I should have been proud to accept
her hand, for I perceive she is as good as she is beautiful; but as
things are, I have now the honour, messire, of refusing.”

Blanche looked at him with gratitude in her eyes; but the old gentleman
only smiled and smiled, until his smile grew positively sickening to
Denis.

“I am afraid,” he said, “Monsieur de Beaulieu, that you do not
perfectly understand the choice I have to offer you. Follow me, I
beseech you, to this window.” And he led the way to one of the large
windows which stood open on the night. “You observe,” he went on,
“there is an iron ring in the upper masonry, and reeved through that, a
very efficacious rope. Now, mark my words; if you should find your
disinclination to my niece’s person insurmountable, I shall have you
hanged out of this window before sunrise. I shall only proceed to such
an extremity with the greatest regret, you may believe me. For it is
not at all your death that I desire, but my niece’s establishment in
life. At the same time, it must come to that if you prove obstinate.
Your family, Monsieur de Beaulieu, is very well in its way; but if you
sprang from Charlemagne, you should not refuse the hand of a Malétroit
with impunity—not if she had been as common as the Paris road—not if
she were as hideous as the gargoyle over my door. Neither my niece nor
you, nor my own private feelings, move me at all in this matter. The
honour of my house has been compromised; I believe you to be the guilty
person; at least you are now in the secret; and you can hardly wonder
if I request you to wipe out the stain. If you will not, your blood be
on your own head! It will be no great satisfaction to me to have your
interesting relics kicking their heels in the breeze below my windows;
but half a loaf is better than no bread, and if I cannot cure the
dishonour, I shall at least stop the scandal.”

There was a pause.

“I believe there are other ways of settling such imbroglios among
gentlemen,” said Denis. “You wear a sword, and I hear you have used it
with distinction.”

The Sire de Malétroit made a signal to the chaplain, who crossed the
room with long silent strides and raised the arras over the third of
the three doors. It was only a moment before he let it fall again; but
Denis had time to see a dusky passage full of armed men.

“When I was a little younger, I should have been delighted to honour
you, Monsieur de Beaulieu,” said Sire Alain; “but I am now too old.
Faithful retainers are the sinews of age, and I must employ the
strength I have. This is one of the hardest things to swallow as a man
grows up in years; but with a little patience, even this becomes
habitual. You and the lady seem to prefer the salle for what remains of
your two hours; and as I have no desire to cross your preference, I
shall resign it to your use with all the pleasure in the world. No
haste!” he added, holding up his hand, as he saw a dangerous look come
into Denis de Beaulieu’s face. “If your mind revolts against hanging,
it will be time enough two hours hence to throw yourself out of the
window or upon the pikes of my retainers. Two hours of life are always
two hours. A great many things may turn up in even as little a while as
that. And, besides, if I understand her appearance, my niece has still
something to say to you. You will not disfigure your last hours by a
want of politeness to a lady?”

Denis looked at Blanche, and she made him an imploring gesture.

It is likely that the old gentleman was hugely pleased at this symptom
of an understanding; for he smiled on both, and added sweetly: “If you
will give me your word of honour, Monsieur de Beaulieu, to await my
return at the end of the two hours before attempting anything
desperate, I shall withdraw my retainers, and let you speak in greater
privacy with mademoiselle.”

Denis again glanced at the girl, who seemed to beseech him to agree.

“I give you my word of honour,” he said.

Messire de Malétroit bowed, and proceeded to limp about the apartment,
clearing his throat the while with that odd musical chirp which had
already grown so irritating in the ears of Denis de Beaulieu. He first
possessed himself of some papers which lay upon the table; then he went
to the mouth of the passage and appeared to give an order to the men
behind the arras; and lastly he hobbled out through the door by which
Denis had come in, turning upon the threshold to address a last smiling
bow to the young couple, and followed by the chaplain with a hand-lamp.

No sooner were they alone than Blanche advanced towards Denis with her
hands extended. Her face was flushed and excited, and her eyes shone
with tears.

“You shall not die!” she cried, “you shall marry me after all.”

“You seem to think, madam,” replied Denis, “that I stand much in fear
of death.”

“Oh no, no,” she said, “I see you are no poltroon. It is for my own
sake—I could not bear to have you slain for such a scruple.”

“I am afraid,” returned Denis, “that you underrate the difficulty,
madam. What you may be too generous to refuse, I may be too proud to
accept. In a moment of noble feeling towards me, you forgot what you
perhaps owe to others.”

He had the decency to keep his eyes upon the floor as he said this, and
after he had finished, so as not to spy upon her confusion. She stood
silent for a moment, then walked suddenly away, and falling on her
uncle’s chair, fairly burst out sobbing. Denis was in the acme of
embarrassment. He looked round, as if to seek for inspiration, and
seeing a stool, plumped down upon it for something to do. There he sat,
playing with the guard of his rapier, and wishing himself dead a
thousand times over, and buried in the nastiest kitchen-heap in France.
His eyes wandered round the apartment, but found nothing to arrest
them. There were such wide spaces between the furniture, the light fell
so baldly and cheerlessly over all, the dark outside air looked in so
coldly through the windows, that he thought he had never seen a church
so vast, nor a tomb so melancholy. The regular sobs of Blanche de
Malétroit measured out the time like the ticking of a clock. He read
the device upon the shield over and over again, until his eyes became
obscured; he stared into shadowy corners until he imagined they were
swarming with horrible animals; and every now and again he awoke with a
start, to remember that his last two hours were running, and death was
on the march.

Oftener and oftener, as the time went on, did his glance settle on the
girl herself. Her face was bowed forward and covered with her hands,
and she was shaken at intervals by the convulsive hiccup of grief. Even
thus she was not an unpleasant object to dwell upon, so plump and yet
so fine, with a warm brown skin, and the most beautiful hair, Denis
thought, in the whole world of womankind. Her hands were like her
uncle’s; but they were more in place at the end of her young arms, and
looked infinitely soft and caressing. He remembered how her blue eyes
had shone upon him, full of anger, pity, and innocence. And the more he
dwelt on her perfections, the uglier death looked, and the more deeply
was he smitten with penitence at her continued tears. Now he felt that
no man could have the courage to leave a world which contained so
beautiful a creature; and now he would have given forty minutes of his
last hour to have unsaid his cruel speech.

Suddenly a hoarse and ragged peal of cockcrow rose to their ears from
the dark valley below the windows. And this shattering noise in the
silence of all around was like a light in a dark place, and shook them
both out of their reflections.

“Alas, can I do nothing to help you?” she said, looking up.

“Madam,” replied Denis, with a fine irrelevancy, “if I have said
anything to wound you, believe me, it was for your own sake and not for
mine.”

She thanked him with a tearful look.

“I feel your position cruelly,” he went on. “The world has been bitter
hard on you. Your uncle is a disgrace to mankind. Believe me, madam,
there is no young gentleman in all France but would be glad of my
opportunity, to die in doing you a momentary service.”

“I know already that you can be very brave and generous,” she answered.
“What I _want_ to know is whether I can serve you—now or afterwards,”
she added, with a quaver.

“Most certainly,” he answered with a smile. “Let me sit beside you as
if I were a friend, instead of a foolish intruder; try to forget how
awkwardly we are placed to one another; make my last moments go
pleasantly; and you will do me the chief service possible.”

“You are very gallant,” she added, with a yet deeper sadness . . .
“very gallant . . . and it somehow pains me. But draw nearer, if you
please; and if you find anything to say to me, you will at least make
certain of a very friendly listener. Ah! Monsieur de Beaulieu,” she
broke forth—“ah! Monsieur de Beaulieu, how can I look you in the face?”
And she fell to weeping again with a renewed effusion.

“Madam,” said Denis, taking her hand in both of his, “reflect on the
little time I have before me, and the great bitterness into which I am
cast by the sight of your distress. Spare me, in my last moments, the
spectacle of what I cannot cure even with the sacrifice of my life.”

“I am very selfish,” answered Blanche. “I will be braver, Monsieur de
Beaulieu, for your sake. But think if I can do you no kindness in the
future—if you have no friends to whom I could carry your adieux. Charge
me as heavily as you can; every burden will lighten, by so little, the
invaluable gratitude I owe you. Put it in my power to do something more
for you than weep.”

“My mother is married again, and has a young family to care for. My
brother Guichard will inherit my fiefs; and if I am not in error, that
will content him amply for my death. Life is a little vapour that
passeth away, as we are told by those in holy orders. When a man is in
a fair way and sees all life open in front of him, he seems to himself
to make a very important figure in the world. His horse whinnies to
him; the trumpets blow and the girls look out of window as he rides
into town before his company; he receives many assurances of trust and
regard—sometimes by express in a letter—sometimes face to face, with
persons of great consequence falling on his neck. It is not wonderful
if his head is turned for a time. But once he is dead, were he as brave
as Hercules or as wise as Solomon, he is soon forgotten. It is not ten
years since my father fell, with many other knights around him, in a
very fierce encounter, and I do not think that any one of them, nor so
much as the name of the fight, is now remembered. No, no, madam, the
nearer you come to it, you see that death is a dark and dusty corner,
where a man gets into his tomb and has the door shut after him till the
judgment day. I have few friends just now, and once I am dead I shall
have none.”

“Ah, Monsieur de Beaulieu!” she exclaimed, “you forget Blanche de
Malétroit.”

“You have a sweet nature, madam, and you are pleased to estimate a
little service far beyond its worth.”

“It is not that,” she answered. “You mistake me if you think I am so
easily touched by my own concerns. I say so, because you are the
noblest man I have ever met; because I recognise in you a spirit that
would have made even a common person famous in the land.”

“And yet here I die in a mouse-trap—with no more noise about it than my
own squeaking,” answered he.

A look of pain crossed her face, and she was silent for a little while.
Then a fight came into her eyes, and with a smile she spoke again.

“I cannot have my champion think meanly of himself. Any one who gives
his life for another will be met in Paradise by all the heralds and
angels of the Lord God. And you have no such cause to hang your head.
For . . . Pray, do you think me beautiful?” she asked, with a deep
flush.

“Indeed, madam, I do,” he said.

“I am glad of that,” she answered heartily. “Do you think there are
many men in France who have been asked in marriage by a beautiful
maiden—with her own lips—and who have refused her to her face? I know
you men would half despise such a triumph; but believe me, we women
know more of what is precious in love. There is nothing that should set
a person higher in his own esteem; and we women would prize nothing
more dearly.”

“You are very good,” he said; “but you cannot make me forget that I was
asked in pity and not for love.”

“I am not so sure of that,” she replied, holding down her head. “Hear
me to an end, Monsieur de Beaulieu. I know how you must despise me; I
feel you are right to do so; I am too poor a creature to occupy one
thought of your mind, although, alas! you must die for me this morning.
But when I asked you to marry me, indeed, and indeed, it was because I
respected and admired you, and loved you with my whole soul, from the
very moment that you took my part against my uncle. If you had seen
yourself, and how noble you looked, you would pity rather than despise
me. And now,” she went on, hurriedly checking him with her hand,
“although I have laid aside all reserve and told you so much, remember
that I know your sentiments towards me already. I would not, believe
me, being nobly born, weary you with importunities into consent. I too
have a pride of my own: and I declare before the holy mother of God, if
you should now go back from your word already given, I would no more
marry you than I would marry my uncle’s groom.”

Denis smiled a little bitterly.

“It is a small love,” he said, “that shies at a little pride.”

She made no answer, although she probably had her own thoughts.

“Come hither to the window,” he said, with a sigh. “Here is the dawn.”

And indeed the dawn was already beginning. The hollow of the sky was
full of essential daylight, colourless and clean; and the valley
underneath was flooded with a grey reflection. A few thin vapours clung
in the coves of the forest or lay along the winding course of the
river. The scene disengaged a surprising effect of stillness, which was
hardly interrupted when the cocks began once more to crow among the
steadings. Perhaps the same fellow who had made so horrid a clangour in
the darkness not half-an-hour before, now sent up the merriest cheer to
greet the coming day. A little wind went bustling and eddying among the
tree-tops underneath the windows. And still the daylight kept flooding
insensibly out of the east, which was soon to grow incandescent and
cast up that red-hot cannon-ball, the rising sun.

Denis looked out over all this with a bit of a shiver. He had taken her
hand, and retained it in his almost unconsciously.

“Has the day begun already?” she said; and then, illogically enough:
“the night has been so long! Alas, what shall we say to my uncle when
he returns?”

“What you will,” said Denis, and he pressed her fingers in his.

She was silent.

“Blanche,” he said, with a swift, uncertain, passionate utterance, “you
have seen whether I fear death. You must know well enough that I would
as gladly leap out of that window into the empty air as lay a finger on
you without your free and full consent. But if you care for me at all
do not let me lose my life in a misapprehension; for I love you better
than the whole world; and though I will die for you blithely, it would
be like all the joys of Paradise to live on and spend my life in your
service.”

As he stopped speaking, a bell began to ring loudly in the interior of
the house; and a clatter of armour in the corridor showed that the
retainers were returning to their post, and the two hours were at an
end.

“After all that you have heard?” she whispered, leaning towards him
with her lips and eyes.

“I have heard nothing,” he replied.

“The captain’s name was Florimond de Champdivers,” she said in his ear.

“I did not hear it,” he answered, taking her supple body in his arms
and covering her wet face with kisses.

A melodious chirping was audible behind, followed by a beautiful
chuckle, and the voice of Messire de Malétroit wished his new nephew a
good morning.




PROVIDENCE AND THE GUITAR




