CHAPTER I


Monsieur Léon Berthelini had a great care of his appearance, and
sedulously suited his deportment to the costume of the hour. He
affected something Spanish in his air, and something of the bandit,
with a flavour of Rembrandt at home. In person he was decidedly small
and inclined to be stout; his face was the picture of good humour; his
dark eyes, which were very expressive, told of a kind heart, a brisk,
merry nature, and the most indefatigable spirits. If he had worn the
clothes of the period you would have set him down for a hitherto
undiscovered hybrid between the barber, the innkeeper, and the affable
dispensing chemist. But in the outrageous bravery of velvet jacket and
flapped hat, with trousers that were more accurately described as
fleshings, a white handkerchief cavalierly knotted at his neck, a shock
of Olympian curls upon his brow, and his feet shod through all weathers
in the slenderest of Molière shoes—you had but to look at him and you
knew you were in the presence of a Great Creature. When he wore an
overcoat he scorned to pass the sleeves; a single button held it round
his shoulders; it was tossed backwards after the manner of a cloak, and
carried with the gait and presence of an Almaviva. I am of opinion that
M. Berthelini was nearing forty. But he had a boy’s heart, gloried in
his finery, and walked through life like a child in a perpetual
dramatic performance. If he were not Almaviva after all, it was not for
lack of making believe. And he enjoyed the artist’s compensation. If he
were not really Almaviva, he was sometimes just as happy as though he
were.

I have seen him, at moments when he has fancied himself alone with his
Maker, adopt so gay and chivalrous a bearing, and represent his own
part with so much warmth and conscience, that the illusion became
catching, and I believed implicitly in the Great Creature’s pose.

But, alas! life cannot be entirely conducted on these principles; man
cannot live by Almavivery alone; and the Great Creature, having failed
upon several theatres, was obliged to step down every evening from his
heights, and sing from half-a-dozen to a dozen comic songs, twang a
guitar, keep a country audience in good humour, and preside finally
over the mysteries of a tombola.

Madame Berthelini, who was art and part with him in these undignified
labours, had perhaps a higher position in the scale of beings, and
enjoyed a natural dignity of her own. But her heart was not any more
rightly placed, for that would have been impossible; and she had
acquired a little air of melancholy, attractive enough in its way, but
not good to see like the wholesome, sky-scraping, boyish spirits of her
lord.

He, indeed, swam like a kite on a fair wind, high above earthly
troubles. Detonations of temper were not unfrequent in the zones he
travelled; but sulky fogs and tearful depressions were there alike
unknown. A well-delivered blow upon a table, or a noble attitude,
imitated from Mélingne or Frederic, relieved his irritation like a
vengeance. Though the heaven had fallen, if he had played his part with
propriety, Berthelini had been content! And the man’s atmosphere, if
not his example, reacted on his wife; for the couple doated on each
other, and although you would have thought they walked in different
worlds, yet continued to walk hand in hand.

It chanced one day that Monsieur and Madame Berthelini descended with
two boxes and a guitar in a fat case at the station of the little town
of Castel-le-Gâchis, and the omnibus carried them with their effects to
the Hotel of the Black Head. This was a dismal, conventual building in
a narrow street, capable of standing siege when once the gates were
shut, and smelling strangely in the interior of straw and chocolate and
old feminine apparel. Berthelini paused upon the threshold with a
painful premonition. In some former state, it seemed to him, he had
visited a hostelry that smelt not otherwise, and been ill received.

The landlord, a tragic person in a large felt hat, rose from a business
table under the key-rack, and came forward, removing his hat with both
hands as he did so.

“Sir, I salute you. May I inquire what is your charge for artists?”
inquired Berthelini, with a courtesy at once splendid and insinuating.

“For artists?” said the landlord. His countenance fell and the smile of
welcome disappeared. “Oh, artists!” he added brutally; “four francs a
day.” And he turned his back upon these inconsiderable customers.

A commercial traveller is received, he also, upon a reduction—yet is he
welcome, yet can he command the fatted calf; but an artist, had he the
manners of an Almaviva, were he dressed like Solomon in all his glory,
is received like a dog and served like a timid lady travelling alone.

Accustomed as he was to the rubs of his profession, Berthelini was
unpleasantly affected by the landlord’s manner.

“Elvira,” said he to his wife, “mark my words: Castel-le-Gâchis is a
tragic folly.”

“Wait till we see what we take,” replied Elvira.

“We shall take nothing,” returned Berthelini; “we shall feed upon
insults. I have an eye, Elvira: I have a spirit of divination; and this
place is accursed. The landlord has been discourteous, the Commissary
will be brutal, the audience will be sordid and uproarious, and you
will take a cold upon your throat. We have been besotted enough to
come; the die is cast—it will be a second Sédan.”

Sédan was a town hateful to the Berthelinis, not only from patriotism
(for they were French, and answered after the flesh to the somewhat
homely name of Duval), but because it had been the scene of their most
sad reverses. In that place they had lain three weeks in pawn for their
hotel bill, and had it not been for a surprising stroke of fortune they
might have been lying there in pawn until this day. To mention the name
of Sédan was for the Berthelinis to dip the brush in earthquake and
eclipse. Count Almaviva slouched his hat with a gesture expressive of
despair, and even Elvira felt as if ill-fortune had been personally
invoked.

“Let us ask for breakfast,” said she, with a woman’s tact.

The Commissary of Police of Castel-le-Gâchis was a large red
Commissary, pimpled, and subject to a strong cutaneous transpiration. I
have repeated the name of his office because he was so very much more a
Commissary than a man. The spirit of his dignity had entered into him.
He carried his corporation as if it were something official. Whenever
he insulted a common citizen it seemed to him as if he were adroitly
flattering the Government by a side wind; in default of dignity he was
brutal from an overweening sense of duty. His office was a den, whence
passers-by could hear rude accents laying down, not the law, but the
good pleasure of the Commissary.

Six several times in the course of the day did M. Berthelini hurry
thither in quest of the requisite permission for his evening’s
entertainment; six several times he found the official was abroad. Léon
Berthelini began to grow quite a familiar figure in the streets of
Castel-le-Gâchis; he became a local celebrity, and was pointed out as
“the man who was looking for the Commissary.” Idle children attached
themselves to his footsteps, and trotted after him back and forward
between the hotel and the office. Léon might try as he liked; he might
roll cigarettes, he might straddle, he might cock his hat at a dozen
different jaunty inclinations—the part of Almaviva was, under the
circumstances, difficult to play.

As he passed the market-place upon the seventh excursion the Commissary
was pointed out to him, where he stood, with his waistcoat unbuttoned
and his hands behind his back, to superintend the sale and measurement
of butter. Berthelini threaded his way through the market stalls and
baskets, and accosted the dignitary with a bow which was a triumph of
the histrionic art.

“I have the honour,” he asked, “of meeting M. le Commissaire?”

The Commissary was affected by the nobility of his address. He excelled
Léon in the depth if not in the airy grace of his salutation.

“The honour,” said he, “is mine!”

“I am,” continued the strolling-player, “I am, sir, an artist, and I
have permitted myself to interrupt you on an affair of business.
To-night I give a trifling musical entertainment at the Café of the
Triumphs of the Plough—permit me to offer you this little programme—and
I have come to ask you for the necessary authorisation.”

At the word “artist,” the Commissary had replaced his hat with the air
of a person who, having condescended too far, should suddenly remember
the duties of his rank.

“Go, go,” said he, “I am busy—I am measuring butter.”

“Heathen Jew!” thought Léon. “Permit me, sir,” he resumed aloud. “I
have gone six times already—”

“Put up your bills if you choose,” interrupted the Commissary. “In an
hour or so I will examine your papers at the office. But now go; I am
busy.”

“Measuring butter!” thought Berthelini. “Oh, France, and it is for this
that we made ’93!”

The preparations were soon made; the bills posted, programmes laid on
the dinner-table of every hotel in the town, and a stage erected at one
end of the Café of the Triumphs of the Plough; but when Léon returned
to the office, the Commissary was once more abroad.

“He is like Madame Benoîton,” thought Léon, “Fichu Commissaire!”

And just then he met the man face to face.

“Here, sir,” said he, “are my papers. Will you be pleased to verify?”

But the Commissary was now intent upon dinner.

“No use,” he replied, “no use; I am busy; I am quite satisfied. Give
your entertainment.”

And he hurried on.

“Fichu Commissaire!” thought Léon.




