CHAPTER II


The audience was pretty large; and the proprietor of the café made a
good thing of it in beer. But the Berthelinis exerted themselves in
vain.

Léon was radiant in velveteen; he had a rakish way of smoking a
cigarette between his songs that was worth money in itself; he
underlined his comic points, so that the dullest numskull in
Castel-le-Gâchis had a notion when to laugh; and he handled his guitar
in a manner worthy of himself. Indeed his play with that instrument was
as good as a whole romantic drama; it was so dashing, so florid, and so
cavalier.

Elvira, on the other hand, sang her patriotic and romantic songs with
more than usual expression; her voice had charm and plangency; and as
Léon looked at her, in her low-bodied maroon dress, with her arms bare
to the shoulder, and a red flower set provocatively in her corset, he
repeated to himself for the many hundredth time that she was one of the
loveliest creatures in the world of women.

Alas! when she went round with the tambourine, the golden youth of
Castel-le-Gâchis turned from her coldly. Here and there a single
halfpenny was forthcoming; the net result of a collection never
exceeded half a franc; and the Maire himself, after seven different
applications, had contributed exactly twopence. A certain chill began
to settle upon the artists themselves; it seemed as if they were
singing to slugs; Apollo himself might have lost heart with such an
audience. The Berthelinis struggled against the impression; they put
their back into their work, they sang loud and louder, the guitar
twanged like a living thing; and at last Léon arose in his might, and
burst with inimitable conviction into his great song, “Y a des honnêtes
gens partout!” Never had he given more proof of his artistic mastery;
it was his intimate, indefeasible conviction that Castel-le-Gâchis
formed an exception to the law he was now lyrically proclaiming, and
was peopled exclusively by thieves and bullies; and yet, as I say, he
flung it down like a challenge, he trolled it forth like an article of
faith; and his face so beamed the while that you would have thought he
must make converts of the benches.

He was at the top of his register, with his head thrown back and his
mouth open, when the door was thrown violently open, and a pair of new
comers marched noisily into the café. It was the Commissary, followed
by the Garde Champêtre.

The undaunted Berthelini still continued to proclaim, “Y a des honnêtes
gens partout!” But now the sentiment produced an audible titter among
the audience. Berthelini wondered why; he did not know the antecedents
of the Garde Champêtre; he had never heard of a little story about
postage stamps. But the public knew all about the postage stamps and
enjoyed the coincidence hugely.

The Commissary planted himself upon a vacant chair with somewhat the
air of Cromwell visiting the Rump, and spoke in occasional whispers to
the Garde Champêtre, who remained respectfully standing at his back.
The eyes of both were directed upon Berthelini, who persisted in his
statement.

“Y a des honnêtes gens partout,” he was just chanting for the twentieth
time; when up got the Commissary upon his feet and waved brutally to
the singer with his cane.

“Is it me you want?” inquired Léon, stopping in his song.

“It is you,” replied the potentate.

“Fichu Commissaire!” thought Léon, and he descended from the stage and
made his way to the functionary.

“How does it happen, sir,” said the Commissary, swelling in person,
“that I find you mountebanking in a public café without my permission?”

“Without?” cried the indignant Léon. “Permit me to remind you—”

“Come, come, sir!” said the Commissary, “I desire no explanations.”

“I care nothing about what you desire,” returned the singer. “I choose
to give them, and I will not be gagged. I am an artist, sir, a
distinction that you cannot comprehend. I received your permission and
stand here upon the strength of it; interfere with me who dare.”

“You have not got my signature, I tell you,” cried the Commissary.
“Show me my signature! Where is my signature?”

That was just the question; where was his signature? Léon recognised
that he was in a hole; but his spirit rose with the occasion, and he
blustered nobly, tossing back his curls. The Commissary played up to
him in the character of tyrant; and as the one leaned farther forward,
the other leaned farther back—majesty confronting fury. The audience
had transferred their attention to this new performance, and listened
with that silent gravity common to all Frenchmen in the neighbourhood
of the Police. Elvira had sat down, she was used to these distractions,
and it was rather melancholy than fear that now oppressed her.

“Another word,” cried the Commissary, “and I arrest you.”

“Arrest me?” shouted Léon. “I defy you!”

“I am the Commissary of Police,” said the official.

Léon commanded his feelings, and replied, with great delicacy of
innuendo—

“So it would appear.”

The point was too refined for Castel-le-Gâchis; it did not raise a
smile; and as for the Commissary, he simply bade the singer follow him
to his office, and directed his proud footsteps towards the door. There
was nothing for it but to obey. Léon did so with a proper pantomime of
indifference, but it was a leek to eat, and there was no denying it.

The Maire had slipped out and was already waiting at the Commissary’s
door. Now the Maire, in France, is the refuge of the oppressed. He
stands between his people and the boisterous rigours of the Police. He
can sometimes understand what is said to him; he is not always puffed
up beyond measure by his dignity. ’Tis a thing worth the knowledge of
travellers. When all seems over, and a man has made up his mind to
injustice, he has still, like the heroes of romance, a little bugle at
his belt whereon to blow; and the Maire, a comfortable _deus ex
machinâ_, may still descend to deliver him from the minions of the law.
The Maire of Castel-le-Gâchis, although inaccessible to the charms of
music as retailed by the Berthelinis, had no hesitation whatever as to
the rights of the matter. He instantly fell foul of the Commissary in
very high terms, and the Commissary, pricked by this humiliation,
accepted battle on the point of fact. The argument lasted some little
while with varying success, until at length victory inclined so plainly
to the Commissary’s side that the Maire was fain to reassert himself by
an exercise of authority. He had been out-argued, but he was still the
Maire. And so, turning from his interlocutor, he briefly but kindly
recommended Léon to get back instanter to his concert.

“It is already growing late,” he added.

Léon did not wait to be told twice. He returned to the Café of the
Triumphs of the Plough with all expedition. Alas! the audience had
melted away during his absence; Elvira was sitting in a very
disconsolate attitude on the guitar-box; she had watched the company
dispersing by twos and threes, and the prolonged spectacle had somewhat
overwhelmed her spirits. Each man, she reflected, retired with a
certain proportion of her earnings in his pocket, and she saw
to-night’s board and to-morrow’s railway expenses, and finally even
to-morrow’s dinner, walk one after another out of the café door and
disappear into the night.

“What was it?” she asked languidly. But Léon did not answer. He was
looking round him on the scene of defeat. Scarce a score of listeners
remained, and these of the least promising sort. The minute hand of the
clock was already climbing upward towards eleven.

“It’s a lost battle,” said he, and then taking up the money-box he
turned it out. “Three francs seventy-five!” he cried, “as against four
of board and six of railway fares; and no time for the tombola! Elvira,
this is Waterloo.” And he sat down and passed both hands desperately
among his curls. “O Fichu Commissaire!” he cried, “Fichu Commissaire!”

“Let us get the things together and be off,” returned Elvira. “We might
try another song, but there is not six halfpence in the room.”

“Six halfpence?” cried Léon, “six hundred thousand devils! There is not
a human creature in the town—nothing but pigs and dogs and
commissaires! Pray heaven, we get safe to bed.”

“Don’t imagine things!” exclaimed Elvira, with a shudder.

And with that they set to work on their preparations. The tobacco-jar,
the cigarette-holder, the three papers of shirt-studs, which were to
have been the prices of the tombola had the tombola come off, were made
into a bundle with the music; the guitar was stowed into the fat
guitar-case; and Elvira having thrown a thin shawl about her neck and
shoulders, the pair issued from the café and set off for the Black
Head.

As they crossed the market-place the church bell rang out eleven. It
was a dark, mild night, and there was no one in the streets.

“It is all very fine,” said Léon; “but I have a presentiment. The night
is not yet done.”




