IV


THE SUPERMAN


No doubt the reader who has followed the argument in the preceding
chapters will have happened, before now, upon the thought that
Nietzsche's chain of reasoning, so far, still has a gap in it. We have
seen how he started by investigating Greek art in the light of the
Schopenhauerean philosophy, how this led him to look into morality, how
he revealed the origin of morality in transitory manifestations of the
will to power, and how he came to the conclusion that it was best for
a man to reject all ready-made moral ideas and to so order his life
that his every action would be undertaken with some notion of making
it subserve his own welfare or that of his children or children's
children. But a gap remains and it may be expressed in the question:
How is a man to define and determine his own welfare and that of the
race after him?

Here, indeed, our dionysian immoralist is confronted by a very serious
problem, and Nietzsche himself well understood its seriousness. Unless
we have in mind some definite ideal of happiness and some definite
goal of progress we had better sing the doxology and dismiss our
congregation. Christianity has such an ideal and such a goal. The one
is a Christ-like life on earth and the other is a place at the right
hand of Jehovah in the hereafter. Mohammedanism, a tinsel form of
Christianity, paints pictures of the same sort. Buddhism holds out the
tempting bait of a race set free from the thrall of earthly desires,
with an eternity of blissful nothingness.[1] The other oriental faiths
lead in the same direction and Schopenhauer, in his philosophy, laid
down the doctrine that humanity would attain perfect happiness only
when it had overcome its instinct of self-preservation--that is to
say, when it had ceased to desire to live. Even Christian Science--that
most grotesque child of credulous faith and incredible denial--offers
us the double ideal of a mortal life entirely free from mortal pain and
a harp in the heavenly band for all eternity.

What had Nietzsche to offer in place of these things? By what standard
was his immoralist to separate the good--or beneficial--things of the
world from the bad--or damaging--things? And what was the goal that the
philosopher had in mind for his immoralist? The answer to the first
question is to be found in Nietzsche's definition of the terms "good"
and "bad." "All that elevates the sense of power, the will to power,
and power itself"--this is how he defined "good." "All that proceeds
from weakness"--this is how he defined "bad." Happiness, he held, is
"the feeling that power increases--that resistance is being overcome."
"I preach not contentedness," he said, "but more power; not peace, but
war; not virtue, but efficiency. The weak and defective must go to the
wall: that is the first principle of the dionysian charity. And we must
help them to go."[2]

To put it more simply, Nietzsche offers the gospel of prudent and
intelligent selfishness, of absolute and utter individualism. "One
must learn," sang Zarathustra, "how to love oneself, with a whole and
hearty love, that one may find life with oneself endurable, and not go
gadding about. This gadding about is familiar: it is called loving
one's neighbor.'"[3] His ideal was an aristocracy which regarded the
proletariat merely as a conglomeration of draft animals made to be
driven, enslaved and exploited. "A good and healthy aristocracy,"
he said, "must acquiesce, with a good conscience, in the sacrifice
of a legion of individuals, who, for its benefit, must be reduced
to slaves and tools. The masses have no right to exist on their own
account: their sole excuse for living lies in their usefulness as a
sort of superstructure or scaffolding, upon which a more select race
of beings may be elevated."[4] Rejecting all permanent rules of good
and evil and all notions of brotherhood, Nietzsche held that the
aristocratic individualist--and it was to the aristocrat only that he
gave, unreservedly, the name of human being--must seek every possible
opportunity to increase and exalt his own sense of efficiency, of
success, of mastery, of power. Whatever tended to impair him, or to
decrease his efficiency, was bad. Whatever tended to increase it--at
no matter what cost to others--was good. There must be a complete
surrender to the law of natural selection--that invariable natural law
which ordains that the fit shall survive and the unfit shall perish.
All growth must occur at the top. The strong must grow stronger, and
that they may do so, they must waste no strength in the vain task of
trying to lift up the weak.

The reader may interrupt here with the question we encountered at the
start: how is the dionysian individualist to know whether a given
action will benefit him or injure him? The answer, of course, lies
in the obvious fact that, in every healthy man, instinct supplies a
very reliable guide, and that, when instinct fails or is uncertain,
experiment must solve the problem. As a general thing, nothing is more
patent than the feeling of power--the sense of efficiency, of capacity,
of mastery. Every man is constantly and unconsciously measuring himself
with his neighbors, and so becoming acutely aware of those things in
which he is their superior. Let two men clash in the stock market and
it becomes instantly apparent that one is richer, or more resourceful
or more cunning than the other. Let two men run after an omnibus and
it becomes instantly apparent that one is swifter than the other. Let
two men come together as rivals in love, war, drinking or holiness,
and one is bound to feel that he has bested the other. Such contests
are infinite in variety and in number, and all life, in fact, is made
up of them. Therefore, it is plain that every man is conscious of his
power, and aware of it when this power is successfully exerted against
some other man. In such exertions, argues Nietzsche, lies happiness,
and so his prescription for happiness consists in unrestrained
yielding to the will to power. That all men worth discussing so yield,
despite the moral demand for humility, is so plain that it scarcely
needs statement. It is the desire to attain and manifest efficiency
and superiority which makes one man explore the wilds of Africa and
another pile up vast wealth and another write books of philosophy and
another submit to pain and mutilation in the prize ring. It is this
yearning which makes men take chances and risk their lives and limbs
for glory. Everybody knows, indeed, that in the absence of such a
primordial and universal emulation the world would stand still and
the race would die. Nietzsche asks nothing more than that the fact be
openly recognized and admitted; that every man yield to the yearning
unashamed, without hypocrisy and without wasteful efforts to feed and
satisfy the yearning of other men at the expense of his own.

It is evident, of course, that the feeling of superiority has a
complement in the feeling of inferiority. Every man, in other words,
sees himself, in respect to some talent possessed in common by himself
and a rival, in one of three ways: he knows that he is superior, he
knows that he is inferior, or he is in doubt. In the first case, says
Nietzsche, the thing for him to do is to make his superiority still
greater by yielding to its stimulation: to make the gap between himself
and his rival wider and wider. In the second case, the thing for him to
do is to try to make the gap smaller: to lift himself up or to pull his
rival down until they are equal or the old disproportion is reversed.
In the third case, it is his duty to plunge into a contest and risk
his all upon the cast of the die. "I do not exhort you to peace,"
says Zarathustra, "but to victory!"[5] If victory comes not, let it
be defeat, death and annihilation--but, in any event, let there be a
fair fight. Without this constant strife--this constant testing--this
constant elimination of the unfit--there can be no progress. "As
the smaller surrenders himself to the greater, so the greater must
surrender himself to the will to power and stake life upon the issue.
It is the mission of the greatest to run risk and danger--to cast dice
with death."[6] Power, in a word, is never infinite: it is always
becoming.

Practically and in plain language, what does all this mean? Simply that
Nietzsche preaches a mighty crusade against all those ethical ideas
which teach a man to sacrifice himself for the theoretical good of his
inferiors. A culture which tends to equalize, he says, is necessarily
a culture which tends to rob the strong and so drag them down, for the
strong cannot give of their strength to the weak without decreasing
their store. There must be an unending effort to widen the gap; there
must be a constant search for advantage, an infinite alertness. The
strong man must rid himself of all idea that it is disgraceful to yield
to his acute and ever present yearning for still more strength. There
must be an abandonment of the old slave-morality and a transvaluation
of moral values. The will to power must be emancipated from the bonds
of that system of ethics which brands it with infamy, and so makes the
one all-powerful instinct of every sentient creature loathsome and
abominable.

It is only the under-dog, he says, that believes in equality. It
is only the groveling and inefficient mob that seeks to reduce all
humanity to one dead level, for it is only the mob that would gain
by such leveling. "'There are no higher men,' says the crowd in the
market place. 'We are all equal; man is man; in the presence of God
we are all equal!' In the presence of God, indeed! But I tell you
that God is dead!" So thunders Zarathustra.[7] That is to say, our
idea of brotherhood is part of the mob-morality of the ancient Jews,
who evolved it out of their own helplessness and credited it to their
god. We have inherited their morality with their god and so we find
it difficult--in the mass--to rid ourselves of their point of view.
Nietzsche himself rejected utterly the Judaic god and he believed that
the great majority of intelligent men of his time were of his mind.
That he was not far wrong in this assumption is evident to everyone.
At the present time, indeed, it is next to impossible to find a sane
man in all the world who believes in the actual existence of the
deity described in the old testament. All theology is now an effort
to explain away this god. Therefore, argues Nietzsche, it is useless
to profess an insincere concurrence in a theistic idea at which our
common sense revolts, and ridiculous to maintain the inviolability of
an ethical scheme grounded upon this idea.

It may be urged here that, even if the god of Judea is dead, the idea
of brotherhood still fives, and that, as a matter of fact, it is an
idea inherent in the nature of man, and one that owes nothing to the
rejected supernaturalism which once fortified and enforced it. That
is to say, it may be argued that the impulse to self-sacrifice and
mutual help is itself an instinct. The answer to this lies in the very
patent fact that it is not. Nothing, indeed, is more apparent than the
essential selfishness of man. In so far as they are able to defy or
evade the moral code without shame or damage, the strong always exploit
the weak. The rich man puts up the price of the necessities of life
and so makes himself richer and the poor poorer. The emperor combats
democracy. The political boss opposes the will of the people for his
own advantage. The inventor patents his inventions and so increases
his relative superiority to the common run of men. The ecclesiastic
leaves a small parish for a larger one--because the pay is better
or "the field offers wider opportunities," _i.e._ gives him a better
chance to "save souls" and so increases his feeling of efficiency. The
philanthropist gives away millions because the giving visualizes and
makes evident to all men his virtue and power. It is ever the same
in this weary old world: every slave would be a master if he could.
Therefore, why deny it? Why make it a crime to do what every man's
instincts prompt him to do? Why call it a sin to do what every man
does, insofar as he can? The man who throws away his money or cripples
himself with drink, or turns away from his opportunities--we call him a
lunatic or a fool. And yet, wherein does he differ from the ideal holy
man of our slave-morality--the holy man who tortures himself, neglects
his body, starves his mind and reduces himself to parasitism, that the
weak, the useless and unfit may have, through his ministrations, some
measure of ease? Such is the argument of the dionysian philosophy. It
is an argument for the actual facts of existence--however unrighteous
and ugly those facts may be.

That the lifting up of the weak, in the long run, is an unprofitable
and useless business is evident on very brief reflection. Philanthropy,
considered largely, is inevitably a failure. Now and then we may
transform an individual pauper or drunkard into a useful, producing
citizen, but this happens very seldom. Nothing is more patent, indeed,
than the fact that charity merely converts the unfit--who, in the
course of nature, would soon die out and so cease to encumber the
earth--into parasites--who live on indefinitely, a nuisance and a
burden to their betters. The "reformed" drunkard always goes back to
his cups: drunkardness, as every physician knows, is as essentially
incurable as congenital insanity. And it is the same with poverty.
We may help a pauper to survive by giving him food and drink, but we
cannot thereby make an efficient man of him--we cannot rid him of the
unfitness which made him a pauper. There are, of course, exceptions
to this, as to other rules, but the validity of the rule itself will
not be questioned by any observant man. It goes unquestioned, indeed,
by those who preach the doctrine of charity the loudest. They know
it would be absurd to argue that helping the unfit is profitable to
the race, and so they fall back, soon or late, upon the argument that
charity is ordained of God and that the impulse to it is implanted
in every decent man. Nietzsche flatly denies this. Charity, he says,
is a man-made idea, with which the gods have nothing to do. Its sole
effect is to maintain the useless at the expense of the strong. In the
mass, the helped can never hope to discharge in full their debt to the
helpers. The result upon the race is thus retrogression.

And now for our second question. What was the goal Nietzsche had in
mind for his immoralist? What was to be the final outcome of his
overturning of all morality? Did he believe the human race would
progress until men became gods and controlled the sun and stars as they
now control the flow of great rivers? Or did he believe that the end
of it all would be annihilation? After the publication of Nietzsche's
earlier books, with their ruthless tearing down of the old morality,
these questions were asked by critics innumerable in all the countries
of Europe. The philosopher was laughed at as a crazy iconoclast who
destroyed without rebuilding. He was called a visionary and a lunatic,
and it was reported and believed that he had no answer: that his
philosophy was doomed to bear itself to the earth, like an arch without
a keystone. But in April, 1883, he began the publication of "_Also
sprach Zarathustra_" and therein his reply was written large.

"I teach you," cries Zarathustra, "the superman! Man is something that
shall be surpassed. What, to man, is the ape? A joke or a shame. Man
shall be the same to the superman: a joke or shame.... Man is a bridge
connecting ape and superman.... The superman will be the final flower
and ultimate expression of the earth. I conjure you to be faithful to
the earth ... to cease looking beyond the stars for your hopes and
rewards. You must sacrifice yourself to the earth that one day it may
bring forth the superman."[8]

Here we hearken unto the materialist, the empiricist, the monist _par
excellence._ And herein we perceive dimly the outlines of the superman.
He will be rid of all delusions that hamper and oppress the will to
power. He will be perfect in body and perfect in mind. He will know
everything worth knowing and have strength and skill and cunning to
defend himself against any conceivable foe. Because the prospect of
victory will feed his will to power he will delight in combat, and
his increasing capacity for combat will decrease his sensitiveness
to pain. Conscious of his efficiency, he will be happy; having no
illusions regarding a heaven and a hell, he will be content. He will
see life as something pleasant--something to be faced gladly and with
a laugh. He will say "yes" alike to its pleasures and to its ills. Rid
of the notion that there is anything filthy in living--that the flesh
is abominable[9] and life an affliction[10]--he will grow better and
better fitted to meet the conditions of actual existence. He will be
scornful, merciless and supremely fit. He will be set free from man's
fear of gods and of laws, just as man has been set free from the ape's
fear of lions and of open places.

To put it simply, the superman's thesis will be this: that he has been
put into the world without his consent, that he must live in the world,
that he owes nothing to the other people there, and that he knows
nothing whatever of existence beyond the grave. Therefore, it will be
his effort to attain the highest possible measure of satisfaction for
the only unmistakable and genuinely healthy instinct within him: the
yearning to live--to attain power--to meet and overcome the influences
which would weaken or destroy him. "Keep yourselves up, my brethren,"
cautions Zarathustra, "learn to keep yourselves up! The sea is stormy
and many seek to keep afloat by your aid. The sea is stormy and all are
overboard. Well, cheer up and save yourselves, ye old seamen!... What
is your fatherland? The land wherein your children will dwell.... Thus
does your love to these remote ones speak: 'Disregard your neighbors!
Man is something to be surpassed!' Surpass yourself at the expense
of your neighbor. What you cannot seize, let no man _give_ you....
Let him who can command, obey!"[11] The idea, by this time, should be
plain. The superman, in the struggle for existence, asks and gives
no quarter. He believes that it is the destiny of sentient beings to
progress upward, and he is willing to sacrifice himself that his race
may do so. But his sacrifice must benefit, not his neighbor--not the
man who should and must look out for himself--but the generations yet
unborn.

It must be borne in mind that the superman will make a broad
distinction between instinct and passion--that he will not mistake the
complex thing we call love, with its costly and constant hurricanes of
emotion, for the instinct of reproduction--that he will not mistake
mere anger for war--that he will not mistake patriotism, with all its
absurdities and illusions, for the homing instinct. The superman, in
brief, will know how to renounce as well as how to possess, but his
renunciation will be the child, not of faith or of charity, but of
expediency. "Will nothing beyond your capacity," says Zarathustra.
"Demand nothing of yourself that is beyond achievement!... The higher
a thing is, the less often does it succeed. Be of good cheer! What
matter! Learn to laugh at yourselves!... Suppose you have failed? Has
not the future gained by your failure?"[12] The superman, as Nietzsche
was fond of putting it, must play at dice with death. He must have
ever in mind no other goal but the good of the generations after him.
He must be willing to battle with his fellows, as with illusions, that
those who came after may not be afflicted by these enemies. He must be
supremely unmoral and unscrupulous. His must be the gospel of eternal
defiance.

Nietzsche, it will be observed, was unable to give any very definite
picture of this proud, heaven-kissing superman. It is only in
Zarathustra's preachments to "the higher man," a sort of bridge between
man and superman, that we may discern the philosophy of the latter. On
one occasion Nietzsche penned a passage which seemed to compare the
superman to "the great blond beasts" which ranged Europe in the days
of the mammoth, and from this fact many commentators have drawn the
conclusion that he had in mind a mere two-legged brute, with none of
the higher traits that we now speak of as distinctly human. But, as a
matter of fact, he harbored no such idea. In another place, wherein he
speaks of three metamorphoses of the race, under the allegorical names
of the camel, the lion and the child, he makes this plain. The camel,
a hopeless beast of burden, is man. But when the camel goes into the
solitary desert, it throws off its burden and becomes a lion. That is
to say, the heavy and hampering load of artificial dead-weight called
morality is cast aside and the instinct to live--or, as Nietzsche
insists upon regarding it, the will to power--is given free rein.
The lion is the "higher man"--the intermediate stage between man and
superman. The latter appears neither as camel nor lion, but as a little
child. He knows a little child's peace. He has a little child's calm.
Like a babe _in utero_ he is ideally adapted to his environment.

Zarathustra sees man "like a camel kneeling down to be heavy laden."
What are his burdens? One is "to humiliate oneself." Another is
"to love those who despise us." In the desert comes the first
metamorphosis, and the "thou shalt" of the camel becomes the "I will"
of the lion. And what is the mission of the lion? "To create for
itself freedom for new creating." After the lion comes the child. It
is "innocence and oblivion, a new starting, a play, a wheel rolling by
itself, a prime motor, a holy asserting." The thought here is cast in
the heightened language of mystic poetry, but its meaning, I take it,
is not lost.[13]

Nietzsche, even more than Schopenhauer, recognized the fact that great
mental progress--in the sense that mental progress means an increased
capacity for grappling with the conditions of existence--necessarily
has to depend upon physical efficiency. In exceptional cases a great
mind may inhabit a diseased body, but it is obvious that this is not
the rule. A nation in which the average man had but one hand and the
duration of life was but 20 years could not hope to cope with even the
weakest nation of modern Europe. So it is plain that the first step in
the improvement of the race must be the improvement of the body. Jesus
Christ gave expression to this need by healing the sick, and the chief
end and aim of all modern science is that of making life more and more
bearable. Every labor-saving machine ever invented by man has no other
purpose than that of saving bodily wear and tear. Every religion aims
to rescue man from the racking fear of hell and the strain of trying
to solve the great problems of existence for himself. Every scheme of
government that we know is, at bottom, a mere device for protecting
human beings from injury and death.

Thus it will be seen that Nietzsche's program of progress does not
differ from other programs quite so much as, at first sight, it may
seem to do. He laid down the principle that, before anything else could
be accomplished, we must have first looked to the human machine. As
we have seen, the intellect is a mere symptom of the will to live.
Therefore whatever removes obstacles to the free exercise of this will
to live, necessarily promotes and increases intelligence. A race that
was never incapacitated by illness would be better fitted than any
other race for any conceivable intellectual pursuit: from making money
to conjugating Greek verbs. Nietzsche merely states this obvious fact
in an unaccustomed form.

His superman is to give his will to live--or will to power, as you
please--perfect freedom. As a result, those individuals in whom this
instinct most accurately meets the conditions of life on earth will
survive, and in their offspring, by natural laws, the instinct itself
will become more and more accurate. That is to say, there will appear
in future generations individuals in whom this instinct will tend more
and more to order the performance of acts of positive benefit and to
forbid the performance of acts likely to result in injury. This injury,
it is plain, may take the form of unsatisfied wants as well as of
broken skulls. Therefore, the man--or superman--in whom the instinct
reaches perfection will unconsciously steer clear of all the things
which harass and batter mankind today--exhausting self-denials as well
as exhausting passions. Whatever seems likely to benefit him, he will
do; whatever seems likely to injure him he will avoid. When he is in
doubt, he will dare--and accept defeat or victory with equal calm.
His attitude, in brief, will be that of a being who faces life as he
finds it, defiantly and unafraid--who knows how to fight and how to
forbear--who sees things as they actually are, and not as they might or
should be, and so wastes no energy yearning for the moon or in butting
his head against stone walls. "This new table, O my brethren, I put
over you: _Be hard!_"[14]

Such was the goal that Nietzsche held before the human race. Other
philosophers before him had attempted the same thing. Schopenhauer had
put forward his idea of a race that had found happiness in putting
away its desire to live. Comte had seen a vision of a race whose every
member sought the good of all. The humanitarians of all countries
had drawn pictures of Utopias peopled by beings who had outgrown all
human instincts--who had outgrown the _one_ fundamental, unquenchable
and eternal instinct of every living thing: the desire to conquer, to
live, to remain alive. Nietzsche cast out all these fine ideals as
essentially impossible. Man was of the earth, earthy, and his heavens
and hells were creatures of his own vaporings. Only after he had ceased
dreaming of them and thrown off his crushing burden of transcendental
morality--only thus and then could he hope to rise out of the slough of
despond in which he wallowed.


[1] "Nirvana is a cessation of striving for individual existence"--that
is, after death. See "Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology," vol.
II, pp. 178; New York, 1902.

[2] "Der Antichrist," § 2.

[3] "_Also sprach Zarathustra,_" III.

[4] "_Jenseits von Gut und Böse,_" § 258.

[5] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," I.

[6] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," II.

[7] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," IV.

[8] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," I.

[9] Galatians V, 19, 20, 21.

[10] Job V, 7; XIV, 1; Ecclesiastes I, 1.

[11] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," I.

[12] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," IV.

[13] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," I.

[14] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," III.




