VI


CHRISTIANITY


Nietzsche's astonishingly keen and fearless criticism of Christianity
has probably sent forth wider ripples than any other stone he ever
heaved into the pool of philistine contentment. He opened his attack in
"_Menschliches allzu Menschliches_," the first book of his maturity,
and he was still at it, in full fuming and fury, in "_Der Antichrist_,"
the last thing he was destined to write. The closing chapter of "_Der
Antichrist_"--his swan song--contains his famous phillipic, beginning
"I condemn." It recalls Zola's "_j'accuse_" letter in the Dreyfus case,
but it is infinitely more sweeping and infinitely more uproarious and
daring.

"I condemn Christianity," it begins. "I bring against it the most
terrible of accusations that ever an accuser put into words. It is
to me the greatest of all imaginable corruptions.... It has left
nothing untouched by its depravity. It has made a worthlessness out
of every value, a lie out of every truth, a sin out of everything
straightforward, healthy and honest. Let anyone dare to speak to me of
its humanitarian blessings! To do away with pain and woe is contrary
to its principles. It lives by pain and woe: it has created pain and
woe in order to perpetuate itself. It invented the idea of original
sin.[1] It invented 'the equality of souls before God'--that cover
for all the rancour of the useless and base.... It has bred the art
of self-violation--repugnance and contempt for all good and cleanly
instincts.... Parasitism is its praxis. It combats all good red-blood,
all love and all hope for life, with its anæmic ideal of holiness. It
sets up 'the other world' as a negation of every reality. The cross is
the rallying post for a conspiracy against health, beauty, well-being,
courage, intellect, benevolence--against life itself....

"This eternal accusation I shall write upon all walls: I call
Christianity the one great curse, the one great intrinsic depravity,...
for which no expedient is sufficiently poisonous, secret, subterranean,
mean! I call it the one immortal shame and blemish upon the human
race!"[2]

So much for the philosopher's vociferous hurrah at the close of his
argument. In the argument itself it is apparent that his indictment of
Christianity contains two chief counts. The first is the allegation
that it is essentially untrue and unreasonable, and the second is
the theory that it is degrading. The first of these counts is not
unfamiliar to the students of religious history. It was first voiced by
that high priest who "rent his clothes" and cried "What need have we of
any further witnesses? Ye have heard the blasphemy."[3] It was voiced
again by the Romans who threw converts to the lions, and after the long
silence of the middle ages, it was piped forth again by Voltaire, Hume,
the encyclopedists and Paine. After the philosophers and scientists
who culminated in Darwin had rescued reason for all time from the
transcendental nonsense of the cobweb-spinners and metaphysicians,
Huxley came to the front with his terrific heavy artillery and those
who still maintained that Christianity was historically true--Gladstone
and the rest of the forlorn hope--were mowed down. David Strauss,
Lessing, Eichhorn, Michaelis, Bauer, Meyer, Ritschl,[4] Pfleiderer and
a host of others joined in the chorus and in Nietzsche's early manhood
the battle was practically won. By 1880 no reasonable man actually
believed that there were devils in the swine, and it was already
possible to deny the physical resurrection and still maintain a place
in respectable society. Today a literal faith in the gospel narrative
is confined to ecclesiastical reactionaries, pious old ladies and men
about to be hanged.

Therefore, Nietzsche did not spend much time examining the historical
credibility of Christianity. He did not try to prove, like Huxley,
that the witnesses to the resurrection were superstitious peasants and
hysterical women, nor did he seek to show, like Huxley again, that
Christ might have been taken down from the cross before he was dead.
He was intensely interested in all such inquiries, but he saw that,
in the last analysis, they left a multitude of problems unsolved. The
solution of these unsolved problems was the task that he took unto
himself. Tunneling down, in his characteristic way, into the very
foundations of the faith, he endeavored to prove that it was based upon
contradictions and absurdities; that its dogmas were illogical and its
precepts unworkable; and that its cardinal principles presupposed
the acceptance of propositions which, to the normal human mind, were
essentially unthinkable. This tunneling occupied much of Nietzsche's
energy in "_Menschliches allzu Menschliches_," and he returned to
it again and again, in all of the other books that preceded "_Der
Antichrist_." His method of working may be best exhibited by a few
concrete examples.

Prayer, for instance, is an exceedingly important feature of Christian
worship and any form of worship in which it had no place would be
necessarily unchristian.[5] But upon what theory is prayer based?
Examining the matter from all sides you will have to conclude that it
is reasonable only upon two assumptions: first, that it is possible to
change the infallible will and opinion of the deity, and secondly, that
the petitioner is capable of judging what he needs. Now, Christianity
maintains, as one of its main dogmas, that the deity is omniscient
and all-wise,[6] and, as another fundamental doctrine, that human
beings are absolutely unable to solve their problems without heavenly
aid[7] _i.e._ that the deity necessarily knows what is best for any
given man better than that man can ever hope to know it himself.
Therefore, Christianity, in ordaining prayer, orders, as a condition of
inclusion in its communion, an act which it holds to be useless. This
contradiction, argues Nietzsche, cannot be explained away in terms
comprehensible to the human intelligence.

Again Christianity holds that man is a mere creature of the deity's
will, and yet insists that the individual be judged and punished for
his acts. In other words, it tries to carry free will on one shoulder
and determinism on the other, and its doctors and sages have themselves
shown that they recognize the absurdity of this by their constant, but
futile efforts to decide which of the two shall be abandoned. This
contradiction is a legacy from Judaism, and Mohammedanism suffers
from it, too. Those sects which have sought to remove it by an entire
acceptance of determinism--under the name of predestination, fatalism,
or what not--have become bogged in hopeless morasses of unreason and
dogmatism. It is a cardinal doctrine of Presbyterianism, for instance,
that "by the decree of God, for the manifestation of his glory, some
men and angels are predestinated unto everlasting life and others
foreordained to everlasting death ... without any foresight of faith
or good works, or perseverance in either of them, or any other thing
in the creature, as conditions...."[8] In other words, no matter
how faithfully one man tries to follow in the footsteps of Christ,
he may go to hell, and no matter how impiously another sins, he may
be foreordained for heaven. That such a belief makes all religion,
faith and morality absurd is apparent. That it is, at bottom, utterly
unthinkable to a reasoning being is also plain.

Nietzsche devoted a great deal of time during his first period of
activity to similar examinations of Christian ideas and he did a great
deal to supplement the historical investigations of those English and
German savants whose ruthless exposure of fictions and frauds gave
birth to what we now call the higher criticism. But his chief service
was neither in the field of historical criticism nor in that of the
criticism of dogmas. Toward the end of his life he left the business of
examining biblical sources to the archeologists and historians, whose
equipment for the task was necessarily greater than his own, and the
business of reducing Christian logic to contradiction and absurdity to
the logicians. Thereafter, his own work took him a step further down
and in the end he got to the very bottom of the subject. The answer of
the theologians had been that, even if you denied the miracles, the
gospels, the divinity of Christ and his very existence as an actual
man, you would have to admit that Christianity itself was sufficient
excuse for its own existence; that it had made the world better and
that it provided a workable scheme of life by which men could live and
die and rise to higher things. This answer, for awhile, staggered the
agnostics and Huxley himself evidently came near being convinced that
it was beyond rebuttal.[9] But it only made Nietzsche spring into the
arena more confident than ever. "Very well," he said, "we will argue it
out. You say that Christianity has made the world better? I say that it
has made it worse! You say that it is comforting and uplifting? I say
that it is cruel and degrading! You say that it is the best religion
mankind has ever invented? I say it is the most dangerous!"

Having thus thrown down the gage of battle, Nietzsche proceeded to
fight like a Tartar, and it is but common fairness to say that,
for a good while, he bore the weight of his opponents' onslaught
almost unaided. The world was willing enough to abandon its belief
in Christian supernaturalism and as far back as the early 80's the
dignitaries of the Church of England--to employ a blunt but expressive
metaphor--had begun to get in out of the wet. But the pietists still
argued that Christianity remained the fairest flower of civilization
and that it met a real and ever-present human want and made mankind
better. To deny this took courage of a decidedly unusual sort--courage
that was willing to face, not only ecclesiastical anathema and
denunciation, but also the almost automatic opposition of every
so-called respectable man. But Nietzsche, whatever his deficiencies
otherwise, certainly was not lacking in assurance, and so, when he
came to write "_Der Antichrist_" he made his denial thunderous and
uncompromising beyond expression. No medieval bishop ever pronounced
more appalling curses. No backwoods evangelist ever laid down the law
with more violent eloquence. The book is the shortest he ever wrote,
but it is by long odds the most compelling. Beginning _allegro_, it
proceeds from _forte_, by an uninterrupted _crescendo_ to _allegro con
moltissimo molto fortissimo_. The sentences run into mazes of italics,
dashes and asterisks. It is German that one cannot read aloud without
roaring and waving one's arm.

Christianity, says Nietzsche, is the most dangerous system of
slave-morality the world has ever known. "It has waged a deadly
war against the highest type of man. It has put a ban on all his
fundamental instincts. It has distilled evil out of these instincts.
It makes the strong and efficient man its typical outcast man. It has
taken the part of the weak and the low; it has made an ideal out of
its antagonism to the very instincts which tend to preserve life and
well-being.... It has taught men to regard their highest impulses as
sinful--as temptations."[10] In a word, it tends to rob mankind of
all those qualities which fit any living organism to survive in the
struggle for existence.

As we shall see later on, civilization obscures and even opposes this
struggle for existence, but it is in progress all the same, at all
times and under all conditions. Every one knows, for instance, that
one-third of the human beings born into the world every year die before
they are five years old. The reason for this lies in the fact that they
are, in some way or other, less fitted to meet the conditions of life
on earth than the other two-thirds. The germ of cholera infantum is
an enemy to the human race, and so long as it continues to exist upon
earth it will devote all of its activity to attacking human infants
and seeking to destroy them. It happens that some babies recover from
cholera infantum, while others die of it. This is merely another
way of saying that the former, having been born with a capacity for
resisting the attack of the germ, or having been given the capacity
artificially, are better fitted to survive, and that the latter, being
incapable of making this resistance, are unfit.

All life upon earth is nothing more than a battle with the enemies
of life. A germ is such an enemy, cold is such an enemy, lack of
food is such an enemy, and others that may be mentioned are lack of
water, ignorance of natural laws, armed foes and deficient physical
strength. The man who is able to get all of the food he wants, and
so can nourish his body until it becomes strong enough to combat the
germs of disease; who gets enough to drink, who has shelter from the
elements, who has devised means for protecting himself against the
desires of other men--who yearn, perhaps, who take for themselves some
of the things that he has acquired--such a man, it is obvious, is far
better fitted to live than a man who has none of these things. He is
far better fitted to survive, in a purely physical sense, because his
body is nourished and protected, and he is far better fitted to attain
happiness, because most of his powerful wants are satisfied.

Nietzsche maintains that Christianity urges a man to make no such
efforts to insure his personal survival in the struggle for existence.
The beatitudes require, he says, that, instead of trying to do so, the
Christian shall devote his energies to helping others and shall give
no thought to himself. Instead of exalting himself as much as possible
above the common herd and thus raising his chances of surviving, and
those of his children, above those of the average man, he is required
to lift up this average man. Now, it is plain that every time he
lifts up some one else, he must, at the same time, decrease his own
store, because his own store is the only stock from which he can draw.
Therefore, the tendency of the Christian philosophy of humility is to
make men voluntarily throw away their own chances of surviving, which
means their own sense of efficiency, which means their own "feeling of
increasing power," which means their own happiness. As a substitute for
this natural happiness, Christianity offers the happiness derived from
the belief that the deity will help those who make the sacrifice and so
restore them to their old superiority. This belief, as Nietzsche shows,
is no more borne out by known facts than the old belief in witches. It
is, in fact, proved to be an utter absurdity by all human experience.

"I call an animal, a species, an individual, depraved," he says,
"when it loses its instincts, when it selects, when it _prefers_ what
is injurious to it.... Life itself is an instinct for growth, for
continuance, for accumulation of forces, for _power:_ where the will
to power is wanting there is decline."[11] Christianity, he says,
squarely opposes this will to power in the Golden Rule, the cornerstone
of the faith. The man who confines his efforts to attain superiority
over his fellow men to those acts which he would be willing to have
them do toward him, obviously abandons all such efforts entirely.
To put it in another form, a man can't make himself superior to the
race in general without making every other man in the world, to that
extent, his inferior. Now, if he follows the Golden Rule, he must
necessarily abandon all efforts to make himself superior, because if
he didn't he would be suffering all the time from the pain of seeing
other men--whose standpoint the Rule requires him to assume--grow
inferior. Thus his activity is restricted to one of two things:
standing perfectly still or deliberately making himself inferior. The
first is impossible, but Nietzsche shows that the latter is not, and
that, in point of fact, it is but another way of describing the act
of sympathy--one of the things ordered by the fundamental dogma of
Christianity.

Sympathy, says Nietzsche, consists merely of a strong man giving up
some of his strength to a weak man. The strong man, it is evident, is
debilitated thereby, while the weak man, very often, is strengthened
but little. If you go to a hanging and sympathize with the condemned,
it is plain that your mental distress, without helping that gentleman,
weakens, to a perceptible degree, your own mind and body, just as
all other powerful emotions weaken them, by consuming energy, and so
you are handicapped in the struggle for life to the extent of this
weakness. You may get a practical proof of it an hour later by being
overcome and killed by a foot-pad whom you might have been able to
conquer, had you been feeling perfectly well, or by losing money to
some financial rival for whom, under normal conditions, you would have
been a match; and then again you may get no immediate or tangible
proof of it at all. But your organism will have been weakened to some
measurable extent, all the same, and at some time--perhaps on your
death bed--this minute drain will make itself evident, though, of
course, you may never know it.

"Sympathy," says Nietzsche, "stands in direct antithesis to the tonic
passions which elevate the energy of human beings and increase their
feeling of efficiency and power. It is a depressant. One loses force
by sympathizing and any loss of force which has been caused by other
means--personal suffering, for example--is increased and multiplied
by sympathy. Suffering itself becomes contagious through sympathy and
under certain circumstances it may lead to a total loss of life. If
a proof of that is desired, consider the case of the Nazarene, whose
sympathy for his fellow men brought him, in the end, to the cross.

"Again, sympathy thwarts the law of development, of evolution, of the
survival of the fittest. It preserves what is ripe for extinction, it
works in favor of life's condemned ones, it gives to life itself a
gloomy aspect by the number of the ill-constituted it _maintains_ in
life.... It is both a multiplier of misery and a conservator of misery.
It is the principal tool for the advancement of decadence. It leads to
nothingness, to the negation of all those instincts which are at the
basis of life.... But one does not say 'nothingness;' one says instead
'the other world' or 'the better life.'... This innocent rhetoric,
out of the domain of religio-moral fantasy, becomes far from innocent
when one realizes what tendency it conceals: the tendency _hostile to
life_."[12]

The foregoing makes it patent that Nietzsche was a thorough-going and
uncompromising biological monist. That is to say, he believed that man,
while superior to all other animals because of his greater development,
was, after all, merely an animal, like the rest of them; that the
struggle for existence went on among human beings exactly as it went
on among the lions in the jungle and the protozoa in the sea ooze, and
that the law of natural selection ruled all of animated nature--mind
and matter--alike. Indeed, it is but just to credit him with being the
pioneer among modern monists of this school, for he stated and defended
the doctrine of morphological universality at a time when practically
all the evolutionists doubted it, and had pretty well proved its truth
some years before Haeckel wrote his "Monism" and "The Riddle of the
Universe."

To understand all of this, it is necessary to go back to Darwin and his
first statement of the law of natural selection. Darwin proved, in "The
Origin of the Species," that a great many more individuals of any given
species of living being are born into the world each year than can
possibly survive. Those that are best fitted to meet the condition of
existence live on; those that are worst fitted die. The result is that,
by the influence of heredity, the survivors beget a new generation in
which there is a larger percentage of the fit. One might think that
this would cause a greater number to survive, but inasmuch as the food
and room on earth are limited, a large number must always die. But
all the while the half or third, or whatever the percentage may be,
which actually do survive become more and more fit. In consequence, a
species, generation after generation, tends to become more and more
adapted to meet life's vicissitudes, or, as the biologists say, more
and more adapted to its environment.

Darwin proved that this law was true of all the lower animals and
showed that it was responsible for the evolution of the lower apes
into anthropoid apes, and that it could account, theoretically, for a
possible evolution of anthropoid apes into man. But in "The Descent
of Man" he argued that the law of natural selection ceased when man
became an intelligent being. Thereafter, he said, man's own efforts
worked against those of nature. Instead of letting the unfit of his
race die, civilization began to protect and preserve them. The result
was that nature's tendency to make all living beings more and more
sturdy was set aside by man's own conviction that mere sturdiness was
not the thing most to be desired. From this Darwin argued that if two
tribes of human beings lived side by side, and if, in one of them, the
unfit were permitted to perish, while in the other there were many
"courageous, sympathetic and faithful members, who were always ready to
warn each other of danger, and to aid and defend one another"--that in
such a case, the latter tribe would make the most progress, despite its
concerted effort to defy a law of nature.

Darwin's disciples agreed with him in this and some of them went to
the length of asserting that civilization, in its essence, was nothing
more or less than a successful defiance of this sort.[13] Herbert
Spencer was much troubled by the resultant confusion and as one critic
puts it,[14] the whole drift of his thought "appears to be inspired
by the question: how to evade and veil the logical consequence of
evolutionarism for human existence?" John Fiske, another Darwinian,
accepted the situation without such disquieting doubt. "When humanity
began to be evolved," he said, "an entirely new chapter in the history
of the universe was opened. Henceforth the life of the nascent soul
came to be first in importance and the bodily life became subordinated
to it."[15] Even Huxley believed that man would have to be excepted
from the operation of the law of natural selection. "The ethical
progress of society," he said, "depends, not on imitating the cosmic
process and still less on running away from it, but in combating it."
He saw that it was audacious thus to pit man against nature, but he
thought that man was sufficiently important to make such an attempt
and hoped "that the enterprise might meet with a certain measure of
success."[16] And the other Darwinians agreed with him.[17]

As all the best critics of philosophy have pointed out,[18] any
philosophical system which admits such a great contradiction fails
utterly to furnish workable standards of order in the universe, and so
falls short of achieving philosophy's first aim. We must either believe
with the scholastics that intelligence rules, or we must believe, with
Haeckel, that all things happen in obedience to invariable natural
laws. We cannot believe both. A great many men, toward the beginning
of the 90's, began to notice this fatal defect in Darwin's idea of
human progress. In 1891 one of them pointed out the conclusion toward
which it inevitably led.[19] If we admitted, he said, that humanity
had set at naught the law of natural selection, we must admit that
civilization was working against nature's efforts to preserve the race,
and that, in the end, humanity would perish. To put it more succinctly,
man might defy the law of natural selection as much as he pleased, but
he could never hope to set it aside. Soon or late, he would awaken to
the fact that he remained a mere animal, like the rabbit and the worm,
and that, if he permitted his body to degenerate into a thing entirely
lacking in strength and virility, not all the intelligence conceivable
could save him.

Nietzsche saw all this clearly as early as 1877.[20] He saw that what
passed for civilization, as represented by Christianity, was making
such an effort to defy and counteract the law of natural selection,
and he came to the conclusion that the result would be disaster.
Christianity, he said, ordered that the strong should give part of
their strength to the weak, and so tended to weaken the whole race.
Self-sacrifice, he said, was an open defiance of nature, and so were
all the other Christian virtues, in varying degree. He proposed, then,
that before it was too late, humanity should reject Christianity, as
the "greatest of all imaginable corruptions," and admit freely and
fully that the law of natural selection was universal and that the only
way to make real progress was to conform to it.

It may be asked here how Nietzsche accounted for the fact that humanity
had survived so long--for the fact that the majority of men were still
physically healthy and that the race, as a whole, was still fairly
vigorous. He answered this in two ways. First, he denied that the
race was maintaining to the full its old vigor. "The European of the
present," he said, "is far below the European of the Renaissance." It
would be absurd, he pointed out, to allege that the average German
of 1880 was as strong and as healthy--_i.e._ as well fitted to his
environment--as the "blond beast" who roamed the Saxon lowlands in
the days of the mammoth. It would be equally absurd to maintain that
the highest product of modern civilization--the town-dweller--was as
vigorous and as capable of becoming the father of healthy children as
the intelligent farmer, whose life was spent in approximate accordance
with all the more obvious laws of health.

Nietzsche's second answer was that humanity had escaped utter
degeneration and destruction because, despite its dominance as a
theory of action, few men actually practiced Christianity. It was
next to impossible, he said, to find a single man who, literally and
absolutely, obeyed the teachings of Christ.[21] There were plenty of
men who thought they were doing so, but all of them were yielding in
only a partial manner. Absolute Christianity meant absolute disregard
of self. It was obvious that a man who reached this state of mind
would be unable to follow any gainful occupation, and so would find
it impossible to preserve his own life or the lives of his children.
In brief, said Nietzsche, an actual and utter Christian would perish
today just as Christ perished, and so, in his own fate, would provide a
conclusive argument against Christianity.

Nietzsche pointed out further that everything which makes for the
preservation of the human race is diametrically opposed to the
Christian ideal. Thus Christianity becomes the foe of science. The one
argues that man should sit still and let God reign; the other that man
should battle against the tortures which fate inflicts upon him, and
try to overcome them and grow strong. Thus all science is unchristian,
because, in the last analysis, the whole purpose and effort of science
is to arm man against loss of energy and death, and thus make him
self-reliant and unmindful of any duty of propitiating the deity. That
this antagonism between Christianity and the search, for truth really
exists has been shown in a practical way time and again. Since the
beginning of the Christian era the church has been the bitter and
tireless enemy of all science, and this enmity has been due to the fact
that every member of the priest class has realized that the more a man
learned the more he came to depend upon his own efforts, and the less
he was given to asking help from above. In the ages of faith men prayed
to the saints when they were ill. Today they send for a doctor. In the
ages of faith battles were begun with supplications, and it was often
possible to witness the ridiculous spectacle of both sides praying to
the same God. Today every sane person knows that the victory goes to
the wisest generals and largest battalions.

Nietzsche thus showed, first, that Christianity (and all other ethical
systems having self-sacrifice as their basis) tended to oppose the law
of natural selection and so made the race weaker; and secondly, that
the majority of men, consciously or unconsciously, were aware of this,
and so made no effort to be absolute Christians. If Christianity were
to become universal, he said, and every man in the world were to follow
Christ's precepts to the letter in all the relations of daily life,
the race would die out in a generation. This being true--and it may
be observed in passing that no one has ever successfully controverted
it--there follows the converse: that the human race had best abandon
the idea of self-sacrifice altogether and submit itself to the law of
natural selection. If this is done, says Nietzsche, the result will
be a race of supermen--of proud, strong dionysians--of men who will
say "yes" to the world and will be ideally capable of meeting the
conditions under which life must exist on earth.

In his efforts to account for the origin of Christianity, Nietzsche
was less happy, and indeed came very near the border-line of the
ridiculous. The faith of modern Europe, he said, was the result of a
gigantic effort on the part of the ancient Jews to revenge themselves
upon their masters. The Jews were helpless and inefficient and thus
evolved a slave-morality. Naturally, as slaves, they hated their
masters, while realizing, all the while, the unmanliness of the ideals
they themselves had to hold to in order to survive. So they crucified
Christ, who voiced these same ideals, and the result was that the
outside world, which despised the Jews, accepted Christ as a martyr and
prophet and thus swallowed the Jewish ideals without realizing it. In a
word, the Jews detested the slave-morality which circumstances thrust
upon them, and got their revenge by foisting it, in a sugar-coated
pill, upon their masters.

It is obvious that this idea is sheer lunacy. That the Jews ever
realized the degenerating effect of their own slave-morality is
unlikely, and that they should take counsel together and plan such
an elaborate and complicated revenge, is impossible. The reader of
Nietzsche must expect to encounter such absurdities now and then.
The mad German was ordinarily a most logical and orderly thinker,
but sometimes the traditional German tendency to indulge in wild and
imbecile flights of speculation cropped up in him.


[1] _Vide_ the chapter on "Crime and Punishment."

[2] "_Der Antichrist_," § 62.

[3] St. Mark XIV, 63, 64.

[4] Albrecht Ritschl (1822-89), who is not to be confused with
Nietzsche's teacher at Bonn and Leipsic. Ritschl founded what is
called the Ritschlian movement in theology. This has for its object
the abandonment of supernaturalism and the defence of Christianity as
a mere scheme of living. It admits that the miracle stories are fables
and even concedes that Christ was not divine, but maintains that his
teachings represent the best wisdom of the human race. See Denny:
"Studies in Theology," New York, 1894.

[5] Ph. IV, 6: "Be careful for nothing; but in everything by prayer and
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to
God."

[6] Deut. XXXII, 4: "He is the rock, his work is perfect." See also a
hundred similar passages in the Old and New Testaments.

[7] Isaiah XLIV, 8: "Now, O Lord, thou art our Father; we are the clay
and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand."

[8] "The Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the United States,"
pp. 16 to 20: Philadelphia, 1841.

[9] To the end of his days Huxley believed that, to the average human
being, even of the highest class, some sort of faith would always be
necessary. "My work in the London hospitals," he said, "taught me
that the preacher often does as much good as the doctor." It would be
interesting to show how this notion has been abandoned in recent years.
The trained nurse, who was unknown in Huxley's hospital days, now takes
the place of the confessor, and as Dr. Osler has shown us in "Science
and Immortality," men die just as comfortably as before.

[10] "_Der Antichrist_," § 5.

[11] "_Der Antichrist_," § 6.

[12] "_Der Antichrist_," § 7.

[13] Alfred Russell Wallace: "Darwinism," London, 1889.

[14] Alexander Tille, introduction to the Eng. tr. of "The Works of
Friedrich Nietzsche," vol. XI; New York, 1896.

[15] John Fiske: "The Destiny of Man;" London, 1884.

[16] Romanes Lecture on "Evolution and Ethics," 1893.

[17] As a matter of fact this dualism still lives. Thus it was lately
defended by a correspondent of the New York _Sun:_ "If there can be
such a thing as an essential difference there surely is one between the
animal evolution discovered by Darwin and the self-culture, progress
and spiritual aspiration of man." Many other writers on the subject
take the same position.

[18] See the article on "Monism" in the New International Encyclopedia.

[19] A. J. Balfour: "Fragment on Progress;" London, 1891.

[20] He was a monist, indeed, as early as 1873, at which time he had
apparently not yet noticed Darwin's notion that the human race could
successfully defy the law of natural selection. "The absence of any
cardinal distinction between man and beast," he said, "is a doctrine
which I consider true." ("_Unzeitgemässe Betrachtungen_," I, 189.)
Nevertheless, in a moment of sophistry, late in life, he undertook to
criticize the law of natural selection and even to deny its effects
(_vide_ "Roving Expeditions of an Inopportune Philosopher," § 14, in
"The Twilight of the Idols"). It is sufficient to say, in answer, that
the law itself is inassailable and that all of Nietzsche's work, saving
this single unaccountable paragraph, helps support it. His frequent
sneers at Darwin, in other places, need not be taken too seriously.
Everything English, toward the close of his life, excited his ire, but
the fact remains that he was a thorough Darwinian and that, without
Darwin's work, his own philosophy would have been impossible.

[21] This observation is as old as Montaigne, who said: "After all, the
stoics were actually stoical, but where in all Christendom will you
find a Christian?"




VII


TRUTH


At the bottom of all philosophy, of all science and of all thinking,
you will find the one all-inclusive question: How is man to tell truth
from error? The ignorant man solves this problem in a very simple
manner: he holds that whatever he believes, he _knows;_ and that
whatever he knows is true. This is the attitude of all amateur and
professional theologians, politicians and other numbskulls of that
sort. The pious old maid, for example, who believes in the doctrine of
the immaculate conception looks upon her faith as proof, and holds that
all who disagree with her will suffer torments in hell. Opposed to this
childish theory of knowledge is the chronic doubt of the educated man.
He sees daily evidence that many things held to be true by nine-tenths
of all men are, in reality, false, and he is thereby apt to acquire a
doubt of everything, including his own beliefs.

At different times in the history of man, various methods of solving
or evading the riddle have been proposed. In the age of faith it was
held that, by his own efforts alone, man was unable, even partly, to
distinguish between truth and error, but that he could always go for
enlightenment to an infallible encyclopedia: the word of god, as set
forth, through the instrumentality of inspired scribes, in the holy
scriptures. If these scriptures said that a certain proposition was
true, it _was_ true, and any man who doubted it was either a lunatic
or a criminal.[1] This doctrine prevailed in Europe for many years and
all who ventured to oppose it were in danger of being killed, but in
the course of time the number of doubters grew so large that it was
inconvenient or impossible to kill all of them, and so, in the end,
they had to be permitted to voice their doubts unharmed.

The first man of this new era to inflict any real damage upon the
ancient churchly idea of revealed wisdom was Nicolas of Cusa, a
cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church, who lived in the early part of
the fifteenth century.[2] Despite his office and his time, Nicolas was
an independent and intelligent man, and it became apparent to him,
after long reflection, that mere belief in a thing was by no means
a proof of its truth. Man, he decided was prone to err, but in the
worst of his errors, there was always some kernel of truth, else he
would revolt against it as inconceivable. Therefore, he decided, the
best thing for man to do was to hold all of his beliefs lightly and to
reject them whenever they began to appear as errors. The real danger,
he said, was not in making mistakes, but in clinging to them after they
were known to be mistakes.

It seems well nigh impossible that a man of Nicolas' age and training
should have reasoned so clearly, but the fact remains that he did, and
that all of modern philosophy is built upon the foundations he laid.
Since his time a great many other theories of knowledge have been put
forward, but all have worked, in a sort of circle, back to Nicolas.
It would be interesting, perhaps, to trace the course and history of
these variations and denials, but such an enterprise is beyond the
scope of the present inquiry. Nicolas by no means gave the world a
complete and wholly credible system of philosophy. Until the day of
his death scholasticism was dominant in the world that he knew, and
it retained its old hold upon human thought, in fact, for nearly two
hundred years thereafter. Not until Descartes, in 1619, made his famous
resolution "to take nothing for the truth without clear knowledge
that it is such," did humanity in general begin to realize, as Huxley
says, that there was sanctity in doubt. And even Descartes could not
shake himself free of the supernaturalism and other balderdash which
yet colored philosophy. He laid down, for all time, the emancipating
doctrine that "the profession of belief in propositions, of the truth
of which there is no sufficient evidence, is immoral"--a doctrine
that might well be called the Magna Charta of human thought[3]--but
it should not be forgotten that he also laid down other doctrines and
that many of them were visionary and silly. The philosophers after him
rid their minds of the old ideas but slowly and there were frequent
reversions to the ancient delusion that a man's mind is a function of
his soul--whatever that may be--and not of his body. It was common,
indeed, for a philosopher to set out with sane, debatable, conceivable
ideas--and then to go soaring into the idealistic clouds.[4] Only in
our own time have men come to understand that the ego, for all its
seeming independence, is nothing more than the sum of inherited race
experience--that a man's soul, his conscience and his attitude of
mind are things he has inherited from his ancestors, just as he has
inherited his two eyes, his ten toes and his firm belief in signs,
portents and immortality. Only in our own time have men ceased seeking
a golden key to all riddles, and sat themselves down to solve one
riddle at a time.

Those metaphysicians who fared farthest from the philosopher of Cusa
evolved the doctrine that, in themselves, things have no existence at
all, and that we can think of them only in terms of our impressions
of them. The color green, for example, may be nothing but a delusion,
for all we can possibly know of it is that, under certain conditions,
our optic nerves experience a sensation of greenness. Whether this
sensation of greenness is a mere figment of our imagination or the
reflection of an actual physical state, is something that we cannot
tell. It is impossible, in a word, to determine whether there are
actual things around us, which produce real impressions upon us, or
whether our idea of these things is the mere result of subjective
impressions or conditions. We know that a blow on the eyes may cause us
to see a flash of light which does not exist and that a nervous person
may feel the touch of hands and hear noises which are purely imaginary.
May it not be possible, also, that all other sensations have their rise
within us instead of without, and that in saying that objects give us
impressions we have been confusing cause and effect?

Such is the argument of those metaphysicians who doubt, not only the
accuracy of human knowledge, but also the very capacity of human beings
to acquire knowledge. It is apparent, on brief reflection, that this
attitude, while theoretically admissible, is entirely impracticable,
and that, as a matter of fact, it gives us no more substantial
basis for intelligent speculation than the old device of referring
all questions to revelation. To say that nothing exists save in the
imagination of living beings is to say that this imagination itself
does not exist. This, of course, is an absurdity, because every man
is absolutely certain that he himself is a real thing and that his
mind is a real thing, too, and capable of thought. In place of such
cob-web spinning, modern philosophers--driven to it, it may be said,
in parenthesis, by the scientists--have gone back to the doctrine
that, inasmuch as we can know nothing of anything save through the
impressions it makes upon us, these impressions must be accepted
provisionally as accurate, so long as they are evidently normal and
harmonize one with the other.

That is to say, our perceptions, corrected by our experience and our
common sense, must serve as guides for us, and we must seize every
opportunity to widen their range and increase their accuracy. For
millions of years they have been steadily augmenting our store of
knowledge. We know, for instance, that when fire touches us it causes
an impression which we call pain and that this impression is invariably
the same, and always leads to the same results, in all normal human
beings. Therefore, we accept it as an axiom that fire causes pain.
There are many other ideas that may be and have been established in the
same manner: by the fact that they are universal among sane men. But
there is also a multitude of things which produce different impressions
upon different men, and here we encounter the problem of determining
which of these impressions is right and which is wrong. One man,
observing the rising and setting of the sun, concludes that it is a
ball of fire revolving about the earth. Another man, in the face of
the same phenomena, concludes that the earth revolves around the sun.
How, then, are we to determine which of these men has drawn the proper
conclusion?

As a matter of fact, it is impossible in such a case, to come to any
decision which can be accepted as utterly and absolutely true. But
all the same the scientific empiric method enables us to push the
percentage of error nearer and nearer to the irreducible minimum. We
can observe the phenomenon under examination from a multitude of sides
and compare the impression it produces with the impressions produced
by kindred phenomena regarding which we know more. Again, we can put
this examination into the hands of men specially trained and fitted
for such work--men whose conclusions we know, by previous experience,
to be above the average of accuracy. And so, after a long time, we can
formulate some idea of the thing under inspection which violates few
or none of the other ideas held by us. When we have accomplished this,
we have come as near to the absolute truth as it is possible for human
beings to come.

I need not point out that this method does not contemplate a mere
acceptance of the majority vote. Its actual effect, indeed, is quite
the contrary, for it is only a small minority of human beings who may
be said, with any truth, to be capable of thought. It is probable, for
example, that nine-tenths of the people in Christendom today believe
that Friday is an unlucky day, while only the remaining tenth hold that
one day is exactly like another. But despite this, it is apparent
that the idea of the latter will survive and that, by slow degrees, it
will be forced upon the former. We know that it is true, not because
it is accepted by all men or by the majority of men--for, as a matter
of fact, we have seen that it isn't--but because we realize that the
few who hold to it are best capable of distinguishing between actual
impressions and mere delusions.

Again, the scientific method tends to increase our knowledge by the
very fact that it discourages unreasoning faith. The scientist realizes
that most of his so-called facts are probably errors and so he is
willing to harbor doubts of their truth and to seek for something
better. Like Socrates he boldly says "I know that I am ignorant." He
realizes, in fact, that error, when it is constantly under fire, is
bound to be resolved in the long run into something approximating the
truth. As Nicolas pointed out 500 years ago, nothing is utterly and
absolutely true and nothing is utterly and absolutely false. There
is always a germ of truth in the worst error, and there is always a
residuum of error in the soundest truth. Therefore, an error is fatal
only when it is hidden from the white light of investigation. Herein
lies the difference between the modern scientist and the moralist. The
former holds nothing sacred, not even his own axioms; the latter lays
things down as law and then makes it a crime to doubt them.

It is in this way--by submitting every idea to a searching, pitiless,
unending examination--that the world is increasing its store of what
may be called, for the sake of clearness, absolute knowledge. Error
always precedes truth, and it is extremely probable that the vast
majority of ideas held by men of today--even the sanest and wisest
men--are delusions, but with the passing of the years our stock of
truth grows larger and larger. "A conviction," says Nietzsche, "always
has its history--its previous forms, its tentative forms, its states of
error. It becomes a conviction, indeed, only after having been _not_
a conviction, and then _hardly_ a conviction. No doubt falsehood is
one of these embryonic forms of conviction. Sometimes only a change
of persons is needed to transform one into the other. That which, in
the son, is a conviction, was, in the father, still a falsehood."[5]
The tendency of intelligent men, in a word, is to approach nearer
and nearer the truth, by the processes of rejection, revision and
invention. Many old ideas are rejected by each new generation, but
there always remain a few that survive. We no longer believe with
the cave-men that the thunder is the voice of an angry god and the
lightning the flash of his sword, but we still believe, as they did,
that wood floats upon water, that seeds sprout and give forth plants,
that a roof keeps off the rain and that a child, if it lives long
enough, will inevitably grow into a man or a woman. Such ideas may be
called truths. If we deny them we must deny at once that the world
exists and that we exist ourselves.

Nietzsche's discussion of these problems is so abstruse and so much
complicated by changes in view that it would be impossible to make an
understandable summary of it in the space available here. In his first
important book, "_Menschliches allzu Menschliches_" he devoted himself,
in the main, to pointing out errors made in the past, without laying
down any very definite scheme of thought for the future. In the early
stages of human progress, he said, men made the mistake of regarding
everything that was momentarily pleasant or beneficial as absolutely
and eternally true. Herein they manifested the very familiar human
weakness for rash and hasty generalization, and the equally familiar
tendency to render the ideas of a given time and place perpetual and
permanent by erecting them into codes of morality and putting them
into the mouths of gods. This, he pointed out, was harmful, for a
thing might be beneficial to the men of today and fatal to the men of
tomorrow. Therefore, he argued that while a certain idea's effect was a
good criterion, humanly speaking, of its present or current truth, it
was dangerous to assume that this effect would be always the same, and
that, in consequence, the idea itself would remain true forever.

Not until the days of Socrates, said Nietzsche, did men begin to notice
this difference between imminent truth and eternal truth. The notion
that such a distinction existed made its way very slowly, even after
great teachers began to teach it, but in the end it was accepted by
enough men to give it genuine weight. Since that day philosophy and
science, which were once merely different names for the same thing,
have signified two separate things. It is the object of philosophy
to analyze happiness, and by means of the knowledge thus gained, to
devise means for safeguarding and increasing it. In consequence, it is
necessary for philosophy to generalize--to assume that the thing which
makes men happy today will make them happy tomorrow. Science, on the
contrary, concerns itself, not with things of the uncertain future, but
with things of the certain present. Its object is to examine the world
as it exists today, to uncover as many of its secrets as possible, and
to study their effect upon human happiness. In other words, philosophy
first constructs a scheme of happiness and then tries to fit the world
to it, while science studies the world with no other object in view
than the increase of knowledge, and with full confidence that, in the
long run, this increase of knowledge will increase efficiency and in
consequence happiness.

It is evident, then, that science, for all its contempt for fixed
schemes of happiness, will eventually accomplish with certainty what
philosophy--which most commonly swims into the ken of the average man
as morality--is now trying to do in a manner that is not only crude
and unreasonable, but also necessarily unsuccessful. In a word, just
so soon as man's store of knowledge grows so large that he becomes
complete master of the natural forces which work toward his undoing,
he will be perfectly happy. Now, Nietzsche believed, as we have seen
in past chapters, that man's instinctive will to power had this same
complete mastery over his environment as its ultimate object, and so
he concluded that the will to power might be relied upon to lead man
to the truth. That is to say, he believed that there was, in every
man of the higher type (the only type he thought worth discussing) an
instinctive tendency to seek the true as opposed to the false, that
this instinct, as the race progressed, grew more and more accurate,
and that its growing accuracy explained the fact that, despite the
opposition of codes of morality and of the iron hand of authority, man
constantly increased his store of knowledge. A thought, he said, arose
in a man without his initiative or volition, and was nothing more or
less than an expression of his innate will to obtain power over his
environment by accurately observing and interpreting it. It was just
as reasonable, he said, to say _It_ thinks as to say _I_ think,[6]
because every intelligent person knew that a man couldn't control his
thoughts. Therefore, the fact that these thoughts, in the long run
and considering the human race as a whole, tended to uncover more
and more truths proved that the will to power, despite the danger of
generalizing from its manifestations, grew more and more accurate and
so worked in the direction of absolute truth. Nietzsche believed that
mankind was ever the slave of errors, but he held that the number of
errors tended to decrease. When, at last, truth reigned supreme and
there were no more errors, the superman would walk the earth.

Now it is impossible for any man to note the workings of the will to
power save as it is manifested in his own instincts and thoughts, and
therefore Nietzsche, in his later books, urges that every man should be
willing, at all times, to pit his own feelings against the laws laid
down by the majority. A man should steer clear of rash generalization
from his own experience, but he should be doubly careful to steer
clear of the generalizations of others. The greatest of all dangers
lies in subscribing to a thesis without being certain of its truth.
"This not-wishing-to-see what one sees ... is a primary requisite
for membership in a party, in any sense whatsoever. Therefore, the
party man becomes a liar by necessity." The proper attitude for a
human being, indeed, is chronic dissent and skepticism. "Zarathustra
is a skeptic.... Convictions are prisons.... The freedom from every
kind of permanent conviction, the ability to search freely, belong to
strength.... The need of a belief, of something that is unconditioned
is a sign of weakness. The man of belief is necessarily a dependent
man.... His instinct gives the highest honor to self-abnegation.
He does not belong to himself, but to the author of the idea he
believes."[7] It is only by skepticism, argues Nietzsche, that we can
hope to make any progress. If all men accepted without question, the
_dicta_ of some one supreme sage, it is plain that there could be no
further increase of knowledge. It is only by constant turmoil and
conflict and exchange of views that the minute granules of truth can
be separated from the vast muck heap of superstition and error. Fixed
truths, in the long run, are probably more dangerous to intelligence
than falsehoods.[8]

This argument, I take it, scarcely needs greater elucidation. Every
intelligent man knows that if there had been no brave agnostics to defy
the wrath of the church in the middle ages, the whole of Christendom
would still wallow in the unspeakably foul morass of ignorance which
had its center, during that black time, in an infallible sovereign of
sovereigns. Authority, at all times and everywhere, means sloth and
degeneration. It is only doubt that creates. It is only the minority
that counts.

The fact that the great majority of human beings are utterly incapable
of original thought, and so must, perforce, borrow their ideas or
submit tamely to some authority, explains Nietzsche's violent loathing
and contempt for the masses. The average, self-satisfied, conservative,
orthodox, law-abiding citizen appeared to him to be a being but little
raised above the cattle in the barn-yard. So violent was this feeling
that every idea accepted by the majority excited, for that very reason,
his suspicion and opposition. "What everybody believes," he once said,
"is never true." This may seem like a mere voicing of brobdingnagian
egotism, but as a matter of fact, the same view is held by every man
who has spent any time investigating the history of ideas. "Truth,"
said Dr. Osler a while ago, "scarcely ever carries the struggle for
acceptance at its first appearance." The masses are always a century
or two behind. They have made a virtue of their obtuseness and call
it by various fine names: conservatism, piety, respectability, faith.
The nineteenth century witnessed greater human progress than all the
centuries before it saw or even imagined, but the majority of white men
of today still believe in ghosts, still fear the devil, still hold that
the number 13 is unlucky and still picture the deity as a patriarch in
a white beard, surrounded by a choir of resplendent amateur musicians.
"We think a thing," says Prof. Henry Sedgwick, "because all other
people think so; or because, after all, we _do_ think so; or because we
are told so, and think we must think so; or because we once thought so,
and think we still think so; or because, having thought so, we think we
_will_ think so."

Naturally enough, Nietzsche was an earnest opponent of the theological
doctrine of free will. He held, as we have seen, that every human
act was merely the effect of the will to power reacting against
environment, and in consequence he had to reject absolutely the notion
of volition and responsibility. A man, he argued, was not an object
_in vacuo_ and his acts, thoughts, impulses and motives could not be
imagined without imagining some cause for them. If this cause came from
without, it was clearly beyond his control, and if it came from within
it was no less so, for his whole attitude of mind, his instinctive
habits of thoughts, his very soul, so-called, were merely attributes
that had been handed down to him, like the shape of his nose and the
color of his eyes, from his ancestors. Nietzsche held that the idea
of responsibility was the product and not the cause of the idea of
punishment, and that the latter was nothing more than a manifestation
of primitive man's will to power--to triumph over his fellows by
making them suffer the handicap and humiliation of pain. "Men were
called free," he said, "in order that they might be condemned and
punished.... When we immoralists try to cleanse psychology, history,
nature and sociology of these notions, we find that our chief enemies
are the theologians, who, with their preposterous idea of 'a moral
order of the world,' go on tainting the innocence of man's struggle
upward with talk of punishment and guilt. Christianity is, indeed, a
hangman's metaphysic."[9] As a necessary corollary of this, Nietzsche
denied the existence of any plan in the cosmos. Like Haeckel, he
believed that but two things existed--energy and matter; and that all
the phenomena which made us conscious of the universe were nothing more
than symptoms of the constant action of the one upon the other. Nothing
ever happened without a cause, he said, and no cause was anything
other than the effect of some previous cause. "The destiny of man," he
said, "cannot be disentangled from the destiny of everything else in
existence, past, present and future.... We are a part of the whole, we
exist in the whole.... There is nothing which could judge, measure or
condemn our being, for that would be to judge, measure and condemn the
whole.... But there is nothing outside of the whole.... The concept of
God has hitherto made our existence a crime.... We deny God, we deny
responsibility by denying God: it is only thereby that we save man."[10]

Herein, unluckily, Nietzsche fell into the trap which has snapped upon
Haeckel and every other supporter of atheistic determinism. He denied
that the human will was free and argued that every human action was
inevitable, and yet he spent his whole life trying to convince his
fellow men that they should do otherwise than as they did in fact. In
a word, he held that they had no control whatever over their actions,
and yet, like Moses, Mohammed and St. Francis, he thundered at them
uproariously and urged them to turn from their errors and repent.


[1] J. W. Draper, "A History of the Conflict Between Religion and
Science;" New York, 1874.

[2] Richard Falckenberg: "A History of Modern Philosophy," tr. by A. C.
Armstrong, Jr.; New York, 1897; Chap. I.

[3] T. H. Huxley: "Hume," preface; London, 1879.

[4] Comte and Kant, for example.

[5] "_Der Antichrist_," § 55.

[6] "_Jenseits von Gut und Böse_," VII.

[7] "_Der Antichrist_," § 54.

[8] "_Menschliches allzu Menschliches_," § 483.

[9] "_Götzendämmerung_," VI.

[10] "_Götzendämmerung_," VI.




