VIII


CIVILIZATION


On the surface, at least, the civilization of today seems to be moving
slowly toward two goals. One is the eternal renunciation of war and
the other is universal brotherhood: one is "peace on earth" and the
other is "good will to men." Five hundred years ago a statesman's fame
rested frankly and solely upon the victories of his armies; today
we profess to measure him by his skill at keeping these armies in
barracks. And in the internal economy of all civilized states we find
today some pretence at unrestricted and equal suffrage. In times past
it was the chief concern of all logicians and wiseacres to maintain
the proposition that God reigned. At present, the dominant platitude
of Christendom--the cornerstone of practically every political party
and the stock-in-trade of every politician--is the proposition that the
people rule.

Nietzsche opposed squarely both the demand for peace and the demand for
equality, and his opposition was grounded upon two arguments. In the
first place, he said, both demands were rhetorical and insincere and
all intelligent men knew that neither would ever be fully satisfied.
In the second place, he said, it would be ruinous to the race if they
were. That is to say, he believed that war was not only necessary, but
also beneficial, and that the natural system of castes was not only
beneficent, but also inevitable. In the demand for universal peace he
saw only the yearning of the weak and useless for protection against
the righteous exploitation of the useful and strong. In the demand
for equality he saw only the same thing. Both demands, he argued,
controverted and combated that upward tendency which finds expression
in the law of natural selection.

"The order of castes," said Nietzsche, "is the dominating law of
nature, against which no merely human agency may prevail. In every
healthy society there are three broad classes, each of which has its
own morality, its own work, its own notion of perfection and its own
sense of mastery. The first class comprises those who are obviously
superior to the mass intellectually; the second includes those whose
eminence is chiefly muscular, and the third is made up of the mediocre.
The third class, very naturally, is the most numerous, but the first is
the most powerful.

"To this highest caste belongs the privilege of representing beauty,
happiness and goodness on earth.... Its members accept the world as
they find it and make the best of it.... They find their happiness in
those things which, to lesser men, would spell ruin--in the labyrinth,
in severity toward themselves and others, in effort. Their delight is
self-governing: with them asceticism becomes naturalness, necessity,
instinct. A difficult task is regarded by them as a privilege; to play
with burdens which would crush others to death is their recreation.
They are the most venerable species of men. They are the most cheerful,
the most amiable. They rule because they are what they are. They are
not at liberty to be second in rank.

"The second caste includes the guardians and keepers of order and
security--the warriors, the nobles, the king--above all, as the
highest types of warrior, the judges and defenders of the law. They
execute the mandates of the first caste, relieving the latter of all
that is coarse and menial in the work of ruling.

"At the bottom are the workers--the men of handicraft, trade,
agriculture and the greater part of art and science. It is the law of
nature that they should be public utilities--that they should be wheels
and functions. The only kind of happiness of which they are capable
makes intelligent machines of them. For the mediocre, it is happiness
to be mediocre. In them the mastery of one thing--_i.e._ specialism--is
an instinct.

"It is unworthy of a profound intellect to see in mediocrity itself
an objection. It is, indeed, a necessity of human existence, for only
in the presence of a horde of average men is the exceptional man a
possibility....

"Whom do I hate most among the men of today? The socialist who
undermines the workingman's healthy instincts, who takes from him his
feeling of contentedness with his existence, who makes him envious, who
teaches him revenge.... There is no wrong in unequal rights: it lies in
the vain pretension to equal rights."[1]

It is obvious from this that Nietzsche was an ardent believer in
aristocracy, but it is also obvious that he was not a believer in the
thing which passes for aristocracy in the world today. The nobility of
Europe belongs, not to his first class, but to his second class. It is
essentially military and legal, for in themselves its members are puny
and inefficient, and it is only the force of law that maintains them in
their inheritance.

The fundamental doctrine of civilized law, as we know it today, is the
proposition that what a man has once acquired shall belong to him and
his heirs forever, without need on his part or theirs to defend it
personally against predatory rivals. This transfer of the function of
defense from the individual to the state naturally exalts the state's
professional defenders--that is, her soldiers and judges--and so it is
not unnatural to find the members of this class, and their parasites,
in control of most of the world's governments and in possession of a
large share of the world's wealth, power and honors.[2] To Nietzsche
this seemed grotesquely illogical and unfair. He saw that this ruling
class expended its entire energy in combating experiment and change
and that the aristocracy it begot and protected--an aristocracy often
identical, very naturally, with itself--tended to become more and more
unfit and helpless and more and more a bar to the ready recognition
and unrestrained functioning of the only true aristocracy--that of
efficiency.

Nietzsche pointed out that one of the essential absurdities of a
constitutional aristocracy was to be found in the fact that it hedged
itself about with purely artificial barriers. Next only to its desire
to maintain itself without actual personal effort was its jealous
endeavor to prevent accessions to its ranks. Nothing, indeed, disgusts
the traditional belted earl quite so much as the ennobling of some
upstart brewer or iron-master. This exclusiveness, from Nietzsche's
point of view, seemed ridiculous and pernicious, for a true aristocracy
must be ever willing and eager to welcome to its ranks--and to enroll
in fact, automatically--all who display those qualities which make
a man extraordinarily fit and efficient. There should always be, he
said, a free and constant interchange of individuals between the three
natural castes of men. It should be always possible for an abnormally
efficient man of the slave class to enter the master class, and, by
the same token, accidental degeneration or incapacity in the master
class should be followed by swift and merciless reduction to the ranks
of slaves. Thus, those aristocracies which presented the incongruous
spectacle of imbeciles being intrusted with the affairs of government
seemed to him utterly abhorrent, and those schemes of caste which made
a mean birth an offset to high intelligence seemed no less so.

So long as man's mastery of the forces of nature is incomplete, said
Nietzsche, it will be necessary for the vast majority of human beings
to spend their lives in either supplementing those natural forces
which are partly under control or in opposing those which are still
unleashed. The business of tilling the soil, for example, is still
largely a matter of muscular exertion, despite the vast improvement
in farm implements, and it will probably remain so for centuries to
come. Since such labor is necessarily mere drudgery, and in consequence
unpleasant, it is plain that it should be given over to men whose
realization of its unpleasantness is least acute. Going further, it is
plain that this work will be done with less and less revolt and less
and less driving, as we evolve a class whose ambition to engage in
more inviting pursuits grows smaller and smaller. In a word, the ideal
ploughman is one who has no thought of anything higher and better than
ploughing. Therefore, argued Nietzsche, the proper performance of the
manual labor of the world makes it necessary that we have a laboring
class, which means a class content to obey without fear or question.

This doctrine brought down upon Nietzsche's head the pious wrath
of all the world's humanitarians, but empiric experiment has more
than once proved its truth. The history of the hopelessly futile and
fatuous effort to improve the negroes of the Southern United States by
education affords one such proof. It is apparent, on brief reflection,
that the negro, no matter how much he is educated, must remain, as a
race, in a condition of subservience; that he must remain the inferior
of the stronger and more intelligent white man so long as he retains
racial differentiation. Therefore, the effort to educate him has
awakened in his mind ambitions and aspirations which, in the very
nature of things, must go unrealized, and so, while gaining nothing
whatever materially, he has lost all his old contentment, peace of mind
and happiness. Indeed, it is a commonplace of observation in the United
States that the educated and refined negro is invariably a hopeless,
melancholy, embittered and despairing man.

Nietzsche, to resume, regarded it as absolutely essential that there
be a class of laborers or slaves--his "third caste"--and was of the
opinion that such a class would exist upon earth so long as the human
race survived. Its condition, compared to that of the ruling class,
would vary but slightly, he thought, with the progress of the years. As
man's mastery of nature increased, the laborer would find his task less
and less painful, but he would always remain a fixed distance behind
those who ruled him. Therefore, Nietzsche, in his philosophy, gave no
thought to the desires and aspirations of the laboring class, because,
as we have just seen, he held that a man could not properly belong to
this class unless his desires and aspirations were so faint or so well
under the control of the ruling class that they might be neglected.
All of the Nietzschean doctrines and ideas apply only to the ruling
class. It was at the top, he argued, that mankind grew. It was only in
the ideas of those capable of original thought that progress had its
source. William the Conqueror was of far more importance, though he was
but a single man, than all the other Normans of his generation taken
together.

Nietzsche was well aware that his "first caste" was necessarily small
in numbers and that there was a strong tendency for its members to drop
out of it and seek ease and peace in the castes lower down. "Life,"
he said, "is always hardest toward the summit--the cold increases,
the responsibility increases."[3] But to the truly efficient man
these hardships are but spurs to effort. His joy is in combating and
in overcoming--in pitting his will to power against the laws and
desires of the rest of humanity. "I do not advise you to labor," says
Zarathustra, "but to fight. I do not advise you to compromise and
make peace, but to conquer. Let your labor be fighting and your peace
victory.... You say that a good cause will hallow even war? I tell you
that a good war hallows every cause. War and courage have done more
great things than charity. Not your pity, but your bravery lifts up
those about you. Let the little girlies tell you that 'good' means
'sweet' and 'touching.' I tell you that 'good' means 'brave.'... The
slave rebels against hardships and calls his rebellion superiority. Let
your superiority be an acceptance of hardships. Let your commanding be
an obeying.... Let your highest thought be: 'Man is something to be
surpassed.'... I do not advise you to love your neighbor--the nearest
human being. I advise you rather to flee from the nearest and love the
furthest human being. Higher than love to your neighbor is love to the
higher man that is to come in the future.... Propagate yourself upward.
Thus live your life. What are many years worth? I do not spare you....
Die at the right time!"[4]

The average man, said Nietzsche, is almost entirely lacking in this
gorgeous, fatalistic courage and sublime egotism. He is ever reluctant
to pit his private convictions and yearnings against those of the mass
of men. He is either afraid to risk the consequences of originality or
fearful that, since the majority of his fellows disagree with him, he
must be wrong. Therefore, no matter how strongly an unconventional idea
may possess a man, he commonly seeks to combat it and throttle it, and
the ability to do this with the least possible expenditure of effort we
call self-control. The average man, said Nietzsche, has the power of
self-control well developed, and in consequence he seldom contributes
anything positive to the thought of his age and almost never attempts
to oppose it.

We have seen in the preceding chapter that if every man, without
exception, were of this sort, all human progress would cease, because
the ideas of one generation would be handed down unchanged to the
next and there would be no effort whatever to improve the conditions
of existence by the only possible method--constant experiment with
new ideas. Therefore, it follows that the world must depend for its
advancement upon those revolutionists who, instead of overcoming their
impulse to go counter to convention, give it free rein. Of such is
Nietzsche's "first caste" composed. It is plain that among the two
lower castes, courage of this sort is regarded, not as an evidence of
strength, but as a proof of weakness. The man who outrages conventions
is a man who lacks self-control, and the majority, by a process we
have examined in our consideration of slave-morality, has exalted
self-control, which, at bottom, is the antithesis of courage, into a
place of honor higher than that belonging, by right, to courage itself.

But Nietzsche pointed out that the act of denying or combating accepted
ideas is a thing which always tends to inspire other acts of the same
sort. It is true enough that a revolutionary idea, so soon as it
replaces an old convention and obtains the sanction of the majority,
ceases to be revolutionary and becomes itself conventional, but all the
same the mere fact that it has succeeded gives courage to those who
harbor other revolutionary ideas and inspires them to give these ideas
voice. Thus, it happens that courage breeds itself, and that, in times
of great conflict, of no matter what sort, the world produces more than
an average output of originality, or, as we more commonly denominate
it, genius. In this manner Nietzsche accounted for a fact that had been
noticed by many men before him: that such tremendous struggles as the
French Revolution and the American Civil War are invariably followed by
eras of diligent inquiry, of bold overturning of existing institutions
and of marked progress. People become accustomed to unrestrained combat
and so the desirability of self-control becomes less insistent.

Nietzsche had a vast contempt for what he called "the green-grazing
happiness of the herd." Its strong morality and its insistence upon
the doctrine that whatever is, is right--that "God's in his heaven;
all's well with the world"--revolted him. He held that the so-called
rights of the masses had no justifiable existence, since everything
they asserted as a right was an assertion, more or less disguised, of
the doctrine that the unfit should survive. "There are," he said, "only
three ways in which the masses appear to me to deserve a glance: first,
as blurred copies of their betters, printed on bad paper and from worn
out plates; secondly, as a necessary opposition to stimulate the master
class, and thirdly, as instruments in the hands of the master class.
Further than this I hand them over to statistics--and the devil."[5]
Kant's proposal that the morality of every contemplated action be
tested by the question, "Suppose everyone did as I propose to do?"
seemed utterly ridiculous to Nietzsche because he saw that "everyone"
always opposed the very things which meant progress; and Kant's
corollary that the sense of duty contemplated in this dictum was "the
obligation to act in reverence for law," proved to Nietzsche merely
that both duty and law were absurdities. "Contumely," he said, "always
falls upon those who break through some custom or convention. Such men,
in fact, are called criminals. Everyone who overthrows an existing law
is, at the start, regarded as a wicked man. Long afterward, when it
is found that this law was bad and so cannot be re-established, the
epithet is changed. All history treats almost exclusively of wicked men
who, in the course of time, have come to be looked upon as good men.
All progress is the result of successful crimes."[6]

Dr. Turck,[7] Miss Paget, M. Nordau and other critics see in all this
good evidence that Nietzsche was a criminal at heart. At the bottom of
all philosophies, says Miss Paget,[8] there is always one supreme idea.
Sometimes it is a conception of nature, sometimes it is a religious
faith and sometimes it is a theory of truth. In Nietzsche's case it is
"my taste." He is always irritated: "_I_ dislike," "_I_ hate," "_I_
want to get rid of" appear on every page of his writings. He delights
in ruthlessness, his fellow men disgust him, his physical senses are
acute, he has a sick ego. For that reason he likes singularity, the
lonely Alps, classic literature and Bizet's "clear yellow" music.
Turck argues that Nietzsche was a criminal because he got pleasure out
of things which outraged the majority of his fellow men, and Nordau, in
supporting this idea, shows that it is possible for a man to experience
and approve criminal impulses and still never act them: that there are
criminals of the chair as well as of the dark lantern and sandbag. The
answer to all of this, of course, is the fact that the same method of
reasoning would convict every original thinker the world has ever known
of black felony: that it would make Martin Luther a criminal as well
as Jack Sheppard, John the Baptist as well as the Borgias, and Galileo
as well as Judas Iscariot; that it would justify the execution of all
the sublime company of heroes who have been done to death for their
opinions, from Jesus Christ down the long line.


[1] "_Der Antichrist_," § 57.

[2] In "The Governance of England," (London: 1904) Sidney Low points
out (chap. X) that, despite the rise of democracy, the government of
Great Britain is still entirely in the hands of the landed gentry
and nobility. The members of this class plainly owe their power to
the military prowess of their ancestors, and their identity with the
present military and judicial class is obvious. The typical M.P., in
fact, also writes "J.P." after his name and "Capt." or "Col." before
it. The examples of Russia, Germany, Japan, Austria, Italy, Spain and
the Latin-American republics scarcely need be mentioned. In China the
military, judicial and legislative-executive functions are always
combined, and in the United States, while the military branch of the
second caste is apparently impotent, it is plain that the balance of
legislative power in every state and in the national legislature is
held by lawyers, just as the final determination of all laws rests with
judges.

[3] "_Der Antichrist_," § 55.

[4] The quotations are from various chapters in the first part of
"_Also sprach Zarathustra_."

[5] "_Vom Nutzen und Nachtheil der Historie für das Leben_."

[6] "_Morgenröte_," § 20.

[7] "_Friedrich Nietzsche und seine philosophische Irrwege_," Leipsic,
1891.

[8] _North American Review_, Dec., 1904.




