I


NIETZSCHE'S ORIGINS


The construction of philosophical family trees for Nietzsche has ever
been one of the favorite pastimes of his critics and interpreters.
Thus Dr. Oscar Levy, editor of the English translation of his works,
makes him the heir of Goethe and Stendhal, and the culminating figure
of the "Second Renaissance" launched by the latter, who was "the
first man to cry halt to the Kantian philosophy which had flooded
all Europe."[1] Dr. M. A. Mügge agrees with this genealogy so far
as it goes, but points out that Nietzsche was also the intellectual
descendant of certain pre-Socratic Greeks, particularly Heracleitus,
and of Spinoza and Stirner.[2] Alfred Fouillée, the Frenchman, is
another who gives him Greek blood, but in seeking his later forebears
Fouillée passes over the four named by Levy and Mügge and puts Hobbes,
Schopenhauer, Darwin, Rousseau and Diderot in place of them.[3] Again,
Thomas Common says that "perhaps Nietzsche is most indebted to Chamfort
and Schopenhauer," but also allows a considerable influence to Hobbes,
and endeavors to show how Nietzsche carried on, consciously and
unconsciously, certain ideas originating with Darwin and developed by
Huxley, Spencer and the other evolutionists.[4] Dr. Alexander Tille has
written a whole volume upon this latter relationship.[5] Finally, Paul
Elmer More, the American, taking the cue from Fouillée, finds the germs
of many of Nietzsche's doctrines in Hobbes, and then proceeds to a
somewhat elaborate discussion of the mutations of ethical theory during
the past two centuries, showing how Hume superimposed the idea of
sympathy as a motive upon Hobbes' idea of self-interest, and how this
sympathy theory prevailed over that of self-interest, and degenerated
into sentimentalism, and so opened the way for Socialism and other such
delusions, and how Nietzsche instituted a sort of Hobbesian revival.[6]
Many more speculations of that sort, some of them very ingenious and
some merely ingenuous, might be rehearsed. By one critic or another
Nietzsche has been accused of more or less frank borrowings from
Xenophanes, Democritus, Pythagoras, Callicles, Parmenides, Arcelaus,
Empedocles, Pyrrho, Hegesippus, the Eleatic Zeno, Machiavelli, Comte,
Montaigne, Mandeville, La Bruyère, Fontenelle, Voltaire, Kant, La
Rochefoucauld, Helvétius, Adam Smith, Malthus, Butler, Blake, Proudhon,
Paul Rée, Flaubert, Taine, Gobineau, Renan, and even from Karl
Marx!--a long catalogue of meaningless names, an exhaustive roster
of pathfinders and protestants. A Frenchman, Jules de Gaultier, has
devoted a whole book to the fascinating subject.[7]

But if we turn from this laborious and often irrelevant search for
common ideas and parallel passages to the actual facts of Nietzsche's
intellectual development, we shall find, perhaps, that his ancestry
ran in two streams, the one coming down from the Greeks whom he
studied as school-boy and undergraduate, and the other having its
source in Schopenhauer, the great discovery of his early manhood and
the most powerful single influence of his life. No need to argue the
essentially Greek color of Nietzsche's apprentice thinking. It was,
indeed, his interest in Greek literature and life that made him a
philologist by profession, and the same interest that converted him
from a philologist into a philosopher. The foundation of his system
was laid when he arrived at his conception of the conflict between
the Greek gods Apollo and Dionysus, and all that followed belonged
naturally to the working out of that idea. But what he got from the
Greeks of his early adoration was more than a single idea and more
than the body of miscellaneous ideas listed by the commentators: it
was the Greek outlook, the Greek spirit, the Greek attitude toward God
and man. In brief, he ceased to be a German pastor's son, brought up
in the fear of the Lord, and became a citizen of those gorgeous and
enchanted isles, much as Shelley had before him. The sentimentality of
Christianity dropped from him like an old garment; he stood forth, as
it were, bare and unashamed, a pagan in the springtime of the world, a
_ja-sager_. More than the reading of books, of course, was needed to
work that transformation--the blood that leaped had to be blood capable
of leaping--but it was out of books that the stimulus came, and the
feeling of surety, and the beginnings of a workable philosophy of life.
It is not a German that speaks in "The Antichrist," nor even the Polish
noble that Nietzsche liked to think himself, but a Greek of the brave
days before Socrates, a spokesman of Hellenic innocence and youth.

No doubt it was the unmistakably Greek note in Schopenhauer--the
delivery of instinct, so long condemned to the ethical dungeons--that
engendered Nietzsche's first wild enthusiasm for the Frankfort sage.
The atmosphere of Leipsic in 1865 was heavy with moral vapors, and the
daring dissent of Schopenhauer must have seemed to blow through it like
a sharp wind from the sea. And Nietzsche, being young and passionate,
was carried away by the ecstasy of discovery, and so accepted the whole
Schopenhauerean philosophy without examining it too critically--the
bitter with the sweet, its pessimism no less than its rebellion. He,
too, had to go through the green-sickness of youth, particularly of
German youth. The Greek was yet but half way from Naumburg to Attica,
and he now stopped a moment to look backward. "Every line," he tells us
somewhere, "cried out renunciation, denial, resignation.... Evidences
of this sudden change are still to be found in the restless melancholy
of the leaves of my diary at that period, with all their useless
self-reproach and their desperate gazing upward for recovery and for
the transformation of the whole spirit of mankind. By drawing all my
qualities and my aspirations before the forum of gloomy self-contempt
I became bitter, unjust and unbridled in my hatred of myself. I even
practised bodily penance. For instance, I forced myself for a fortnight
at a stretch to go to bed at two o'clock in the morning and to rise
punctually at six." But not for long. The fortnight of self-accusing
and hair-shirts was soon over. The green-sickness vanished.[8] The
Greek emerged anew, more Hellenic than ever. And so, almost from the
start, Nietzsche rejected quite as much of Schopenhauer as he accepted.
The Schopenhauerean premise entered into his system--the will to live
was destined to become the father, in a few years, of the will to
power--but the Schopenhauerean conclusion held him no longer than it
took him to inspect it calmly. Thus he gained doubly--first, by the
acquisition of a definite theory of human conduct, one giving clarity
to his own vague feelings, and secondly, by the reaction against an
abject theory of human destiny, the very antithesis of that which rose
within him.

And yet, for all his dissent, for all his instinctive revolt against
the resignationism which overwhelmed him for an hour, Nietzsche
nevertheless carried away with him, and kept throughout his life, some
touch of Schopenhauer's distrust of the search for happiness. Nine
years after his great discovery we find him quoting and approving his
teacher's words: "A happy life is impossible; the highest thing that
man can aspire to is a _heroic_ life." And still later we find him
thundering against "the green-grazing happiness of the herd." What is
more, he gave his assent later on, though always more by fascination
than by conviction, to the doctrine of eternal recurrence, the most
hopeless idea, perhaps, ever formulated by man. But in all this a
certain distinction is to be noted: Schopenhauer, despairing of the
happy life, renounced even the heroic life, but Nietzsche never did
anything of the sort. On the contrary, his whole philosophy is a
protest against that very despair. The heroic life may not bring
happiness, and it may even fail to bring good, but at all events it
will shine gloriously in the light of its own heroism. In brief,
high endeavor is an end in itself--nay, the noblest of all ends. The
higher man does not work for a wage, not even for the wage of bliss:
his reward is in the struggle, the danger, the aspiration. As for the
happiness born of peace and love, of prosperity and tranquillity, that
is for "shopkeepers, women, Englishmen and cows." The man who seeks
it thereby confesses his incapacity for the loftier joys and hazards
of the free spirit, and the man who wails because he cannot find it
thereby confesses his unfitness to live in the world. "My formula for
greatness," said Nietzsche toward the end of his life, "is _amor fati_
... not only to bear up under necessity, but to _love_ it." Thus,
borrowing Schopenhauer's pessimism, he turned it, in the end, into a
defiant and irreconcilable optimism--not the slave optimism of hope,
with its vain courting of gods, but the master optimism of courage.

So much for the larger of the direct influences upon Nietzsche's
thinking. Scarcely less was the influence of that great revolution in
man's view of man, that genuine "transvaluation of all values," set in
motion by the publication of Charles Darwin's "The Origin of Species,"
in 1859. In the chapter on Christianity I have sketched briefly the
part that Nietzsche played in the matter, and have shown how it rested
squarely upon the parts played by those who went before him. He himself
was fond of attacking Darwin, whom he disliked as he disliked all
Englishmen, and of denying that he had gotten anything of value out
of Darwin's work, but it is not well to take such denunciations and
denials too seriously. Like Ibsen, Nietzsche was often an unreliable
witness as to his own intellectual obligations. So long as he dealt
with ideas his thinking was frank and clear, but when he turned to the
human beings behind them, and particularly when he discussed those who
had presumed to approach the problems he undertook to solve himself,
his incredible intolerance, jealousy, spitefulness and egomania, and
his savage lust for bitter, useless and unmerciful strife, combined
to make his statements dubious, and sometimes even absurd. Thus with
his sneers at Darwin and the other evolutionists, especially Spencer.
If he did not actually follow them, then he at least walked side by
side with them, and every time they cleared another bit of the path he
profited by it too. One thing, at all events, they gave to the world
that entered into Nietzsche's final philosophy, and without which it
would have stopped short of its ultimate development, and that was the
conception of man as a mammal. Their great service to human knowledge
was precisely this. They found man a loiterer at the gates of heaven, a
courtier in the ante-chambers of gods. They brought him back to earth
and bade him help himself.

Meanwhile, the reader who cares to go into the matter further will
find Nietzsche elbowing other sages in a multitude of places. He
himself has testified to his debt to Stendhal (Marie Henri Beyle), that
great apologist for Napoleon Bonaparte and exponent of the Napoleonic
philosophy. "Stendhal," he says, "was one of the happiest accidents of
my life.... He is quite priceless, with his penetrating psychologist's
eye and his grip upon facts, recalling that of the greatest of all
masters of facts (_ex ungue Napoleon_--); and last, but not least,
as an _honest_ atheist--one of a species rare and hard to find in
France.... Maybe I myself am jealous of Stendhal? He took from me the
best of atheistic jokes, that I might best have made: 'the only excuse
for God is that He doesn't exist.'"[9] Of his debt to Max Stirner the
evidence is less clear, but it has been frequently alleged, and, as
Dr. Mügge says, "quite a literature has grown up around the question."
Stirner's chief work, "_Der Einzige und sein Eigentum_,"[10] was first
published in 1844, the year of Nietzsche's birth, and in its strong
plea for the emancipation of the individual there are many ideas and
even phrases that were later voiced by Nietzsche. Dr. Mügge quotes a
few of them: "What is good and what is evil? I myself am my own rule,
and I am neither good nor evil. Neither word means anything to me....
Between the two vicissitudes of victory and defeat swings the fate
of the struggle--master or slave!... Egoism, not love, must decide."
Others will greet the reader of Stirner's book: "As long as you believe
in the truth, you do not believe in yourself; you are a servant, a
religious man. You alone are the truth.... Whether what I think and do
is Christian, what do I care? Whether it is human, liberal, humane,
whether unhuman, illiberal, unhumane, what do I ask about that? If
only it accomplishes what I want, if only I satisfy myself in it, then
overlay it with predicates if you will: it is all one to me...." But,
as Dr. J. L. Walker well says, in his introduction to Mr. Byington's
English translation, there is a considerable gulf between Stirner and
Nietzsche, even here. The former's plea is for absolute liberty for
all men, great and small. The latter is for liberty only in the higher
castes: the chandala he would keep in chains. Therefore, if Nietzsche
actually got anything from Stirner, it certainly did not enter
unchanged into the ultimate structure of his system.

The other attempts to convict him of appropriating ideas come to little
more. Dr. Mügge, for example, quotes these pre-Nietzschean passages
from Heracleitus: "War is universal and right, and by strife all things
arise and are made use of ... Good and evil are the same.... To me,
one is worth ten thousand, if he be the best." And Mr. More quotes
this from Hobbes: "In the first place, I put forth, for a general
inclination of all mankind, a perpetual and restless desire of power
after power, that ceaseth only with death"--to which the reader may
add, "Whatsoever is the object of any man's appetite or desire, that
is it which he for his part calleth good ... for these words of good,
evil and contemptible are ever used with relation to the person that
useth them; there being nothing simply and absolutely so; nor any
common rule of good and evil, to be taken for the nature of objects
themselves."[11] But all these passages prove no more than that men of
past ages saw the mutability of criteria, and their origin in human
aspiration and striving. Not only Heracleitus, but many other Greeks,
voiced that ethical scepticism. It was for many years, indeed, one of
the dominant influences in Greek philosophy, and so, if Nietzsche
is accused of borrowing it, that is no more than saying what I have
already said: that he ate Greek grapes in his youth and became, to all
intellectual intents and purposes, a Greek himself. A man must needs
have a point of view, a manner of approach to life, and that point of
view is no less authentic when he reaches it through his reading and by
the exercise of a certain degree of free choice than when he accepts
it unthinkingly from the folk about him. The service of Heracleitus
and the other Greeks to Nietzsche was not that they gave him his
philosophy, but that they made him a philosopher. It was the questions
they asked rather than the answers they made that interested and
stimulated him, and if, at times, he answered much as they had done,
that was only proof of his genuine kinship with them.

On the artistic, as opposed to the analytical side, Nietzsche's most
influential teacher, perhaps, was Goethe, the noblest intellectual
figure of modern Germany, the common _stammvater_ of all the warring
schools of today--in Nietzsche's own phrase, "not only a good and
great man, but a culture itself." His writings are full of praises
of his hero, whom he began to read as a boy of eight or ten years.
His grandmother, Frau Erdmuthe Nietzsche, was a sister to Dr. Krause,
professor of divinity at Weimar in Goethe's day, and she lived in the
town while the poet held his court there, and undoubtedly came into
contact with him. Her mother, Frau Pastor Krause, was probably the
Muthgen of Goethe's diary. But despite all this, she thought that
"Faust" and "Elective Affinities" were "not fit for little boys" and so
it remained for Judge Pindar, the father of one of young Nietzsche's
Naumburg playmates, to conduct the initiation.[12] Thirty years
afterward, Nietzsche gratefully acknowledged his debt to Herr Pindar,
and his vastly greater debt to Goethe--"a thorough-going realist in
the midst of an unreal age.... He did not sever himself from life, but
entered into it. Undaunted, he took as much as possible to himself....
What he sought was _totality_."[13]

Nietzsche was also an extravagant admirer of Heinrich Heine, and
tried to imitate that poet's "sweet and passionate music." "People
will say some day," he declared, "that Heine and I were the greatest
artists, by far, that ever wrote in German, and that we left the best
any mere German[14] could do an incalculable distance behind us."[15]
Another poet he greatly revered was Friedrich Hölderlin, a South
German rhapsodist of the Goethe-Schiller period, who wrote odes in
free rhythms and philosophical novels in gorgeous prose, and died the
year before Nietzsche was born, after forty years of insanity. Karl
Joel,[16] Dr. Mügge and other critics have sought to connect Nietzsche,
through Hölderlin, with the romantic movement in Germany, but the
truth is that both Nietzsche and Hölderlin, if they were romantics
at all, were of the Greek school rather than the German. Certainly,
nothing could be further from genuine German romanticism, with its
sentimentality, its begging of questions and its booming patriotism,
than the gospel of the superman. What Nietzsche undoubtedly got from
the romantics was a feeling of ease in the German language, a disregard
for the artificial bonds of the schools, a sense of hospitality to
the gipsy phrase. In brief, they taught him how to write. But they
certainly did not teach him what to write.

Even so, it is probable that he was as much influenced by certain
Frenchmen as he ever was by Germans--particularly by Montaigne, La
Bruyère, La Rochefoucauld, Fontenelle, Vauvenargues and Chamfort, his
constant companions on his wanderings. He borrowed from them, not only
the somewhat obvious device of putting his argument into the form of
apothegms and epigrams, but also their conception of the dialectic as
one of the fine arts--in other words, their striving after style. "It
is to a small number of French authors," he once said, "that I return
again and again. I believe only in French culture, and regard all that
is called culture elsewhere in Europe, especially in Germany, as mere
misunderstanding.... The few persons of higher culture that I have met
in Germany have had French training--above all, Frau Cosima Wagner,
by long odds the best authority on questions of taste I ever heard
of."[17] This preference carried him so far, indeed, that he usually
wrote more like a Frenchman than like a German, toying with words,
experimenting with their combinations, matching them as carefully as
pearls for a necklace. "Nietzsche," says one critic,[18] "whether for
good or evil, introduced Romance (not romantic!) qualities of terseness
and clearness into German prose; it was his endeavor to free it from
those elements which he described as _deutsch und schwer_." (German and
heavy.)

For the rest, he denounced Klopstock, Herder, Wieland, Lessing and
Schiller, the remaining gods in Germany's literary valhalla, even more
bitterly than he denounced Kant and Hegel, the giants of orthodox
German philosophy.


[1] "The Revival of Aristocracy," London, 1906, pp. 14-59.

[2] "Friedrich Nietzsche: His Life and Work," New York, 1909, pp.
315-320.

[3] "_Nietzsche et l'Immoralisme_," Paris, 1902, p. 294.

[4] "Nietzsche as Critic, Philosopher, Poet and Prophet," London, 1901,
pp. xi-xxiii.

[5] "_Von Darwin bis Nietzsche_," Leipsic, 1895.

[6] "Nietzsche," Boston, 1912, pp. 18-45.

[7] "_De Kant à Nietzsche,_" Paris, 1900.

[8] Nietzsche himself, in after years, viewed this attack humorously,
and was wont to say that it was caused, not by Schopenhauer alone, but
also (and chiefly) by the bad cooking of Leipsic. See "_Ecce Homo_,"
II, i.

[9] "_Ecce Homo_," II, 3.

[10] Eng. tr. by Steven T. Byington, "The Ego and His Own," New York,
1907.

[11] The Leviathan, I, vi; London, 1651.

[12] Frau Förster-Nietzsche: "The Life of Nietzsche" (Eng. tr.), Vol.
I, p. 31.

[13] "_Götzendämmerung_," IX, 49.

[14] Heine was a Jew--and Nietzsche, as we know, liked to think himself
a Pole.

[15] "_Ecce Homo_," II, 4.

[16] "_Nietzsche und die Romantik_," Jena, 1905.

[17] "_Ecce Homo_," II, 3.

[18] J. G. Robertson: "A History of German Literature," Edinburgh,
1902, pp. 611-615.




