IX


WOMEN AND MARRIAGE


Nietzsche's faithful sister, with almost comical and essentially
feminine disgust, bewails the fact that, as a very young man, the
philosopher became acquainted with the baleful truths set forth in
Schopenhauer's immortal essay "On Women." That this daring work greatly
influenced him is true, and that he subscribed to its chief arguments
all the rest of his days is also true, but it is far from true to say
that his view of the fair sex was borrowed bodily from Schopenhauer or
that he would have written otherwise than as he did if Schopenhauer
had never lived. Nietzsche's conclusions regarding women were the
inevitable result, indeed, of his own philosophical system. It is
impossible to conceive a man who held his opinions of morality and
society laying down any other doctrines of femininity and matrimony
than those he scattered through his books.

Nietzsche believed that there was a radical difference between the
mind of man and the mind of woman and that the two sexes reacted in
diametrically different ways to those stimuli which make up what might
be called the clinical picture of human society. It is the function of
man, he said, to wield a sword in humanity's battle with everything
that makes life on earth painful or precarious. It is the function of
woman, not to fight herself, but to provide fresh warriors for the
fray. Thus the exercise of the will to exist is divided between the
two: the man seeking the welfare of the race as he actually sees it and
the woman seeking the welfare of generations yet unborn. Of course, it
is obvious that this division is by no means clearly marked, because
the man, in struggling for power over his environment, necessarily
improves the conditions under which his children live, and the woman,
working for her children, often benefits herself. But all the same the
distinction is a good one and empiric observation bears it out. As
everyone who has given a moment's thought to the subject well knows,
a man's first concern in the world is to provide food and shelter for
himself and his family, while a woman's foremost duty is to bear and
rear children. "Thus," said Nietzsche, "would I have man and woman: the
one fit for warfare, the other fit for giving birth; and both fit for
dancing with head and legs"[1]--that is to say: both capable of doing
their share of the race's work, mental and physical, with conscious and
superabundant efficiency.

Nietzsche points out that, in the racial economy, the place of woman
may be compared to that of a slave-nation, while the position of man
resembles that of a master-nation. We have seen how a weak nation,
unable, on account of its weakness, to satisfy its will to survive and
thirst for power by forcing its authority upon other nations, turns
to the task of keeping these other nations, as much as possible, from
enforcing their authority upon it. Realizing that it cannot rule, but
must serve, it endeavors to make the conditions of its servitude as
bearable as possible. This effort is commonly made in two ways: first
by ostensibly renouncing its desire to rule, and secondly, by attempts
to inoculate its powerful neighbors with its ideas in subterranean
and round-about ways, so as to avoid arousing their suspicion and
opposition. It becomes, in brief, humble and cunning, and with its
humility as a cloak, it seeks to pit its cunning against the sheer
might of those it fears.

The position of women in the world is much the same. The business
of bearing and rearing children is destructive to their physical
strength, and in consequence makes it impossible for them to prevail
by force when their ideas and those of men happen to differ. To take
away the sting of this incapacity, they make a virtue of it, and it
becomes modesty, humility, self-sacrifice and fidelity; to win in
spite of it they cultivate cunning, which commonly takes the form of
hypocrisy, cajolery, dissimulation and more or less masked appeals to
the masculine sexual instinct. All of this is so often observed in
every-day life that it has become commonplace. A woman is physically
unable to force a man to do as she desires, but her very inability to
do so becomes a sentimental weapon against him, and her blandishments
do the rest. The spectacle of a strong man ruled by a weak woman is no
rare one certainly, and Samson was neither the first nor last giant to
fall before a Delilah. There is scarcely a household in all the world,
in truth, in which the familiar drama is not being acted and reacted
day after day.

Now, it is plain from the foregoing that, though women's business in
the world is of such a character that it inevitably leads to physical
degeneration, her constant need to overcome the effects of this
degeneration by cunning produces constant mental activity, which, by
the law of exercise, should produce, in turn, great mental efficiency.
This conclusion, in part, is perfectly correct, for women, as a sex,
are shrewd, resourceful and acute; but the very fact that they are
always concerned with imminent problems and that, in consequence, they
are unaccustomed to dealing with the larger riddles of life, makes
their mental attitude essentially petty. This explains the circumstance
that despite their mental suppleness, they are not genuinely strong
intellectually. Indeed, the very contrary is true. Women's constant
thought is, not to lay down broad principles of right and wrong; not to
place the whole world in harmony with some great scheme of justice; not
to consider the future of nations; not to make two blades of grass grow
where one grew before; but to deceive, influence, sway and please men.
Normally, their weakness makes masculine protection necessary to their
existence and to the exercise of their overpowering maternal instinct,
and so their whole effort is to obtain this protection in the easiest
way possible. The net result is that feminine morality is a morality
of opportunism and imminent expediency, and that the normal woman has
no respect for, and scarcely any conception of abstract truth. Thus is
proved the fact noted by Schopenhauer and many other observers: that a
woman seldom manifests any true sense of justice or of honor.

It is unnecessary to set forth this idea in greater detail, because
everyone is familiar with it and proofs of its accuracy are supplied
in infinite abundance by common observation. Nietzsche accepted it
as demonstrated. When he set out to pursue the subject further, he
rejected entirely the Schopenhauerean corollary that man should ever
regard woman as his enemy, and should seek, by all means within his
power, to escape her insidious influence. Such a notion naturally
outraged the philosopher of the superman. He was never an advocate
of running away: to all the facts of existence he said "yes." His
ideal was not resignation or flight, but an intelligent defiance and
opposition. Therefore, he argued that man should accept woman as a
natural opponent arrayed against him for the benevolent purpose of
stimulating him to constant efficiency. Opposition, he pointed out,
was a necessary forerunner of function, and in consequence the fact
that woman spent her entire effort in a ceaseless endeavor to undermine
and change the will of man, merely served to make this will alert and
strong, and so increased man's capacity for meeting and overcoming the
enemies of his existence.

A man conscious of his strength, observes Nietzsche, need have no
fear of women. It is only the man who finds himself utterly helpless
in the face of feminine cajolery that must cry, "Get thee behind me,
Satan!" and flee. "It is only the most sensual men," he says, "who
have to shun women and torture their bodies." The normal, healthy man,
despite the strong appeal which women make to him by their subtle
putting forward of the sexual idea--visually as dress, coquetry and
what not--still keeps a level head. He is strong enough to weather the
sexual storm. But the man who cannot do this, who experiences no normal
reaction in the direction of guardedness and caution and reason, must
either abandon himself utterly as a helpless slave to woman's instinct
of race-preservation, and so become a bestial voluptuary, or avoid
temptation altogether and so become a celibate.[2]

There is nothing essentially evil in woman's effort to combat and
control man's will by constantly suggesting the sexual idea to him,
because it is necessary, for the permanence of the race, that this
idea be presented frequently and powerfully. Therefore, the conflict
between masculine and feminine ideals is to be regarded, not as a
lamentable battle, in which one side is right and the other wrong, but
a convenient means of providing that stimulation-by-opposition without
which all function, and in consequence all progress, would cease. "The
man who regards women as an enemy to be avoided," says Nietzsche,
"betrays an unbridled lust which loathes not only itself, but also its
means."[3]

There are, of course, occasions when the feminine influence, by
its very subtlety, works harm to the higher sort of men. It is
dangerous for a man to love too violently and it is dangerous, too,
for him to be loved too much.' "The natural inclination of women
to a quiet, uniform and peaceful existence "--that is to say, to a
slave-morality--"operates adversely to the heroic impulse of the
masculine free spirit. Without being aware of it, women act like a
person who would remove stones from the path of a mineralogist, lest
his feet should come in contact with them--forgetting entirely that he
is faring forth for the very purpose of coming in contact with them....
The wives of men with lofty aspirations cannot resign themselves to
seeing their husbands suffering, impoverished and slighted, even
though it is apparent that this suffering proves, not only that its
victim has chosen his attitude aright, but also that his aims--some
day, at least--will be realized. Women always intrigue in secret
against the higher souls of their husbands. They seek to cheat the
future for the sake of a painless and agreeable present."[4] In other
words, the feminine vision is ever limited in range. Your typical woman
cannot see far ahead; she cannot reason out the ultimate effect of a
complicated series of causes; her eye is always upon the present or
the very near future. Thus Nietzsche reaches, by a circuitous route,
a conclusion supported by the almost unanimous verdict of the entire
masculine sex, at all times and everywhere.

Nietzsche quite agrees with Schopenhauer (and with nearly everyone
else who has given the matter thought) that the thing we call love is
grounded upon physical desire, and that all of those arts of dress
and manner in which women excel are mere devices for arousing this
desire in man, but he points out, very justly, that a great many other
considerations also enter into the matter. Love necessarily presupposes
a yearning to mate, and mating is its logical consequence, but the
human imagination has made it more than that. The man in love sees
in his charmer, not only an attractive instrument for satisfying his
comparatively rare and necessarily brief impulses to dalliance, but
also a worthy companion, guide, counsellor and friend. The essence of
love is confidence--confidence in the loved one's judgment, honesty
and fidelity and in the persistence of her charm. So large do
these considerations loom among the higher classes of men that they
frequently obscure the fundamental sexual impulse entirely. It is a
commonplace, indeed, that in the ecstasies of amorous idealization, the
notion of the function itself becomes obnoxious. It may be impossible
to imagine a man loving a woman without having had, at some time,
conscious desire for her, but all the same it is undoubtedly true that
the wish for marriage is very often a wish for close and constant
association with the one respected, admired and trusted rather than a
yearning for the satisfaction of desire.

All of this admiration, respect and trust, as we have seen, may be
interpreted as confidence, which, in turn, is faith. Now, faith is
essentially unreasonable, and in the great majority of cases, is
the very antithesis of reason. Therefore, a man in love commonly
endows the object of his affection with merits which, to the eye of
a disinterested person, she obviously lacks. "Love ... has a secret
craving to discover in the loved one as many beautiful qualities as
possible and to raise her as high as possible." "Whoever idolizes a
person tries to justify himself by idealizing; and thus becomes an
artist (or self-deceiver) in order to have a clear conscience." Again
there is a tendency to illogical generalization. "Everything which
pleases me once, or several times, is pleasing of and in itself." The
result of this, of course, is quick and painful disillusion. The loved
one is necessarily merely human and when the ideal gives way to the
real, reaction necessarily follows. "Many a married man awakens one
morning to the consciousness that his wife is far from attractive."[5]
And it is only fair to note that the same awakening is probably the
bitter portion of most married women, too.

In addition, it is plain that the purely physical desire which lies
at the bottom of all human love, no matter how much sentimental
considerations may obscure it, is merely a passion and so, in the very
nature of things, is intermittent and evanescent. There are moments
when it is overpowering, but there are hours, days, weeks and months
when it is dormant. Therefore, we must conclude with Nietzsche, that
the thing we call love, whether considered from its physical or
psychical aspect, is fragile and short-lived.

Now, inasmuch as marriage, in the majority of cases, is a permanent
institution (as it is, according to the theory of our moral code, in
_all_ cases), it follows that, in order to make the relation bearable,
something must arise to take the place of love. This something, as we
know, is ordinarily tolerance, respect, _camaraderie_, or a common
interest in the well-being of the matrimonial firm or in the offspring
of the marriage. In other words, the discovery that many of the ideal
qualities seen in the life-companion through the rosy glasses of love
do not exist is succeeded by a common-sense and unsentimental decision
to make the best of those real ones which actually do exist.

From this it is apparent that a marriage is most apt to be successful
when the qualities imagined in the beloved are all, or nearly all,
real: that is to say, when the possibility of disillusion is at an
irreducible minimum. This occurs sometimes by accident, but Nietzsche
points out that such accidents are comparatively rare. A man in love,
indeed, is the worst possible judge of his _inamorata's_ possession
of those traits which will make her a satisfactory wife, for, as we
have noted, he observes her through an ideal haze and sees in her
innumerable merits which, to the eye of an unprejudiced and accurate
observer, she does not possess. Nietzsche, at different times, pointed
out two remedies for this. His first plan proposed that marriages for
love be discouraged, and that we endeavor to insure the permanence of
the relation by putting the selection of mates into the hands of third
persons likely to be dispassionate and far-seeing: a plan followed
with great success, it may be recalled, by most ancient peoples and in
vogue, in a more or less disguised form, in many European countries
today. "It is impossible," he said, "to found a permanent institution
upon an idiosyncrasy. Marriage, if it is to stand as the bulwark of
civilization, cannot be founded upon the temporary and unreasonable
thing called love. To fulfil its mission, it must be founded upon the
impulse to reproduction, or race permanence; the impulse to possess
property (women and children are property); and the impulse to rule,
which constantly organizes for itself the smallest unit of sovereignty,
the family, and which needs children and heirs to maintain, by physical
force, whatever measure of power, riches and influence it attains."

Nietzsche's second proposal was nothing more or less than the
institution of trial marriage, which, when it was proposed years
later by an American sociologist,[6] caused all the uproar which
invariably rises in the United States whenever an attempt is made
to seek absolute truth. "Give us a term," said Zarathustra, "and a
small marriage, that we may see whether we are fit for the great
marriage."[7] The idea here, of course, is simply this: that, when a
man and a woman find it utterly impossible to live in harmony, it is
better for them to separate at once than to live on together, making
a mock of the institution they profess to respect, and begetting
children who, in Nietzsche's phrase, cannot be regarded other than as
mere "scapegoats of matrimony." Nietzsche saw that this notion was so
utterly opposed to all current ideals and hypocrisies that it would
be useless to argue it, and so he veered toward his first proposal.
The latter, despite its violation of one of the most sacred illusions
of the Anglo-Saxon race, is by no means a mere fantasy of the chair.
Marriages in which love is subordinated to mutual fitness and material
considerations are the rule in many countries today, and have been so
for thousands of years, and if it be urged that, in France, their fruit
has been adultery, unfruitfulness and degeneration, it may be answered
that, in Turkey, Japan and India, they have become the cornerstones of
quite respectable civilizations.

Nietzsche believed that the ultimate mission and function of human
marriage was the breeding of a race of supermen and he saw very clearly
that fortuitous pairing would never bring this about. "Thou shalt not
only propagate thyself," said Zarathustra, "but propagate thyself
upward. Marriage should be the will of two to create that which is
greater than either. But that which the many call marriage--alas! what
call I that? Alas I that soul-poverty of two! Alas! that soul-filth
of two! Alas! that miserable dalliance of two! Marriage they call
it--and they say that marriages are made in heaven. I like them not:
these animals caught in heavenly nets.... Laugh not at such marriages!
What child has not reason to weep over its parents?" It is the old
argument against haphazard breeding. We select the sires and dams of
our race-horses with most elaborate care, but the strains that mingle
in our children's veins get there by chance. "Worthy and ripe for
begetting the superman this man appeared to me, but when I saw his
wife earth seemed a madhouse. Yea, I wish the earth would tremble in
convulsions when such a saint and such a goose mate! This one fought
for truth like a hero--and then took to heart a little dressed-up
lie. He calls it his marriage. That one was reserved in intercourse
and chose his associates fastidiously--and then spoiled his company
forever. He calls it his marriage. A third sought for a servant with
an angel's virtues. Now he is the servant of a woman. Even the most
cunning buys his wife in a sack."[8]

As has been noted, Nietzsche was by no means a declaimer against women.
A bachelor himself and constitutionally suspicious of all who walked
in skirts, he nevertheless avoided the error of damning the whole sex
as a dangerous and malignant excrescence upon the face of humanity. He
saw that woman's mind was the natural complement of man's mind; that
womanly guile was as useful, in its place, as masculine truth; that
man, to retain those faculties which made him master of the earth,
needed a persistent and resourceful opponent to stimulate them and so
preserve and develop them. So long as the institution of the family
remained a premise in every sociological syllogism, so long as mere
fruitfulness remained as much a merit among intelligent human beings
as it was among peasants and cattle--so long, he saw, it would be
necessary for the stronger sex to submit to the parasitic opportunism
of the weaker.

But he was far from exalting mere women into goddesses, after the
sentimental fashion of those virtuosi of illusion who pass for
law-givers in the United States, and particularly in the southern
part thereof. Chivalry, with its ridiculous denial of obvious facts,
seemed to him unspeakable and the good old sub-Potomac doctrines that
a woman who loses her virtue is, _ipso facto_, a victim and not a
criminal or _particeps criminis_, and that a "lady," by virtue of being
a "lady," is necessarily a reluctant and helpless quarry in the hunt
of love--these ancient and venerable fallacies would have made him
laugh. He admitted the great and noble part that woman had to play in
the world-drama, but he saw clearly that her methods were essentially
deceptive, insincere and pernicious, and so he held that she should be
confined to her proper role and that any effort she made to take a hand
in other matters should be regarded with suspicion, and when necessary,
violently opposed. Thus Nietzsche detested the idea of women's suffrage
almost as much as he detested the idea of chivalry. The participation
of women in large affairs, he argued, could lead to but one result:
the contamination of the masculine ideals of justice, honor and truth
by the feminine ideals of dissimulation, equivocation and intrigue.
In women, he believed, there was an entire absence of that instinctive
liking for a square deal and a fair fight which one finds in all
men--even the worst.

Hence, Nietzsche believed that, in his dealings with women, man should
be wary and cautious. "Let men fear women when she loveth: for she
sacrificeth all for love and nothing else hath value to her.... Man
is for woman a means: the end is always the child.... Two things are
wanted by the true man: danger and play. Therefore he seeketh woman as
the most dangerous toy within his reach.... Thou goest to women? _Don't
forget thy whip!_"[9] This last sentence has helped to make Nietzsche
a stench in the nostrils of the orthodox, but the context makes his
argument far more than a mere effort at sensational epigram. He is
pointing out the utter unscrupulousness which lies at the foundation of
the maternal instinct: an unscrupulousness familiar to every observer
of humanity.[10] Indeed, it is so potent a factor in the affairs of the
world that we have, by our ancient device of labelling the inevitable
the good, exalted it to the dignity and estate of a virtue. But all
the same, we are instinctively conscious of its inherent opposition
to truth and justice, and so our law books provide that a woman who
commits a crime in her husband's presence is presumed to have been led
to it by her desire to work what she regards as his good, which means
her desire to retain his protection and good will. "Man's happiness
is: 'I will.' Woman's happiness is: 'He will.'"[11]

Maternity, thought Nietzsche, was a thing even more sublime
than paternity, because it produced a more keen sense of race
responsibility. "Is there a state more blessed," he asked, "than that
of a woman with child?... Even worldly justice does not allow the
judge and hangman to lay hold on her."[12] He saw, too, that woman's
insincere masochism[13] spurred man to heroic efforts and gave vigor
and direction to his work by the very fact that it bore the outward
aspect of helplessness. He saw that the resultant stimulation of the
will to power was responsible for many of the world's great deeds,
and that, if woman served no other purpose, she would still take an
honorable place as the most splendid reward--greater than honors or
treasures--that humanity could bestow upon its victors. The winning
of a beautiful and much-sought woman, indeed, will remain as great an
incentive to endeavor as the conquest of a principality so long as
humanity remains substantially as it is today.

It is unfortunate that Nietzsche left us no record of his notions
regarding the probable future of matrimony as an institution. We have
reason to believe that he agreed with Schopenhauer's analysis of the
"lady," _i.e._ the woman elevated to splendid, but complete parasitism.
Schopenhauer showed that this pitiful creature was the product of
the monogamous ideal, just as the prostitute was the product of the
monogamous actuality. In the United States and England, unfortunately,
it is impossible to discuss such matters with frankness, or to apply to
them the standards of absolute truth, on account of the absurd axiom
that monogamy is ordained of God,--with which maxim there appears
the equally absurd corollary: that the civilization of a people is
to be measured by the degree of dependence of its women. Luckily for
posterity this last revolting doctrine is fast dying, though its
decadence is scarcely noticed and wholly misunderstood. We see about us
that women are becoming more and more independent and self-sufficient
and that, as individuals, they have less and less need to seek and
retain the good will and protection of individual men, but we overlook
the fact that this tendency is fast undermining the ancient theory
that the family is a necessary and impeccable institution and that
without it progress would be impossible. As a matter of fact, the idea
of the family, as it exists today, is based entirely upon the idea of
feminine helplessness. So soon as women are capable of making a living
for themselves and their children, without the aid of the fathers of
the latter, the old cornerstone of the family--the masculine defender
and bread-winner--will find his occupation gone, and it will become
ridiculous to force him, by law or custom, to discharge duties for
which there is no longer need. Wipe out your masculine defender, and
your feminine parasite-_haus-frau_--and where is your family?

This tendency is exhibited empirically by the rising revolt against
those fetters which the family idea has imposed upon humanity: by
the growing feeling that divorce should be a matter of individual
expedience; by the successful war of cosmopolitanism upon insularity
and clannishness and upon all other costly outgrowths of the old idea
that because men are of the same blood they must necessarily love
one another; and by the increasing reluctance among civilized human
beings to become parents without some reason more logical than the
notion that parenthood, in itself, is praiseworthy. It seems plain,
in a word, that so soon as any considerable portion of the women of
the world become capable of doing men's work and of thus earning a
living for themselves and their children without the aid of men, there
will be in full progress a dangerous, if unconscious, war upon the
institution of marriage. It may be urged in reply that this will never
happen, because of the fact that women are physically unequal to men,
and that in consequence of their duty of child-bearing, they will ever
remain so, but it may be answered to this that use will probably vastly
increase their physical fitness; that science will rob child-bearing
of most of its terrors within a comparatively few years; and that the
woman who seeks to go it alone will have only herself and her child to
maintain, whereas, the man of today has not only himself and his child,
but also the woman. Again, it is plain that the economic handicap
of child-bearing is greatly overestimated. At most, the business of
maternity makes a woman utterly helpless for no longer than three
months, and in the case of a woman who has three children, this means
nine months in a life time. It is entirely probable that alcohol
alone, not to speak of other enemies of efficiency, robs the average
man of quite that much productive activity during his three score years
and ten.


[1] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," III.

[2] Nietzsche saw, of course ("The Genealogy of Morals," III), that
temporary celibacy was frequently necessary to men with peculiarly
difficult and vitiating tasks ahead of them. The philosopher who sought
to solve world riddles, he said, had need to steer clear of women, for
reasons which appealed, with equal force, to the athlete who sought to
perform great feats of physical strength. It is obvious, however, that
this desire to escape distraction and drain differs vastly from ethical
celibacy.

[3] "_Morgenröte_," § 346.

[4] "_Menschliches allzu Menschliches_," § 431, 434.

[5] All of these quotations are from "_Morgenröte_."

[6] Elsie Clews Parsons: "The Family," New York, 1906. Mrs. Parsons is
a doctor of philosophy, a Hartley house fellow and was for six years a
lecturer on sociology at Barnard College.

[7] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," III.

[8] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," I.

[9] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," I.

[10] Until quite recently it was considered indecent and indefensible
to mention this fact, despite its obviousness. But it is now discussed
freely enough and in Henry Arthur Jones' play, "The Hypocrites," it is
presented admirably in the character of the mother whose instinctive
effort to protect her son makes her a scoundrel and the son a cad.

[11] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," I.

[12] "_Morgenröte_," § 552.

[13] Prof. Dr. R. von Krafft Ebing: "Masochism is ... a peculiar
perversion ... consisting in this, that the individual seized with
it is dominated by the idea that he is wholly and unconditionally
subjected to the will of a person of the opposite sex, who treats him
imperiously and humiliates and maltreats him."




