II


THE BEGINNINGS OF THE PHILOSOPHER


At Bonn Nietzsche became a student of Ritschl, the famous
philologist,[1] and when Ritschl left Bonn for Leipsic, Nietzsche
followed him. All traces of the good fellow had disappeared and the
student that remained was not unlike those sophomores of medieval
Toulouse who "rose from bed at 4 o'clock, and having prayed to God,
went at 5 o'clock to their studies, their big books under their arms,
their inkhorns and candles in their hands." Between teacher and pupil
there grew up a bond of strong friendship. Nietzsche was taken, too,
under the wing of motherly old Frau Ritschl, who invited him to her
afternoons of coffee and cinnamon cake and to her evening soirées,
where he met the great men of the university world and the eminent
strangers who came and went. To Ritschl the future philosopher owed
many things, indeed, including his sound knowledge of the ancients, his
first (and last) university appointment and his meeting with Richard
Wagner. Nietzsche always looked back upon these days with pleasure and
there was ever a warm spot in his heart for the kindly old professor
who led him up to grace.

Two years or more were thus spent, and then, in the latter part of
1867, Nietzsche began his term of compulsory military service in the
fourth regiment of Prussian field artillery. He had hoped to escape
because he was near-sighted and the only son of a widow, but a watchful
_oberst-lieutenant_ found loopholes in the law and so ensnared him.
He seems to have been some sort of officer, for a photograph of the
period shows him with epaulets and a sword. But lieutenant or sergeant,
soldiering was scarcely his forte, and he cut a sorry figure on a
horse. After a few months of unwilling service, in fact, he had a
riding accident and came near dying as his father had died before him.
As it was he wrenched his breast muscles so badly that he was condemned
by a medical survey and discharged from the army.

During his long convalescence he busied himself with philological
studies and began his first serious professional work--essays on the
Theogony of Hesiod, the sources of Diogenes Laërtius and the eternal
strife between Hesiod and Homer. He also made an index to an elaborate
collection of German historical fragments and performed odd tasks
of like sort for various professors. In October, 1868, he returned
to Leipsic--not as an undergraduate, but as a special student. This
change was advantageous, for it gave him greater freedom of action and
protected him from that student _bonhomie_ he had learned to despise.
Again old Ritschl was his teacher and friend and again Frau Ritschl
welcomed him to her _salon_ and gave him of her good counsel and her
excellent coffee.

Meanwhile there had occurred something that was destined to direct and
color the whole stream of his life. This was his discovery of Arthur
Schopenhauer. In the 60's, it would appear, the great pessimist was
still scarcely more than a name in the German universities, which, for
all their later heterodoxy, clung long to their ancient first causes.
Nietzsche knew nothing of him, and in the seminaries of Leipsic not a
soul maintained him. Of Kant and of Hegel there was talk unlimited, and
of Lotze and Fichte there were riotous disputations that roared and
raged about the class-room of Fechner, then the university professor
of philosophy. But of Schopenhauer nothing was heard, and so, when
Nietzsche, rambling through an old Leipsic bookshop, happened upon a
second-hand copy of "_Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_"[2] a new
world came floating into his view. This was in 1865.

"I took the book to my lodgings," he said years afterward, "and
flung myself on a sofa and read and read and read. It seemed as if
Schopenhauer were addressing me personally. I felt his enthusiasm and
seemed to see him before me. Every line cried aloud for renunciation,
denial, resignation!"

So much for the first flush of the ecstasy of discovery. That Nietzsche
entirely agreed with everything in the book, even in his wildest
transports of admiration, is rather doubtful. He was but 21--the age of
great passions and great romance--and he was athirst for some writing
that would solve the problems left unanswered by the accepted sages,
but it is probable that when he shouted the Schopenhauer manifesto
loudest he read into the text wild variations of his own. The premises
of the pessimist gave credit and order to thoughts that had been rising
up in his own mind; but the conclusions, if he subscribed to them at
all, led him far afield. No doubt he was like one of those fantastic
messiahs of new cults who search the scriptures for testimony--and
find it. Late in life, when he was accused of inconsistency in first
deifying Schopenhauer and then damning him, he made this defense, and
despite the derisive sneers of his enemies, it seemed a fairly good one.

Schopenhauer's argument, to put it briefly, was that the will to
exist--the primary instinct of life--was the eternal first cause of all
human actions, motives and ideas. The old philosophers of Christendom
had regarded intelligence as the superior of instinct. Some of them
thought that an intelligent god ruled the universe and that nothing
happened without his knowledge and desire. Others believed that man was
a free agent, that whatever he did was the result of his own thought
and choice, and that it was right, in consequence, to condemn him
to hell for his sins and to exalt him to heaven for any goodness he
might chance to show. Schopenhauer turned all this completely about.
Intelligence, he said, was not the source of will, but its effect. When
life first appeared upon earth, it had but one aim and object: that of
perpetuating itself. This instinct, he said, was still at the bottom
of every function of all living beings. Intelligence grew out of the
fact that mankind, in the course of ages, began to notice that certain
manifestations of the will to live were followed by certain invariable
results. This capacity of perceiving was followed by a capacity for
remembering, which in turn produced a capacity for anticipating. An
intelligent man, said Schopenhauer, was merely one who remembered
so many facts (the result either of personal experience or of the
transmitted experience of others) that he could separate them into
groups and observe their relationship, one to the other, and hazard a
close guess as to their future effects: _i.e._ could reason about them.

Going further, Schopenhauer pointed out that this will to exist, this
instinct to preserve and protect life, this old Adam, was to blame for
the unpleasant things of life as well as for the good things--that
it produced avarice, hatred and murder just as well as industry,
resourcefulness and courage--that it led men to seek means of killing
one another as well as means of tilling the earth and procuring food
and raiment. He showed, yet further, that its bad effects were a great
deal more numerous than its good effects and so accounted for the
fact--which many men before him had observed--that life, at best, held
more of sorrow than of joy.[3]

The will-to-live, argued Schopenhauer, was responsible for all this.
Pain, he believed, would always outweigh pleasure in this sad old
world until men ceased to want to live--until no one desired food or
drink or house or wife or money. To put it more briefly, he held that
true happiness would be impossible until mankind had killed will
with will, which is to say, until the will-to-live was willed out of
existence. Therefore the happiest man was the one who had come nearest
this end--the man who had killed all the more obvious human desires,
hopes and aspirations--the solitary ascetic--the monk in his cell--the
soaring, starving poet--the cloud-enshrouded philosopher.

Nietzsche very soon diverged from this conclusion. He believed, with
Schopenhauer, that human life, at best, was often an infliction and a
torture, but in his very first book he showed that he admired, not the
ascetic who tried to escape from the wear and tear of life altogether,
but the proud, stiff-necked hero who held his balance in the face of
both seductive pleasure and staggering pain; who cultivated within
himself a sublime indifference, so that happiness and misery, to him,
became mere words, and no catastrophe, human or superhuman, could
affright or daunt him.[4]

It is obvious that there is a considerable difference between these
ideas, for all their similarity in origin and for all Nietzsche's
youthful worship of Schopenhauer. Nietzsche, in fact, was so enamoured
by the honesty and originality of what may be called the data of
Schopenhauer's philosophy that he took the philosophy itself rather
on trust and did not begin to inquire into it closely or to compare
it carefully with his own ideas until after he had committed himself
in a most embarrassing fashion. The same phenomena is no curiosity in
religion, science or politics.

Before a realization of these differences quite dawned upon Nietzsche
he was busied with other affairs. In 1869, when he was barely 25, he
was appointed, upon Ritschl's recommendation, to the chair of classical
philology at the University of Basel, in Switzerland, an ancient
stronghold of Lutheran theology. He had no degree, but the University
of Leipsic promptly made him a doctor of philosophy, without thesis
or examination, and on April 13th he left the old home at Naumburg to
assume his duties. Thus passed that pious household. The grandmother
had died long before--in 1856--and one of the maiden aunts had preceded
her to the grave by a year. The other, long ill, had followed in 1867.
But Nietzsche's mother lived until 1897, though gradually estranged
from him by his opinions, and his sister, as we know, survived him.

Nietzsche was officially professor of philology, but he also became
teacher of Greek in the pedagogium attached to the University.
He worked like a Trojan and mixed Schopenhauer and Hesiod in his
class-room discourses upon the origin of Greek verbs and other such
dull subjects. But it is not recorded that he made a very profound
impression, except upon a relatively small circle. His learning was
abysmal, but he was far too impatient and unsympathetic to be a
good teacher. His classes, in fact, were never large, except in the
pedagogium. This, however, may have been partly due to the fact that
in 1869, as in later years, there were comparatively few persons
impractical enough to spend their days and nights in the study of
philology.

In 1870 came the Franco-Prussian war and Nietzsche decided to go to
the front. Despite his hatred of all the cant of cheap patriotism and
his pious thankfulness that he was a Pole and not a German, he was at
bottom a good citizen and perfectly willing to suffer and bleed for his
country. But unluckily he had taken out Swiss naturalization papers in
order to be able to accept his appointment at Basel, and so, as the
subject of a neutral state, he had to go to the war, not as a warrior,
but as a hospital steward.

Even as it was, Nietzsche came near giving his life to Germany. He was
not strong physically--he had suffered from severe headaches as far
back as 1862--and his hard work at Basel had further weakened him. On
the battlefields of France he grew ill. Diphtheria and what seems to
have been cholera morbus attacked him and when he finally reached home
again he was a neurasthenic wreck. Ever thereafter his life was one
long struggle against disease. He suffered from migraine, that most
terrible disease of the nerves, and chronic catarrh of the stomach made
him a dyspeptic. Unable to eat or sleep, he resorted to narcotics, and
according to his sister, he continued their use throughout his life.
"He wanted to get well quickly," she says, "and so took double doses."
Nietzsche, indeed, was a slave to drugs, and more than once in after
life, long before insanity finally ended his career, he gave evidence
of it.

Despite his illness he insisted upon resuming work, but during the
following winter he was obliged to take a vacation in Italy. Meanwhile
he had delivered lectures to his classes on the Greek drama and two
of these he revised and published, in 1872, as his first book, "_Die
Geburt der Tragödie_" ("The Birth of Tragedy"). Engelmann, the great
Leipsic publisher, declined it, but Fritsch, of the same city, put it
into type.[5] This book greatly pleased his friends, but the old-line
philologists of the time thought it wild and extravagant, and it almost
cost Nietzsche his professorship. Students were advised to keep away
from him, and during the winter of 1872-3, it is said, he had no pupils
at all.

Nevertheless the book, for all its iconoclasm, was an event. It sounded
Nietzsche's first, faint battle-cry and put the question mark behind
many tilings that seemed honorable and holy in philology. Most of
the philologists of that time were German savants of the comic-paper
sort, and their lives were spent in wondering why one Greek poet made
the name of a certain plant masculine while another made it feminine.
Nietzsche, passing over such scholastic futilities, burrowed down
into the heart of Greek literature. Why, he asked himself, did the
Greeks take pleasure in witnessing representations of bitter, hopeless
conflicts, and how did this form of entertainment arise among them?
Later on, his conclusions will be given at length, but in this place it
may be well to sketch them in outline, because of the bearing they have
upon his later work, and even upon the trend of his life.

In ancient Greece, he pointed out at the start, Apollo was the god of
art--of life as it was recorded and interpreted--and Bacchus Dionysus
was the god of life itself--of eating, drinking and making merry, of
dancing and roistering, of everything that made men acutely conscious
of the vitality and will within them. The difference between the things
they represented has been well set forth in certain homely verses
addressed by Rudyard Kipling to Admiral Robley D. Evans, U. S. N.:

    Zogbaum draws with a pencil
      And I do things with a pen,
    But you sit up in a conning tower,
      Bossing eight hundred men.

    To him that hath shall be given
      And that's why these books are sent
    To the man who has _lived_ more stories
      Than Zogbaum or I could _invent_.

Here we have the plain distinction: Zogbaum and Kipling are apollonic,
while Evans is dionysian. Epic poetry, sculpture, painting and
story-telling are apollonic: they represent, not life itself, but some
one man's visualized idea of life. But dancing, great deeds and, in
some cases, music, are dionysian: they are part and parcel of life as
some actual human being, or collection of human beings, is living it.

Nietzsche maintained that Greek art was at first apollonic, but that
eventually there appeared a dionysian influence--the fruit, perhaps,
of contact with primitive, barbarous peoples. Ever afterward there
was constant conflict between them and this conflict was the essence
of Greek tragedy. As Sarcey tells us, a play, to hold our attention,
must depict some sort of battle, between man and man or idea and idea.
In the melodrama of today the battle is between hero and villain; in
the ancient Greek tragedy it was between Apollo and Dionysus, between
the life contemplative and the life strenuous, between law and outlaw,
between the devil and the seraphim.

Nietzsche, as we shall see, afterward applied this distinction in
morals and life as well as in art. He called himself a dionysian and
the crowning volume of his system of philosophy, which he had barely
started when insanity overtook him, was to have been called "Dionysus."


[1] Friedrich Wilhelm Ritschl (1806-1876), the foremost philologist
of modern times. He became a professor of classical literature and
rhetoric in 1839 and founded the science of historical literary
criticism, as we know it today.

[2] Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1860) published this book, his _magnum
opus_, at Leipsic in 1819. It has been translated into English as "The
World as Will and Idea" and has appeared in many editions.

[3] Schopenhauer (_"Nachträge für Lehre vom Leiden der Welt_") puts the
argument thus: "Pleasure is never as pleasant as we expect it to be and
pain is always more painful. The pain in the world always outweighs the
pleasure. If you don't believe it, compare the respective feelings of
two animals, one of which is eating the other."

[4] Later on, in "_Menschliches allzu Menschliches_," II, Nietzsche
argued that the ascetic was either a coward, who feared the temptations
of pleasure and the agonies of pain, or an exhausted worldling who had
become satiated with life.

[5] Begun in 1869, this maiden work was dedicated to Richard Wagner.
At Wagner's suggestion Nietzsche eliminated a great deal of matter in
the original draft. The full title was "The Birth of Tragedy from the
Spirit of Music," but this was changed, in 1886, when a third edition
was printed, to "The Birth of Tragedy, or Hellenism and Pessimism."
Nietzsche then also added a long preface, entitled "An Attempt at
Self-Criticism." The material originally excluded was published in
1896.




