V


ETERNAL RECURRENCE


In the superman Nietzsche showed the world a conceivable and possible
goal for all human effort. But there still remained a problem and it
was this: When the superman at last appears on earth, what then? Will
there be another super-superman to follow and a super-supersuperman
after that? In the end, will man become the equal of the creator of the
universe, whoever or whatever He may be? Or will a period of decline
come after, with a return down the long line, through the superman to
man again, and then on to the anthropoid ape, to the lower mammals, to
the asexual cell, and, finally, to mere inert matter, gas, ether and
empty space?

Nietzsche answered these questions by offering the theory that the
universe moves in regular cycles and that all which is now happening
on earth, and in all the stars, to the uttermost, will be repeated,
again and again, throughout eternity. In other words, he dreamed of a
cosmic year, corresponding, in some fashion, to the terrestrial year.
Man, who has sprung from the elements, will rise into superman, and
perhaps infinitely beyond, and then, in the end, by catastrophe or slow
decline, he will be resolved into the primary elements again, and the
whole process will begin anew.

This notion, it must be admitted, was not original with Nietzsche and
it would have been better for his philosophy and for his repute as an
intelligent thinker had he never sought to elucidate it. In his early
essay on history he first mentioned it and there he credited it to its
probable inventors--the Pythagoreans.[1] It was their belief that,
whenever the heavenly bodies all returned to certain fixed relative
positions, the whole history of the universe began anew. The idea
seemed to fascinate Nietzsche, in whom, despite his worship of the
actual, there was an ever-evident strain of mysticism, and he referred
to it often in his later books. The pure horror of it--of the notion
that all the world's suffering would have to be repeated again and
again, that men would have to die over and over again for all infinity,
that there was no stopping place or final goal--the horror of all this
appealed powerfully to his imagination. Frau Andreas-Salomé tells us
that he "spoke of it only in a low voice and with every sign of the
profoundest emotion" and there is reason to believe that, at one time,
he thought there might be some confirmation of it in the atomic theory,
and that his desire to go to Vienna to study the natural sciences
was prompted by a wish to investigate this notion. Finally he became
convinced that there was no ground for such a belief in any of the
known facts of science, and after that, we are told, his shuddering
horror left him.

It was then possible for him to deal with the doctrine of eternal
recurrence as a mere philosophical speculation, without the
uncomfortable reality of a demonstrated scientific fact, and thereafter
he spent much time considering it. In "_Also sprach Zarathustra_" he
puts it into the brain of his prophet-hero, and shows how it well-nigh
drove the latter mad.

"I will come back," muses Zarathustra, "with this sun, with this earth,
with this eagle, with this serpent--_not_ for a new life or a better
life, but to the same life I am now leading. I will come back unto this
same old life, in the greatest things and in the smallest, in order to
teach once more the eternal recurrence of all things."[2]

In the end, Nietzsche turned this fantastic idea into a device for
exalting his superman. The superman is one who realizes that all of
his struggles will be in vain, and that, in future cycles, he will
have to go through them over and over again. Yet he has attained such
a superhuman immunity to all emotion--to all ideas of pleasure and
pain--that the prospect does not daunt him. Despite its horror, he
faces it unafraid. It is all a part of life, and in consequence it is
good. He has learned to agree to everything that exists--even to the
ghastly necessity for living again and again. In a word, he does not
fear an endless series of lives, because life, to him, has lost all the
terrors which a merely human man sees in it.

"Let us not only endure the inevitable," says Nietzsche, "and still
less hide it from ourselves: _let us love it!_"

As Vernon Lee (Miss Violet Paget)[3] has pointed out, this idea is
scarcely to be distinguished from the fundamental tenet of stoicism.
Miss Paget also says that it bears a close family resemblance to that
denial of pain which forms the basis of Christian Science, but this is
not true, for a vast difference exists between a mere denial of pain
and a willingness to admit it, face it, and triumph over it. But the
notion appears, in endless guises, in many philosophies and Goethe
voiced it, after a fashion, in his maxim, "_Entbehren sollst du_" ("Man
must do without"). The idea of eternal recurrence gives point, again,
to a familiar anecdote. This concerns a joker who goes to an inn, eats
his fill and then says to the innkeeper: "You and I will be here again
in a million years: let me pay you then." "Very well," replies the
quick-witted innkeeper, "but first pay me for the beefsteak you ate the
last time you were here--a million years ago."

Despite Nietzsche's conclusion that the known facts of existence do
not bear it out, and the essential impossibility of discussing it to
profit, the doctrine of eternal recurrence is by no means unthinkable.
The celestial cycle put forward, as an hypothesis, by modern
astronomy--the progression, that is, from gas to molten fluid, from
fluid to solid, and from solid, by catastrophe, back to gas again--is
easily conceivable, and it is easily conceivable, too, that the earth,
which has passed through an uninhabitable state into a habitable state,
may one day become uninhabitable again, and so keep seesawing back and
forth through all eternity.

But what will be the effect of eternal recurrence upon the superman?
The tragedy of it, as we have seen, will merely serve to make him
heroic. He will defy the universe and say "yes" to life. Putting aside
all thought of conscious existence beyond the grave, he will seek to
live as nearly as possible in exact accordance with those laws laid
down for the evolution of sentient beings on earth when the cosmos was
first set spinning. But how will he know when he has attained this
end? How will he avoid going mad with doubts about his own knowledge?
Nietzsche gave much thought, first and last, to this epistemological
problem, and at different times he leaned toward different schools,
but his writing, taken as a whole, indicates that the fruit of his
meditations was a thorough-going empiricism. The superman, indeed, is
an empiricist who differs from Bacon only in the infinitely greater
range of his observation and experiment. He learns by bitter experience
and he generalizes from this knowledge. An utter and unquestioning
materialist, he knows nothing of mind except as a function of body.
To him speculation seems vain and foolish: his concern is ever with
imminent affairs. That is to say, he believes a thing to be true when
his eyes, his ears, his nose and his hands tell him it is true. And in
this he will be at one with all those men who are admittedly above the
mass today. Reject empiricism and you reject at one stroke, the whole
sum of human knowledge.

When a man stubs his toe, for example, the facts that the injured
member swells and that it hurts most frightfully appear to him as
absolute certainties. If we deny that he actually knows these things
and maintain that the spectacle of the swelling and the sensation of
pain are mere creatures of his mind, we cast adrift from all order and
common-sense in the universe and go sailing upon a stormy sea of crazy
metaphysics and senseless contradictions. There are many things that
we do not know, and in the nature of things, never can know. We do not
know _why_ phosphorus has a tendency to combine with oxygen, but the
fact that it _has_ we _do_ know--and if we try to deny we _do_ know it,
we must deny that we are sentient beings, and in consequence, must
regard life and the universe as mere illusions. No man with a sound
mind makes any such denial. The things about us are real, just as our
feeling that we are alive is real.[4]

From this it must be plain that the superman will have the same guides
that we have, viz.: his instincts and senses. But in him they will be
more accurate and more acute than in us, because the whole tendency
of his scheme of things will be to fortify and develop them.[5] If
any race of Europe devoted a century to exercising its right arms,
its descendants, in the century following, would have right arms like
piston-rods. In the same way, the superman, by subordinating everything
else to his instinct to live, will make it evolve into something very
accurate and efficient. His whole concern, in brief, will be to live
as long as possible and so to avoid as much as possible all of those
things which shorten life--by injuring the body from without or by
using up energy within. As a result he will cease all effort to learn
_why_ the world exists and will devote himself to acquiring knowledge
_how_ it exists. This knowledge _how_ will be within his capacity even
more than it is within our capacity today. Our senses, as we have
seen, have given us absolute knowledge that stubbing the toe results
in swelling and pain. The superman's developed senses will give him
absolute knowledge about everything that exists on earth. He will know
exactly _how_ a tubercle bacillus attacks the lung tissue, he will know
exactly _how_ the blood fights the bacillus, and he will know exactly
_how_ to interfere in this battle in such a manner that the blood shall
be invariably victorious. In a word, he will be the possessor of exact
and complete knowledge regarding the working of all the benign and
malignant forces in the world about him, but he will not bother himself
about insoluble problems. He will waste no time speculating as to _why_
tubercle bacilli were sent into the world: his instinct to live will be
satisfied by his success in stamping them out.

The ideal superman then is merely a man in whom instinct works without
interference--a man who feels that it is right to live and that the
only knowledge worth while is that which makes life longer and more
bearable. The superman's instinct for life is so strong that its mere
exercise satisfies him, and so makes him happy. He doesn't bother
about the unknown void beyond the grave: it is sufficient for him to
know that he is alive and that being alive is pleasant. He is, in the
highest sense, a utilitarian, and he believes to the letter in Auguste
Comte's[6] dictum that the only thing living beings can ever hope to
accomplish on earth is to adapt themselves perfectly to the natural
forces around them--to the winds and the rain, the hills and the sea,
the thunderbolt and the germ of disease.

"I am a dionysian!" cries Nietzsche. "I am an immoralist!" He means
simply that his ideal is a being capable of facing the horrors of life
unafraid, of meeting great enemies and slaying them, of gazing down
upon the earth in pride and scorn, of making his own way and bearing
his own burdens. In the profane folk-philosophy of every healthy and
vigorous people, we find some trace of this dionysian idea. "Let us so
live day by day," says a distinguished American statesman, "that we can
look any man in the eye and tell him to go to hell!" We get a subtle
sort of joy out of this saying because it voices our racial advance
toward individualism and away from servility and oppression. We believe
in freedom, in toleration, in moral anarchy. We have put this notion
into innumerable homely forms.

Things have come to a hell of a pass
When a man can't wallop his own jackass!

So we phrase it. The superman, did he stalk the earth, would say the
same thing.


[1] Pythagoras (B.C. 570?-500?) was a Greek who brought the doctrine of
the transmigration of souls from Asia Minor to Greece. In Magna Graecia
he founded a mystical brotherhood, half political party and half school
of philosophy. It survived him for many years and its members revered
him as the sage of sages. He was a bitter foe to democracy and took
part in wars against its spread.

[2] "_Also sprach Zarathustra_," III.

[3] _North American Review_, Dec., 1904.

[4] _Vide_ the chapter on "Truth."

[5] It is very evident, I take it, that the principal function of
all science is the widening of our perceptions. The chief argument
for idealism used to be the axiom that our power of perception was
necessarily limited and that it would be limited forever. This may
be true still, but it is now apparent that these limits are being
indefinitely extended, and may be extended, in future, almost
infinitely. A thousand years ago, if any one had laid down the
thesis that malaria was caused by minute animals, he would have been
dismissed as a lunatic, because it was evident that no one could see
these animals, and it was evident, too--that is to say, the scientists
of that time held it to be evident--that this inability to see them
would never be removed, because the human eye would always remain
substantially as it was. But now we know that the microscope may
increase the eye's power of perception a thousandfold. When we consider
the fact that the spectroscope has enabled us to make a chemical
analysis of the sun, that the telephone has enabled us to hear 2,000
miles and that the x-rays have enabled us to see through flesh and
bone, we must admit without reservation, that our power of perception,
at some future day, may be infinite. And if we admit this we must admit
the essential possibility of the superman.

[6] "_Cours de philosophie positive_," tr. by Helen Martineau; London,
1853.




