II


NIETZSCHE AND HIS CRITICS


Let us set aside at the start that great host of critics whose chief
objection to Nietzsche is that he is blasphemous, that his philosophy
and his manner outrage the piety and prudery of the world. Of such
sort are the pale parsons who arise in suburban pulpits to dispose of
him in the half hour between the first and second lessons, as their
predecessors of the 70's and 80's disposed of Darwin, Huxley and
Spencer. Let them read their indictments and bring in their verdicts
and pronounce their bitter sentences! The student of Nietzsche must
perceive at once the irrelevance of that sort of criticism. It was the
deliberate effort of the philosopher, from the very start of what he
calls his tunnelling period, to provoke and deserve the accusation of
sacrilege. In framing his accusations against Christian morality he
tried to make them, not only persuasive and just, but also as offensive
as possible. No man ever had more belief in the propagandist value of a
_succès de scandale._ He tried his best to shock the guardians of the
sacred vessels, to force upon them the burdens of an active defense,
to bring them out into the open, to attract attention to the combat by
accentuating its mere fuming and fury. If he succeeded in the effort,
if he really outraged Christendom, then it is certainly absurd to bring
forward that deliberate achievement as an exhibit against itself.

The more pertinent and plausible criticisms of Nietzsche, launched
against him in Europe and America by many industrious foes, may be
reduced for convenience to five fundamental propositions, to wit:

(_a_) He was a decadent and a lunatic, and in consequence his
philosophy is not worthy of attention.

(_b_) His writings are chaotic and contradictory and it is impossible
to find in them any connected philosophical system.

(_c_) His argument that self-sacrifice costs more than it yields, and
that it thus reduces the average fitness of a race practising it, is
contradicted by human experience.

(_d_) The scheme of things proposed by him is opposed by ideas inherent
in all civilized men.

(_e_) Even admitting that his criticism of Christian morality is
well-founded, he offers nothing in place of it that would work as well.

It is scarcely worth while to linger over the first and second of
these propositions. The first has been defended most speciously by Max
Nordau, in "Degeneration," a book which made as much noise, when it was
first published in 1893, as any of Nietzsche's own. Nordau's argument
is based upon a theory of degeneration borrowed quite frankly from
Cesare Lombroso, an Italian quasi-scientist whose modest contributions
to psychiatry were offset by many volumes of rubbish about spooks,
table-tapping, mental telepathy, spirit photography and the alleged
stigmata of criminals and men of genius. Degeneracy and decadence
were terms that filled the public imagination in the 80's and 90's,
and even Nietzsche himself seemed to think, at times, that they had
definite meanings and that his own type of mind was degenerate. As
Nordau defines degeneracy it is "a morbid deviation from the original
type"--_i.e._ from the physical and mental norm of the species--and
he lays stress upon the fact that by "morbid" he means "infirm" or
"incapable of fulfilling normal functions." But straightway he begins
to regard _any_ deviation as morbid and degenerate, despite the obvious
fact that it may be quite the reverse. He says, for example, that a man
with web toes is a degenerate, and then proceeds to argue elaborately
from that premise, entirely overlooking the fact that web toes, under
easily imaginable circumstances, might be an advantage instead of a
handicap, and that, under the ordinary conditions of life, we are
unable to determine with any accuracy whether they are the one thing
or the other. So with the symptoms of degeneracy that he discovers in
Nietzsche. He shows that Nietzsche differed vastly from the average,
every-day German of his time, and even from the average German of
superior culture--that he thought differently, wrote differently,
admired different heroes and believed in different gods--but he by no
means proves thereby that Nietzsche's processes of thought were morbid
or infirm, or that the conclusions he reached were invalid _a priori._
Since Nordau startled the world with his book, the Lombrosan theory of
degeneracy has lost ground among psychologists and pathologists, but it
is still launched against Nietzsche by an occasional critic, and so it
deserves to be noticed.

Nordau's discussion of Nietzsche's insanity is rather more intelligent
than his discussion of the philosopher's alleged degeneracy, if only
because his facts are less open to dispute, but here, too, he forgets
that the proof of an idea is not to be sought in the soundness of the
man fathering it, but in the soundness of the idea itself. One asks of
a pudding, not if the cook who offers it is a good woman, but if the
pudding itself is good. Nordau, in attempting to dispose of Nietzsche's
philosophy on the ground that the author died a madman, succeeds only
in piling up a mass of uncontroverted but irrelevant accusations. He
shows that Nietzsche was an utter believer in his own wisdom, that he
had a fondness for repeating certain favorite arguments _ad nauseam_,
that he was violently impatient of criticism, that he chronically
underestimated the man opposed to him, that he sometimes indulged in
blasphemy for the sheer joy of shocking folks, and that he was often
hypnotized by the exuberance of his own verbosity, but it must be plain
that this indictment has its effective answer in the fact that it might
be found with equal justice against almost any revolutionary enthusiast
one selected at random--for example, Savonarola, Tolstoi, Luther,
Ibsen, Garrison, Phillips, Wilkes, Bakúnin, Marx, or Nordau himself.
That Nietzsche died insane is undoubted, and that his insanity was not
sudden in its onset is also plain, and one may even admit frankly that
it is visible, here and there, in his writings, particularly those of
his last year or two; but that his principal doctrines, the ideas upon
which his fame are based, are the fantasies of a maniac is certainly
wholly false. Had he sought to prove that cows had wings, it might be
fair today to dismiss him as Nordau attempts to dismiss him. But when
he essayed to prove that Christianity impeded progress, he laid down a
proposition that, whatever its novelty and daring, was obviously not
irrational, and neither was there anything irrational in the reasoning
whereby he supported it. One need go no further for proof of this than
the fact that multitudes of sane men, while he lived and since his
death, have debated that proposition in all seriousness and found a
plentiful food for sober thought in Nietzsche's statement and defense
of it. Ibsen also passed out of life in mental darkness, and so did
Schumann, but no reasonable critic would seek thereby to deny all
intelligibility to "Peer Gynt" or to the piano quintet in E flat.

Again, it is Nordau who chiefly voices the second of the objections
noted at the beginning of this chapter, though here many another
self-confessed serpent of wisdom follows him. Nietzsche, he says,
tore down without building up, and died without having formulated any
workable substitute for the Christian morality he denounced. Even to
the reader who has got no further into Nietzsche than the preceding
chapters of this book, the absurdity of such a charge must be manifest
without argument. No man, indeed, ever left a more comprehensive
system of ethics, not even Comte or Herbert Spencer, and if it be true
that he scattered it through a dozen books and that he occasionally
modified it in some of its details, it is equally true that his
fundamental principles were always stated with perfect clearness and
that they remained substantially unchanged from first to last. But
even supposing that he had died before he had arranged his ideas in a
connected and coherent form, and that it had remained for his disciples
to deduce and group his final conclusions, and to rid the whole of
inconsistency--even then it would have been possible to study those
conclusions seriously and to accept them for what they were worth.
Nordau lays it down as an axiom that a man cannot be a reformer unless
he proposes some ready-made and perfectly symmetrical scheme of things
to take the place of the notions he seeks to overturn, that if he does
not do this he is a mere hurler of bricks and shouter of blasphemies.
But all of us know that this is not true. Nearly every considerable
reform the world knows has been accomplished, not by one man, but by
many men working in series. It seldom happens, indeed, that the man who
first points out the necessity for change lives long enough to see that
change accomplished, or even to define its precise manner and terms.
Nietzsche himself was not the first critic of Christian morality,
nor did he so far dispose of the question that he left no room for
successors. But he made a larger contribution to it than any man had
ever made before him, and the ideas he contributed were so acute and so
convincing that they must needs be taken into account by every critic
who comes after him.

So much for the first two arguments against the prophet of the
superman. Both raise immaterial objections and the second makes an
allegation that is grotesquely untrue. The other three are founded upon
sounder logic, and, when maintained skillfully, afford more reasonable
ground for objecting to the Nietzschean system, either as a whole or in
part. It would be interesting, perhaps, to attempt a complete review
of the literature embodying them, but that would take a great deal
more space than is here available, and so we must be content with a
glance at a few typical efforts at refutation. One of the most familiar
of these appears in the argument that the messianic obligation of
self-sacrifice, whatever its cost, has yet yielded the race a large
profit--that we are the better for our Christian charity and that
we owe it entirely to Christianity. This argument has been best put
forward, perhaps, by Bennett Hume, an Englishman. If it were not for
Christian charity, says Mr. Hume, there would be no hospitals and
asylums for the sick and insane, and in consequence, no concerted and
effective effort to make man more healthy and efficient. Therefore, he
maintains, it must be admitted that the influence of Christianity, as a
moral system, has been for the good of the race. But this argument, in
inspection, quickly goes to pieces, and for two reasons. In the first
place, it must be obvious that the advantages of preserving the unfit,
few of whom ever become wholly fit again, are more than dubious; and
in the second place, it must be plain that modern humanitarianism, in
so far as it is scientific and unsentimental and hence profitable, is
so little a purely Christian idea that the Christian church, even down
to our own time, has actually opposed it. No man, indeed, can read Dr.
Andrew D. White's great history of the warfare between science and
the church without carrying away the conviction that such great boons
as the conquest of smallpox and malaria, the development of surgery,
the improved treatment of the insane, and the general lowering of the
death rate have been brought about, not by the maudlin alms-giving of
Christian priests, but by the intelligent meliorism of rebels against
a blind faith, ruthless in their ways and means but stupendously
successful in their achievement.

Another critic, this time a Frenchman, Alfred Fouillée by name,[1]
chooses as his point of attack the Nietzschean doctrine that a struggle
is welcome and beneficial to the strong, that intelligent self-seeking,
accompanied by a certain willingness to take risks, is the road of
progress. A struggle, argues M. Fouillée, always means an expenditure
of strength, and strength, when so expended, is further weakened by
the opposing strength it arouses and stimulates. Darwin is summoned
from his tomb to substantiate this argument, but its exponent seems to
forget (while actually stating it!) the familiar physiological axiom,
so often turned to by Darwin, that strength is one of the effects of
use, and the Darwinian corollary that disuse, whether produced by
organized protection or in some other way, leads inevitably to weakness
and atrophy. In other words, the ideal strong man of M. Fouillée's
dream is one who seeks, with great enthusiasm, the readiest possible
way of ridding himself of his strength.

Nordau, Violet Paget and various other critics attack Nietzsche from
much the same side. That is to say, they endeavor to controvert his
criticism of humility and self-sacrifice and to show that the law of
natural selection, with its insistence that only the fittest shall
survive, is insufficient to insure human progress. Miss Paget, for
example,[2] argues that if there were no belief in every man's duty to
yield something to his weaker brother the race would soon become a herd
of mere wild beasts. She sees humility as a sort of brake or governor,
placed upon humanity to keep it from running amuck. A human being is
so constituted, she says, that he necessarily looms in his own view
as large as all the rest of the world put together. This distortion
of values is met with in the consciousness of every individual, and
if there were nothing to oppose it, it would lead to a hopeless
conflict between exaggerated egos. Humility, says Miss Paget, tempers
the conflict, without wholly ending it. A man's inherent tendency to
magnify his own importance and to invite death by trying to force that
view upon others is held in check by the idea that it is his duty to
consider the welfare of those others. The objection to all this is that
the picture of humility Miss Paget draws is not at all a picture of
self-sacrifice, of something founded upon an unselfish idea of duty,
but a picture of highly intelligent egoism. Whatever his pharisaical
account of his motives, it must be obvious that her Christian gentleman
is merely a man who throws bones to the dogs about him. Between such
wise prudence and the immolation of the Beatitudes a wide gulf is
fixed. As a matter of fact, that prudence is certainly not opposed by
Nietzsche. The higher man of his visions is far from a mere brawler. He
is not afraid of an open fight, and he is never held back by fear of
hurting his antagonist, but he also understands that there are times
for truce and guile. In brief, his self-seeking is conducted, not alone
by his fists, but also by his head. He knows when to pounce upon his
foes and rivals, but he also knows when to keep them from pouncing upon
him. Thus Miss Paget's somewhat elaborate refutation, though it leads
to an undoubtedly sound conclusion, by no means disposes of Nietzsche.

The other branches of the argument that self-sacrifice is beneficial
open an endless field of debate, in which the same set of facts is
often susceptible of diametrically opposite interpretations. We have
already glanced at the alleged effects of Christian charity upon
progress, and observed the enormous difference between sentimental
efforts to preserve the unfit and intelligent efforts to make them fit,
and we have seen how practical Christianity, whatever its theoretical
effects, has had the actual effect of furthering the former and
hindering the latter. It is often argued that there is unfairness
in thus burdening the creed with the crimes of the church, but how
the two are to be separated is never explained. What sounder test of
a creed's essential value can we imagine than that of its visible
influence upon the men who subscribe to it? And what sounder test of
its terms than the statement of its ordained teachers and interpreters,
supported by the unanimous approval of all who profess it? We are here
dealing, let it be remembered, not with esoteric doctrines, but with
practical doctrines--that is to say, with working policies. If the
Christian ideal of charity is to be defended as a working policy, then
it is certainly fair to examine it at work. And when that is done the
reflective observer is almost certain to conclude that it is opposed
to true progress, that it acts as a sentimental shield to the unfit
without helping them in the slightest to shake off their unfitness.
What is more, it stands contrary to that wise forethought which
sacrifices one man today that ten may be saved tomorrow. Nothing could
be more patent, indeed, than the high cost to humanity of the Christian
teaching that it is immoral to seek the truth outside the Word of God,
or to take thought of an earthly tomorrow, or to draw distinctions in
value between beings who all possess souls of infinite, and therefore
of exactly equal preciousness.

But setting aside the doctrine that self-sacrifice is a religious
duty, there remains the doctrine that it is a measure of expediency,
that when the strong help the weak they also help themselves. Let it
be said at once that this second doctrine, provided only it be applied
intelligently and without any admixture of sentimentality, is not in
opposition to anything in Nietzsche's philosophy. On the contrary,
he is at pains to point out the value of exploiting the inefficient
masses, and obviously that exploitation is impossible without some
concession to their habits and desires, some offer, however fraudulent,
of a _quid pro quo_--and unprofitable unless they can be made to yield
more than they absorb. For one thing, there is the business of keeping
the lower castes in health. They themselves are too ignorant and lazy
to manage it, and therefore it must be managed by their betters. When
we appropriate money from the public funds to pay for vaccinating a
horde of negroes, we do not do it because we have any sympathy for them
or because we crave their blessings, but simply because we don't want
them to be falling ill of smallpox in our kitchens and stables, to the
peril of our own health and the neglect of our necessary drudgery.[3]
In so far as the negroes have any voice in the matter at all, they
protest against vaccination, for they can't understand its theory and
so they see only its tyranny, but we vaccinate them nevertheless,
and thus increase their mass efficiency in spite of them. It costs
something to do the work, but we see a profit in it. Here we have a
good example of self-sacrifice based frankly upon expediency, and
Nietzsche has nothing to say against it.

But what he does insist upon is that we must beware of mixing
sentimentality with the business, that we must keep the idea of
expediency clear of any idea of altruism. The trouble with the world,
as he describes it, is that such a corruption almost always takes
place. That is to say, we too often practise charity, not because it is
worth while, but merely because it is pleasant. The Christian ideal,
he says, "knows how to enrapture." Starting out from the safe premise,
approved by human experience, that it is sometimes a virtue--_i.e._, a
measure of intelligent prudence--to help the weak, we proceed to the
illogical conclusion that it is _always_ a virtue. Hence our wholesale
coddling of the unfit, our enormous expenditure upon vain schemes of
amelioration, our vain efforts to combat the laws of nature. We nurse
the defective children of the lower classes into some appearance of
health, and then turn them out to beget their kind. We parole the
pickpocket, launch him upon society with a tract in his hand--and
lose our pocket-books next day. We send missionaries to the heathen,
build hospitals for them, civilize and educate them--and later on have
to fight them. We save a pauper consumptive today, on the ostensible
theory that he is more valuable saved than dead--and so open the way
for saving his innumerable grandchildren in the future. In brief, our
self-sacrifice of expediency seldom remains undefiled. Nine times out
of ten a sentimental color quickly overcomes it, and soon or late
there is apt to be more sentimentality in it than expediency.

What is worse, this sentimentalism results in attaching a sort of
romantic glamour to its objects. Just as the Sunday-school teaching
virgin, beginning by trying to save the Chinese laundryman's soul,
commonly ends by falling in love with him, so the virtuoso of any
other sort of charity commonly ends by endowing its beneficiary with
a variety of imaginary virtues. Sympathy, by some subtle alchemy, is
converted into a sneaking admiration. "Blessed are the poor in spirit"
becomes "Blessed are the poor." This exaltation of inefficiency, it
must be manifest, is a dangerous error. There is, in fact, nothing
at all honorable about unfitness, considered in the mass. On the
contrary, it is invariably a symptom of actual dishonor--of neglect,
laziness, ignorance and depravity--if not primarily in the individual
himself, then at least in his forebears, whose weakness he carries on.
It is highly important that this fact should be kept in mind by the
human race, that the essential inferiority of the inefficient should
be insisted upon, that the penalties of deliberate slackness should
be swift and merciless. But as it is, those penalties are too often
reduced to nothing by charity, while the offense they should punish
is elevated to a fictitious martyrdom. Thus we have charity converted
into an instrument of debauchery. Thus we have it playing the part of
an active agent of decay, and so increasing the hazards of life on
earth. "We may compare civilized man," says Sir Ray Lankester,[4] "to
a successful rebel against nature, who by every step forward renders
himself liable to greater and greater penalties." No need to offer
cases in point. Every one of us knows what the Poor Laws of England
have accomplished in a hundred years--how they have multiplied misery
enormously and created a caste of professional paupers--how they have
seduced that caste downward into depths of degradation untouched by
any other civilized race in history--and how, by hanging the crushing
burden of that caste about the necks of the English people, they have
helped to weaken and sicken the whole stock and to imperil the future
of the nation.

So much for the utility of self-sacrifice--undeniable, perhaps, so long
as a wise and ruthless foresight rules, but immediately questionable
when sentimentality enters into the matter. There remains the answer
in rebuttal that sentimentality, after all, is native to the soul of
man, that we couldn't get rid of it if we tried. Herein, if we look
closely, we will observe tracks of an idea that has colored the whole
stream of human thought since the dawn of Western philosophy, and is
accepted today, as irrefutably true, by all who pound pulpits and wave
their arms and call upon their fellow men to repent. It has clogged
all ethical inquiry for two thousand years, it has been a premise in
a million moral syllogisms, it has survived the assaults of all the
iconoclasts that ever lived. It is taught in all our schools today and
lies at the bottom of all our laws, prophecies and revelations. It is
the foundation and cornerstone, not only of Christianity, but also of
every other compound of theology and morality known in the world. And
what is this king of all axioms and emperor of all fallacies? Simply
the idea that there are rules of "natural morality" engraven indelibly
upon the hearts of man--that all men, at all times and everywhere, have
ever agreed, do now agree and will agree forevermore, unanimously and
without reservation, that certain things are right and certain other
things are wrong, that certain things are nice and certain other things
are not nice, that certain things are pleasing to God and certain other
things are offensive to God.

In every treatise upon Christian ethics and "natural theology," so
called, you will find these rules of "natural morality" in the first
chapter. Thomas Aquinas called them "the eternal law." Even the Greeks
and Romans, for all their skepticism in morals, had a sneaking belief
in them. Aristotle tried to formulate them and the Latin lawyers
constantly assumed their existence. Most of them are held in firm faith
today by all save a small minority of the folk of Christendom. The
most familiar of them, perhaps, is the rule against murder--the sixth
commandment. Another is the rule against the violation of property
in goods, wives and cattle--the eighth and tenth commandments. A
third is the rule upon which the solidity of the family is based, and
with it the solidity of the tribe--the fifth commandment. The theory
behind these rules is, not only that they are wise, but that they are
innate and sempiternal, that every truly enlightened man recognizes
their validity intuitively, and is conscious of sin when he breaks
them. To them Christianity added an eleventh commandment, a sort of
infinite extension of the fifth, "that ye love one another"[5]--and
in two thousand years it has been converted from a novelty into a
universality. That is to say, its point of definite origin has been
lost sight of, and it has been moved over into the group of "natural
virtues," of "eternal laws." When Christ first voiced it, in his
discourse at the Last Supper, it was so far from general acceptance
that he named a belief in it as one of the distinguishing marks of his
disciples, but now our moralists tell us that it is in the blood of
all of us, and that we couldn't repudiate it if we would. Brotherhood,
indeed, is the very soul of Christianity, and the only effort of the
pious today is to raise it from a universal theory to a universal fact.

But the truth is, of course, that it is not universal at all, and that
nothing in the so-called soul of man prompts him to subscribe to it.
We cling to it today, not because it is inherent in us, but simply
because it is the moral fashion of our age. When the disciples first
heard it put into terms, it probably struck them as a revolutionary
novelty, and on some dim tomorrow our descendants may regard it as an
archaic absurdity. In brief, rules of morality are wholly temporal and
temporary, for the good and sufficient reason that there is no "natural
morality" in man--and the sentimental rule that the strong shall give
of their strength to the weak is no exception. There have been times in
the history of the race when few, if any intelligent men subscribed to
it, and there are thousands of intelligent men who refuse to subscribe
to it today, and no doubt there will come a time when those who are
against it will once more greatly outnumber those who are in favor of
it. So with all other "eternal laws." Their eternality exists only in
the imagination of those who seek to glorify them. Nietzsche himself
spent his best years demonstrating this, and we have seen how he set
about the task--how he showed that the "good" of one race and age was
the "bad" of some other race and age--how the "natural morality" of the
Periclean Greeks, for example, differed diametrically from the "natural
morality" of the captive Jews. All history bears him out. Mankind is
ever revising and abandoning its "inherent" ideas. We say today that
the human mind instinctively revolts against cruel punishments, and yet
a moment's reflection recalls the fact that the world is, and always
has been peopled by millions to whom cruelty, not only to enemies
but to the weak in general, seems and has seemed wholly natural and
agreeable. We say that man has an "innate" impulse to be fair and
just, and yet it is a commonplace observation that multitudes of men,
in the midst of our most civilized societies, have little more sense
of justice than so many jackals. Therefore, we may safely set aside
the argument that a "natural" instinct for sentimental self-sacrifice
stands as an impassable barrier to Nietzsche's dionysian philosophy.
There is no such barrier. There is no such instinct. It is an idea
merely--an idea powerful and persistent, but still mutable and mortal.
Certainly, it is absurd to plead it in proof against the one man who
did most to establish its mutability.

We come now to the final argument against Nietzsche--the argument, to
wit, that, even admitting his criticism of Christian morality to be
well-founded, he offers nothing in place of it that would serve the
world as well. The principal spokesman of this objection, perhaps,
is Paul Elmer More, who sets it forth at some length in his hostile
but very ingenious little study of Nietzsche.[6] Mr. More goes back
to Locke to show the growth of the two ideas which stand opposed as
Socialism and individualism, Christianity and Nietzscheism today. So
long, he says, as man believed in revelation, there was no genuine
effort to get at the springs of human action, for every impulse that
was ratified by the Scriptures was believed to be natural and moral,
and every impulse that went counter to the Scriptures was believed
to be sinful, even by those who yielded to it habitually. But when
that idea was cleared away, there arose a need for something to take
its place, and Locke came forward with his theory that the notion of
good was founded upon sensations of pleasure and that of bad upon
sensations of pain. There followed Hume, with his elaborate effort
to prove that sympathy was a source of pleasure, by reason of its
grateful tickling of the sense of virtue, and so the new conception of
good finally stood erect, with one foot on frank self-interest and the
other on sympathy. Mr. More shows how, during the century following,
the importance of the second of these factors began to be accentuated,
under the influence of Rousseau and his followers, and how, in the end,
the first was forgotten almost entirely and there arose a non-Christian
sentimentality which was worse, if anything, than the sentimentality
of the Beatitudes. In England, France and Germany it colored almost the
whole of philosophy, literature and politics. Stray men, true enough,
raised their voices against it, but its sweep was irresistible. Its
fruits were diverse and memorable--the romantic movement in Germany,
humanitarianism in England, the Kantian note in ethics, and, most
important of all, Socialism.

That this exaltation of sympathy was imprudent, and that its effects,
in our own time, are far from satisfactory, Mr. More is disposed
to grant freely. It is perfectly true, as Nietzsche argues, that
humanitarianism has been guilty of gross excesses, that there is a
"danger that threatens true progress in any system of education and
government which makes the advantage of the average rather than the
distinguished man its chief object." But Mr. More holds that the
danger thus inherent in sympathy is matched by a danger inherent in
selfishness, that we are no worse off on one horn of Hume's dual ethic
than we should be on the other. Sympathy unbalanced by self-seeking
leads us into maudlin futilities and crimes against efficiency;
self-seeking unchecked by sympathy would lead us into sheer savagery.
If there is any choice between the two, that choice is probably in
favor of sympathy, for the reason that it is happily impossible of
realization. The most lachrymose of the romantics, in the midst of
their sentimentalizing, were yet careful of their own welfare. Many of
them, indeed, displayed a quite extraordinary egoism, and there was
some justice in Byron's sneer that Sterne, for one, preferred weeping
over a dead ass to relieving the want (at cost to himself) of a living
mother.

But in urging all this against Nietzsche, Mr. More and the other
destructive critics of the superman make a serious error, and that
is the error of assuming that Nietzsche hoped to abolish Christian
morality completely, that he proposed a unanimous desertion of the
idea of sympathy for the idea of intelligent self-seeking. As a matter
of fact, he had no such hope and made no such proposal. Nothing was
more firmly fixed in his mind, indeed, than the notion that the vast
majority of men would cling indefinitely, and perhaps for all time,
to some system of morality more or less resembling the Christian
morality of today. Not only did he have no expectation of winning that
majority from its idols, but he bitterly resented any suggestion that
such a result might follow from his work. The whole of his preaching
was addressed, not to men in the mass, but to the small minority of
exceptional men--not to those who live by obeying, but to those who
live by commanding--not to the race as a race, but only to its masters.
It would seem to be impossible that any reader of Nietzsche should
overlook this important fact, and yet it is constantly overlooked by
most of his critics. They proceed to prove, elaborately and, it must
be said, quite convincingly, that if his transvaluation of values were
made by all men, the world would be no better off than it is today,
and perhaps a good deal worse, but all they accomplish thereby is to
demolish a hobgoblin of straw. Nietzsche himself sensed the essential
value of Hume's dualism. What he sought to do was not to destroy it,
but to restore it, and, restoring it, to raise it to a state of active
conflict--to dignify self-interest as sympathy has been dignified,
and so to put the two in perpetual opposition. He believed that the
former was by long odds the safer impulse for the higher castes of
men to follow, if only because of its obviously closer kinship to the
natural laws which make for progress upward, but by the same token
he saw that these higher castes could gain nothing by disturbing the
narcotic contentment of the castes lower down. Therefore, he was, to
that extent, an actual apologist for the thing he elsewhere so bitterly
attacked. Sympathy, self-sacrifice, charity--these ideas lulled and
satisfied the chandala, and so he was content to have the chandala
hold to them. "Whom do I hate most among the rabble of today? The
Socialist who undermines the workingman's instincts, who destroys his
satisfaction with his insignificant existence, who makes him envious
and teaches him revenge."[7] In brief, Nietzsche dreamed no dream of
all mankind converted into a race of supermen: the only vision he saw
was one of supermen at the top.

To make an end, his philosophy was wholly aristocratic, in aim as well
as in terms. He believed that superior men, by which he meant alert
and restless men, were held in chains by the illusions and inertia of
the mass--that their impulse to move forward and upward, at whatever
cost to those below, was restrained by false notions of duty and
responsibility. It was his effort to break down those false notions,
to show that the progress of the race was more important than the
comfort of the herd, to combat and destroy the lingering spectre of
sin--in his own phrase, to make man innocent. But when he said man he
always meant the higher man, the man of tomorrow, and not mere men. For
the latter he had only contempt: he sneered at their heroes, at their
ideals, at their definitions of good and evil. "There are only three
ways," he said, "in which the masses appear to me to deserve a glance:
first, as blurred copies of their betters, printed on bad paper and
from worn-out plates; secondly, as a necessary opposition; and thirdly,
as tools. Further than that I hand them over to statistics--and the
devil.[8] ... I am writing for a race of men which does not yet exist.
I am writing for the lords of the earth."[9]


[1] Author of "_Nietzsche et l'Immoralisme_" and other books. The
argument discussed appears in an article in the _International Monthly_
for March, 1901, pp. 134-165.

[2] In the _North American Review_ for Dec., 1904.

[3] A more extended treatment of this point will be found in "Men _vs._
the Man," by Robert Rives La Monte and the present author: New York,
1910.

[4] In "The Kingdom of Man," London, 1907.

[5] John XIII, 34.

[6] "Nietzsche," Boston, 1912. Reprinted in "The Drift of Romanticism,"
pp. 147-190, Boston, 1913.

[7] "_Der Antichrist_," 57.

[8] "_Vom Nutzen und Nachtheil der Historie für das Leben_," IX.

[9] "_Der Wille zur Macht_", 958.




HOW TO STUDY NIETZSCHE


Through the diligence and enthusiasm of Dr. Oscar Levy, author of "The
Revival of Aristocracy," a German by birth but for some time a resident
of London, the whole canon of Nietzsche's writings is now to be had in
English translation. So long ago as 1896 a complete edition in eleven
volumes was projected, and Dr. Alexander Tille, lecturer on German in
the University of Glasgow, and author of "_Von Darwin bis Nietzsche_,"
was engaged to edit it. But though it started fairly with a volume
including "The Case of Wagner" and "The Antichrist," and four more
volumes followed after a year or so, it got no further than that. Ten
years later came Dr. Levy. He met with little encouragement when he
began, but by dint of unfailing perseverance he finally gathered about
him a corps of competent translators, made arrangements with publishers
in Great Britain and the United States, and got the work under way. His
eighteenth and last volume was published early in 1913.

These translations, in the main, are excellent, and explanatory
prefaces and notes are added wherever needed. The contents of the
various volumes are as follows:

I. "The Birth of Tragedy," translated by Wm. A. Haussmann, Ph. D., with
a biographical introduction by Frau Förster-Nietzsche, a portrait of
Nietzsche, and a facsimile of his manuscript.

II. "Early Greek Philosophy and Other Essays," translated by Maximilian
A. Mügge, Ph. D., author of "Friedrich Nietzsche: His Life and Work."
Contents: "The Greek Woman," "On Music and Words," "Homer's Contest,"
"The Relation of Schopenhauer's Philosophy to a German Culture,"
"Philosophy During the Tragic Age of the Greeks," and "On Truth and
Falsity in Their Ultramoral Sense."

III. "On the Future of Our Educational Institutions" and "Homer and
Classical Philology," translated by J. M. Kennedy, author of "The
Quintessence of Nietzsche," with an introduction by the translator.

IV. "Thoughts Out of Season," I ("David Strauss, the Confessor and the
Writer" and "Richard Wagner in Bayreuth"), translated by Anthony M.
Ludovici, author of "Nietzsche: His Life and Works," "Nietzsche and
Art," and "Who is to be Master of the World?" with an introduction by
Dr. Levy and a preface by the translator.

V. "Thoughts Out of Season," II ("The Use and Abuse of History" and
"Schopenhauer as Educator"), translated by Adrian Collins, M. A., with
an introduction by the translator.

VI. "Human All-Too Human," I, translated by Helen Zimmern, with an
introduction by J. M. Kennedy.

VII. "Human All-Too Human," II, translated by Paul V. Cohn, B. A., with
an introduction by the translator.

VIII. "The Case of Wagner" (including "Nietzsche _contra_ Wagner"
and selected aphorisms), translated by A. M. Ludovici, and "We
Philologists," translated by J. M. Kennedy, with prefaces by the
translators.

IX. "The Dawn of Day," translated by J. M. Kennedy, with an
introduction by the translator.

X. "The Joyful Wisdom," translated by Thomas Common, author of
"Nietzsche as Critic, Philosopher, Poet and Prophet" (including "Songs
of Prince Free-as-a-Bird," translated by Paul V. Cohn and Maude D.
Petre).

XI. "Thus Spake Zarathustra," translated by Thomas Common, with an
introduction by Frau Förster-Nietzsche and explanatory notes by A. M.
Ludovici.

XII. "Beyond Good and Evil," translated by Helen Zimmern, with an
introduction by Thomas Common.

XIII. "The Genealogy of Morals," translated by Horace B. Samuel, M.
A., and "People and Countries," translated by J. M. Kennedy, with an
editor's note by Dr. Levy.

XIV. "The Will to Power," I, translated by A. M. Ludovici, with a
preface by the translator.

XV. "The Will to Power," II, translated by A. M. Ludovici, with a
preface by the translator.

XVI. "The Twilight of the Idols" (including "The Antichrist," "Eternal
Recurrence" and explanatory notes to "Thus Spake Zarathustra"),
translated by A. M. Ludovici, with a preface by the translator.

XVII. "Ecce Homo," translated by A. M. Ludovici; various songs,
epigrams and dithyrambs, translated by Paul V. Cohn, Herman Scheffauer,
Francis Bickley and Dr. G. T. Wrench; and the music of Nietzsche's
"Hymn to Life" (words by Lou Salomé), with an introduction by Mr.
Ludovici, a note to the poetry by Dr. Levy, and a reproduction of Karl
Donndorf's bust of Nietzsche.

XVIII. Index.

The student who would read Nietzsche had better begin with one of
the aphoristic books, preferably "The Dawn of Day." From that let
him proceed to "Beyond Good and Evil," "The Genealogy of Morals" and
"The Antichrist." He will then be ready to understand "Thus Spake
Zarathustra." Later on he may read "Ecce Homo" and dip into "The Joyful
Wisdom," "Human All-Too Human" and "The Will to Power," as his fancy
suggests. The Wagner pamphlets are of more importance to Wagnerians
than to students of Nietzsche's ideas, and the early philological and
critical essays have lost much of their interest by the passage of
time. Nietzsche's poetry had better be avoided by all who cannot read
it in the original German. The English translations are mostly very
free and seldom satisfactory.

Of the larger Nietzschean commentaries in English the best is
"Friedrich Nietzsche: His Life and Work," by M. A. Mügge. Appended to
it is a bibliography of 850 titles--striking evidence of the attention
that Nietzsche's ideas have gained in the world. Other books that will
be found useful are "The Quintessence of Nietzsche," by J. M. Kennedy;
"Nietzsche: His Life and Works," by Anthony M. Ludovici; "The Gospel
of Superman," by Henri Lichtenberger, translated from the French by J.
M. Kennedy; "The Philosophy of Nietzsche," by Georges Chatterton-Hill,
and "The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche," by Grace Neal Dolson, Ph.
D., this last a pioneer work of permanent value. Lesser studies are
to be found in "Friedrich Nietzsche," by A. R. Orage; "Nietzsche as
Critic, Philosopher, Poet and Prophet," by Thomas Common; "Friedrich
Nietzsche and His New Gospel," by Emily S. Hamblen, and "Nietzsche,"
by Paul Elmer More. Interesting discussions of various Nietzschean
ideas are in "The Revival of Aristocracy," by Dr. Oscar Levy; "Who
is to be Master of the World?" by A. M. Ludovici; "On the Tracks of
Life," by Leo G. Sera, translated from the Italian by J. M. Kennedy;
"Nietzsche and Art," by A. M. Ludovici, and "The Mastery of Life," by
G. T. Wrench. Selections from Nietzsche's writings are put together
under subject headings in "Nietzsche in Outline and Aphorism," by A.
R. Orage; "Nietzsche: His Maxims," by J. M. Kennedy, and "The Gist
of Nietzsche," by H. L. Mencken. An elaborate and invaluable summary
of all Nietzsche's writings, book by book, is to be found in "What
Nietzsche Taught," by Willard H. Wright. This volume, the fruit of
very diligent labor, is admirably concise and well-ordered.

The standard biography of Nietzsche is "_Das Leben Friedrich
Nietzsches_" by Frau Förster-Nietzsche, a large work in three volumes.
In 1911 Frau Förster-Nietzsche prepared a shorter version and this
has since been done into English by A. M. Ludovici, and published in
two volumes, under the title of "The Life of Nietzsche." Unluckily,
so devoted a sister was not the best person to deal with certain
episodes in the life of her brother and hero. The gaps she left and
the ameliorations she attempted are filled and corrected in "The Life
of Friedrich Nietzsche," by Daniel Halévy, translated from the French
by J. M. Hone, with an extraordinarily brilliant introduction by T. M.
Kettle, M. P.

Small but suggestive studies of Nietzsche and his ideas are to be
found in "Egoists," "Mezzotints in Modern Music," and "The Pathos
of Distance," by James Huneker; "Degeneration," by Max Nordau;
"Affirmations," by Havelock Ellis; "Aristocracy and Evolution," by W.
H. Mallock; "Heretics" and "Orthodoxy," by G. K. Chesterton; "Lectures
and Essays on Natural Theology," by William Wallace; "Heralds of
Revolt," by William Barry, D. D.; "Essays in Sociology," by J. M.
Robertson; "The Larger Aspects of Socialism," by William English
Walling; "Three Modern Seers," by Mrs. Havelock Ellis; "Slaves to
Duty," by J. Badcock; "In Peril of Change," by C. F. G. Masterman;
"Man's Place in the Cosmos," by A. Seth Pringle Pattison; and "Gospels
of Anarchy," by Vernon Lee (Violet Paget). George Bernard Shaw's
variations upon Nietzschean themes are in "The Revolutionist's
Handbook," appended to "Man and Superman." Of magazine articles dealing
with the prophet of the superman there has been no end of late. Most
of them are worthless, but any bearing the name of Grace Neal Dolson,
Thomas Common, Thomas Stockham Baker or Maude D. Petre may be read
with profit. One of the best discussions of Nietzsche I have ever
encountered was contributed to the _Catholic World_ during December,
1905, and January, February, March, May and June, 1906, by Miss Petre.
It is to be regretted that these excellent papers, which sought to
rescue Nietzsche from the misunderstandings of Christian critics, have
not been re-printed in book-form.



INDEX


Adieu, I Must Go!, patriotic song
_Amor fati_
Anarchism
Andreas-Salomé, _see_ Salomé.
Antichrist, The--
  Publication of
  Quotations from
  Style of
  English translation of
Apollo--
  First conception of
  God of music and poetry
  Influence of
  Conflict with Dionysus
Aquinas, Thomas
Arcelaus
Aristocracy
Art for art's sake
Asceticism, 21 _footnote_
Atheism

Bacchus Dionysus--
  First conception of
  Imported into Greece
  God of strenuous life
  Conflict with Apollo
  Nietzsche a Dionysian
Bad, definition of
Badcock, J.
Baker, Thomas Stockham
Balfour, A. J.
Barry, Wm.
Basel, University of--
  Nietzsche appointed prof.
  Lectures on Greek drama
  In academic society
  Leave of absence
  Resigns professorship
  In asylum at
  Income at
Beauty, the idea of
Beer, Nietzsche's dislike of
Beyle, Marie Henri, _see_ Stendhal.
Beyond Good and Evil--
  Publication of
  Quotations from
  Argument of
  English translation of
Beyond-man, _see_ Higher man.
Bible, Nietzsche's knowledge of
Bible, quotations from
Bickley, Francis
Birth of Tragedy, The--
  Its genesis and publication
  Doctrine of
  Quotation from
  Revised
  English translation of
Bizet's music
Blake, William
Blond beast
Bonn, Nietzsche's career at
Bradley, Henry
Brandes, Georg
Buddhism
Burkhardt, Prof.
Butler, Samuel
Callicles
Castes
_Catholic World_
Celibacy
Chamfort
Chandala, _see_ Masses.
Charity
Chatterton-Hill, Georges
Chesterton, G. K.
Chivalry
Chloral, Nietzsche's use of
Christian Science
Christianity--
  Nietzsche's indictment of
  Scientific revolt against
  Its dogmas examined
  Free will vs. determinism
  Its slave-morality
  Charity
  Opposition to natural selection
  Nietzsche's attack on self-sacrifice
  Origin of Christianity
Cohn, Paul V.
College, American
Collins, Adrian
Commercialism
Common, Thomas
Comte, Auguste
Conscience, the nature of
Costume
Cron, Bernard, _see_ Gast.
Crucifixion, the
Culture, German

Dancing
Darwin, Charles
David Strauss, the Confessor and the Writer--
  Publication of
  Quotation from
  English translation of
  _See also_ Strauss, David.
Dawn of Day, The--
  Publication of
  Quotations from
  English translation of
Death--
  The right to die
  Regulation of
  Attitude at
Death of Nietzsche
Decalogue
Degeneracy, Nietzsche's alleged
Degeneration, Nordau's book
Democracy
Descartes
Desire
Determinism
Diderot
Diogenes Laërtius, early essay on
Dionysus, _see_ Bacchus.
Dionysus, the Philosophy of Eternal Recurrence, plan of proposed book
Doctor of philosophy
Dolson, Grace Neal
Donndorf, Karl
Drama, Greek
Draper, J. W.
Dreams
Dualism

Ecce Homo--
  Publication of
  Quotations from
  English translation of
Education, perils of State aid
Egoism, Stirner's
Elective Affinities
Ellis, Havelock
Ellis, Mrs. Havelock
Emerson, Ralph Waldo
Empedocles
Encyclopedists, French
Engadine, summers in
English translation of Nietzsche
Englishmen
Eternal recurrence--
  Origin of the idea
  Its fascinations for Nietzsche
  Effect on superman
European, the good
Eusebius, Pamphilius
Evil, definition of; _see also_ Bad.
Falckenberg, Richard
Faust
Fiske, John
Fite, Warner
Flaubert, Gustav
Fontenelle
Förster-Nietzsche, Elisabeth, Nietzsche's sister--
  Her biography of her brother
  Editor of his works
  Marriage and widowhood
  Relations with Nietzsche
Fouillée, Alfred
Franco-Prussian war, service in
Free spirit
Free Spirit, The, plan of proposed book
Free will
Freedom
Friedrich Wilhelm IV.

Gast, Peter
Gaultier, Jules de
Genealogy of Morals, The--
  Publication of
  Quotations from
  English translation of
Genoa
Gentleman, the
Gobineau
God, the idea of
Goethe
Golden Rule
Good, definition of
Gould, Dr. George M.
Grave of My Father, The, early poem
Greatness, definition of
Greek art, Nietzsche's theory of
Greek drama, early essays on
Greek Philosophy and Other Essays
Greek Woman, The, essay
Greeks, influence on Nietzsche
Greeley, Horace

Haeckel, Ernst
Halévy, Daniel
Hamblen, Emily S.
Happiness, definitions of
Happiness, unattainable
Haussmann, William A.
Headaches, Nietzsche's
Hegel
Hegesippus
Heine, Heinrich
Hellen, E. von der
Helvétius
Heracleitus
Herder
_Herrenmoral, see_ Master-morality.
Hesiod
Higher man
History, function of
History, On the Good and Bad Effects of upon Human Life--
  Publication of
  Quotations from
  English translation of
Hobbes, Thomas
Hölderlin, Friedrich
Homer and Classical Philology, essay
Hone, J. M.
Human, All-too Human--
  Publication of first volume
  Effect of upon friends and public
  Quotations from
  Second and third volumes
  English translation of
Hume, Bennett
Hume, David
Humility
Huneker, James
Huxley, Thomas H.
Hymn to Life
Hypochondria, Nietzsche's

Ibsen, Henrik
_Ideen_
Immoralist, The, plan of proposed book
Income, Nietzsche's
Inopportune Speculations--
  First volume
  Plan of
  Quotation from
  English translation of
Insanity, Nietzsche's

Jenner
Jews
Joel, Karl
Jones, Henry Arthur
Joyful Science, The--
  Publication of
  Quotation from
  English translation of

Kant, Immanuel
Kennedy, J. M.
Kettle, T. M.
Kipling, Rudyard
Klopstock
Koegel, Fritz
Krafft-Ebing, R. von
Krause, Dr., Nietzsche's great-uncle
Krause, Frau, Nietzsche's great-grandmother

La Bruyère
Lady, the
La Monte, Robert Rives
Lankester, E. Ray
La Rochefoucauld
Law, origin of
Legislation, freak
Leipsic, student days at
Lessing
Levy, Oscar
Liberty, the worth of
Lichtenberger, Henri
Liszt, Franz
_Litterarischen Vereinigung mania, Der_
Locke, John
Lombroso, Cesare
_L'Origine de la famille de Nietzsche_
Love, nature of
Low, Sidney
Ludovici, Anthony M.

Machiavelli
Maggiore, Lake
Mallock, W. H.
Malthus
Mammal, man as a
Man, meaning of the word
Mandeville
Marienbad
Markby, William
Marriage, _see_ Women.
Marx, Karl
Masochism
Masses, the
Masterman, C. F. G.
Master-morality
Maternity
Mencken, H. L.
Mentone
Messiah, The, Handel oratorio
Meysenbug, Fräulein von
Military service
Miscellaneous Opinions and Aphorisms
Mohammedanism
Monarchy
Monism
Montaigne
Moonlight on the Pussta, composition
Moral order of the world
Morality--
  Definitions of
  Expression of expedience
  How it becomes fixed
  Master and slave morality
  Nietzsche's criticism of
More, Paul Elmer
Mügge, M. A.
Music, Nietzsche's compositions
Music, Nietzsche's love of

Natural morality
Natural selection, _see_ Struggle for existence.
Naumann, C. G.
Naumburg, Nietzsche at
New Thought
Nice
Nicholas of Cusa
Nietzsche, Ermentrude, Nietzsche's grandmother
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, his characteristics--
  As a boy
  Pride in his Polish descent
  Love of music
  A brilliant pupil
  His dislike of _biergemüthlichkeit_
  Drug-taking
  As a professor
  Method of writing
  His intolerance
  Personal appearance
  Illnesses
  Insanity
  Literary style
  Women
  Relations to his sister
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, his life--
  Birth
  Boyhood at Naumburg
  First writings
  At Pforta
  Matriculates at Bonn
  Student of Ritschl
  Removes to Leipsic
  Military service
  First philological work
  Discovery of Schopenhauer
  Takes his degree
  Professor at Basel
  First breakdown
  Publishes "The Birth of Tragedy"
  Other early essays
  Meeting with Wagner
  Meeting with Rée
  Human, All-too Human
  Affair with Lou Salomé
  Failing health
  Income
  Breakdown at Turin
  Death
Nietzsche, Josef, Nietzsche's brother
Nietzsche, Karl Ludwig, Nietzsche's father
Nietzsche, Therese Elisabeth Alexandra, Nietzsche's sister,
  _see_ Förster-Nietzsche.
Nietzsche versus Wagner--
  Publication of
  English translation of
Nietzschy
Nirvana
Nobility
Nordau, Max

Orage, A. R.
Osler, William
Overbeck, Franz

Paganism, Nietzsche's
Paget, Violet (Vernon Lee)
Paine, Thomas
Parmenides
Parsons, Elsie Clews
Pasteur, Louis
Pattison, A. Seth Pringle
Peace, universal
Petre, Maude D.
Pfleiderer, Otto
Pforta
Philologists, We, essay
Philosophy
Pindar, Judge, of Naumburg
Pleasure and pain
Plowshare, The
Poetry, Nietzsche's
Polish origin of Nietzsche family
Poor Laws, effect of English
Prayer
Predestination
Priestcraft
Professor at Basel
Progress, Nietzsche's program of
Property rights
Proudhon
Pussta
Pyrrho
Pythagoras


Rée, Paul--
  Nietzsche's meeting with
  Rivals in love
  Influence on Nietzsche
Renaissance, Second
Richard Wagner in Bayreuth--
  Publication of
  English translation of
  _See also_ Wagner.
Ritschl, Albrecht
Ritschl, Frau
Ritschl, Friedrich Wilhelm
Robertson, J. M.
Röcken
Romantic movement in Germany
Roosevelt, Theodore
Rousseau

St. Austin
Sallust
Salomé, Lou--
  Meeting with Nietzsche
  Book on Nietzsche
  Marriage
  Nietzsche's affair with
  Hymn to Life
Samuel, Horace B.
Science, its aims
Scheffauer, Hermann
Schiller
Schooldays at Naumburg
Schopenhauer, Arthur--
  Nietzsche's discovery of
  The will-to-live
  Nietzsche's divergence
  Essay on
  Influence on Nietzsche
Schopenhauer as a Teacher--
  Publication of
  Quotations from
  English translation of
Schumann, Robert
Self-control
Sera, Leo G.
Seydlitz, Baron von
Shaw, G. Bernard
_Silberblick_
Sils Maria
Sin, the Christian idea of
Skepticism
_Sklavmoral, see_ Slave-morality.
Slave-morality
Smith, Adam
Social contract
Socialism
Socrates
Sorrento
Spencer, Herbert
Spinoza
State, origin of
Stendhal
Stirner, Max
Strauss, David Friedrich
  _see also_ David Strauss, the Confessor and the Writer.
Strauss, Richard, 55.
Struggle for existence
Style, Nietzsche's German
Suicide
Superman--
  Described
  His purposes
  His characteristics
Sympathy

Taine
Teacher, Nietzsche as a
Teachers, their characteristics
Thoughts Out of Season, _see_ Inopportune Speculations.
Tille, Alexander
Tobacco, Nietzsche's dislike of
Tr----, Fräulein, Nietzsche's proposal to
Tragedy, its origin
Tribschen
Truth--
  Definitions of
  Its origin in error
  The scientific method
Turck, Dr.
Turin, breakdown at
Twilight of the Idols, The--
  Publication of
  Quotations from
  English translation of

Vauvenarges
Venice
Voltaire

Wagner, The Case of--
  Publication of
  Quotation from
  English translation of
Wagner, Cosima
Wagner, Richard--
  Meeting with Nietzsche
  Nietzsche visits at Tribschen
  Richard Wagner in Bayreuth
  Burlesqued in Thus Spake Zarathustra
  The Case of Wagner
  Nietzsche vs. Wagner
  Nietzsche as a Wagnerian
  Wagner and Schopenhauer
  Parsifal
  Bayreuth opening
  Break with Nietzsche
  Nietzsche's last words on
Walker, J. L.
Wallace, Alfred Russell
Wallace, William
Walling, William English
Wanderer and His Shadow, The
War, benefits of
War, Heracleitus on
Weimar
White, Andrew D.
Wieland
Wife
Will-to-live
Will-to-power
Will-to-Power, The--
  Plan of proposed work
  Notes published
  Quotation from
  English translation of
Windelband, Wilhelm
Women--
  Nietzsche's personal attitude
  Their chief duty
  Their slave-morality
  Sources of their weakness
  Their guile
  Man's attitude toward them
  Marriage
  "Don't forget thy whip!"
  Schopenhauer on
  The lady
Wrench, G. T.
Wright, Willard H.

Zarathustra, Thus Spake--
  Publication of
  Plan of
  Quotations from
  Richard Strauss' tone-poem
  English translation of
Zeno
Zimmern, Helen
Zoroaster, _see_ Zarathustra.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, by 
H. L. Mencken


