CHAPTER XIII

THE RIDDLE OF THE SPHINX


It is with no light emotion, or jaunty air, that the writer approaches
this part of his subject. On the contrary, he feels something like awe
when he contemplates the nature of that great Something which he is
called upon to attempt to "explain" in a few pages. He feels, in only a
lighter degree, the emotion that one experiences when, in occasional
moments, his mind leads to a contemplation of The Infinite. He feels
that that which men mean when they say "Gravitation" and "The Ether,"
are but symbols and feeble concepts of Something so far above human
experience that the Mind of Man may grasp only its lowest shadings, the
greater and higher part of it, like the higher rays of the Spectrum,
being hidden from the experience of Man.

In his endeavor to pass on to you his ideas regarding the Something that
explains both Gravitation and the Ether, he must ask you to endeavor to
form a Mental Picture of a "Something." This Something must fill all
Space within the Limits of the Universe, or Cosmos--if limits it has.
It must be an expression of the first of the attributes of The
Infinite--the one called Omnipresence, or Presence-everywhere--and _yet
it must not be The Infinite Presence_. It also must be an expression of
the second of the attributes of the Infinite--the one called
Omnipotence, or All-Power--and _yet it must not be The Infinite Power_.
It also must be an expression of the third attribute of The
Infinite--the one called Omniscience, or All-Knowing--and _yet it must
not be The Infinite Wisdom_. It must be an expression of All the
Attributes that _we think of_ as belonging to The Infinite--_and yet
through them All we may see The Infinite, Itself, in the background,
viewing its expressions_.

This Something that you are asked to think of is that Something
regarding which the mystics have dreamed; the philosophers have
speculated; the scientists have sneered and smiled--that Something that
Men have thought of as The Universal Mind or the Cosmic Mind.

You are asked to think of this Something as a great Ocean of Pure Mind,
permeating all Space--between Solar Systems--between Worlds--between
Masses of Substance--between the Molecules, Atoms, and Corpuscles. In
and about and around everything--yes, even in Everything--in the very
essence of the Corpuscle it is--in truth _it is that Essence itself_.

Bound up in the bosom of that Mighty Ocean of Mind must reside all
Knowledge of the Universe--of all "this side of God." For that
All-Knowledge is but a knowing of its own region. Latent within itself
must be locked up all Energy, or capacity for Force or Motion, for all
Force or Energy is Mental. In its very presence it exemplifies the
capacity of filling All Space. Omnipresent; Omnipotent; Omniscient--all
the attributes of The Infinite are manifested in it--_and yet it is but
the outward expression of That-Behind-the-Veil, which is the Causeless
Cause of All_.

In that Great Ocean of Universal or Cosmic Mind, bodies of Substance are
but as floating specks of dust--_or even bubbles formed of the substance
of that Ocean itself_--on the surface of that Ocean, there may arise
waves, currents, ripples, eddies, whirlpools,--storms, hurricanes,
tempests,--from its bosom may rise vapor, that after stages of clouds,
rain-drops, flowing in streams, rivers, bays, at last again reach the
source of its origin. These disturbances and changes we call Energy,
Force, Motion--but they are but surface manifestations, and the Great
Ocean is serene in its depths, and, in reality, is unchanged and
undisturbed.

This, friends, is that which the writer asks you to accept in the place
of Aristotle's Ether. Is it a worthy exchange?

       *       *       *       *       *

We have seen that the Attraction of Gravitation was different from any
other so-called form of Force and Energy--both in its operations and
laws, as well as in its constancy and self-support. And that it was
different from the other forms of Attraction such as Cohesion, Chemical
Affinity, etc. And, so we must consider it as more than a mere
"Emotional Excitement" in the Mind of the Particle--that bubble on the
surface of the Ocean. And it must be different from the special forms of
Attraction manifested by the Atom and Molecule. It must be a simpler,
more basic, and yet a more constant and permanent thing. It must exist
before and after "Excitement; Vibration; Cohesion; and Chemical
Affinity." _It must be the Mother of the Forces._

Let us imagine the Cosmic Mind as a great body of Something filling
Space, instead of as the surface of the Ocean, which figure we used just
now--either figure is equally correct. This great Cosmic Mind is to be
thought of as filling Space, and containing within its volume (Oh, for a
better word!) countless worlds, and suns, as well as smaller bodies of
Substance. These suns and world, and bodies are apparently free and
unconnected, floating in this great volume of Mind. But they are not
free and unconnected--they are linked together by a web of lines of
Gravitation. Each body of Substance has a line reaching out in a
continuous direction, and connecting it with another body. Each body has
one of such lines connecting it with _each_ particular "other body."
Consequently, each body has countless lines reaching out from it; some
slender, and some thick,--the thickness depending upon the ratio of
distances maintained by, and relative sizes of, the particular bodies
that it connects. This system of "lines" form a great net-work of
connections in the volume of Mind, crossing each other at countless
points (but not interfering with each other.) And although the number
may be said to be "countless," still these lines do not begin to cover
the entire dimensions of Space, or of the Mind that fills it. There are
great areas of Space entirely untouched by these lines. If one could see
the system of lines, it probably would appear as a sheared off section
of a great spider's web, with lines in all directions, but with "plenty
of room" between the lines. _Perhaps these lines converge to a common
centre, and that centre may be----!_ But this is transcendental
dreaming--let us proceed with our consideration of the use of these
lines.

It is to be understood, of course, that these "lines" _are not material_
lines--not made of Substance--but rather, "conditions" in the Cosmic
Mind. Not Thought-waves arising from the Excitement of Particles, but
Something more basic, simpler, and more permanent. Let us look closer
and we will see that the great lines of Gravitation radiating from, and
connecting world with world--sun with planet--are really cables composed
of much smaller lines, the finest strands of which are seen to emanate
from each Corpuscle or Particle of Substance--the "line" of Gravitation
reaching from the Earth to the Sun being composed of a mass of tiny
strands which connect each Particle of one body with each Particle of
the other. The last analysis shows us that _each Particle is connected
with every other Particle in the Universe by a line of Attraction_.

_These "Lines of Attraction" are what we call Gravitation_--purely
Mental in nature--Lines of Mind-Principle in the great volume of mind.

These lines of Gravitation must have existed from the creation of the
Particle, and the connection between Particle and Particles must have
existed from the beginning, if beginning there was. The Particles may
have changed their positions and relations in the Universe, but the
lines have never been broken. Whether the Particle existed as a free
Corpuscle--whether combined as Atom or Molecule--whether part of this
world or sun or planet, or that one countless millions of miles
removed--it mattered not. The Line of Gravitation always was there,
between that Particle and every other Particle. Distance extended and
thinned the line, or the reverse, as the case might be--but it was
there, always. Obstacles proved no hindrance to passage, for the lines
passed through the obstacle. Can it not be seen that here is the secret
of the fact that no "time" is required for the passage of
Gravitation--it apparently traveling instantaneously, whereas, in fact,
it does not "travel" at all. And does not seem that this theory also
explains why no medium is required for the "travel" of Gravitation? And
does it not explain why Gravitation is not affected in its "passage" by
intervening bodies? Gravitation does not "travel" or "pass"--it remains
constant, and ever present between the articles, varying in degree as
the distance between the Particles is increased, and _vice-versa_; and
increasing and decreasing in effect, according to the number of
Particles combining their lines of Attraction, as in the case of Atom,
Molecule, Mass, World. Gravitation is a Mental Connection or Bond
uniting the Mind in the several Particles, rather than their Substance
or Material.

Along these lines of Gravitation pass the "Thought-waves," resulting
from the Excitement of the Particles--these fleeting, changing,
inconstant waves of Emotion--how different they are from the changeless,
constant exhibition of Gravitation. And along these same lines--when
shortened by close contact, travel the impulses of Cohesion and Chemical
Affinity. Gravitation not only performs its own work, but also acts as a
"common-carrier" for the waves of Desire-Force, and the Thought-waves of
Excitement of the Particles, manifesting as Attractive Energy, and
Radiant Energy, respectively.

The writer asks you to remember, particularly, that while the
Desire-waves of the Particles,--and their Thought-waves of
Excitement--are changeable, disconnected, and inconstant; the Line of
Gravitation is never broken, and could not be unless the Particle of
Substance was swept out of existence, in which case the balance of the
Universe would be overturned, and chaos would result. The Divine Plan is
perfect to the finest detail--every Particle is needed--is known--is
counted--and used in the Plan. And Gravitation is the plainest evidence
of the REALITY of The Infinite that is afforded us. _In it we see the
actual machinery of The Infinite._ No wonder that great thinkers have
bowed their heads reverently before its Power and Awfulness, when their
minds have finally grasped its import. Verily the sparrow's fall is
noted, and known, as the Biblical writer has recorded, for the fall is
in obedience to that great Law that holds the Particles in their
places--that makes possible the whirl of worlds, and the existence of
Solar Systems--that, indeed, makes possible the Forms of Life as we know
them--that Something that forever and ever has, and will, silently,
ceaselessly, untiringly, and without emotion, fulfilled its work and
destiny--GRAVITATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Theory of Dynamic Thought also holds that in addition to the
existence of the Cosmic Mind, or Ocean of Mind-principle--and the Lines
of Attraction that run through it, each particle has its Mental
Atmosphere, or Aura. The Aura is an Atmosphere of Mind that surrounds
the Particle--and also the larger bodies--and also living forms higher
in the scale. This Aura is merely an extension of the bit of Mind that
is segregated or apparently separated from the Cosmic Mind, for use by
the individual Particle, Mass, or Creature. Through, and by means of
this Aura the Particle takes cognizance of the approach and nature of
the other Particles in its vicinity. The same rule holds good in the
case of the Creatures, including Man, as we shall see in a later
chapter. The fact is mentioned here, merely in order to connect the
several manifestation of Mental Phenomena mentioned in the several parts
of this book.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some may object to the Theory of the Lines of Gravitation being the only
"carriers" of the Energy of the Sun, as being contrary to the conception
of Science that the Sun radiates Energy _in all directions equally_,
just as does a piece of hot iron, or a lamp. Answering this objection,
the writer would say that there is a decided difference in the two
cases. The iron or lamp radiates its heat and light to the particles of
the surrounding air and other Substance in close distance, the "lines"
being very close together,--so close in fact that they seem to be
continuous and having no space between them, at least no Space
sufficiently large to be detected by the eye of Man, or his instruments.
But with the Sun the case is different, for the distances are greater
and the lines spread apart as the distance is increased. Draw a diagram
of many fine rays emanating from a central point, and you will have the
idea at once. If Space were filled with Substance, just as is the
Atmosphere of the Earth--the Air, is meant of course--then indeed would
the lines practically be joined together, but as Space between the
worlds is almost devoid of Substance, the lines between the Sun and the
other worlds, and planets, spread out rapidly as the distance from the
Sun increases.

To show how this objection is really an additional proof of the Theory
the writer begs to call your attention to the fact that according to the
calculations of the physicists in Science, the Sun's energy would have
been exhausted in 20,000,000 years, granting that it was dispersed
equally in all directions during that time. But, _note this_, Science in
its other branches, namely in Geology, etc., holds that the Sun already
has been throwing out energy for 500,000,000 or more years, and seems
able to stand the strain for many millions of years more. Thus Science
is arrayed against Science. Does not this Theory harmonize the two, by
showing that the Sun does _not_ emanate Energy in _all_ directions,
equally, and at all times--but, on the contrary radiates Energy _only
along the lines of Gravitation, and in proportion to the relative
distances and sizes of the bodies to whom such Energy is radiated_?

The writer need scarcely state that in the short space at his disposal,
in the pages of this book, he has been able merely to outline his Theory
of Dynamic Force, as applied to the Inorganic World. The patience of the
average reader has limits--and he must pass on to other features of the
workings of the theory, namely the Mental Life of Man, in which the same
laws are manifested. But, he feels that those interested in the phases
of the subject touched upon, may explain for themselves the missing
details by reference to the teachings of Modern Science on the subjects
of Physics, remembering, _always_, to substitute the Theory of Dynamic
Thought for the "Ether" theory that Modern Science borrows from
Aristotle as a temporary "makeshift." The writer believes that this
Theory will account for many of the missing links in Physics--a broad
statement, he knows, and one either extremely impudent or superbly
confident, according to the view-point of the critic.

       *       *       *       *       *

The writer may be able to throw a little additional light, probably,
upon the question of the relation between Gravitation, and the
Excitement-waves of Radiant Energy. Without attempting to go into
details, he wishes to suggest that in view of the fact that the
Particles are connected by the "Lines of Gravitation," any great,
extended, and rapid disturbance of a number of Particles would cause a
series of undulating or wave-like movements in the "lines," which might
be spoken of as waves of "Agitation or Unrest" in the Lines of
Gravitation. This Agitation, or Unrest, of course, would be thus
communicated to all other Particles toward whom lines extended, the
intensity or effect of such Agitation or Unrest depending upon the
relative distances, and the number of Particles involved. We may easily
imagine how the intense and high rate of vibration among the Particles
of the Sun, manifesting as intense Heat, would cause a like high degree
of Agitation or Unrest among the Lines of Gravitation--the "lines"
dancing backward and forward; around and about; following the movements
of the Particles, and thus producing "waves" of Gravitational Agitation
and Unrest, which when communicated to the Particles of the Earth, would
produce a similar Excitement among the Particles of the latter. In the
same way the "Sun-spots," and consequent terrestial electrical
disturbance may be explained.

While not absolutely tying himself to this particular conception of the
details of the workings of the law, the writer feels free to say that
he considers it a very reasonable idea, and one that in all probability
will be found to come nearer to explaining the phenomena, than any other
hypothesis. It certainly coincides with the "undulatory wave" theory of
Science. The idea is but crudely expressed here, for lack of space, it
being impossible to attempt to go into details--the mere mention of
general principles being all that is possible at this time and place.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, for a few additional words on the subject of our theory that in
place of the hypothetical Ether of Science--a Substance that is not
Substance--there exists a great Ocean of Cosmic Mind. The idea is not
without coroborative proof in the direction of the thought of advanced
thinkers even among the ranks of Science.

While Science has accustomed the public to the idea that in the
Universal Ether might be found the origin of Matter--the essence of
Energy--the secret of Motion--it has not spoken of "Mind," in connection
with this Universal Something. But the idea is not altogether new, and
some daring Scientific thinkers have placed themselves on record
regarding same. Let us quote from a few of them--it will make smoother
our path.

_Edward Drinker Cope_, in several of his writings, hinted at the idea
that _the basis of Life and Consciousness lay back of the Atoms, and
might be found in the Universal Ether_.

_Dolbear_ says: "_Possibly the Ether may be the medium through which
Mind and Matter react_."

_Hemstreet_ says: "_Mind in the Ether is no more unnatural than Mind in
flesh and blood_."

_Stockwell_ says: "The Ether is coming to be apprehended as an
_immaterial_, superphysical substance, filling all space, carrying in
its infinite throbbing bosom the specks of aggregated dynamic force
called worlds. _It embodies the ultimate spiritual principle_, and
represents the unity of those forces and energies from which spring, as
their source, all phenomena, physical, _mental and spiritual_, as they
are known to man."

_Dolbear_ speaks of the Ether as a substance, which, besides the
function of energy and motion, has other inherent properties "_out of
which could emerge, under proper circumstances, other phenomena, such as
life, or mind or whatever may be in the substratum_."

_Newton_ spoke of it as a "_subtle spirit, or immaterial substance_."
_Dolbear_ says: "The Ether--the properties of which _we vainly strive to
interpret in the terms of Matter_, the undiscovered properties of which
ought to warn every one against the danger of strongly asserting what
is possible and what is impossible in the nature of things."

_Stockwell_ says: "That the Ether _is not Matter in any of its forms_,
practically all scientists are agreed. _Dolbear_, again, says: If the
Ether that fills all space is not atomic in structure, presents no
friction to bodies moving through it, and is not subject to the law of
gravitation, it _does not seem proper to call it Matter_. One might
speak of it as a substance if he wants another name for it. As for
myself, I make _a sharp distinction between the Ether and Matter_, and
feel somewhat confused to hear one speak of the Ether as Matter."

And yet, in spite of the above expressions, no Scientist has dared to
say in plain words that the Ether, or whatever took the place of the
Ether, _must be Mind_, although several seem to be on the verge of the
declaration, but apparently afraid to voice their thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

In view of what we have seen in our consideration of the facts and
principles advanced in this chapter, we are invited to consider the
following two Supplemental Propositions:

SUPPLEMENTAL PROPOSITION III.--_Connecting each Particle of Substance
with each and every other Particle of Substance, there exists "lines" of
Mental Connection, the "thickness" of which depends upon the distance
between the two particles, decreasing in proportion as the distance is
increased. These "lines" may be considered as "conditions" of the great
Ocean of Cosmic Mind which pervades and fills all Space, including the
essence or inner being of the Particles of Substance, as well as the
space between the said Particles. These "lines" are the "Lines of
Gravitation," by and over which the phenomenon of Gravitation is
manifested. These Lines of Gravitation have always existed between each
Particle and every other Particle, and have persisted continuously and
constantly, throughout all the changes of condition, and position, and
relation, that the Particles have undergone. There is no "passage" or
"transmission" of Energy or Force of Gravitation over these lines, or
any other channel, but, on the contrary the Energy or Force of
Gravitation is a constant and continuous Mental Connection or Bond
existing between the Mind of the Particles, rather than between their
Substance or Material._

SUPPLEMENTAL PROPOSITION IV.--_The Lines of Gravitation, mentioned in
the preceding proposition, are the medium over which travel, or are
transmitted the "Thought-waves" resulting from the Excitement of the
Particles, and by which waves the "Mental States" are communicated or
transmitted. The same medium transmits or carries the Mental Force of
Attraction--Cohesion, Chemical Affinity, etc., evidencing in the
relation of the Particles to each other. Thus Gravitation not only
performs its own work, but also acts as a "common carrier" for the
"waves of Excitement," manifesting as Radiant Energy; and the waves of
Desire-Force, manifesting as Attractive Energy._

       *       *       *       *       *

And here, the writer rests his case in the action in the Forum of
Advanced Thought, entitled "_The Theory of Dynamic Thought vs. The
Theory of Aristotle's Ether_," in which he appears for the Plaintiff. He
begs that you, the members of the jury, will give to the evidence, and
argument, due consideration, to the end that you may render a just
verdict.




