CHAPTER II

THINGS AS THEY ARE


In our last chapter we considered the Source-of-All-Things, which we
called The Infinite. In this chapter we shall consider the All-Things
itself, which men call The Universe. Note that the word Universe is
derived from the Latin word "Unus," meaning "One," and "_Versor_,"
meaning "to turn," the combined word meaning, literally, "One that
turns, or moves." The Latin words indicate a close meaning, namely, One
thing in motion, turning its several aspects, and assuming many changes
of appearance.

The writer does not intend touching upon theories of the origin of the
Universe, nor of its purpose, or of any design in its production or
management, nor of its possible or probable end. These questions do not
belong to our subject, and then again, as was said in the last chapter,
speculation regarding it is devoid of results, and leads one to
quicksands and bogs of mental reasoning, from which it is difficult to
extract oneself. The answer to the Riddle of the Universe rests with The
Infinite.

But it is different with the case of the manifested Universe that is
evidenced by our senses. Science is a different thing from metaphysics,
and its process and mode of work are along different lines. And, much
knowledge of Things may be obtained from a consideration of
it--remembering always, that its knowledge is confined to Things, and
not to That-which-is-back-of-Things. And, so let us consider the
Universe of Things.

Material Science has held that the Universe is composed of two
principles, (1) Matter; (2) Energy or Force. Some hold that these two
principles really are aspects of the same thing, and that there is
really but one Principle, one aspect of which is shape, form, etc., and
called Matter; the other a quality manifesting in Motion, which quality
is called Force. Others, the most radical, hold that there is nothing
but Matter, and that Force and Energy is but a "quality," or "power,"
inherent in Matter. Others hold that Force is the "real thing" and
Matter but a form of Force. All branches hold to the idea that Matter
and Energy are always found together, and can not be thought of
separately. Matter and Force are held to be Eternal, and Infinite, it
following that there can be no addition to, or subtraction from either;
all apparent loss and gain, creation and destruction being but change of
form or mode. God is declared unnecessary, and the Universe is held to
operate according to certain Laws of Matter or Force (either or both)
which are unchangeable and immutable--eternal and always valid. Mind and
Thought are held to be products of properties of Matter or Force (one or
both), secreted, evolved, or produced in the Brain. The Soul is
relegated to the waste heap, and discarded as useless in the new
philosophy. _Moleschott_ said, "Thought is a motion of Matter"; and
_Holbach_, that "Matter enjoys the power of thinking." "Natural Laws"
are held to be sufficient for the explanation of all phenomena, although
ignoring the fact that the reason has never before formed the conception
of a "law," without thinking it necessary to think of a "law-maker," or
a power to enforce and administer the law. However, the philosophers
hold that it is no more difficult to think of such a law than to try to
form an idea of Space or Eternity, both of which are unthinkable to the
human reason, but both of which are admitted as self-evident facts.

But notwithstanding this somewhat crude and "raw" reasoning, Material
Science has accomplished a wonderful work in the world, and has brought
to light facts of inestimable value to Man in mastering the material
world, and in forming correct ideas of the solution of material
difficulties. The facts of Material Science enables the world to
cheerfully overlook its theories. And even the theories are rapidly
undergoing a change, and, as we have stated, some of the most advanced
scientists are rapidly reaching the position of the Occultists and
mystics, bringing with them a mass of facts to back them up, to exhibit
to the Occultists who dealt with principles rather than with details, or
material facts, so far as fundamental theories were concerned. Each is
boring his way through the mountain tunnel of the Unknown, and both will
meet in the centre, their lines meeting each other without a variation.
But the Occultists will call the tunnel-centre Mind, and the scientists
will call it Matter, but both will be speaking of the same thing. And
the Causer of the mountain will probably know that they both are right.

But, we are speaking of the new school of advanced Material Science
now--not of the old conservative "All is Matter" people, who have been
left behind. The new school speaks of Substance now, instead of Matter,
and ascribes to "Substance" the properties of Matter, Energy, and
something that they call Sensation, by which they mean Mind in a crude
form, and from which they say Mind and "Soul" evolved.

This new school of Scientists are very different from their
predecessors--they are less "hide-bound," and far from being so
"cock-sure." They are seeing Matter melting into Energy, and giving
signs of Sensation, and they are beginning to feel that, after all,
there must be a Thing-in-Itself, that is the real basis of, or "real
thing" in Substance. There is heard very little among them about "dead
matter"; "blind force"; or of the "mechanical theory" of Life and the
Universe. Instead of it being a big machine, operated under mechanical
laws, with Life as the steam, the Universe is beginning to be regarded
as somehow filled with Life, and Science is finding new examples of Life
in unexpected quarters, and the "dead matter" area is being narrowed.

Men who have followed the advances made by recent Science are holding
their breaths in awe and earnest expectation--and those who are pushing
the inquiries and investigations to the furthest extent are showing by
their eager faces and trembling hands that they feel that they are very
close to the border line separating the old Materialism from a New
Science that will give Thought and Philosophy a new impetus and a new
platform. Such men are feeling that they are seeing the old Matter
melting away into something else--the old theories are falling apart
under the light of new discoveries--and these men feel that they are
penetrating a new and hitherto unexplored region of the Unknown. May
success be theirs, for they are now on the right road to Truth.

In the following chapters we shall see frequent references to
"Science"--and when we use the word we shall know it means this new
school of Scientists, rather than the older school that is now being
superceded. There is no conflict between True Occultism and True
Science, notwithstanding their directly opposite theories and
ideals--they are merely looking at the Truth from different
viewpoints--at different sides of the same shield. A better day is
coming, when they shall work together, instead of in opposition. There
should be no partisanship in the search for Truth.

Things have worked this way: Occultism would enunciate a theory or
principle--but would not attempt to prove it by material facts, for it
had not gathered the facts, having found the principle _within_ the
mind, rather than without. Then, after laughing at the occult theory or
principle, Science would search diligently for material facts to prove
an opposite theory, and in so doing would unearth new facts that would
support the Occultists contention. Then Science would discard its old
theory (that is, the younger men would--the old ones, never) and proceed
to proclaim a new theory or principle, under a new name, and backed up
with a mass of facts and experiments that would create a new school with
many enthusiastic followers. The old claim of the Occultists would then
be forgotten or else go unrecognized under its old name; or disguised by
the fantastic and _bizarre_ coverings which some so-called Occultists
had draped around the original Truth.

But, so long as Truth is being uncovered, what matters it who does the
work, or by what name he calls his school. The movement is ever forward,
and upward--what matter the banner under which the armies move?

In this book the writer will advance a very different theory of the
Universe of All-Things from that of Modern Science, although he feels
that his theory may easily be reconciled with the most advanced views of
that school.

In the first place, as he has stated in the first chapter, he does not
hold that the Universe, as we know it, is self-sufficient, but he
recognizes a Something back of all phenomena and appearances, which
Something he calls "The Infinite."

And he differs very materially from the views of those who claim that
Mind is but a property, or quality, or something proceeding from Matter
or Force, or Matter-Force, or Force-Matter--according to the views of
the respective schools. He takes an entirely different and opposite
position.

He holds that all that we call Matter (or Substance) and Mind (_as we
know it_) are but aspects of something infinitely higher, and which may
be called the "Cosmic Mind." He holds that _what we call_ "Mind" is but
a partial manifestation of the Cosmic Mind. And that Substance or Matter
is but a cruder or grosser form of that which we call Mind, and which
has been manifested in order to give Mind a Body through which to
operate. But this view he merely states in passing, for he makes no
attempt to demonstrate or prove the same, his idea being that it forms a
different part of the general subject than the phase of "Dynamic
Thought," to the consideration of which this book is devoted.

He also differs very materially from the Materialistic school in his
conception of Force or Energy. Instead of regarding Force as a distinct
principle, and as something of which Mind is but a form, he walks boldly
out into the arena of Scientific Thought, and throwing down his
gauntlet, proclaims his theory that "There is no such thing as Force
apart from Life and Mind"--"All Force and Energy is the product of Life
and Mind--all Force, Energy and Motion result from Vital-Mental
Action--all Force, Energy and Motion is Vital-Mental Force, Energy and
Motion."--"The Mind abiding in and permeating all Substance, not only
has the power to Think, but also the power to Act, and to manifest Force
and Energy, which are its inherent and essential properties."

He also takes the position that Mind is in and about and around
Everything. And that "Everything is Alive and Thinking." And that there
is no such things as "Dead-Matter," or "Blind-Force," but that all
Substance, even to the tiniest Particle, is permeated with Life and
Mind, and that all Force and Motion is caused and manifested by Mind.

He holds that all forms of Force, Energy and Motion, from the Attraction
of the Particles of Matter, and their movements in response thereto, up
to the Attraction of Gravitation, and the response of the Worlds, and
Suns, and Stars, and Planets, thereto--are forms of Mental Energy and
Force, and Action. And that from the tiniest atom, or particle, to the
greatest Sun--all obey this Great Action of Mind--this Great Force of
Mind--this Great Energy of Mind--this Great Power of Mind.

And upon this rock--this rock of Truth, he believes it to be--he takes
his stand, and announces his belief, and bids all-comers take notice of
what he believes to be a germ-thought that will grow, develop, and
increase so that it will eventually permeate all Scientific Thought as
the years roll along. He calls this theory "The Theory of Dynamic
Thought."




