CHAPTER V

THE STORY OF SUBSTANCE


As we stated in a former chapter, there are two Aspects of All-Things,
_viz._, (1) Substance; (2) Mind. In this and the following two chapters
we shall consider the first one, Substance, which Science calls
"Matter."

Perhaps it would be as well to begin by asking ourselves the question:
"What is Substance?" The answer seems to be: "Anything that takes up
room; the Body aspect of Things; matter occupying space, etc." Some
writers have spoken of Substance as "something tangible--that can be
felt," but this definition will not do, for there are forms of Substance
too fine to be felt. And so, perhaps the definition "The Body of
Things," is as good a definition as any, taken in connection with the
thought that it "takes up room."

Science divides Substance (which it calls "Matter") into four general
classes, _viz._: (1) _Solid Matter_, which is Substance, the parts of
which closely adhere and resist impression, such as stone, wood, flesh,
etc., the degrees of solidity varying greatly, and sometimes shading
into the next class, which is called:

(2) _Liquid Matter_, which may be described as Substance, the parts of
which have a free motion among themselves, and easily yield to
impression, such as water, molasses, etc., the degree of fluidity
ranging from some liquids that flow very slowly, such as hot pitch, up
to others that flow very freely, such as water, wine, etc., the property
of fluidity being also shared by the next higher class, which is called:

(3) _Aeriform Matter_, which is Substance in the form of "elastic
fluid," such as air, gas, vapor, etc.; and

(4) _Radiant Matter_, which is of recent recognition, and which is an
ultra-gaseous form of Substance, utterly unlike anything ever before
known, consisting of the tiniest particles of "corpuscles" of Substance
finer and more subtle than the rarest form of atomic substance known to
Science.

The three classes are well represented by (1) Earth (solid); (2) Water
(liquid); (3) Air (aeriform); (4) The Corpuscles or Electrons, or
particles of electrified substance, first noticed in connection with the
X Rays, Radium, etc.

But it must be remembered that these four classes of Substance are not
fixed or permanent--on the contrary they are changeable either under
pressure, when subjected to heat, or under the influence of electricity,
etc. In fact the word "condition" is more applicable than the term
"class." The condition or class of a particle of Substance may be
changed into another class or condition by the application of the
agencies above named. The same substance may exist in two or three
classes, under different circumstances. Solids may be changed into
liquids, and liquids into gases, and _vice versa_. Metals may be melted,
then changed into gas, according to the degree of heat applied. Liquids
may be changed into vapor by the application of heat, or into solids by
the withdrawal of heat.

For an example we may turn to Water, which is a solid in the condition
of ice; a liquid in the condition of water; and steam in the condition
of vapor. Quicksilver is a metal which is in a liquid condition in our
ordinary temperature, but which becomes a solid when subjected to a very
low degree of temperature, and may be transformed into a gas, under a
high degree of heat. Air is a vapor in our ordinary temperature, but has
been transformed into "liquid air" under tremendous pressure, which
produced a very low degree of temperature, and, theoretically, it may be
transformed into a solid under a sufficiently low degree of
temperature, although so far, Science has not been able to produce a
degree of cold sufficient to "freeze" the liquid air. It is all a matter
of "freeze," "melt," and "evaporate," in all forms of Substance--and any
substance, at least theoretically, is capable of being subjected to any
of the three conditions just named, and being manifested in the
respective conditions, of Solid, Liquid, and Aeriform.

This may actually be accomplished with the majority of substances at
this time, although in some instances we are not able to produce a
sufficiently high temperature to "melt and evaporate" certain solid
substances, on the one hand, or a sufficiently low degree of temperature
to "liquify" or "freeze solid" certain vapors. But the intense heat of
the centre of the earth is able to melt rocks, and show them as liquid
lava flowing from volcanoes, and Science teaches that the solid
Substance of the Earth, and other planets, suns, etc., existed in the
shape of a vapor at one time, and would again take on that condition in
case of a collision with another great body, which convert motion into
intense heat that would first melt, and then vaporize every solid
particle of which the earth is composed.

If the sun's heat were completely to die out, the cold would be so
intense that the air around the earth, and all the gases and vapors,
would be frozen to solids. In physics the term "gas" is generally
applied to a substance that is aeriform in our ordinary temperature, but
which may be liquefied in a low temperature; the term "vapor" being
generally applied to the aeriform condition of substances that are solid
or liquid in our ordinary temperatures, but which may be "evaporated" by
heat, and thus transformed into an aeriform condition, resuming their
original form upon cooling. These terms, however, are technical, and
practically there is no difference between a gas and a vapor.

In the above statements regarding the possibility of the transformation
of each of the several forms of Substance, into other forms, the
reference has been applied only to the three better known forms, _i.e._,
Solid, Liquid and Aeriform. The fourth form or state of Substance, known
as Radiant Matter, is of too recent discovery to admit of its properties
being accurately observed. The best and latest opinion of Science,
however, is that it constitutes what may be called "Primal Matter"--that
is substance from which all other forms, states, kinds and varieties of
Substance arise--the "stuff" from which they are manufactured. Science
seems to be discarding the Ether theory of the Origin of Matter, in
favor of this "Primal Matter."

Physical Science divides Substance into Masses, Molecules, and
Atoms--that is, the old Physical Science did, but the later
investigators now see that even the Atom may be sub-divided. But the old
terms may as well be used, at least for the time being. Let us consider
these divisions.

_A "Mass"_ is a quantity of Substance considered as a whole--but which
is composed of a collection or combination of parts (molecules.) A lump
of coal; a piece of iron; a portion of meat, even a drop of water, is a
Mass. The only requisite for a Mass, is that it contains two or more
parts or molecules. Therefore a Mass is a collection or combination of
two or more molecules, considered as a whole.

_A "Molecule"_ is the _physical_ unit of Substance, or, in other words,
the smallest part of any kind of Substance that can exist by itself and
still remain that particular "kind" of substance. (But not the smallest
chemical part--the latter is called an Atom, and Atoms combine to form a
Molecule.) The Molecule exists as a unit, and cannot be split or
separated by physical means, although it may be separated into Atoms by
chemical means. In order that we may form a clear idea of the Molecule,
let us take a very small Mass of Matter--a drop of water, for instance.
This drop of water is a Mass composed of a great number of molecules. It
may be divided, and sub-divided, into smaller and still smaller parts.
This division may be carried on until it reaches a point where our sight
and instruments are unable to make a further sub-division.

But, theoretically, the work may be carried on still further, until at
last a limit is reached where we are unable to divide the water into any
smaller parts, without separating its chemical constituents from each
other, in which latter case there would be no water at all, its chemical
constituents (or Atoms) having separated and now appearing as two atoms
of Hydrogen and one atom of Oxygen, separated and apart and no longer
forming a molecule of water.

Well, this smallest possible part of water (or any other form of
Substance) is a Molecule. Remember the Molecule is the smallest part of
that kind of Substance that can be produced by division and
sub-division, without destroying the "kind" of the Substance. It is the
smallest part of any kind of Substance that can exist by itself, and
maintain its "kind."

In order that you may grasp the minuteness of the Molecule, we may
mention that Science claims that no molecule, even the largest, is of
sufficient magnitude to be seen under even the strongest microscope. It
has been calculated that if a drop of water as large as a pea were
magnified to the size of the Earth, the molecules would then appear no
larger than the original drop. The space between the molecules is
believed to be considerably larger than the molecules themselves.

The figures that are necessary to use in connection with molecular
Substance are likely to stagger the imagination. Besides speaking of the
molecules of inorganic Substance, it may be interesting to note that a
spider's thread is so fine that a piece of it large enough to circle the
earth would weigh only half a pound. And yet each thread is composed of
six thousand filaments. And each of these minute filaments may be
divided into tiny bits, and each bit will still be a Mass of Substance
containing thousands of molecules and their constituent chemical atoms.
There are living, microscopic creatures, so small that five millions of
them might be crowded into a space the size of a pin head. And yet each
of them have organs. And in these organs fluids circulate. Try to figure
out the size of the molecules of the fluids circulating in these tiny
organs, not to speak of the chemical atoms.

When you handle a coin, an infinitesimal portion of it is worn off--can
you figure the size of the molecules composing that part? When a rose
throws off its perfume, it emanates tiny particles of itself--can you
measure or weigh the molecules composing that odor? The human mind is
compelled to realize its finiteness when it considers these things--but
we have only just begun to consider the smallness of Things.

_An "Atom"_ is the _chemical_ unit of Substance--that is, the smallest
chemical part that can enter into combination. It has been considered
indivisible--that is, incapable of further sub-division. That is, it has
been so considered, until very recently, but the latest discoveries have
exploded this idea, and have shown the Atom is composed of certain other
Things, as we shall see a little later on. Still we may use the Atom as
a very good unit of measurement, for it still represents the unit of
_chemical_ Substance, just as the molecule is the unit of _physical_
Substance. In order that you may understand the difference between
Molecules and Atoms--physical units, and chemical units, let us give you
a few examples.

Take a molecule of water--the _physical_ unit, you remember. When it is
chemically separated or analyzed, it is found to contain two atoms of
hydrogen, and one atom of oxygen--both chemical units, remember--which
when united and combined, form water, but which when separated are
simple atoms of certain chemical gases. The proportion in water is
always the same, two of hydrogen and one of oxygen--this is the only
partnership that will form water. The molecule of table salt contains
one atom of sodium and one of chlorine. The molecule of air contains
five chemical gases, of which nitrogen and oxygen are the principal
ones, the proportion being about three parts of nitrogen to one of
oxygen. Some molecules are far more complex, for instance the molecule
of sugar is composed of _forty-five_ chemical atoms, and sulphuric acid
of seven. An atom is estimated at one-250,000,000th of an inch in
diameter.

But this is not all. The old theory of the finality, and ultimateness of
the Atom has been shattered by the recent discoveries of Science. The
atom of Hydrogen was formerly considered to be the refinement of
Substance--the Ultimate Atom--the smallest and finest Atom possible or
known--the last thing that could be imagined about Substance. Some even
went so far as to declare that the Atom of Hydrogen was the Ultimate
Element, that is the Element out of which all other atoms were
made--the mother of Atoms--the Origin of Substance. It was supposed
that all other Atoms of Matter were composed of a varying number of
hydrogen Atoms, which themselves were "vortex-rings in the Ether"--and
that analysis could go no further. Science rested on its oars, and
pronounced the work of a century completed.

But alas! no sooner was this position reached, than the discovery of
Radiant Matter and the formulation of the "Corpuscle Theory" brought
down the whole theoretical structure, and Science was compelled to take
up the hunt again, and to probe further into the inner recesses of
Things for the Ultimate Thing. But, nevertheless, Atoms still exist,
although their finality is no longer urged. The facts remain, although
the theory has fallen.

Let us see about this latest theory--the Corpuscle or Electron Theory.
The discovery of Radiant Matter, and the investigation of the late
discovery of Radium, has led to the further discovery that each Atom,
instead of being a "thing-in-itself" is a little mass containing
numerous other "Things" called "Corpuscles" (or "Electrons," because
electrified). The theory is this, briefly: That each Atom is a minute
mass of Substance containing a number of "electrified particles," which
are known as Electrons, in constant motion and vibration, revolving
around each other, as do the planets, suns, and moons of the
Universe--in fact each chemical Atom is like unto a Universe in itself.
The simplest Atom--that which was supposed to be the "Ultimate
Atom"--the Atom of Hydrogen--is supposed to contain within its tiny self
no less than 1,000 minute Corpuscles, which because electrified are
called "Electron," revolving in fixed and regular orbits within the
containing globe of the Atom. The more complex forms of Atoms are
supposed to contain a far greater number of Electrons, the authorities
estimating those in an Atom of Oxygen at 10,000; those in an Atom of
Gold, 100,000; and those in an Atom of Radium, 150,000. These figures
are of course mere "scientific guesses" but when compared with the
similar "guess" regarding the size of the Atom, they give a startling
illustration of the size of the newly discovered Corpuscle or Electron.

Another authority, for an illustration, asks us to consider a great
globe about 100 feet in diameter--that is, of course, 100 feet through
its centre. Let the globe represent the Atom. Then imagine 1,000 minute
"specks," each the size of a pin-point, composed of Substance, and each
containing, as in a capsule, an atom of electricity. Each "speck" is
revolving around each other in a regular orbit, in that great "100 feet
through" globe, and keeping well away from one another. That will give
you an idea of the relative size of the Electrons and Atoms, and the
room that the former have to move about in--good many feet between each,
you will notice. Lots of room, and plenty to spare. Try to figure out
the size of an Electron.

Many readers of the magazines have been confused as to the relation
between the Corpuscles and the Electrons (or Ions, as some have called
the latter.) The matter is very simple. They are both the same. The
Corpuscle is the tiny particle of Matter, which because it is
electrified and has thus become the "unit of electricity," is called an
"Electron." From the viewpoint of Substance we call the tiny particle a
"Corpuscle"--from the viewpoint of Electricity, we call it an
"Electron."

These Electrons are the tiny particles that pour forth from the pole in
the Crookes' Tube, and constitute what are known as "X Rays," "Cathode
Rays," "Becquerel Rays," etc. They also are the particles that are
thrown off and emitted by Radium, and similar substances. They exist in
the Atom, as explained, but also are found "free" and independent, and
in the last condition or state are thrown off in the aforesaid "Rays,"
and by Radium, etc. So far the Corpuscles are known only as charged
with Electricity, and the Electron only as a tiny charge of Electricity
with which the Corpuscle is charged. But Science dreams of Corpuscles of
Substance other than Electrons, in which case the old Occult teachings
of "light dust" and "heat dust," etc., will be verified.

The Electron contains a powerful charge of Electricity, as much in fact
as an Atom, 1,000 to 150,000 times its size will carry. But Science is
wondering how these highly charged particles manage to hold together in
the Atom, so rigidly coherent as to appear indestructible. We think that
we may get a hint at the matter a little later on in this book.

Science, or at least _some_ scientists, are wondering whether the
"whirl" or vibration of the Corpuscle might not produce that which we
call "Electricity," and whether, when this motion is intensified, waves
of Electricity will not be emitted. The writer fully agrees with this
idea, and finds that it fits closely his own theories regarding
Substance and Motion. But the reader is cautioned against falling into
the error of many recent popular writers on the subject, some of whom
have used terms calculated to convey the idea that the Corpuscle
(Electron) is Electricity _itself_, rather than tiny particles of
Substance called Corpuscles, charged with the unitary charge of
Electricity, and therefore called "Electrons." But for that matter,
Electricity is only known to us as associated with some form of
Substance, and not as "a thing-in-itself." We shall see the reason for
this as we proceed with this book. These Corpuscles are destined to play
a most important part in the theories of Science from now on. They
already have overturned several very carefully and laboriously erected
theoretical structures--and many more will follow, among the many
important ones evidently doomed to the dust-heap being the "vortex-ring"
atomic theory, and other theories built upon the Etheric origin of
Matter, and other theories concerning the Ether, even to the extent of
breaking down the theory of The Ether itself, which theory had almost
come to be considered a Law.

We shall further consider the Corpuscles, and their qualities,
characteristics, etc., in the next chapter, for they have an important
bearing upon the theories advanced in the course of the study of this
book.




