CHAPTER XII

THE LAW OF VIBRANT ENERGY


In previous chapters we have seen that the phenomena of Radiant Energy,
known as Light, Heat, Magnetism and Electricity, had their origin in the
Motion of the Particles, the different classes of phenomena depending
upon the particular degree and nature of the aforesaid Motion of
Particles.

We have seen also that Radiant Energy could be communicated or
transmitted from one body of Substance to another. And that the
communication of transmission might be accomplished not only by close
contact of the bodies, but by "waves" of some sort which were caused in
some "medium" (the Ether) by the vibrations of the Particles of the
body, and which "waves," when they reached the other body, were
transformed into vibrations of the Particles corresponding to those
manifested in the first body. The idea has been illustrated by the
sending telephone, the sound waves in the diaphragm of which were
transformed into waves of the Electric current, and thus passing along
the wires were transformed again into sound-waves by the diaphragm of
the receiving instrument.

We have seen, also in the preceding chapter, that the medium by which
these vibrations were transferred, transmitted, or communicated, might be
supposed to be Mind, the operation being akin to Thought-transference. Now
let us examine into the workings of the matter.

In the first place, we assume a certain state of vibration, existing in
a certain body of Substance--Heat, or Electricity for instance (either
illustration will answer.) Another body of Substance is brought in close
contact with the first body, and the vibrations of Energy pass on to the
second, not by "waves" but by a seeming actual passing of vibrations
without the need of intervening "waves." This, Science calls
transmission by Conduction, the theory being that the particles rapidly
"pass on" the vibrations from one to another. Convection or conduction
along other forms of Substance, such as hot-air, hot-water-steam, etc.,
is but a variation of the above, as Substance is the medium in both
cases. The third form of transmission is by Radiation, whereby the
vibrations are transmitted by "waves" in some medium other than
Substance (according to the theory), as we have described in a
preceding paragraph, as well as in previous chapters. As a matter of
fact, a careful analysis of the matter will show that even in the
"Conduction" of the most solid Substance, there must be a "_medium not
Substance_" between the Particles of the Substance, _for the Particles
always have Space between them_--this being true of the Particles of
Air, as well as those of Iron. _So there is always Space to be traversed
by a "medium not Substance."_ But we need not stop to split-hairs
regarding this question, for the general explanation will explain this
also.

Now, to get back to our body of Substance vibrating with Radiant Energy,
separated from a second body of Substance by a great distance--thousands
of miles in fact--millions would be better--let us take two worlds, for
instance--the Sun and the Earth. Ignoring for the moment the explanation
of Gravitations (which will be given later) and realizing that there _is
no medium of Substance_ existing between the two bodies, we must grant
that there is a "_medium not Substance_" existing between them, either
permanently or thrown out for the purpose of this special transmission.
We shall assume a medium existing before the need of the transmission
(for reasons to be seen later.) Our Theory of Dynamic Thought, and
Thought-Transference between bodies of Substance, compels us to suppose
that this medium _is a Mental Connection, or Mental Relation, existing
between the two bodies of Substance_. So, we must consider the question
of this medium of Mind transmitting the vibrations of Radiant Energy
from the Sun to the Earth. How can Mind conduct Radiant Energy? _It does
not conduct Radiant Energy_, but it does _transmit_--not Radiant
Energy--but the _Mental State that causes Radiant Energy Vibrations_.

This statement of a "Mental State causing Radiant Energy Vibrations"
seems rather startling at first sight--but let us examine it. We have
seen that the Radiant Energy was caused by the Motion or Vibrations of
the Particles, which Motion or Vibration was the result of the workings
of the Law of Attraction, and which Law was but the manifestation of
Vital-Mental Action. And, at the last, the Vibrations of Radiant Energy
are the result of peculiar or particular "states" of the Life and Mind
of the Particle. The word "State" is derived from the Latin word
_Status_, meaning "position; standing," and is used generally in the
sense of "condition."

This Mental State of the Particle may be described as a state of
"_Emotional Excitement_." Let us pause a moment to consider the meaning
of these words--it often helps us to understand a subject, if we examine
the real meaning of the words defining it. "Emotion" is derived from the
Latin word _Emotum_, meaning "to shake; to stir up"--the Latin word
being made up of two other words, _i.e._, _E_, meaning "out"; and Motum,
"to move." "Emotion" is defined as "a moving or excitement of the mind."
"Excitement" is derived from the Latin word _Excitare_, meaning "to move
out"--the English word being defined as "a calling to Activity; state of
Active feeling; aroused Activity." So you see that the idea of _Active
Motion_, and _Aroused Activity_, of Mind, permeates the term "Emotional
Excitement," that is used by the writer in connection with the Mental
State causing vibration of the Particles of Substance. The single word,
"Excitement," will be used by the writer, hereafter, in the above
connection, in order to avoid complex terms. To those who still object
to the use of a mental term in reference to motion of Substance, he
might remark that Science makes use of the term--"Excite," and
"Excitement"--in reference to Electrical phenomena, so that he is not
altogether without support in the use of the word.

Now to return again to our body of Substance--the Sun--the Particles of
which are manifesting a great degree of "Excitement," evidencing in
Vibrations producing the phenomenon of Radiant Energy. The excitement is
shared equally by its Particles, the "contagion" having spread among
them. Even the Particles of its atmosphere are vibrating with
Excitement, and evidencing Radiant Energy. The Sun is in direct Mental
Connection with the Earth (as we shall see presently) and the Excitement
is transmitted by Thought-Transference (along this Mental Connection) in
the shape of Dynamic Thought-waves of Excitement. These waves have a
rate of speed of 184,000 miles per second--why this particular rate, or
any rate at all, is not apparent; it being very evident, however, that
this particular kind of Mental Action--Excitement, or Thought--is not
transmitted _instantaneously_ as is the Mental Quality known as Desire,
resulting in Attraction, or Gravitation, which seems to be rather a
Basic quality, rather than a temporary disturbance or emotional
excitement. But the writer must not get ahead of his story.

The Excitement of the Particles of Substance composing the Sun is
"contagious," and the Thought-waves travel along the Mental Connection,
or medium, at a wonderful rate of speed. Soon they come in contact with
the Mental Atmosphere of the Earth and the Excitement becomes manifest
in Action, the Emotional Excitement being reproduced by the Particles of
the Earth's Substance nearest the surface which vibrate and manifest the
Radiant Energy in spite of themselves, for the tendency among Particles
is to "settle down," and remain "calm," rather than to participate in
Emotional Excitement. They have acquired a normal and fixed rate of
Vibration, or Mental State, after many years, gradually changing from a
high state of Excitement, to a comparative calm state. And, their
tendency and inclination is Conservative, and they are disposed to
resent and repel Radical states of Excitement or Disturbance, coming
from other less Conservative Bodies.

The above fact partially explains why the communicated Excitement
manifests itself more strongly on the surface of the body "exposed" to
the contagion of Excitement. The Conservative influence is always at
work, and manages to absorb and equally distribute the Energy that is
beating down upon it, without allowing it to penetrate very far. The
Energy is used-up or absorbed, and neutralized by the lower vibrations
of the Mass. The effort of the Energy coming from the sending Body is to
"bring-up" the vibrations of the receiving body to the rate of the
sender; while the effort of the receiving body is to resist this
effort, and to reduce and "bring-down" the transmitted increased rate of
vibration of the Particles immediately exposed to the contagion. In both
cases the effort is toward "equalization" of the rate of vibrations.
This working of the law may be observed plainly in the case of Heat
vibrations--the Energy seeming to wish to "bring-up" the vibrations or
temperature of the second body, while the latter resists this effort,
and strives to "bring-down" the vibrations or temperature of those
Particles of itself that have "caught the Motion." The Energy is like a
Radical Agitator who wishes to stir up an Excitement, leading to "a
change," while the Body is like the Conservative element that prefers to
"let well enough alone," and resists the stirring-up process, and exerts
itself to restore quiet, and to maintain accustomed conditions.

The explanation of the phenomenon given in any work on Physics or
Natural Philosophy will answer fairly well in the consideration of this
Theory of Dynamic Thought, the only important change being required,
being the substitution of "Thought-waves" for "Waves of the Ether" of
Science. Science has described the "working operations," as might be
expected from her years of careful study and examination. She has erred
only in the Theory or Hypothesis advanced to account for the facts. Her
"Ether" handed down by Aristotle, is admitted by her to be paradoxical
and "unthinkable"--but she has had none other to substitute for it. She
will probably sneer at the Dynamic Thought, and Thought-Transference
theory advanced in this book--if indeed she takes the trouble to examine
it. But sometime, from her own ranks--among her most advanced
members--will arise a man who will claim that "All Force is Mental
Force," and that "Transference of Energy is Thought Transference." And
the Scientific World will accept the doctrine after it finds itself
unable to fight it down--and it will give new names and terms to its
workings. And it will proclaim loudly the "new" Truth. And this little
book, and its writer will be ignored--but its work will go on. The
writer although probably doomed to have himself and his theory laughed
at by the masses of people (whose children will accept the teachings of
this book) does not feel discouraged by the prospect. He cares nothing
for personal credit--the truth being the important thing. Like Galvini,
(whose words appear on the title page of this book) he may cry: "_I am
attacked by two very opposite sects--the scientists and the
know-nothings. Both laugh at me, calling me the 'Frog's Dancing Master,'
but I know that I have discovered one of the greatest Forces in
Nature._" The illustration given above of the transmission of the
Excitement of the Particles of the Sun to the Particles of the Earth,
will answer equally well in the case of Light, Heat, Magnetism and
Electricity. And it will answer in the case of the transmission of these
Forces between Atoms, Molecules, and Masses as well as between Worlds
and Solar Systems. Any bodies subject to the Law of Attraction may and
do, so transmit Vibrations. In our consideration of "The Riddle of the
Sphinx," which forms the subject of the next chapter, we shall obtain
further particulars of the workings of the Law.

The consideration of the facts and principles stated in this chapter
brings us to a second Supplemental Proposition, which may be stated as
follows:

SUPPLEMENTAL PROPOSITION II.--_The rates of vibration of the Particles
of Substance may be likened to "Mental States"; and a high degree of the
same may be called an "Excitement." This "Excitement" may be, and is,
communicated from the Particles of the body manifesting it, to the
Particles of other bodies--the medium of such communication being a
Mental Connection or Mental Relation existing between the two bodies of
Substance, without the employment of any material medium--and which
Excitement, so communicated, reproduces in the second body the
vibrations manifested in the first body, subject, always, to the
counteracting efforts of the second body to maintain its accustomed, and
former, rate of vibration, and Mental State._




