
  DYNAMIC THOUGHT

  OR

  THE LAW OF VIBRANT
  ENERGY

  BY

  WILLIAM WALKER ATKINSON


  _Author of "Thought Force;" "Law of the New Thought;" "Nuggets of
  the New Thought;" "Memory Culture" and other Scientific and
  Occult Works. Associate Editor of "Suggestion," 1900-01;
  Editor of "New Thought," 1901-05; Co-Editor
  of "The Segnogram," 1906._

  "I am attacked by two very opposite sects--the Scientists and the
  Know-Nothings; both laugh at me, calling me the 'Frogs' Dancing Master,'
  but I know that I have discovered one of the greatest Forces in Nature."
  --GALVINI.


  1906
  THE SEGNOGRAM PUBLISHING COMPANY
  LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA




Copyright 1906 By The Segnogram Publishing Company


NOTICE.--This book is protected by Copyright, and simultaneous initial
publication in the United States of America, Canada, Great Britain,
France, Germany, Russia, and other countries. All rights reserved.




A FOREWORD


This is a queer book. It is a marriage of the Ancient Occult Teachings
to the latest and most advanced conceptions of Modern Science--an odd
union, for the parties thereto are of entirely different temperaments.
The marriage might be expected to result disastrously, were it not for
the fact that a connecting link has been found that gives them a bond of
common interest. No two people may truly love each other, unless they
also love something in common--the more they love in common, the greater
will be their love for each other. And, let us trust that this will
prove true in this marriage of Occultism and Science, celebrated in this
book.

The Occultists usually get at the "facts," first, but they manage to
evolve such outrageous theories to explain the facts, that the world
will have none of their wares, and turns to Science for something
"reasonable." Science, proceeding along different lines, at first denies
these "facts" of the Occultists, not finding them accounted for by any
of her existing theories; but, later on, when the "facts" have been
finally thrust under her eyes, after repeated attempts and failures, she
says, "Oh, yes, of course!" and proceeds to evolve a new theory, welding
it with other scientific hypotheses, and after attaching a new label
thereto, she proudly exhibits the thing as "the latest discovery of
Modern Science"--and smiles indulgently, or indignantly, when the theory
of the old Occultists is mentioned, saying, "Quite a different thing, we
assure you!" And yet, in all justice, be it said, Science usually
proceeds to find much better "proofs" to fit the "facts" of Occultism,
than did the Occultists themselves. The Occultist "sees things," but is
a poor hand at "proofs"--while the Scientist is great on "proofs," but
so often, and so long, fails to see many things patent to the Occultist
who is able to "look within" himself, but who is then unable to
positively and scientifically "prove" the facts. This is easily
explained--the Occultist's information comes from "within," while the
Scientist's comes from without--and "proofs" belong to the "without"
side of Mentation. And this is why the Occultists so often make such a
bungle regarding "proofs" and the Scientist fails to see "facts" that
are staring the Occultist in the face.

The whole history of Occultism and Science proves the above. Take the
phenomenon called "Mesmerism" for instance--it was an old story with the
Occultists, who had been for years aware of it, theoretically and
practically. Mesmer brought it into general prominence, and Science
laughed at it and at Mesmer's "fluid" theory, and called him a charlatan
and imposter. Years afterwards, Braid, an English surgeon, discovered
that some of the facts of "Mesmerism" were true, and he announced his
discovery in a scientific manner, and lo! his views were accepted, and
the thing was called "Hypnotism," poor old Mesmer being forgotten,
because of his theory. Then, after a number of years, certain other
aspects of the phenomenon were discovered, and scientifically relabelled
"Suggestion," and the re-naming was supposed to "explain" the entire
subject, the learned ones now saying, "Pooh, 'tis nothing but
'Suggestion,'" as if _that_ explained the matter. But so far, they have
only accepted certain phases of this form of Dynamic Thought--for that
is what it is, and there are many other phases of which they do not
dream.

And the same is true of the Occult Teaching that there is "Life in
Everything--the Universe is Alive." For years, this idea was hooted at,
and we had learned scientific discourses upon "dead Matter," "inert
substance," etc. But, only within the past decade--yes, within the last
five years, has Science discovered that there was Life in Everything,
and that even in the Atom of mineral and chemical substance, there was
to be found evidence of Mind. And Science is beginning to plume itself
on its "recent discovery," and to account for it by a new theory, which
is "quite a different thing, we assure you," from the old Occult Theory.

And the same will prove true in the case of the Occult Teaching of an
Universal Mind, or Cosmic Mind. Science and Philosophy have long laughed
at this, but even now their foremost investigators have come to the
borders of a new country, and are gasping in amazement at what they see
beyond its borders--they are now talking about "Life and Mind in the
Ether"--and before long they will discard their paradoxical, absurd,
hypothetical Ether, and say, "We are bathed in an Ocean of Mind"--only
they will insist that this "Ocean of Mind" is, somehow, a "secretion of
Matter"--something oozing out from the pores of Matter, perhaps.

But Science is doing valuable work in the direction of investigation and
experiment, and in this way is _proving the principal occult teachings_
in a way impossible to the Occultists themselves.

So, you see that both Occultism and Science have their own work to
do--and neither can do the work of the other. Just now Science is
coquetting with the question of "Thought Transmission," etc., at which
she has for so long sneered and laughed. By and by she will accept the
facts, and then proceed to prove them by a series of careful and
conclusive experiments, and will then announce the result, solemnly, as
"a triumph of Science."

And so, in this book you will find a marriage of the old Occult
Teachings and Modern Scientific Researches and Investigation. And the
two are bound together with that bond forged by the writer of the
book--heated in the oven of his mind, and hammered into shape with his
"untrained" thought--a crude, clumsy thing, but it serves its purpose--a
thing called "_The Theory of Dynamic Thought_."

And so, this is what this Theory is--a "_tie that binds_." How you will
like it depends upon yourself. For himself, the writer does not hesitate
to say that he is pleased with his handiwork, rude, and clumsy though it
may be. He believes that he has made a thing that will stand wear and
tear, and that though it be not beautifully finished, it "will serve,"
and "be useful." And that is the main thing, after all. And, then,
perhaps, some may see beauty in the very crudeness of the thing--may see
that it bears the loving mark of the hammer that beat it into shape--may
recognize that over it has passed the caress of the hand that made
it--and in that seeing there may come the recognition of a beauty that
is beyond "prettiness."

    WILLIAM WALKER ATKINSON.

    _Los Angeles, California,
    February 16, 1906._




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER.                                   PAGE.

     I. "In the Beginning"                     11

    II. Things as They Are                     20

   III. The Universality of Life and Mind      30

    IV. Life and Mind Among the Atoms          41

     V. The Story of Substance                 61

    VI. Substance and Beyond                   75

   VII. The Paradox of Science                 96

  VIII. The Forces of Nature                  109

    IX. Radiant Energy                        121

     X. The Law of Attraction                 135

    XI. The Theory of Dynamic Thought         154

   XII. The Law of Vibrant Energy             171

  XIII. The Riddle of the Sphinx              182

   XIV. The Mystery of Mind                   200

    XV. The Finer Forces of the Mind          206

   XVI. Thought in Action                     219




    "A fire-mist and a planet,
       A crystal and a cell,
     A jelly-fish and a saurian,
       And caves where the cave-men dwell;
     Then a sense of law and beauty,
       And a face turned from the clod,--
     Some call it Evolution,
       And others call it God."

    "Like tides on a crescent sea-beach,
       When the moon is new and thin,
     Into our hearts high yearnings
       Come welling and surging in,--
       Come from the mystic ocean
     Whose rim no foot has trod,--
       Some of us call it Longing,
     And others call it God."

    --W.H. CARRUTH.




DYNAMIC THOUGHT




CHAPTER I

"IN THE BEGINNING"


This book will deal with Life. It holds that Life is Universal--that it
is inherent in, and manifests (in different degrees) in every part,
particle, phase, aspect, condition, place, or relationship, in the World
of Things that we call the Universe.

It holds that Life manifests in two aspects or forms, which are
generally found by us in connection and co-operation with each other,
but which are both, probably, an expression of some One Thing higher
than either. These two aspects or forms, which together go to make up or
produce that which we know as "Life," are known as (1) Substance or
Matter; and (2) Mind. In this book the term "Substance" is used in
preference to "Matter," owing to the fact that the term "Matter" has
become closely identified with certain ideas of the Materialistic school
of thought, and has generally been regarded by the public in the light
of "dead matter," whereas this book holds that all Substance is Alive.
The term "Mind" is used in the sense of "Mind, _as we know it_," rather
than as "Mind, _as it is_"--or, as "The Cosmic Mind." In some places the
term "Mind-principle" is used to convey the idea of "a portion of the
Great Principle of Mind, of which that which we call 'Mind' is but a
small and but partially expressed portion." These terms are explained
and illustrated as we proceed. The aspect of "Energy or Force" is not
treated as a separate aspect or form of Life, in this book, for the
reason that it is regarded as merely a manifestation of Mind, as will
appear as we proceed. We have much to say regarding Motion, but the
writer has tried to explain and prove that, at the last, all Motion
results from Mental Action, and that all Force and Energy is
Vital-Mental Force and Energy.

This book is not intended to run along metaphysical or theological
lines--its field is different. And so, while it recognizes the
importance of these branches of human thought, still, it finds that its
own particular field is sufficient to engross its entire attention, for
the moment, and, consequently the aforesaid subjects shall not be
touched upon except incidentally, in connection with the subject matter
of the book.

This being the case, there will be no discussion of the "origin of
Life"--the question of "creation"--the problems of theology and
metaphysics--the riddle of the "Why and Wherefore" of Life and the
Universe. The writer has his own opinions upon these questions, but
feels that this is not the place in which to air the same. For the
purposes of the book, he prefers to leave every reader to his own
favorite views and conceptions regarding these great subjects, feeling
that the views regarding Life, Mind, Motion and Substance, that are
advanced in this book, may be accepted by any intelligent reader,
without prejudice to his, or her, accepted religious or philosophical
views.

The writer sees that this something called "Life" exists--he finds it in
evidence everywhere. And he sees it always in its aspects of Substance
and Mind. And he feels justified in regarding "Life" as always existing
in, and manifesting in these aspects--always in conjunction--at least,
Life "as we know it."

And he finds certain apparent Laws of Life in operation in the Universe
to which all Life, in all of its aspects, is apparently amenable. And
he feels justified in considering these Laws constant, and invariable,
and unchangeable so long as the Universe, as it now is, exists.

And with the above views in mind, this book will proceed to a
consideration of its subject, without attempting to peer behind the veil
separating the Universe from its Causer--Life from its Source.

But in justice to reader, subject and writer, the latter has thought it
well to state that he _does_ recognize, not only the veil, but
That-which-is-behind-the-Veil. To proceed without this statement would
be unfair and misleading. The writer wishes to be understood positively
upon this point, even though the declaration may bring forth the
derisive jeer of those who feel that they "have outgrown" this
conception; or else the calm, superior, pitying smile of those who feel
that the Universe is its own Cause and Effect. By "Universe," the writer
means "The whole body of Things" (Webster). His declaration means that
he believes in "That-which-is-above-Things."

The writer prefers not to attempt to "define" THAT which he calls "The
Infinite." The word "Infinite" means "without limit in time, space,
power, capacity, knowledge or excellence" (Webster). And to "define" is
to "limit"; "mark the limits of"; "mark the end of," etc. The term
"define," as applied to "The Infinite," is ridiculous--an absurd
paradox. The writer echoes Spinoza's statement: "To define God is to
deny Him." And so there shall be no attempt at definition or limitation.

But the human mind, in considering the subject, is bound by its own laws
to think of "The Infinite" as Real, and actually being and existent, if
it thinks of It at all. And if it thinks of It as "Infinite," it _must_,
by its own laws, think of It as Causeless; Eternal; Absolute;
Everywhere-present; All-Powerful; All-Wise. The human mind is
_compelled_ to so consider The Infinite, if it thinks of It at all. But
even in so thinking of It as "being" these things, it is doing something
like "defining" or "limiting" It, for The Infinite must not only "be"
those things, but it must "be" so much more, that "those things" are but
as a grain of dust on the desert as compared to the real "Being" of The
Infinite. For the "things" mentioned are but "finite" or "defined"
things--things possessed by the Finite Things--and, at the best can be
but symbols of the attributes or qualities of The Infinite; even the
words "attributes" or "qualities" being an absurdity as applied to The
Infinite. This view, also, _must_ be reported by the human reason, if
it thinks about the matter at all.

The final report of the human reason regarding this matter is that it is
insoluble and unthinkable to that reason, in its final analysis. This
because the human reason is compelled to use terms, concepts, etc.,
derived from its experience with finite things, and therefore has no
tools, measurements, or other appliances with which to "think" of The
Infinite. All that it can do is to report that it finds that it has
limits itself, and that it finds beyond those limits That which it
cannot define, but which it is justified in considering as Infinite, and
superior to all finite conceptions, such as Time, Space, Causation and
Thought. (The idea of Thought being finite, equally with Time, Space and
Causation, is not common, by the writer is compelled to place it in that
category, because it is clearly under the laws of Time, Space, and Cause
and Effect, and must be considered as "finite." The "knowledge"
possessed by The Infinite must be something far transcending that which
we know as the result of "mental operations," or "thinking.")

Certain fundamental truths seem to have been impressed upon the human
intellect, and the reason is compelled to report in accordance
therewith. But an analysis of these fundamental truths is futile, and
the attempt only leads one into wild speculations. The only advantage
that comes from the attempt is the strengthening of mental muscle of
those who are able to stand the strain of the exercise; and the fact
that by such attempt we are made aware that we do not know, and cannot
know, by reasons of the nature of the Intellect, and are thus prevented
from harboring absurd and childish theories about the Unknowable. To
know that we do _not_ know, and _cannot_ know, is the next best thing to
actually knowing.

The writer does not wish to be understood, that the limits of the human
reason are unalterably fixed. On the contrary, he believes that
additional fundamental portions of Truth are super-imposed upon the mind
of the race from time to time. And he believes, yes, _knows_, that there
are regions of the mind that give reports higher than those conveyed
through the Intellect. And he believes that there are phases of
knowledge in store for Man that will raise him as much higher than his
present position, as that present position is superior to that of the
earthworm. And he believes that there are Beings in existence to-day, on
planes of Life as yet undreamed of by the average man, who far transcend
Man in power, wisdom and nature. He believes that Man is merely just
entering into his kingdom, and does not realize the grandeur of that
which is his Divine Inheritance.

It will be as well to mention here that the classification of Mind with
the aspects of Life, in conjunction with Substance, and Motion, does not
mean that the Ego or Man is a material thing. The writer believes that
the Ego is a transcendent Being, partaking in some wonderful way of the
essence of The Infinite--that it is a Soul--Immortal. He believes that
as Paul says, "We are all children of God, but what we shall be does not
as yet appear." These matters shall not be discussed in this book, but
the writer wishes to make himself clear, in order to prevent
misunderstanding. Again, in this respect, he must "fly in the face of
Materialism."

But, although the writer expresses his belief in the existence of The
Infinite, and bases his philosophy upon that basis, he does not wish to
insist upon the identification of his conception with that of any other
particular conception of the Source of Life. Nor does he insist upon
names, or terms, in connection with the conception. He has used the
term, "The Infinite," because it seems to be broader than any other of
which he could think, but he uses it merely as a name for the
Un-Nameable. So, if the reader prefers, he, or she, may use the terms:
"God"; "Deity"; "First Cause"; "Principle"; "Unknowable"; "Infinite and
Eternal Energy"; "The Thing-in-Itself"; "The Absolute"; or any of the
other countless terms used by Man in his attempt to name the
Un-Nameable--to describe the Un-Describable--to define the Un-Definable.

And all may retain their ideas, or lack of ideas, regarding the relation
of The Infinite to their own particular religious views, or lack of
views. The philosophy of this book need not disturb a man's religious
belief--nor does it insist upon the man holding any special religious
belief. Those are matters entirely for the exercise of the man's own
reason and conscience. And they may retain their own pet philosophy
regarding the origin, purposes or plan of the production and existence
of the Universe--this book shall not meddle with their metaphysics or
philosophy. What is herein offered may be assimilated with the
fundamental ideas of nearly every form of religious or philosophical
belief, it being in the nature of an Addition rather than a Subtraction,
or Division. Its philosophy is Constructive rather than Destructive.




