CHAPTER XI

THE THEORY OF DYNAMIC THOUGHT


From the preceding chapters we have learned that:

(1) The forms of Force or Radiant Energy, known as Light, Heat,
Magnetism and Electricity, are "Modes of Motion," arising from the
Original Motion of the Particles of Substance (Molecules, Atoms,
Corpuscles or Electrons). And that such Original Motion of the Particles
arises from the Operation of The Law of Attraction;

(2) That the forms of Attractive Force or Energy, known as Gravitation,
Cohesion, Adhesion, Atomic Attraction, Chemical Affinity or Chemism, and
Corpuscular Attraction, also arise from the operation of the Law of
Attraction;

(3) That, from the above, it follows that: All Manifestations of Force
and Energy in Inorganic Substance (_viz._, both Radiant Energy in its
forms of Light, Heat, Magnetism, Electricity, etc.; and also Attractive
Energy in its forms of Gravitation, Cohesion, Adhesion, Chemical
Affinity or Atomic Attraction and Corpuscular Attraction) arise from the
operation of the Law of Attraction.

It will be well to remember that the fact that some of the above forms
of Radiant Force or Energy, such as Heat, Light, Magnetism and
Electricity, may arise from Motion transmitted from other Substance,
does not alter the matter. For if they arise from "waves" from some
other Substance, it merely follows that the Original Motion that gave
rise to the "waves" arose from the operation of the Law of Attraction.
Or, if they arise from "interrupted Motion," it merely follows that the
Motion that is interrupted may be traced back to Original Motion that
arose from the operation of the Law of Attraction. So that all
Mechanical Power, and all the forms of Energy or Force producing the
same (omitting for the moment the forms of Energy or Force of "Living
Organisms," which will be described later on) arise from the operation
of the Law of Attraction.

Now, for the next step. We have seen that the operation of the Law of
Attraction results from Vital-Mental Action on the part of the Life and
Mind Principle inherent in the nature of the Particles of Substance.
Consequently, all forms of Energy and Force arising from the operation
of The Law of Attraction--the latter being the result of Vital-Mental
Action--then it follows that:

_All forms of Energy and Force having its origin in the Law of
Attraction are manifestations of Vital-Mental Action._

But this is not all--for we have not considered the Energy and Force
abiding in, and manifested by, what are called "Living Organisms," such
as human, animal and plant life, which are manifested by the physical
organisms or "bodies" of man, animal and plant. In order to avoid a long
digression into the realms of biology, we will omit all but a passing
reference to the theories that seek to identify the action of the cells
of organic life with those of the particles of inorganic life--for
remember, that Organic Substance has its Molecules, Atoms and
Corpuscles, as well as its higher combinations known as "Cells"--and we
will seek the ultimate source of all forms of Force and Energy,
exhibited by "Organic Life," in that which lies back of "Physical
Action." We need no argument here--for all will readily recognize that
behind the physical action of man, animal and plant, lies Life and Mind,
and that therefore all Force and Energy arising from such action must be
manifestations of Vital-Mental Action.

And so, summing up our conclusions regarding Force and Energy and Motion
in Inorganic Substance--and then in Organic Substance--we arrive at an
understanding of the Basic Proposition of the Theory of Dynamic Thought,
which is as follows:

BASIC PROPOSITION.--_That All forms and exhibition of Force, Energy,
Motion and Power are manifestations of Vital-Mental Action. And that,
consequently, at the last there is no Force but Vital-Mental Force; no
Energy but Vital-Mental Energy; no Motion but Vital-Mental Motion; no
Power but Vital-Mental Power._

It is possible that the average reader will fail to recognize the
tremendous importance of the above proposition. It is most
revolutionary, and is not only directly opposed to the Materialistic
theory which makes Matter the dominant factor--the only factor, in
fact--in Life; but it is also far different from the opinion of the
average person who has been taught to think of "blind force," "dead
matter," "mechanical energy," "power of machinery, engines," etc. And
yet, you are invited to go back over the path that leads up to the
theory, and test and examine every bit of the road for weak
spots--insecure bridges, etc.--the writer feels that the work will bear
examination. He thinks that he has succeeded not only in proving that
(1) The Universe is Alive and Thinking; and (2) That Mind is
Dominant--but he believes, also, that he has made at least partially
understandable the old occult and metaphysical aphorism that has been
heard so much in these later days--the statement that "All is Mind--Mind
is All."

The only fact needed now is the proof of the old occult theory that
Matter or Substance blends gradually into Mind, and that in the end it
is found to have its origin there. So far, Science has not given us this
proof, but it begins to look that way, although Science does not dream
of what lies at the end of the road she is travelling. She tells us that
she sees Matter melting into Force or Energy, and that perhaps the
Universe may be found to be Energy or Force, at the last. But she
ignores the fact that her investigations have already proven (to those
who know how to combine them) that Mind is back of Force--that all Force
is Mental Force, at the last. And, so, you see it is not so far a cry
from Matter to Mind in these days of the Twentieth Century. The bridge
is being erected by the Materialists, but the Mentalist will be the
first to cross over it.

But there are many important questions ahead of us for consideration in
relation to the Theory of Dynamic Thought. And we must hasten on to
them.

One of the first questions that must be considered is that of the
transmission of Force, Energy or Motion. Science has told us that Light
travels and is "contagious," that Heat travels and is "contagious," that
Electricity travels and is "contagious," that Magnetism travels and is
"contagious." But is has failed to find evidences of Cohesive Force, or
Adhesive Force, or the Force of Gravitation, or the Force of Chemical
Affinity, or the Force of Corpuscular Affinity, being "contagious," and
although it recognizes that they must "travel" beyond the limits of the
bodies manifesting them, yet it has hazarded no theory or hypothesis,
worthy of the name, to account for the phenomenon. It informs us that
Light, Heat, Magnetism and Electricity "travel" (via waves of the
"Ether") at the rate of 184,000 miles per second--and that when they
reach their destination the "Ether waves" set up similar vibrations in
the Substance with which they come in contact. The only explanation of
the method or medium of "travel" is the "Aristotle's Ether" Theory,
which, while generally accepted as a working hypothesis, nevertheless,
brings a broad smile to the face of any thoughtful scientist who
considers it in detail. As for the medium of the transmission of
Gravitation, Cohesion, Chemical Affinity and Molecular Affinity, Science
is mute. All that she says is that Gravitation is believed to travel
_instantaneously_ over distances that it takes Light, travelling at the
rate of 184,000 miles per second, _over two thousand years_ to travel.
Verily, Gravitation defies Scientific theories and estimates, and laughs
at the "Ether." Let us see if the Dynamic Thought Theory throws any
light on the subject!

The first step in the solution of the problem of the transferring and
communication of Energy is the remembrance of the fact that the Energy
is _purely Mental_. Be it Gravitation, Affinity or Attraction, on the
one hand--or Light, Heat, Magnetism or Electricity on the other--it is
all Mental Force. Attraction in all of its forms has been recognized as
Mental Action. And the vibrations that cause Light, Heat, Magnetism and
Electricity have been seen to result from the Law of Attraction, and,
therefore, are Mental. This being the case, would it not be wise for us
to look for a solution of the transmission of Force and Energy in the
region from which it originated--_the Mental Region_? Does not this seem
reasonable? Should not the explanation for Mental Effects be sought in a
Mental Cause? And should not the medium between Mind and Mind be looked
for in the Mental Region?

Taking the liberty of peeping into some of the succeeding chapters of
this book--getting a little ahead of the story, as it were--let us
consider the operation of Mind in the higher forms of Life. Without
argument, or proof at this point, let us remember the well-founded
statements of fact--and the old occult teachings as well--that the Mind
is not confined to the limits of the body, but extends as an "Aura" for
some distance beyond the physical form. Let us also remember the
phenomena grouped together under the general subject of
"Thought-transference," "Thought-transmission," "Telepathy," or (the
best term of all) "Telesthesia" (meaning, literally "far-off
sensation"). The writer imagines that he hears the yell of derision go
up at this point from the materialistic personage, or "man on the
street," who has been induced to read this book by some well meaning
friend. "Thought-transference, Fiddlesticks," we may hear him cry, in
imagination. But let this reader remember--Fiddlesticks, or no
Fiddlesticks--that Thought-transmission is a proven fact--and that
thousands of people _know_ it to be so, absolutely, from their own
experience. It is too late in the day for sneers at the mention of the
term.

Well, then, since Force is Mental, and we are looking for a Mental
explanation for the phenomenon of Transmission of Force, does it not
seem natural to consider Thought-transmission in that connection?
Answering a possible objection of some critical reader, to the effect
that before a "sensation" may be received, the receiver must have
"sense-organs"--a very good objection, but one that is answered by
Science itself--let us read on.

Haeckel, the distinguished scientist, in his endeavor to prove that
Man's senses are but a development of something in inorganic life, has
called our attention to the fact that Molecules, and Atoms, are capable
of "receiving" sensations and "responding" thereto. He makes quite a
point of this in his latest works, and remarks, among many other things
showing his positive views on the subject of "sensation in the inorganic
world": "_I cannot imagine the simplest chemical and physical process
without attributing the movements of the material particles to
unconscious sensation_"; and again: "_The idea of chemical affinity
consists in the fact that the various chemical elements perceive the
qualitative differences in other elements--experience 'pleasure' or
'revulsion' at contact with them, and execute specific movements on this
ground_." He also quotes, approvingly, the remarks of Nageli, who said:
"_If the molecules possess something that is related, however distantly,
to sensation, it must be comfortable to be able to follow their
attractions and repulsions; uncomfortable when they are forced to do
otherwise_." Haeckel also says that in his opinion _the sensations in
animal and plant life are "connected by a long series of evolutionary
stages with the simpler forms of sensation that we find in the inorganic
elements, and that reveal themselves in chemical affinity_." Is not this
strong enough? Perhaps we may now be permitted at least to "assume" that
even the Atoms, Molecules and Corpuscles have "something like
sensation."

Some one may now object that Haeckel speaks of "contact" between the
particles, and that sensation by contact (even in an atom) is far
different from sensation without contact, at a short distance. Quite
right, but if the objector will take the trouble to review the teachings
of Science regarding the relation of the Particles, he will see that the
Particles are _never "exactly" in contact_, except in moments of
collision, which, by the way, they carefully avoid. The Corpuscles, as
we have shown, have _"plenty of room" in which to move about_, and they
move in orbits around each other. The Atoms combine, _but there is
always room between them_, as may be seen by reference to the teachings
regarding the "Ether," which "fills up the cracks" according to the
theory. And the Molecules _also have "plenty of room,"_ as may be seen
by reference to that part of the subject, particularly to the comparison
of the drop of water magnified to the size of the Earth, in which the
Molecules would appear about the size of the original drop _with more
room between each than their own size_.

In fact, as we have been shown in a previous chapter, the particles are
attracted only to a certain distance, at which they resist the impulse
or attraction and "stand off" a bit. They will not be forced too near
without creating disturbances, and manifestations of force, and if they
are separate beyond a certain distance the attractive power ceases to
operate. But _there is always some room between them_, and they bridge
over that room and exert and receive the attractive power _in some way_.
This is true not only of the particles but of the great bodies, like the
Earth and planets, that are attracted, and attract over great distances.
Now for the question: "How do they exert sense and attractive power over
the great comparative distance--great, comparatively, as well in atom,
as in planet and sun?"

Some one may answer the question closing the last paragraph with the
word "_Electricity_." Very good--Electricity, like the "Ether," comes in
quite handy when one is forced to explain something not known.
"Electricity," like the "Glacial Period," "Aristotle's Ether," "Natural
Laws," and "Suggestion," is a most handy weapon of argument, and often
acts as a preventative to further inquiry and investigation until some
sufficiently irreverent of precedent arises to ask, "But Why and How?"
and starts the ball rolling again.

But "Electricity" will not answer in this case, for the rate of the
"travel" of Electricity is well known--184,000 miles per second, which,
fast as it is, assumes the crawl of a "slow-freight" when compared with
the "instantaneous" rate of travel of Gravitation. And then Electricity
requires a "medium" and Gravitation does not, and in many other ways the
two are seen to be totally different. And in the case of the Space between
the Atom and Molecule and Corpuscle, it is no more reasonable to say
"Electricity" than it would be to say "Heat" or "Light"; and "Magnetism" is
not available for obvious reasons. Remember that Electricity, Light and
Heat are _caused_ by Motion resulting from Attraction, and _the child
cannot procreate the parent_. Heat, Light and Electricity may beget each
other (and they do). And Gravitation may procreate Heat, Light and
Electricity. But Heat, Light and Electricity _cannot procreate
Gravitation_--Never! And Light, Heat and Electricity require replenishing
from the common source of Energy, but Gravitation is self-sufficient and
asks no replenishing or storage-battery or power-house. Electricity, Heat
and Light come and go, appearing, manifesting and disappearing, swallowed
up by each other, or by Substance. But Gravitation is always
there--unchangeable--unwavering--immutable--invariable--Something above
Matter and Force--something majestic, awe-inspiring, sublime! Does it
take a wild flight of the imagination to see that this Something, that
is not Matter, and nor Force, _must be a manifestation of Mind_?

Let us first apply this idea of Thought-transference to the operation of
the Law of Attraction between the Corpuscles, Atoms and Molecules of
Substance--the Particles of Substance. The particles are believed to
move to or away from each other in accordance with the workings of
Attraction and Affinity, in its various degrees. First they must
_desire_ to move--not Desire in the developed sense that we feel it, but
still elementary "feeling," or "inclination," or "tendency"--call it
what you will, but it remains rudimentary Mental Emotion--an E-motion
leading to Motion. (This is not a pun--look up the meaning of the word
Emotion and you will see its application.)

Then, following the Desire, comes the action in the direction of
gratifying it. The Particles act to gratify Desire in two ways--acting
at a "distance," remember--they exert the Attractive Force, which the
writer believes to be Mental Force, _transmitted by Mind, projection_, a
mental or psychic bond or connection being thus established. By means of
this bond of Mind, the Particle endeavors to (1) draw itself to the
object; and (2) to draw the object toward itself. In the case of the
Molecule, this Desire and Movement seems to be mutual, and evidenced by
and to all Molecules alike, _providing they be within Molecular
Distance_, as Science calls it. But in the case of the Atoms, it seems
to be different--for there is found a greater degree of "choice," or
"elective affinity." This "election" or "choice" is not altogether free,
but depends upon the relative likes and dislikes of certain "kinds" of
elements, as we have seen in previous chapters, although, to be sure,
these Elements are all made out of the same "stuff" in different
combinations.

The details of Corpuscular Attraction are not known, so it cannot be
told whether "preferences" exist, or whether (in the words of the
street) all Corpuscles "look alike" to each other. It would appear,
however, that there must be some reasons for preference, among the
Corpuscles, else they would always form in the same combinations--always
act alike to each other, as they are alike in other actions--and thus
there would be but _one_ Element or kind of Atom, formed, instead of the
_seventy-five_, already known. To be sure, in this case, it _might_ be
that the _one_ kind of Atom formed would be the Atom of Hydrogen, and
that all other Elements, or Atoms, were modifications of that one--just
proving the dream of the Scientists of the Nineteenth Century. But, as
Kipling would say, "that is another story."

To return to the Particle which we left trying to draw the other
Particle to itself, and itself toward the other. There is no _material_
connection between them (and Electricity and Magnetism will not answer),
so what is to be done? Evidently the Particle knows, for it exerts _a
"drawing" power or force by means of the Mental-connection_, and two
come together. The Particle evidently is able to exert a repelling or
"moving away" power by reversing the process, the Mental-bond acting as
the medium. This may cause a smile, because we have never seen an
instance of bodies pulling themselves together by intangible "bonds."
_Haven't we?_ Then how about two pieces of magnetised steel, or two
electrified substances? Oh, that's different, you say. _Why, different?_
Isn't _the bond intangible_? And, haven't we seen that both Electricity
and Magnetism were Mental Actions also? Oh,--er--but well,--oh yes,
_that's_ it--perhaps the Attracting Force is Magnetism or Electricity.
No, that will not do, for we have seen that Electricity and Magnetism
were _products_ of this Attraction, not _producers_ of it--the
Attraction must come _before_ Electricity and Magnetism, not _after_
them--you are mixing Cause and Effect. And, even if you were right--and
you cannot be--wouldn't the Electrical or Magnetic Force be _called into
operation, and directed by the Mental Action_, arising from the Desire?
You cannot get away from Mental Action when you study the Law of
Attraction.

"But, how about the fact that Heat causes the Particles to change their
vibrations, and draw apart, and all that sort of thing--and Electricity,
likewise?" you may ask. "Surely this takes the matter away from Mental
Action, doesn't it?" Well, the writer thinks that the phenomenon
referred to only helps to prove his theory. And he will endeavor to so
prove to you.

The consideration of the facts related in this chapter, leads us to a
supplemental proposition to our Basic Proposition, which may be stated
as follows:

SUPPLEMENTAL PROPOSITION I.--_Not only is the Law of Attraction the
manifestation of a Mental Process, or Vital-Mental Action; but also the
actual Force or Energy used in bringing the Particles of Substance in
closer relation, in accordance with that Law, is in its nature a Vital
Mental Force or Energy, operating between bodies or particles of
Substance, without a material medium._




