CHAPTER XVI

THOUGHT IN ACTION


Without attempting to go into details, or to enter into explanations,
the writer purposes taking his readers on a flying trip through the
region of "Thought in Action," or "Dynamic Thought in Operation in Human
Life." The details of this fascinating region must be left for another
and more extended visit, in our next book (before mentioned) which will
be called "_The Wonders of The Mind_." But he thinks that even this
flying trip will prove of interest and instruction.

Let us start with a hasty look at Man himself. Not to speak of his
"Seven Planes of Mind," which belongs to the next visit, we find him a
very interesting object. Not only has he a physical body, apparent to
our senses, but he has also a finer or "astral body," which he may use
(unconsciously, or consciously, when he learns how) for little
excursions away from the body, during his lifetime. This Astral Body is
composed of Substance just as his denser physical body. The field and
range of Substance extends far beyond the powers of ordinary vision, as
even the Materialists must admit when they talk of "Radiant Matter,"
"Etherial Substance," etc. Then he has currents of Fine Force coursing
through his nervous system, which may be seen by those possessing
"Astral Vision," if the teachings of the Occultists be true.

Then he, like the Particle, has an "Aura" or egg-shaped projection of
Mind and fine particles of Psychoplasm, which has been thrown off in the
process of Thought, and which clusters around him, producing a "Mental
Atmosphere," which constantly surrounds him, and makes itself "felt" by
those coming in his presence. Those who read these words may remember,
readily, the "feeling" they have experienced when coming in contact with
certain people--how some radiated an atmosphere of cheerfulness,
brightness, etc., while others radiated the very opposite. Some radiate
a feeling of energy, activity, etc., while others manifest just the
reverse. Many likes and dislikes between people meeting for the first
time, arise in this way, each finding in the mental atmosphere of the
other, some inharmonious element. These radiations are perceived by
others coming into their range.

Occultists tell us that the character of a man's thought vibrations may
be determined by certain colors, which are visible to those having
"Astral Sight." There is nothing so wonderful about this, when it is
remembered that the various "colors" of light, comprising the visible
colors of the spectrum, ranging from red, on through orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo, and terminating in violet, arise simply from
different rates of vibration of the Particles of Substance. And as
Thought is produced by Mind causing vibrations in the Psychoplasm, why
is not the Astral Colors reasonable? We cannot stop to consider these
colors in detail, but may run over the ones corresponding to each marked
Emotion of Thought, as reported by the Occult teachings.

For instance the shade of the thought manifesting in physical or organic
functions, is of a colorless white, or "color of clear water"; and the
color of the thought manifesting in Fine Force or Vital Energy, is that
of air,--heated air arising from a furnace or heated ground--when it
emerges from the body although of a faint pink when in the body itself.
Black represents Hate, Malice, etc.; Gray (bright shade) represents
Selfishness, while Gray of a dark dull shade represents Fear. Green
represents Jealousy, Deceit, Treachery, and similar emotions, ranging
from the dull shades which characterize the lower and cruder forms, to
the bright shades which characterize the finer, or more delicate forms
of "Tact," "Politeness," "Diplomacy," etc. Red (dull shade) represents
Sensuality and Animal Passion, while red (bright and vivid) represents
Anger. Crimson, in varying shades, represents the phases of "Love."
Brown represents Avarice or Greed. Orange represents Pride and Ambition;
and Yellow, in varying shades, represents grades of Intellectual Power.
Blue is the color of the Religious thoughts, ranging, however, through a
great variety of stages, from the dull shade of superstitious religious
belief, to the beautiful violet of the highest religious emotion or
thought. What is generally known as "Spirituality" is characterized by a
Light Blue of a peculiarly luminous shade. Just as there are ultra-red,
and ultra-violet rays in the spectrum, which the eye cannot perceive, so
Occultists inform us there are "colors" in the Aura or Mental Atmosphere
of a person of unusual psychic or occult development, the ultra-violet
rays indicating the thought of one who is pursuing the higher planes of
occult thought and unfoldment, while the ultra-red is evidenced by those
possessing occult development, but who are using the same for base and
selfish purposes--"black-magic" in fact. There are other shades, known
to Occultists, indicating several highly developed states of Mind, but
it is needless to mention them here.

But the influence of these Particles of "Thought-stuff" thrown off from
the Mind Psychoplasm under the vibrations produced by the Mind during
the process of Thought, does not cease with the phenomena surrounding
the Aura. They are radiated to a considerable distance, and produce a
number of effects. We will remember how the Corpuscles or Electrons are
thrown off by Substance in a high state of vibration. Well, the same law
manifests in the vibrations attendant upon the production of Thought.
The particles are thrown off in great quantities each vibrating at the
rate imparted to it during the process. No these particles of
"Thought-stuff" do not compose the "Thought-waves"--the latter belong to
a different set of phenomena.

These particles of vibrating "Thought-stuff" fly off from the brain of
the thinker, in all directions, and affect other persons who may come in
contact with them. There is an important rule here, however, and that is
that they seem to be attracted by those minds which are vibrating in
similar thought-rates with themselves, and are but feebly
attracted--and in some cases, actually repelled--by minds vibrating on
opposite lines of Thought. "Like attracts Like," in the Thought World,
and "Birds of a feather flock together," here as elsewhere.

Some of these particles of "Thought-stuff" are still in existence, and
vibrating, which proceeded from the minds of persons long since dead,
the same being emitted or thrown off during the lifetime of the persons,
however. Just as a distant star, which was destroyed hundreds of years
ago, may have emitted rays which are only now reaching our vision, years
after the destruction of the star which emitted them--and just as an
odor will remain in a room after the object causing it has departed the
particles still remaining and vibrating--and just as a stove removed
from a room may leave heat vibrations behind it--so do these particles
persist, vibrate, and influence other minds, long after the person who
caused them may have passed out of the body. In this way, rooms, houses,
neighborhoods, and localities may vibrate with the thoughts of people
who lived there long ago, but who have since passed away, or removed.
These vibrations affect people living in these places, to a greater or
lesser extent, depending upon circumstances, but they may always be
counteracted or changed (if they are of undesirable nature) by setting
upon positive vibrations on a different plane of mind, or character of
thought.

The mind of a thinker is constantly emitting or throwing off these
particles of "Thought-stuff"; the distance and rate of speed, to and by
which they travel, being determined by the "force" used in their
production, there being a great difference between the thought of a
vigorous thinker, and that emanating from a weak, listless mind. These
projections of Thought-stuff have a tendency to mingle with others of a
corresponding rate of vibration (depending upon the character of the
thought.) Some remain around the places where they were emitted, while
others float off like clouds, and obey the Law of Attraction which draws
them to persons thinking along similar lines.

The characteristics of cities arise in this way, the general average of
Thought of their inhabitants causing a corresponding Thought-atmosphere
to hang over and around it, which atmosphere is distinctly felt by
visitors, and often determines the mental character of the persons
residing there, in spite of their previous characteristics--_that is,
unless they understand the Laws of Thought_. Some neighborhoods, also,
have their own peculiar Mental Atmosphere, as all may have noticed if
they have visited certain "tough" neighborhoods, on the one hand, and
neighborhoods of an opposite kind, on the other. Certain kinds of
Thoughts and Actions seem to be contagious in certain places--_and they
are_ to those who do not understand the Law. Certain shops seem to have
their own atmosphere--some reflecting confidence and honest dealing, and
others radiating an atmosphere that causes patrons to hold tightly to
their pocketbooks, and, in some extreme cases, to be certain that their
buttons are tightly sewed on their garments. Yes, places like people,
have their distinctive Mental Atmospheres, and both arise from the same
cause.

And each person draws to himself these particles of vibrating
"Thought-stuff" corresponding with the general mental attitude
maintained by him. If one harbors feelings of Malice, he will find
thoughts of malice, revenge, hate, etc., pouring in upon him. He has
made himself a centre of Attraction, and has set the Law into operation.
His only safe course is to resolutely change his thought vibrations.

A most remarkable form of these particles of Thought-stuff is evidenced
in the case of what are known among occultists as "Thought-forms,"
which are aggregations of Particles of Thought-stuff energized by
intense and positive thought, and which are sent out with such intensity
and positiveness, that they are almost "vitalized," and manifest almost
the same degree of mental influence that would be manifested by the
sender if he were present where they are. This highly interesting phase
of the subject would take many chapters to describe in detail, and we
must content ourselves with a mere passing view. To those who are
interested in the subject, the writer would say that he purposes
considering them at considerable length, in the forthcoming book "_The
Wonders of The Mind_," which has been alluded to elsewhere.

Besides the operation of these particles of Thought-stuff emitted during
the production of Thought, there are many other phases of Thought
Influence, or Thought in Action. The principal phase of this phenomena
arises from the working of the Law of Attraction between the respective
minds of different people. Just as are the Particles of Substance united
and connected by "lines" of connection, so are the minds of Men
connected. And the strong "pull" of Desire manifests along these lines,
just as it does in the case of the Atoms. There has been much written of
recent years regarding this "Drawing Power of the Mind," and although
some of what has been written is the veriest rubbish and nonsense, yet
under it all there remains a strong, form, substantial substratum of
Fact and Truth. Men _do_ attract Success and Failure to them--people
_do_ attract things to them--as strange as it may seem to the person who
has not acquainted himself with the laws underlying the phenomenon.

There is no "miracle" about all of this--it is simply that the Law of
Attraction is in full operation, and that people of similar thoughts are
drawn together by reason thereof. The workings of this Law are somewhat
intricate, but all of us are constantly using them, consciously or
unconsciously. We draw to ourselves that which we Desire very much, or
that which we Fear very much, for a Fear is a Belief, and acts in the
direction of actualizing itself, _sometimes_. But, again, as Kipling
would say: "But, that's another story." This phase of the subject is a
mighty subject in itself, and "the half has not been told" even by the
many who have written of it. The writer intends to try to remedy the
deficiency in his next book, however.

Then, again, the "Excitement" of Thought, in the minds of people may be
transmitted or communicated to the minds of others, and a similar
vibration set up, under certain conditions, and subject to certain
restraining influences--just as in the case of the Particles of
Substances in a body or Mass of Substance. And, in many ways that will
suggest themselves to the reader who has mastered the contents of the
earlier chapters of this book, the phenomena of Dynamic Thought in the
case of the Atoms, and Particles, may be, and are duplicated in the case
of Individual Minds of Men.

The reader will see, readily, that this theory of Dynamic Thought, and
the facts noted in the consideration thereof, give an intelligent
explanation for the respective phenomena of Hypnotism, Mesmerism,
Suggestion, Thought-transference, Telepathy, etc., as well as of Mental
Healing, Magnetic Healing, etc., all of which are manifestations of
"Dynamic Thought." Not only do we see, as Prentice Mulford said, that
"Thoughts are Things," but we may see "_just why_" they are Things. And
we may see and understand the laws of their production and operation.
This theory of Dynamic Thought will throw light into many dark corners,
and make plain many "hard sayings" that have perplexed you in the past.
The writer believes that it gives us the key to many of the great
Riddles of Life.

This theory has come to stay. It is no ephemeral thing, doomed to "die
a-borning." It will be taken up by others and polished, and added to,
and shaped, and "decorated"--but the fundamental principles will stand
the stress of Time and Men. Of this the writer feels assured. It may be
laughed at at first, not only by the "man on the street," but also by
the scientists. But it will outlive this, and in time will come to its
own--perhaps long after the writer and the book have been forgotten.

This must be so--for the idea of "Dynamic Thought" underlies the entire
Universe, and is the cause of all phenomena. Not only is all that we see
as Life and Mind, and Substance illustrations of the Law, but even that
which lies back of these things must evidence the same Law. Is it too
daring a conception to hazard the thought that perhaps the Universe
itself is _the result of the Dynamic Thought of The Infinite_?

Oh, Dynamic Thought, we see in thee the instrument by which all Form and
Shape are created, changed and destroyed--we see in thee the source of
all Energy, Force and Motion--we see thee Always--present and
Everywhere--present, and always in Action. Verily, thou art Life in
Action. Thou art the embodiment of Action and Motion, of which Zittel
hath said: "Wherever our eyes dwell on the Universe; whithersoever we
are carried in the flight of thought, everywhere we find Motion." Suns,
planets, worlds, bodies, atoms, and particles, move, and act at thy
bidding. Amidst all the change of Substance--among the play of
Forces--and among and amidst all that results therefrom--there art thou,
unchanged, and constant. As though fresh from the hand of The Infinite,
thou hast maintained thy vigor and strength, and power, throughout the
aeons of Time. And, likewise, Space has no terrors for thee, for thou
hath mastered it. Thou art a symbol of the Power of The Infinite--thou
art Its message to doubting Man!

Let us close this book with the thought of the Greatness of this Thing
that we call Dynamic Thought--which, great as it is, is but as the
shadow of the Absolute Power of The Infinite One, which is the Causeless
Cause, and the Causer of Causes. And in thus parting company, reader,
let us murmur the words of the German poet, who has sung:

  "Dost thou ask for rest? See then how foolish is thy desire; the stern
    yoke of motion holds in harness the whole Universe.

  "Nowhere in this age canst thou ever find rest, and no power can
    deliver thee from the doom of Activity.

  "Rest is not to be found either in heaven or on earth, and from death
    and dying break forth new growth,--new birth.

  "All the life of Nature is an ocean of Activity; following on her
    footsteps, without ceasing, thou must march forward with the whole.

  "Even the dark portal of death gives thee no rest, and out of thy
    coffin will spring blossoms of a new life."


FINIS.




SUCCESS-THOUGHT


The desire of every reader is to get, hot from his pen, all that a
progressive writer has to say. Readers of this book will be interested
in knowing that Mr. William Walker Atkinson is on the regular editorial
staff of THE SEGNOGRAM, and that the choicest of his "I Can and I Will"
preachments are appearing in each issue of that magazine.

THE SEGNOGRAM is a monthly magazine for Success-Thought Thinkers and
Readers. It has one mission to fill--the upbuilding--the betterment of
man. It has no time to quarrel with any creed, sect, doctrine or belief.
The Law of Love is its controlling influence--it has none other. To read
it is to be imbued with its high teachings. It is a Success Magazine
that teaches how to win Success without preaching about it. It believes
in doing things, because in doing things we win Success.

Do you desire to come in with us? Do you want to join our circle of
thousands of Success readers? Do you want to get the cream of
Success--thought? If so you must not lag behind. Keep to the front by
keeping in touch with Mr. Atkinson and his coworkers, Messrs. A. Victor
Segno and H.M. Walker.

The price of the magazine is 50 cents a year, five cents the copy. Write
for sample copy if you never have seen it.


ADDRESS

  The Segnogram Publishing Co.
  LOS ANGELES, CAL.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:


Obvious typos and printer errors have been corrected without comment. In
addition to obvious errors, the following changes have been made:

  Page 17: Missing word "are" was added to the phrase, "And he believes
    that there are Beings in existence...."

  Page 86: Missing word "the" was added to the phrase, "... one of the
    Atoms of our molecule...."

  Page 100: Missing word "miles" was added for meaning in the phrase,
    "... the rate of 184,000 miles per second."

  Page 107: Missing word "be" was added for meaning in the phrase, "...
    the Atom was supposed to be a vortex-ring...."

  Page 189: 'incon-constant' changed to 'inconstant' in the phrase, "...
    are changeable, disconnected, and inconstant...."

  Page 209: 'difference' changed to 'distance' in the phrase, "And just
    as Particles are influenced at a distance by other Particles, so are
    Men influenced at a distance by other Men."

Other than the above changes, no attempt has been made to correct common
spelling, punctuation, grammar, etc. The author's usage is preserved as
printed in the original publication. Unconventional and/or inconsistent
spelling which has been preserved includes, but is not limited to the
following:

  seive
  Corelation
  terrestial
  mould/ mold

Inconsistent hyphenation which has been preserved includes:

  to-day/ today
  view-point/ viewpoint





End of Project Gutenberg's Dynamic Thought, by William Walker Atkinson

