CHAPTER VIII

THE FORCES OF NATURE


The Substance filling the Universe is in constant and unceasing Motion.
Motion is evidenced in every physical and chemical process and change,
and manifested in the constant interchange of position of the Particles
of Substance.

There is absolutely no rest in Nature--everything is constantly
changing--moving--and vibrating. Building-up processes are ever at work
forming larger masses or bodies of the Particles--and tearing-down
processes, disintegration and decomposition of Molecules and Atoms, and
Corpuscles, are constantly at work also. Nature maintains a constant
balance among her Forces. If the building-up energies and forces were
allowed full sway, then all the Particles in the Universe ultimately
would gravitate to a common centre, thus forming a compact and solid
Mass, which would thus dwell for Eternity, unless the Creative Power
should move upon it and again scatter its Particles in all directions.
And, if the tearing-down, and dispersive forces and energies were
allowed full sway, the Particles would fly apart and would remain
asunder for Eternity, unless called together by some new Creative fiat.

But Nature pits one force against another, maintaining an equilibrium.
The result is constant play and inter-play of forces, causing
distribution, and redistribution of Particles, following the
gathering-together and building-up processes.

There is no lost motion, or waste force. One form of force and motion is
converted into another, and so on, and on. Nothing is lost--all force is
conserved, as we shall see as we proceed.

In the public mind--or rather, in the mind of that part of the public
which think of the matter at all--there seems to be an idea that "Force"
is something of the nature of an entity, separate from Substance or
Mind--something that pounces down upon Substance and drives it along by
presence from without. The ancient philosophers regarded Substance as
acted upon from _without_ by an entity called Force, Substance being
regarded as absolutely inert and "dead." This idea, which is still held
by the average person, owing, doubtless, to the survival of old forms of
expression, was generally held by philosophers until the time of
Descartes and Newton. This old idea was due to the teachings of
Aristotle--he of the Ether Theory--and Science and Philosophy were timid
about shaking off the Aristotelian dogmas. Others held that Light, Heat
and Electricity were "fluids" conveyed from body to body--in fact the
general public still entertains this idea regarding Electricity, owing
to the use of the term "the Electric _fluid_."

The present teaching of Science is that Force is the result of the
motion of the Particles of Substance, and, of course, originates from
_within_, rather than from without. It is true that Motion may be
communicated to a body by means of another body in Motion imparting the
same to it, but that does not alter the case, for the Original Motion
came from the movement and vibration of the Particles of Substance,
although it may have passed through many stages of transformation,
change and transmission in its progress. The only exception to the rule
is Gravitation, which is a form of Force, the nature of which is unknown
to Science, although its laws of operation, etc., are understood. We
shall learn some new facts about Gravitation in the forthcoming chapters
of this book.

It will be well for us to remember _this_ fact, in our consideration of
Force and Motion--that Force and Motion _originate_ from the inherent
property of Motion passed by the Particles of Substance, and come from
_within_, not from without. This is the best teaching of Modern Science,
and also, forms an important part of the Theory of Dynamic Thought which
is advanced in this book. Buchner, the author of "_Force and Matter_,"
vigorously insists upon this conception, saying, among many other
similar expressions: "Force may be defined as a condition of activity or
a motion of matter, or of the minutest particles of matter or a capacity
thereof."

The term "Force" is generally defined in works on Physics as "That which
causes, changes or terminates Motion." The word "Force" is generally
used in the sense of "in action," while "Energy" is usually used in the
sense of "Potential Force--capacity for performing work," the idea being
that it is "stored-up" force, or "force awaiting use." The term "Power"
is used in two senses, the first meaning "a measure of Mechanical
Energy," such as a "forty horse-power engine," etc.; the second sense
being "Capacity or Ability to Act, or exercise Force," this use being
almost identical to the idea of "Energy," as above described, although,
possibly, a little stronger expression.

The Materialistic school holds that Force is a property of Matter, the
latter being regarded as the "real thing" of the Universe. Others hold
that Force is the "real thing," and that what is called Matter, or
Substance, is but a centre of Force, etc. Others hold that the two are
but aspects of the same thing, calling the "thing" by the name
"Matter-Force," or "Force-Matter." Haeckel calls this combined "thing"
by the name of "Substance," claiming that what are called Matter and
Force are but "attributes" of it, the third "attribute" being
"Sensation," which he holds is akin to Mind--"Haeckel's Substance" is
held to be Eternal, and Self-existent--its own Cause, in fact. (In this
book the term "Substance" is not used in this sense, but merely as
synonymous with what Science usually calls "Matter.")

The views advanced in this book differ materially from any of those
above mentioned, it being held by the writer that "All Force is
Vital-Mental Force," and, consequently, "Force" as a separate thing is
considered an unreasonable proposition--what is called "Force" being
considered merely an action of Mind upon Substance, causing Motion. The
writer does not intend to advance this idea at this point beyond the
mere mentioning of the fact--the theory being brought out and developed
as we proceed--and he will proceed to a consideration of the phenomena
of Force, along the lines of Modern Science, believing that in this way
the subject may be better understood.

The term "Motion," as used in Physics, is defined as: "The act, process
or state of changing place or position; movement"--(Webster). So you
see, Motion is the movement of Substance changing place or position;
Force is that which causes, changes or terminates Motion; and Energy is
the "capacity" for manifesting Force; and Power the Ability to Act. In
works on Physics you will notice the expression, "Potential Energy,"
meaning Energy awaiting action; also "Kinetic Energy," meaning Energy in
Action; that is, in Motion. We shall not need these terms in this book,
but it is well to understand them.

Another term frequently met with, is "Conservation of Energy," which is
used to indicate that Law of Physics the operation of which renders
Energy indestructible. That is, Science holds that Energy can not be
destroyed--that it is not lost, or created, but is merely transformed
into other forms of Energy, Potential or Kinetic. Therefore, after
Energy is used, it either passes into a state of Potential Energy or
Rest, awaiting a future call to Activity, or else is immediately
transformed into another form of Kinetic Energy, or Energy in Action.
The theory holds that the quantity or amount of Energy in the Universe
is fixed in its totality--none may be created or destroyed--there can be
no addition to, or subtraction from the Totality of Energy--that all
Energy used has been previously stored up, or else has been immediately
transmitted or transformed. It is also held that when Energy manifests
as the result of work performed, it is always found that it is at the
expense of some previously manifested form of Energy--that the agency by
which the work is performed always parts with its stock of Energy, and
that the thing worked upon always acquires or gains the amount of Energy
lost by the aforesaid agent, or worker--and yet there is no actual loss
or gain, but merely transformation.

The above theory is mentioned as of interest in the general subject,
although it does not play a prominent part in the subject of this book,
for the writer holds that all Energy resides in Mind, and emerges
therefrom, and, in the end, returns thereto. This being believed, it is
seen that Energy is not to be thought of as a separate thing having a
"totality," but merely as a quality of Mind--the question of its
totality or fixed quantity not being inquired into, although both,
probably, run along the lines of the nature of Mind, and depend upon
the limitations, or lack of limitations, of the latter. However, the
question does not assume a vital importance in our consideration of the
subject.

So far as the question of transmission, or transformation of Energy, is
concerned, however, the principles of the Law of Conservation of Energy
may be accepted as correct, although it more properly belongs to the
principle of what has been called "The Corelation of Force," the idea of
which is that one form of Energy may be, and is always, transformed into
another form, and so on, and on, unto infinity. This idea is followed in
this book, except that the idea of "From Mind originally, to Mind
finally," is incorporated within it. This law of the "Corelation of
Force" may be illustrated by the following quotation from Tyndall, the
great scientist of the last century, who says:

"A river, in descending from an elevation of 7720 feet, generates an
amount of heat competent to augment its own temperature 10 degrees F.,
and this amount of heat was abstracted from the sun, in order to lift
the matter of the river to the elevation from which it falls. As long as
the river continues on the heights, whether in the solid form as a
glacier, or in the liquid form as a lake, the heat expended by the sun
in lifting it has disappeared from the universe. It has been consumed in
the act of lifting. But, at the moment that the river starts upon its
downward course, and encounters the resistance of its bed, the heat
expanded in its elevation begins to be restored. The mental eye, indeed,
can follow the emission from its source through the ether, as vibratory
motion, to the ocean, where it ceases to be vibration, and takes the
potential form among the molecules of aqueous vapor; to the
mountain-top, where the heat absorbed in vaporization is given out in
condensation, while that expended by the sun in _lifting_ the water to
its present elevation is still unrestored. This we find paid back to the
last unit by the friction along the river's bed; at the bottom of the
cascade, where the plunge of the torrent is suddenly arrested; in the
warmth of the machinery turned by the river; in the spark from the
millstone; beneath the crusher of the miner; in the Alpine saw-mill; in
the milk-churn of the chalet; in the supports of the cradle in which the
mountaineer, by water-power, rocks his baby to sleep. All the forms of
mechanical motion here indicated are simply the parcelling out of an
amount of calorific motion derived originally from the sun; and, at each
point at which the mechanical motion is destroyed or diminished, it is
the sun's heat which is restored."

The following quotation, also, is interesting as illustrating another
phase of this law:

"The work performed by men and other animals is due to the transformed
energy of food. This food is of vegetable origin and owes its energy to
the solar rays. The energy of men and animals is, therefore, the
transformed energy of the sun. Excepting the energy of the tides, the
sun's rays are the source of all the forms of energy practically
available. It has been estimated that the heat received by the earth
from the sun each year would melt a layer of ice over the entire globe a
hundred feet in thickness. This represents energy equal to one
horse-power for each fifty square feet of surface."--Anthony and
Brackett.

From the above quotations, it will be seen that the principal and most
familiar sources (or great storage batteries) of Energy, apparent to
dwellers upon this planet, are (1) the Earth manifesting the Power of
Gravitation; and (2) the Sun, manifesting solar heat. In Tyndall's
illustration we see the force of the sun's Energy--heat--raising the
water from the ocean, by evaporation (although aided by the earth's
gravitation "pulling down" the heavier air, allowing the vapor to rise).
Then we see the Force of Gravitation causes the condensed vapor to fall
as rain or snow on the mountain-top--then causing the rain to run into
little streams, and so on until the river is reached--then causing the
river to start on its downward journey of over seven thousand feet--then
causing it to plunge over the cascade; to turn the wheels that operated
the machinery, and turned the millstone, and the crusher of the miner,
and the saw-mill, and the milk-churn, and the cradle. And, as Tyndall
might have added, had he lived a little later--in the running of the
dynamo, which running, produced electricity, that in turn caused lights
to burn; other machinery to run and manufacture things; stoves to cook;
flat-irons to iron; automobiles and engines to run; and many other
things along the lines of transmitting Energy, Force and Motion.

And in this consideration, let us not forget the important part that
Gravitation--that most wonderful of all Forces--plays in the grand
scheme of Nature. Not only does this Force cause the planets to circle
around the sun, and, perhaps that sun around another sun, and so on, and
on until the matter becomes unthinkable--not only this, but it performs
a million parts in the affair of earthly Matter, as we shall see in a
later chapter. The Force of Gravitation is one of the greatest
mysteries confronting Science to-day, although many believe it a simple
question. Gravitation and the Universal Ether contain the great secrets
of Nature that Man is striving to unveil. And yet, so "common" is
Gravitation that the race, including almost all the scientists, take it
as a "matter of course." We shall devote much attention to the question
of Gravitation in the forthcoming chapters of this book, for it plays a
very important part in the general theory of Dynamic Thought, upon which
this book is based. We shall have a special chapter devoted to it, a
little later on, and the matter will also come up for explanation
further on in the book.

But, in the meantime, let us consider the other forms of Energy, _viz._,
Heat, Light, Magnetism and Electricity, which with Gravitation and
Attraction of other kinds, form the Forces of Nature.




