CHAPTER IV—Fourth Quarter.


Some new remembrance of the ghostly figures in the Bells; some faint
impression of the ringing of the Chimes; some giddy consciousness of
having seen the swarm of phantoms reproduced and reproduced until the
recollection of them lost itself in the confusion of their numbers; some
hurried knowledge, how conveyed to him he knew not, that more years had
passed; and Trotty, with the Spirit of the child attending him, stood
looking on at mortal company.

Fat company, rosy-cheeked company, comfortable company.  They were but
two, but they were red enough for ten.  They sat before a bright fire,
with a small low table between them; and unless the fragrance of hot tea
and muffins lingered longer in that room than in most others, the table
had seen service very lately.  But all the cups and saucers being clean,
and in their proper places in the corner-cupboard; and the brass
toasting-fork hanging in its usual nook and spreading its four idle
fingers out as if it wanted to be measured for a glove; there remained no
other visible tokens of the meal just finished, than such as purred and
washed their whiskers in the person of the basking cat, and glistened in
the gracious, not to say the greasy, faces of her patrons.

This cosy couple (married, evidently) had made a fair division of the
fire between them, and sat looking at the glowing sparks that dropped
into the grate; now nodding off into a doze; now waking up again when
some hot fragment, larger than the rest, came rattling down, as if the
fire were coming with it.

It was in no danger of sudden extinction, however; for it gleamed not
only in the little room, and on the panes of window-glass in the door,
and on the curtain half drawn across them, but in the little shop beyond.
A little shop, quite crammed and choked with the abundance of its stock;
a perfectly voracious little shop, with a maw as accommodating and full
as any shark’s.  Cheese, butter, firewood, soap, pickles, matches, bacon,
table-beer, peg-tops, sweetmeats, boys’ kites, bird-seed, cold ham, birch
brooms, hearth-stones, salt, vinegar, blacking, red-herrings, stationery,
lard, mushroom-ketchup, staylaces, loaves of bread, shuttlecocks, eggs,
and slate pencil; everything was fish that came to the net of this greedy
little shop, and all articles were in its net.  How many other kinds of
petty merchandise were there, it would be difficult to say; but balls of
packthread, ropes of onions, pounds of candles, cabbage-nets, and
brushes, hung in bunches from the ceiling, like extraordinary fruit;
while various odd canisters emitting aromatic smells, established the
veracity of the inscription over the outer door, which informed the
public that the keeper of this little shop was a licensed dealer in tea,
coffee, tobacco, pepper, and snuff.

Glancing at such of these articles as were visible in the shining of the
blaze, and the less cheerful radiance of two smoky lamps which burnt but
dimly in the shop itself, as though its plethora sat heavy on their
lungs; and glancing, then, at one of the two faces by the parlour-fire;
Trotty had small difficulty in recognising in the stout old lady, Mrs.
Chickenstalker: always inclined to corpulency, even in the days when he
had known her as established in the general line, and having a small
balance against him in her books.

The features of her companion were less easy to him.  The great broad
chin, with creases in it large enough to hide a finger in; the astonished
eyes, that seemed to expostulate with themselves for sinking deeper and
deeper into the yielding fat of the soft face; the nose afflicted with
that disordered action of its functions which is generally termed The
Snuffles; the short thick throat and labouring chest, with other beauties
of the like description; though calculated to impress the memory, Trotty
could at first allot to nobody he had ever known: and yet he had some
recollection of them too.  At length, in Mrs. Chickenstalker’s partner in
the general line, and in the crooked and eccentric line of life, he
recognised the former porter of Sir Joseph Bowley; an apoplectic
innocent, who had connected himself in Trotty’s mind with Mrs.
Chickenstalker years ago, by giving him admission to the mansion where he
had confessed his obligations to that lady, and drawn on his unlucky head
such grave reproach.

Trotty had little interest in a change like this, after the changes he
had seen; but association is very strong sometimes; and he looked
involuntarily behind the parlour-door, where the accounts of credit
customers were usually kept in chalk.  There was no record of his name.
Some names were there, but they were strange to him, and infinitely fewer
than of old; from which he argued that the porter was an advocate of
ready-money transactions, and on coming into the business had looked
pretty sharp after the Chickenstalker defaulters.

So desolate was Trotty, and so mournful for the youth and promise of his
blighted child, that it was a sorrow to him, even to have no place in
Mrs. Chickenstalker’s ledger.

‘What sort of a night is it, Anne?’ inquired the former porter of Sir
Joseph Bowley, stretching out his legs before the fire, and rubbing as
much of them as his short arms could reach; with an air that added, ‘Here
I am if it’s bad, and I don’t want to go out if it’s good.’

‘Blowing and sleeting hard,’ returned his wife; ‘and threatening snow.
Dark.  And very cold.’

‘I’m glad to think we had muffins,’ said the former porter, in the tone
of one who had set his conscience at rest.  ‘It’s a sort of night that’s
meant for muffins.  Likewise crumpets.  Also Sally Lunns.’

The former porter mentioned each successive kind of eatable, as if he
were musingly summing up his good actions.  After which he rubbed his fat
legs as before, and jerking them at the knees to get the fire upon the
yet unroasted parts, laughed as if somebody had tickled him.

‘You’re in spirits, Tugby, my dear,’ observed his wife.

The firm was Tugby, late Chickenstalker.

‘No,’ said Tugby.  ‘No.  Not particular.  I’m a little elewated.  The
muffins came so pat!’

With that he chuckled until he was black in the face; and had so much ado
to become any other colour, that his fat legs took the strangest
excursions into the air.  Nor were they reduced to anything like decorum
until Mrs. Tugby had thumped him violently on the back, and shaken him as
if he were a great bottle.

‘Good gracious, goodness, lord-a-mercy bless and save the man!’ cried
Mrs. Tugby, in great terror.  ‘What’s he doing?’

Mr. Tugby wiped his eyes, and faintly repeated that he found himself a
little elewated.

‘Then don’t be so again, that’s a dear good soul,’ said Mrs. Tugby, ‘if
you don’t want to frighten me to death, with your struggling and
fighting!’

Mr. Tugby said he wouldn’t; but, his whole existence was a fight, in
which, if any judgment might be founded on the constantly-increasing
shortness of his breath, and the deepening purple of his face, he was
always getting the worst of it.

‘So it’s blowing, and sleeting, and threatening snow; and it’s dark, and
very cold, is it, my dear?’ said Mr. Tugby, looking at the fire, and
reverting to the cream and marrow of his temporary elevation.

‘Hard weather indeed,’ returned his wife, shaking her head.

‘Aye, aye!  Years,’ said Mr. Tugby, ‘are like Christians in that respect.
Some of ’em die hard; some of ’em die easy.  This one hasn’t many days to
run, and is making a fight for it.  I like him all the better.  There’s a
customer, my love!’

Attentive to the rattling door, Mrs. Tugby had already risen.

‘Now then!’ said that lady, passing out into the little shop.  ‘What’s
wanted?  Oh!  I beg your pardon, sir, I’m sure.  I didn’t think it was
you.’

She made this apology to a gentleman in black, who, with his wristbands
tucked up, and his hat cocked loungingly on one side, and his hands in
his pockets, sat down astride on the table-beer barrel, and nodded in
return.

‘This is a bad business up-stairs, Mrs. Tugby,’ said the gentleman.  ‘The
man can’t live.’

‘Not the back-attic can’t!’ cried Tugby, coming out into the shop to join
the conference.

‘The back-attic, Mr. Tugby,’ said the gentleman, ‘is coming down-stairs
fast, and will be below the basement very soon.’

Looking by turns at Tugby and his wife, he sounded the barrel with his
knuckles for the depth of beer, and having found it, played a tune upon
the empty part.

‘The back-attic, Mr. Tugby,’ said the gentleman: Tugby having stood in
silent consternation for some time: ‘is Going.’

‘Then,’ said Tugby, turning to his wife, ‘he must Go, you know, before
he’s Gone.’

‘I don’t think you can move him,’ said the gentleman, shaking his head.
‘I wouldn’t take the responsibility of saying it could be done, myself.
You had better leave him where he is.  He can’t live long.’

‘It’s the only subject,’ said Tugby, bringing the butter-scale down upon
the counter with a crash, by weighing his fist on it, ‘that we’ve ever
had a word upon; she and me; and look what it comes to!  He’s going to
die here, after all.  Going to die upon the premises.  Going to die in
our house!’

‘And where should he have died, Tugby?’ cried his wife.

‘In the workhouse,’ he returned.  ‘What are workhouses made for?’

‘Not for that,’ said Mrs. Tugby, with great energy.  ‘Not for that!
Neither did I marry you for that.  Don’t think it, Tugby.  I won’t have
it.  I won’t allow it.  I’d be separated first, and never see your face
again.  When my widow’s name stood over that door, as it did for many
years: this house being known as Mrs. Chickenstalker’s far and wide, and
never known but to its honest credit and its good report: when my widow’s
name stood over that door, Tugby, I knew him as a handsome, steady,
manly, independent youth; I knew her as the sweetest-looking,
sweetest-tempered girl, eyes ever saw; I knew her father (poor old
creetur, he fell down from the steeple walking in his sleep, and killed
himself), for the simplest, hardest-working, childest-hearted man, that
ever drew the breath of life; and when I turn them out of house and home,
may angels turn me out of Heaven.  As they would!  And serve me right!’

Her old face, which had been a plump and dimpled one before the changes
which had come to pass, seemed to shine out of her as she said these
words; and when she dried her eyes, and shook her head and her
handkerchief at Tugby, with an expression of firmness which it was quite
clear was not to be easily resisted, Trotty said, ‘Bless her!  Bless
her!’

Then he listened, with a panting heart, for what should follow.  Knowing
nothing yet, but that they spoke of Meg.

If Tugby had been a little elevated in the parlour, he more than balanced
that account by being not a little depressed in the shop, where he now
stood staring at his wife, without attempting a reply; secretly
conveying, however—either in a fit of abstraction or as a precautionary
measure—all the money from the till into his own pockets, as he looked at
her.

The gentleman upon the table-beer cask, who appeared to be some
authorised medical attendant upon the poor, was far too well accustomed,
evidently, to little differences of opinion between man and wife, to
interpose any remark in this instance.  He sat softly whistling, and
turning little drops of beer out of the tap upon the ground, until there
was a perfect calm: when he raised his head, and said to Mrs. Tugby, late
Chickenstalker:

‘There’s something interesting about the woman, even now.  How did she
come to marry him?’

‘Why that,’ said Mrs. Tugby, taking a seat near him, ‘is not the least
cruel part of her story, sir.  You see they kept company, she and
Richard, many years ago.  When they were a young and beautiful couple,
everything was settled, and they were to have been married on a New
Year’s Day.  But, somehow, Richard got it into his head, through what the
gentlemen told him, that he might do better, and that he’d soon repent
it, and that she wasn’t good enough for him, and that a young man of
spirit had no business to be married.  And the gentlemen frightened her,
and made her melancholy, and timid of his deserting her, and of her
children coming to the gallows, and of its being wicked to be man and
wife, and a good deal more of it.  And in short, they lingered and
lingered, and their trust in one another was broken, and so at last was
the match.  But the fault was his.  She would have married him, sir,
joyfully.  I’ve seen her heart swell many times afterwards, when he
passed her in a proud and careless way; and never did a woman grieve more
truly for a man, than she for Richard when he first went wrong.’

‘Oh! he went wrong, did he?’ said the gentleman, pulling out the vent-peg
of the table-beer, and trying to peep down into the barrel through the
hole.

‘Well, sir, I don’t know that he rightly understood himself, you see.  I
think his mind was troubled by their having broke with one another; and
that but for being ashamed before the gentlemen, and perhaps for being
uncertain too, how she might take it, he’d have gone through any
suffering or trial to have had Meg’s promise and Meg’s hand again.
That’s my belief.  He never said so; more’s the pity!  He took to
drinking, idling, bad companions: all the fine resources that were to be
so much better for him than the Home he might have had.  He lost his
looks, his character, his health, his strength, his friends, his work:
everything!’

‘He didn’t lose everything, Mrs. Tugby,’ returned the gentleman, ‘because
he gained a wife; and I want to know how he gained her.’

‘I’m coming to it, sir, in a moment.  This went on for years and years;
he sinking lower and lower; she enduring, poor thing, miseries enough to
wear her life away.  At last, he was so cast down, and cast out, that no
one would employ or notice him; and doors were shut upon him, go where he
would.  Applying from place to place, and door to door; and coming for
the hundredth time to one gentleman who had often and often tried him (he
was a good workman to the very end); that gentleman, who knew his
history, said, “I believe you are incorrigible; there is only one person
in the world who has a chance of reclaiming you; ask me to trust you no
more, until she tries to do it.”  Something like that, in his anger and
vexation.’

‘Ah!’ said the gentleman.  ‘Well?’

‘Well, sir, he went to her, and kneeled to her; said it was so; said it
ever had been so; and made a prayer to her to save him.’

‘And she?—Don’t distress yourself, Mrs. Tugby.’

‘She came to me that night to ask me about living here.  “What he was
once to me,” she said, “is buried in a grave, side by side with what I
was to him.  But I have thought of this; and I will make the trial.  In
the hope of saving him; for the love of the light-hearted girl (you
remember her) who was to have been married on a New Year’s Day; and for
the love of her Richard.”  And she said he had come to her from Lilian,
and Lilian had trusted to him, and she never could forget that.  So they
were married; and when they came home here, and I saw them, I hoped that
such prophecies as parted them when they were young, may not often fulfil
themselves as they did in this case, or I wouldn’t be the makers of them
for a Mine of Gold.’

The gentleman got off the cask, and stretched himself, observing:

‘I suppose he used her ill, as soon as they were married?’

‘I don’t think he ever did that,’ said Mrs. Tugby, shaking her head, and
wiping her eyes.  ‘He went on better for a short time; but, his habits
were too old and strong to be got rid of; he soon fell back a little; and
was falling fast back, when his illness came so strong upon him.  I think
he has always felt for her.  I am sure he has.  I have seen him, in his
crying fits and tremblings, try to kiss her hand; and I have heard him
call her “Meg,” and say it was her nineteenth birthday.  There he has
been lying, now, these weeks and months.  Between him and her baby, she
has not been able to do her old work; and by not being able to be
regular, she has lost it, even if she could have done it.  How they have
lived, I hardly know!’

‘I know,’ muttered Mr. Tugby; looking at the till, and round the shop,
and at his wife; and rolling his head with immense intelligence.  ‘Like
Fighting Cocks!’

He was interrupted by a cry—a sound of lamentation—from the upper story
of the house.  The gentleman moved hurriedly to the door.

‘My friend,’ he said, looking back, ‘you needn’t discuss whether he shall
be removed or not.  He has spared you that trouble, I believe.’

Saying so, he ran up-stairs, followed by Mrs. Tugby; while Mr. Tugby
panted and grumbled after them at leisure: being rendered more than
commonly short-winded by the weight of the till, in which there had been
an inconvenient quantity of copper.  Trotty, with the child beside him,
floated up the staircase like mere air.

‘Follow her!  Follow her!  Follow her!’  He heard the ghostly voices in
the Bells repeat their words as he ascended.  ‘Learn it, from the
creature dearest to your heart!’

It was over.  It was over.  And this was she, her father’s pride and joy!
This haggard, wretched woman, weeping by the bed, if it deserved that
name, and pressing to her breast, and hanging down her head upon, an
infant.  Who can tell how spare, how sickly, and how poor an infant!  Who
can tell how dear!

‘Thank God!’ cried Trotty, holding up his folded hands.  ‘O, God be
thanked!  She loves her child!’

The gentleman, not otherwise hard-hearted or indifferent to such scenes,
than that he saw them every day, and knew that they were figures of no
moment in the Filer sums—mere scratches in the working of these
calculations—laid his hand upon the heart that beat no more, and listened
for the breath, and said, ‘His pain is over.  It’s better as it is!’
Mrs. Tugby tried to comfort her with kindness.  Mr. Tugby tried
philosophy.

‘Come, come!’ he said, with his hands in his pockets, ‘you mustn’t give
way, you know.  That won’t do.  You must fight up.  What would have
become of me if _I_ had given way when I was porter, and we had as many
as six runaway carriage-doubles at our door in one night!  But, I fell
back upon my strength of mind, and didn’t open it!’

Again Trotty heard the voices saying, ‘Follow her!’  He turned towards
his guide, and saw it rising from him, passing through the air.  ‘Follow
her!’ it said.  And vanished.

He hovered round her; sat down at her feet; looked up into her face for
one trace of her old self; listened for one note of her old pleasant
voice.  He flitted round the child: so wan, so prematurely old, so
dreadful in its gravity, so plaintive in its feeble, mournful, miserable
wail.  He almost worshipped it.  He clung to it as her only safeguard; as
the last unbroken link that bound her to endurance.  He set his father’s
hope and trust on the frail baby; watched her every look upon it as she
held it in her arms; and cried a thousand times, ‘She loves it!  God be
thanked, she loves it!’

He saw the woman tend her in the night; return to her when her grudging
husband was asleep, and all was still; encourage her, shed tears with
her, set nourishment before her.  He saw the day come, and the night
again; the day, the night; the time go by; the house of death relieved of
death; the room left to herself and to the child; he heard it moan and
cry; he saw it harass her, and tire her out, and when she slumbered in
exhaustion, drag her back to consciousness, and hold her with its little
hands upon the rack; but she was constant to it, gentle with it, patient
with it.  Patient!  Was its loving mother in her inmost heart and soul,
and had its Being knitted up with hers as when she carried it unborn.

All this time, she was in want: languishing away, in dire and pining
want.  With the baby in her arms, she wandered here and there, in quest
of occupation; and with its thin face lying in her lap, and looking up in
hers, did any work for any wretched sum; a day and night of labour for as
many farthings as there were figures on the dial.  If she had quarrelled
with it; if she had neglected it; if she had looked upon it with a
moment’s hate; if, in the frenzy of an instant, she had struck it!  No.
His comfort was, She loved it always.

She told no one of her extremity, and wandered abroad in the day lest she
should be questioned by her only friend: for any help she received from
her hands, occasioned fresh disputes between the good woman and her
husband; and it was new bitterness to be the daily cause of strife and
discord, where she owed so much.

She loved it still.  She loved it more and more.  But a change fell on
the aspect of her love.  One night.

She was singing faintly to it in its sleep, and walking to and fro to
hush it, when her door was softly opened, and a man looked in.

‘For the last time,’ he said.

‘William Fern!’

‘For the last time.’

He listened like a man pursued: and spoke in whispers.

‘Margaret, my race is nearly run.  I couldn’t finish it, without a
parting word with you.  Without one grateful word.’

‘What have you done?’ she asked: regarding him with terror.

He looked at her, but gave no answer.

After a short silence, he made a gesture with his hand, as if he set her
question by; as if he brushed it aside; and said:

‘It’s long ago, Margaret, now: but that night is as fresh in my memory as
ever ’twas.  We little thought, then,’ he added, looking round, ‘that we
should ever meet like this.  Your child, Margaret?  Let me have it in my
arms.  Let me hold your child.’

He put his hat upon the floor, and took it.  And he trembled as he took
it, from head to foot.

‘Is it a girl?’

‘Yes.’

He put his hand before its little face.

‘See how weak I’m grown, Margaret, when I want the courage to look at it!
Let her be, a moment.  I won’t hurt her.  It’s long ago, but—What’s her
name?’

‘Margaret,’ she answered, quickly.

‘I’m glad of that,’ he said.  ‘I’m glad of that!’  He seemed to breathe
more freely; and after pausing for an instant, took away his hand, and
looked upon the infant’s face.  But covered it again, immediately.

‘Margaret!’ he said; and gave her back the child.  ‘It’s Lilian’s.’

‘Lilian’s!’

‘I held the same face in my arms when Lilian’s mother died and left her.’

‘When Lilian’s mother died and left her!’ she repeated, wildly.

‘How shrill you speak!  Why do you fix your eyes upon me so?  Margaret!’

She sunk down in a chair, and pressed the infant to her breast, and wept
over it.  Sometimes, she released it from her embrace, to look anxiously
in its face: then strained it to her bosom again.  At those times, when
she gazed upon it, then it was that something fierce and terrible began
to mingle with her love.  Then it was that her old father quailed.

‘Follow her!’ was sounded through the house.  ‘Learn it, from the
creature dearest to your heart!’

‘Margaret,’ said Fern, bending over her, and kissing her upon the brow:
‘I thank you for the last time.  Good night.  Good bye!  Put your hand in
mine, and tell me you’ll forget me from this hour, and try to think the
end of me was here.’

‘What have you done?’ she asked again.

‘There’ll be a Fire to-night,’ he said, removing from her.  ‘There’ll be
Fires this winter-time, to light the dark nights, East, West, North, and
South.  When you see the distant sky red, they’ll be blazing.  When you
see the distant sky red, think of me no more; or, if you do, remember
what a Hell was lighted up inside of me, and think you see its flames
reflected in the clouds.  Good night.  Good bye!’  She called to him; but
he was gone.  She sat down stupefied, until her infant roused her to a
sense of hunger, cold, and darkness.  She paced the room with it the
livelong night, hushing it and soothing it.  She said at intervals, ‘Like
Lilian, when her mother died and left her!’  Why was her step so quick,
her eye so wild, her love so fierce and terrible, whenever she repeated
those words?

‘But, it is Love,’ said Trotty.  ‘It is Love.  She’ll never cease to love
it.  My poor Meg!’

She dressed the child next morning with unusual care—ah, vain expenditure
of care upon such squalid robes!—and once more tried to find some means
of life.  It was the last day of the Old Year.  She tried till night, and
never broke her fast.  She tried in vain.

She mingled with an abject crowd, who tarried in the snow, until it
pleased some officer appointed to dispense the public charity (the lawful
charity; not that once preached upon a Mount), to call them in, and
question them, and say to this one, ‘Go to such a place,’ to that one,
‘Come next week;’ to make a football of another wretch, and pass him here
and there, from hand to hand, from house to house, until he wearied and
lay down to die; or started up and robbed, and so became a higher sort of
criminal, whose claims allowed of no delay.  Here, too, she failed.

She loved her child, and wished to have it lying on her breast.  And that
was quite enough.

It was night: a bleak, dark, cutting night: when, pressing the child
close to her for warmth, she arrived outside the house she called her
home.  She was so faint and giddy, that she saw no one standing in the
doorway until she was close upon it, and about to enter.  Then, she
recognised the master of the house, who had so disposed himself—with his
person it was not difficult—as to fill up the whole entry.

‘O!’ he said softly.  ‘You have come back?’

She looked at the child, and shook her head.

‘Don’t you think you have lived here long enough without paying any rent?
Don’t you think that, without any money, you’ve been a pretty constant
customer at this shop, now?’ said Mr. Tugby.

She repeated the same mute appeal.

‘Suppose you try and deal somewhere else,’ he said.  ‘And suppose you
provide yourself with another lodging.  Come!  Don’t you think you could
manage it?’

She said in a low voice, that it was very late.  To-morrow.

‘Now I see what you want,’ said Tugby; ‘and what you mean.  You know
there are two parties in this house about you, and you delight in setting
’em by the ears.  I don’t want any quarrels; I’m speaking softly to avoid
a quarrel; but if you don’t go away, I’ll speak out loud, and you shall
cause words high enough to please you.  But you shan’t come in.  That I
am determined.’

She put her hair back with her hand, and looked in a sudden manner at the
sky, and the dark lowering distance.

‘This is the last night of an Old Year, and I won’t carry ill-blood and
quarrellings and disturbances into a New One, to please you nor anybody
else,’ said Tugby, who was quite a retail Friend and Father.  ‘I wonder
you an’t ashamed of yourself, to carry such practices into a New Year.
If you haven’t any business in the world, but to be always giving way,
and always making disturbances between man and wife, you’d be better out
of it.  Go along with you.’

‘Follow her!  To desperation!’

Again the old man heard the voices.  Looking up, he saw the figures
hovering in the air, and pointing where she went, down the dark street.

‘She loves it!’ he exclaimed, in agonised entreaty for her.  ‘Chimes! she
loves it still!’

‘Follow her!’  The shadow swept upon the track she had taken, like a
cloud.

He joined in the pursuit; he kept close to her; he looked into her face.
He saw the same fierce and terrible expression mingling with her love,
and kindling in her eyes.  He heard her say, ‘Like Lilian!  To be changed
like Lilian!’ and her speed redoubled.

O, for something to awaken her!  For any sight, or sound, or scent, to
call up tender recollections in a brain on fire!  For any gentle image of
the Past, to rise before her!

‘I was her father!  I was her father!’ cried the old man, stretching out
his hands to the dark shadows flying on above.  ‘Have mercy on her, and
on me!  Where does she go?  Turn her back!  I was her father!’

But they only pointed to her, as she hurried on; and said, ‘To
desperation!  Learn it from the creature dearest to your heart!’  A
hundred voices echoed it.  The air was made of breath expended in those
words.  He seemed to take them in, at every gasp he drew.  They were
everywhere, and not to be escaped.  And still she hurried on; the same
light in her eyes, the same words in her mouth, ‘Like Lilian!  To be
changed like Lilian!’  All at once she stopped.

‘Now, turn her back!’ exclaimed the old man, tearing his white hair.  ‘My
child!  Meg!  Turn her back!  Great Father, turn her back!’

In her own scanty shawl, she wrapped the baby warm.  With her fevered
hands, she smoothed its limbs, composed its face, arranged its mean
attire.  In her wasted arms she folded it, as though she never would
resign it more.  And with her dry lips, kissed it in a final pang, and
last long agony of Love.

Putting its tiny hand up to her neck, and holding it there, within her
dress, next to her distracted heart, she set its sleeping face against
her: closely, steadily, against her: and sped onward to the River.

To the rolling River, swift and dim, where Winter Night sat brooding like
the last dark thoughts of many who had sought a refuge there before her.
Where scattered lights upon the banks gleamed sullen, red, and dull, as
torches that were burning there, to show the way to Death.  Where no
abode of living people cast its shadow, on the deep, impenetrable,
melancholy shade.

To the River!  To that portal of Eternity, her desperate footsteps tended
with the swiftness of its rapid waters running to the sea.  He tried to
touch her as she passed him, going down to its dark level: but, the wild
distempered form, the fierce and terrible love, the desperation that had
left all human check or hold behind, swept by him like the wind.

He followed her.  She paused a moment on the brink, before the dreadful
plunge.  He fell down on his knees, and in a shriek addressed the figures
in the Bells now hovering above them.

‘I have learnt it!’ cried the old man.  ‘From the creature dearest to my
heart!  O, save her, save her!’

He could wind his fingers in her dress; could hold it!  As the words
escaped his lips, he felt his sense of touch return, and knew that he
detained her.

The figures looked down steadfastly upon him.

‘I have learnt it!’ cried the old man.  ‘O, have mercy on me in this
hour, if, in my love for her, so young and good, I slandered Nature in
the breasts of mothers rendered desperate!  Pity my presumption,
wickedness, and ignorance, and save her.’  He felt his hold relaxing.
They were silent still.

‘Have mercy on her!’ he exclaimed, ‘as one in whom this dreadful crime
has sprung from Love perverted; from the strongest, deepest Love we
fallen creatures know!  Think what her misery must have been, when such
seed bears such fruit!  Heaven meant her to be good.  There is no loving
mother on the earth who might not come to this, if such a life had gone
before.  O, have mercy on my child, who, even at this pass, means mercy
to her own, and dies herself, and perils her immortal soul, to save it!’

She was in his arms.  He held her now.  His strength was like a giant’s.

‘I see the Spirit of the Chimes among you!’ cried the old man, singling
out the child, and speaking in some inspiration, which their looks
conveyed to him.  ‘I know that our inheritance is held in store for us by
Time.  I know there is a sea of Time to rise one day, before which all
who wrong us or oppress us will be swept away like leaves.  I see it, on
the flow!  I know that we must trust and hope, and neither doubt
ourselves, nor doubt the good in one another.  I have learnt it from the
creature dearest to my heart.  I clasp her in my arms again.  O Spirits,
merciful and good, I take your lesson to my breast along with her!  O
Spirits, merciful and good, I am grateful!’

He might have said more; but, the Bells, the old familiar Bells, his own
dear, constant, steady friends, the Chimes, began to ring the joy-peals
for a New Year: so lustily, so merrily, so happily, so gaily, that he
leapt upon his feet, and broke the spell that bound him.

                                * * * * *

‘And whatever you do, father,’ said Meg, ‘don’t eat tripe again, without
asking some doctor whether it’s likely to agree with you; for how you
_have_ been going on, Good gracious!’

She was working with her needle, at the little table by the fire;
dressing her simple gown with ribbons for her wedding.  So quietly happy,
so blooming and youthful, so full of beautiful promise, that he uttered a
great cry as if it were an Angel in his house; then flew to clasp her in
his arms.

But, he caught his feet in the newspaper, which had fallen on the hearth;
and somebody came rushing in between them.

‘No!’ cried the voice of this same somebody; a generous and jolly voice
it was!  ‘Not even you.  Not even you.  The first kiss of Meg in the New
Year is mine.  Mine!  I have been waiting outside the house, this hour,
to hear the Bells and claim it.  Meg, my precious prize, a happy year!  A
life of happy years, my darling wife!’

And Richard smothered her with kisses.

You never in all your life saw anything like Trotty after this.  I don’t
care where you have lived or what you have seen; you never in all your
life saw anything at all approaching him!  He sat down in his chair and
beat his knees and cried; he sat down in his chair and beat his knees and
laughed; he sat down in his chair and beat his knees and laughed and
cried together; he got out of his chair and hugged Meg; he got out of his
chair and hugged Richard; he got out of his chair and hugged them both at
once; he kept running up to Meg, and squeezing her fresh face between his
hands and kissing it, going from her backwards not to lose sight of it,
and running up again like a figure in a magic lantern; and whatever he
did, he was constantly sitting himself down in his chair, and never
stopping in it for one single moment; being—that’s the truth—beside
himself with joy.

‘And to-morrow’s your wedding-day, my pet!’ cried Trotty.  ‘Your real,
happy wedding-day!’

‘To-day!’ cried Richard, shaking hands with him.  ‘To-day.  The Chimes
are ringing in the New Year.  Hear them!’

They WERE ringing!  Bless their sturdy hearts, they WERE ringing!  Great
Bells as they were; melodious, deep-mouthed, noble Bells; cast in no
common metal; made by no common founder; when had they ever chimed like
that, before!

‘But, to-day, my pet,’ said Trotty.  ‘You and Richard had some words
to-day.’

‘Because he’s such a bad fellow, father,’ said Meg.  ‘An’t you, Richard?
Such a headstrong, violent man!  He’d have made no more of speaking his
mind to that great Alderman, and putting _him_ down I don’t know where,
than he would of—’

‘—Kissing Meg,’ suggested Richard.  Doing it too!

‘No.  Not a bit more,’ said Meg.  ‘But I wouldn’t let him, father.  Where
would have been the use!’

‘Richard my boy!’ cried Trotty.  ‘You was turned up Trumps originally;
and Trumps you must be, till you die!  But, you were crying by the fire
to-night, my pet, when I came home!  Why did you cry by the fire?’

‘I was thinking of the years we’ve passed together, father.  Only that.
And thinking that you might miss me, and be lonely.’

Trotty was backing off to that extraordinary chair again, when the child,
who had been awakened by the noise, came running in half-dressed.

‘Why, here she is!’ cried Trotty, catching her up.  ‘Here’s little
Lilian!  Ha ha ha!  Here we are and here we go!  O here we are and here
we go again!  And here we are and here we go! and Uncle Will too!’
Stopping in his trot to greet him heartily.  ‘O, Uncle Will, the vision
that I’ve had to-night, through lodging you!  O, Uncle Will, the
obligations that you’ve laid me under, by your coming, my good friend!’

Before Will Fern could make the least reply, a band of music burst into
the room, attended by a lot of neighbours, screaming ‘A Happy New Year,
Meg!’  ‘A Happy Wedding!’  ‘Many of ’em!’ and other fragmentary good
wishes of that sort.  The Drum (who was a private friend of Trotty’s)
then stepped forward, and said:

‘Trotty Veck, my boy!  It’s got about, that your daughter is going to be
married to-morrow.  There an’t a soul that knows you that don’t wish you
well, or that knows her and don’t wish her well.  Or that knows you both,
and don’t wish you both all the happiness the New Year can bring.  And
here we are, to play it in and dance it in, accordingly.’

Which was received with a general shout.  The Drum was rather drunk,
by-the-bye; but, never mind.

‘What a happiness it is, I’m sure,’ said Trotty, ‘to be so esteemed!  How
kind and neighbourly you are!  It’s all along of my dear daughter.  She
deserves it!’

They were ready for a dance in half a second (Meg and Richard at the
top); and the Drum was on the very brink of feathering away with all his
power; when a combination of prodigious sounds was heard outside, and a
good-humoured comely woman of some fifty years of age, or thereabouts,
came running in, attended by a man bearing a stone pitcher of terrific
size, and closely followed by the marrow-bones and cleavers, and the
bells; not _the_ Bells, but a portable collection on a frame.

Trotty said, ‘It’s Mrs. Chickenstalker!’  And sat down and beat his knees
again.

‘Married, and not tell me, Meg!’ cried the good woman.  ‘Never!  I
couldn’t rest on the last night of the Old Year without coming to wish
you joy.  I couldn’t have done it, Meg.  Not if I had been bed-ridden.
So here I am; and as it’s New Year’s Eve, and the Eve of your wedding
too, my dear, I had a little flip made, and brought it with me.’

Mrs. Chickenstalker’s notion of a little flip did honour to her
character.  The pitcher steamed and smoked and reeked like a volcano; and
the man who had carried it, was faint.

‘Mrs. Tugby!’ said Trotty, who had been going round and round her, in an
ecstasy.—‘I _should_ say, Chickenstalker—Bless your heart and soul!  A
Happy New Year, and many of ’em!  Mrs. Tugby,’ said Trotty when he had
saluted her;—‘I _should_ say, Chickenstalker—This is William Fern and
Lilian.’

The worthy dame, to his surprise, turned very pale and very red.

‘Not Lilian Fern whose mother died in Dorsetshire!’ said she.

Her uncle answered ‘Yes,’ and meeting hastily, they exchanged some
hurried words together; of which the upshot was, that Mrs. Chickenstalker
shook him by both hands; saluted Trotty on his cheek again of her own
free will; and took the child to her capacious breast.

‘Will Fern!’ said Trotty, pulling on his right-hand muffler.  ‘Not the
friend you was hoping to find?’

‘Ay!’ returned Will, putting a hand on each of Trotty’s shoulders.  ‘And
like to prove a’most as good a friend, if that can be, as one I found.’

‘O!’ said Trotty.  ‘Please to play up there.  Will you have the
goodness!’

To the music of the band, and, the bells, the marrow-bones and cleavers,
all at once; and while the Chimes were yet in lusty operation out of
doors; Trotty, making Meg and Richard, second couple, led off Mrs.
Chickenstalker down the dance, and danced it in a step unknown before or
since; founded on his own peculiar trot.

Had Trotty dreamed?  Or, are his joys and sorrows, and the actors in
them, but a dream; himself a dream; the teller of this tale a dreamer,
waking but now?  If it be so, O listener, dear to him in all his visions,
try to bear in mind the stern realities from which these shadows come;
and in your sphere—none is too wide, and none too limited for such an
end—endeavour to correct, improve, and soften them.  So may the New Year
be a happy one to you, happy to many more whose happiness depends on you!
So may each year be happier than the last, and not the meanest of our
brethren or sisterhood debarred their rightful share, in what our Great
Creator formed them to enjoy.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHIMES***


******* This file should be named 653-0.txt or 653-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/5/653



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


