CHAPTER IV

Immortality

Is There Conscious Immortality? What is Immortality? Why We Hope for
Consciousness in a Future Life. How the Ancients Regarded a Future Life.


    Virtue alone builds pyramids. Her monuments shall last when
    Egypt’s fall.—Young.

In order that there should be what is spoken of as conscious
immortality—or post-mortem consciousness—there must be an entity or
organism to manifest it. Consciousness is the resultant of the vibratory
movements of certain groupings of electrons called brain cells, acted on
by certain other outside vibrations. This resultant called consciousness
is the “unconscious cerebration” of the scientists. There can no more
be consciousness without brain cells than there can be the music of a
violin without the violin. There must be the entity or personality with
the brain to receive, preserve, and transmit the vibrations that are
contained in the reservoir of thought in the universe.

All thoughts, words and deeds are preserved and exist as rates of
vibration in the universe, and are open to those attuned to receive
them. We spoke in a former chapter of the illustration of the wireless
telegraph and telephone. The coherer, receiver and transmitter being
attuned, communication is established. This is another illustration of
intelligent PURPOSE in the universe, and man is the mouthpiece of it.

When it is seen that every thought or word belongs to its distinctive
wave and must find a brain attuned to the same rate of vibration to
receive and to voice it, the irrationality of endowing an intangible,
substanceless, non-existing, so-called “spirit” with consciousness must
be apparent to anyone.

This is immortality, which correlates every thought and word of man,
holding them in universal phonographic records, as it were, forming a
vast reservoir from which continuously flows by electrical energy all
so-called intelligent and other vibrations, we receiving those to which
we are attuned. This is a thought that might well engage our most serious
attention, involving as it does a responsibility of no little magnitude.
We may well pause to inquire of ourselves what are we depositing in
those archives of thought for redistribution to ourselves, and to our
posterity, to say nothing of mankind in general.

Certain forms of vibration, such as hatred, malice, envy, jealousy
and especially fear, are productive of disease, poverty, old age and
death—all those inharmonious vibrations which comprise the sum of
all the troubles and sorrows of mankind. The most productive of these
inharmonious conditions known as sickness, poverty, old age and death, is
FEAR. Veneration and worship of all kinds is a form of fear and opens the
body to every ill.

Man through religious teaching and self-made creeds has evolved the idea
of rewards and punishments for the “good” and “bad” deeds of this life,
and as there must be a conscious entity to punish and reward and a place
in which to administer the same, a so-called “future life” becomes a
necessity.

What rational ground for all this? None whatever. The cessation of
consciousness in what is called death, is an inevitable step in the
inauguration and evolution of existence. As we have stated heretofore
life and death are one and the same. The same unit of electric energy
with two impulses—life and death. Continuous vibration. Every movement
being the evolution of some new form demonstrating life’s continuity and
electrical nature.

Thales said (600 B. C.), “All around is change. Everything always
becoming something else. All in motion like streams.” He recognized the
law of evolution or continuous vibration. Theophrastes (371 B. C.) says,
“There is one eternal, indestructible substance out of which everything
arises and into which everything again returns.”

That “eternal, indestructible substance” is now known to be electricity,
and the inherent, unceasing energy of its infinite particles or
electrons—now known to be electrical, polar, sexual—the explanation
of all phenomena embraced under the terms—life and death. Life and
Immortality are synonymous. The present is eternity. The now is all there
is. All conscious or unconscious thought vibration is immortal, and is
recorded in the cylindrical records of the universe, and those having the
attunement to those records are in possession of the so-called secrets
of the universe; which are nothing more than the workings of nature’s
inevitable laws revealed and unfolded to us through an understanding of
this great universal substance—Electricity. The one only substance in the
universe.

This substance, this sea of electrons, of which we are, and in which
we live and move and have our being, is in constant motion even as the
great body of water on our globe. “The waters of the globe are all one
sea and truly seen their tide is one.” So in this electrical ocean there
is ebb and flow, ebb and flow, of etheric and atmospheric conditions.
The movement of these tides and waves is always cyclical, proving their
electrical nature. This is seen in the globule of water, in the globe
tides, in the tornadoes, cyclone, etc. All so-called “destructive
conditions” are due to the breaking of the circuit and the violent
determined effort to close it again, and are in themselves constructive
processes. When the circuit is broken the destructive force is let loose
and continues its havoc until this violently vibrating mass of electrons
has re-formed into other conditions in the great electrical ocean.

The suns, worlds, planets, stars are but varied manifestations of this
vibratory electrical force which through millions of ages has evolved and
rotated them into existence, its limitless energy forever continuing the
work of creation or evolution.

These worlds, suns, planets being prepared to generate and maintain the
various forms of life, which by analogy must be the same on other planets
as on ours.

Beginning with the simplest type of organism, the work of evolution
and progress is carried on until the present race of mankind with its
intelligence and will is produced. And there are much higher types in the
universe than what is called human. All this is produced by the action of
the vibratory electrical force which constitutes life—which IS LIFE. You
may call it God if it pleases you.

Consciousness, intelligence, is but the resultant of varying rates of
vibration of different tempos. The action of the vibratory force is
seen in the plants and flowers where the pruning and concentration of
vibration into one stalk improves the fruit or flower. In the American
Beauty rose many branches and buds are sacrificed to bring one flower to
the fullest perfection.

For ages this same pruning process has been applied to the organism known
as man, in order to evolve the intelligence that has produced our men of
genius and power, to control in turn the very forces that called them
into existence. By self-control man has been enabled to direct these
vibrations, holding in check his varied passions which otherwise would
injure him and hasten his dissolution.

The vibrations known as the ether or sound can produce every emotion we
are capable of displaying. We in turn control these same vibrations and
produce music. Ruskin says, “All one’s life is music if one touches the
note rightly and in tune.” “Light, heat, force, motion, sound, sight,
taste, color, thought, emotion all these are but different rates of
vibration.”

Color vibrations denote the passions. Yellow the lymphatic, red the
positive and aggressive, blue the nervous temperament. Purple or violet
are intense vibrations which usually are self-destructive, overthrowing
the reason and producing insanity. These color-vibrations are in turn
susceptible to inhibition and control by musical vibrations of a much
lower tempo than those of color; musical vibrations attaining to only
thirty-two thousand (32,000) per second at their highest tempo, while
the color vibrations known as violet reach twelve million (12,000,000)
to the second. Is it the SONOROSITY of musical tones that equalizes the
vibrations of color and music?

The vibrations of the tones of a violin have been known to heal the
most obstinate wounds, and even surgical operations have been performed
under the influence of musical vibrations. So potent is this force that
the musical step of the military march has to be broken when crossing a
bridge lest it collapse. The walls of Jericho are said to have collapsed
under the vibrations produced by blowing upon rams’ horns in the hands
of the Israelites. Windows have been broken by the vibratory tones of an
organ.

The varying forms of so-called matter are but varying rates of vibration,
ready to be acted upon and dissolved by other rates. The same force
that tears down builds up. Death is only another rate of vibration set
up by this Eternal Life. Post-mortem consciousness is unscientific and
ridiculous. Organic life gives off electrons, that unite and form a new
organism, and the resulting embryo is of like organism, perpetuating
its kind from generation to generation. As this is continuous and never
ceasing, it must be what is meant by Immortality.




