CHAPTER II

Electricity and Life

Proof That Electricity Is Life. Recent Discoveries in the Wireless
Telegraph and Telephone. Their Effect on the Thought of the Race. Other
Possibilities of Electricity.


    Our little lives are kept in equipose,
    By opposite attractions and desires.—Longfellow.

Recent discoveries in what is called electrical science, demonstrating
the wide range of application of electric vibrations and suggesting
almost unlimited possibilities as to its future adaptation to the
purposes of mankind, indicate that man has at last harnessed the primary
force or energy of the universe to become his willing servant. With the
discovery of the wireless telegraph, and wireless telephone—by means of
which conversation has been carried on at a distance of four hundred
miles—the scientific nature and possibilities of telepathy is understood.
The principle is the same. In the wireless telephone by means of two
instruments attuned to the same rate of vibration two persons widely
separated are enabled to hear each other’s words. In telepathy two
persons whose brain cells are attuned to the same rate of vibration are
enabled to sense each others thoughts, at any distance.

This is the explanation of impressions of impending disaster and death.
The so-called psychic forces are perfectly natural and there is nothing
supernatural in the universe.

A knowledge of the laws of electrical vibration is the key that will
unlock all the secrets of the universe to man.

All motion,—electrical vibration—is the real Book of Life, opened ever to
the true student of science. Burbank by the study of this book of nature
has discovered the law of various polarities or affinities (natural
selection) of vegetables, fruits and flowers and has caused them to
produce new varieties, improving the species.

What is called intelligent purpose is said to be manifested by man in
this ability to direct and assist what is called nature to bring about
different and “better” (?) conditions. Left to herself nature produces
chaotic conditions; weeds, brambles, briars and trees crowding themselves
into various fantastic shapes. Lack of intelligent PURPOSE is shown in
all this and only the “intelligent purpose” displayed by man produces
order out of chaos. Where then is the intelligent purpose of the
universe? Certain vibrations in the universe cause floods, tornadoes,
cyclones, earthquakes, etc. These are simply results of natural laws
of electric energy which in sport, as it were, like a child with his
blocks, builds and pulls down, builds and pulls down, “creates and
destroys” ad infinitum. Attraction and repulsion, positive and negative
electric action—vibration—generates, sustains and destroys all the
manifold forms, organic and inorganic, of what is called life and death.
There is no death. Death is but a name given to one of the many forms
manifested by life. A knowledge of the dual nature of electrical impulse
is the true and only “secret” of life and death.

In the organic form or entity called man there has been evolved an organ
called the brain; an arrangement of cells whose vibratory action enables
them to receive and give off vibrations called thought—intelligence.
The universe transmits these vibrations through the entity attuned to
receive them. Or, to speak poetically, we say, the universe “voices its
intelligence through man.” And man voices his intelligence through the
universe. Man thus becomes a Lord—a God—and has dominion.

If we accept electricity as the only substance and vibration as the vital
force and origin of all existence, it is impossible to imagine what may
yet be revealed to us respecting the structure of the universe.

If electricity is all there is, then thought must be electrical. The
vibrations being received by the brain cells, are conveyed throughout
the body. Light vibrations strike upon the eye and enter the brain and
we see by the brain. Sound waves enter the brain by the ear and we hear
by the brain. Various vibrations received by the brain are transmitted
through the nerves to the various organs of the body. They respond to
these vibrations and harmony, health or disease, results.

If the brain is attuned to receive healthful vibrations, the body will
surely respond and harmony or health obtain. This is the secret of mental
healing in all its forms that is being practiced in these states today,
whether it be Mental Science, Christian Science, New Thought, Divine
Healing, Suggestive Therapeutics, or whatever; and reduces every one of
these various systems of healing to a simple natural law of vibration.
These healthful vibrations are as free to all as the air they breathe and
cannot be cornered by any set of so-called “healers” in the world. The
result of so-called evil or malefic vibrations we see every day in our
hospitals, asylums, jails, police courts, etc. The reading of certain
books and daily newspapers attunes the brain to receive a certain kind
of vibration and the results usually lead to the reform school and State
prison. What are called evil thought vibrations are as abounding in the
universe as good thought vibrations, and if the brain is attuned to
receive them, the resulting inharmonious conditions are sure to obtain.

Colors are the result of electric vibration. Sir William Crookes and
Gessler demonstrated this by their invention of vacuum tubes. By
attaching one of these tubes to one of the poles of a static electric
machine, or high frequency coil, with a low potency, a yellow light is
produced. The potency being increased red appears. By still further
increasing the potency to about twelve million vibrations per second,
purple or violet rays are generated. Then comes the Roentgen or X-ray—a
brilliant, greenish, light, which renders opaque bodies transparent. Thus
science in electrical discovery is rapidly revealing to us the secrets of
the universe.

All vibrations are co-related. For instance, a man has a burst of violent
passion—a high rate of brain cell vibration—and we say he “sees red.”
This is true and he is almost sure to commit murder and will if the rate
of vibration be kept up in his brain cells. And unless you can “switch
the current”—lower the vibration—he will be plunged into a sea of color
or intense vibration which his brain is unable to assimilate and we
have what we term insanity. The writer firmly believes that Musical
Vibrations which are transformed into electrical waves and transmitted
to the patient, will ultimately be found to be the “switch” that shall
change the potency of these vibrations in the insane, and restore many a
hopeless entity to normal brain conditions.

As another illustration of the power of thought vibrations take those
that went forth when Garrison, Phillips, Sumner and others voiced the
abolition of slavery in this country, which culminated in the greatest
war of modern times and developed a manhood and self-sacrifice seldom if
ever given to the world. This is Immortality. These events belong to no
one country, but to the world and are the heritage of humanity, and but
one step in the evolution of the race toward the goal of perfect liberty,
which is the knowledge of truth and love, and the real brotherhood of
man.




