CHAPTER V

The Sun

Its Relation to Planetary Life. What is Radiant Energy? Why the Ancients
Worshipped the Sun. The Parsees the Present Sun Worshippers.


It is supposed to be a figure of speech, a mere bit of symbolism to call
the sun masculine and the earth feminine. To call the earth a woman. To
state that woman was made from man, etc. But when it is understood that
sex is nothing but polarity, that male and female, masculine and feminine
and positive and negative are synonymous terms, we begin to understand
the truly scientific nature of these expressions. They are purely
electrical terms. This sex or polarity is universal. The Macrocosm and
the Microcosm are the same. The Universe is not a Di-verse. Individuality
is not di-viduality. Every organism in the universe is thoroughly
bi-polar or bi-sexual, manifesting the eternal nature of its ultimate
component electrons.

The writer once saw hundreds of children under a common impulse come
swarming, dancing, from every quarter of a great city to a common meeting
place. As they rushed together en masse their individual movements
continued until out of the marching and counter-marching, the shifting,
changing, rearranging, re-adjusting there was evolved before his eyes
the flag of this nation with its glorious stripes and stars composed of
human boys and girls.

We have stated that ether, air, fire, water, earth, are but masses of
infinitesimally small particles—called electrons—of the one primeval,
universal substance, living their life of attraction and repulsion,
embrace and separation, forever whirling in their eternal “Maypole
dance.” Rushing together in a mad embrace, then darting away to seek
some other partner. Weaving in and out, in and out, around about, back
and forth, to and fro. This dance is called Creation—Evolution. It is an
eternal Brocken—an eternal Nachtspiel.

The sun is but one great mass of these whirling, vibrating, dancing
electrons. As varying numbers of these rush off and regroup themselves,
other planets are “born” or evolved. All depend upon the larger or parent
mass from which they parted. Our earth is but one of these children of
the sun. The earth is a woman, a beautiful woman, forever young, forever
fair. The sun is her father.

The sun is the primary source of the variety of forms of life on this
earth. While the electrical energy, or positive and negative impulse of
the electrons of atomic matter, constitute the eternal force or energy
called Life, only by the radiant energy of the sun in our system,
could we have the planets—of which our earth is one—and the varied
forms of activity evolved and maintained thereon. Our earth could no
more produce these higher forms of activity called mineral, vegetable,
animal, man,—all biological activities—without the sun, than the female
could produce offspring without the male. The sun is positive, the earth
negative. The sun’s vibrations reach our earth in about eight minutes
and acting upon its atmosphere, it finds a resistance or polarity out of
which is evolved light, heat and moisture.

Every molecule of our body is rotated into form and continues its
activities by the radiant energy of the sun.

Here again we see there can be no death. Every atom in the universe is
living, pulsating, vibrating electric energy.

The sun is like a great dynamo, rotating every planetary body into form
and position, and through its continued radio-activity carrying on the
further processes of creation called the evolution of sentient life. It
is often asked, “Are other worlds inhabited by sentient beings?” There
can be no reason for supposing otherwise. Given atmospheres, and the
radiant energy of the sun or suns, must by analogy evolve like results on
other planets.

We do not wonder the ancients worshipped the sun. They regarded it as
the source or author of their being—their Creator. The theologian calls
his creator God. But the Hebrew word for God is Elohim—creative forces.
John says, “The word was God.” The psalmist says, “Day unto day uttereth
speech.” What is speech but vibration? The sun is the source of all
vibration in the solar system. It has created this earth and all its
inhabitants. All forms of life on this planet, all activities, are but
the radiant energy of the sun.




CHAPTER VI

Fear

The Great Curse of Humanity. The Only Devil. Its Insidious Claims. Its
Effect on Life.


    “The thing that I feared hath come upon me.”—Job.

Through fear the human race has been converted into cowards and slaves.

In a former chapter we have suggested the origin or birth of this demon
with its subsequent evolution of the ideas of good and evil, rewards
and punishments, religions, right and wrong, etc.—Side by side with
the above was the evolution of the conscience, which in turn became
the greatest producer of fear known to the human race. The conscience,
that Shakespeare says “doth make cowards of us all.” A modern teacher
says “Conscience is the jaw of morality. It has spread far outside
the Christian or any other religion and become an essential factor of
modern civilization. Conscience is the most depressing element in human
existence. Its entire business is to reduce spirit. Every inch of its
energy is laid out against health. It taxes vitality. It claws with
shame. It bites with disgrace. It murders with morbidness, both body and
mind. It manufactures right and wrong. It discharges poison or stimulant
into the blood and nerves. … It has scared the race into trembling lest
it leave them. It has made cowards of us all.”

In man’s effort to escape the thralldom of these twin curses,—fear and
conscience—which so often drives humanity to self-destruction or loss
of reason, and feeling his helplessness against these demons, he sought
a means of propitiating them, and so constructed a system of religious
belief. Believing that his Gods must be placated for his fancied
transgressions, a form of worship was evolved, with ceremonies involving
sacrifice of blood, gifts of money, and treasure for building magnificent
temples, churches, abbeys and monasteries. Lavishing billions of dollars
upon their architecture and art. All these were efforts to overcome fear,
and appease a conscience, which was evolved through the influence of the
shadow-world and the folk-lore of primitive man upon the progenitors of
the race.

We have only to vibrate the unused cells of the brain to bring forth
primitive savagery. Take the action of a mob—let a vibratory wave of
passion be set up in the unused cells of the brain and the entity knows
no law but primitive force. Fear is for the time forgotten in the lust
for blood. This is the explanation of the so-called bravery of the
soldier in time of battle. Although fear dominates him before the
clash of arms is reached, yet the moment he meets his antagonist the
primitive lust for blood overcomes his fear and he becomes once more a
primeval savage and fights to the death. The rationale of this is, that
environment and mode of thought has put in vibration and attuned certain
cells of the brain, by which he establishes communication with some
reservoir of primitive savage vibration in the universe, and all the wild
impulses of primeval instinct rush into and dominate him.

The forgotten “vices” of our ancestors, apparently repeated from
generation to generation, mean no more than this, as we have suggested
heretofore; environment and its engendered mode of thought simply fitting
the brain as a receiver for the reception of specific vibrations. We
treat as criminals those who should be really treated for disease. We are
responsible for the slum conditions in our cities and country which set
up the brain attunement that calls forth these vibrations of ancestral
vices. This is HOW the slums breed vice and crime. And it is in this
direction we should put forth our efforts to reform the criminal. Are
we not responsible for our criminals? We most assuredly are. We are
responsible for these slum conditions and environments which create and
bring into play these specific brain cells and cell vibrations. We say
“Natural born criminals.” Not always. They are made so by environment.
If the money spent in the effort to reform the vicious and criminal was
applied to cleansing the slums and changing man’s environment, it would
greatly reduce the necessity for jails, reform schools and asylums. We
should enact laws to enable us to begin with the child in the public
schools—compulsory if necessary. Not only educating, but seeing that they
were properly clothed and housed and fed, and removed from their vicious
surroundings, parents or guardians. In fact, we are the real criminals
who permit such a thing as a crime producing slum or a “poor quarter.”
The state can easily afford to do this in order to do away with the
so-called vicious element or criminal class.

The present progress of invention in labor-saving devices call for a
greater intelligence than the handling of the pick and the shovel, and
this is being evolved; and this great living vibratory energy or force
which created man and evolved his intellect and his will, man has in
turn harnessed for his use, reducing the necessity for excessive manual
labor; and he will have more time for the arts and sciences. The “man
with the hoe,” will become the man with the electric plow and cultivator,
and instead of hard, laborious work, these wonderful electric inventions
will eventually reduce all labor to mild recreation and enjoyment. This
wonderful electric force has now become a servant and is willing and
eager to give its restless energy to man. It is the power that Tennyson
says is “closer to you than breathing, nearer than hands and feet.” It
is your universal father ready to give whatsoever you ask; but man must
study to know this power, and learn its natural movements in order to
come into the full benefit of his rightful heritage of this primal force
by which he was evolved into conscious existence.

The blight of fear has retarded the human race from coming into its
heritage of knowledge concerning this primal substance and force of the
universe—Electricity. Every effort of science to explain phenomena has
been frowned upon and opposed by theology, which is the child of fear and
conscience. Man has been kept in swaddling clothes which have prevented
his growth to maturity. But thanks to the change of nurses during the
recent centuries his clothes have been changed so frequently that he
has had an opportunity to grow lusty, and all the efforts of nurses to
keep him in leading-strings today are unavailing. He is outgrowing fear
and superstition that has so long strangled science. And science is
destroying fear by its revelations of the workings of natural law, which
in the field of electrical discovery is making its most rapid strides.




