CHAPTER VIII

Healing

Mental Therapeutics or Healing Suggestions. Christian Science. Mental
Science. Faith Healing, Etc.


As stated in a former chapter, every system of so-called mental healing
being practiced in these States or elsewhere today, whether it calls
itself Christian Science, Mental Science, Divine Healing, New Thought,
Suggestive Therapeutics, or whatever, is but an effort—with more or less
understanding—to utilize the law of electric vibration.

Mrs. Eddy says in “Science and Health,” page 292, “Electricity is not
a vital fluid, but the least material form of illusive consciousness.”
“Electricity is the sharp surplus of materiality which counterfeits the
true essence of spiritual truth.” (So simple, isn’t it?) “The vapid fury
of mortal mind expressed in earthquakes, wind, waves, lightning, fire and
bestial ferocity shows the so-called mind to be self-destructive.”

There is one synthetical substance, or truth, in the universe. You may
name it to suit yourself. It will smell just as sweet and act just the
same under whatever name you may give it. It has a habit of remaining
just what it is yesterday, today and forever. We call it Electricity.
It is the one mind, the one substance, the all and in all. From it
is evolved matter in all its various forms. The unit of all force is
electrical; the two impulses of which account for the variety of forms
in which it manifests itself. It creates, preserves, destroys, and the
various manifestations, such as earthquake, floods, fire, lightening are
but results of these two impulses, and simply show the absence of any
intelligent PURPOSE whatever; and forces us to see that there can be no
such thing as a Supreme Being—or supreme intelligence in the universe.
That this great omnipresent energy which evolved the meaningless phrases
and sentences of Mrs. Eddy’s “Christian Science” was acting neither less
nor more “intelligently” than when it produced a Beethoven sonata or a
Dante’s Inferno.

Man seems to have been able to a certain extent to control this force
and harness it to his use, and has materially lessened its destructive
tendency by devices such as the lightening-rod and various insulating
methods. This is an evidence of intelligent purpose evolved by the
vibratory forces of this intelligent substance.

Man has subjected this force to his usage upon his own organism and the
results are astounding. Every day some new application is being made. In
the field of Electro-Therapeutics there are so many new developments,
so many wondrous actions on various diseases that the medical profession
has to constantly revise its text books, in order to keep step with
this stately energy that is marching on to disclose to those attuned to
receive them the great secrets of nature.

We have the phonograph, which deposits the vibrations of the human
voice—or any other vibration, upon the wax cylinder, which can be
preserved almost indefinitely and reproduced at will. From whence came
the vibratory impulse or suggestion that invented the phonograph? The
within is as the without. The above is as the below. The macrocosm is
as the microcosm. Is there not in the laboratory of the universe some
cyclical or cylindrical formation (as all electric force—which is all the
force there is—is spherical) that receives, and preserves, and reproduces
the impressions of all thoughts, words and deeds, the brain specifically
attuned receiving its specific vibration, or thought? Does it require any
great effort to grasp the thought that the electrical (mental, thought)
forces or vibrations of the universe can be utilized by us, to act on the
cells of the brain and convey to the body or its various organs through
the nerves, our commands to cast out all inharmonious vibration, and
to refuse to entertain any but harmonious or healthful suggestions.
“Whatsoever a man thinketh, he is.” We repeat, these so-called healthful
vibrations are as free to all as the air they breathe and cannot be
corralled by any set of healers. This is not said to discredit any system
of healing, for all are with more or less understanding using the same
principle, and with accordingly varying degrees of success. But it is
said to destroy and nullify any claim of exclusive ability.

To attune yourself to receive these health-giving or harmony-producing
vibrations be alone. Assume any comfortable position. Let the body relax
and the mind become passive. All speech is electrical in its vibratory
action. Use these words:

BE STILL AND KNOW THAT I AM GOD.

You may be afraid at first to say these words. This is all the more
reason why you should say them. There is nothing so de-harmonizing and
de-vitalizing as fear. Read the chapter in this book on “Fear” again, and
cast it out of you forever.

Listen—no person ever died saying, “Be Still and Know That I Am God.”

The repetition of these words will gradually attune the brain to receive
the most health-giving, vitalizing vibrations in the universe. These,
acting on the cells of the brain are conveyed throughout the entire body
by the nerves. The lungs, the liver, the stomach—all—will gradually
receive these vitalizing, curative thought vibrations, and respond to
them.

Sometimes these inharmonious conditions seem persistent and hard to
overcome, and patience and perseverance in repetition may be necessary.
But persevere and you cannot fail to win out. It is as certain as that
friction will produce fire, and that heat will dissolve ice. Don’t whine.
Don’t beg. Don’t pray. Command, as is your right and privilege, as a unit
of this mighty electric force which is life and health. It’s up to you.
All the life and health of the universe is yours if you will. Permanent,
abiding, continuous attunement to the infinite ocean of force, is to
continue the integrity of the organism you call your—Self.


Radium

Note.—The discovery of radium opened up a field of experiment and
investigation that has greatly confirmed in the scientific mind the
belief that all action is electrical and that in this direction will be
found the solution of all biological problems.

It is now thought by scientists that radium is the source of life, if
not the so-called AURA of life itself. If this were true, it would
only mean that radium is the fundamental, basic, primeval substance of
the universe, which we have termed Electricity. … It is known to be
electrical in its action, giving off light, heat and radiant energy.
It seems to be self-existent, or self-renewing, suffering no apparent
diminution of its force or energy.

One thing is certain, Electricity is Life, and in the eternally inherent,
automatic impulse of its individual electrons will be found the solution
of all phenomena. In radium or radioactivity science may be getting down
to “bed-rock.” At any rate, it is hot on the trail that will lead to the
discovery of the truth we are announcing, viz.: that there is but one
substance—Electricity, whose eternal, infinite expression is Life.




