CHAPTER IV

THE CINEMATOGRAPHICAL MECHANISM OF THOUGHT AND THE MECHANISTIC
ILLUSION--A GLANCE AT THE HISTORY OF SYSTEMS[96]--REAL BECOMING AND
FALSE EVOLUTIONISM.


It remains for us to examine in themselves two theoretical illusions
which we have frequently met with before, but whose consequences rather
than principle have hitherto concerned us. Such is the object of the
present chapter. It will afford us the opportunity of removing certain
objections, of clearing up certain misunderstandings, and, above all, of
defining more precisely, by contrasting it with others, a philosophy
which sees in duration the very stuff of reality.

Matter or mind, reality has appeared to us as a perpetual becoming. It
makes itself or it unmakes itself, but it is never something made. Such
is the intuition that we have of mind when we draw aside the veil which
is interposed between our consciousness and ourselves. This, also, is
what our intellect and senses themselves would show us of matter, if
they could obtain a direct and disinterested idea of it. But,
preoccupied before everything with the necessities of action, the
intellect, like the senses, is limited to taking, at intervals, views
that are instantaneous and by that very fact immobile of the becoming of
matter. Consciousness, being in its turn formed on the intellect, sees
clearly of the inner life what is already made, and only feels
confusedly the making. Thus, we pluck out of duration those moments that
interest us, and that we have gathered along its course. These alone we
retain. And we are right in so doing, while action only is in question.
But when, in _speculating_ on the _nature_ of the real, we go on
regarding it as our practical interest requires us to regard it, we
become unable to perceive the true evolution, the radical becoming. Of
becoming we perceive only states, of duration only instants, and even
when we speak of duration and of becoming, it is of another thing that
we are thinking. Such is the most striking of the two illusions we wish
to examine. It consists in supposing that we can think the unstable by
means of the stable, the moving by means of the immobile.

The other illusion is near akin to the first. It has the same origin,
being also due to the fact that we import into speculation a procedure
made for practice. All action aims at getting something that we feel the
want of, or at creating something that does not yet exist. In this very
special sense, it fills a void, and goes from the empty to the full,
from an absence to a presence, from the unreal to the real. Now the
unreality which is here in question is purely relative to the direction
in which our attention is engaged, for we are immersed in realities and
cannot pass out of them; only, if the present reality is not the one we
are seeking, we speak of the _absence_ of this sought-for reality
wherever we find the _presence_ of another. We thus express what we have
as a function of what we want. This is quite legitimate in the sphere of
action. But, whether we will or no, we keep to this way of speaking,
and also of thinking, when we speculate on the nature of things
independently of the interest they have for us. Thus arises the second
of the two illusions. We propose to examine this first. It is due, like
the other, to the static habits that our intellect contracts when it
prepares our action on things. Just as we pass through the immobile to
go to the moving, so we make use of the void in order to think the full.

We have met with this illusion already in dealing with the fundamental
problem of knowledge. The question, we then said, is to know why there
is order, and not disorder, in things. But the question has meaning only
if we suppose that disorder, understood as an absence of order, is
possible, or imaginable, or conceivable. Now, it is only order that is
real; but, as order can take two forms, and as the presence of the one
may be said to consist in the absence of the other, we speak of disorder
whenever we have before us that one of the two orders for which we are
not looking. The idea of disorder is then entirely practical. It
corresponds to the disappointment of a certain expectation, and it does
not denote the absence of all order, but only the presence of that order
which does not offer us actual interest. So that whenever we try to deny
order completely, absolutely, we find that we are leaping from one kind
of order to the other indefinitely, and that the supposed suppression of
the one and the other implies the presence of the two. Indeed, if we go
on, and persist in shutting our eyes to this movement of the mind and
all it involves, we are no longer dealing with an idea; all that is left
of disorder is a word. Thus the problem of knowledge is complicated, and
possibly made insoluble, by the idea that order fills a void and that
its actual presence is superposed on its virtual absence. We go from
absence to presence, from the void to the full, in virtue of the
fundamental illusion of our understanding. That is the error of which we
noticed one consequence in our last chapter. As we then anticipated, we
must come to close quarters with this error, and finally grapple with
it. We must face it in itself, in the radically false conception which
it implies of negation, of the void and of the nought.[97]

Philosophers have paid little attention to the idea of the nought. And
yet it is often the hidden spring, the invisible mover of philosophical
thinking. From the first awakening of reflection, it is this that pushes
to the fore, right under the eyes of consciousness, the torturing
problems, the questions that we cannot gaze at without feeling giddy and
bewildered. I have no sooner commenced to philosophize than I ask myself
why I exist; and when I take account of the intimate connection in which
I stand to the rest of the universe, the difficulty is only pushed back,
for I want to know why the universe exists; and if I refer the universe
to a Principle immanent or transcendent that supports it or creates it,
my thought rests on this principle only a few moments, for the same
problem recurs, this time in its full breadth and generality: Whence
comes it, and how can it be understood, that anything exists? Even here,
in the present work, when matter has been defined as a kind of descent,
this descent as the interruption of a rise, this rise itself as a
growth, when finally a Principle of creation has been put at the base of
things, the same question springs up: How--why does this principle exist
rather than nothing?

Now, if I push these questions aside and go straight to what hides
behind them, this is what I find:--Existence appears to me like a
conquest over nought. I say to myself that there might be, that indeed
there ought to be, nothing, and I then wonder that there is something.
Or I represent all reality extended on nothing as on a carpet: at first
was nothing, and being has come by superaddition to it. Or, yet again,
if something has always existed, nothing must always have served as its
substratum or receptacle, and is therefore eternally prior. A glass may
have always been full, but the liquid it contains nevertheless fills a
void. In the same way, being may have always been there, but the nought
which is filled, and, as it were, stopped up by it, pre-exists for it
none the less, if not in fact at least in right. In short, I cannot get
rid of the idea that the full is an embroidery on the canvas of the
void, that being is superimposed on nothing, and that in the idea of
"nothing" there is _less_ than in that of "something." Hence all the
mystery.

It is necessary that this mystery should be cleared up. It is more
especially necessary, if we put duration and free choice at the base of
things. For the disdain of metaphysics for all reality that endures
comes precisely from this, that it reaches being only by passing through
"not-being," and that an existence which endures seems to it not strong
enough to conquer non-existence and itself posit itself. It is for this
reason especially that it is inclined to endow true being with a
_logical_, and not a psychological nor a physical existence. For the
nature of a purely logical existence is such that it seems to be
self-sufficient and to posit itself by the effect alone of the force
immanent in truth. If I ask myself why bodies or minds exist rather than
nothing, I find no answer; but that a logical principle, such as A=A,
should have the power of creating itself, triumphing over the nought
throughout eternity, seems to me natural. A circle drawn with chalk on
a blackboard is a thing which needs explanation: this entirely physical
existence has not by itself wherewith to vanquish non-existence. But the
"logical essence" of the circle, that is to say, the possibility of
drawing it according to a certain law--in short, its definition--is a
thing which appears to me eternal: it has neither place nor date; for
nowhere, at no moment, has the drawing of a circle begun to be possible.
Suppose, then, that the principle on which all things rest, and which
all things manifest possesses an existence of the same nature as that of
the definition of the circle, or as that of the axiom A=A: the mystery
of existence vanishes, for the being that is at the base of everything
posits itself then in eternity, as logic itself does. True, it will cost
us rather a heavy sacrifice: if the principle of all things exists after
the manner of a logical axiom or of a mathematical definition, the
things themselves must go forth from this principle like the
applications of an axiom or the consequences of a definition, and there
will no longer be place, either in the things nor in their principle,
for efficient causality understood in the sense of a free choice. Such
are precisely the conclusions of a doctrine like that of Spinoza, or
even that of Leibniz, and such indeed has been their genesis.

Now, if we could prove that the idea of the nought, in the sense in
which we take it when we oppose it to that of existence, is a
pseudo-idea, the problems that are raised around it would become
pseudo-problems. The hypothesis of an absolute that acts freely, that in
an eminent sense endures, would no longer raise up intellectual
prejudices. The road would be cleared for a philosophy more nearly
approaching intuition, and which would no longer ask the same sacrifices
of common sense.

Let us then see what we are thinking about when we speak of "Nothing."
To represent "Nothing," we must either imagine it or conceive it. Let us
examine what this image or this idea may be. First, the image.

I am going to close my eyes, stop my ears, extinguish one by one the
sensations that come to me from the outer world. Now it is done; all my
perceptions vanish, the material universe sinks into silence and the
night.--I subsist, however, and cannot help myself subsisting. I am
still there, with the organic sensations which come to me from the
surface and from the interior of my body, with the recollections which
my past perceptions have left behind them--nay, with the impression,
most positive and full, of the void I have just made about me. How can I
suppress all this? How eliminate myself? I can even, it may be, blot out
and forget my recollections up to my immediate past; but at least I keep
the consciousness of my present reduced to its extremest poverty, that
is to say, of the actual state of my body. I will try, however, to do
away even with this consciousness itself. I will reduce more and more
the sensations my body sends in to me: now they are almost gone; now
they are gone, they have disappeared in the night where all things else
have already died away. But no! At the very instant that my
consciousness is extinguished, another consciousness lights up--or
rather, it was already alight: it had arisen the instant before, in
order to witness the extinction of the first; for the first could
disappear only for another and in the presence of another. I see myself
annihilated only if I have already resuscitated myself by an act which
is positive, however involuntary and unconscious. So, do what I will, I
am always perceiving something, either from without or from within. When
I no longer know anything of external objects, it is because I have
taken refuge in the consciousness that I have of myself. If I abolish
this inner self, its very abolition becomes an object for an imaginary
self which now perceives as an external object the self that is dying
away. Be it external or internal, some object there always is that my
imagination is representing. My imagination, it is true, can go from one
to the other, I can by turns imagine a nought of external perception or
a nought of internal perception, but not both at once, for the absence
of one consists, at bottom, in the exclusive presence of the other. But,
from the fact that two relative noughts are imaginable in turn, we
wrongly conclude that they are imaginable together: a conclusion the
absurdity of which must be obvious, for we cannot imagine a nought
without perceiving, at least confusedly, that we are imagining it,
consequently that we are acting, that we are thinking, and therefore
that something still subsists.

The image, then, properly so called, of a suppression of everything is
never formed by thought. The effort by which we strive to create this
image simply ends in making us swing to and fro between the vision of an
outer and that of an inner reality. In this coming and going of our mind
between the without and the within, there is a point, at equal distance
from both, in which it seems to us that we no longer perceive the one,
and that we do not yet perceive the other: it is there that the image of
"Nothing" is formed. In reality, we then perceive both, having reached
the point where the two terms come together, and the image of Nothing,
so defined, is an image full of things, an image that includes at once
that of the subject and that of the object and, besides, a perpetual
leaping from one to the other and the refusal ever to come to rest
finally on either. Evidently this is not the nothing that we can oppose
to being, and put before or beneath being, for it already includes
existence in general.

But we shall be told that, if the representation of Nothing, visible or
latent, enters into the reasonings of philosophers, it is not as an
image, but as an idea. It may be agreed that we do not imagine the
annihilation of everything, but it will be claimed that we can conceive
it. We conceive a polygon with a thousand sides, said Descartes,
although we do not see it in imagination: it is enough that we can
clearly represent the possibility of constructing it. So with the idea
of the annihilation of everything. Nothing simpler, it will be said,
than the procedure by which we construct the idea of it. There is, in
fact, not a single object of our experience that we cannot suppose
annihilated. Extend this annihilation of a first object to a second,
then to a third, and so on as long as you please: the nought is the
limit toward which the operation tends. And the nought so defined is the
annihilation of everything. That is the theory. We need only consider it
in this form to see the absurdity it involves.

An idea constructed by the mind is an idea only if its pieces are
capable of coexisting; it is reduced to a mere word if the elements that
we bring together to compose it are driven away as fast as we assemble
them. When I have defined the circle, I easily represent a black or a
white circle, a circle in cardboard, iron, or brass, a transparent or an
opaque circle--but not a square circle, because the law of the
generation of the circle excludes the possibility of defining this
figure with straight lines. So my mind can represent any existing thing
whatever as annihilated;--but if the annihilation of anything by the
mind is an operation whose mechanism implies that it works on a part of
the whole, and not on the whole itself, then the extension of such an
operation to the totality of things becomes self-contradictory and
absurd, and the idea of an annihilation of everything presents the same
character as that of a square circle: it is not an idea, it is only a
word. So let us examine more closely the mechanism of the operation.

In fact, the object suppressed is either external or internal: it is a
thing or it is a state of consciousness. Let us consider the first case.
I annihilate in thought an external object: in the place where it was,
there is no longer anything.--No longer anything of that object, of
course, but another object has taken its place: there is no absolute
void in nature. But admit that an absolute void is possible: it is not
of that void that I am thinking when I say that the object, once
annihilated, leaves its place unoccupied; for by the hypothesis it is a
_place_, that is a void limited by precise outlines, or, in other words,
a kind of _thing_. The void of which I speak, therefore, is, at bottom,
only the absence of some definite object, which was here at first, is
now elsewhere and, in so far as it is no longer in its former place,
leaves behind it, so to speak, the void of itself. A being unendowed
with memory or prevision would not use the words "void" or "nought;" he
would express only what is and what is perceived; now, what is, and what
is perceived, is the _presence_ of one thing or of another, never the
_absence_ of anything. There is absence only for a being capable of
remembering and expecting. He remembered an object, and perhaps expected
to encounter it again; he finds another, and he expresses the
disappointment of his expectation (an expectation sprung from
recollection) by saying that he no longer finds anything, that he
encounters "nothing." Even if he did not expect to encounter the object,
it is a possible expectation of it, it is still the falsification of his
eventual expectation that he expresses by saying that the object is no
longer where it was. What he perceives in reality, what he will succeed
in effectively thinking of, is the presence of the old object in a new
place or that of a new object in the old place; the rest, all that is
expressed negatively by such words as "nought" or the "void," is not so
much thought as feeling, or, to speak more exactly, it is the tinge that
feeling gives to thought. The idea of annihilation or of partial
nothingness is therefore formed here in the course of the substitution
of one thing for another, whenever this substitution is thought by a
mind that would prefer to keep the old thing in the place of the new, or
at least conceives this preference as possible. The idea implies on the
subjective side a preference, on the objective side a substitution, and
is nothing else but a combination of, or rather an interference between,
this feeling of preference and this idea of substitution.

Such is the mechanism of the operation by which our mind annihilates an
object and succeeds in representing in the external world a partial
nought. Let us now see how it represents it within itself. We find in
ourselves phenomena that are produced, and not phenomena that are not
produced. I experience a sensation or an emotion, I conceive an idea, I
form a resolution: my consciousness perceives these facts, which are so
many _presences_, and there is no moment in which facts of this kind are
not present to me. I can, no doubt, interrupt by thought the course of
my inner life; I may suppose that I sleep without dreaming or that I
have ceased to exist; but at the very instant when I make this
supposition, I conceive myself, I imagine myself watching over my
slumber or surviving my annihilation, and I give up perceiving myself
from within only by taking refuge in the perception of myself from
without. That is to say that here again the full always succeeds the
full, and that an intelligence that was only intelligence, that had
neither regret nor desire, whose movement was governed by the movement
of its object, could not even conceive an absence or a void. The
conception of a void arises here when consciousness, lagging behind
itself, remains attached to the recollection of an old state when
another state is already present. It is only a comparison between what
is and what could or ought to be, between the full and the full. In a
word, whether it be a void of matter or a void of consciousness, _the
representation of the void is always a representation which is full and
which resolves itself on analysis into two positive elements: the idea,
distinct or confused, of a substitution, and the feeling, experienced or
imagined, of a desire or a regret_.

It follows from this double analysis that the idea of the absolute
nought, in the sense of the annihilation of everything, is a
self-destructive idea, a pseudo-idea, a mere word. If suppressing a
thing consists in replacing it by another, if thinking the absence of
one thing is only possible by the more or less explicit representation
of the presence of some other thing, if, in short, annihilation
signifies before anything else substitution, the idea of an
"annihilation of everything" is as absurd as that of a square circle.
The absurdity is not obvious, because there exists no particular object
that cannot be supposed annihilated; then, from the fact that there is
nothing to prevent each thing in turn being suppressed in thought, we
conclude that it is possible to suppose them suppressed altogether. We
do not see that suppressing each thing in turn consists precisely in
replacing it in proportion and degree by another, and therefore that the
suppression of absolutely everything implies a downright contradiction
in terms, since the operation consists in destroying the very condition
that makes the operation possible.

But the illusion is tenacious. Though suppressing one thing consists _in
fact_ in substituting another for it, we do not conclude, we are
unwilling to conclude, that the annihilation of a thing _in thought_
implies the substitution in thought of a new thing for the old. We agree
that a thing is always replaced by another thing, and even that our mind
cannot think the disappearance of an object, external or internal,
without thinking--under an indeterminate and confused form, it is
true--that another object is substituted for it. But we add that the
representation of a disappearance is that of a phenomenon that is
produced in space or at least in time, that consequently it still
implies the calling up of an image, and that it is precisely here that
we have to free ourselves from the imagination in order to appeal to the
pure understanding. "Let us therefore no longer speak," it will be said,
"of disappearance or annihilation; these are physical operations. Let us
no longer represent the object A as annihilated or absent. Let us say
simply that we think it "non-existent." To annihilate it is to act on it
in time and perhaps also in space; it is to accept, consequently, the
condition of spatial and temporal existence, to accept the universal
connection that binds an object to all others, and prevents it from
disappearing without being at the same time replaced. But we can free
ourselves from these conditions; all that is necessary is that by an
effort of abstraction we should call up the idea of the object A by
itself, that we should agree first to consider it as existing, and then,
by a stroke of the intellectual pen, blot out the clause. The object
will then be, by our decree, non-existent."

Very well, let us strike out the clause. We must not suppose that our
pen-stroke is self-sufficient--that it can be isolated from the rest of
things. We shall see that it carries with it, whether we will or no,
all that we tried to abstract from. Let us compare together the two
ideas--the object A supposed to exist, and the same object supposed
"non-existent."

The idea of the object A, supposed existent, is the representation pure
and simple of the object A, for we cannot represent an object without
attributing to it, by the very fact of representing it, a certain
reality. Between thinking an object and thinking it existent, there is
absolutely no difference. Kant has put this point in clear light in his
criticism of the ontological argument. Then, what is it to think the
object A non-existent? To represent it non-existent cannot consist in
withdrawing from the idea of the object A the idea of the attribute
"existence," since, I repeat, the representation of the existence of the
object is inseparable from the representation of the object, and indeed
is one with it. To represent the object A non-existent can only consist,
therefore, in _adding_ something to the idea of this object: we add to
it, in fact, the idea of an _exclusion_ of this particular object by
actual reality in general. To think the object A as non-existent is
first to think the object and consequently to think it existent; it is
then to think that another reality, with which it is incompatible,
supplants it. Only, it is useless to represent this latter reality
explicitly; we are not concerned with what it is; it is enough for us to
know that it drives out the object A, which alone is of interest to us.
That is why we think of the expulsion rather than of the cause which
expels. But this cause is none the less present to the mind; it is there
in the implicit state, that which expels being inseparable from the
expulsion as the hand which drives the pen is inseparable from the
pen-stroke. The act by which we declare an object unreal therefore
posits the existence of the real in general. In other words, to
represent an object as unreal cannot consist in depriving it of every
kind of existence, since the representation of an object is necessarily
that of the object existing. Such an act consists simply in declaring
that the existence attached by our mind to the object, and inseparable
from its representation, is an existence wholly ideal--that of a mere
_possible_. But the "ideality" of an object, and the "simple
possibility" of an object, have meaning only in relation to a reality
that drives into the region of the ideal, or of the merely possible, the
object which is incompatible with it. Suppose the stronger and more
substantial existence annihilated: it is the attenuated and weaker
existence of the merely possible that becomes the reality itself, and
you will no longer be representing the object, then, as non-existent. In
other words, and however strange our assertion may seem, _there is_
more, _and not_ less, _in the idea of an object conceived as "not
existing" than in the idea of this same object conceived as "existing";
for the idea of the object "not existing" is necessarily the idea of the
object "existing" with, in addition, the representation of an exclusion
of this object by the actual reality taken in block_.

But it will be claimed that our idea of the non-existent is not yet
sufficiently cut loose from every imaginative element, that it is not
negative enough. "No matter," we shall be told, "though the unreality of
a thing consist in its exclusion by other things; we want to know
nothing about that. Are we not free to direct our attention where we
please and how we please? Well then, after having called up the idea of
an object, and thereby, if you will have it so, supposed it existent, we
shall merely couple to our affirmation a 'not,' and that will be enough
to make us think it non-existent. This is an operation entirely
intellectual, independent of what happens outside the mind. So let us
think of anything or let us think of the totality of things, and then
write in the margin of our thought the 'not,' which prescribes the
rejection of what it contains: we annihilate everything mentally by the
mere fact of decreeing its annihilation."--Here we have it! The very
root of all the difficulties and errors with which we are confronted is
to be found in the power ascribed here to negation. We represent
negation as exactly symmetrical with affirmation. We imagine that
negation, like affirmation, is self-sufficient. So that negation, like
affirmation, would have the power of creating ideas, with this sole
difference that they would be negative ideas. By affirming one thing,
and then another, and so on _ad infinitum_, I form the idea of "All;"
so, by denying one thing and then other things, finally by denying All,
I arrive at the idea of Nothing.--But it is just this assimilation which
is arbitrary. We fail to see that while affirmation is a complete act of
the mind, which can succeed in building up an idea, negation is but the
half of an intellectual act, of which the other half is understood, or
rather put off to an indefinite future. We fail to see that while
affirmation is a purely intellectual act, there enters into negation an
element which is not intellectual, and that it is precisely to the
intrusion of this foreign element that negation owes its specific
character.

To begin with the second point, let us note that to deny always consists
in setting aside a possible affirmation.[98] Negation is only an
attitude taken by the mind toward an eventual affirmation. When I say,
"This table is black," I am speaking of the table; I have seen it
black, and my judgment expresses what I have seen. But if I say, "This
table is not white," I surely do not express something I have perceived,
for I have seen black, and not an absence of white. It is therefore, at
bottom, not on the table itself that I bring this judgment to bear, but
rather on the judgment that would declare the table white. I judge a
judgment and not the table. The proposition, "This table is not white,"
implies that you might believe it white, that you did believe it such,
or that I was going to believe it such. I warn you or myself that this
judgment is to be replaced by another (which, it is true, I leave
undetermined). Thus, while affirmation bears directly on the thing,
negation aims at the thing only indirectly, through an interposed
affirmation. An affirmative proposition expresses a judgment on an
object; a negative proposition expresses a judgment on a judgment.
_Negation, therefore, differs from affirmation properly so called in
that it is an affirmation of the second degree: it affirms something of
an affirmation which itself affirms something of an object._

But it follows at once from this that negation is not the work of pure
mind, I should say of a mind placed before objects and concerned with
them alone. When we deny, we give a lesson to others, or it may be to
ourselves. We take to task an interlocutor, real or possible, whom we
find mistaken and whom we put on his guard. He was affirming something:
we tell him he ought to affirm something else (though without specifying
the affirmation which must be substituted). There is no longer then,
simply, a person and an object; there is, in face of the object, a
person speaking to a person, opposing him and aiding him at the same
time; there is a beginning of society. Negation aims at some one, and
not only, like a purely intellectual operation, at some thing. It is of
a pedagogical and social nature. It sets straight or rather warns, the
person warned and set straight being possibly, by a kind of doubling,
the very person that speaks.

So much for the second point; now for the first. We said that negation
is but the half of an intellectual act, of which the other half is left
indeterminate. If I pronounce the negative proposition, "This table is
not white," I mean that you ought to substitute for your judgment, "The
table is white," another judgment. I give you an admonition, and the
admonition refers to the necessity of a substitution. As to what you
ought to substitute for your affirmation, I tell you nothing, it is
true. This may be because I do not know the color of the table; but it
is also, it is indeed even more, because the white color is that alone
that interests us for the moment, so that I only need to tell you that
some other color will have to be substituted for white, without having
to say which. A negative judgment is therefore really one which
indicates a need of substituting for an affirmative judgment another
affirmative judgment, the nature of which, however, is not specified,
sometimes because it is not known, more often because it fails to offer
any actual interest, the attention bearing only on the substance of the
first.

Thus, whenever I add a "not" to an affirmation, whenever I deny, I
perform two very definite acts: (1) I interest myself in what one of my
fellow-men affirms, or in what he was going to say, or in what might
have been said by another _Me_, whom I anticipate; (2) I announce that
some other affirmation, whose content I do not specify, will have to be
substituted for the one I find before me. Now, in neither of these two
acts is there anything but affirmation. The _sui generis_ character of
negation is due to superimposing the first of these acts upon the
second. It is in vain, then, that we attribute to negation the power of
creating ideas _sui generis_, symmetrical with those that affirmation
creates, and directed in a contrary sense. No idea will come forth from
negation, for it has no other content than that of the affirmative
judgment which it judges.

To be more precise, let us consider an existential, instead of an
attributive, judgment. If I say, "The object A does not exist," I mean
by that, first, that we might believe that the object A exists: how,
indeed, can we think of the object A without thinking it existing, and,
once again, what difference can there be between the idea of the object
A existing and the idea pure and simple of the object A? Therefore,
merely by saying "The object A," I attribute to it some kind of
existence, though it be that of a mere _possible_, that is to say, of a
pure idea. And consequently, in the judgment "The object A is not,"
there is at first an affirmation such as "The object A has been," or
"The object A will be," or, more generally, "The object A exists at
least as a mere _possible_." Now, when I add the two words "is not," I
can only mean that if we go further, if we erect the possible object
into a real object, we shall be mistaken, and that the possible of which
I am speaking is excluded from the actual reality as incompatible with
it. Judgments that posit the non-existence of a thing are therefore
judgments that formulate a contrast between the possible and the actual
(that is, between two kinds of _existence_, one thought and the other
found), where a person, real or imaginary, wrongly believes that a
certain possible is realized. Instead of this possible, there is a
reality that differs from it and rejects it: the negative judgment
expresses this contrast, but it expresses the contrast in an
intentionally incomplete form, because it is addressed to a person who
is supposed to be interested exclusively in the possible that is
indicated, and is not concerned to know by what kind of reality the
possible is replaced. The expression of the substitution is therefore
bound to be cut short. Instead of affirming that a second term is
substituted for the first, the attention which was originally directed
to the first term will be kept fixed upon it, and upon it alone. And,
without going beyond the first, we shall implicitly affirm that a second
term replaces it in saying that the first "is not." We shall thus judge
a judgment instead of judging a thing. We shall warn others or warn
ourselves of a possible error instead of supplying positive information.
Suppress every intention of this kind, give knowledge back its
exclusively scientific or philosophical character, suppose in other
words that reality comes itself to inscribe itself on a mind that cares
only for things and is not interested in persons: we shall affirm that
such or such a thing is, we shall never affirm that a thing is not.

How comes it, then, that affirmation and negation are so persistently
put on the same level and endowed with an equal objectivity? How comes
it that we have so much difficulty in recognizing that negation is
subjective, artificially cut short, relative to the human mind and still
more to the social life? The reason is, no doubt, that _both_ negation
and affirmation are expressed in propositions, and that _any_
proposition, being formed of _words_, which symbolize _concepts_, is
something relative to social life and to the human intellect. Whether I
say "The ground is damp" or "The ground is not damp," in both cases the
terms "ground" and "damp" are concepts more or less artificially created
by the mind of man--extracted, by his free initiative, from the
continuity of experience. In both cases the concepts are represented by
the same conventional words. In both cases we can say indeed that the
proposition aims at a social and pedagogical end, since the first would
propagate a truth as the second would prevent an error. From this point
of view, which is that of formal logic, to affirm and to deny are indeed
two mutually symmetrical acts, of which the first establishes a relation
of agreement and the second a relation of disagreement between a subject
and an attribute. But how do we fail to see that the symmetry is
altogether external and the likeness superficial? Suppose language
fallen into disuse, society dissolved, every intellectual initiative,
every faculty of self-reflection and of self-judgment atrophied in man:
the dampness of the ground will subsist none the less, capable of
inscribing itself automatically in sensation and of sending a vague idea
to the deadened intellect. The intellect will still affirm, in implicit
terms. And consequently, neither distinct concepts, nor words, nor the
desire of spreading the truth, nor that of bettering oneself, are of the
very essence of the affirmation. But this passive intelligence,
mechanically keeping step with experience, neither anticipating nor
following the course of the real, would have no wish to deny. It could
not receive an imprint of negation; for, once again, that which exists
may come to be recorded, but the non-existence of the non-existing
cannot. For such an intellect to reach the point of denying, it must
awake from its torpor, formulate the disappointment of a real or
possible expectation, correct an actual or possible error--in short,
propose to teach others or to teach itself.

It is rather difficult to perceive this in the example we have chosen,
but the example is indeed the more instructive and the argument the more
cogent on that account. If dampness is able automatically to come and
record itself, it is the same, it will be said, with non-dampness; for
the dry as well as the damp can give impressions to sense, which will
transmit them, as more or less distinct ideas, to the intelligence. In
this sense the negation of dampness is as objective a thing, as purely
intellectual, as remote from every pedagogical intention, as
affirmation.--But let us look at it more closely: we shall see that the
negative proposition, "The ground is not damp," and the affirmative
proposition, "The ground is dry," have entirely different contents. The
second implies that we know the dry, that we have experienced the
specific sensations, tactile or visual for example, that are at the base
of this idea. The first requires nothing of the sort; it could equally
well have been formulated by an intelligent fish, who had never
perceived anything but the wet. It would be necessary, it is true, that
this fish should have risen to the distinction between the real and the
possible, and that he should care to anticipate the error of his
fellow-fishes, who doubtless consider as alone possible the condition of
wetness in which they actually live. Keep strictly to the terms of the
proposition, "The ground is not damp," and you will find that it means
two things: (1) that one might believe that the ground is damp, (2) that
the dampness is replaced in fact by a certain quality _x_. This quality
is left indeterminate, either because we have no positive knowledge of
it, or because it has no actual interest for the person to whom the
negation is addressed. To deny, therefore, always consists in presenting
in an abridged form a system of two affirmations: the one determinate,
which applies to a certain _possible_; the other indeterminate,
referring to the unknown or indifferent reality that supplants this
possibility. The second affirmation is virtually contained in the
judgment we apply to the first, a judgment which is negation itself. And
what gives negation its subjective character is precisely this, that in
the discovery of a replacement it takes account only of the replaced,
and is not concerned with what replaces. The replaced exists only as a
conception of the mind. It is necessary, in order to continue to see it,
and consequently in order to speak of it, to turn our back on the
reality, which flows from the past to the present, advancing from
behind. It is this that we do when we deny. We discover the change, or
more generally the substitution, as a traveller would see the course of
his carriage if he looked out behind, and only knew at each moment the
point at which he had ceased to be; he could never determine his actual
position except by relation to that which he had just quitted, instead
of grasping it in itself.

To sum up, for a mind which should follow purely and simply the thread
of experience, there would be no void, no nought, even relative or
partial, no possible negation. Such a mind would see facts succeed
facts, states succeed states, things succeed things. What it would note
at each moment would be things existing, states appearing, events
happening. It would live in the actual, and, if it were capable of
judging, it would never affirm anything except the existence of the
present.

Endow this mind with memory, and especially with the desire to dwell on
the past; give it the faculty of dissociating and of distinguishing: it
will no longer only note the present state of the passing reality; it
will represent the passing as a change, and therefore as a contrast
between what has been and what is. And as there is no essential
difference between a past that we remember and a past that we imagine,
it will quickly rise to the idea of the "possible" in general.

It will thus be shunted on to the siding of negation. And especially it
will be at the point of representing a disappearance. But it will not
yet have reached it. To represent that a thing has disappeared, it is
not enough to perceive a contrast between the past and the present; it
is necessary besides to turn our back on the present, to dwell on the
past, and to think the contrast of the past with the present in terms of
the past only, without letting the present appear in it.

The idea of annihilation is therefore not a pure idea; it implies that
we regret the past or that we conceive it as regrettable, that we have
some reason to linger over it. The idea arises when the phenomenon of
substitution is cut in two by a mind which considers only the first
half, because that alone interests it. Suppress all interest, all
feeling, and there is nothing left but the reality that flows, together
with the knowledge ever renewed that it impresses on us of its present
state.

From annihilation to negation, which is a more general operation, there
is now only a step. All that is necessary is to represent the contrast
of what is, not only with what has been, but also with all that might
have been. And we must express this contrast as a function of what might
have been, and not of what is; we must affirm the existence of the
actual while looking only at the possible. The formula we thus obtain no
longer expresses merely a disappointment of the individual; it is made
to correct or guard against an error, which is rather supposed to be the
error of another. In this sense, negation has a pedagogical and social
character.

Now, once negation is formulated, it presents an aspect symmetrical with
that of affirmation; if affirmation affirms an objective reality, it
seems that negation must affirm a non-reality equally objective, and, so
to say, equally real. In which we are both right and wrong: wrong,
because negation cannot be objectified, in so far as it is negative;
right, however, in that the negation of a thing implies the latent
affirmation of its replacement by something else, which we
systematically leave on one side. But the negative form of negation
benefits by the affirmation at the bottom of it. Bestriding the positive
solid reality to which it is attached, this phantom objectifies itself.
Thus is formed the idea of the void or of a partial nought, a thing
being supposed to be replaced, not by another thing, but by a void which
it leaves, that is, by the negation of itself. Now, as this operation
works on anything whatever, we suppose it performed on each thing in
turn, and finally on all things in block. We thus obtain the idea of
absolute Nothing. If now we analyze this idea of Nothing, we find that
it is, at bottom, the idea of Everything, together with a movement of
the mind that keeps jumping from one thing to another, refuses to stand
still, and concentrates all its attention on this refusal by never
determining its actual position except by relation to that which it has
just left. It is therefore an idea eminently comprehensive and full, as
full and comprehensive as the idea of _All_, to which it is very closely
akin.

How then can the idea of Nought be opposed to that of All? Is it not
plain that this is to oppose the full to the full, and that the
question, "Why does something exist?" is consequently without meaning, a
pseudo-problem raised about a pseudo-idea? Yet we must say once more why
this phantom of a problem haunts the mind with such obstinacy. In vain
do we show that in the idea of an "annihilation of the real" there is
only the image of all realities expelling one another endlessly, in a
circle; in vain do we add that the idea of non-existence is only that of
the expulsion of an imponderable existence, or a "merely possible"
existence, by a more substantial existence which would then be the true
reality; in vain do we find in the _sui generis_ form of negation an
element which is not intellectual--negation being the judgment of a
judgment, an admonition given to some one else or to oneself, so that it
is absurd to attribute to negation the power of creating ideas of a new
kind, viz. ideas without content;--in spite of all, the conviction
persists that before things, or at least under things, there is
"Nothing." If we seek the reason of this fact, we shall find it
precisely in the feeling, in the social and, so to speak, practical
element, that gives its specific form to negation. The greatest
philosophic difficulties arise, as we have said, from the fact that the
forms of human action venture outside of their proper sphere. We are
made in order to act as much as, and more than, in order to think--or
rather, when we follow the bent of our nature, it is in order to act
that we think. It is therefore no wonder that the habits of action give
their tone to those of thought, and that our mind always perceives
things in the same order in which we are accustomed to picture them when
we propose to act on them. Now, it is unquestionable, as we remarked
above, that every human action has its starting-point in a
dissatisfaction, and thereby in a feeling of absence. We should not act
if we did not set before ourselves an end, and we seek a thing only
because we feel the lack of it. Our action proceeds thus from "nothing"
to "something," and its very essence is to embroider "something" on the
canvas of "nothing." The truth is that the "nothing" concerned here is
the absence not so much of a thing as of a utility. If I bring a visitor
into a room that I have not yet furnished, I say to him that "there is
nothing in it." Yet I know the room is full of air; but, as we do not
sit on air, the room truly contains nothing that at this moment, for the
visitor and for myself, counts for anything. In a general way, human
work consists in creating utility; and, as long as the work is not
done, there is "nothing"--nothing that we want. Our life is thus spent
in filling voids, which our intellect conceives under the influence, by
no means intellectual, of desire and of regret, under the pressure of
vital necessities; and if we mean by void an absence of utility and not
of things, we may say, in this quite relative sense, that we are
constantly going from the void to the full: such is the direction which
our action takes. Our speculation cannot help doing the same; and,
naturally, it passes from the relative sense to the absolute sense,
since it is exercised on things themselves and not on the utility they
have for us. Thus is implanted in us the idea that reality fills a void,
and that Nothing, conceived as an absence of everything, pre-exists
before all things in right, if not in fact. It is this illusion that we
have tried to remove by showing that the idea of Nothing, if we try to
see in it that of an annihilation of all things, is self-destructive and
reduced to a mere word; and that if, on the contrary, it is truly an
idea, then we find in it as much matter as in the idea of All.

       *       *       *       *       *

This long analysis has been necessary to show that _a self-sufficient
reality is not necessarily a reality foreign to duration_. If we pass
(consciously or unconsciously) through the idea of the nought in order
to reach that of being, the being to which we come is a logical or
mathematical essence, therefore non-temporal. And, consequently, a
static conception of the real is forced on us: everything appears given
once for all, in eternity. But we must accustom ourselves to think being
directly, without making a detour, without first appealing to the
phantom of the nought which interposes itself between it and us. We must
strive to see in order to see, and no longer to see in order to act.
Then the Absolute is revealed very near us and, in a certain measure,
in us. It is of psychological and not of mathematical nor logical
essence. It lives with us. Like us, but in certain aspects infinitely
more concentrated and more gathered up in itself, it _endures_.

But do we ever think true duration? Here again a direct taking
possession is necessary. It is no use trying to approach duration: we
must install ourselves within it straight away. This is what the
intellect generally refuses to do, accustomed as it is to think the
moving by means of the unmovable.

The function of the intellect is to preside over actions. Now, in
action, it is the result that interests us; the means matter little
provided the end is attained. Thence it comes that we are altogether
bent on the end to be realized, generally trusting ourselves to it in
order that the idea may become an act; and thence it comes also that
only the goal where our activity will rest is pictured explicitly to our
mind: the movements constituting the action itself either elude our
consciousness or reach it only confusedly. Let us consider a very simple
act, like that of lifting the arm. Where should we be if we had to
imagine beforehand all the elementary contractions and tensions this act
involves, or even to perceive them, one by one, as they are
accomplished? But the mind is carried immediately to the end, that is to
say, to the schematic and simplified vision of the act supposed
accomplished. Then, if no antagonistic idea neutralizes the effect of
the first idea, the appropriate movements come of themselves to fill out
the plan, drawn in some way by the void of its gaps. The intellect,
then, only represents to the activity ends to attain, that is to say,
points of rest. And, from one end attained to another end attained, from
one rest to another rest, our activity is carried by a series of leaps,
during which our consciousness is turned away as much as possible from
the movement going on, to regard only the anticipated image of the
movement accomplished.

Now, in order that it may represent as unmovable the result of the act
which is being accomplished, the intellect must perceive, as also
unmovable, the surroundings in which this result is being framed. Our
activity is fitted into the material world. If matter appeared to us as
a perpetual flowing, we should assign no termination to any of our
actions. We should feel each of them dissolve as fast as it was
accomplished, and we should not anticipate an ever-fleeting future. In
order that our activity may leap from an _act_ to an _act_, it is
necessary that matter should pass from a _state_ to a _state_, for it is
only into a state of the material world that action can fit a result, so
as to be accomplished. But is it thus that matter presents itself?

_A priori_ we may presume that our perception manages to apprehend
matter with this bias. Sensory organs and motor organs are in fact
coördinated with each other. Now, the first symbolize our faculty of
perceiving, as the second our faculty of acting. The organism thus
evidences, in a visible and tangible form, the perfect accord of
perception and action. So if our activity always aims at a _result_ into
which it is momentarily fitted, our perception must retain of the
material world, at every moment, only a _state_ in which it is
provisionally placed. This is the most natural hypothesis. And it is
easy to see that experience confirms it.

From our first glance at the world, before we even make our _bodies_ in
it, we distinguish _qualities_. Color succeeds to color, sound to sound,
resistance to resistance, etc. Each of these qualities, taken
separately, is a state that seems to persist as such, immovable until
another replaces it. Yet each of these qualities resolves itself, on
analysis, into an enormous number of elementary movements. Whether we
see in it vibrations or whether we represent it in any other way, one
fact is certain, it is that every quality is change. In vain, moreover,
shall we seek beneath the change the thing which changes: it is always
provisionally, and in order to satisfy our imagination, that we attach
the movement to a mobile. The mobile flies for ever before the pursuit
of science, which is concerned with mobility alone. In the smallest
discernible fraction of a second, in the almost instantaneous perception
of a sensible quality, there may be trillions of oscillations which
repeat themselves. The permanence of a sensible quality consists in this
repetition of movements, as the persistence of life consists in a series
of palpitations. The primal function of perception is precisely to grasp
a series of elementary changes under the form of a quality or of a
simple state, by a work of condensation. The greater the power of acting
bestowed upon an animal species, the more numerous, probably, are the
elementary changes that its faculty of perceiving concentrates into one
of its instants. And the progress must be continuous, in nature, from
the beings that vibrate almost in unison with the oscillations of the
ether, up to those that embrace trillions of these oscillations in the
shortest of their simple perceptions. The first feel hardly anything but
movements; the others perceive quality. The first are almost caught up
in the running-gear of things; the others react, and the tension of
their faculty of acting is probably proportional to the concentration of
their faculty of perceiving. The progress goes on even in humanity
itself. A man is so much the more a "man of action" as he can embrace in
a glance a greater number of events: he who perceives successive events
one by one will allow himself to be led by them; he who grasps them as
a whole will dominate them. In short, the qualities of matter are so
many stable views that we take of its instability.

Now, in the continuity of sensible qualities we mark off the boundaries
of bodies. Each of these bodies really changes at every moment. In the
first place, it resolves itself into a group of qualities, and every
quality, as we said, consists of a succession of elementary movements.
But, even if we regard the quality as a stable state, the body is still
unstable in that it changes qualities without ceasing. The body
pre-eminently--that which we are most justified in isolating within the
continuity of matter, because it constitutes a relatively closed
system--is the living body; it is, moreover, for it that we cut out the
others within the whole. Now, life is an evolution. We concentrate a
period of this evolution in a stable view which we call a form, and,
when the change has become considerable enough to overcome the fortunate
inertia of our perception, we say that the body has changed its form.
But in reality the body is changing form at every moment; or rather,
there is no form, since form is immobile and the reality is movement.
What is real is the continual _change of_ form: _form is only a snapshot
view of a transition_. Therefore, here again, our perception manages to
solidify into discontinuous images the fluid continuity of the real.
When the successive images do not differ from each other too much, we
consider them all as the waxing and waning of a single _mean_ image, or
as the deformation of this image in different directions. And to this
mean we really allude when we speak of the _essence_ of a thing, or of
the thing itself.

Finally things, once constituted, show on the surface, by their changes
of situation, the profound changes that are being accomplished within
the Whole. We say then that they _act_ on one another. This action
appears to us, no doubt, in the form of movement. But from the mobility
of the movement we turn away as much as we can; what interests us is, as
we said above, the unmovable plan of the movement rather than the
movement itself. Is it a simple movement? We ask ourselves _where_ it is
going. It is by its direction, that is to say, by the position of its
provisional end, that we represent it at every moment. Is it a complex
movement? We would know above all _what_ is going on, _what_ the
movement is doing--in other words, the _result_ obtained or the
presiding _intention_. Examine closely what is in your mind when you
speak of an action in course of accomplishment. The idea of change is
there, I am willing to grant, but it is hidden in the penumbra. In the
full light is the motionless plan of the act supposed accomplished. It
is by this, and by this only, that the complex act is distinguished and
defined. We should be very much embarrassed if we had to imagine the
movements inherent in the actions of eating, drinking, fighting, etc. It
is enough for us to know, in a general and indefinite way, that all
these acts are movements. Once that side of the matter has been settled,
we simply seek to represent the _general plan_ of each of these complex
movements, that is to say the _motionless design_ that underlies them.
Here again knowledge bears on a state rather than on a change. It is
therefore the same with this third case as with the others. Whether the
movement be qualitative or evolutionary or extensive, the mind manages
to take stable views of the instability. And thence the mind derives, as
we have just shown, three kinds of representations: (1) qualities, (2)
forms of essences, (3) acts.

To these three ways of seeing correspond three categories of words:
_adjectives_, _substantives_, and _verbs_, which are the primordial
elements of language. Adjectives and substantives therefore symbolize
_states_. But the verb itself, if we keep to the clear part of the idea
it calls up, hardly expresses anything else.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, if we try to characterize more precisely our natural attitude
towards Becoming, this is what we find. Becoming is infinitely varied.
That which goes from yellow to green is not like that which goes from
green to blue: they are different _qualitative_ movements. That which
goes from flower to fruit is not like that which goes from larva to
nymph and from nymph to perfect insect: they are different
_evolutionary_ movements. The action of eating or of drinking is not
like the action of fighting: they are different _extensive_ movements.
And these three kinds of movement themselves--qualitative, evolutionary,
extensive--differ profoundly. The trick of our perception, like that of
our intelligence, like that of our language, consists in extracting from
these profoundly different becomings the single representation of
becoming _in general_, undefined becoming, a mere abstraction which by
itself says nothing and of which, indeed, it is very rarely that we
think. To this idea, always the same, and always obscure or unconscious,
we then join, in each particular case, one or several clear images that
represent _states_ and which serve to distinguish all becomings from
each other. It is this composition of a specified and definite state
with change general and undefined that we substitute for the specific
change. An infinite multiplicity of becomings variously colored, so to
speak, passes before our eyes: we manage so that we see only differences
of color, that is to say, differences of state, beneath which there is
supposed to flow, hidden from our view, a becoming always and everywhere
the same, invariably colorless.

Suppose we wish to portray on a screen a living picture, such as the
marching past of a regiment. There is one way in which it might first
occur to us to do it. That would be to cut out jointed figures
representing the soldiers, to give to each of them the movement of
marching, a movement varying from individual to individual although
common to the human species, and to throw the whole on the screen. We
should need to spend on this little game an enormous amount of work, and
even then we should obtain but a very poor result: how could it, at its
best, reproduce the suppleness and variety of life? Now, there is
another way of proceeding, more easy and at the same time more
effective. It is to take a series of snapshots of the passing regiment
and to throw these instantaneous views on the screen, so that they
replace each other very rapidly. This is what the cinematograph does.
With photographs, each of which represents the regiment in a fixed
attitude, it reconstitutes the mobility of the regiment marching. It is
true that if we had to do with photographs alone, however much we might
look at them, we should never see them animated: with immobility set
beside immobility, even endlessly, we could never make movement. In
order that the pictures may be animated, there must be movement
somewhere. The movement does indeed exist here; it is in the apparatus.
It is because the film of the cinematograph unrolls, bringing in turn
the different photographs of the scene to continue each other, that each
actor of the scene recovers his mobility; he strings all his successive
attitudes on the invisible movement of the film. The process then
consists in extracting from all the movements peculiar to all the
figures an impersonal movement abstract and simple, _movement in
general_, so to speak: we put this into the apparatus, and we
reconstitute the individuality of each particular movement by combining
this nameless movement with the personal attitudes. Such is the
contrivance of the cinematograph. And such is also that of our
knowledge. Instead of attaching ourselves to the inner becoming of
things, we place ourselves outside them in order to recompose their
becoming artificially. We take snapshots, as it were, of the passing
reality, and, as these are characteristic of the reality, we have only
to string them on a becoming, abstract, uniform and invisible, situated
at the back of the apparatus of knowledge, in order to imitate what
there is that is characteristic in this becoming itself. Perception,
intellection, language so proceed in general. Whether we would think
becoming, or express it, or even perceive it, we hardly do anything else
than set going a kind of cinematograph inside us. We may therefore sum
up what we have been saying in the conclusion that the _mechanism of our
ordinary knowledge is of a cinematographical kind_.

Of the altogether practical character of this operation there is no
possible doubt. Each of our acts aims at a certain insertion of our will
into the reality. There is, between our body and other bodies, an
arrangement like that of the pieces of glass that compose a
kaleidoscopic picture. Our activity goes from an arrangement to a
rearrangement, each time no doubt giving the kaleidoscope a new shake,
but not interesting itself in the shake, and seeing only the new
picture. Our knowledge of the operation of nature must be exactly
symmetrical, therefore, with the interest we take in our own operation.
In this sense we may say, if we are not abusing this kind of
illustration, that _the cinematographical character of our knowledge of
things is due to the kaleidoscopic character of our adaptation to them_.

The cinematographical method is therefore the only practical method,
since it consists in making the general character of knowledge form
itself on that of action, while expecting that the detail of each act
should depend in its turn on that of knowledge. In order that action may
always be enlightened, intelligence must always be present in it; but
intelligence, in order thus to accompany the progress of activity and
ensure its direction, must begin by adopting its rhythm. Action is
discontinuous, like every pulsation of life; discontinuous, therefore,
is knowledge. The mechanism of the faculty of knowing has been
constructed on this plan. Essentially practical, can it be of use, such
as it is, for speculation? Let us try with it to follow reality in its
windings, and see what will happen.

I take of the continuity of a particular becoming a series of views,
which I connect together by "becoming in general." But of course I
cannot stop there. What is not determinable is not representable: of
"becoming in general" I have only a verbal knowledge. As the letter _x_
designates a certain unknown quantity, whatever it may be, so my
"becoming in general," always the same, symbolizes here a certain
transition of which I have taken some snapshots; of the transition
itself it teaches me nothing. Let me then concentrate myself wholly on
the transition, and, between any two snapshots, endeavor to realize what
is going on. As I apply the same method, I obtain the same result; a
third view merely slips in between the two others. I may begin again as
often as I will, I may set views alongside of views for ever, I shall
obtain nothing else. The application of the cinematographical method
therefore leads to a perpetual recommencement, during which the mind,
never able to satisfy itself and never finding where to rest, persuades
itself, no doubt, that it imitates by its instability the very movement
of the real. But though, by straining itself to the point of giddiness,
it may end by giving itself the illusion of mobility, its operation has
not advanced it a step, since it remains as far as ever from its goal.
In order to advance with the moving reality, you must replace yourself
within it. Install yourself within change, and you will grasp at once
both change itself and the successive states in which _it might_ at any
instant be immobilized. But with these successive states, perceived from
without as real and no longer as potential immobilities, you will never
reconstitute movement. Call them _qualities_, _forms_, _positions_, or
_intentions_, as the case may be, multiply the number of them as you
will, let the interval between two consecutive states be infinitely
small: before the intervening movement you will always experience the
disappointment of the child who tries by clapping his hands together to
crush the smoke. The movement slips through the interval, because every
attempt to reconstitute change out of states implies the absurd
proposition, that movement is made of immobilities.

Philosophy perceived this as soon as it opened its eyes. The arguments
of Zeno of Elea, although formulated with a very different intention,
have no other meaning.

Take the flying arrow. At every moment, says Zeno, it is motionless, for
it cannot have time to move, that is, to occupy at least two successive
positions, unless at least two moments are allowed it. At a given
moment, therefore, it is at rest at a given point. Motionless in each
point of its course, it is motionless during all the time that it is
moving.

Yes, if we suppose that the arrow can ever _be_ in a point of its
course. Yes again, if the arrow, which is moving, ever coincides with a
position, which is motionless. But the arrow never _is_ in any point of
its course. The most we can say is that it might be there, in this
sense, that it passes there and might stop there. It is true that if it
did stop there, it would be at rest there, and at this point it is no
longer movement that we should have to do with. The truth is that if the
arrow leaves the point A to fall down at the point B, its movement AB is
as simple, as indecomposable, in so far as it is movement, as the
tension of the bow that shoots it. As the shrapnel, bursting before it
falls to the ground, covers the explosive zone with an indivisible
danger, so the arrow which goes from A to B displays with a single
stroke, although over a certain extent of duration, its indivisible
mobility. Suppose an elastic stretched from A to B, could you divide its
extension? The course of the arrow is this very extension; it is equally
simple and equally undivided. It is a single and unique bound. You fix a
point C in the interval passed, and say that at a certain moment the
arrow was in C. If it had been there, it would have been stopped there,
and you would no longer have had a flight from A to B, but _two_
flights, one from A to C and the other from C to B, with an interval of
rest. A single movement is entirely, by the hypothesis, a movement
between two stops; if there are intermediate stops, it is no longer a
single movement. At bottom, the illusion arises from this, that the
movement, _once effected_, has laid along its course a motionless
trajectory on which we can count as many immobilities as we will. From
this we conclude that the movement, _whilst being effected_, lays at
each instant beneath it a position with which it coincides. We do not
see that the trajectory is created in one stroke, although a certain
time is required for it; and that though we can divide at will the
trajectory once created, we cannot divide its creation, which is an act
in progress and not a thing. To suppose that the moving body _is_ at a
point of its course is to cut the course in two by a snip of the
scissors at this point, and to substitute two trajectories for the
single trajectory which we were first considering. It is to distinguish
two successive acts where, by the hypothesis, there is only one. In
short, it is to attribute to the course itself of the arrow everything
that can be said of the interval that the arrow has traversed, that is
to say, to admit _a priori_ the absurdity that movement coincides with
immobility.

We shall not dwell here on the three other arguments of Zeno. We have
examined them elsewhere. It is enough to point out that they all consist
in applying the movement to the line traversed, and supposing that what
is true of the line is true of the movement. The line, for example, may
be divided into as many parts as we wish, of any length that we wish,
and it is always the same line. From this we conclude that we have the
right to suppose the movement articulated as we wish, and that it is
always the same movement. We thus obtain a series of absurdities that
all express the same fundamental absurdity. But the possibility of
applying the movement _to_ the line traversed exists only for an
observer who keeping outside the movement and seeing at every instant
the possibility of a stop, tries to reconstruct the real movement with
these possible immobilities. The absurdity vanishes as soon as we adopt
by thought the continuity of the real movement, a continuity of which
every one of us is conscious whenever he lifts an arm or advances a
step. We feel then indeed that the line passed over between two stops is
described with a single indivisible stroke, and that we seek in vain to
practice on the movement, which traces the line, divisions
corresponding, each to each, with the divisions arbitrarily chosen of
the line once it has been traced. The line traversed by the moving body
lends itself to any kind of division, because it has no internal
organization. But all movement is articulated inwardly. It is either an
indivisible bound (which may occupy, nevertheless, a very long duration)
or a series of indivisible bounds. Take the articulations of this
movement into account, or give up speculating on its nature.

When Achilles pursues the tortoise, each of his steps must be treated as
indivisible, and so must each step of the tortoise. After a certain
number of steps, Achilles will have overtaken the tortoise. There is
nothing more simple. If you insist on dividing the two motions further,
distinguish both on the one side and on the other, in the course of
Achilles and in that of the tortoise, the _sub-multiples_ of the steps
of each of them; but respect the natural articulations of the two
courses. As long as you respect them, no difficulty will arise, because
you will follow the indications of experience. But Zeno's device is to
reconstruct the movement of Achilles according to a law arbitrarily
chosen. Achilles with a first step is supposed to arrive at the point
where the tortoise was, with a second step at the point which it has
moved to while he was making the first, and so on. In this case,
Achilles would always have a new step to take. But obviously, to
overtake the tortoise, he goes about it in quite another way. The
movement considered by Zeno would only be the equivalent of the movement
of Achilles if we could treat the movement as we treat the interval
passed through, decomposable and recomposable at will. Once you
subscribe to this first absurdity, all the others follow.[99]

Nothing would be easier, now, than to extend Zeno's argument to
qualitative becoming and to evolutionary becoming. We should find the
same contradictions in these. That the child can become a youth, ripen
to maturity and decline to old age, we understand when we consider that
vital evolution is here the reality itself. Infancy, adolescence,
maturity, old age, are mere views of the mind, _possible stops_ imagined
by us, from without, along the continuity of a progress. On the
contrary, let childhood, adolescence, maturity and old age be given as
integral parts of the evolution, they become _real stops_, and we can no
longer conceive how evolution is possible, for rests placed beside rests
will never be equivalent to a movement. How, with what is made, can we
reconstitute what is being made? How, for instance, from childhood once
posited as a _thing_, shall we pass to adolescence, when, by the
hypothesis, childhood only is given? If we look at it closely, we shall
see that our habitual manner of speaking, which is fashioned after our
habitual manner of thinking, leads us to actual logical
dead-locks--dead-locks to which we allow ourselves to be led without
anxiety, because we feel confusedly that we can always get out of them
if we like: all that we have to do, in fact, is to give up the
cinematographical habits of our intellect. When we say "The child
becomes a man," let us take care not to fathom too deeply the literal
meaning of the expression, or we shall find that, when we posit the
subject "child," the attribute "man" does not yet apply to it, and
that, when we express the attribute "man," it applies no more to the
subject "child." The reality, which is the _transition_ from childhood
to manhood, has slipped between our fingers. We have only the imaginary
stops "child" and "man," and we are very near to saying that one of
these stops _is_ the other, just as the arrow of Zeno _is_, according to
that philosopher, at all the points of the course. The truth is that if
language here were molded on reality, we should not say "The child
becomes the man," but "There is becoming from the child to the man." In
the first proposition, "becomes" is a verb of indeterminate meaning,
intended to mask the absurdity into which we fall when we attribute the
state "man" to the subject "child." It behaves in much the same way as
the movement, always the same, of the cinematographical film, a movement
hidden in the apparatus and whose function it is to superpose the
successive pictures on one another in order to imitate the movement of
the real object. In the second proposition, "becoming" is a subject. It
comes to the front. It is the reality itself; childhood and manhood are
then only possible stops, mere views of the mind; we now have to do with
the objective movement itself, and no longer with its cinematographical
imitation. But the first manner of expression is alone conformable to
our habits of language. We must, in order to adopt the second, escape
from the cinematographical mechanism of thought.

We must make complete abstraction of this mechanism, if we wish to get
rid at one stroke of the theoretical absurdities that the question of
movement raises. All is obscure, all is contradictory when we try, with
states, to build up a transition. The obscurity is cleared up, the
contradiction vanishes, as soon as we place ourselves along the
transition, in order to distinguish states in it by making cross cuts
therein in thought. The reason is that there is _more_ in the transition
than the series of states, that is to say, the possible cuts--_more_ in
the movement than the series of positions, that is to say, the possible
stops. Only, the first way of looking at things is conformable to the
processes of the human mind; the second requires, on the contrary, that
we reverse the bent of our intellectual habits. No wonder, then, if
philosophy at first recoiled before such an effort. The Greeks trusted
to nature, trusted the natural propensity of the mind, trusted language
above all, in so far as it naturally externalizes thought. Rather than
lay blame on the attitude of thought and language toward the course of
things, they preferred to pronounce the course of things itself to be
wrong.

Such, indeed, was the sentence passed by the philosophers of the Eleatic
school. And they passed it without any reservation whatever. As becoming
shocks the habits of thought and fits ill into the molds of language,
they declared it unreal. In spatial movement and in change in general
they saw only pure illusion. This conclusion could be softened down
without changing the premisses, by saying that the reality changes, but
that it _ought not_ to change. Experience confronts us with becoming:
that is _sensible_ reality. But the _intelligible_ reality, that which
_ought_ to be, is more real still, and that reality does not change.
Beneath the qualitative becoming, beneath the evolutionary becoming,
beneath the extensive becoming, the mind must seek that which defies
change, the definable quality, the form or essence, the end. Such was
the fundamental principle of the philosophy which developed throughout
the classic age, the philosophy of Forms, or, to use a term more akin to
the Greek, the philosophy of Ideas.

The word [Greek: eidos], which we translate here by "Idea," has, in
fact, this threefold meaning. It denotes (1) the quality, (2) the form
or essence, (3) the end or _design_ (in the sense of _intention_) of the
act being performed, that is to say, at bottom, the _design_ (in the
sense of _drawing_) of the act supposed accomplished. _These three
aspects are those of the adjective, substantive and verb, and correspond
to the three essential categories of language._ After the explanations
we have given above, we might, and perhaps we ought to, translate
[Greek: eidos] by "view" or rather by "moment." For [Greek: eidos] is
the stable view taken of the instability of things: the _quality_, which
is a moment of becoming; the _form_, which is a moment of evolution; the
_essence_, which is the mean form above and below which the other forms
are arranged as alterations of the mean; finally, the intention or
_mental design_ which presides over the action being accomplished, and
which is nothing else, we said, than the _material design_, traced out
and contemplated beforehand, of the action accomplished. To reduce
things to Ideas is therefore to resolve becoming into its principal
moments, each of these being, moreover, by the hypothesis, screened from
the laws of time and, as it were, plucked out of eternity. That is to
say that we end in the philosophy of Ideas when we apply the
cinematographical mechanism of the intellect to the analysis of the
real.

But, when we put immutable Ideas at the base of the moving reality, a
whole physics, a whole cosmology, a whole theology follows necessarily.
We must insist on the point. Not that we mean to summarize in a few
pages a philosophy so complex and so comprehensive as that of the
Greeks. But, since we have described the cinematographical mechanism of
the intellect, it is important that we should show to what idea of
reality the play of this mechanism leads. It is the very idea, we
believe, that we find in the ancient philosophy. The main lines of the
doctrine that was developed from Plato to Plotinus, passing through
Aristotle (and even, in a certain measure, through the Stoics), have
nothing accidental, nothing contingent, nothing that must be regarded as
a philosopher's fancy. They indicate the vision that a systematic
intellect obtains of the universal becoming when regarding it by means
of snapshots, taken at intervals, of its flowing. So that, even to-day,
we shall philosophize in the manner of the Greeks, we shall rediscover,
without needing to know them, such and such of their general
conclusions, in the exact proportion that we trust in the
cinematographical instinct of our thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

We said there is _more_ in a movement than in the successive positions
attributed to the moving object, _more_ in a becoming than in the forms
passed through in turn, _more_ in the evolution of form than the forms
assumed one after another. Philosophy can therefore derive terms of the
second kind from those of the first, but not the first from the second:
from the first terms speculation must take its start. But the intellect
reverses the order of the two groups; and, on this point, ancient
philosophy proceeds as the intellect does. It installs itself in the
immutable, it posits only Ideas. Yet becoming exists: it is a fact. How,
then, having posited immutability alone, shall we make change come forth
from it? Not by the addition of anything, for, by the hypothesis, there
exists nothing positive outside Ideas. It must therefore be by a
diminution. So at the base of ancient philosophy lies necessarily this
postulate: that there is more in the motionless than in the moving, and
that we pass from immutability to becoming by way of diminution or
attenuation.

It is therefore something negative, or zero at most, that must be added
to Ideas to obtain change. In that consists the Platonic "non-being,"
the Aristotelian "matter"--a metaphysical zero which, joined to the
Idea, like the arithmetical zero to unity, multiplies it in space and
time. By it the motionless and simple Idea is refracted into a movement
spread out indefinitely. In right, there ought to be nothing but
immutable Ideas, immutably fitted to each other. In fact, matter comes
to add to them its void, and thereby lets loose the universal becoming.
It is an elusive nothing, that creeps between the Ideas and creates
endless agitation, eternal disquiet, like a suspicion insinuated between
two loving hearts. Degrade the immutable Ideas: you obtain, by that
alone, the perpetual flux of things. The Ideas or Forms are the whole of
intelligible reality, that is to say, of truth, in that they represent,
all together, the theoretical equilibrium of Being. As to sensible
reality, it is a perpetual oscillation from one side to the other of
this point of equilibrium.

Hence, throughout the whole philosophy of Ideas there is a certain
conception of duration, as also of the relation of time to eternity. He
who installs himself in becoming sees in duration the very life of
things, the fundamental reality. The Forms, which the mind isolates and
stores up in concepts, are then only snapshots of the changing reality.
They are moments gathered along the course of time; and, just because we
have cut the thread that binds them to time, they no longer endure. They
tend to withdraw into their own definition, that is to say, into the
artificial reconstruction and symbolical expression which is their
intellectual equivalent. They enter into eternity, if you will; but what
is eternal in them is just what is unreal. On the contrary, if we treat
becoming by the cinematographical method, the Forms are no longer
snapshots taken of the change, they are its constitutive elements, they
represent all that is positive in Becoming. Eternity no longer hovers
over time, as an abstraction; it underlies time, as a reality. Such is
exactly, on this point, the attitude of the philosophy of Forms or
Ideas. It establishes between eternity and time the same relation as
between a piece of gold and the small change--change so small that
payment goes on for ever without the debt being paid off. The debt could
be paid at once with the piece of gold. It is this that Plato expresses
in his magnificent language when he says that God, unable to make the
world eternal, gave it Time, "a moving image of eternity."[100]

Hence also arises a certain conception of extension, which is at the
base of the philosophy of Ideas, although it has not been so explicitly
brought out. Let us imagine a mind placed alongside becoming, and
adopting its movement. Each successive state, each quality, each form,
in short, will be seen by it as a mere cut made by thought in the
universal becoming. It will be found that form is essentially extended,
inseparable as it is from the extensity of the becoming which has
materialized it in the course of its flow. Every form thus occupies
space, as it occupies time. But the philosophy of Ideas follows the
inverse direction. It starts from the Form; it sees in the Form the very
essence of reality. It does not take Form as a snapshot of becoming; it
posits Forms in the eternal; of this motionless eternity, then, duration
and becoming are supposed to be only the degradation. Form thus posited,
independent of time, is then no longer what is found in a perception; it
is a _concept_. And, as a reality of the conceptual order occupies no
more of extension than it does of duration, the Forms must be stationed
outside space as well as above time. Space and time have therefore
necessarily, in ancient philosophy, the same origin and the same value.
The same diminution of being is expressed both by extension in space and
detention in time. Both of these are but the distance between what is
and what ought to be. From the standpoint of ancient philosophy, space
and time can be nothing but the field that an incomplete reality, or
rather a reality that has gone astray from itself, needs in order to run
in quest of itself. Only it must be admitted that the field is created
as the hunting progresses, and that the hunting in some way deposits the
field beneath it. Move an imaginary pendulum, a mere mathematical point,
from its position of equilibrium: a perpetual oscillation is started,
along which points are placed next to points, and moments succeed
moments. The space and time which thus arise have no more "positivity"
than the movement itself. They represent the remoteness of the position
artificially given to the pendulum from its normal position, _what it
lacks_ in order to regain its natural stability. Bring it back to its
normal position: space, time and motion shrink to a mathematical point.
Just so, human reasonings are drawn out into an endless chain, but are
at once swallowed up in the truth seized by intuition, for their
extension in space and time is only the distance, so to speak, between
thought and truth.[101] So of extension and duration in relation to pure
Forms or Ideas. The sensible forms are before us, ever about to recover
their ideality, ever prevented by the matter they bear in them, that is
to say, by their inner void, by the interval between what they are and
what they ought to be. They are for ever on the point of recovering
themselves, for ever occupied in losing themselves. An inflexible law
condemns them, like the rock of Sisyphus, to fall back when they are
almost touching the summit, and this law, which has projected them into
space and time, is nothing other than the very constancy of their
original insufficiency. The alternations of generation and decay, the
evolutions ever beginning over and over again, the infinite repetition
of the cycles of celestial spheres--this all represents merely a certain
fundamental deficit, in which materiality consists. Fill up this
deficit: at once you suppress space and time, that is to say, the
endlessly renewed oscillations around a stable equilibrium always aimed
at, never reached. Things re-enter into each other. What was extended in
space is contracted into pure Form. And past, present, and future shrink
into a single moment, which is eternity.

This amounts to saying that physics is but logic spoiled. In this
proposition the whole philosophy of Ideas is summarized. And in it also
is the hidden principle of the philosophy that is innate in our
understanding. If immutability is more than becoming, form is more than
change, and it is by a veritable fall that the logical system of Ideas,
rationally subordinated and coördinated among themselves, is scattered
into a physical series of objects and events accidentally placed one
after another. The generative idea of a poem is developed in thousands
of imaginations which are materialized in phrases that spread themselves
out in words. And the more we descend from the motionless idea, wound on
itself, to the words that unwind it, the more room is left for
contingency and choice. Other metaphors, expressed by other words, might
have arisen; an image is called up by an image, a word by a word. All
these words run now one after another, seeking in vain, by themselves,
to give back the simplicity of the generative idea. Our ear only hears
the words: it therefore perceives only accidents. But our mind, by
successive bounds, leaps from the words to the images, from the images
to the original idea, and so gets back, from the perception of
words--accidents called up by accidents--to the conception of the Idea
that posits its own being. So the philosopher proceeds, confronted with
the universe. Experience makes to pass before his eyes phenomena which
run, they also, one behind another in an accidental order determined by
circumstances of time and place. This physical order--a degeneration of
the logical order--is nothing else but the fall of the logical into
space and time. But the philosopher, ascending again from the percept to
the concept, sees condensed into the logical all the positive reality
that the physical possesses. His intellect, doing away with the
materiality that lessens being, grasps being itself in the immutable
system of Ideas. Thus Science is obtained, which appears to us, complete
and ready-made, as soon as we put back our intellect into its true
place, correcting the deviation that separated it from the intelligible.
Science is not, then, a human construction. It is prior to our
intellect, independent of it, veritably the generator of Things.

And indeed, if we hold the Forms to be simply snapshots taken by the
mind of the continuity of becoming, they must be relative to the mind
that thinks them, they can have no independent existence. At most we
might say that each of these Ideas is an _ideal_. But it is in the
opposite hypothesis that we are placing ourselves. Ideas must then exist
by themselves. Ancient philosophy could not escape this conclusion.
Plato formulated it, and in vain did Aristotle strive to avoid it. Since
movement arises from the degradation of the immutable, there could be no
movement, consequently no sensible world, if there were not, somewhere,
immutability realized. So, having begun by refusing to Ideas an
independent existence, and finding himself nevertheless unable to
deprive them of it, Aristotle pressed them into each other, rolled them
up into a ball, and set above the physical world a Form that was thus
found to be the Form of Forms, the Idea of Ideas, or, to use his own
words, the Thought of Thought. Such is the God of Aristotle--necessarily
immutable and apart from what is happening in the world, since he is
only the synthesis of all concepts in a single concept. It is true that
no one of the manifold concepts could exist apart, such as it is in the
divine unity: in vain should we look for the ideas of Plato within the
God of Aristotle. But if only we imagine the God of Aristotle in a sort
of refraction of himself, or simply inclining toward the world, at once
the Platonic Ideas are seen to pour themselves out of him, as if they
were involved in the unity of his essence: so rays stream out from the
sun, which nevertheless did not contain them. It is probably this
_possibility of an outpouring_ of Platonic Ideas from the Aristotelian
God that is meant, in the philosophy of Aristotle, by the active
intellect, the [Greek: nous] that has been called [Greek:
poiêtikos]--that is, by what is essential and yet unconscious in human
intelligence. The [Greek: nous poiêtikos] is Science entire, posited all
at once, which the conscious, discursive intellect is condemned to
reconstruct with difficulty, bit by bit. There is then within us, or
rather behind us, a possible vision of God, as the Alexandrians said, a
vision always virtual, never actually realized by the conscious
intellect. In this intuition we should see God expand in Ideas. This it
is that "does everything,"[102] playing in relation to the discursive
intellect, which moves in time, the same rôle as the motionless Mover
himself plays in relation to the movement of the heavens and the course
of things.

There is, then, immanent in the philosophy of Ideas, a particular
conception of causality, which it is important to bring into full
light, because it is that which each of us will reach when, in order to
ascend to the origin of things, he follows to the end the natural
movement of the intellect. True, the ancient philosophers never
formulated it explicitly. They confined themselves to drawing the
consequences of it, and, in general, they have marked but points of view
of it rather than presented it itself. Sometimes, indeed, they speak of
an _attraction_, sometimes of an _impulsion_ exercised by the prime
mover on the whole of the world. Both views are found in Aristotle, who
shows us in the movement of the universe an aspiration of things toward
the divine perfection, and consequently an ascent toward God, while he
describes it elsewhere as the effect of a contact of God with the first
sphere and as descending, consequently, from God to things. The
Alexandrians, we think, do no more than follow this double indication
when they speak of _procession_ and _conversion_. Everything is derived
from the first principle, and everything aspires to return to it. But
these two conceptions of the divine causality can only be identified
together if we bring them, both the one and the other, back to a third,
which we hold to be fundamental, and which alone will enable us to
understand, not only why, in what sense, things move in space and time,
but also why there is space and time, why there is movement, why there
are things.

This conception, which more and more shows through the reasonings of the
Greek philosophers as we go from Plato to Plotinus, we may formulate
thus: _The affirmation of a reality implies the simultaneous affirmation
of all the degrees of reality intermediate between it and nothing._ The
principle is evident in the case of number: we cannot affirm the number
10 without thereby affirming the existence of the numbers 9, 8, 7, ...,
etc.--in short, of the whole interval between 10 and zero. But here our
mind passes naturally from the sphere of quantity to that of quality.
It seems to us that, a certain perfection being given, the whole
continuity of degradations is given also between this perfection, on the
one hand, and the nought, on the other hand, that we think we conceive.
Let us then posit the God of Aristotle, thought of thought--that is,
thought _making a circle_, transforming itself from subject to object
and from object to subject by an instantaneous, or rather an eternal,
circular process: as, on the other hand, the nought appears to posit
itself, and as, the two extremities being given, the interval between
them is equally given, it follows that all the descending degrees of
being, from the divine perfection down to the "absolute nothing," are
realized automatically, so to speak, when we have posited God.

Let us then run through this interval from top to bottom. First of all,
the slightest diminution of the first principle will be enough to
precipitate Being into space and time; but duration and extension, which
represent this first diminution, will be as near as possible to the
divine inextension and eternity. We must therefore picture to ourselves
this first degradation of the divine principle as a sphere turning on
itself, imitating, by the perpetuity of its circular movement, the
eternity of the circle of the divine thought; creating, moreover, its
own place, and thereby place in general,[103] since it includes without
being included and moves without stirring from the spot; creating also
its own duration, and thereby duration in general, since its movement is
the measure of all motion.[104] Then, by degrees, we shall see the
perfection decrease, more and more, down to our sublunary world, in
which the cycle of birth, growth and decay imitates and mars the
original circle for the last time. So understood, the causal relation
between God and the world is seen as an attraction when regarded from
below, as an impulsion or a contact when regarded from above, since the
first heaven, with its circular movement, is an imitation of God and all
imitation is the reception of a form. Therefore, we perceive God as
efficient cause or as final cause, according to the point of view. And
yet neither of these two relations is the ultimate causal relation. The
true relation is that which is found between the two members of an
equation, when the first member is a single term and the second a sum of
an endless number of terms. It is, we may say, the relation of the
gold-piece to the small change, if we suppose the change to offer itself
automatically as soon as the gold piece is presented. Only thus can we
understand why Aristotle has demonstrated the necessity of a first
motionless mover, not by founding it on the assertion that the movement
of things must have had a beginning, but, on the contrary, by affirming
that this movement could not have begun and can never come to an end. If
movement exists, or, in other words, if the small change is being
counted, the gold piece is to be found somewhere. And if the counting
goes on for ever, having never begun, the single term that is eminently
equivalent to it must be eternal. A perpetuity of mobility is possible
only if it is backed by an eternity of immutability, which it unwinds in
a chain without beginning or end.

Such is the last word of the Greek philosophy. We have not attempted to
reconstruct it _a priori_. It has manifold origins. It is connected by
many invisible threads to the soul of ancient Greece. Vain, therefore,
the effort to deduce it from a simple principle.[105] But if everything
that has come from poetry, religion, social life and a still rudimentary
physics and biology be removed from it, if we take away all the light
material that may have been used in the construction of the stately
building, a solid framework remains, and this framework marks out the
main lines of a metaphysic which is, we believe, the natural metaphysic
of the human intellect. We come to a philosophy of this kind, indeed,
whenever we follow to the end, the cinematographical tendency of
perception and thought. Our perception and thought begin by substituting
for the continuity of evolutionary change a series of unchangeable forms
which are turn by turn, "caught on the wing," like the rings at a
merry-go-round, which the children unhook with their little stick as
they are passing. Now, how can the forms be passing, and on what "stick"
are they strung? As the stable forms have been obtained by extracting
from change everything that is definite, there is nothing left, to
characterize the instability on which the forms are laid, but a negative
attribute, which must be indetermination itself. Such is the first
proceeding of our thought: it dissociates each change into two
elements--the one stable, definable for each particular case, to wit,
the Form; the other indefinable and always the same, Change in general.
And such, also, is the essential operation of language. Forms are all
that it is capable of expressing. It is reduced to taking as understood
or is limited to _suggesting_ a mobility which, just because it is
always unexpressed, is thought to remain in all cases the same.--Then
comes in a philosophy that holds the dissociation thus effected by
thought and language to be legitimate. What can it do, except objectify
the distinction with more force, push it to its extreme consequences,
reduce it into a system? It will therefore construct the real, on the
one hand, with definite Forms or immutable elements, and, on the other,
with a principle of mobility which, being the negation of the form,
will, by the hypothesis, escape all definition and be the purely
indeterminate. The more it directs its attention to the forms delineated
by thought and expressed by language, the more it will see them rise
above the sensible and become subtilized into pure concepts, capable of
entering one within the other, and even of being at last massed together
into a single concept, the synthesis of all reality, the achievement of
all perfection. The more, on the contrary, it descends toward the
invisible source of the universal mobility, the more it will feel this
mobility sink beneath it and at the same time become void, vanish into
what it will call the "non-being." Finally, it will have on the one hand
the system of ideas, logically coördinated together or concentrated into
one only, on the other a quasi-nought, the Platonic "non-being" or the
Aristotelian "matter."--But, having cut your cloth, you must sew it.
With supra-sensible Ideas and an infra-sensible non-being, you now have
to reconstruct the sensible world. You can do so only if you postulate a
kind of metaphysical necessity in virtue of which the confronting of
this All with this Zero _is equivalent_ to the affirmation of all the
degrees of reality that measure the interval between them--just as an
undivided number, when regarded as a difference between itself and zero,
is revealed as a certain sum of units, and with its own affirmation
affirms all the lower numbers. That is the natural postulate. It is that
also that we perceive as the base of the Greek philosophy. In order then
to explain the specific characters of each of these degrees of
intermediate reality, nothing more is necessary than to measure the
distance that separates it from the integral reality. Each lower degree
consists in a diminution of the higher, and the _sensible_ newness that
we perceive in it is resolved, from the point of view of the
_intelligible_, into a new quantity of negation which is superadded to
it. The smallest possible quantity of negation, that which is found
already in the highest forms of sensible reality, and consequently _a
fortiori_ in the lower forms, is that which is expressed by the most
general attributes of sensible reality, extension and duration. By
increasing degradations we will obtain attributes more and more special.
Here the philosopher's fancy will have free scope, for it is by an
arbitrary decree, or at least a debatable one, that a particular aspect
of the sensible world will be equated with a particular diminution of
being. We shall not necessarily end, as Aristotle did, in a world
consisting of concentric spheres turning on themselves. But we shall be
led to an analogous cosmology--I mean, to a construction whose pieces,
though all different, will have none the less the same relations between
them. And this cosmology will be ruled by the same principle. The
physical will be defined by the logical. Beneath the changing phenomena
will appear to us, by transparence, a closed system of concepts
subordinated to and coördinated with each other. Science, understood as
the system of concepts, will be more real than the sensible reality. It
will be prior to human knowledge, which is only able to spell it letter
by letter; prior also to things, which awkwardly try to imitate it. It
would only have to be diverted an instant from itself in order to step
out of its eternity and thereby coincide with all this knowledge and all
these things. Its immutability is therefore, indeed, the cause of the
universal becoming.

Such was the point of view of ancient philosophy in regard to change
and duration. That modern philosophy has repeatedly, but especially in
its beginnings, had the wish to depart from it, seems to us
unquestionable. But an irresistible attraction brings the intellect back
to its natural movement, and the metaphysic of the moderns to the
general conclusions of the Greek metaphysic. We must try to make this
point clear, in order to show by what invisible threads our mechanistic
philosophy remains bound to the ancient philosophy of Ideas, and how
also it responds to the requirements, above all practical, of our
understanding.

       *       *       *       *       *

Modern, like ancient, science proceeds according to the
cinematographical method. It cannot do otherwise; all science is subject
to this law. For it is of the essence of science to handle _signs_,
which it substitutes for the objects themselves. These signs undoubtedly
differ from those of language by their greater precision and their
higher efficacy; they are none the less tied down to the general
condition of the sign, which is to denote a fixed aspect of the reality
under an arrested form. In order to think movement, a constantly renewed
effort of the mind is necessary. Signs are made to dispense us with this
effort by substituting, for the moving continuity of things, an
artificial reconstruction which is its equivalent in practice and has
the advantage of being easily handled. But let us leave aside the means
and consider only the end. What is the essential object of science? It
is to enlarge our influence over things. Science may be speculative in
its form, disinterested in its immediate ends; in other words we may
give it as long a credit as it wants. But, however long the day of
reckoning may be put off, some time or other the payment must be made.
It is always then, in short, practical utility that science has in view.
Even when it launches into theory, it is bound to adapt its behavior to
the general form of practice. However high it may rise, it must be ready
to fall back into the field of action, and at once to get on its feet.
This would not be possible for it, if its rhythm differed absolutely
from that of action itself. Now action, we have said, proceeds by leaps.
To act is to re-adapt oneself. To know, that is to say, to foresee in
order to act, is then to go from situation to situation, from
arrangement to rearrangement. Science may consider rearrangements that
come closer and closer to each other; it may thus increase the number of
moments that it isolates, but it always isolates moments. As to what
happens in the interval between the moments, science is no more
concerned with that than are our common intelligence, our senses and our
language: it does not bear on the interval, but only on the extremities.
So the cinematographical method forces itself upon our science, as it
did already on that of the ancients.

Wherein, then, is the difference between the two sciences? We indicated
it when we said that the ancients reduced the physical order to the
vital order, that is to say, laws to genera, while the moderns try to
resolve genera into laws. But we have to look at it in another aspect,
which, moreover, is only a transposition, of the first. Wherein consists
the difference of attitude of the two sciences toward change? We may
formulate it by saying that _ancient science thinks it knows its object
sufficiently when it has noted of it some privileged moments, whereas
modern science considers the object at any moment whatever_.

The forms or ideas of Plato or of Aristotle correspond to privileged or
salient moments in the history of things--those, in general, that have
been fixed by language. They are supposed, like the childhood or the old
age of a living being, to characterize a period of which they express
the quintessence, all the rest of this period being filled by the
passage, of no interest in itself, from one form to another form. Take,
for instance, a falling body. It was thought that we got near enough to
the fact when we characterized it as a whole: it was a movement
_downward_; it was the tendency toward a _centre_; it was the _natural_
movement of a body which, separated from the earth to which it belonged,
was now going to find its place again. They noted, then, the final term
or culminating point ([Greek: telos, akmê]) and set it up as the
essential moment: this moment, that language has retained in order to
express the whole of the fact, sufficed also for science to characterize
it. In the physics of Aristotle, it is by the concepts "high" and "low,"
spontaneous displacement and forced displacement, own place and strange
place, that the movement of a body shot into space or falling freely is
defined. But Galileo thought there was no essential moment, no
privileged instant. To study the falling body is to consider it at it
matters not what moment in its course. The true science of gravity is
that which will determine, for any moment of time whatever, the position
of the body in space. For this, indeed, signs far more precise than
those of language are required.

We may say, then, that our physics differs from that of the ancients
chiefly in the indefinite breaking up of time. For the ancients, time
comprises as many undivided periods as our natural perception and our
language cut out in it successive facts, each presenting a kind of
individuality. For that reason, each of these facts admits, in their
view, of only a _total_ definition or description. If, in describing it,
we are led to distinguish phases in it, we have several facts instead of
a single one, several undivided periods instead of a single period; but
time is always supposed to be divided into determinate periods, and the
mode of division to be forced on the mind by apparent crises of the
real, comparable to that of puberty, by the apparent release of a new
form.--For a Kepler or a Galileo, on the contrary, time is not divided
objectively in one way or another by the matter that fills it. It has no
natural articulations. We can, we ought to, divide it as we please. All
moments count. None of them has the right to set itself up as a moment
that represents or dominates the others. And, consequently, we know a
change only when we are able to determine what it is about at any one of
its moments.

The difference is profound. In fact, in a certain aspect it is radical.
But, from the point of view from which we are regarding it, it is a
difference of degree rather than of kind. The human mind has passed from
the first kind of knowledge to the second through gradual perfecting,
simply by seeking a higher precision. There is the same relation between
these two sciences as between the noting of the phases of a movement by
the eye and the much more complete recording of these phases by
instantaneous photography. It is the same cinematographical mechanism in
both cases, but it reaches a precision in the second that it cannot have
in the first. Of the gallop of a horse our eye perceives chiefly a
characteristic, essential or rather schematic attitude, a form that
appears to radiate over a whole period and so fill up a time of gallop.
It is this attitude that sculpture has fixed on the frieze of the
Parthenon. But instantaneous photography isolates any moment; it puts
them all in the same rank, and thus the gallop of a horse spreads out
for it into as many successive attitudes as it wishes, instead of
massing itself into a single attitude, which is supposed to flash out in
a privileged moment and to illuminate a whole period.

From this original difference flow all the others. A science that
considers, one after the other, undivided periods of duration, sees
nothing but phases succeeding phases, forms replacing forms; it is
content with a _qualitative_ description of objects, which it likens to
organized beings. But when we seek to know what happens within one of
these periods, at any moment of time, we are aiming at something
entirely different. The changes which are produced from one moment to
another are no longer, by the hypothesis, changes of quality; they are
_quantitative_ variations, it may be of the phenomenon itself, it may be
of its elementary parts. We were right then to say that modern science
is distinguishable from the ancient in that it applies to magnitudes and
proposes first and foremost to measure them. The ancients did indeed try
experiments, and on the other hand Kepler tried no experiment, in the
proper sense of the word, in order to discover a law which is the very
type of scientific knowledge as we understand it. What distinguishes
modern science is not that it is experimental, but that it experiments
and, more generally, works only with a view to measure.

For that reason it is right, again, to say that ancient science applied
to _concepts_, while modern science seeks _laws_--constant relations
between variable magnitudes. The concept of circularity was sufficient
to Aristotle to define the movement of the heavenly bodies. But, even
with the more accurate concept of elliptical form, Kepler did not think
he had accounted for the movement of planets. He had to get a law, that
is to say, a constant relation between the quantitative variations of
two or several elements of the planetary movement.

Yet these are only consequences--differences that follow from the
fundamental difference. It did happen to the ancients accidentally to
experiment with a view to measuring, as also to discover a law
expressing a constant relation between magnitudes. The principle of
Archimedes is a true experimental law. It takes into account three
variable magnitudes: the volume of a body, the density of the liquid in
which the body is immersed, the vertical pressure that is being exerted.
And it states indeed that one of these three terms is a function of the
other two.

The essential, original difference must therefore be sought elsewhere.
It is the same that we noticed first. The science of the ancients is
static. Either it considers in block the change that it studies, or, if
it divides the change into periods, it makes of each of these periods a
block in its turn: which amounts to saying that it takes no account of
time. But modern science has been built up around the discoveries of
Galileo and of Kepler, which immediately furnished it with a model. Now,
what do the laws of Kepler say? They lay down a relation between the
areas described by the heliocentric radius-vector of a planet and the
_time_ employed in describing them, a relation between the longer axis
of the orbit and the _time_ taken up by the course. And what was the
principle discovered by Galileo? A law which connected the space
traversed by a falling body with the _time_ occupied by the fall.
Furthermore, in what did the first of the great transformations of
geometry in modern times consist, if not in introducing--in a veiled
form, it is true--time and movement even in the consideration of
figures? For the ancients, geometry was a purely static science. Figures
were given to it at once, completely finished, like the Platonic Ideas.
But the essence of the Cartesian geometry (although Descartes did not
give it this form) was to regard every plane curve as described by the
movement of a point on a movable straight line which is displaced,
parallel to itself, along the axis of the abscissae--the displacement of
the movable straight line being supposed to be uniform and the abscissa
thus becoming representative of the time. The curve is then defined if
we can state the relation connecting the space traversed on the movable
straight line to the time employed in traversing it, that is, if we are
able to indicate the position of the movable point, on the straight line
which it traverses, at any moment whatever of its course. This relation
is just what we call the equation of the curve. To substitute an
equation for a figure consists, therefore, in seeing the actual position
of the moving points in the tracing of the curve at any moment whatever,
instead of regarding this tracing all at once, gathered up in the unique
moment when the curve has reached its finished state.

Such, then, was the directing idea of the reform by which both the
science of nature and mathematics, which serves as its instrument, were
renewed. Modern science is the daughter of astronomy; it has come down
from heaven to earth along the inclined plane of Galileo, for it is
through Galileo that Newton and his successors are connected with
Kepler. Now, how did the astronomical problem present itself to Kepler?
The question was, knowing the respective positions of the planets at a
given moment, how to calculate their positions at any other moment. So
the same question presented itself, henceforth, for every material
system. Each material point became a rudimentary planet, and the main
question, the ideal problem whose solution would yield the key to all
the others was, the positions of these elements at a particular moment
being given, how to determine their relative positions at any moment. No
doubt the problem cannot be put in these precise terms except in very
simple cases, for a schematized reality; for we never know the
respective positions of the real elements of matter, supposing there are
real elements; and, even if we knew them at a given moment, the
calculation of their positions at another moment would generally require
a mathematical effort surpassing human powers. But it is enough for us
to know that these elements might be known, that their present
positions might be noted, and that a superhuman intellect might, by
submitting these data to mathematical operations, determine the
positions of the elements at any other moment of time. This conviction
is at the bottom of the questions we put to ourselves on the subject of
nature, and of the methods we employ to solve them. That is why every
law in static form seems to us as a provisional instalment or as a
particular view of a dynamic law which alone would give us whole and
definitive knowledge.

Let us conclude, then, that our science is not only distinguished from
ancient science in this, that it seeks laws, nor even in this, that its
laws set forth relations between magnitudes: we must add that the
magnitude to which we wish to be able to relate all others is time, and
that _modern science must be defined pre-eminently by its aspiration to
take time as an independent variable_. But with what time has it to do?

We have said before, and we cannot repeat too often, that the science of
matter proceeds like ordinary knowledge. It perfects this knowledge,
increases its precision and its scope, but it works in the same
direction and puts the same mechanism into play. If, therefore, ordinary
knowledge, by reason of the cinematographical mechanism to which it is
subjected, forbears to follow becoming in so far as becoming is moving,
the science of matter renounces it equally. No doubt, it distinguishes
as great a number of moments as we wish in the interval of time it
considers. However small the intervals may be at which it stops, it
authorizes us to divide them again if necessary. In contrast with
ancient science, which stopped at certain so-called essential moments,
it is occupied indifferently with any moment whatever. But it always
considers moments, always virtual stopping-places, always, in short,
immobilities. Which amounts to saying that real time, regarded as a
flux, or, in other words, as the very mobility of being, escapes the
hold of scientific knowledge. We have already tried to establish this
point in a former work. We alluded to it again in the first chapter of
this book. But it is necessary to revert to it once more, in order to
clear up misunderstandings.

When positive science speaks of time, what it refers to is the movement
of a certain mobile T on its trajectory. This movement has been chosen
by it as representative of time, and it is, by definition, uniform. Let
us call T_{1}, T_{2}, T_{3}, ... etc., points which divide the trajectory
of the mobile into equal parts from its origin T_0. We shall say that 1, 2,
3, ... units of time have flowed past, when the mobile is at the points
T_{1}, T_{2}, T_{3}, ... of the line it traverses. Accordingly, to consider
the state of the universe at the end of a certain time _t_, is to
examine where it will be when T is at the point T_t of its course. But
of the _flux_ itself of time, still less of its effect on consciousness,
there is here no question; for there enter into the calculation only the
points T_{1}, T_{2}, T_{3}, ... taken on the flux, never the flux itself.
We may narrow the time considered as much as we will, that is, break up at
will the interval between two consecutive divisions T_{n} and T_{n-|-1};
but it is always with points, and with points only, that we are dealing.
What we retain of the movement of the mobile T are positions taken on
its trajectory. What we retain of all the other points of the universe
are their positions on their respective trajectories. To each _virtual
stop_ of the moving body T at the points of division T_{1}, T_{2}, T_{3},
 ... we make correspond a _virtual stop_ of all the other mobiles at the
points where they are passing. And when we say that a movement or any
other change has occupied a time _t_, we mean by it that we have noted a
number _t_ of correspondences of this kind. We have therefore counted
simultaneities; we have not concerned ourselves with the flux that goes
from one to another. The proof of this is that I can, at discretion,
vary the rapidity of the flux of the universe in regard to a
consciousness that is independent of it and that would perceive the
variation by the quite qualitative _feeling_ that it would have of it:
whatever the variation had been, since the movement of T would
participate in this variation, I should have nothing to change in my
equations nor in the numbers that figure in them.

Let us go further. Suppose that the rapidity of the flux becomes
infinite. Imagine, as we said in the first pages of this book, that the
trajectory of the mobile T is given at once, and that the whole history,
past, present and future, of the material universe is spread out
instantaneously in space. The same mathematical correspondences will
subsist between the moments of the history of the world unfolded like a
fan, so to speak, and the divisions T_{1}, T_{2}, T_{3}, ... of the line
which will be called, by definition, "the course of time." In the eyes of
science nothing will have changed. But if, time thus spreading itself
out in space and succession becoming juxtaposition, science has nothing
to change in what it tells us, we must conclude that, in what it tells
us, it takes account neither of _succession_ in what of it is specific
nor of _time_ in what there is in it that is fluent. It has no sign to
express what strikes our consciousness in succession and duration. It no
more applies to becoming, so far as that is moving, than the bridges
thrown here and there across the stream follow the water that flows
under their arches.

Yet succession exists; I am conscious of it; it is a fact. When a
physical process is going on before my eyes, my perception and my
inclination have nothing to do with accelerating or retarding it. What
is important to the physicist is the _number_ of units of duration the
process fills; he does not concern himself about the units themselves
and that is why the successive states of the world might be spread out
all at once in space without his having to change anything in his
science or to cease talking about time. But for us, conscious beings, it
is the units that matter, for we do not count extremities of intervals,
we feel and live the intervals themselves. Now, we are conscious of
these intervals as of _definite_ intervals. Let me come back again to
the sugar in my glass of water:[106] why must I wait for it to melt?
While the duration of the phenomenon is _relative_ for the physicist,
since it is reduced to a certain number of units of time and the units
themselves are indifferent, this duration is an _absolute_ for my
consciousness, for it coincides with a certain degree of impatience
which is rigorously determined. Whence comes this determination? What is
it that obliges me to wait, and to wait for a certain length of
psychical duration which is forced upon me, over which I have no power?
If succession, in so far as distinct from mere juxtaposition, has no
real efficacy, if time is not a kind of force, why does the universe
unfold its successive states with a velocity which, in regard to my
consciousness, is a veritable absolute? Why with this particular
velocity rather than any other? Why not with an infinite velocity? Why,
in other words, is not everything given at once, as on the film of the
cinematograph? The more I consider this point, the more it seems to me
that, if the future is bound to _succeed_ the present instead of being
given alongside of it, it is because the future is not altogether
determined at the present moment, and that if the time taken up by this
succession is something other than a number, if it has for the
consciousness that is installed in it absolute value and reality, it is
because there is unceasingly being created in it, not indeed in any such
artificially isolated system as a glass of sugared water, but in the
concrete whole of which every such system forms part, something
unforeseeable and new. This duration may not be the fact of matter
itself, but that of the life which reascends the course of matter; the
two movements are none the less mutually dependent upon each other. _The
duration of the universe must therefore be one with the latitude of
creation which can find place in it._

When a child plays at reconstructing a picture by putting together the
separate pieces in a puzzle game, the more he practices, the more and
more quickly he succeeds. The reconstruction was, moreover,
instantaneous, the child found it ready-made, when he opened the box on
leaving the shop. The operation, therefore, does not require a definite
time, and indeed, theoretically, it does not require any time. That is
because the result is given. It is because the picture is already
created, and because to obtain it requires only a work of recomposing
and rearranging--a work that can be supposed going faster and faster,
and even infinitely fast, up to the point of being instantaneous. But,
to the artist who creates a picture by drawing it from the depths of his
soul, time is no longer an accessory; it is not an interval that may be
lengthened or shortened without the content being altered. The duration
of his work is part and parcel of his work. To contract or to dilate it
would be to modify both the psychical evolution that fills it and the
invention which is its goal. The time taken up by the invention, is one
with the invention itself. It is the progress of a thought which is
changing in the degree and measure that it is taking form. It is a vital
process, something like the ripening of an idea.

The painter is before his canvas, the colors are on the palette, the
model is sitting--all this we see, and also we know the painter's
style: do we foresee what will appear on the canvas? We possess the
elements of the problem; we know in an abstract way, how it will be
solved, for the portrait will surely resemble the model and will surely
resemble also the artist; but the concrete solution brings with it that
unforeseeable nothing which is everything in a work of art. And it is
this nothing that takes time. Nought as matter, it creates itself as
form. The sprouting and flowering of this form are stretched out on an
unshrinkable duration, which is one with their essence. So of the works
of nature. Their novelty arises from an internal impetus which is
progress or succession, which confers on succession a peculiar virtue or
which owes to succession the whole of its virtue--which, at any rate,
makes succession, or _continuity of interpenetration_ in time,
irreducible to a mere instantaneous juxtaposition in space. This is why
the idea of reading in a present state of the material universe the
future of living forms, and of unfolding now their history yet to come,
involves a veritable absurdity. But this absurdity is difficult to bring
out, because our memory is accustomed to place alongside of each other,
in an ideal space, the terms it perceives in turn, because it always
represents _past_ succession in the form of juxtaposition. It is able to
do so, indeed, just because the past belongs to that which is already
invented, to the dead, and no longer to creation and to life. Then, as
the succession to come will end by being a succession past, we persuade
ourselves that the duration to come admits of the same treatment as past
duration, that it is, even now, unrollable, that the future is there,
rolled up, already painted on the canvas. An illusion, no doubt, but an
illusion that is natural, ineradicable, and that will last as long as
the human mind!

_Time is invention or it is nothing at all._ But of time-invention
physics can take no account, restricted as it is to the
cinematographical method. It is limited to counting simultaneities
between the events that make up this time and the positions of the
mobile T on its trajectory. It detaches these events from the whole,
which at every moment puts on a new form and which communicates to them
something of its novelty. It considers them in the abstract, such as
they would be outside of the living whole, that is to say, in a time
unrolled in space. It retains only the events or systems of events that
can be thus isolated without being made to undergo too profound a
deformation, because only these lend themselves to the application of
its method. Our physics dates from the day when it was known how to
isolate such systems. To sum up, _while modern physics is distinguished
from ancient physics by the fact that it considers any moment of time
whatever, it rests altogether on a substitution of time-length for
time-invention_.

It seems then that, parallel to this physics, a second kind of knowledge
ought to have grown up, which could have retained what physics allowed
to escape. On the flux itself of duration science neither would nor
could lay hold, bound as it was to the cinematographical method. This
second kind of knowledge would have set the cinematographical method
aside. It would have called upon the mind to renounce its most cherished
habits. It is within becoming that it would have transported us by an
effort of sympathy. We should no longer be asking where a moving body
will be, what shape a system will take, through what state a change will
pass at a given moment: the moments of time, which are only arrests of
our attention, would no longer exist; it is the flow of time, it is the
very flux of the real that we should be trying to follow. The first kind
of knowledge has the advantage of enabling us to foresee the future and
of making us in some measure masters of events; in return, it retains
of the moving reality only eventual immobilities, that is to say, views
taken of it by our mind. It symbolizes the real and transposes it into
the human rather than expresses it. The other knowledge, if it is
possible, is practically useless, it will not extend our empire over
nature, it will even go against certain natural aspirations of the
intellect; but, if it succeeds, it is reality itself that it will hold
in a firm and final embrace. Not only may we thus complete the intellect
and its knowledge of matter by accustoming it to install itself within
the moving, but by developing also another faculty, complementary to the
intellect, we may open a perspective on the other half of the real. For,
as soon as we are confronted with true duration, we see that it means
creation, and that if that which is being unmade endures, it can only be
because it is inseparably bound to what is making itself. Thus will
appear the necessity of a continual growth of the universe, I should say
of a _life_ of the real. And thus will be seen in a new light the life
which we find on the surface of our planet, a life directed the same way
as that of the universe, and inverse of materiality. To intellect, in
short, there will be added intuition.

The more we reflect on it, the more we shall find that this conception
of metaphysics is that which modern science suggests.

For the ancients, indeed, time is theoretically negligible, because the
duration of a thing only manifests the degradation of its essence: it is
with this motionless essence that science has to deal. Change being only
the effort of a form toward its own realization, the realization is all
that it concerns us to know. No doubt the realization is never complete:
it is this that ancient philosophy expresses by saying that we do not
perceive form without matter. But if we consider the changing object at
a certain essential moment, at its apogee, we may say that there it
just touches its intelligible form. This intelligible form, this ideal
and, so to speak, limiting form, our science seizes upon. And possessing
in this the gold-piece, it holds eminently the small money which we call
becoming or change. This change is less than being. The knowledge that
would take it for object, supposing such knowledge were possible, would
be less than science.

But, for a science that places all the moments of time in the same rank,
that admits no essential moment, no culminating point, no apogee, change
is no longer a diminution of essence, duration is not a dilution of
eternity. The flux of time is the reality itself, and the things which
we study are the things which flow. It is true that of this flowing
reality we are limited to taking instantaneous views. But, just because
of this, scientific knowledge must appeal to another knowledge to
complete it. While the ancient conception of scientific knowledge ended
in making time a degradation, and change the diminution of a form given
from all eternity--on the contrary, by following the new conception to
the end, we should come to see in time a progressive growth of the
absolute, and in the evolution of things a continual invention of forms
ever new.

It is true that it would be to break with the metaphysics of the
ancients. They saw only one way of knowing definitely. Their science
consisted in a scattered and fragmentary metaphysics, their metaphysics
in a concentrated and systematic science. Their science and metaphysics
were, at most, two species of one and the same genus. In our hypothesis,
on the contrary, science and metaphysics are two opposed although
complementary ways of knowing, the first retaining only moments, that is
to say, that which does not endure, the second bearing on duration
itself. Now, it was natural to hesitate between so novel a conception
of metaphysics and the traditional conception. The temptation must have
been strong to repeat with the new science what had been tried on the
old, to suppose our scientific knowledge of nature completed at once, to
unify it entirely, and to give to this unification, as the Greeks had
already done, the name of metaphysics. So, beside the new way that
philosophy might have prepared, the old remained open, that indeed which
physics trod. And, as physics retained of time only what could as well
be spread out all at once in space, the metaphysics that chose the same
direction had necessarily to proceed as if time created and annihilated
nothing, as if duration had no efficacy. Bound, like the physics of the
moderns and the metaphysics of the ancients, to the cinematographical
method, it ended with the conclusion, implicitly admitted at the start
and immanent in the method itself: _All is given._

That metaphysics hesitated at first between the two paths seems to us
unquestionable. The indecision is visible in Cartesianism. On the one
hand, Descartes affirms universal mechanism: from this point of view
movement would be relative,[107] and, as time has just as much reality
as movement, it would follow that past, present and future are given
from all eternity. But, on the other hand (and that is why the
philosopher has not gone to these extreme consequences), Descartes
believes in the free will of man. He superposes on the determinism of
physical phenomena the indeterminism of human actions, and,
consequently, on time-length a time in which there is invention,
creation, true succession. This duration he supports on a God who is
unceasingly renewing the creative act, and who, being thus tangent to
time and becoming, sustains them, communicates to them necessarily
something of his absolute reality. When he places himself at this
second point of view, Descartes speaks of movement, even spatial, as of
an absolute.[108]

He therefore entered both roads one after the other, having resolved to
follow neither of them to the end. The first would have led him to the
denial of free will in man and of real will in God. It was the
suppression of all efficient duration, the likening of the universe to a
thing given, which a superhuman intelligence would embrace at once in a
moment or in eternity. In following the second, on the contrary, he
would have been led to all the consequences which the intuition of true
duration implies. Creation would have appeared not simply as
_continued_, but also as _continuous_. The universe, regarded as a
whole, would really evolve. The future would no longer be determinable
by the present; at most we might say that, once realized, it can be
found again in its antecedents, as the sounds of a new language can be
expressed with the letters of an old alphabet if we agree to enlarge the
value of the letters and to attribute to them, retro-actively, sounds
which no combination of the old sounds could have produced beforehand.
Finally, the mechanistic explanation might have remained universal in
this, that it can indeed be extended to as many systems as we choose to
cut out in the continuity of the universe; but mechanism would then have
become a _method_ rather than a _doctrine_. It would have expressed the
fact that science must proceed after the cinematographical manner, that
the function of science is to scan the rhythm of the flow of things and
not to fit itself into that flow.--Such were the two opposite
conceptions of metaphysics which were offered to philosophy.

It chose the first. The reason of this choice is undoubtedly the mind's
tendency to follow the cinematographical method, a method so natural to
our intellect, and so well adjusted also to the requirements of our
science, that we must feel doubly sure of its speculative impotence to
renounce it in metaphysics. But ancient philosophy also influenced the
choice. Artists for ever admirable, the Greeks created a type of
supra-sensible truth, as of sensible beauty, whose attraction is hard to
resist. As soon as we incline to make metaphysics a systematization of
science, we glide in the direction of Plato and of Aristotle. And, once
in the zone of attraction in which the Greek philosophers moved, we are
drawn along in their orbit.

Such was the case with Leibniz, as also with Spinoza. We are not blind
to the treasures of originality their doctrines contain. Spinoza and
Leibniz have poured into them the whole content of their souls, rich
with the inventions of their genius and the acquisitions of modern
thought. And there are in each of them, especially in Spinoza, flashes
of intuition that break through the system. But if we leave out of the
two doctrines what breathes life into them, if we retain the skeleton
only, we have before us the very picture of Platonism and
Aristotelianism seen through Cartesian mechanism. They present to us a
systematization of the new physics, constructed on the model of the
ancient metaphysics.

What, indeed, could the unification of physics be? The inspiring idea of
that science was to isolate, within the universe, systems of material
points such that, the position of each of these points being known at a
given moment, we could then calculate it for any moment whatever. As,
moreover, the systems thus defined were the only ones on which the new
science had hold, and as it could not be known beforehand whether a
system satisfied or did not satisfy the desired condition, it was useful
to proceed always and everywhere _as if_ the condition was realized.
There was in this a methodological rule, a very natural rule--so
natural, indeed, that it was not even necessary to formulate it. For
simple common sense tells us that when we are possessed of an effective
instrument of research, and are ignorant of the limits of its
applicability, we should act as if its applicability were unlimited;
there will always be time to abate it. But the temptation must have been
great for the philosopher to hypostatize this hope, or rather this
impetus, of the new science, and to convert a general rule of method
into a fundamental law of things. So he transported himself at once to
the limit; he supposed physics to have become complete and to embrace
the whole of the sensible world. The universe became a system of points,
the position of which was rigorously determined at each instant by
relation to the preceding instant and theoretically calculable for any
moment whatever. The result, in short, was universal mechanism. But it
was not enough to formulate this mechanism; what was required was to
found it, to give the reason for it and prove its necessity. And the
essential affirmation of mechanism being that of a reciprocal
mathematical dependence of all the points of the universe, as also of
all the moments of the universe, the reason of mechanism had to be
discovered in the unity of a principle into which could be contracted
all that is juxtaposed in space and successive in time. Hence, the whole
of the real was supposed to be given at once. The reciprocal
determination of the juxtaposed appearances in space was explained by
the indivisibility of true being, and the inflexible determinism of
successive phenomena in time simply expressed that the whole of being is
given in the eternal.

The new philosophy was going, then, to be a recommencement, or rather a
transposition, of the old. The ancient philosophy had taken each of the
_concepts_ into which a becoming is concentrated or which mark its
apogee: it supposed them all known, and gathered them up into a single
concept, form of forms, idea of ideas, like the God of Aristotle. The
new philosophy was going to take each of the _laws_ which condition a
becoming in relation to others and which are as the permanent substratum
of phenomena: it would suppose them all known, and would gather them up
into a unity which also would express them eminently, but which, like
the God of Aristotle and for the same reasons, must remain immutably
shut up in itself.

True, this return to the ancient philosophy was not without great
difficulties. When a Plato, an Aristotle, or a Plotinus melt all the
concepts of their science into a single one, in so doing they embrace
the whole of the real, for concepts are supposed to represent the things
themselves, and to possess at least as much positive content. But a law,
in general, expresses only a relation, and physical laws in particular
express only _quantitative_ relations between concrete things. So that
if a modern philosopher works with the laws of the new science as the
Greek philosopher did with the concepts of the ancient science, if he
makes all the conclusions of a physics supposed omniscient converge on a
single point, he neglects what is concrete in the phenomena--the
qualities perceived, the perceptions themselves. His synthesis
comprises, it seems, only a fraction of reality. In fact, the first
result of the new science was to cut the real into two halves, quantity
and quality, the former being credited to the account of _bodies_ and
the latter to the account of _souls_. The ancients had raised no such
barriers either between quality and quantity or between soul and body.
For them, the mathematical concepts were concepts like the others,
related to the others and fitting quite naturally into the hierarchy of
the Ideas. Neither was the body then defined by geometrical extension,
nor the soul by consciousness. If the [Greek: psychê] of Aristotle, the
entelechy of a living body, is less spiritual than our "soul," it is
because his [Greek: oôma], already impregnated with the Idea, is less
corporeal than our "body." The scission was not yet irremediable between
the two terms. It has become so, and thence a metaphysic that aims at an
abstract unity must resign itself either to comprehend in its synthesis
only one half of the real, or to take advantage of the absolute
heterogeneity of the two halves in order to consider one as a
translation of the other. Different phrases will express different
things if they belong to the same language, that is to say, if there is
a certain relationship of sound between them. But if they belong to two
different languages, they might, just because of their radical diversity
of sound, express the same thing. So of quality and quantity, of soul
and body. It is for having cut all connection between the two terms that
philosophers have been led to establish between them a rigorous
parallelism, of which the ancients had not dreamed, to regard them as
translations and not as inversions of each other; in short, to posit a
fundamental identity as a substratum to their duality. The synthesis to
which they rose thus became capable of embracing everything. A divine
mechanism made the phenomena of thought to correspond to those of
extension, each to each, qualities to quantities, souls to bodies.

It is this parallelism that we find both in Leibniz and in Spinoza--in
different forms, it is true, because of the unequal importance which
they attach to extension. With Spinoza, the two terms Thought and
Extension are placed, in principle at least, in the same rank. They are,
therefore, two translations of one and the same original, or, as Spinoza
says, two attributes of one and the same substance, which we must call
God. And these two translations, as also an infinity of others into
languages which we know not, are called up and even forced into
existence by the original, just as the essence of the circle is
translated automatically, so to speak, both by a figure and by an
equation. For Leibniz, on the contrary, extension is indeed still a
translation, but it is thought that is the original, and thought might
dispense with translation, the translation being made only for us. In
positing God, we necessarily posit also all the possible views of God,
that is to say, the monads. But we can always imagine that a view has
been taken from a point of view, and it is natural for an imperfect mind
like ours to class views, qualitatively different, according to the
order and position of points of view, qualitatively identical, from
which the views might have been taken. In reality the points of view do
not exist, for there are only views, each given in an indivisible block
and representing in its own way the whole of reality, which is God. But
we need to express the plurality of the views, that are _unlike_ each
other, by the multiplicity of the points of view that are _exterior_ to
each other; and we also need to symbolize the more or less close
relationship between the views by the relative situation of the points
of view to one another, their nearness or their distance, that is to
say, by a magnitude. That is what Leibniz means when he says that space
is the order of coexistents, that the perception of extension is a
confused perception (that is to say, a perception relative to an
imperfect mind), and that nothing exists but monads, expressing thereby
that the real Whole has no parts, but is repeated to infinity, each time
integrally (though diversely) within itself, and that all these
repetitions are complementary to each other. In just the same way, the
visible relief of an object is equivalent to the whole set of
stereoscopic views taken of it from all points, so that, instead of
seeing in the relief a juxtaposition of solid parts, we might quite as
well look upon it as made of the _reciprocal complementarity_ of these
whole views, each given in block, each indivisible, each different from
all the others and yet representative of the same thing. The Whole, that
is to say, God, is this very relief for Leibniz, and the monads are
these complementary plane views; for that reason he defines God as "the
substance that has no point of view," or, again, as "the universal
harmony," that is to say, the reciprocal complementarity of monads. In
short, Leibniz differs from Spinoza in this, that he looks upon the
universal mechanism as an aspect which reality takes for us, whereas,
Spinoza makes of it an aspect which reality takes for itself.

It is true that, after having concentrated in God the whole of the real,
it became difficult for them to pass from God to things, from eternity
to time. The difficulty was even much greater for these philosophers
than an Aristotle or a Plotinus. The God of Aristotle, indeed, had been
obtained by the compression and reciprocal compenetration of the Ideas
that represent, in their finished state or in their culminating point,
the changing things of the world. He was, therefore, transcendent to the
world, and the duration of things was juxtaposed to His eternity, of
which it was only a weakening. But in the principle to which we are led
by the consideration of universal mechanism, and which must serve as its
substratum, it is not concepts or _things_, but laws or _relations_ that
are condensed. Now, a relation does not exist separately. A law connects
changing terms and is immanent in what it governs. The principle in
which all these relations are ultimately summed up, and which is the
basis of the unity of nature, cannot, therefore, be transcendent to
sensible reality; it is immanent in it, and we must suppose that it is
at once both in and out of time, gathered up in the unity of its
substance and yet condemned to wind it off in an endless chain. Rather
than formulate so appalling a contradiction, the philosophers were
necessarily led to sacrifice the weaker of the two terms, and to regard
the temporal aspect of things as a mere illusion. Leibniz says so in
explicit terms, for he makes of time, as of space, a confused
perception. While the multiplicity of his monads expresses only the
diversity of views taken of the whole, the history of an isolated monad
seems to be hardly anything else than the manifold views that it can
take of its own substance: so that time would consist in all the points
of view that each monad can assume towards itself, as space consists in
all the points of view that all monads can assume towards God. But the
thought of Spinoza is much less clear, and this philosopher seems to
have sought to establish, between eternity and that which has duration,
the same difference as Aristotle made between essence and accidents: a
most difficult undertaking, for the [Greek: ylê] of Aristotle was no
longer there to measure the distance and explain the passage from the
essential to the accidental, Descartes having eliminated it for ever.
However that may be, the deeper we go into the Spinozistic conception of
the "inadequate," as related to the "adequate," the more we feel
ourselves moving in the direction of Aristotelianism--just as the
Leibnizian monads, in proportion as they mark themselves out the more
clearly, tend to approximate to the Intelligibles of Plotinus.[109] The
natural trend of these two philosophies brings them back to the
conclusions of the ancient philosophy.

To sum up, the resemblances of this new metaphysic to that of the
ancients arise from the fact that both suppose ready-made--the former
above the sensible, the latter within the sensible--a science one and
complete, with which any reality that the sensible may contain is
believed to coincide. _For both, reality as well as truth are integrally
given in eternity._ Both are opposed to the idea of a reality that
creates itself gradually, that is, at bottom, to an absolute duration.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, it might easily be shown that the conclusions of this metaphysic,
springing from science, have rebounded upon science itself, as it were,
by ricochet. They penetrate the whole of our so-called empiricism.
Physics and chemistry study only inert matter; biology, when it treats
the living being physically and chemically, considers only the inert
side of the living: hence the mechanistic explanations, in spite of
their development, include only a small part of the real. To suppose _a
priori_ that the whole of the real is resolvable into elements of this
kind, or at least that mechanism can give a complete translation of what
happens in the world, is to pronounce for a certain metaphysic--the very
metaphysic of which Spinoza and Leibniz have laid down the principles
and drawn the consequences. Certainly, the psycho-physiologist who
affirms the exact equivalence of the cerebral and the psychical state,
who imagines the possibility, for some superhuman intellect, of reading
in the brain what is going on in consciousness, believes himself very
far from the metaphysicians of the seventeenth century, and very near to
experience. Yet experience pure and simple tells us nothing of the kind.
It shows us the interdependence of the mental and the physical, the
necessity of a certain cerebral substratum for the psychical
state--nothing more. From the fact that two things are mutually
dependent, it does not follow that they are equivalent. Because a
certain screw is necessary to a certain machine, because the machine
works when the screw is there and stops when the screw is taken away, we
do not say that the screw is the equivalent of the machine. For
correspondence to be equivalence, it would be necessary that to any part
of the machine a definite part of the screw should correspond--as in a
literal translation in which each chapter renders a chapter, each
sentence a sentence, each word a word. Now, the relation of the brain to
consciousness seems to be entirely different. Not only does the
hypothesis of an equivalence between the psychical state and the
cerebral state imply a downright absurdity, as we have tried to prove in
a former essay,[110] but the facts, examined without prejudice,
certainly seem to indicate that the relation of the psychical to the
physical is just that of the machine to the screw. To speak of an
equivalence between the two is simply to curtail, and make almost
unintelligible, the Spinozistic or Leibnizian metaphysic. It is to
accept this philosophy, such as it is, on the side of Extension, but to
mutilate it on the side of Thought. With Spinoza, with Leibniz, we
suppose the unifying synthesis of the phenomena of matter achieved, and
everything in matter explained mechanically. But, for the conscious
facts, we no longer push the synthesis to the end. We stop half-way. We
suppose consciousness to be coextensive with a certain part of nature
and not with all of it. We are thus led, sometimes to an
"epiphenomenalism" that associates consciousness with certain particular
vibrations and puts it here and there in the world in a sporadic state,
and sometimes to a "monism" that scatters consciousness into as many
tiny grains as there are atoms; but, in either case, it is to an
incomplete Spinozism or to an incomplete Leibnizianism that we come
back. Between this conception of nature and Cartesianism we find,
moreover, intermediate historical stages. The medical philosophers of
the eighteenth century, with their cramped Cartesianism, have had a
great part in the genesis of the "epiphenomenalism" and "monism" of the
present day.

       *       *       *       *       *

These doctrines are thus found to fall short of the Kantian criticism.
Certainly, the philosophy of Kant is also imbued with the belief in a
science single and complete, embracing the whole of the real. Indeed,
looked at from one aspect, it is only a continuation of the metaphysics
of the moderns and a transposition of the ancient metaphysics. Spinoza
and Leibniz had, following Aristotle, hypostatized in God the unity of
knowledge. The Kantian criticism, on one side at least, consists in
asking whether the whole of this hypothesis is necessary to modern
science as it was to ancient science, or if part of the hypothesis is
not sufficient. For the ancients, science applied to _concepts_, that is
to say, to kinds of _things_. In compressing all concepts into one, they
therefore necessarily arrived at a _being_, which we may call Thought,
but which was rather thought-object than thought-subject. When Aristotle
defined God the [Greek: noêseôs noêsis], it is probably on [Greek:
noêseôs], and not on [Greek: noêsis] that he put the emphasis. God was
the synthesis of all concepts, the idea of ideas. But modern science
turns on laws, that is, on relations. Now, a relation is a bond
established by a mind between two or more terms. A relation is nothing
outside of the intellect that relates. The universe, therefore, can only
be a system of laws if phenomena have passed beforehand through the
filter of an intellect. Of course, this intellect might be that of a
being infinitely superior to man, who would found the materiality of
things at the same time that he bound them together: such was the
hypothesis of Leibniz and of Spinoza. But it is not necessary to go so
far, and, for the effect we have here to obtain, the human intellect is
enough: such is precisely the Kantian solution. Between the dogmatism of
a Spinoza or a Leibniz and the criticism of Kant there is just the same
distance as between "it may be maintained that--" and "it suffices
that--." Kant stops this dogmatism on the incline that was making it
slip too far toward the Greek metaphysics; he reduces to the strict
minimum the hypothesis which is necessary in order to suppose the
physics of Galileo indefinitely extensible. True, when he speaks of the
human intellect, he means neither yours nor mine: the unity of nature
comes indeed from the human understanding that unifies, but the unifying
function that operates here is impersonal. It imparts itself to our
individual consciousnesses, but it transcends them. It is much less than
a substantial God; it is, however, a little more than the isolated work
of a man or even than the collective work of humanity. It does not
exactly lie within man; rather, man lies within it, as in an atmosphere
of intellectuality which his consciousness breathes. It is, if we will,
a _formal_ God, something that in Kant is not yet divine, but which
tends to become so. It became so, indeed, with Fichte. With Kant,
however, its principal rôle was to give to the whole of our science a
relative and _human_ character, although of a humanity already somewhat
deified. From this point of view, the criticism of Kant consisted
chiefly in limiting the dogmatism of his predecessors, accepting their
conception of science and reducing to a minimum the metaphysic it
implied.

But it is otherwise with the Kantian distinction between the matter of
knowledge and its form. By regarding intelligence as pre-eminently a
faculty of establishing relations, Kant attributed an extra-intellectual
origin to the terms between which the relations are established. He
affirmed, against his immediate predecessors, that knowledge is not
entirely resolvable into terms of intelligence. He brought back into
philosophy--while modifying it and carrying it on to another plane--that
essential element of the philosophy of Descartes which had been abandoned
by the Cartesians.

Thereby he prepared the way for a new philosophy, which might have
established itself in the extra-intellectual matter of knowledge by a
higher effort of intuition. Coinciding with this matter, adopting the
same rhythm and the same movement, might not consciousness, by two
efforts of opposite direction, raising itself and lowering itself by
turns, become able to grasp from within, and no longer perceive only
from without, the two forms of reality, body and mind? Would not this
twofold effort make us, as far as that is possible, re-live the
absolute? Moreover, as, in the course of this operation, we should see
intellect spring up of itself, cut itself out in the whole of mind,
intellectual knowledge would then appear as it is, limited, but not
relative.

Such was the direction that Kantianism might have pointed out to a
revivified Cartesianism. But in this direction Kant himself did not go.

He _would_ not, because, while assigning to knowledge an
extra-intellectual matter, he believed this matter to be either
coextensive with intellect or less extensive than intellect. Therefore
he could not dream of cutting out intellect in it, nor, consequently, of
tracing the genesis of the understanding and its categories. The molds
of the understanding and the understanding itself had to be accepted as
they are, already made. Between the matter presented to our intellect
and this intellect itself there was no relationship. The agreement
between the two was due to the fact that intellect imposed its form on
matter. So that not only was it necessary to posit the intellectual form
of knowledge as a kind of absolute and give up the quest of its genesis,
but the very matter of this knowledge seemed too ground down by the
intellect for us to be able to hope to get it back in its original
purity. It was not the "thing-in-itself," it was only the refraction of
it through our atmosphere.

If now we inquire why Kant did not believe that the matter of our
knowledge extends beyond its form, this is what we find. The criticism
of our knowledge of nature that was instituted by Kant consisted in
ascertaining what our mind must be and what Nature must be _if_ the
claims of our science are justified; but of these claims themselves Kant
has not made the criticism. I mean that he took for granted the idea of
a science that is one, capable of binding with the same force all the
parts of what is given, and of coördinating them into a system
presenting on all sides an equal solidity. He did not consider, in his
_Critique of Pure Reason_, that science became less and less objective,
more and more symbolical, to the extent that it went from the physical
to the vital, from the vital to the psychical. Experience does not move,
to his view, in two different and perhaps opposite ways, the one
conformable to the direction of the intellect, the other contrary to it.
There is, for him, only _one_ experience, and the intellect covers its
whole ground. This is what Kant expresses by saying that all our
intuitions are sensuous, or, in other words, infra-intellectual. And
this would have to be admitted, indeed, if our science presented in all
its parts an equal objectivity. But suppose, on the contrary, that
science is less and less objective, more and more symbolical, as it goes
from the physical to the psychical, passing through the vital: then, as
it is indeed necessary to perceive a thing somehow in order to symbolize
it, there would be an intuition of the psychical, and more generally of
the vital, which the intellect would transpose and translate, no doubt,
but which would none the less transcend the intellect. There would be,
in other words, a supra-intellectual intuition. If this intuition exist,
a taking possession of the spirit by itself is possible, and no longer
only a knowledge that is external and phenomenal. What is more, if we
have an intuition of this kind (I mean an ultra-intellectual intuition)
then sensuous intuition is likely to be in continuity with it through
certain intermediaries, as the infra-red is continuous with the
ultra-violet. Sensuous intuition itself, therefore, is promoted. It will
no longer attain only the phantom of an unattainable thing-in-itself. It
is (provided we bring to it certain indispensable corrections) into the
absolute itself that it will introduce us. So long as it was regarded as
the only material of our science, it reflected back on all science
something of the relativity which strikes a scientific knowledge of
spirit; and thus the perception of bodies, which is the beginning of the
science of bodies, seemed itself to be relative. Relative, therefore,
seemed to be sensuous intuition. But this is not the case if
distinctions are made between the different sciences, and if the
scientific knowledge of the spiritual (and also, consequently, of the
vital) be regarded as the more or less artificial extension of a certain
manner of knowing which, applied to bodies, is not at all symbolical.
Let us go further: if there are thus two intuitions of different order
(the second being obtained by a reversal of the direction of the first),
and if it is toward the second that the intellect naturally inclines,
there is no essential difference between the intellect and this
intuition itself. The barriers between the matter of sensible knowledge
and its form are lowered, as also between the "pure forms" of
sensibility and the categories of the understanding. The matter and form
of intellectual knowledge (restricted to its own object) are seen to be
engendering each other by a reciprocal adaptation, intellect modeling
itself on corporeity, and corporeity on intellect.

But this duality of intuition Kant neither would nor could admit. It
would have been necessary, in order to admit it, to regard duration as
the very stuff of reality, and consequently to distinguish between the
substantial duration of things and time spread out in space. It would
have been necessary to regard space itself, and the geometry which is
immanent in space, as an ideal limit in the direction of which material
things develop, but which they do not actually attain. Nothing could be
more contrary to the letter, and perhaps also to the spirit, of the
_Critique of Pure Reason_. No doubt, knowledge is presented to us in it
as an ever-open roll, experience as a push of facts that is for ever
going on. But, according to Kant, these facts are spread out on one
plane as fast as they arise; they are external to each other and
external to the mind. Of a knowledge from within, that could grasp them
in their springing forth instead of taking them already sprung, that
would dig beneath space and spatialized time, there is never any
question. Yet it is indeed beneath this plane that our consciousness
places us; there flows true duration.

In this respect, also, Kant is very near his predecessors. Between the
non-temporal, and the time that is spread out in distinct moments, he
admits no mean. And as there is indeed no intuition that carries us into
the non-temporal, all intuition is thus found to be sensuous, by
definition. But between physical existence, which is spread out in
space, and non-temporal existence, which can only be a conceptual and
logical existence like that of which metaphysical dogmatism speaks, is
there not room for consciousness and for life? There is, unquestionably.
We perceive it when we place ourselves in duration in order to go from
that duration to moments, instead of starting from moments in order to
bind them again and to construct duration.

Yet it was to a non-temporal intuition that the immediate successors of
Kant turned, in order to escape from the Kantian relativism. Certainly,
the ideas of becoming, of progress, of evolution, seem to occupy a large
place in their philosophy. But does duration really play a part in it?
Real duration is that in which each form flows out of previous forms,
while adding to them something new, and is explained by them as much as
it explains them; but to deduce this form directly from one complete
Being which it is supposed to manifest, is to return to Spinozism. It
is, like Leibniz and Spinoza, to deny to duration all efficient action.
The post-Kantian philosophy, severe as it may have been on the
mechanistic theories, accepts from mechanism the idea of a science that
is one and the same for all kinds of reality. And it is nearer to
mechanism than it imagines; for though, in the consideration of matter,
of life and of thought, it replaces the successive degrees of
complexity, that mechanism supposed by degrees of the realization of an
Idea or by degrees of the objectification of a Will, it still speaks of
degrees, and these degrees are those of a scale which Being traverses in
a single direction. In short, it makes out the same articulations in
nature that mechanism does. Of mechanism it retains the whole design; it
merely gives it a different coloring. But it is the design itself, or at
least one half of the design, that needs to be re-made.

If we are to do that, we must give up the method of _construction_,
which was that of Kant's successors. We must appeal to experience--an
experience purified, or, in other words, released, where necessary, from
the molds that our intellect has formed in the degree and proportion of
the progress of our action on things. An experience of this kind is not
a non-temporal experience. It only seeks, beyond the spatialized time in
which we believe we see continual rearrangements between the parts, that
concrete duration in which a radical recasting of the whole is always
going on. It follows the real in all its sinuosities. It does not lead
us, like the method of construction, to higher and higher
generalities--piled-up stories of a magnificent building. But then it
leaves no play between the explanations it suggests and the objects it
has to explain. It is the detail of the real, and no longer only the
whole in a lump, that it claims to illumine.

       *       *       *       *       *

That the thought of the nineteenth century called for a philosophy of
this kind, rescued from the arbitrary, capable of coming down to the
detail of particular facts, is unquestionable. Unquestionably, also, it
felt that this philosophy ought to establish itself in what we call
concrete duration. The advent of the moral sciences, the progress of
psychology, the growing importance of embryology among the biological
sciences--all this was bound to suggest the idea of a reality which
_endures_ inwardly, which is duration itself. So, when a philosopher
arose who announced a doctrine of evolution, in which the progress of
matter toward perceptibility would be traced together with the advance
of the mind toward rationality, in which the complication of
correspondences between the external and the internal would be followed
step by step, in which change would become the very substance of
things--to him all eyes were turned. The powerful attraction that
Spencerian evolutionism has exercised on contemporary thought is due to
that very cause. However far Spencer may seem to be from Kant, however
ignorant, indeed, he may have been of Kantianism, he felt, nevertheless,
at his first contact with the biological sciences, the direction in
which philosophy could continue to advance without laying itself open to
the Kantian criticism.

But he had no sooner started to follow the path than he turned off
short. He had promised to retrace a genesis, and, lo! he was doing
something entirely different. His doctrine bore indeed the name of
evolutionism; it claimed to remount and redescend the course of the
universal becoming; but, in fact, it dealt neither with becoming nor
with evolution.

We need not enter here into a profound examination of this philosophy.
Let us say merely that _the usual device of the Spencerian method
consists in reconstructing evolution with fragments of the evolved_. If
I paste a picture on a card and then cut up the card into bits, I can
reproduce the picture by rightly grouping again the small pieces. And a
child who working thus with the pieces of a puzzle-picture, and putting
together unformed fragments of the picture finally obtains a pretty
colored design, no doubt imagines that he has _produced_ design and
color. Yet the act of drawing and painting has nothing to do with that
of putting together the fragments of a picture already drawn and already
painted. So, by combining together the most simple results of evolution,
you may imitate well or ill the most complex effects; but of neither the
simple nor the complex will you have retraced the genesis, and the
addition of evolved to evolved will bear no resemblance whatever to the
movement of evolution.

Such, however, is Spencer's illusion. He takes reality in its present
form; he breaks it to pieces, he scatters it in fragments which he
throws to the winds; then he "integrates" these fragments and
"dissipates their movement." Having _imitated_ the Whole by a work of
mosaic, he imagines he has retraced the design of it, and made the
genesis.

Is it matter that is in question? The diffused elements which he
integrates into visible and tangible bodies have all the air of being
the very particles of the simple bodies, which he first supposes
disseminated throughout space. They are, at any rate, "material points,"
and consequently unvarying points, veritable little solids: as if
solidity, being what is nearest and handiest to us, could be found at
the very origin of materiality! The more physics progresses, the more it
shows the impossibility of representing the properties of ether or of
electricity--the probable base of all bodies--on the model of the
properties of the matter which we perceive. But philosophy goes back
further even than the ether, a mere schematic figure of the relations
between phenomena apprehended by our senses. It knows indeed that what
is visible and tangible in things represents our possible action on
them. It is not by dividing the evolved that we shall reach the
principle of that which evolves. It is not by recomposing the evolved
with itself that we shall reproduce the evolution of which it is the
term.

Is it the question of mind? By compounding the reflex with the reflex,
Spencer thinks he generates instinct and rational volition one after the
other. He fails to see that the specialized reflex, being a terminal
point of evolution just as much as perfect will, cannot be supposed at
the start. That the first of the two terms should have reached its final
form before the other is probable enough; but both the one and the other
are _deposits_ of the evolution movement, and the evolution movement
itself can no more be expressed as a function solely of the first than
solely of the second. We must begin by mixing the reflex and the
voluntary. We must then go in quest of the fluid reality which has been
precipitated in this twofold form, and which probably shares in both
without being either. At the lowest degree of the animal scale, in
living beings that are but an undifferentiated protoplasmic mass, the
reaction to stimulus does not yet call into play one definite mechanism,
as in the reflex; it has not yet choice among several definite
mechanisms, as in the voluntary act; it is, then, neither voluntary nor
reflex, though it heralds both. We experience in ourselves something of
this true original activity when we perform semi-voluntary and
semi-automatic movements to escape a pressing danger. And yet this is
but a very imperfect imitation of the primitive character, for we are
concerned here with a mixture of two activities already formed, already
localized in a brain and in a spinal cord, whereas the original activity
was a simple thing, which became diversified through the very
construction of mechanisms like those of the spinal cord and brain. But
to all this Spencer shuts his eyes, because it is of the essence of his
method to recompose the consolidated with the consolidated, instead of
going back to the gradual process of consolidation, which is evolution
itself.

Is it, finally, the question of the correspondence between mind and
matter? Spencer is right in defining the intellect by this
correspondence. He is right in regarding it as the end of an evolution.
But when he comes to retrace this evolution, again he integrates the
evolved with the evolved--failing to see that he is thus taking useless
trouble, and that in positing the slightest fragment of the actually
evolved he posits the whole--so that it is vain for him, then, to
pretend to make the genesis of it.

For, according to him, the phenomena that succeed each other in nature
project into the human mind images which represent them. To the
relations between phenomena, therefore, correspond symmetrically
relations between the ideas. And the most general laws of nature, in
which the relations between phenomena are condensed, are thus found to
have engendered the directing principles of thought, into which the
relations between ideas have been integrated. Nature, therefore, is
reflected in mind. The intimate structure of our thought corresponds,
piece by piece, to the very skeleton of things--I admit it willingly;
but, in order that the human mind may be able to represent relations
between phenomena, there must first be phenomena, that is to say,
distinct facts, cut out in the continuity of becoming. And once we posit
this particular mode of cutting up such as we perceive it to-day, we
posit also the intellect such as it is to-day, for it is by relation to
it, and to it alone, that reality is cut up in this manner. Is it
probable that mammals and insects notice the same aspects of nature,
trace in it the same divisions, articulate the whole in the same way?
And yet the insect, so far as intelligent, has already something of our
intellect. Each being cuts up the material world according to the lines
that its action must follow: it is these lines of _possible action_
that, by intercrossing, mark out the net of experience of which each
mesh is a fact. No doubt, a town is composed exclusively of houses, and
the streets of the town are only the intervals between the houses: so,
we may say that nature contains only facts, and that, the facts once
posited, the relations are simply the lines running between the facts.
But, in a town, it is the gradual portioning of the ground into lots
that has determined at once the place of the houses, their general
shape, and the direction of the streets: to this portioning we must go
back if we wish to understand the particular mode of subdivision that
causes each house to be where it is, each street to run as it does.
Now, the cardinal error of Spencer is to take experience already
allotted as given, whereas the true problem is to know how the allotment
was worked. I agree that the laws of thought are only the integration of
relations between facts. But, when I posit the facts with the shape they
have for me to-day, I suppose my faculties of perception and
intellection such as they are in me to-day; for it is they that portion
the real into lots, they that cut the facts out in the whole of reality.
Therefore, instead of saying that the relations between facts have
generated the laws of thought, I can as well claim that it is the form
of thought that has determined the shape of the facts perceived, and
consequently their relations among themselves: the two ways of
expressing oneself are equivalent; they say at bottom the same thing.
With the second, it is true, we give up speaking of evolution. But, with
the first, we only speak of it, we do not think of it any the more. For
a true evolutionism would propose to discover by what _modus vivendi_,
gradually obtained, the intellect has adopted its plan of structure, and
matter its mode of subdivision. This structure and this subdivision work
into each other; they are mutually complementary; they must have
progressed one with the other. And, whether we posit the present
structure of mind or the present subdivision of matter, in either case
we remain in the evolved: we are told nothing of what evolves, nothing
of evolution.

And yet it is this evolution that we must discover. Already, in the
field of physics itself, the scientists who are pushing the study of
their science furthest incline to believe that we cannot reason about
the parts as we reason about the whole; that the same principles are not
applicable to the origin and to the end of a progress; that neither
creation nor annihilation, for instance, is inadmissible when we are
concerned with the constituent corpuscles of the atom. Thereby they tend
to place themselves in the concrete duration, in which alone there is
true generation and not only a composition of parts. It is true that the
creation and annihilation of which they speak concern the movement or
the energy, and not the imponderable medium through which the energy and
the movement are supposed to circulate. But what can remain of matter
when you take away everything that determines it, that is to say, just
energy and movement themselves? The philosopher must go further than the
scientist. Making a clean sweep of everything that is only an
imaginative symbol, he will see the material world melt back into a
simple flux, a continuity of flowing, a becoming. And he will thus be
prepared to discover real duration there where it is still more useful
to find it, in the realm of life and of consciousness. For, so far as
inert matter is concerned, we may neglect the flowing without committing
a serious error: matter, we have said, is weighted with geometry; and
matter, the reality which _descends_, endures only by its connection
with that which _ascends_. But life and consciousness are this very
ascension. When once we have grasped them in their essence by adopting
their movement, we understand how the rest of reality is derived from
them. Evolution appears and, within this evolution, the progressive
determination of materiality and intellectuality by the gradual
consolidation of the one and of the other. But, then, it is within the
evolutionary movement that we place ourselves, in order to follow it to
its present results, instead of recomposing these results artificially
with fragments of themselves. Such seems to us to be the true function
of philosophy. So understood, philosophy is not only the turning of the
mind homeward, the coincidence of human consciousness with the living
principle whence it emanates, a contact with the creative effort: it is
the study of becoming in general, it is true evolutionism and
consequently the true continuation of science--provided that we
understand by this word a set of truths either experienced or
demonstrated, and not a certain new scholasticism that has grown up
during the latter half of the nineteenth century around the physics of
Galileo, as the old scholasticism grew up around Aristotle.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 96: The part of this chapter which treats of the history of
systems, particularly of the Greek philosophy, is only the very succinct
résumé of views that we developed at length, from 1900 to 1904, in our
lectures at the Collège de France, especially in a course on the
_History of the Idea of Time_ (1902-1903). We then compared the
mechanism of conceptual thought to that of the cinematograph. We believe
the comparison will be useful here.]

[Footnote 97: The analysis of the idea of the nought which we give here
(pp. 275-298) has appeared before in the _Revue philosophique_ (November
1906).]

[Footnote 98: Kant, _Critique of Pure Reason_, 2nd edition, p. 737:
"From the point of view of our knowledge in general ... the peculiar
function of negative propositions is simply to prevent error." Cf.
Sigwart, _Logik_, 2nd edition, vol. i. pp. 150 ff.]

[Footnote 99: That is, we do not consider the sophism of Zeno refuted by
the fact that the geometrical progression _a_(1 + 1/_n_ + 1/_n_2 +
1/_n_3 +,... etc.)--in which _a_ designates the initial distance between
Achilles and the tortoise, and _n_ the relation of their respective
velocities--has a finite sum if _n_ is greater than 1. On this point we
may refer to the arguments of F. Evellin, which we regard as conclusive
(see Evellin, _Infini et quantité_, Paris, 1880, pp. 63-97; cf. _Revue
philosophique_, vol. xi., 1881, pp. 564-568). The truth is that
mathematics, as we have tried to show in a former work, deals and can
deal only with lengths. It has therefore had to seek devices, first, to
transfer to the movement, which is not a length, the divisibility of the
line passed over, and then to reconcile with experience the idea
(contrary to experience and full of absurdities) of a movement that is a
length, that is, of a movement _placed upon_ its trajectory and
arbitrarily decomposable like it.]

[Footnote 100: Plato, _Timaeus_, 37 D.]

[Footnote 101: We have tried to bring out what is true and what is false
in this idea, so far as spatiality is concerned (see Chapter III.). It
seems to us radically false as regards _duration_.]

[Footnote 102: Aristotle, _De anima_, 430 a 14 [Greek: kai hestin ho men
toioutos nous tô pynta ginesthai, ho de tô panta poiein, ôs hexis tis,
oion to phôs. tropon gar tina ka to phôs poiei ta dynamei onta chrômata
energeia chrômata].]

[Footnote 103: _De caelo_, ii. 287 a 12 [Greek: tês eschatês periphoras
oute kenon estin exôthen oute topos.] _Phys._ iv. 212 a 34 [Greek: to de
pan esti men hôs kinêsetai hesti d' hôs ou. hôs men gar holon, hama ton
topon hou metaballei. kyklô de kinêsetai, tôn moriôn gar outos ho
topos].]

[Footnote 104: _De caelo_, i. 279 a 12 [Greek: oude chronos hestin hexô
tou ouranou]. _Phys._ viii. 251 b 27 [Greek: ho chronos pathos ti
kinêseôs].]

[Footnote 105: Especially have we left almost entirely on one side those
admirable but somewhat fugitive intuitions that Plotinus was later to
seize, to study and to fix.]

[Footnote 106: See page 10.]

[Footnote 107: Descartes, _Principes_, ii. § 29.]

[Footnote 108: Descartes, _Principes_, ii. §§ 36 ff.]

[Footnote 109: In a course of lectures on Plotinus, given at the Collège
de France in 1897-1898, we tried to bring out these resemblances. They
are numerous and impressive. The analogy is continued even in the
formulae employed on each side.]

[Footnote 110: "Le Paralogisme psycho-physiologique" (_Revue de
métaphysique et de morale_, Nov. 1904, pp. 895-908). Cf. _Matière et
mémoire_, Paris, 1896, chap. i.]




INDEX

(Compiled by the Translator)


Abolition of everything a self-contradiction, 280, 283, 296, 298
  idea of, 279, 282, 283, 295, 296.
    _See_ Nought

Absence of order, 231, 234, 274.
    _See_ Disorder

Absolute and freedom, 277
  reality, 99, 228-9, 269, 358, 361
  reality of the person, 269
  time and the, 239, 240, 298, 340, 344

Absoluteness of duration, 206
  of understanding, xi, 47, 152, 190, 197, 199

Abstract becoming, 304-7
  multiplicity, 257-9
  time, 9, 17, 20-2, 37, 39, 46, 51, 163, 318-9, 336, 352-3

Accident and essence in Aristotle's philosophy, 353
  in evolution, 86-7, 104, 114-5, 127, 169, 170, 252, 254-5, 266, 267,
   326-7

Accidental variations, 55, 63, 68, 69, 74, 85-6, 168

Accumulation of energy, function of vegetable organisms, 253, 255

Achilles and tortoise, in Zeno, 311, 312-3

Acquired characters, inheritance of, 76-9, 83-4, 87, 169, 170, 173, 231

Act, consciousness as inadequacy of, to representation, 144
  form (or essence), quality, three classes of representation, 302-3

Action, creativeness of free, 192, 247
  and concepts, 160, 297
  and consciousness, xiii, 5, 143-4, 145, 179-80, 207, 262
  discontinuity of, 154, 307
  freedom of, in animals, 130
  as function of nervous system, 262-3
  indivisibility of, 94, 95, 308-9
  and inert matter, 96, 136, 141-2, 156, 187, 198, 226, 366
  instinct and, 136, 141
  instrument of, consciousness, 180
  instrument of, life, 162
  instrument of matter, 161, 198-9
  as instrument of consciousness, 180
  and intellect. _See_ Intellect and action
  intensity of consciousness varies with ratio of possible, to real, 145
  meaning of, 301-3
  moves from want to fulness, 297, 298
  organism a machine for, 252, 254, 300
  and perception, 5, 11, 12, 93, 188, 189, 206, 227-30, 300, 307, 368
  possible, 12, 13, 96, 144, 145, 146-7, 159, 165, 179-81, 188, 264
  and science, 93, 195-6, 198-9, 329-30
  and space, 203
  sphere of the intellect, 155
  tension in a free, 200, 207, 238, 240, 301-2

Activity, dissatisfaction the starting-point of, 297
  of instinct, continuous with vital process, 139, 140
  life as, 128-9, 247
  mutually inverse factors in vital, 248
  and nervous system, 110, 130, 132-3, 134-5, 180, 252, 261-3
  organism as, 174
  potential. _See_ Action, possible
  tension of free, 200, 202, 207-8, 223-4, 237, 239, 300-1
  and torpor in evolution, 109, 111, 113, 114, 119-20, 129-30,
  135-6, 181, 292
  vital, has evolved divergently, 134
    _See_ Divergent lines of evolution

Adaptation, 50-1, 55, 57-8, 59, 70, 101, 129, 133, 192, 255, 270, 305-6
  and causation, 102
  mutual, between materiality and intellectuality, 187, 206-7
  and progress, 101-2

Adequate and inadequate in Spinoza, 353

Adjectives, substantives and verbs, 303-4, 315

Aesthetics and philosophy, 177

Affection, Role of, in the idea of chance, 234
  in the idea of nought, 281-3, 289, 293, 295, 296
  in negation, 286-7

Affirmation and negation, 285-6, 293

Age and individuality, 15-6

Albuminoid substances, 121-2

Alciope, 96

Alexandrian philosophy, 322, 323

Algae in illustration of probable consciousness in vegetable forms, 112

Alimentation, 113-4, 117, 247

Allegory of the Cave, 191

Alternations of increase and decrease of mutability of the universe, 245-6

Alveolar froth, 33-4

Ambiguity of the idea of "generality" in philosophy, 230-1, 320-1
  of primitive organisms, 99, 112, 113, 129-30

Ammophila hirsuta, paralyzing instinct in, 173

Amoeba, in illustration of imitation of the living by the unorganized, 33-6
  in illustration of the ambiguity of primitive organisms, 99
  in illustration of the mobility characteristic of animals, 108
  in illustration of the "explosive" expenditure of energy characteristic
   of animals, 120, 253

Anagenesis, 34

Anarchy, idea of, 233, 234.
   _See_ Disorder

Anatomy, comparative, and transformism, 25

Ancient philosophy, Achilles and tortoise, 311-2
  Alexandrian philosophy, 322-3
  Allegory of the Cave, 191
  Anima (De), 322 _note_
  Apogee of sensible object, 344, 345, 349
  Archimedes, 343-4
  Aristotle, 135, 174-5, 227-8, 314, 316, 321, 323, 324, 328-33, 347, 349,
   353, 356, 370
  Arrow of Zeno, 308-13
  ascent toward God, in Aristotle, 323
  Astronomy, ancient and modern, 334-6
  attraction and impulsion in, 323-4
  becoming in, 313-4, 317
  bow and indivisibility of motion, 308-9
  Caelo (De), of Aristotle, 322 _note_, 324 _note_
  and Cartesian geometry, 334-5
  causality in, 323, 325-6
  change in, 313-4, 317, 328-9, 342-3
  cinematographical nature of, 315
  circularity of God's thought, 323-4
  concentric spheres, 328
  concepts, 326-7, 356
  "conversion" and "procession" in, 323
  degradation of ideas into sensible flux, 317-8, 321, 323-4, 327, 328,
   343-5, 352-3
  degrees of reality, 323-4, 327
  diminution, derivation of becoming by. _See_ Degradation of Ideas, etc.
  duration, 317-9 _note_, 323-4, 327-9
  Eleatic philosophy, 308, 314
  Enneads of Plotinus, 210 _note_
  essence and accident, 354
  essence or form, 314-5
  eternal, 317-8, 324-6
  Eternity, 317-8, 320, 324, 328-9
  extension, 210 _note_, 318, 324, 327
  form or idea, 314-20, 322, 327, 329-31, 352
  geometry, Cartesian, and ancient philosophy, 334
  God of Aristotle, 196-7, 322-4, 349, 352, 356
  [Greek: hylê], 353
  Idea, 314-22, 352-3
  and indivisibility of motion, 307-8, 311
  intelligible reality in, 326
  intelligibles of Plotinus, 353
  [Greek: logos], of Plotinus, 210 _note_
  matter in Aristotle's philosophy, 316, 327
  and modern astronomy, 333-4, 335
  and modern geometry, 333-4
  and modern philosophy, 226-7, 228-9, 232, 281-2, 344-5, 346, 349-51, 364,
   369
  and modern science, 329-30, 336, 342-3, 344-5, 357
  motion in, 307-8, 312-3
  necessity in, 327
  [Greek: noêseôs noêsis], 356
  non-being, 316, 327
  [Greek: nous poiêtikos], 322
  oscillation about being, sensible reality as, 317-8
  Physics of Aristotle, 227-8 _note_, 324 _note_, 330-1
  Plato, 48, 156, 191, 210 _note_, 316-8, 321-4, 327, 330, 348, 349
  Plotinus, 210, 316, 323, 326 _note_, 349, 352-4
  procession in Alexandrian philosophy, 323
  [Greek: psychê], 210 _note_, 350
  realism in, 232
  refraction of idea through matter or non-being, 317
  sectioning of becoming, 318-9
  sensible reality, 314, 316-8, 321, 327-9, 352-3
  [Greek: sôma], 350
  space and time, 317-9, 320
  Timaeus, 318 _note_
  time in ancient and in modern science, 330-1, 336-7, 341-4
  time and space, 317-9, 320
  vision of God in Alexandrian philosophy, 322
  Zeno, 308, 313

Ancient science and modern, 329-31, 336-7, 342-5, 357

Anima (De), of Aristotle, 322 _note_

Animal kingdom, 12, 105-6, 119-21, 126, 129, 131-2, 134-6, 137-8, 139, 179,
   184-5

Animals, 105-47, 167, 170, 181, 183, 187, 212, 214, 246, 252, 253, 254,
   262-5, 267, 271, 293, 301
  deduction in, 212
  induction in, 214
  and man, 139-43, 183, 187, 188, 212, 263, 264, 267
  and man in respect to brain, 183, 184-5, 263-5
  and man in respect to consciousness, 139-43, 180, 183, 187, 188, 192,
   212, 263-8
  and man in respect to instruments of action, 139-43, 150-1
  and man in respect to intelligence, 137-8, 187, 188, 191-2, 212
  and plants, 105-39, 124-6, 143, 145, 146-7, 168-70, 181-2, 253, 254, 293
  and plants in respect to activity of consciousness, 109, 111, 113,
   119-21, 128-9, 132, 134-6, 142-3, 144, 181-2, 293
  and plants in respect to function, 117-8, 121-2, 127
  and plants in respect to instinct, 167, 170
  and plants in respect to mobility, 109, 110, 113, 129-30, 132-3, 135, 181
  and plants in respect to nature of consciousness, 134-5

Antagonistic currents of the vital impetus, 129, 135-6, 181, 184, 250,
   258-9

Anthophora, 146-7

Antinomies of Kant, 204, 205

Antipathy. _See_ Sympathy, Feeling, Divination

Antithesis and thesis, 205

Ants, 101, 134, 140, 157

Ape's brain and consciousness contrasted with man's, 263

Aphasia, 181

Apidae, social instinct in the, 171

Apogee of instinct in the hymenoptera and of intelligence in man, 174-5
    _See_ Evolutionary superiority

Apogee of sensible object, in philosophy of Ideas, 343-4, 349

Approximateness of the knowledge of matter, 206-7

Approximation, in matter, to the mathematical order, 218.
    _See_ Order

Archimedes, 333-4

Aristotle. _See_ Ancient Philosophy, Aristotle

Arrow, Flying, of Zeno, 308-9, 310, 312-3

Art, 6-7, 29 _note_, 45, 89, 177

Artemia Salina, transformations of, 72, 73

Arthropods in evolution, 130-5, 142

Articulate species, 133

Articulations of matter relative to action, 156, 367
  of motion, 310-1
  of real time, 332-3

Artificial, how far scientific knowledge is, 197, 218-9
  instruments, 138, 139, 140-1

Artist, in illustration of the creativeness of duration, 340-1

Ascending cosmic movement, 11, 208, 275, 369

Ascent toward God, in Aristotle, 323

Association of organisms, 260.
    _See_ Individuation
  universal oscillation between association and individuation, 259, 260.
    _See_ Societies

Astronomy and deduction, 213
  and the inert order, 224
  modern, in reference to ancient science, 334-6

Atmosphere of spatiality bathing intelligence, 204

Atom, 240, 254, 255
  as an intellectual view of matter, 203, 250
  and interpenetration, 207

Attack and defence in evolution, 131-2

Attention, 2, 148-9, 154, 184, 209
  discontinuity of, 2
  in man and in lower animals, 184.
    _See_ Tension and instinct, Tension as inverted extension,
   Tension of personality, Sympathetic appreciation, etc.,
   Relaxation and intellect

Attraction and impulsion in Greek philosophy, 323, 324

Attribute and subject, 148

Automatic activity, 145
  as instrument of voluntary, 252
  order, 224, 231-4.
    _See_ Negative movement, etc., Geometrical order

Automatism, 127, 143-4, 174, 223-4, 261, 264


Background of instinct and intelligence, consciousness as, 186

Backward-looking attitude of the intellect, 47, 48, 237

Baldwin, J.M., 27 _note_

Ballast of intelligence, 152, 230, 239, 369-70

Bastian, 212 _note_

Bateson, 63

Becoming, 164, 236, 248-9, 273, 299-304, 307-8, 313-4, 316, 337-8,
    342-3, 345, 363
  in ancient philosophy, 313-4, 317
  in Descartes's philosophy, 346
  in Eleatic philosophy, 313-4, 315
  in general, or abstract becoming, 304, 306-7
  instantaneous and static views of, 272, 304-5
  states of, falsely so called, 164, 247-8, 273, 298-301, 307-8
  in the successors of Kant, 363.
    _See_ Change, New, Duration, Time, Views of reality

Bees, 101, 140, 142, 146, 166, 172

Beethoven, 224

Berthold, 34 _note_

Bethe, 176 _note_

Bifurcations of tendency, 54.
    _See_ Divergent lines of evolution

Biology, 12, 25, 26, 31-2, 43, 168-9, 174-5, 194-6
  evolutionist, 168-9
  and philosophy, 43, 194-6
  and physico-chemistry, 26

Blaringhem, 85

Bodies, 156, 188, 189, 300-1, 360.
    _See_ Inert matter as a relaxation of the unextended into the
  extended defined as bundles of qualities, 349

Bois-Reymond (Du), 38

Boltzmann, 245

Bombines, social instincts in, 171

Bouvier, 142 _note_

Bow, strain of, illustrating indivisibility of motion, 308-10

Brain and consciousness, 5, 109, 110, 179-80, 183-4, 212 _note_, 252,
   261-4, 270, 354, 356, 366.
    _See_ Nervous System in man and lower animals, 183, 184, 263-5

Brandt, 66 _note_

Breast-Plate, in reference to animal mobility, 130, 131.
    _See_ Carapace, Cellulose envelope

Brown-Séquard, 80-2

Bulb, medullary, in the development of the nervous system, 110, 252

Busquet, 259 _note_

Bütschli, 33 _note_

Buttel-Reepen, 171 _note_

Butterflies, in illustration of variation from evolutionary type, 72


Caelo (De), of Aristotle, 322 _note_, 324 _note_

Calcareous sheath, in reference to animal mobility, 130-1

Calkins, 16 _note_

Canal, in illustration of the relation of function and structure, 93

Canalization, in illustration of the function of animal organisms, 93,
   95, 110, 126, 256, 270

Canvas, embroidering "something" on the, of "nothing," 297

Caprice, an attribute not of freedom but of mechanism, 47

Carapace, in reference to animal mobility, 130-1

Carbohydrates, in reference to the function of the animal organism, 121-2

Carbon, in reference to the function of organisms, 107, 113, 114, 117,
   254, 255

Carbonic acid, in reference to the function of organisms, 254, 255

Carnot, 243, 246, 256

Cartesian geometry, compared with ancient, 334

Cartesianism, 345, 356, 358

Cartesians, 358. _See_ Spinoza, Leibniz

Carving, the, of matter by intellect, 155

Categorical propositions, characteristic of instinctive knowledge, 149-50

Categories, conceptual, x, xiii, 48, 147, 148-9, 165, 189-90, 195-7, 207,
   220-1, 257-60, 265, 358, 361.
    _See_ Concept deduction of, and genesis of the intellect, 196, 207, 359.
    _See_ Genesis of matter and of the intellect
  innate, 147, 148-9
  misfit for the vital, x, xiii, 48, 165, 195-9, 220-1, 257-9
  in reference to the adaptation to each other of the matter and form of
   knowledge, 361

Cats, in illustration of the law of correlation, 67

Causal relation in Aristotle, 325
  between consciousness and movement, 111
  in Greek philosophy, 324-5

Causality, mechanical, a category which does not apply to life, x, xiv, 177
  in the philosophy of Ideas, 323-6

Causation and adaptation, 101, 102
  final, involves mechanical, 44

Cause and effect as mathematical functions of each other, 20, 21
  efficient, 238, 277, 323
  efficient, in Aristotle's philosophy, 324
  efficient, in Leibniz's philosophy, 353
  final, 40, 44, 238
  final, in Aristotle's philosophy, 324
  by impulsion, release and unwinding, 73
  mechanical, as containing effect, 14, 233, 269
  in the vital order, 95, 164

Cave, Plato's allegory of the, 191

Cell, 16, 24, 33, 162, 166, 167, 260, 269
  as artificial construct, 162
  in the "colonial theory," 260
  division, 16, 24, 33
  instinct in the, 166, 167
  in relation to the soul, 269

Cellulose envelope in reference to vegetable immobility and torpor, 108,
   111, 130

Cerebral activity and consciousness, 5, 109-10, 180-1, 183-4, 212 _note_,
    252, 253, 261, 264, 268, 270, 350, 351, 354, 355, 366
  mechanism, 5, 252, 253, 262, 264, 366

Cerebro-spinal system, 124. _See_ Nervous system

Certainty of induction, 215, 216

Chance analogous to disorder, 233, 234.
    _See_ Affection
  in evolution, 86-7, 104, 114-5, 126, 169-70, 171, 252, 254, 255, 266,
   267, 326-7.
    _See_ Indetermination

Change, 1, 7-8, 18, 85-6, 248, 275, 294, 300-304, 308, 313-4, 317, 326,
   328-9, 343-4, 344-5
  in ancient philosophy, 313-4, 316-7, 325-6, 327-9, 343, 345
  in Eleatic philosophy, 314
  known only from within, 307-8

Chaos, 232.
    _See_ Disorder

Character, moral, 5, 99-100

Charrin, 81 _note_

Chemistry, 27, 34-6, 55, 72, 74, 98, 194, 226, 256, 260

Child, intelligence in, 147-8
  adolescence of, in illustration of evolutionary becoming, 311-3

Chipped stone, in paleontology, 139

Chlorophyllian function, 107-9, 114, 117, 246, 253

Choice, 110, 125, 143-5, 179, 180, 252, 260-4, 276, 366
  and consciousness, 110, 179, 260-4

Chrysalis, 114 _note_

Cinematograph, 306-7, 339-40

Cinematographical character of ancient philosophy, 315-6
  of intellectual knowledge, 306, 307, 312-8, 323-4, 331-3, 346
  of language, 306-7, 312-5
  of modern science, 329-31, 336-7, 341-3, 345, 346, 347

Circle of the given, broken by action, 192, 247
  logical and physical, 277
  vicious, in intellectualist philosophy, 193, 197, 320
  vicious, in the intuitional method is only apparent, 192, 193

Circularity of God's thought in Aristotle's philosophy, 324
  of each special evolution, 128

Circulation, protoplasmic, imitated, 32-3
  in plants and animals, 108

Circumstances in the determination of evolution, 101-2, 128-9, 133, 138,
    142, 150-1, 167, 168, 170-1, 193, 194, 252, 256
  in relation to special instincts, 138, 168, 193

Classes of words corresponding to the three kinds of representation, 303-4

Clausius, 243

Clearness characteristic of intellect, 160

Cleft between the organized and the unorganized, 190, 196-9

Climbing plants, instincts of, 170 _note_

Coincidence of matter with space as in Kant, 206, 207, 244
  of mind with intellect as in Kant, 48, 206
  of qualities, 216
  of seeing and willing, 237
  of self with self, definition of the feeling of duration, 199-200

Coleopter, instinct in, 146

Colonial theory, 259, 260

Colonies, microbial, 259

Color variation in lizards, 72, 74

Coming and going of the mind between the without and the within gives rise
    to the idea of "Nothing," 279
  between nature and mind, the true method of philosophy, 239

Common-sense, 29, 153, 161, 213, 224, 277
  defined as continuous experience of the real, 213

Comparison of ancient philosophy with modern, 226, 228-9, 232, 328-9,
   345-6, 349-51, 353-4, 356

Compenetration, 352-3. _See_ Interpenetration

Complementarity of forms evolved, xii, xiii, 51, 101, 103, 113, 116-7,
   135, 136, 254, 255
  of instinct and intelligence, 146, 173.
    _See_ Opposition of Instinct and Intelligence
  of intuition and intellect, 343, 345
  in the powers of life, 49, 96-7, 140-3, 177, 178-9, 183-5, 239, 246,
   254, 343
  of science and metaphysics, 344

Complexity of the order of mathematics, 208-10, 217, 251

Compound reflex, instinct as a, 174

Concentration, intellect as, 191, 301
  of personality, 198-9, 201

Concentric spheres in Aristotle's philosophy, 328

Concept accessory to action, ix
  analogy of, with the solid body, ix
  in animals, 187
  externality of, 160, 168, 175-8, 199-200, 251, 306, 311, 314
  fringed about with intuition, 46
  and image distinguished, 160, 279
  impotent to grasp life, ix-xiii, 49
  intellect the concept-making faculty, vi, 49
  misfit for the vital, 48
  representation of the act by which the intellect is fixed on things, 161
  synthesis of, in ancient philosophy, 325-6, 356.
    _See_ Categories, Externality, Frames, Image, Space, Symbol

Conditions, external, in evolution, 128-9, 133, 138, 141-2, 150-1, 166-7,
   168, 170, 193, 194, 251, 256, 257
  external, in determination of special instinct, 141-2, 150-1, 167,
   168, 171

Conduct, mechanism and finality in the evolution of, 47.
    _See_ Freedom, Determination, Indetermination

Confused plurality of life, 257

Conjugation of Infusoria, 16

Consciousness and action, ix, 5, 144, 145, 179-80, 207, 260-1
  consciousness as appendage to action, ix
  consciousness as arithmetical difference between possible and real
   activity, 145
  consciousness as auxiliary to action, 179-80
  consciousness as inadequacy of act to representation, 144
  consciousness as instrument of action, 180
  consciousness as interval between possible and real action, 145, 179
  consciousness as light from zone of possible actions surrounding the
   real act, 179
  consciousness and locomotion, 262
  consciousness plugged up by action, 144, 145.
    _See_ Torpor, Sleep
  consciousness as sketch of action, 207
  intensity of, varies with ratio of possible to real action, 145

Consciousness in animals, as distinguished from the consciousness of
   plants, 130, 135-6, 143
  as distinguished from the consciousness of man, 139-43, 180, 183, 184,
    187, 188, 212, 263-9.
    _See_ Torpor, Sleep
  characteristic of animals, torpor of plants, 109, 111, 113, 120, 128-9,
   135-6, 181, 182, 292
  as background of instinct and intelligence, 186
  and brain, 180, 262, 263, 269, 270, 354
  and choice, 110, 144-5, 179, 262-4
  coextensive with universal life, 186, 270
  and creation, consciousness as demand for creation, 261
  current of, penetrating matter, 181, 270
  as deficiency of instinct, 145
  in dog and man, 180
  double form of, 179
  function of, 207
  as hesitation or choice, 143, 144
  imprisonment of, 180, 183-4, 264
  as invention and freedom, 264, 270
  in man as distinguished from, in lower forms of life, 180, 263, 264,
   267, 268
  and matter, 179, 181-2
  as motive principle of evolution, 181-2
  nullified, as distinguished from the absence of consciousness, 143
  and the organism, 270
  in plants, 131, 135-6, 143
  as world principle, 237, 261

Conservation of energy, 243, 244

Construction, 139-42, 150-1, 156, 157-8, 180, 182.
    _See_ Manufacture, Solid
  the characteristic work of intellect, 163-4
  as the method of Kant's successors, 364-5

Contingency, 96, 255, 268.
    _See_ Accident, Chance
  the, of order, 231, 235

Continuation of vital process in instinct, 138, 139, 166, 167, 246.
    _See_ Variations, Vital process

Continuity, 1, 26, 29-30, 37, 138-40, 154, 162-4, 258, 302, 306-7, 311-2,
    321, 325-6, 329-30, 347
  of becoming, 306-7, 312
  of change, 325-6
  of evolution, 18, 19
  of extension, 154
  of germinative plasma, 26, 37
  of instinct with vital process, 139, 140, 166-7, 246
  of life, 1-11, 29, 163-4, 258
  of living substance, 162
  of psychic life, 1, 30
  of the real, 302, 329-30
  of sensible intuition with ultra-intellectual, 361
  of sensible universe, 346

Conventionality of science, 207

"Conversion" and "procession" in Alexandrian philosophy, 323

Cook, Plato's comparison of the, and the dialectician, 156

Cope, 35 _note_, 77, 111

Correlation, law of, 66, 67

Correspondence between mind and matter in Spencer, 368.
    _See_ Simultaneity

Cortical mechanism, 252, 253, 262.
    _See_ Cerebral mechanism

Cosmogony and genesis of matter, 188.
    _See_ Genesis of matter and of intellect, Spencer

Cosmology the, that follows from the philosophy of Ideas, 315, 328
  as reversed psychology, 208

Counterweight representation as, to action, 145

Counting simultaneities, the measurement of time is, 338, 341-2

Creation, xi, 7, 11, 12, 22, 29, 30, 45, 93, 100, 101, 103, 105, 108, 114,
    128-31, 161, 163-4, 178, 200, 217, 218, 223, 226, 230, 237-40, 261,
    270, 275, 339-40
  in Descartes's philosophy, 345
  of intellect, 248-9
  of matter, 237, 239, 247-8, 249.
    _See_ Materiality the inversion of spirituality
  of present by past, 5, 20-3, 27, 167, 199-202
  the vital order as, 230

Creative evolution, 7, 15, 21, 27, 29, 36, 37, 65, 100, 104-5, 161,
   163, 223-4, 230-1, 237, 264, 269

Creativeness of free action, 192, 243
  of invention, 250

Creeping plants in illustration of vegetable mobility, 108

Cricket victim of paralyzing instinct of sphex, 172

Criterion, quest of a, 53 _ff._
  of evolutionary rank, 133, 265

Criticism, Kantian, 205, 287 _note_, 356, 360-2
  of knowledge, 194-5

Cross-cuts through becoming by intellect, 314.
    _See_ Views of reality
  through matter by perception, 206

Cross-roads of vital tendency, 51, 52, 54, 110, 126

Crustacea, 19, 111, 129-30

Crystal illustrating (by contrast) individuation, 12

Cuénot, 79 _note_

Culminating points of evolutionary progress, 50, 133-5.
    _See_ Evolutionary superiority

Current, 26, 27, 51, 185, 236, 237, 250, 266, 269

Currents, antagonistic, 250
  of existence, 185
  of life penetrating matter, 26, 27, 266, 270
  vital, 26, 27, 51, 237, 266, 270
  of will penetrating matter, 237

Curves, as symbol of life, 32, 90, 213

Cuts through becoming by the intellect, 313-4.
    _See_ Views of reality, Snapshots in illustration, etc.
  through matter by perception, 206

Cuvier, 125 _note_


Dantec (Le), 18 _note_, 34 _note_

Darwin, 62-5, 66, 72, 108, 170 _note_

Darwinism, 56, 85, 86

Dastre, 36 _note_

Dead, the, is the object of intellect, 165

Dead-locks in speculation, 155, 312

Death, 246 _note_, 271

Declivity descended by matter, 208, 246, 256, 339-40.
    _See_ Descending movement

Decomposing and recomposing powers characteristic of intellect, 157, 251

Deduction, analogy between, related to moral sphere and tangent to
   curve, 213
  and astronomy, 213
  duration refractory to, 213
  geometry the ideal limit of, 213-26, 361
  in animals, 212
  inverse to positive spiritual effort, 212
  nature of, 211
  physics and, 213
  weakness of, in psychology and moral science, 213

Defence and attack in evolution, 132

Deficiency of will the negative condition of mathematical order and
   complexity, 209

Definition in the realm of life, 13, 105, 106

Degenerates, 133-5

_Dégénérescence sénile (La)_, by Metchnikoff, 18 _note_

Degradation of energy, 241, 242, 246
  of the extra-spatial into the spatial, 207
  of the ideas into the sensible flux in ancient philosophy, 317-9,
   324-5, 327-9, 331, 343, 345, 352-3

Degrees of being in the successors of Kant, 362-3

Degrees of reality in Greek philosophy, 324, 327

Delage, 59 _note_, 81 _note_, 260 _note_

Delamare, 81 _note_

Deliberation, 144

De Manacéine, 124 _note_

Deposit, instinct and intelligence as deposits, emanations, issues, or
   aspects of life, x, xii, xiii, 49, 103, 105, 136, 365

De Saporta, 107 _note_

Descartes, 280, 334, 345, 346, 353, 358
  becoming, 345-6
  creation, 346
  determinism, 345
  duration, 346
  freedom, 345, 346
  geometry, 334
  God, 346
  image and idea or concept, 281
  indeterminism, 345
  mechanism, 345, 346
  motion, 346
  vacillation between abstract time and real duration, 345

Descending movement of existence, 11, 202, 203, 208, 271, 275, 369

Design, motionless, of action the object of intellect, 154-5, 299,
   301-2, 303

Detention in the dream state, 202
  of intuition in intellect, 238

Determination, 76-7, 129-30, 223, 246

Determinism, 217, 264, 345, 348. _See_ Inert matter, Geometry
  in Descartes, 345

Development, 133, 134-5, 141.
    _See_ Order, Progress, Evolution, Superiority

Deviation from type, 82-4

Dialect and intuition in philosophy, 238

Dichotomy of the real in modern philosophy, 350

Differentiation of parts in an organism, 253, 260

Dilemma of any systematic metaphysics, 195, 197, 230

Diminution, derivation of becoming from being by, in ancient philosophy,
   316, 317, 322, 323-4, 327-8, 343-5, 352
  geometrical order as, or lower complication of the vital order, 236

Dionaea illustrating certain animal characteristics in plants, 107,
   108, 109

Discontinuity of action, 154, 306-7
  of attention, 2
  of extension relative to action, 154, 163
  of knowledge, 306
  of living substance, 163
  a positive idea, 154

Discontinuous the object of intellect, 154

Discord in nature, 127, 128, 254-5, 267

Disorder, 40, 104, 222-3, 225-6, 232-5, 274.
    _See_ Expectation, Order, mathematical, Orders of reality, two

Disproportion between an invention and its consequences, 182

Dissociation as a cosmic principle opposed to association, 260
  of tendencies, 54, 89, 135, 254, 255, 257, 258.
    _See_ Divergent lines of evolution

Distance, extension as the, between what is and what ought to be, 318-9,
   327-8, 331

Distinct multiplicity in the dream state, 201, 210
  of the inert, 257

Distinctness characteristic of the intellect, 160, 237, 251
  characteristic of perception, 227, 251
  as spatiality, 203, 207-8, 244, 250

Divergent lines of evolution, xii, 54, 55, 87, 97-101, 103-4, 106, 107,
   109, 112, 113, 116, 119, 130, 132, 134-5, 142, 149, 150, 168, 173, 181,
   254, 255, 266, 267.
    _See_ Dissociation of tendencies, Complementarity, etc., Schisms
    in the primitive impulsion of life

Diversity, sensible, 205, 220-1, 231, 235, 236

Divination, instinct as, 176.
    _See_ Sympathy, etc.

Divisibility of extension, 154, 162

Division as function of intellect, 152, 154, 162-3, 189
  of labor, 99, 110, 118, 157, 166, 260
  of labor in cells, 166

Dog and man, consciousness in, 180

Dogmatism of the ancient epistemology contrasted with the relativism of
   the modern, 230
  of Leibniz and Spinoza, 356-7
  skepticism, and relativism, 196-7, 230

Dogs and the law of correlation, 66

Domestication of animals and heredity, 80

Dominants of Reinke, 42 _note_

Dorfmeister, 72

Dream, 144, 180-1, 202, 209, 256.
    _See_ Interpenetration, Relaxation, Detention, Recollection
  as relaxation, 202

Driesch, 42 _note_

Drosera, 107, 108, 109

Dufourt, 124 _note_

Duhem, 242 _note_

Dunan, Ch., xv _note_

Duration, xiv _note_, 2, 4-6, 8-11, 15, 17, 21, 22, 37, 39, 46, 51,
   199, 201, 206, 213, 216, 240, 272, 273, 276, 298-9, 308-9, 317-8, 319
   _note_, 324, 328, 332, 339, 342, 343, 345, 354, 361, 363-4
  absoluteness of, 206
  and deduction, 213
  in Descartes's philosophy, 346
  gnawing of, 4, 8, 46
  indivisibility of, 6, 308-9
  and induction, 216
  and the inert, 343-4
  in the philosophy of the Ideas, 316-7, 319 _note_, 324, 327, 328-9
  rhythm of, 11, 128, 346.
    _See_ Creation, Evolution, Invention, Time, Unforeseeableness,
    Uniqueness


Echinoderms in reference to animal mobility, 130, 131

Efficient cause in conception of chance, 234
  Spinoza and, 269

Effort in evolution, 170

[Greek: Eidos], 314-5

Eimer, 55, 72, 73, 86

Elaborateness of the mathematical order, 208-10, 217, 251

Eleatic philosophy, 308, 314-5

Emanation, logical thought an, issue, aspect or deposit of life, ix, xii,
   xiii, 49

Embroidering "something" on the canvas of "nothing," 297

Embroidery by descendants on the canvas handed down by ancestors, 23

Embryo, 18, 19, 26, 27, 75, 81, 89, 101, 166

Embryogeny, comparative, and transformism, 25

Embryonic life, 27, 166

Empirical study of evolution the centre of the theory of knowledge and of
   the theory of life, 178
  theories of knowledge, 205

Empty, thinking the full by means of the empty, 273-4

End in Eleatic philosophy, 314-5
  of science is practical utility, 329

Energy, 115-7, 120-3, 242, 243, 245, 246, 252-5, 256, 257, 262
  conservation of, 242
  degradation of, 242, 243, 246
  solar, stored by plants, released by animals, 245, 254

Enneadae of Plotinus, 210 _note_

Entelechy of Driesch, 42 _note_

Entropy, 243

Environment in evolution, 129, 133, 138, 140, 142, 150, 167, 168, 170,
   192, 193, 252, 256, 257
  and special instincts, 138, 168, 192, 193

Epiphenomenalism, 262

Essence and accidents in Aristotle's philosophy, 353
  or form in Eleatic philosophy, 314-5
  the meaning of, 302-3

Essences (or forms), qualities and acts, the three kinds of
   representation, 303-4

Eternity, 39, 298, 314, 317, 320, 324, 328, 346, 352, 354
  in the philosophy of Ideas, 316-7, 319, 324, 328
  in Spinoza's philosophy, 353

Euglena, 116

Evellin, 311 _note_

Eventual actions, 11, 96.
    _See_ Possible activity

Evolution, ix-xv, 18, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26-7, 37, 46-55, 63, 68, 79
    _note_, 84-8, 97-105, 107, 113, 116, 126, 127, 129-30, 131-2,
    133, 134, 136, 138-40, 141-2, 143, 161, 166, 167, 168-72, 173, 174,
    175, 179, 181, 182, 185, 186, 190, 193, 198-9, 207-8, 224, 231, 242
    _note_, 246, 248, 249, 251, 252, 254, 264-6, 268, 273, 302, 311,
    345, 359, 360, 366
  accident in, 104, 169, 170, 173, 174, 251, 252
  animal, a progress toward mobility, 131
  antagonistic tendencies in, 103, 113, 185
  automatic and determinate, is action being undone, 248
  blind alleys of, 129
  circularity of each special, 128
  complementarity of the divergent lines of, 97-102, 103, 116
  conceptually inexpressible, 49, 50, 52, 53, 127, 181, 273
  continuity of, 18, 19, 26, 37, 46, 273, 302, 312, 345
  creative, 7, 15, 21, 27, 30, 36, 37, 65, 100, 105, 161, 162, 163, 223,
   230, 238, 264, 269
  culminating points of, 50, 133, 174, 185, 265, 266, 268
  development by, 133, 134, 141-2
  divergent lines of, xii, 53, 54, 87, 97-101, 103-4, 107, 173-4, 246
  and duration, 20, 22, 37, 45-6
  empirical study of, the centre of the theory of knowledge and of life,
   178
  and environment, 101-3, 129, 133, 138, 142, 150, 167, 168, 169, 192,
   193, 251, 256, 257
  of instinct, 170, 171, 174-5.
    _See_ Divergent lines, etc., Culminating points, etc., Evolution
   and environment
  of intellect, x-xii, 153, 186, 189-90, 193, 198-9, 207-8, 359, 360.
    _See_ Divergent lines, etc., Culminating points, etc., Genesis
   of matter and of intellect
  as invention, 344
  of man, 264, 266, 268. _See_ Culminating points, etc.
  motive principle of, is consciousness, 181
  of species product of the vital impetus opposed by matter, 247-8, 254
  and transformism, 24
  unforeseeable, 47, 48, 53, 86, 224
  variation in, 23-4, 55, 63, 68, 72 _note_, 85, 131, 137-8, 167, 169,
   171, 264

Evolutionary, qualitative, and extensive motion 302-3, 311, 312
  superiority, 133-5, 174-5.
    _See_ Success, Criterion of evolutionary rank, Culminating points, etc.

Evolutionism, x-xii, xiv, 77, 84, 364

Exhaustion of the mutability of the universe, 337-8

Existence, logical, as contrasted with psychical and physical, 276, 362
  of matter tends toward instantaneity, 201
  of self means change, 1 _ff._
  superaddition of, upon nothingness, 276

Expectation, 214-6, 221, 222, 226, 233, 235, 274, 281, 292
  in conception of disorder, 221, 222, 226, 233, 234, 235, 274
  in conception of void or naught, 282, 292

Experience, 138, 147, 177, 197, 204, 229, 321, 354, 359, 363, 368

Explosion, illustrating cause by release, 73

Explosive character of animal energy, 116, 119, 120, 246
  of organization, 92

Explosives, manufacture of, by plants and use by animals, 246, 254

Extension, 149, 154, 161, 202, 203, 207, 211, 223, 236, 245, 318-20,
   324, 327, 351, 352
  continuity of, 154
  discontinuity of, relative to action, 154, 162
  as the distance between what is and what ought to be, 318
  divisibility of, 154, 162
  the most general property of matter, 154, 250, 251
  the inverse movement to tension, 245
  of knowledge, 150
  in Leibniz's philosophy, 351, 352
  of matter in space, 204, 211
  in the philosophy of Ideas, 318-9, 323-4, 327
  and relaxation, 202, 207, 209, 211, 212, 218, 223, 245
  in Spinoza's philosophy, 350
  in the Transcendental Aesthetic, 203
  unity of, 158-9
  as weakening of the essence of being, in Plotinus, 210 _note_

Extensive, evolutionary and qualitative motion, 302-3, 311, 312

External conditions in evolution, 128, 133, 137, 141-2, 150-1, 167,
   168, 170, 192, 193, 252, 256, 257
  finality, 41

Externality of concepts, 160, 168, 174, 177, 199, 251, 305, 311-4
  the most general property of matter, 154, 250, 251

Externalized action in distinction from internalized, 147, 165.
    _See_ Somnambulism, etc., Automatic activity, etc.

Eye of mollusc and vertebrate compared, 60, 75, 77, 84, 86, 87-8


Fabre, 172 _note_

Fabrication. _See_ Construction

Fallacies, two fundamental, 272, 273

Fallacy of thinking being by not-being, 276, 277, 284, 297-8
  of thinking the full by the empty, 273-5
  of thinking motion by the motionless, 272, 273, 297-8, 307-8, 309-14

Fallibility of instinct, 172-3

Falling back of matter upon consciousness, 264
  bodies, comparison of Aristotle and Galileo, 228, 331-2, 334
  weight, figure of material world, 245, 246

Familiar, the, is the object of intellect, 163, 164, 199, 270

Faraday, 203

Fasting, in reference to primacy of nervous system over the other
   physiological systems, 124

Fauna, menace of torpor in primitive, 130

Feeling in the conception of chance, 207
  and instinct, 143, 174-5

Fencing-master, illustrating hereditary transmission, 79

Ferments, certain characteristics of, 106

Fertilization of orchids by insects, by Darwin, 170 _note_

Fichte's conception of the intellect, 189-90, 357

Filings, iron, in illustration of the relation of structure to
   function, 94, 95

Film, cinematographic, figure of abstract motion, 304-6

Final cause, 40, 45, 234, 325
  conception of, involves conception of mechanical cause, 44
  God as, in Aristotle, 322-3

Finalism, 39-53, 58, 74, 88-97, 101-5, 126-8

Finality, 41, 164, 177-8, 185, 223, 224, 266
  external and internal, 41
  misfit for the vital, 177, 223-4, 225, 266
  and the unforeseeableness of life, 164, 185

Fischel, 75 _note_

Fish in illustration of animal tendency to mobility, 130, 131

Fixation of nutritive elements, 107-9, 113, 117, 246, 247, 253

Fixity, 108-13, 118, 119, 130, 155.
    _See_ Torpor
  apparent or relative, 155
  cellulose envelope and the, of plants, 108, 111, 130
  of extension, 155
  of plants, 108-13, 118, 119, 130-1
  of torpid animals, 130

Flint hatchets and human intelligence, 137

Fluidity of life, 153, 165, 193
   of matter as a whole, 186, 369

Flux of material bodies, 265
   of reality, 250, 251, 337, 342, 344

Flying arrow of Zeno, 308, 309, 310

Focalization of personality, 201

Food, 106-9, 113-4, 117, 120, 121, 246, 247, 254

Foraminifera, failure of certain, to evolve, 197

Force, 126-7, 141, 149, 150, 175, 246, 254, 339
  life a, inverse to matter, 246
  limitedness of vital force, 126, 127, 141, 149, 162
  time as, 339-40

Forel, 176 _note_

Foreseeing, 8, 28, 29, 30, 37, 45, 47, 96.
    _See_ Unforeseeableness

Form, xi, 51, 101, 104, 113, 116-8, 129, 135-6, 148-53, 155, 156, 160,
   164, 195-7, 222, 237, 250, 255, 302, 303, 314, 317, 318, 322, 341,
   357, 359, 361, 362
  complementarity of forms evolved, xi, 51, 101, 104, 113, 116-8, 135-6,
   255
  expansion of the forms of consciousness, xii, xiii
  (or essences), qualities and acts the three kinds of representation,
   302-3
  God as pure form in Aristotle, 196, 322
  or idea in ancient philosophy, 317, 318, 330
  of intelligence, xiv, 48, 147, 148, 165, 190, 195, 196, 198, 207, 219,
   257-9, 266, 358-9, 361. _See_ Concept
  and matter in creation, 239, 250
  and matter in knowledge, 195, 361
  a snapshot view of transition, 302

Formal knowledge, 152
  logic, 292

Forms of sensibility, 361

Fossil species, 102

Foster, 125 _note_

Fox in illustration of animal intelligence, 138

Frames of the understanding, 46-7, 48, 150-2, 173, 177, 197-9, 219-20,
   223-4, 258, 270, 313, 358, 364
  fit the inert, 197, 218
  inadequate to reality entire, 364
  misfit for the vital, x, xiii, xiv, 46, 48, 173, 177, 197-9, 223,
   258, 313
  product of life, 358
  transform freedom into necessity, 270
  utility of, lies in their unlimited application, 149-50, 152

Freedom, 11, 48, 126, 130, 163, 164, 200, 202, 207, 208, 217, 223, 231,
   237, 239, 247, 249, 264-6, 269, 270, 277, 300, 339-41, 345, 346
  the absolute as freely acting, 277
  affirmed by conscience, 269
  animal characteristic rather than vegetable, 129-30
  caprice attribute not of, but of mechanism, 47
  coextensiveness of consciousness with, 111, 112, 202, 264, 270
  of creation and life, 247, 254, 255
  creativeness of, 223, 239, 248
  in Descartes's philosophy, 345, 346
  as efficient causality, 277
  inversion of necessity, 236
  and liberation of consciousness, 265, 266.
    _See_ Imprisonment of consciousness
  and novelty, 12, 163, 164, 200, 218, 231, 239, 249, 270, 339-42
  order in, 223
  property of every organism, 129-31
  relaxation of, into necessity, 217
  tendency of, to self-negation in habit, 127
  tension of, 200, 201, 202, 207, 223, 237, 301
  transformed by the understanding into necessity, 270
    _See_ Spontaneity

Fringe of intelligence around instinct, 136
  of intuition around intellect, xii, xiii, 46
  of possible action around real action, 179, 272

Froth, alveolar, in imitation of organic phenomena, 33-4

Full, fallacy of thinking the, by the empty, 273-6

Function, ix, 3, 5, 44, 46, 47, 88-90, 94, 95, 106-10, 113, 114, 117, 120,
   121, 127, 132, 140, 141, 145, 152, 153, 157, 161, 163, 164, 168, 173-5,
   186-92, 199, 206, 207, 233, 237, 246, 251, 254-6, 262, 263, 270, 273,
   298, 306, 346, 358, 369
  accumulation of energy the function of vegetable organisms, 254, 255
  action the, of intellect, ix, 12, 44, 47, 93, 161, 162, 186-8, 206, 251,
   273, 305
  action the, of nervous system, 262, 263
  alimentation, 106, 107, 120, 121, 246, 254
  of animals is canalization of energy, 93, 110, 126, 255, 256
  carbon and the, of organisms, 107, 113, 114, 117, 254, 255
  chlorophyllian, 107-9, 114, 117, 246, 254
  concept-making the, of intellect, x, 49
  of consciousness: sketching movements, 207
  construction the, of intellect, 108
  illumination of action, of perception, 5, 206, 307-8
  of intelligence: action, ix, 12, 44, 46, 93, 160, 162, 186-8, 206, 251,
   273, 307-8
  of intelligence: concept-making, x, 50
  of intelligence: construction, 160, 163, 181-2
  of intelligence: division, 154, 155, 162, 189
  of intelligence: illumination of action by perception, 5, 206, 301
  of intelligence: repetition, 164, 199, 214-6
  of intelligence: retrospection, 47, 237
  of intelligence: connecting same with same, 199, 233, 270
  of intelligence: scanning the rhythm of the universe, 346
  of intelligence: tactualizing all perception, 168
  of intelligence: unification, 152, 154, 357
  of the nervous system: action, 262, 263
  and organ, 88-90, 94, 95, 132-3, 140, 141, 158.
    _See_ Function and structure
  and organ in arthropods, vertebrates and man, 132-3
  of the organism, 94, 106-10, 112, 114, 117, 120, 126, 173-5, 246, 253-6
  of the organism, alimentation, 106, 107, 120, 121, 246, 254
  of the organism, animal: canalization of energy, 93, 110, 126, 255, 256
  of the organism, carbon in, 107, 113, 114, 117, 254, 255
  of the organism, chlorophyllian function, 107-9, 114, 117, 246, 247, 254
  of the organism, primary functions of life: storage and expenditure of
   energy, 254-6
  of the organism, vegetable: accumulation of energy, 254, 255
  of philosophy: adoption of the evolutionary movement of life and
   consciousness, 370
  of science, 168, 346
  sketching movements the, of consciousness, 207
  and structure, 55, 62, 66, 69, 74, 75, 76, 86, 88-91, 93, 94, 96, 118,
   132, 140, 141, 158, 162, 250, 252, 256
  tactualizing all perception the, of science, 168
  of vegetable organism: accumulation of energy, 254, 255

Functions of life, the two: storage and expenditure of energy, 254-6


Galileo, homogeneity of time in, 332
  his influence on metaphysics, 20, 228
  his influence on modern science, 334, 335
  extension of Galileo's physics, 357, 370
  his theory of the fall of bodies compared with Aristotle's, 228, 331,
   332, 334

Ganoid breast-plate of ancient fishes, in reference to animal mobility,
   130, 131

Gaudry, 130 _note_

Genera, relation of, to individuals, 226
  relation of, to laws, 225, 226, 330
  potential, 226-7
  and signs, 158

Generality, ambiguity of the idea of, in philosophy, 229-31, 236

Generalization dependent on repetition, 230, 231
  distinguished from transference of sign, 158
  in the vital and mathematical orders, 224, 225, 230

Generic, type of the: similarity of structure between generating and
   generated, 223, 224

Genesis, xiii, xiv, 153, 186-199, 207, 359, 360
  of intellect, xiii, xiv, 153, 186, 187, 190, 193, 194, 196-7, 207,
   264, 360
  of knowledge, 191
  of matter, xiii, xiv, 153, 186, 188, 190, 193, 199, 207, 360

Genius and the willed order, 223, 237

Genus. _See_ Genera

Geometrical, the, is the object of the intellect, 190

Geometrical order as a diminution or lower complication of the vital,
   223, 225, 236, 330.
    _See_ Genera, Relation of, to laws
  mutual contingency of, and vital order, 235
    _See_ Mathematical order
  space, relation of, to the spatiality of things, 203

Geometrism, the latent, of intellect, 194, 211-3

Geometry, fitness of, to matter, 10
  goal of intellectual operations, 211, 213, 218
  ideal limit of induction and deduction, 214-8, 361.
    _See_ Space, Descending movement of existence
  modern, compared with ancient, 36, 161, 333-4
  natural, 194, 211-2
  perception impregnated with, 205, 230
  reasoning in, contrasted with reasoning concerning life, 7, 8
  scientific, 161, 211

Germ, accidental predisposition of, in Neo-Darwinism, 168, 169, 170

Germ-plasm, continuity of, 27, 37, 78-83

Giard, 84

Glucose in organic function, 122, 123

Glycogen in organic function, 122-4

God, as activity, 249
  of Aristotle, 196, 322, 325, 349, 353, 356-7
  ascent toward, in Aristotle's philosophy, 322-3
  circularity of God's thought, in Aristotle's philosophy, 324, 325
  in Descartes's philosophy, 346, 347
  as efficient cause in Aristotle's philosophy, 324
  as hypostasis of the unity of nature, 196, 322, 357
  in Leibniz's philosophy, 352, 353, 356-7
  as eternal matter, 196-7
  as pure form, 196-7, 322
  in Spinoza's philosophy, 351, 357

Greek philosophy. _See_ Ancient philosophy

Green parts of plants, 107-9, 114, 117, 246, 247, 254

Growing old, 15

Growth, creation is, 240-1, 275
  and novelty, 231
  of the powers of life, 132, 134-5
  reality is, 237
  of the universe, 343, 345

Guérin, P., 59 _note_

Guinea-pig, in illustration of hereditary transmission, 80, 81


Habit and consciousness annulled, 143
  form of knowledge a habit or bent of attention, 148
  and heredity, 78, 93, 169, 170, 173.
    _See_ Acquired characters, inheritance of
  instinct as an intelligent, 173-4
  and invention in animals, 264
  and invention in man, 265
  tendency of freedom to self-negation in, 127-8

Harmony between instinct and life, and between intelligence and the
   inert, 187, 194-5, 198
  of the organic world is complementarity due to a common original
   impulse 50, 51, 103, 116, 118
  pre-established, 205, 206
  in radical finalism, 127-8.
    _See_ Discord

Hartog, 60 _note_

Hatchets, ancient flint, and human intellect, 137

Heliocentric radius-vector in Kepler's laws, 333-4

Hereditary transmission, 76-83, 87, 168-9, 170, 173, 225-6, 230
  domestication of animals and, 80-1
  habit and, 79, 83, 169, 170, 173

Hesitation or choice, consciousness as, 143, 144

Heteroblastia and identical structures on divergent lines of evolution, 75

Heymons, 72 _note_

History as creative evolution, 6, 15, 21, 26, 29, 36, 37, 65-6, 103-4,
   105, 163, 264, 269
  of philosophy, 238

Hive as an organism, 166

_Homo faber_, designation of human species, 139

Homogeneity of space, 156, 212
  the sphere of intellect, 163
  of time in Galileo, 332

Horse-fly illustrating the object of instinct, 146

Houssay, 109 _note_

Human and animal attention, 184
  and animal brain, 184, 263-5
  and animal consciousness, 139-43, 180, 183, 184, 187, 188, 191,
   212, 263-8
  and animal instruments of action, 139-43, 150
  and animal intelligence, 138, 187, 188, 191, 192, 212
  and animal invention, relation of, to habit, 264, 265
  intellect and language, 157-8
  intellect and manufacture, 137, 138

Humanity in evolution, 134, 137-9, 142, 147, 158, 181, 184, 185, 264-71.
    _See_ Culminating points, etc.
  goal of evolution, 266, 267

Huxley, 38

Hydra and individuality, 13

[Greek: Hylê] of Aristotle, 353

Hymenoptera, the culmination of arthropod and instinctive evolution,
   134, 173-4
  as entomologists, 146, 172-3
  organization and instinct in, 140
  paralyzing instinct of, 146, 172, 173-4
  social instincts of, 101, 171

Hypostasis of the unity of nature, God as, 196-7, 322, 356

Hypothetical propositions characteristic of intellectual knowledge, 149-50


Idea or form in ancient philosophy, 49, 314, 316-7, 318, 329-30
  in ancient philosophy, [Greek: eidos], 314-5
  in ancient philosophy, Platonic, 48
  and image in Descartes, 280

Idealism, 232

Idealists and realists alike assume the possibility of an absence of
   order, 220, 232

Identical structures in divergent lines of evolution, 55, 60-1, 62, 69,
   74-7, 86, 119

Illumination of action the function of perception, 5, 206, 307

Image and idea in Descartes, 280
  distinguished from concept, 160-1, 280

Imitation of being in Greek philosophy, 324, 327
  of instinct by science, 168-9, 173-4
  of life in intellectual representation, 4, 33, 88-9, 101, 176, 208,
   209, 213, 226, 259, 341, 365
  of life by the unorganized, 33, 35, 36
  of motion by intelligence, 305, 307-8, 312, 313, 329.
    _See_ Imitation of the real, etc.
  of the physical order by the vital, 230
  of the real by intelligence, 258, 270, 307

Immobility of extension, 155
  and plants, 108-13, 118, 119, 130
  of primitive and torpid animals, 130-1
  relative and apparent; mobility real, 155

Impatience, duration as, 10, 339-40

Impelling cause, 73

Impetus, vital, divergence of, 26-7, 51-5, 97-105, 110, 118-9, 126-7,
   131, 134-6, 257, 258, 266, 270
  vital, limitedness of, 126, 141, 148-9, 254
  vital, loaded with matter, 239
  vital, as necessity for creation, 252, 261
  vital, transmission of, through organisms, 25, 27, 79, 85, 87, 88,
   230, 231, 250, 251
  vital, _See_ Impulse of life

Implement, the animal, is natural: the human, artificial, 139-43
  artificial, 137-40, 150-1
  constructing, function of intelligence, 159, 182-3
  life known to intelligence only as, 162
  matter known to intelligence only as, 161, 198
  natural, 141, 145, 150
  organized, 141, 145, 150
  unorganized, 137-9, 141, 150-1

Implicit knowledge, 148

Impotence of intellect and perception to grasp life, 176-8

Imprisonment of consciousness, 180-3, 264-6

Impulse of life, divergence of, 26, 27, 51-5, 97-105, 110, 118-9,
   126-7, 131, 134-6, 257, 258, 266, 270
  limitedness of, 126, 141, 148-9, 254
  loaded with matter, 239
  tendency to mobility, 131, 132
  as necessity for creation, 252, 261
  negates itself, 247, 248
  prolonged in evolution, 246
  prolonged in our will, 239
  transmitted through generations of organisms, 25, 26, 79, 85, 87,
   230, 231
  unity of, 202, 250, 270

Impulsion and attraction in Greek philosophy, 323-4
  release and unwinding, the three kinds of cause, 73
  given to mind by matter, 202

Inadequacy of act to representation, consciousness as, 143

Inadequate and adequate in Spinoza, 353

Inanition, illustrating primacy of nervous system, 124 _note_

Incoherence, 236.
    _See_ Absence of order, Chance, Chaos
  in nature, 104

Incommensurability of free act with conceptual idea, 47, 201
  of instinct and intelligence, 167-8, 175

Incompatibility of developed tendencies, 104, 168

Independent variable, time as, 20, 335-6

Indetermination, 86, 114, 126, 252, 253, 326.
    _See_ Accident in evolution

Indeterminism in Descartes, 345

Individual, viewed by intelligence as aggregate of molecules and of
   facts, 250-1
  and division of labor, 140
  in evolutionist biology, 169, 171, 246 _note_
  and genus, 226-9
  mind in philosophy, 191
  aesthetic intuition only attains the, 177
  and society, 260, 265
  transmits the vital impetus, 250, 259, 270

Individuality never absolute, x, 12, 13, 16, 19, 42, 260
  and age, 15-23, 27, 43
  corporeal, physics tends to deny, 188, 189, 208.
    _See_ Interpenetration, Obliteration of outlines, Solidarity
    of the parts of matter
  and generality, 226-8
  the many and the one in the idea of, x, 258
  as plan of possible influence, 11

Individuation never absolute, x, 12-16, 43, 260
  as a cosmic principle in contrast with association, 259-60
  property of life, 12-5
  partly the work of matter, 257-8, 259, 270

Indivisibility of action, 94, 95
  of duration, 6, 308
  of invention, 164
  of life, 225, 270-1.
    _See_ Unity
  of life of motion, 307-11

Induction in animals, 214
  certainty of, approached as factors approach pure magnitudes, 222, 223
  and duration, 216
  and expectation, 214-6
  geometry the ideal limit of, 214-8, 361.
    _See_ Space, Geometry, Reasoning, "Descending" movement of matter, etc.
  and magnitude, 215, 216
  repetition the characteristic function of intellect, 164, 199, 205-16
  and space, 216.
    _See_ Space as the ideal limit, Systems, etc.

Industry, ix, 161, 162, 164

Inert matter and action, 96, 136, 141, 155, 187, 198, 225, 367
  in Aristotle, 316, 327, 353
  bodies, 7, 8, 12, 14, 20, 21, 156, 159, 174, 186, 188, 189, 204, 213,
   215, 228, 240, 241, 298, 300, 341, 342, 346-8, 360
  Creation of. _See_ Inert matter the inversion of life
  flux of, 186, 265, 273, 369
  and form, 148, 149, 157, 239, 250
  genesis of, 188
  homogeneity of, 156
  imitation of living matter by, 33, 35, 36
  imitation of physical order by vital, 230
  instantaneity of, 10, 201
  and intellect, ix, 31, 141, 159-62, 164, 165, 167-8, 175, 179, 181, 186,
    187, 195, 196, 197, 198, 205-12, 216-9, 224, 264, 270, 319, 369
  the inversion or interruption of life, 93, 94, 98, 99, 128-9, 153, 177,
   186, 189, 190, 196, 197, 201, 203, 208, 216-9, 231, 235, 236, 239, 240,
   245-50, 252, 254, 256, 258, 259, 261, 264, 267, 272, 276, 319,
   339-40, 343.
    _See_ Inert matter, order inherent in
  knowledge of, approximate but not relative, 206
  the metaphysics and the physics of, 195-6
  as necessity, 252, 264
  the order inherent in, 40, 103, 153, 201, 207-12, 216, 226-7, 230-6,
   245, 251, 263, 274, 319-20.
    _See_ Inert matter, inversion of life
  penetration of, by life, 25, 26, 51, 179, 181, 237, 239, 266, 270, 271
  and perception, 12, 206, 226
  and the psychical, 201, 202, 205, 269, 270, 350, 367
  solidarity of the parts of, 188, 202, 207, 241, 257-9, 270, 271, 352
  and space, 10, 153, 189, 204-11, 214, 244, 250, 251, 257
  in Spencer's philosophy, 365

Inertia, 176, 224

Infant, intelligence in, 147, 148

Inference a beginning of invention, 138

Inferiority in evolutionary rank, 174-5

Influence, possible, 11, 189

Infusoria, conjugation of, 15
  development of the eye from its stage in, 60-1, 72, 78, 84
  and individuation, 260
  and mechanical explanations, 34, 35
  vegetable function in, 116

Inheritance of acquired characters. _See_ Hereditary transmission

Innate knowledge, 146-7, 150-1

Innateness of the categories, 148, 149-50

Inorganic matter. _See_ Inert matter

Insectivorous plants, 107-9

Insects, 19, 101, 107, 126, 131, 134, 135, 140-1, 146, 147, 157, 166,
   169, 171-5, 188
  apogee of instinct in hymenoptera, 134, 173-4
  consciousness and instinct, 145, 167, 173
  continuity of instinct with organization, 139, 145
  fallibility of instinct in, 172-3
  instinct in general in, 169, 173-4
  language of ants, 157-8
  object of instinct in, 146
  paralyzing instinct in, 146, 171, 172-3
  social instinct in, 101, 157-8, 171
  special instincts as variations on a theme, 167.
    _See_ Arthropods in evolution

Insensible variation, 63, 66

Inspiration of a poem an undivided intuitive act, contrasted with its
   intellectual imitation in words, 209, 210, 258.
    _See_ Sympathy

Instantaneity of the intellectual view, 31, 70, 84, 89, 199, 201-2, 207,
   226, 249, 258, 273, 300-6, 311, 314, 331-3, 342, 351, 352

Instinct and action on inert matter, 136, 141
  in animals as distinguished from plants, 170
  in cells, 166
  and consciousness, 143-5, 166, 167, 173, 174, 175, 186
  culmination of, in evolution, 133, 174-5.
    _See_ Arthropods in evolution, Evolutionary superiority
  fallibility of, 173-4
  in insects in general, 169, 173-4
  and intelligence, xii, 51, 100, 103, 113, 116-8, 132-7, 141-3, 145, 150,
   152, 159, 168-70, 173-9, 184-5, 186, 197-8, 238, 246, 254, 255, 259,
   267, 268, 343, 345, 366
  and intuition, 177, 178-9, 181
  object of, 146-52, 165, 168, 172-9, 186, 189, 195, 234, 254
  and organization, 23-4, 138-40, 145, 166-8, 171-2, 173, 176, 193,
   194, 264
  paralyzing, in certain hymenoptera, 146, 171, 172-3
  in plants, 170, 171
  social, of insects, 101, 157-8, 171

Instinctive knowledge, 148, 167, 168, 173-4
  learning, 193
  metaphysics, 192, 269, 270, 277

Instrument, action as, of consciousness, 180
  animal, is natural; human artificial, 139-43
  automatic activity as instrument of voluntary, 252
  consciousness as, of action, 180
  intelligence: the function of intelligence is to construct
   instruments, 159, 192-3
  intelligence transforms life into an, 162
  intelligence transforms matter into an, 161, 198
  intelligence: the instruments of intelligence are artificial, ix, 137-9,
   140-1, 150-1
  natural or organized instruments of instinct, 140-1, 145, 150

Intellect and action, ix, 11, 29, 44-8, 93, 136, 142, 152-7, 162, 179,
   186, 187, 192, 195, 197-8, 219, 220, 226-9, 251, 270, 273, 297-9, 301,
   302, 306, 329, 346-7
  in animals, 187
  Fichte's conception of the, 189, 190, 357
  function of the, 5, 11, 12, 44-50, 92, 93, 126, 137-45, 149-60, 162-4,
   168, 174, 176, 181, 187-99, 204-8, 214-9, 229, 233, 237, 241, 242,
   246, 247, 251, 270, 290, 298, 299, 328, 336, 337, 341, 342, 347,
   348, 356, 357
  genesis of the, xi-xv, 49, 103, 104-5, 126-7, 152, 153, 186, 187, 189,
   193, 194, 195, 198, 207, 247-9, 358, 359, 366
  as inversion of intuition, 7, 8, 11, 12, 46, 49, 51, 86, 88-91, 93, 94,
   103-4, 113, 116-8, 129, 132, 133, 135, 136, 139-43, 145, 157, 161,
   168-80, 181, 183, 184, 185, 190-204, 207-12, 216-8, 221, 223, 225-6,
   230-3, 235, 236, 238, 245-52, 254-9, 264, 267-71, 276, 277, 313, 330,
   339, 342-5, 361, 369
  and language, 4, 148, 158-60, 258, 265, 292, 303, 304, 312, 313, 326
  and matter, ix-xv, 10, 11, 48-9, 92, 135, 136, 141, 142, 152-4, 155,
   160, 161, 165, 168, 175, 179, 181, 182, 186-7, 190, 193, 194, 195,
   198, 199, 201-4, 205-10, 213, 215, 218-20, 224, 225-30, 240-2, 245,
   246, 248-52, 254, 256-9, 264, 270, 271, 272, 273, 275, 297-8, 306,
   319, 321, 329, 340, 341-3, 347-9, 355, 358-61, 368, 369
  mechanism of the, ix-xv, 4, 30, 32, 47-9, 70, 84-5, 88-9, 101, 137-8,
    150-5, 156-7, 160, 161, 164, 165, 167, 168, 173, 174, 176, 177,
   186, 187, 190-3, 194-218, 223-40, 244, 246-7, 249-51, 254, 255, 257,
   258, 266, 270, 273, 276-7, 292, 300-21, 325, 329, 330, 332, 337, 338,
   339, 341-8, 351, 358-9, 361-2, 363-4, 365, 367
  object of the, ix-xv, 7, 8, 10, 17, 20, 21, 30, 31, 34, 35, 37, 46-9,
   52, 71, 74, 84, 87-92, 93, 95, 102, 103, 139, 140, 149, 152-66, 168,
   173, 175-9, 180, 181, 186, 190, 193-211, 213, 216-20, 223, 224, 226,
   228-30, 233, 237, 238, 240, 245, 249-51, 254, 255, 257-9, 261, 264,
   265, 270, 271, 273, 274, 298-314, 318-22, 326, 328, 329, 332-8, 342,
   344-9, 351, 352-7, 359-61, 363, 365, 369-70
  and perception, 4-5, 11, 12, 93-4, 161-2, 168, 176-7, 188, 189, 205,
   207, 226-7, 228-9, 230, 238, 249-51, 273, 299-300, 301, 306, 359-60
  and rhythm, 299, 300-1, 306-7, 329, 337, 346-7
  and science, 8-12, 31, 92-3, 152, 153, 157-8, 159, 160-1, 162-3, 168,
   173-6, 187, 193-8, 202, 204, 207-9, 214-6, 217, 225-6, 228-9, 241,
   251, 270, 273, 297-8, 306, 321, 322, 329, 333-5, 345, 346-8, 354,
   356, 357, 359-60, 362-3, 369-70
  and space, 10-11, 154, 156-7, 160-3, 174-5, 176-7, 189, 202-4, 207-12,
   215, 218, 222-3, 244, 245, 250, 251, 257-8, 361-2
  and time, 4, 8-9, 17, 18, 20-2, 36, 39, 45-6, 47, 51, 163, 300, 301,
   331-2, 335-7, 341
  possibility of transcending the, xii, xiii, 48, 152, 177-8, 193-4,
   198-200, 205-6, 207-8, 266, 360-1.
    _See_ Philosophy, Intelligence

Intellectualism, hesitation of Descartes between, and intuitionism, 345

Intelligence and action, 137-41, 150, 154-5, 161, 162-3, 181, 189, 198, 306
  animal, 138, 187, 188, 212
  categories of, x, 48, 195-6
  of the child, 147-8
  and consciousness, 187
  culmination of, 130, 139-40, 174-5.
    _See_ Superiority
  genesis of, 136, 177-8, 366
  and the individual, 251
  and instinct, 109, 135, 136, 141, 142, 168-70, 173-7, 179, 186, 197,
    209, 238, 259, 267
  in Kant's philosophy, 357-8
  and laws, 229-30
  limitations of, 152
  and matter, 152, 159-60, 161-2, 175, 179, 181, 186, 189, 194-8, 230,
   237, 250, 369, 370
  mechanism of, 152, 153, 164, 165
  and motion, 153, 159-60, 274, 303-7, 312, 313, 329
  object of, 145-56, 161, 162, 175, 179, 250
  practical nature of, ix-xv, 137-9, 141, 150-1, 247-8, 305, 306, 328-9
  and reality, ix-xv, 161-2, 177, 237, 251, 258, 269, 271, 307
  and science, 175, 176, 193, 194-5
  and signs, 157, 158, 159, 160
  and space, 205
    _See_ Intellect, Understanding, Reason

Intelligent, the, contrasted with the merely intelligible, 175

Intelligible reality in ancient philosophy, 316-7
  world, 160-1

Intelligibles of Plotinus, 353

Intension of knowledge, 149-50

Intensity of consciousness varies with ratio of possible to real
   action, 144-5

Intention as contrasted with mechanism, 233.
    _See_ Automatic order, Willed order
  of life the object of instinct, 176, 233

Interaction, universal, 188-9

Interest as cause of variation, 131
  in representation of "nought," 296, 297.
    _See_ Affection, rôle of, etc.

Internal finality, 41

Internality of instinct, 168, 174-5, 176-7
  of subject in object the condition of knowledge of reality, 307,
   317, 358-9

Interpenetration, 161, 162, 174-5, 177, 184 _note_, 188, 189, 201-3,
   207-8, 257, 258, 270, 319-20, 341, 352

Interruption, materiality an, of positivity, 219, 246, 247-8, 319-20.
    _See_ Inverse relation, etc.

Interval of time, 8-9, 22, 23
  between what is done and what might be done covered by consciousness, 179

Intuition, continuity between sensible and ultra-intellectual, 360-1
  dialectic and, in philosophy, 238.
    _See_ Intellect as inversion of intuition
  fringe of, around the nucleus of intellect, xiii, 12, 46, 49, 193
  and instinct, 176-9, 182
  and intellect in theoretical knowledge, 176-9, 270-1

Intuitional cosmology as reversed psychology, 207-8
  metaphysics contrasted with intellectual or systematic, 191-2,
   268-70, 277-8
  method of philosophy, apparent vicious circle of, 191-4, 195-8

Intuitionism in Spinoza, 347-8
  and intellectualism in Descartes, 345-6

Invention, consciousness as, and freedom, 264, 270-1
  creativeness of, 164, 237, 340, 341
  disproportion between, and its consequences, 181, 182-3
  duration as, 10-1
  evolution as, 102-3, 255, 344-5
  fervor of, 164
  indivisibility of, 164
  inference a beginning of, 138
  mechanical, 142-3, 194-5
  of steam engine as epoch-marking, 138-9
  time as, 341
  unforeseeableness of, 164
  upspringing of, 164
    _See_ New

Inverse relation of the physical and psychical, 126-7, 143-4, 145, 173-4,
   177-8, 201, 202, 206-7, 208, 210-1, 212, 217, 218, 222, 223, 236, 240,
   245, 246, 247-8, 249, 256, 257, 261, 264, 265, 270, 319-20

Irreversibility of duration. _See_ Repetition

Isolated systems of matter, 204, 213, 215, 241, 242, 341, 342, 346, 347-8.
    _See_ Bodies


Janet, Paul, 60-1 _note_

Jennings, 35 _note_

Jourdain and the two kinds of order, 221

Juxtaposition, 207-8, 338, 339, 341.
  Cf. Succession


Kaleidoscopic variation, 74

Kant, antinomies of, 204-5, 206
  becoming in Kant's successors, 362
  coincidence of matter with space in Kant's philosophy, 206, 207-8, 244
  construction the method of Kant's successors, 364-5
  his criticism of pure reason, 205, 287 _note_, 356-62, 364
  degrees of being in Kant's successors, 362-3
  duration in Kant's successors, 362-3
  intelligence in Kant's philosophy, 230, 357
  ontological argument in Kant's philosophy, 285
  space and time in Kant's philosophy, 204-6
  and Spencer, 364
    _See_ Mind and matter, Sensuous manifold, Thing-in-itself

Kantianism, 358, 364

Katagenesis, 34

Kepler, 228-9, 332-5

Knowledge and action, 150, 193-4, 196, 197, 206-7, 208, 218
  criticism of, 193-4
  discontinuity of, 306
  extension of, 149
  form of, 148, 194-5, 358-362
  formal, 152
  genesis of, 190
  innate or natural, 146-50
  instinct in, 143, 144, 166-9, 173, 177, 192-3, 198, 268
  intellect in, ix-xv, 48, 149, 162-4, 177, 179, 193-4, 196-9, 206-7, 208,
   218, 237, 238, 251, 270, 305, 306, 312, 313, 315, 317, 325, 331-2,
   342, 343, 347-8, 359-60, 361
  intension of, 149-50
  of reality viewed as the internality of subject in object, 307,
   317, 358-9
  intuition and intellect in theoretical knowledge, 174-7, 179, 238,
   270, 342-4
  matter of, 194-5, 357-8, 359-62
  of matter, xi, 48, 206-7, 360-1
  object of, ix-xv, 1, 48, 147, 148, 159-60, 163, 164, 197-9, 270,
   342, 359-60
  fundamental problem of, 273-5
  as relative to certain requirements of the mind, 152, 190-1, 230
  scientific, 193-4, 196-8, 206, 207, 218
  theory of, xiii, 177, 179, 197, 204-5, 207-8, 229, 231
  unconscious, 142-6, 146, 150, 165, 166
  alleged unknowableness of the thing-in-itself, 205, 206

Kunstler, 260 _note_


Labbé 260 _note_

Labor, division of, 99, 110, 118, 140, 157, 166, 260

Lalande, André, 246 _note_

Lamarck, 75-6

Lamarckism, 75-6, 77, 84-87

Language, 4, 147, 157-60, 258, 265, 293, 302-3, 305, 312-4, 320

La Place, 38

Lapsed intelligence, instinct as, 169, 175

Larvae, 19, 140, 145-66, 172-3

Latent geometrism of intellect, 194, 211-2

Law of correlation, 66, 67
  and genera, 226-9, 330
  heliocentric radius-vector in Kepler's laws, 334
  imprint of relations and laws upon consciousness in Spencer's
   philosophy, 188
  and intuitional philosophy, 176-7
  physical, contrasted with the laws of our codes, 218-9
  physical, expression of the negative movement, 218
  physical, mathematical form of, 218, 219, 229-30, 241
  relation as, 228, 229-30

Learning, instinctive, 192, 193

Le Dantec, 18 _note_

Leibniz, cause in, 277
  dogmatism of, 356, 357
  extension in, 351, 352
  God in, 351, 352, 356
  mechanism in, 348, 351, 355, 356
  his philosophy a systematization of physics, 347
  space in, 351-2
  teleology in, 39, 40
  time in, 352, 362

Lepidoptera, 114 _note_, 134

Le Roy, Ed., 218 _note_

Liberation of consciousness, 183-4, 265, 266

Liberty. _See_ Freedom

Life as activity, 128-9, 246
  cause in the realm of, 94, 164
  complementarity of the powers of, ix-xv, 25-6, 27, 51-5, 97-105, 110,
   113, 116-9, 126-7, 131-6, 140-3, 176, 177, 183, 184, 246, 254-7, 266,
   270, 343, 344-5
  consciousness coextensive with, 186, 257, 270, 362-3
  mutual contingency of the orders of life and matter, 235
  continuity of, 1-11, 29, 30, 162, 163, 258
  as creation, 57-8, 161-2, 223, 230, 246, 247-8, 252, 254, 255
  symbolized by a curve, 31, 89, 90
  embryonic, 166
  and finality, 44, 89, 164, 185, 222-3
  fluidity of, 153, 165, 191-2, 193
  as free, 129-30
  function of, 93-4, 106-10, 113, 114, 117, 120, 121, 126-7, 173-5,
   246, 254-6
  harmony of the realm of, 50, 51, 103, 116, 117-8, 127
  imitation of the inert by, 230
  imitation of, by the inert, 33-6
  impulse of, prolonged in our will, 239
  and individuation, 12-4, 26, 27, 79-80, 85, 87, 88, 127-8, 149, 195-6,
    230, 231, 250, 259, 261, 269, 300-1, 302-3.
    _See_ Individuality
  indivisibility of, 225-6, 270
  and instinct. 136-40, 145, 165-8, 170, 172, 173, 175-9, 186, 192-7, 233,
   264, 366
  and intellect, ix-xv, 13, 32-5, 44-9, 89, 101, 102-3, 104-5, 127, 136,
   152, 160-5, 168, 173-4, 176-9, 181, 191-201, 206, 207, 213, 220,
   222-3, 224, 225-6, 257-61, 266, 270, 300-1, 342, 355, 359-61, 365, 366
  and interpenetration, 271
  as inversion of the inert, 6-7, 8, 176, 177, 186, 190, 191, 196,
  197, 201, 202, 207, 208-9, 210-1, 212, 216, 217, 218, 222-3, 225-6,
   232, 235, 236, 238, 239, 245-50, 264, 329-31
  a limited force, 126, 127, 141, 148, 149, 254
  and memory, 167
  penetrating matter, 26, 27, 52, 179, 181, 182, 237, 239, 266, 269-70
  as tendency to mobility, 128, 131, 132
  and physics and chemistry, 31, 33, 35, 36, 225-6
  in other planets, 256
  as potentiality, 258
  repetition in, and in the inert, 224, 225, 230, 231
  sinuousness of, 71, 98, 99, 102, 112, 113, 116, 129-30, 212
  social, 138, 140, 157-8, 265
  in other solar systems, 256
  and evolution of species, 247-8, 254, 269
  theory of, and theory of knowledge, xii, 177, 179, 197
  unforeseeableness of, 6, 8-9, 20, 26-7, 28, 29, 37, 45-6, 47, 48, 52,
   86, 96, 163, 164, 184, 223-4, 249, 339, 341
  unity of, 250, 268, 270
  as a wave flowing over matter, 251, 266
    _See_ Impulse of, Organic substance, Organism, Organization,
    Vital impetus, Vital order, Vital principle, Vitalism, Willed order

Limitations of instinct and of intelligence, 152

Limitedness of the scope of Galileo's physics, 357, 370
  of the vital impetus, 126, 127, 141, 148, 149, 255

Linden, Maria von, 114 _note_

Lingulae illustrating failure to evolve, 102

Lizards, color variation in, 72, 74

Locomotion and consciousness, 108, 111, 115, 261.
  _See_ Mobility, Movement

Logic and action, ix, 44, 46, 162, 179
  formal, 292
  genesis of, x-xi, xiii-xiv, 49, 103, 104-5, 136, 191-2, 193, 301,
   359, 366
  and geometry, ix, 161, 176, 212
  impotent to grasp life, x, 13, 32, 35, 36, 46-9, 89, 101, 152, 162-5,
   194-201, 205, 206, 213, 219, 220, 222, 223, 225-6, 256-61, 266, 270,
   313, 355, 360-1, 365
  natural, 161, 194-5
  of number, 208
  and physics, 319-20, 321
  and time, 4, 277
    _See_ Intellect, Intelligence, Understanding, Order, mathematical

Logical existence contrasted with psychical and physical, 277, 298,
   328, 361-2
  categories, x, 48, 195, 196
  and physical contrasted, 276-7

_Logik_, by Sigwart, 287 _note_

[Greek: logos], in Plotinus, 210 _note_

Looking backward, the attitude of intellect, 46, 237

Lumbriculus, 13


Machinery and intelligence, 141

Machines, natural and artificial, 139.
    _See_ Implement, Instrument
  organisms, for action, 252, 254, 300-1

Magnitude, certainty of induction approached as factors approach pure
   magnitudes, 215-16
  and modern science, 333, 335

Man in evolution, attention, 184
  brain, 183, 184, 263-5
  consciousness, 139-43, 180, 181, 183, 185, 187, 188, 191-2, 212, 262-8
  goal, 134, 174-5, 185, 266, 267, 269, 270
  habit and invention, 265
  intelligence, 133, 137-9, 143, 146, 174, 175, 187, 188, 212, 266, 267
  language, 158

Manacéine (de), 124 _note_

Manufacture, the aim of intellect, 137, 138, 145, 152-4, 159-65, 181, 191,
   192, 199, 251, 298
  and organization, 92, 93, 126-7, 139-43, 150
  and repetition, 44, 45, 155-8
    _See_ Construction, Solid, Utility

Many and one, categories inapplicable to life, x, 162-3, 177-8, 257,
  261, 268
  in the idea of individuality, 258
    _See_ Multiplicity

Martin, J., 102 _note_

Marion, 107 _note_

Material knowledge, 152

Materialists, 240

Materiality the inversion of spirituality, 212

Mathematical order. _See_ Inert matter, Order

Matter. _See_ Inert matter

Maturation as creative evolution, 47-8, 230

Maupas, 35 _note_

Measurement a human convention, 218, 242
  of real time an illusion, 336-40

Mechanical account of action after the fact, 47
  cause, x, 34, 35, 40, 44, 177, 234, 235
  procedure of intellect, 165
  invention, 138, 140, 194-5
  necessity, 47, 215, 216, 218, 236, 252, 265, 270, 327

Mechanics of transformation, 32

Mechanism, cerebral, 252, 253, 262, 263, 265, 366.
    _See_ Cerebral activity and consciousness
  of the eye, 88
  instinct as, 176-7
  of intellect. _See_ Intellect, mechanism of
  and intention, 233.
    _See_ Automatic order, Willed order
  life more than, x, xiv _note_, 78-9

Mechanistic philosophy, xii, xiv, 17, 29, 30, 37, 74, 88-96, 101, 102,
   194-5, 218, 223, 264, 345, 346, 347, 348, 351, 355, 356, 362

Medical philosophers of the eighteenth century, 356
  science, 165

Medullary bulb in the development of the nervous system, 252
  and consciousness, 110

Memory, 5, 17, 20, 21, 167, 168, 180, 181, 201

Menopause in illustration of crisis of evolution, 19

Mental life, unity of, 268

Metamorphoses of larvae, 139-40, 146-7, 166

Metaphysics and duration, 276
  and epistemology, 177, 179, 185, 197, 208-9
  Galileo's influence on, 20, 238
  instinctive, 191-2, 269, 270, 277-8
  and intellect, 189-90
  and matter, 194
  natural, 21, 325
  and science, 176-7, 194-5, 198, 208-9, 344, 354, 369-70
  systematic, 191, 192, 194, 195-6, 238, 269, 270, 347

Metchnikoff, 18 _note_

Method of philosophy, 191-2

Microbes, illustrating divergence of tendency, 117

Microbial colonies, 259

Mind, individual, in philosophy, 191
  and intellect, 48-9, 205-6
  knowledge as relative to certain requirements of the mind, 152,
   190-1, 230
  and matter, 188-9, 201, 202, 203, 205-6, 264, 269, 270, 350, 365-9
    _See_ Psychic, Psycho-physiological parallelism, Psychology and
    Philosophy, [Greek: psychê]

Minot, Sedgwick, 17 _note_

Mobility, tendency toward, characterizes animals, 109, 110, 113, 129-32,
   135, 180
  and consciousness, 108, 111, 115-6, 261
  and intellect, 154-5, 161-2, 163, 300, 326, 327, 337
  of intelligent signs, 158, 159
  life as tendency toward, 127-8, 131, 132
  in plants, 112, 135
    _See_ Motion

Möbius, 60 _note_

Model necessary to the constructive work of intellect, 164, 166-7

Modern astronomy compared with ancient science, 334, 335
  geometry compared with ancient science, 31, 161, 334
  idealism, 231
  philosophy compared with ancient, 225-9, 231, 327-8, 344, 345,
   349-51, 354, 356-7
  philosophy: parallelism of body and mind in, 180, 350, 355, 356
  science: cinematographical character of, 329, 330, 336, 341, 342, 346-7
  science compared with ancient, 329-36, 342-5, 356-7
  science, Galileo's influence on, 334, 335
  science, Kepler's influence on, 334
  science, magnitudes the object of, 333, 335
  science, time an independent variable in, 20, 335

Molecules, 251

Molluscs, illustrating animal tendency to mobility, 129-31
  perception in, 189
  vision in, 60, 75, 77, 83, 86, 87

Monads of Leibniz, 351-4

Monera, 126

Monism, 355

Moral sciences, weakness of deduction in, 212

Morat, 123 _note_

Morgan, L., 79 _note_, 80

Motion, abstract, 304
  articulations of, 310-1
  an animal characteristic, 252
  and the cinematograph, 304-5
  continuity of, 310
  in Descartes, 346-7
  evolutionary, extensive and qualitative, 302, 303, 311, 312
  in general (_i.e._ abstract), 304-5
  indivisibility of, 306-7, 311, 336-7, 338
  and instinct, 139-40, 331-2
  and intellect, 71, 155, 156, 159-60, 273, 274, 298, 317-8, 321, 329,
   331-2, 338, 344-5
  organization of, 310-1
  track laid by motion along its course, 308-11, 337, 338
    _See_ Mobility, Movement

Motive principle of evolution: consciousness, 181-2

Motor mechanisms, cerebral, 252, 253, 263, 265

Moulin-Quignon, quarry of, 137

Moussu, 81

Movement and animal life, 108, 131, 132
  ascending, 12, 101, 103, 104, 185, 208-9, 210-1, 369-70.
    _See_ Vital impetus
  consciousness and, 111, 118, 144-5, 207-8
  descending, 11-2, 202-4, 207-10, 212, 246, 252, 256, 270, 276, 339,
   361, 369-70
  goal of, the object of the intellect, 155, 299-300, 302, 303
  intellect unable to grasp, 313
  mutual inversion of cosmic movements, 126-7, 143, 144, 173-4, 176, 177,
   209-10, 212, 217, 218, 222-3, 236, 245-51, 261, 264, 265, 272, 342-3
  life as, 166, 176-7
  and the nervous system, 110, 132, 134, 180, 262-3
  of plants, 109, 135-6
    _See_ Mobility, Motion, Locomotion, Current, Tendency, Impetus,
   Impulse, Impulsion

Movements, antagonistic cosmic, 128-9, 135, 181, 185, 250, 259.
    _See_ Movement, Mutual inversion of cosmic

Multiplicity, abstract, 257, 259
  distinct, 202, 209-10, 257. _See_ Interpenetration
  does not apply to life, x, 162, 177, 257, 261, 270

Mutability, exhaustion of, of the universe, 244, 245

Mutations, sudden, 28, 62-3, 64-8
  theory of, 85-6


Natural geometry, 195-6, 211-2
  instrument, 141, 144-5, 150-1
  or innate knowledge, 147, 150-1
  logic, 161, 194-5
  metaphysic, 21, 325-6
  selection, 54, 56-7, 59-60, 61-5, 68, 95, 169-70

Nature, Aristotelian theory of, 135, 174
  discord in, 127-8, 255, 267
  facts and relations in, 368
  incoherence in, 104
  as inert matter, 161-2, 218, 219, 228-9, 239, 245, 264, 280-1, 303,
   356, 359-60, 367
  as life, 100, 138, 139-40, 141-2, 143, 144-5, 150, 154, 155-6, 227,
   241, 260, 269, 270, 301-2
  order of, 225-6
  as ordered diversity, 231, 233
  unity of, 105, 190, 191, 195, 196-9, 322, 352-7, 358

Nebula, cosmic, 249, 257

Necessity for creation, vital impetus as, 252, 261
  and death of individuals, 246 _note_
  and freedom, 218, 236, 270
  in Greek philosophy, 326-7
  in induction, 215, 216
  and matter, 252, 264

Negation, 275, 285-97. _See_ Nought

Negative cause of mathematical order, 217. _See_ Inverse relation, etc.
  cosmic principle, 126-7, 143, 144, 173-4, 176-7, 209, 212, 218, 223-4,
   236, 245-51, 261, 264-5, 272, 243.
    _See_ Inert matter, Opposition of the two ultimate cosmic movements, etc.

Neo-Darwinism, 55, 56, 85, 86, 169-70

Neo-Lamarckism, 42 _note_

Nervous system a centre of action, 109, 130-1, 132, 134-5, 180, 253, 261-3
  of the plant, 114
  primacy of, 120-1, 126-7, 252

Neurone and indetermination, 126

New, freedom and the, 11-2, 164, 165, 199-200, 218, 230, 239, 249,
   270, 339-42

Newcomen, 184

Newton, 335

Nitrogen and the function of organisms, 108, 113-4, 117, 255

[Greek: noêseôs noêsis] of Aristotle, 356

Non-existence. _See_ Nought

Nothing. _See_ Nought

Nought, conception of the, 273-80, 281-3, 289-90, 292-8, 316-7, 327.
    _See_ Negation, Pseudo-ideas, etc.

[Greek: nous poiêtikos] of Aristotle, 322

Novelty. _See_ new.

Nucleus intelligence as the luminous, enveloped by instinct, 166-7
  in microbial colonies, 259
  intelligence as the solid, bathed by a mist of instinct, 193, 194
  of Stentor, 260

Number illustrating degrees of reality, 324-5, 327
  logic of, 208

Nuptial flight, 146

Nutritive elements, fixation of, 107-9, 114, 117, 246, 247, 254

Nymph (Zool.), 139, 146


Object of this book, ix-xv
  of instinct, 146-52, 163, 175-9
  of intellect, 146-52, 161-5, 175, 179, 190-1, 199-200, 237, 250,
   252, 270, 273, 298-304, 307-8, 311-2, 354, 359
  internality of subject in, the condition of knowledge of reality,
   307-8, 317-8, 359
  of knowledge, 147, 148-9, 159-60
  idea of, contrasted with that
  of universal interaction, 11, 188-9, 207-8
  of philosophy as contrasted with object of science, 195-6, 220-1, 225-6,
   227, 239, 251, 270, 273, 297-9, 305-6, 347
  of science, 329, 332-3, 335-6

Obliteration of outlines in the real, 11, 188, 189, 207-8

Oenothera Lamarckiana, 63, 85-6

Old, growing. _See_ Age
  the, is the object of the intellect, 163, 164, 199, 270

One and many in the idea of individuality, x, 258. _See_ Unity

Ontological argument in Kant, 284

Opposition of the two ultimate cosmic movements, 128-9, 175-6, 179,
   186, 201, 203, 238, 248, 254, 259, 261, 267.
    _See_ Inverse relation of the physical and psychical

Orchids, instincts of, 170

Order and action, 226-7
  complementarity of the two orders, 145-6, 173-4, 221-2.
    _See_ Order, Mutual inversion of the two orders
  mutual contingency of the two orders, 231, 235
  and disorder, 40, 103-4, 220-2, 225-6, 231-6, 274
  mutual inversion of the two orders, 186, 201, 202, 206-9, 211, 212,
   216-8, 219-21, 222-3, 225-6, 230, 232, 235, 236, 238, 240, 245-8,
   256, 257, 258, 264, 270, 274, 313, 330
  mathematical, 153, 209-11, 217-9, 223-6, 230-3, 236, 245, 251, 270, 330-1
  of nature, 225-6, 231, 233
  as satisfaction, 222, 223, 274
  vital, 94-5, 164, 222-7, 230, 235, 236, 237, 330-1
  willed, 224, 239

Organ and function, 88-91, 93-4, 95, 132, 140, 141, 157, 161-2

Organic destruction and physico-chemistry, 226
  substance, 131, 140, 141-2, 149, 162-3, 195-6, 240 _note_, 255, 267
  world, cleft between, and the inorganic, 190, 191, 196, 197-8
  world, harmony of, 50-1, 103, 104, 116, 118, 126-7
  world, instinct the procedure of, 165

Organism and action, 123-4, 125, 174, 253, 254, 300-1
  ambiguity of primitive, 99, 112, 113, 116, 129, 130
  association of organisms, 260
  change and the, 301, 302-3
  complementarity of intelligence and instinct in the, 141-2, 150, 181,
   184, 185
  complexity of the, 162, 250, 252, 253, 260
  consciousness and the, 111, 145, 179, 180, 262, 270
  contingency of the actual chemical nature of the, 255, 257
  differentiation of parts in, 252, 260.
    _See_ Organism, complexity of
  extension of, by artificial instruments, 141, 161
  freedom the property of every, 130, 131
  function of, 26, 27, 79, 80, 85, 87, 88, 93-4, 106-110, 113, 114, 117,
   120, 121, 126-7, 128, 136, 173-5, 230, 231, 246, 247, 250, 251, 254,
   255, 256, 258, 270
  function and structure, 55, 61, 62, 69, 74, 75, 76-7, 86, 88-91, 93-4,
    95, 96-7, 118-9, 132, 139, 140, 157-8, 161-3, 250, 252, 256
  generality typified by similarity among organisms, 223, 224, 228-9, 230
  hive as, 166
  and individuation, x, 12, 13, 15, 23, 26-7, 42, 149, 195-6, 225-6,
   228-9, 259, 260, 261, 270
  mutual interpenetration of organisms, 177-8
  mechanism of the, 31, 92-3, 94
  philosophy and the, 195-6
  unity of the, 176-8

Organization of action, 142, 145, 147-8, 150, 181, 184, 185
  of duration, 5-6, 15, 25, 26
  explosive character of, 92
  and instinct, 24, 138-46, 150, 165-7, 171-2, 173, 176, 192-3, 194, 264
  and intellect, 161-2
  and manufacture, 92, 93, 94-5, 96, 126-8
  is the _modus vivendi_ between the antagonistic cosmic
   currents, 181, 250, 254
  of motion, 310
  and perception, 226-7

Originality of the willed order, 224

Orthogenesis, 69, 86-7

Oscillation between association and individuation, 259, 261.
    _See_ Societies
  of ether, 301-2
  of instinct and intelligence about a mean position, 136
  of pendulum, illustrating space and time in ancient philosophy,
   318-9, 320
  between representation of inner and outer reality, 279-80
  of sensible reality in ancient philosophy about being, 316-8

Outlines of perception the plan of action, 5, 11, 12, 93, 188, 189, 204-5,
   206-7, 226-7, 228-9, 230, 250, 299-300, 306

Oxygen, 114, 254, 255


Paleontology, 24-5, 129, 139

Paleozoic era, 102

Parallelism, psycho-physiological, 180, 350, 351, 355, 356

Paralyzing instinct in hymenoptera, 139-40, 146, 172, 174-5

Parasites, 106, 108, 109, 111-13, 134-5

Parasitism, 132

Passivity, 222-4

Past, subsistence of, in present, 4, 20-3, 26-7, 108, 199-202

Peckham, 173-4 _note_

Pecten, illustrating identical structures in divergent lines of
   evolution, 62, 63, 75

Pedagogical and social nature of negation, 287-97

Pedagogy and the function of the intellect, 165

Penetration, reciprocal, 161-2.
    _See_ Interpenetration

Perception and action, 4-5, 11, 12, 93, 188, 189, 206, 226-7, 228-9,
   300-1, 306-7
  and becoming, 176-7, 303-6
  cinematographical character of, 206-7, 249, 251, 331-2
  distinctness of, 226-7, 250
  and geometry, 205, 230
  in molluscs, 188
  and organization, 226-7
  prolonged in intellect, 161-2, 273
  reaction in, 264
  and recollection, 180, 181
  refracts reality, 204, 238, 359-60
  rhythm of, 299-300, 301
  and science, 168

Permanence an illusion, 299-301

Peron, 80

Perrier, Ed., 260 _note_

Personality, absolute reality of, 269
  concentration of, 201, 202
  and matter, 269, 270
  the object of intuition, 268
  tension of, 199, 200, 201

Perthes, Boucher de, 137

Phaedrus, 156 _note_

Phagocytes and external finality, 42

Phagocytosis and growing old, 18

Phantom ideas and problems, 177, 277, 283, 296

Philosophical explanation contrasted with scientific explanation, 168

Philosophy and art, 176-7
  and biology, 43-4, 194-6
  and experience, 197-8
  function of 29-30, 84-5, 93-4, 168, 173-4, 194-7, 198, 268, 269, 369-70
  history of, 238
  incompletely conscious of itself, 207-8, 209
  individual mind in, 191
  and intellect, ix-xv
  intellect and intuition in, 238
  of intuition, 176-7, 191-4, 196, 197, 277
  method of, 191-2, 194, 195, 239
  object of, 239
  and the organism, 195-6
  and physics, 194, 208
  and psychology, 194, 196
  and science, 175, 196-7, 208, 345, 370
    _See_ Ancient philosophy, Cosmology, Finalism, Mechanistic
    philosophy, Metaphysics, Modern philosophy, Post-Kantian philosophy

Phonograph illustrating "unwinding" cause, 73

Phosphorescence, consciousness compared to, 262

Photograph, illustrating the nature of the intellectual view of
   reality, 31, 304-5

Photography, instantaneous, illustrating the mechanism of the
   intellect, 331-2, 333

Physical existence, as contrasted with logical, 276, 297-8, 328, 361
  laws, their precise form artificial, 218, 219, 229, 240-1
  laws and the negative cosmic movement, 218
  operations the object of intelligence, 175, 250
  order, imitation of, by the vital, 230
  science, 176-7

Physicochemistry and organic destruction, 226
  and biology, 25-6, 29-30, 34, 35, 36, 55, 57, 98, 194

Physics, ancient, "logic spoiled," 320, 321-2
  of ancient philosophy, 315, 320, 321-2, 355
  of Aristotle, 228 _note_, 324 _note_, 331, 332
  and deduction, 213
  of Galileo, 357, 369-70
  and individuality of bodies, 188, 208
  as inverted psychics, 202
  and logic, 319-20, 321
  and metaphysics, 194, 208
  and mutability, 245
  success of, 218, 219

Pigment-spot and adaptation, 60, 61, 71-3, 76-7
  and heredity, 83, 84

Pinguicula, certain animal characteristics of, 107

Plan, motionless, of action the object of intellect, 155, 298-9, 301-2, 303

Planets, life in other, 256

Plants and animals in evolution, 105-39, 142-3, 144, 145-6, 147, 168,
   169-70, 181, 182, 183-4, 185, 254, 267
  complementarity of, to animals, 183-4, 185, 267
  consciousness of, 109, 111, 113, 120, 128-35, 142-3, 144, 181, 182, 292.
    _See_ Torpor, Sleep
  function of, 107-9, 113, 114, 117, 246, 247, 254, 256
  function and structure in, 67, 77-8, 79
  individuation in, 12
  instinct in, 170, 171
  and mobility, 108, 109, 111-13, 118-9, 129, 130, 135-6
  parallelism of evolution with animals, 59-60, 106-8, 116
  supporters of all life, 271
  variation of, 85, 86

Plasma, continuity of germinative, 25-6, 42, 78-83

Plastic substances, 255

Plato, 49, 156, 191, 210 _note_, 316, 318, 319, 320, 321, 327, 330, 347, 349

Platonic ideas, 49, 315-6, 321, 322, 327, 330, 352

Plotinus, 210 _note_, 314-5, 323, 324 _note_, 349, 352, 353

Plurality, confused, of life, 257.
    _See_ Interpenetration

Poem, sounds of, distinct to perception; the sense indivisible to
   intuition, 209
  illustrating creation of matter, 240, 319-20

[Greek: poiêtikos, nous], of Aristotle, 322

Polymorphism of ants, bees, and wasps, 140
  of insect societies, 157

Polyzoism, 260

Positive reality, 208, 212. _See_ Reality

Positivity, materiality an inversion or interruption of, 219, 246,
   247-8, 319-20

Possible activity as a factor in consciousness, 11, 12, 96, 144, 145,
   146-7, 158-9, 165, 179, 180, 181, 189, 264, 368
  existence, 290, 295

Post-Kantian philosophy, 362, 363

Potential activity. _See_ Possible activity
  genera, 226
  knowledge, 142-7, 150, 166

Potentiality, life as an immense, 258, 270
  zone of, surrounding acts, 179, 180, 181, 264. _See_ Possible activity

Powers of life, complementarity of, xii, xiii, 26, 27, 51-5, 97-105, 110,
   113, 116-8, 119, 126-7, 131-6, 140-3, 176, 177, 183, 184, 246, 254, 255,
   257, 266, 270, 343, 345

Practical nature of perception and its prolongation in intellect and
   science, 137-41, 150, 193-4, 196, 197, 206, 207-8, 218, 247-8, 273,
   281, 305, 306-7, 328, 329

Preëstablished harmony, 205-6, 207

Present, creation of, by past, 5, 20-3, 26-7, 167, 199-202

Prevision. _See_ Foreseeing

Primacy of nervous system, 120-6, 252

Primary instinct, 138-9, 168

Primitive organisms, ambiguous forms of, 99, 112, 113, 116, 129, 130

"Procession" in Alexandrian philosophy, 323

Progress, adaptation and, 101 ff.
  evolutionary, 50, 133, 134, 138, 141-2, 173-4, 175, 185, 264-5, 266

Prose and verse, illustrating the two kinds of orders, 221, 232

Protophytes, colonizing of, 259

Protoplasm, circulation of, 32-3, 108
  and senescence, 18, 19
  imitation of, 32-3, 35
  primitive, and the nervous system, 124, 126-7
  of primitive organisms, 99, 108, 109
  and the vital principle, 42-3

Protozoa, association of, 259-61
  ageing of, 16
  of ambiguous form, 112
  and individuation, 14, 259-61
  mechanical explanation of movements of, 33
  and nervous system, 126
  reproduction of, 14

Pseudo-ideas and problems, 177, 277, 283, 296

Pseudoneuroptera, division of labor among, 140

[Greek: pschnê] of Aristotle, 350
  of Plotinus, 210 _note_

Psychic activity, twofold nature of, 136, 140-1, 142-3
  life, continuity of, 1-11, 29-30

Psychical existence contrasted with logical, 276, 297-8, 327-8, 361
  nature of life, 257

Psychics inverted physics, 201, 202.
    _See_ Inverse relation of the physical and psychical

Psychology and deduction, 212-3
  and the genesis of intellect, 187, 194, 195-6, 197
  intuitional cosmology as reversed, 208-9

Psycho-physiological parallelism, 180, 350, 351, 355, 356

Puberty, illustrating crises in evolution, 19, 320-1


Qualitative, evolutionary and extensive becoming, 313
  motion, 302-3, 304, 311

Qualities, acts, forms, the classes of representation, 303, 314
  bodies as bundles of, 300-1
  coincidence of, 309
  and movements, 299-300
  and natural geometry, 211
  superimposition of, in induction, 216

Quality is change, 299-300
  in Eleatic philosophy, 314-5
  and quantity in ancient philosophy, 323-4
  and quantity in modern philosophy, 350
  and rhythm, 300-2

Quaternary substances, 121

Quinton, René, 134 _note_


Radius-vector, Heliocentric, in Kepler's laws, 334

Rank, evolutionary, 50, 133-5, 173-4, 265

Reaction, rôle of, in perception, 226-7

Ready-made categories, x, xiv, 48, 237, 250, 251, 273, 311, 321,
   329, 354, 359

Real activity as distinguished from possible, 145
  common-sense is continuous experience of the, 213
  continuity of the, 302, 329
  dichotomy of the, in modern philosophy, 349
  imitation of the, by intelligence, 90, 204, 258, 270, 307, 355
  obliteration of outlines in the, 11-2, 188, 189, 207-8
  representation of the, by science, 203-4

Realism, ancient, 231-2

Realists and idealists alike assume possibility of absence of order,
   220, 231-2

Reality, absolute, 198, 228-9, 230, 269, 359-60, 361
  as action, 47, 191-2, 194-5, 249
  degrees of, 323, 327
  in dogmatic metaphysics, 196
  double form of, 179-80, 216, 230-1, 236
  as duration, 11-2, 217, 272
  as flux, 165, 250, 251, 294, 337, 338, 342
  and the frames of the intellect, 363-4, 365.
    _See_ Frames of the understanding
  as freedom, 247
  of genera in ancient philosophy, 226-7
  is growth, 239
  imitation of, by the intellect, 89-90, 365
  and the intellect, 52, 89-90, 153, 191, 192, 314-5, 355-6
  intelligible, in ancient philosophy, 317
  knowledge of, 307-8, 317, 358-9
  and mechanism, 351, 354-5
  as movement, 90, 155, 301-2, 312
  and not-being, 276, 280, 285
  of the person, 269
  refraction of, through the forms of perception, 204, 238, 359-60
  and science, 194, 196, 198, 199, 203-4, 206-8, 354, 357
  sensible, in ancient philosophy, 314, 317, 321, 327, 328, 352
  symbol of, xi, 30-1, 71, 88-9, 93-4, 195-6, 197, 209, 240, 342,
   360-1, 369
  undefinable conceptually, 13, 49
  unknowable in Kant, 205
  unknowable in Spencer, xi
  views of, 30-1, 71, 84, 88, 199, 201, 206-7, 225-6, 249, 258, 273,
   300-7, 311, 314, 331-2, 342, 351, 352

Reason and life, 7, 8, 48, 161
  cannot transcend itself, 193-4

Reasoning and acting, 192-3
  and experience, 203-4
  and matter, 204-5, 208-9
  on matter and life, 7, 8

Recollection, dependence of, on special circumstances, 167, 180
  in the dream, 202, 207-8
  and perception, 180, 181

Recommencing, continual, of the present in the state of relaxation, 201

Recomposing, decomposing and, the characteristic powers of intellect,
   157, 251

Record, false comparison of memory with, 5

Reflection, 158-9

Reflex activity, 110
  compound, 173-4, 175-6

Refraction of the idea through matter or non-being, 316-7
  of reality through forms of perception, 204, 238, 359-60

Regeneration and individuality, 13, 14

Register of time, 16, 20, 37

Reinke, 42 _note_

Relation, imprint of relations and laws upon consciousness, 188
  as law, 229, 230-1
  and thing, 147-52, 156-7, 160, 161, 187, 202, 352, 357

Relativism, epistemological, 196, 197, 230

Relativity of immobility, 155
  of the intellect, xi, 48-9, 152, 153, 187, 195-6, 197-8, 199, 219,
   273, 306-7, 360-1
  of knowledge, 152, 191, 230
  of perception, 226-7, 228, 300-1

Relaxation in the dream state, 201, 209-10
  and extension, 201, 207-8, 209, 210, 212, 218, 223, 245
  and intellect, 200, 207-8, 209, 212, 218
  logic a, of virtual geometry, 212
  matter a, of unextended into extended, 218
  memory vanishes in complete, 200
  necessity as, of freedom, 218
  present continually recommences in the state of relaxation, 200
  will vanishes in complete, 200, 207-8
    _See_ Tension

Releasing cause, 73, 74, 115, 118-9, 120

Repetition and generalization, 230-1, 232
  and fabrication, 44-5, 46, 155-8
  and intellect, 156-7, 199, 214-6
  of states, 5-6, 7-8, 28-9, 30, 36, 45-6, 47
  in the vital and in the mathematical order, 225, 226, 230, 231

Representation and action, 143-4, 145, 180
  classes of: qualities, forms, acts, 302-3, 314
  and consciousness, 143-4
  of motion, 159-60, 303-4, 305, 306-7, 308, 313, 315, 344-5
  of the Nought, 273-80, 281-4, 289-317, 327

Represented or internalized action distinguished from externalized
   action, 144-7, 158-9, 165

Reproduction and individuation, 13, 14

Resemblance. _See_ Similarity

Reservoir, organism a, of energy, 115, 116, 125-6, 245, 246, 254

Rest and motion in Zeno, 308-12

Retrogression in evolution, 133, 134

Retrospection the function of intellect, 47-8, 237

Reversed psychology: intuitional cosmology, 208

Rhizocephala and animal mobility, 111

Rhumbler, 34 _note_

Rhythm of duration, 11-2, 127-8, 300-1, 345-7
  intelligence adopts the, of action, 305-6
  of perception, 299-300, 301
  and quality, 301
  scanning the, of the universe the function of science, 346-7
  of science must coincide with that of action, 320
  of the universe untranslatable into scientific formulae, 337

Rings of arthropods, 132-3

Ripening, creative evolution as, 47-8, 340-1

Romanes, 139

Roule, 27 _note_

Roy (Le), Ed., 218 _note_


_Salamandra maculata_, vision in, 75

Salensky, 75 _note_

Same, function of intellect connecting same with same, 199-200, 233, 270

Samter and Heymons, 72 _note_

Saporta (De), 112 _note_

Savage's sense of distance and direction, 212

Skepticism or dogmatism the dilemma of any systematic metaphysics,
   195-6, 197, 230-1

Schisms in the primitive impulsion of life, 254-5, 257.
    _See_ Divergent lines of evolution

Scholasticism, 370

Science and action, 93, 195, 198, 328-9
  ancient, and modern, 329-37, 342-5, 357
  astronomy, ancient and modern, 334-5, 336
  cartesian geometry and ancient geometry, 333-4
  cinematographical character of modern, 329, 330, 336-7, 340-1, 342, 345-8
  conventionality of a certain aspect of, 206-7
  and deduction, 212-3
  and discontinuity, 161-2
  function of, 92, 167-8, 173-4, 176-7, 193-4, 195-6, 198-9, 328-9, 346-7
  Galileo's influence on modern, 333-4, 335
  and instinct, 169, 170, 173-4, 175, 193-5
  and intelligence, 176, 177, 193-6
  Kepler's influence on modern, 334
  and matter, 194-5, 206-7, 208
  modern. _See_ Modern science
  object of, 195-6, 220, 221, 251, 270-1, 273, 296-8, 306-7, 328-9,
   332-3, 335-6, 347-8
  and perception, 168
  and philosophy, 175-6, 196-7, 208-9, 344, 370
  physical. _See_ Physics and reality. _See_ Reality and science
  and time, 8-13, 20, 335-8
  unity of, 195-6, 197, 228-9, 230, 321-2, 323, 344-5, 347-8, 349, 354,
   355-6, 359-60, 362-3

Scientific concepts, 338-40
  explanation and philosophical explanation, 168
  formulae, 337
  geometry, 161, 211
  knowledge, 193-4, 196-7, 198, 199, 207, 208, 218

Sclerosis and ageing, 19

Scolia, paralyzing instinct in, 172

Scope of action indefinitely extended by intelligent instruments, 141
  of Galileo's physics, 357, 370

Scott, 63 _note_

Sea-urchin and individuality, 13

Séailles, 29 _note_

Secondary instincts, 139, 168

Sectioning of becoming in the philosophy of ideas, 317-8
  of matter by perception, 206-7, 249, 251

Sedgwick, 260 _note_

Seeing and willing, coincidence of, in intuition, 237

Selection, natural, 54, 56-7, 59-60, 61-2, 63, 64, 68, 95-6, 169, 170

Self, coincidence of, with, 199
  existence of, means change, 1 ff.
  knowledge of, 1 ff.

Senescence, 15-23, 26-7, 42-3

Sensation and space, 202

Sense-perception. _See_ Perception

Sensible flux, 316-7, 318, 321, 322, 327, 343, 345
  intuition and ultra-intellectual, 360-1
  object, apogee of, 342-3, 344-5, 349
  reality, 314, 317, 319, 327, 328, 352

Sensibility, forms of, 361

Sensitive plant, in illustration of mobility in plants, 109

Sensori-motor system. _See_ Nervous system

Sensuous manifold, 205, 221, 232, 235, 236

Sentiment, poetic, in illustration of individuation, 258, 259

Serkovski, 259 _note_

Serpula, in illustration of identical evolution in divergent lines, 96

Sexual cells, 14, 26, 27, 79-81

Sexuality parallel in plants and animals, 58-60, 119-21

Shaler, N.S., 133 _note_, 184 _note_

Sheath, calcareous, in illustration of animal tendency to mobility, 130-1

Signs, function of, 158, 159, 160
  the instrument of science, 329-30

Sigwart, 287 _note_

Silurian epoch, failure of certain species to evolve since, 102

Similarity among individuals of same species the type of generality,
   224-6, 228-9, 230-1
  and mechanical causality, 44, 45

Simultaneity, to measure time is merely to count simultaneities, 9,
   336, 337, 341

Sinuousness of evolution, 71, 98, 102, 212-3

Sitaris, unconscious knowledge of, 146, 147

Situation and magnitude, problems of, 211

Sketching movements, function of consciousness, 207-8

Sleep, 129-31, 135, 181

Snapshot, in illustration of intellectual representation of motion,
   305, 306, 313, 315, 344
    _See_ View of reality, Cinematographical character, etc.
  form defined as a, of transition, 301-2, 317, 318, 321-2, 345

Social instinct, 101, 140, 158, 171-2
  life, 138, 140, 158, 265
  and pedagogical character of negation, 287-97

Societies, 101, 131-2, 158, 171-2, 259

Society and the individual, 260, 265

Solar energy stored by plants, released by animals, 246, 254
  systems, 241-4, 246 _note_, 256, 270
  systems, life in other, 256

Solid, concepts analogous to solids, ix
  intellect as a solid nucleus, 193, 194
  the material of construction and the object of the intellect, 153,
   154, 161, 162, 251

Solidarity between brain and consciousness, 180, 262
  of the parts of matter, 203, 207-8, 241, 271

Solidification operated by the understanding, 249

[Greek: sôma] in Aristotle, 350

Somnambulism and consciousness, 144, 145, 159

Soul and body, 350
  and cell, 269
  creation of, 270

Space and action, 203
  in ancient philosophy, 318, 319
  and concepts, 160-1, 163, 174-5, 176-7, 188-9, 257-9
  geometrical, 203
  homogeneity of, 156, 212
  and induction, 216
  in Kant's philosophy, 205, 206, 207, 244
  in Leibniz's philosophy, 351
  and matter, 189, 202-13, 244, 257, 264, 361-2, 368
  and time in Kant's philosophy, 205-6
  unity and multiplicity determinations of, 357-9
    _See_ Extension

Spatiality atmosphere of, bathing intelligence, 205
  degradation of the extra-spatial, 207
  and distinctness, 203, 207, 244, 250, 257-9
  and geometrical space, 203, 211, 213, 218
  and mathematical order, 208, 209

Special instincts and environment, 138, 168, 192-3, 194
  and recollections, 167, 168, 180
  as variations on a theme, 167, 172, 264

Species, articulate, 133
  evolution of, 247, 255, 269
  and external finality, 128-9, 130-1, 132, 266
  fossil, 102
  human, as goal of evolution, 266, 267
  human, styled _homo faber_, 139
  and instinct, 140, 167, 170-2, 264
  and life, 167
  similarity within, 223-6, 228-9, 230-1

Speculation, dead-locks in, xii, 155, 156, 312, 313-4
  object of philosophy, 44, 152, 196, 198, 220, 225-6, 227, 251, 270-1,
    273, 297-8, 306-7, 317, 347-8

Spencer, Herbert, xi, xiv, 78-9, 153, 188, 189, 190, 364, 365

Spencer's evolutionism, correspondence between mind and matter in, 368
  cosmogony in, 188
  imprint of relations and laws upon consciousness in, 188
  matter in, 365, 367
  mind in, 365, 367

Spheres, concentric, in Aristotle's philosophy, 328

Sphex, paralyzing instinct in, 172-5

Spiders and paralyzing hymenoptera, 172

Spinal cord, 110

Spinoza, the adequate and the inadequate, 353
  cause, 277
  dogmatism, 356, 357
  eternity, 353
  extension, 350
  God, 351, 357
  intuitionism, 347
  mechanism, 348, 352, 355, 356
  time, 362

Spirit, 251, 269, 270

Spirituality and materiality, 128-9, 201-3, 316-7, 208-9, 210-1, 212-3,
   217, 218, 219, 222-3, 237, 238, 245, 247-8, 249, 251, 254, 256, 257,
   259, 261, 267, 270-1, 272, 276, 343

Spontaneity of life, 86, 237. _See_ Freedom
  and mechanism, 40
  in vegetables, 109
  and the willed order, 224

Sport (biol.), 63

Starch, in the function of vegetable kingdom, 114

States of becoming, 1, 13, 163, 247-8, 299, 300, 307

Static character of the intellect, 155-6, 163, 274, 298
  views of becoming, 273

Stehasny, 124 _note_

Steam-engine and bronze, parallel as epoch-marking, 138-9

Stentor and individuality, 260

Stoics, 316

Storing of solar energy by plants, 246, 253-6

Strain of bow and indivisibility of motion, 308

Stream, duration as a, 39, 338

Structure and function. _See_ Function and structure
  identical, in divergent lines of evolution, 55, 60, 61-2, 63, 69, 73-4,
   75, 76-7, 83, 86, 87, 118-9

Subject and attribute, 147-8

Substance, albuminoid, 120-1
  continuity of living, 162
  organic, 121, 131, 140, 142, 149, 162-3, 195-7 _note_, 255, 267
  in Spinoza's philosophy, 350
  ternary substances, 121

Substantives, adjectives, verbs, correspond to the three classes of
   representation, 302-4

Substitution essential to representation of the Nought, 281, 283-4,
   289-90, 291, 294, 296

Success of physics, 218, 219-20
  and superiority, 133, 264-5

Succession in time, 10, 339, 340, 341, 345. Cf. Juxtaposition

Successors of Kant, 363, 364

Sudden mutations, 28, 62-3, 64-5, 68-9

Sun, 115, 241, 323

Superaddition of existence upon nothingness, 276
  of order upon disorder, 236, 275

Superimposition. _See_ Measurement of qualities, in induction, 216

Superiority, evolutionary, 133-5, 173, 174-5

Superman, 267

Supraconsciousness, 261

Survival of the fit, 169.
    _See_ Natural selection

Swim, learning to, as instinctive learning, 193, 194

Symbol, the concept is a, 161, 209, 341-2
  of reality, xi, 30-1, 71, 88-9, 93, 195-6, 210, 240, 342, 360-1, 369-70

Symbolic knowledge of life, 199, 342, 360

Symbolism, 176, 180, 360

Sympathetic or intuitive knowledge, 209, 210, 342

Sympathy, instinct is, 164, 168, 172-8, 342-3.
    _See_ Divination, Feeling, Inspiration

Systematic metaphysics, dilemma of, 195, 196, 230-1
  contrasted with intuitional, 191-2, 193-4, 238, 269, 270, 277, 346-8
  postulate of, 190, 195

Systematization of physics, Liebniz's philosophy, 347

Systems, isolated, 9-13, 203, 214, 215, 241, 242, 342, 347-9


Tangent and curve, analogy with deduction and the moral sphere, 214
  analogy with physico-chemistry and life, 31

Tarakevitch, 124 _note_

Teleology. _See_ Finalism

Tendency, antagonistic tendencies of life, 13, 98, 103, 113, 135, 150
  antagonistic tendencies in development of nervous system, 124-5
  complementary tendencies of life, 51, 103, 135, 150, 168, 246
  to dissociation, 260
  divergent tendencies of life, 54, 89, 99, 101, 107-8, 109-10, 112,
   116-8, 134, 135, 150, 181, 246, 254-8
  to individuation, 13
  life a tendency to act on inert matter, 96
  toward mobility in animals, 109, 110, 113, 127-8, 129-33, 135, 181, 182
  the past exists in present tendency, 5
  to reproduce, 13
  of species to change, 85-86
  mathematical symbols of tendencies, 22, 23
  toward systems, in matter, 10
  transmission of, 80-1
  a vital property is a, 13

Tension and extension, 236, 245
  and freedom, 200-2, 207-8, 223, 237, 239, 300-2
  matter the inversion of vital, 239
  of personality, 199-200, 201, 207-8, 237, 239, 300

Ternary substances, 121

Theology consequent upon philosophy of ideas, 316

Theoretic fallacies, 263, 264
  knowledge and instinct, 177, 268
  knowledge and intellect, 155, 177, 179, 238, 270, 342, 343

Theorizing not the original function of the intellect, 154-5

Theory of knowledge, xiii, 178, 180, 184-5, 197, 204, 207-8, 209,
   228-9, 231
  of life, xiii, 178, 180, 197

Thermodynamics, 241-2.
    _See_ Conservation of energy, Degradation of energy

Thesis and antithesis, 205

Thing as distinguished from motion, 187, 202, 247-8, 249, 299-300
  as distinguished from relation, 147, 148, 150, 152, 158-9, 159-60,
   161, 187, 202, 352, 356-7
  and mind, 206
  as solidification operated by understanding, 249

Thing-in-itself, 205, 206, 230-1, 312

Timaeus, 318 _note_

Time and the absolute, 240, 241, 297-8, 339, 343-4
  abstract, 21, 22, 37, 39
  articulations of real, 331-3
  as force, 16, 45-6, 47, 51, 103, 339
  homogeneous, 17, 18, 163-4, 331-3
  as independent variable, 20, 335-7
  interval of, 9, 22, 23
  as invention, 341-2
  in Leibniz's philosophy, 351, 352, 362
  and logic, 4, 277
  and simultaneity, 9, 336, 337, 341
  in modern science 321-37, 341-5
  and space in Kant, 205
  and space in ancient philosophy, 318, 319.
    _See_ Duration

Tools and intellect, 137-41, 150-1.
    _See_ Implement

Torpor, in evolution, 109, 111, 113, 114 _note_, 120, 128-35, 181, 292

Tortoise, Achilles and the, in Zeno, 311

Touch, science expresses all perception as touch, 168
  is to vision as intelligence to instinct, 169

Track laid by motion along its course, 309-12, 337

Transcendental Aesthetic, 203

Transformation, 32, 72, 73, 131, 231, 263

Transformism, 23-5

Transition, form a snapshot view of, 301-2, 316-7, 318, 321, 344-5

Transmissibility of acquired characters, 75-84, 87, 168, 169, 172-3,
   225-6, 230-1

Transmission of the vital impetus, 26, 27, 79, 85, 87, 88, 93-4, 110,
   126-7, 128, 230, 231, 246, 255, 256, 257, 259, 270

Trigger-action of motor mechanisms, 272

Triton, Regeneration in, 75

Tropism and psychical activity, 35 _note_

Truth seized in intuition, 318-20


Unconscious effort, 170
  instinct, 142-3, 144, 145-6, 147, 166
  knowledge, 145-8, 150-1

Unconsciousness, two kinds of, 144

Undefinable, reality, 13, 48

Understanding, absoluteness of, 153-4, 190-1, 197-8, 199, 200
  and action, ix, xi, 179
  genesis of the, ix-xv, 49, 189, 207-8, 257-9, 359, 361-2
  and geometry, ix, xii
  and innateness of categories, 147, 148-9
  and intuition, 46-7
  and life, ix-xv, 13, 32-3, 46-50, 88-9, 101, 147-8, 149, 152, 162-5,
   173-4, 176-7, 178, 195-201, 213, 220, 222-3, 224, 226, 257-9, 261,
   266, 270, 271, 313, 361-2, 365
  and inert matter, 166, 168, 179, 194-5, 198, 205-6, 207, 219, 355
  and the ready-made, xiii, 48, 237, 250, 251, 273, 311, 321, 328-9,
   354, 358
  and the solid, ix
  unlimited scope of the, 149, 150, 152
    _See_ Intellect, Intelligence, Concept, Categories, Frames
    of the understanding, Logic

Undone, automatic and determinate evolution is action being, 249

Unfolding cause, 73, 74

Unforeseeableness of action, 47
  of duration, 6, 164, 340-2
  of evolution, 47, 48, 52, 86, 224
  of invention, 164
  of life, 164, 184
  and the willed order, 224, 342-3
    _See_ Foreseeing

Unification as the function of the intellect, 152, 154, 357-8

Uniqueness of phases of duration, 164

Unity of extension, 154
  of knowledge, 195-6
  of life, 106-7, 250, 268, 271
  of mental life, 268
  and multiplicity as determinations of space, 351-3
  of nature, 104-5, 189-90, 191, 195-6, 197, 199, 322, 352, 356-8
  of the organism, 176-7
  of science, 195-6, 197, 228-9, 230, 321, 322, 344-5, 347, 359-60, 362-3

Universal interaction, 188, 189
  life, consciousness coextensive with, 186, 257, 270

Universe, continuity of, 346
  Descartes's, 346
  physical, and the idea of disorder, 233, 275
  duration of, 10, 11, 241
  evolution of, 241, 246 _note_
  growth of, 342-3, 344
  movement of, in Aristotle, 323
  mutability of, 244, 245
  as organism, 31, 241
  as realization of plan, 40
  rhythm of, 337, 339, 346-7
  states of, considered by science, 336, 337
  as unification of physics, 348-9, 357

Unknowable, the, of evolutionism, xi
  the, in Kant, 204, 205, 206

Unmaking, the nature of the process of materiality, 245, 248, 249,
   251, 272, 342-3

Unorganized bodies, 7-8, 14, 20, 21, 186.
    _See_ inert matter
  instruments, 137-9, 140-1, 150-1
  matter, cleft between, and the organized, 190, 191, 196, 197-9
  matter, imitation of the organized by, 33-4, 35, 36
  matter and science, 194-6
  matter. _See_ inert matter

Unwinding cause, 73
  of immutability in Greek philosophy, 325, 352

Upspringing of invention, 164

Utility, 4-5, 150, 152, 154-5, 158-9, 160, 168, 187, 195-6, 247-8,
   297-8, 328-9, 330


_Vanessa levana_ and _Vanessa prorsa_, transformation of, 72

Variable, time as an independent, 20, 336

Variation, accidental, 55, 63-4, 68, 85, 168-9
  of color, in lizards, 72, 74
  by deviation, 82-3, 84
  of evolutionary type, 23-4, 72 _note_, 131-2, 137-8, 167, 169, 171-2, 264
  insensible, 63, 68
  interest as cause of, 131-2
  in plants, 85-86

Vegetable kingdom. _See_ Plants

Verb, relation expressed by, 148

Verbs, substantives and adjectives, 303

Verse and prose, in illustration of the two kinds of order, 221, 232

Vertebrate, ix, 126, 130, 131-4, 141

Vibrations, matter analyzed into elementary, 201

Vicious circle, apparent, of intuitionism, 192-4, 196-7
  of intellectualism, 194, 197, 318-9, 320

View, intellectual, of becoming, 4, 90-1, 273, 298-9, 304, 305, 310, 326-7
  intellectual, of matter, 203, 240, 250, 254, 255
  of reality, 206

Vignon, P., 35 _note_

Virtual actions, 12.
    _See_ Possible action
  geometry, 212

Vise, consciousness compressed in a, 179

Vision of God, in Alexandrian philosophy, 322
  in molluscs. See Eye of molluscs, etc.
  in _Salamandra maculata_, 75

Vital activity, 134-6, 139, 140, 166-9, 246, 247-8
  current, 26, 27, 53-5, 80, 85, 87, 88, 96-105, 118-9, 120, 230-1,
   232, 239, 257, 266, 270
  impetus, 50-1, 53-5, 85, 87, 88, 98-105, 118-9, 126-7, 128, 131-2,
   141-2, 148-9, 150, 218, 230-1, 232, 247-8, 250, 252, 254-5, 261
  order, cause in, 34, 35, 94-5, 164
  order, finality and, 223-5, 226
  order, generalization in the, and in the mathematical order contrasted,
   225, 226, 230-1
  order, and the geometrical order, 222-3, 225, 226, 230, 231, 235,
   236, 330-1
  order, imitation of physical order by vital, 230
  principle, 42, 43, 225, 226
  order, repetition in the vital and the mathematical orders contrasted,
   225, 226, 230, 231
  process, 166-7

Vitalism, 42, 43

Void, representation of, 273, 274, 275, 277-8, 281, 283-4, 289-90,
   291, 292, 294, 296, 298

Voisin, 80

Volition and cerebral mechanism, 253-4

Voluntary activity, 110, 252

Vries (de), 24, 63 _note_, 85


Wasps, instinct in, 140, 172

Weapons and intellect, 137

Weismann, 26, 78, 80-1

Will and caprice, 47
  and cerebral mechanism, 252
  current of, penetrating matter, 237
  insertion of, into reality, 305-6, 307
  and relaxation, 201, 207-8
  and mechanism in disorder, 233
  tension of, 199, 201, 207-8

Willed order, mutual contingency of willed order and mathematical
   order, 231-3
  unforeseeability in the, 224, 342-3

Willing, coincidence of seeing and, in intuition, 237

Wilson, E.B., 36

Wolff, 75 _note_

Words and states, 4, 302-3
  three classes of, corresponding to three classes of representation,
   302-3, 313-4

World, intelligible, 162-3
  principle: conciousness, 237, 261

Worms, in illustration of ambiguity of primitive organisms, 130


Yellow-winged sphex, paralyzing instinct in, 172


Zeno on motion, 308-13

Zone of potentialities surrounding acts, 179-80, 181, 264

Zoology, 128-9

Zoospores of algae, in illustration of mobility in plants, 112







