CHAPTER X.

PROGRESS FROM THE FOURTH TO THE SEVENTH CIRCLE.

  Receives a visit from a superior mind--Proposition to advance
  accepted--The seraphim sings--A pearl given--Enters a world of light
  and song--Description of the works which he saw--The instruction of
  the Worthy--The song of the free--Address of another mind on the key
  of wisdom--The seven seals--Address of a third mind--Conduct to the
  sixth circle--A lecture on social progress--Hope a reality--A lecture
  on prophecy--Rules of prophecy the same as mathematical--Prediction
  of communicating with the inhabitants of earth--Predictions,
  opinions only of those below the sixth circle--A lecture on purity
  and prophecy--Nature the standard by which to determine right and
  wrong--Advancement to the seventh circle, or court of Beauty--Sees
  a white throne and inscriptions--A little child leading a lion--A
  serpent fastened to a rock--Twenty four pillars of wisdom--Minstrels
  chant a welcome--Emblems explained--Prediction of events now taking
  place--Contemplated mission to the rudimental sphere, and how it
  would be received--The serpent to be destroyed--Evils to be overcome
  by wisdom.


I was next commissioned to visit a work in the advancement of my
own mind. There came to us a spirit, who said, “The glory of this
tabernacle is dim. Would this society go with me, and see a more
excellent glory?”

“We have no fears of progress,” said the commander.

S. The progress you have made is well, but I am delegated by a circle
you have not seen, to welcome you to a wisdom, which reflects itself
upon the dome of your temple.

C. We are ready to be improved, as to improve others.

S. I know your readiness to advance, and, as you have signified your
wish, you will walk with me to a scene more magnificent than what
adorns this mansion. The whole company within this temple, will form
a circle above this temple; and the seraphim will sing a song of
redemption. When the song is sung, the circle will say, “Hallelujah,
the Lord God, Omnipotent reigneth.”

I was in the midst of the circle, when the seraphim struck the soft
notes of peace, and my heart melted within me. The melody of the song
was indescribably sweet, and the words were distinct and clear. The
wisdom of heaven seemed more beautiful, and the day of salvation opened
upon my sight. I felt no despondency within me, for the clearness of
that mild sky unfolded a glory, that made the former glory appear dark
and unwelcome. I was not unwilling to advance with my companions,
and no discord was heard. When the seraphim had ended its song, the
conductor inquired, “Do all understand the meaning of the words you
have heard?”

“I know what is the meaning,” said the commander.

S. What is known need not be told, except to those who know it not. I
will enjoin it upon you, and your companions, never to communicate to
another what is known unto him, lest he be weary with your society.
Ask, and you will receive; seek, and you will find; knock, and it shall
be opened unto you; so that he who asketh, and he who seeketh, shall
not go away empty. The wisdom of the circle, into whose society you
will shortly be introduced, giveth to all who asketh, and upbraideth
not. Are you willing to do likewise?

C. I am willing.

S. You will, then, receive this pearl. Wear it in your bosom. Let
its radiance beam in all your works. Let its lustre shine in your
conversation. And let its purity make you free from the taint of wrong.
This pearl is of great value. It will save you from darkness. It will
chase away the gloom of error. It will protect you from the weakness of
doubt and fear. You may let the circle view the pearl, and, when they
have examined it, I will proceed with you to the circle where each one
will receive, as it seemeth good to the Worthy. He will open a new page
in the work of progress. Let all listen to his words, and be faithful
to obey the wisdom which he will give you. I am now ready; follow me.

We came to a world of eternal reality. I entered within a sacred
repository of wisdom, where I saw minds renowned in history, whose
countenances reflected a light which illumined all who came near
them. The wide arch of heaven rung with song, and waste places felt
the genial influence of virtue. Before us were written in letters of
gold the words, “Worthy art thou to receive glory, and honor, and
praise, and power.” On the right were crowns at the feet of saints,
and on the left were gems of silver brightness, linked with a chain
of light. These gems were so arranged as to represent in miniature
the words, “Poverty and riches embrace wisdom, when one receives what
the other gives.” Near the entrance of this magnificent theater of
wisdom, rose a writing, “Enter thou into the joy of wisdom.” Beneath
our feet were clouds of vapor, on which the sun shone, giving them a
smiling appearance. A vase of flowers stood in the center, and near by
it a well, out of whose mouth came a gushing current of the water of
life. As we passed the well, the Worthy said, “This is the water that
whosoever drinketh thereof shall never thirst, but it shall be in him a
fountain of water springing up into everlasting life. Drink freely.”

The solemnity of the scene was heightened by the lessons we received
from the Worthy and his companions. I heard attentively, and will give
as correct a report as the understanding of the reader will be able
to appreciate. I will not attempt to narrate all which was set before
us, since the simple relation would require a volume of itself; but I
propose to give a brief synopsis of the unfoldings of wisdom to our
minds.

As we were within the theater of a circle, whose countenances reflected
such light, that we were dazzled with the brilliancy thereof, the
Worthy said; “This pool, whose water is for the thirsty, cometh from
the throne of truth. You have now a portion, which never exhausts or
wastes itself within you. It is immortal to satisfy. The current will
not dry by using. It is free as air. Nature is not poverty. Her wisdom
reaches far above the mind in its soarings. The pool comes up from the
well of hope. Out of hope cometh reality. Hope never wrings sorrow
from the mind. Zeal can not live without animation. Its worth no mind
can fathom. Its everlasting flight is upward, onward, expanding with
its expanse, and rising with its strength. The mind without hope,
is like a mourner without consolation, like a ship without sail or
rudder; and when the water of life satiates the thirst of doubt and
despair, joy rides over the storm and the sea, that dashes against
the shore of eternity. Eternity hath no shore. The immortal enters
eternity when time ends. The mind sees no shore. Days and nights are
not. Time is not. The calendar of months and days is no more. All is
eternity--eternity is all. Rest is work, and work is rest. The water
is your strength, and nature is your fountain. Nature supplies itself,
and what nature does, is well done. I need no wisdom she has not,
for her wisdom is the wisdom of the Infinite. Deep is the fountain,
wide is the stream, and high is the mountain, whence cometh the pure
philosophy of wisdom. The wide creation shines with gems of infinite
skill. Vast is the immensity of infinity. Stretch thy mind away from
star to star, from system to system, from worlds to worlds, and neither
shore nor center rises before you. God is there. God is every where,
infinite, eternal--the spirit, whose life is the energy, the power of
the universe; whose glory the good of the dependent; and whose smile
is in the sunshine and the shower, working out the immutable love of
his nature to bless the works he has made. The north and the south, the
east and the west, above and below, wherever thought extends or not
extends, the mercy of God flows like the limpid current of life, and
yet you have come here to partake of the stream. I would do likewise;
because here you may see its purity, and relish its sweetness. Change
has conformed your taste to the water, and light has dispersed your
doubts of its purity. Where darkness reigned, fears were indulged;
and where fears were indulged, your minds refused the beverage, lest
some ill should befall you. Now the fear is gone, the hope is full;
and where hope is full, the water will not be rejected. Water is life
to the thirsty; doubt is death, because it forbids nature its wants.
Pilgrims, your souls have tested the life of water. Experience has
tested its adaptation to your wants. Remembrance will save you from the
snare of doubts. Hence, the water springeth up in you forever.

“Pilgrims: on your right are crowns at the feet of saints. Honor
cometh not from power. Honor casts authority to rule others at your
feet. The crowns of tyrants must fall from their heads, and no mind
shall honor the head which wears them. Superiority hath no dwelling
place in this circle. Equality reigns, and is acknowledged. No mind
is ruler, and no mind is ruled. One law governs all, and that law is
love. Two minds can not think unlike, because the thoughts of love
must be one in all. The crowns you see, were the crowns we wore in
our pilgrimage. We were not all kings, nor minds who wore an external
crown; but were all rulers over others. We loved rule, and despised
submission. We loved control over minds, and have enjoyed it to our
complete satisfaction. I controlled no one by my crown, but by my
influence. I saw mind needed control, and, not seeing the control
of God, I undertook to do his work. I made laws and executed them
as I pleased, intending the good of those whom I controlled. I gave
to one a penny, and to another more, as I judged them worthy. They
were satisfied with their wages, and did me honor. My crown was not
disgraced, as I supposed, because each mind, whom I controlled,
received his reward. I was well satisfied with my wisdom. I wanted
no more. Others of my companions ruled differently. One ruled by
fear, and another by favor. One ruled by threatenings, and another by
promises. One ruled by poverty, and another by riches. All had their
varied methods of controlling minds; but none were more unworthy than
those who attempted to control, and succeeded, by alarming the fears
of the credulous with tales, revolting to sympathy and degrading to
Deity. They controlled with an iron arm the dupes of their miserable
deception; but their crowns now lie at their feet.

“Pilgrims: you see a change. You see that ignorance hath its votaries,
and, so long as ignorance reigns, kings will rule, and subjects will
tremble. Mind must learn wisdom to disarm tyrants. It must see light
to escape darkness. It must experience freedom to hate bondage. It
must love right to forsake wrong. It must progress in wisdom to loathe
ignorance. The change has come, the light has appeared, the day has
dawned, the bondage has vanished, and the wrong is forsaken. Experience
hath done her work. Mind works for mind, good for good, virtue for
virtue, knowledge for knowledge; and equity and justice have trodden
crowns under their feet, and hurled the tyrant’s scourge away forever.

“You may turn to the left, and there you see a chain of light, linking
gems, and words are written. Poverty and riches dwell together in
kings’ houses. He who rules is rich in power, in the estimation of
his subjects. He is rich in goodly things, and his position is envied
by the ignorant. He fares sumptuously, and the ruled mourn at their
inferiority. Poverty is lean and hungry there. Poverty tarries where
wrong remains. Wrong remains, where ignorance rules. Ignorance rules
where wisdom is not regarded. Wisdom is not regarded where injustice
and force make minds slaves to others’ will. Equity and righteousness
are shunned and despised, law and harmony are violated, and light
reflects the poverty of riches, and the wrongs of poverty. The poor
seek, and he who seeketh findeth. The rich seek only to be rich, and
their riches are not wisdom, but empty, vain toys that glitter in
the eyes of fools, and dazzle only to deceive the unwise. The gems
wear not the face of despair. They are gems, inwoven with light. The
gems represent minds, and minds form words. Words are true to a mind
who writes them. Poverty and riches embrace wisdom, when riches are
employed to relieve poverty. They are wise only when used to do good.
No wisdom is seen in riches, not controlled by wisdom. Love must see
her children redeemed from want, and where there is no want, there is
no poverty.

“This circle is the circle of Worthy. It is a brotherhood of
righteousness. It has relinquished all authority to rule in the name
of God. It acknowledges God alone, as the ruler of the universe. It
disclaims all other rulers, and in the light of his countenance we
walk, dispensing the light we have received and seen to those who need.
Thou art worthy to receive this glory, because thou wilt freely give.
Others are not permitted to receive it, because they will not give as
they receive. The honor is well bestowed on you.

“Pilgrims: you have now entered into the joy of your Lord, because the
blight of wrong, the mildew of neglect, hath no surface on your minds.
Rule is surrendered to God. No authority rests in you to withhold when
others need. No sorrow will pass unrelieved, and no fear sear the soul,
unmitigated. All ignorance demands removal, and he who serves his
friend in need, serves God. The circle will now sing the song of the
free, when other minds will address you.”

The song was sung, but no words can describe its richness. The poor
were made rich, and equality pervaded the immense multitude.

When the song was ended, I heard a mind say, “I have the key of wisdom,
and I will now unlock the door of knowledge.” Proceeding forward, he
addressed us as follows: “True greatness is goodness; true wisdom
is what will make the mind good. I have seen power in the hands of
weakness. I have seen weakness mock at the voice of wisdom, and cast
her reproach at its votaries; but the reproach rebounded on her own
head. I have seen mind pleading for mercy at the gate of poverty.
Alas! mistaken mind sought for bread where it was not, and the heart
languished in despair. The voice of nature has been derided, and the
weakness of ignorance has assumed dominion. Poverty is wrong, and
wrong is poverty. No good thing has poverty to bestow. At its gate,
the hungry wait, and wait to be disappointed. I have sought, but not
found. I have wondered at my misfortune, and complained of the dealings
of God. I have seen no key to unlock the mystery, and my soul has been
disquieted within me. But I sought for bread where it was not, and
for wisdom in a college of ignorance. Opinions were numerous, and as
grainless as husks. Faiths were not wanting in number or variety, but
no mind was satisfied therewith. Views of God were conflicting and
contradictory, and my mind was worn with the wrangling of unsettled
controversy. I sought for peace amid the turbulent waters, but found
only agitation and discontent. I was as wild as the sea on which
my bark floated, without hope or moorings, save the disputed and
unsettled opinions of a dismal theology. In my dreams of the future,
social good was never promised. Philanthropy was selfish, and charity
not a span long. Goodness dwelt in temples, and virtue signified
conformity to others’ views. Parsimony was common law, and beggars were
common outlaws. Nature smiled then as now, but I saw not the smile.
Brotherhood was without children, and conventional limits were drawn
over the face of famishing souls. Imagination portrayed calamities, and
wrongs sustained the wrong.

“Pilgrims, I have a key. It will unlock the iron door, and show you the
secret of all this mischief and wrong. It is a key of knowledge. It is
a key which closes the door of hope. It bars the gate of joy. It shuts
the portal of salvation. It wrongs the poor of bread. It aggrandizes
the indolent from the labor of the industrious. It keeps mind away from
its inheritance, and secludes the riches of heirship. I hold the key by
which all this wrong and mischief has been done to mind, and I propose
to open the door for your personal inspection.”

He opened the door, and drew therefrom a book of seven seals. He began
to unloose the first seal, when he said:

“Pilgrims: The first seal of this book, represents the first circle.
It will show you, that all wisdom cometh to mind by successive
degrees of development. The mind in embryo, hath no wisdom; but when
nature introduces mind into individualized being, the individual mind
breaks the first seal, and wisdom is realized. Nature so orders, by
an immutable law, that self-hood shall be sustained, and therefore
provides the mind with an innate and natural relish for such things
as are adapted to its welfare. It needs no compulsion, or external
force, to induce a reception of those things which are congenial to its
enjoyment. Whatever nature requires, nature has provided. The innate
desire of the mind for sustenance, harmonizes with the supply nature
affords. The nourishment is adapted to the condition, and the condition
to the nourishment. Self-hood is maintained by innate desire, and
innate desire is supplied by maternal condition. The harmony of these
conditions is essential to self-hood. The mother supplies the wants of
nature in her offspring, never so much as suspecting that they should
be disregarded. The child partakes of nature’s provision and realizes
enjoyment. These conditions of want and supply unfold the harmony of
nature, and should not be overlooked in other relations of mind.

“The innate desire is the individual property of the possessor.
The supply is the maternal property, and is wanted only to nourish
offspring. In this economy of nature, the useless to one, is the useful
to the other. And what is not needed by one, is freely given to the
other. It is given because the want of the dependent requires it. The
want of the dependent is the only reason for the gift. Nature exacts
the gift, and self-hood receives the favor. By the favor, mutual
affinities become strengthened, and sympathy answers sympathy. The law
of God is observed, and nature rewards obedience. The self-hood of the
dependent is made subservient to the love of the parent. Both act as
nature demands, and no wrong is done. The good of the mother, blesses
the child, and the blessing of the child is the blessing of herself,
and a disturbance of her love, would be attended with anxiety and pain.

“The second seal represents the second circle. Mind acts with mind.
The opening blossom is not the full blown flower. The vase is wet with
water. Nourishment is wanted to mature the circle. The industry of
other hands is required. The second seal must be unloosed. Progress
never stops in nature, though, sometimes, it is obstructed. Mind
sympathizes with mind. The sympathy of mind with mind is wise. It
saves. Mind without sympathy could not enjoy society. Mind with it,
enjoys. Nature has not wronged mind by sympathy. The sympathy of mind
with mind corresponds with natural affinities. Mutual attractions
never repulse each other. They unite. Chemistry sustains the idea
of mutual attractions. Philosophy reveals the mutual tendencies to
sympathy of things which possess harmonious properties. The wisdom of
the second circle demonstrates the fact, that one mind sympathizes with
another. But the mind acts as self-hood prompts. Mind acts as self-hood
justifies. Self-hood justifies what is adapted to the enjoyment of
self. It condemns what is opposed to its own enjoyment. Thus, its
sympathy must be controlled with the wisdom it possesses. Self-hood
consults what self-love approves. It is limited. The good of others
will, sometimes, be consulted, as when no loss to self is sustained.
It wills what will do self good, what will gratify selfish wants. No
wisdom above its own wants, shares in its counsels. Others’ wrongs are
disregarded, because its benevolence is not sufficiently developed to
aid the needy. Others’ good is neglected, because self-hood has not
the love of brotherhood. It is confined. Limit is established to its
wisdom and benevolence. It sees what self-hood discloses. Manhood is
not unfolded. The third seal is unbroken. It acts within the circle of
its wisdom. It is a development of mind, that needs to be developed.
It wrangles with others for self. It flatters others for self. It
sympathizes with others for self. It yields to others for self. It
neglects others for self. It will not receive the wisdom of superiors,
because others, with whom it sympathizes, are opposed to new things. It
will not aid reform, until reformed.

“The third seal represents the third circle of mind. It will open the
soul to a greater wisdom and love. It will do good without fear or
favor. It will show what mind should do for mind. It will seek peace
and pursue it. But it is conservative. It neglects, oftentimes, its
own good. It neglects, sometimes, the good of others. I will unloose
the seal. The same good to others as to self. The same degree of wisdom
also. The whole duty of this circle is considered as being embraced in
doing by others, as it would have others do by it. The seal of wisdom
and benevolence, needs further development. It has been the mission
of minds, I am now instructing to aid them. Success has attended your
efforts, and reform has been attained. The whole duty of mind is not
contained in doing by others as you would have others do unto you. But
the wisdom of the third seal goes no further. It was wise to mind, when
it was unloosed. It saw a new creation, and the old vanished away. It
passed into disrepute. It was respected by those who saw the opening
wonder no more. It was a new heaven, and a new earth to mind, emerging
from the weakness of the second seal. It was a freedom to mind, which
had served two masters, hope and fear. It was wisdom of superior worth
to the ignorance of the second seal. But the third seal was not the end
of progress. Eternity will have no end. Mind will have no end. Time
will have no end. Periods will end. Time is marked by periods. Day and
night is a period. Circles are periods indefinite. Years are not known
to you, only as the reckoning of the rudimental condition. Night is
as day. Circles are as periods of progress. Minds work as circles of
wisdom in their degree control. I have aided you where you will now
instruct, as you are instructed.

“The fourth seal is now broken. Its condition is good to all. It
recognizes no enemies. It never wrangles. It will bless enemies.
Your own experience was the criterion of truth. Fear and favor were
powerless over you. No wrong was where you labored, but the wrong
of less wisdom. It was not wise to make others unhappy, because you
deemed unhappiness a recommendation to the favor of God. It was not
wise with what wretchedness required, but harmonious with the eternal
law of order and love. It sought and relieved mind from the uncongenial
elements of social wrong. It was interested in the progress of mind,
and the social good of society. It gave beauty for ashes, and the
garments of praise for the spirit of weariness. It was wise in good
things, and shunned not the truth. It was worthy of elevation to a
higher circle, for which cause the circle I am now addressing was
advanced.

“In the mysteries of the fifth seal, I will now instruct this circle. I
will say, no wisdom will govern you from beneath. All rule is tyranny,
when wisdom inferior to your own controls. It is usurpation. Nature
never justifies the wrong of weakness. It never palliates the wrong of
controlling the wise by the weakness of the unwise. Superior wisdom
must govern all conditions of mind, to be harmonious with the law of
progress. When inferior wisdom controls the superior, there is an
obstruction of improvement. Mind is not then free. It is in bondage.
The usurper has always reason to fear. The wrong of usurpation can not
go unrewarded. The wisdom--principle must triumph. When it triumphs,
arbitrary rule will not be endured. Hence, no mind in this circle wears
a crown. They are at the feet of saints. A saint can not wear a crown.
It would be wrong, and what is wrong is inconsistent with the mind of a
saint. In all subordinate circles, there are rulers, and consequently
wrongs. Though the fourth seal opened _one_ mind, so that what was the
mind of one was the mind of all, yet some were tenacious of titles of
distinction. They were indulged in them. Though they saw no wrong, yet
wrong is not right; and what is not right should be avoided. A title,
without signification, is vain, and what is vain is wrong. True, it was
but the shadow of things before, but shadows are the mirror of images.
The mirror of wrong should not be tolerated. The image is not wise,
because it is the image of wrong. Having seen the wrong, we should
forsake it. Having proved the wrong, it would be unwise to pursue it.

“The wisdom of crowns, is the wisdom of ignorance. It supposes a
superiority by inheritance, and denies it by progress. It plants the
sovereignty of a whole nation in the wisdom of hereditary ignorance,
and breaks down a commendable aspiration for industry in progress.
It wastes treasures upon the indolent, while the poor are robbed to
support the unjust burden. It monopolizes industry to satisfy ambition,
and wastes the bread of the hungry to gratify revenge. It makes a tool
of mind, and then lashes it for its servitude. It riots in authority,
and understands not its own weakness. Kings and crowns are inharmonious
with wisdom and goodness. It is as selfish to rule, as it is weak to
be ruled. The one is tyranny, and the other is slavery. The one usurps
what nature never conferred, and the other submits because it is weak.
It will not govern without wisdom, when mind reaches this circle.
Indeed, you will find that government is natural where all minds
acquiesce in benevolence, and wisely act to advance the happiness of
all.

“Crowns imply a distinction. No distinction exists here. All are kings
and priests unto God. All are well governed, because the love of God,
impartial and free as the sunshine, dwells in all, and that governs
all. It is self-government, or the government of self by nature’s
inspiration of love. No discord can enter here. The voice of contention
hath its bounds, and selfishness its limits. I have seen the angry
howl of war. I have seen the wrongs of strife. I have wondered at the
disturbance. But I wonder no more. The love of this circle was not
in them. The sympathies of congenial affinities were not in them.
The benevolence of smiling nature had not warmed their hearts. The
philanthropy of enlarged charity had not united the great brotherhood
of mind. There was ignorance of relationship, and ignorance of the
wisdom of righteousness. These evils will not disturb mind, subdued
by the clear sunlight of truth. Social wisdom is the inheritance of
goodness. Crowns crumble in dust, and equity and justice walk over
their fragments. Those only are worthy, who make worth the height of
their ambition. The hireling is lord of himself, when in the service
of himself, and the lord is a slave, when he fears the revulsions of
his rule. Poverty is worn by the mind whose work is wrong. It is empty
of good. Riches meet the exigency, when divested of selfishness, and
disposed of for other’s benefit. Poverty is made rich, when the wisdom
of reform relieves all want.

“Poverty and riches war with social enjoyment, when uncontrolled by
wisdom. This circle is rich. Other circles have need. The links of
light, which unite with wisdom, and form that wonderful sentence on the
left, will remind this circle of the chain of sympathy which connects
the rich with the poor. The gems are minds. All are not equally
brilliant. The darkness of wrong will not apologize for neglect. The
riches you share, you will freely give; and when the poor receive what
you offer, they will embrace wisdom. Poverty is relieved. The poor
are supplied. They want no more. The sympathies are gratified. Nature
is obeyed. God is honored. Ignorance is overcome. Evils are remedied.
Social harmony is restored. The golden chain of love breaks not in
twain social joy. The gem of obscurity wants no chafing to be seen and
admired. It wants only the covering of wrong to be removed to reveal
its worth. The wrong is ignorance. It is the absence of light. In the
absence of light, it has wandered in darkness. Neglect has permitted
the darkness to linger. When riches are withheld from those who need,
poverty reigns. When poverty reigns, the law of sympathy is denied.
When sympathy is denied, the war of conflict rages. When the conflict
rages, peace is expelled, and with it, the enjoyment of peace.

“You see who wrongs himself. You see who wrongs others. They who
withhold what others require. You can not violate the law of nature
with impunity. You can not neglect others’ good without injury to
yourself. You will aid all who need with the riches you possess.
You will recognize the chain that links all gems together. You will
understand, that the union is immutable. You will feel the shock which
another receives. The chain will convey the force to you. The whole
brotherhood, from the highest to the lowest, will feel it. The light of
this circle reveals but one family. The likeness of God is immortal in
each member. The weak have claims upon the strong. The poor have claims
upon the rich. They are in debt. They owe all they have to the poor. It
is a just claim; and when they have given the poor their dues, all will
become rich. It is no robbery which makes all richer. It is poverty
which refuses what it does not want. It is wrong to receive what will
make you wretched, or refuse what will make you happy. It is right to
receive what will do you good, and wrong to reject it. And you will not
forget that the riches you receive, are the riches of others. They are
given you to be given to others, who are as you were.

“Enter into the joy of wisdom. Enter into the benevolence of God.
Forsake not your brother in the day of need. Bless the enemy in your
gates. Turn not a deaf ear to those minds, who writhe in their own
scorn. Visit the works of sin, and lead the blind by a way they have
not known. Correct those who need with the cord of sympathy, and write
the law of the Lord upon their hearts. Do good to those who scorn your
message and your mission; and say, ‘I am thy brother, why persecutest
thou me?’ So, will you enter into the wisdom of this circle of minds.”

Another mind said, “There is a work which must needs be done. The
rudimental condition needs improvement. There will come a time when
the spirits, as they will call us, can communicate with minds in
the body. I see a work of great magnitude, which will be required
of us. This work requires a change in the social condition of such
minds. As society is now controlled, poverty and riches are unequally
distributed. Minds wrangle about the productions of earth. They disown
the relation of sympathy, and their professions of love are nearly
empty. Sincerity is devoid of active energy. The forms of worship are
forms of display. Pride governs the heart. The poor are wronged. The
rich wrong themselves. Skill and craft oppress the former, and luxury
and extravagance injure the latter. Both are wronged of enjoyment.
The oppression of poverty should be corrected. The indolence of
riches should be vitalized with love. Society should be reconstructed;
industry should be encouraged; love should supplant fear. Works should
take the lead of words. Acts should speak for mind. Wrong should not
tell her tale of woe. Purity should cleanse the impure. The blind
should see the righteousness of God. The harmony of nature should be
imitated. Nations are communities. Communities make nations. Social
order should be established. War should cease. Honesty should abound.
The love, which we feel, should inspire all minds.

“But who will work the necessary change? I see a change in the human
condition approaching. I see a mighty revolution in the organization
of human society. I see means which can accomplish the result. There
is a progress in the rudimental world. The crowns of kings are
growing old with mind. Reverence for human authority will not last
forever. The relics of other days, are monuments of wrong. The tide
of progression will sweep into oblivion the injustice of tyranny. The
sun of truth will enlighten the nations of earth. The glory of God
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall enjoy it together. But, until
the change shall come, no human wisdom can control the disorders of
society. Efforts will be made by philanthropic minds, to rectify the
evils, but without success. Organized communities will be established,
but the evil, in some form, will remain. Something more than a change
of external conditions is required. Externals affect internals, but
the external should not control the internal. The external is the
stream, the internal the fountain. Nature provides that the internal,
the fountain, should control the external, the effect. Not until the
fountain becomes pure, will the stream be worthy. The wrongs of
society, are the manifestations of wisdom in embryo. It is enshrouded
in the darkness of other days. The night of superstition is far spent.
The morning light of truth must break from this sphere. The fountain of
pure water must refresh the desolate earth. The well of sympathy must
flow freely, to nourish the plants of immortal progress.

“The first duty of this circle will be to make known the existence
of mind, in this sphere, to the doubting of earth. The wisdom of
the circle will next be employed to abolish the errors of mind. No
sectarian organization will justify the revelation, which this circle
will disclose. All will stand amazed at the wonder. When the wonder
subsides, the condition of mind will be aided. Spirits will communicate
a system of ethics, adapted to the amelioration of human wrong. It will
be such as will melt the pure gold and remove the dross of corruption.
It will affect the fountain of works. It will inspire the heart. It
will correct the mind. It will remove the darkness. It will chase away
all fear. It will banish all doubt. It will fill the soul with good
things. It will enlarge the sympathy, and strengthen the love of mind.
When the fountain becomes changed, its issue will be pure. When the
issue becomes pure, the poor will become rich. When the poor become
rich, the equality of mind will be recognized. When the equality of
mind shall be recognized, the evils of human society will be overcome.
Nations will war no more. Brother will signify relation. Justice will
be acknowledged. Communities will form nations, and all nations one
family. Then sympathy will unite, and keep united the whole, and the
whole will strive to promote the good of the whole. Then, the good of
the whole will be regarded as the good of one, and the good of one as
the good of the whole. Selfishness will be extinguished by the wisdom
of universal love and philanthropy.

“The wide world will be the common inheritance of her children. No
wrangling about earth, or its gold, will be heard. Industry will be
worth, and gold will be as ashes. The love of money will not exist,
and the love of wisdom will occupy its place. No fraud will be
practiced, for no wrong will be indulged. All motives to evil will
be removed, and the mind of one will be the mind of all. Corruption
and deception will not be found, for when mind knows the thoughts of
mind, the wrongs of corruption and deception will be seen no more. You
know that no wrongs can enter here. No voice of unkindness mocks the
wail of sorrow, when the love of God fills the mind. The miseries of
earth will have no abiding place, when the wisdom of God inspires all
minds. The ignorance of the first circle will not be known, when the
knowledge of good shall become universal. Passion and folly will not
be indulged, when reason and truth control all hearts. But wisdom is
developed by progress, and truth by wise counsels. The work of reform
will soon commence. The circles of heaven will improve the circles of
earth. Wonders and signs will attend your labor. They will be wonders
to the ignorant, but not to you. The work will be commenced, when the
superstitions and wrongs of religionists shall yield to the voice of
philosophy and reason. One generation must pass away, before the time
will come. They must pass from the rudimental to this sphere. In that
time, venerated superstitions will be much discarded, and human rights
will be respected. The work will commence in obscurity, and mind will
rise in glory. Ignorance will scorn the message, and ridicule will be
lavished upon the messengers. Time will bring a change. Professions
will not monopolize the industry of the poor, nor misers hold the key
of plenty. Wealth shall unite with wisdom, and poverty shall smile
at the marriage. Christianity shall no longer be a mockery, but its
wisdom shall flow like a fountain of water over the world of mind. Dark
sayings shall be illuminated, and wayfaring mind shall lift up its
voice in praise. The homes of the willing shall become residences of
angels, and the disconsolate shall fear no evil. The strong shall aid
the weak, and the days of mourning shall be ended.

“I will now conduct this circle into the chamber of hope. There came
to me a messenger from the sixth circle. He told me of things which
will be no wrong to relate. It was a prediction of future good. You may
follow me.”

We followed him to the chamber of hope. The messenger then appeared,
and said:

“This is the circle of Hope. All who will receive, and do the words of
hope, will hear my speech. Before me you see a great wonder. It is the
mountain of Hope in the arm of God. On your right, you see the sun; on
your left, the moon; over your heads, the stars; beneath your feet, the
fifth circle; and behind you, a road. This is the circle of prophecy.
Here causes and their effects may be traced through successive
generations, and their results clearly demonstrated. You will soon be
addressed by a mind of this circle, who will aid you to the desired
wisdom. He will relate what events will transpire in the progress of
truth and wisdom, in the development of rudimental minds.”

A mind soon commenced by saying: “Pilgrims of hope, the mind who
hopes will realize. Hope can not be entertained for things which are
not. It is the reality which gives birth to hope. The reality is
shadowed on the mind with such evidences as conditions will allow.
Hope is expectation of good. Mind will sometimes limit hope. It
will fix times and seasons for the hope of good, to be realized.
The darkness of ignorance suffers temporary disappointment. Hope
will prophecy truthfully. Wisdom sees the thing hoped for. The mind
intuitively anticipates good. Its nature is full of promise. Its
conditions sometimes create doubt and despair; but, unobstructed in
its exercise, it hopes forever. We are not without hope. We will say,
no mind can exist without hope. It is nature. It is the law of mind
immutably established to hope. Mind will hope, and no condition, in
any department of the universe, can exclude all hope. It may be dim.
The dense darkness of low circles admits only an occasional ray to
penetrate the dismal cell of ignorance. The mind of superior circles
admits a greater number. This circle sees what other circles hope for.
The joy of our minds is the anticipation of good in them. They walk by
faith, and we by sight, concerning the good they expect. It is a good
which the reality transfers to them through the intervening circles.
Each circle conveys a lesser light, until the last receives a feeble
ray; so you will see the fulness of hope, as measured to lower circles,
actual realities here. You will see the wonder of wisdom revealed in
the economy of hope. Minds uncultivated hope in a less degree, than
minds of wisdom. The rudimental condition shares in the joy of hope,
proportioned to the wisdom of its condition. In one circle, it is but a
ray; in another, it grows brighter; in a third, it is glorious; and,
in the fourth, it is more glorious. But what these circles hope for,
even in the highest exultation of anticipated good, is as much less
than the reality, as light is more glorious than darkness; I will say
as the sun is more glorious than the stars.

“The sun reflects rays of light. It is the orb of light. Its rays
touch the palace of kings and the wigwam of barbarians. It gives light
to the rich and the poor, the wise and the unwise, to the free and
the slave, to the enlightened and the ignorant, to all nations and
all countries, and moons and stars in nature’s unmeasured expanse. It
gives what will bless, and make happy; unasked, its rays illumine,
and banish the darkness of night. The day is not partial. The day
is wisdom--a blessing to the world. It is not a special or partial
blessing; but it is a blessing in harmony with the law of God. It is a
blessing unstinted and measureless. The sun is the work of God. It is
his wisdom which made it. It is his love which has ordained the sun to
give light to all. It is his power which formed the sun for the good
of mind. All things which he has made, are adapted to good. The mind
which sees the sun, as a work of God, and the rays blessing all things,
may hope for good. He who has made the sun a blessing, may make want
satisfied with reality. The sun gives hope. It is without stint in its
favors. So, is the wisdom of God manifest in the natural world. He is
wise. His works are wise. All things are made in wisdom. Ignorance
may mock at blessings, but nature offers no contradiction. Folly may
scorn the lesson, but hope expels the scorn. Superstition may have her
admirers, but reason fills the soul with confidence. Would mind know
God, it should study his works. The dreams of midnight may conflict
with the stern realities of nature, but they are dreams without hope.
The wild vagaries of uninstructed mind may mislead the weak, but the
voice of nature speaks the language of love. Bigotry may frown upon
free inquiry, but the smile of wisdom is more congenial to mind than
the envy of the miserable. I will see the sun, though doubters may
challenge my sight. I will gaze upon its blessings, though bigots may
call it sacrilegious. I will admire nature, though crowns crumble,
and steeples fall. I will gaze on the works of God, though opinions
falter and rites perish. The wide world is my home, though chains and
prisons, frowns and fears, mark the circle of those who defy a creed
that abolishes neither. The time will come when the chains will be
melted, the prisons demolished, the frowns made smiles, and the fears
overcome with hope. When the sun, in yonder smiling heavens, is taken
as the work of God, and nature is acknowledged to be the standard of
righteousness, the hope of the soul will rise above the misty darkness
of sensuality and wrong. The sun is emblematical of nature in the
profusion of her blessings. Adaptation is seen in the economy of all
nature. Mind needs light, and light is not withheld. Light needs mind,
otherwise it would be vain. So, with the moon. It imparts what it has
received. It gives to bless. It meets the wants of mind. On the right
and on the left, above and below, all things are adapted to their
respective conditions. The stars reflect the mighty power of God. They
shine. They give light. They bless, and curse not. They do good, and
not evil. They minister to the wants of mind. They rest not in their
love. They are full of good. Wants are strangers there. The wisdom of
God will lead you to the full enjoyment of all that hope can embrace;
and, in due time, the wonders of other globes will be opened to you,
and to me, and to all who will journey to them. This circle will hear
the instruction of another mind, and listen attentively to the words
of Hope which will inspire you with the promise of good, yet concealed
from your vision.”

“Pilgrims: in the progress of mind, there is an extension of the
vision. Far in the distance, development discloses the reality of
things, which mind has hoped for. The seers of other days were aided
by this circle. Things were revealed, which have come to pass, and
which will take place. The windows of the future were thrown open,
and prophets saw the truth. The sight was extended through successive
changes to successive results. The intervening links of cause and
effect, being omitted in the history, have answered the purpose of
superstitious veneration, and worked the circles for whose benefit they
were intended into awe and subjection. But the time is approaching
when the philosophy of prophecy will be understood, and appreciated.
The degree of wisdom, essential to endow mind to clearly perceive the
future condition of themselves or others, appertains to this circle.

“The mind who inspires the seer, merely informs him of the fact, which
is intended to be effected. It is a fact which must be in harmony
with causes, and the causes are surveyed to the result. The seers
merely announced the fact. They announced what the mind, who inspired
them, impressed them to relate. The mind of this circle is one mind.
Hence, the mind who inspires of this circle, inspires the will of all
who belong to it. The resolve of one, is the resolve of all. As all
resolve, so one inspires. When a work is resolved upon, the whole
power of this circle is brought into requisition to do it. The labor
is calculated with mathematical exactness. All the obstructions are
surveyed, and all the advantages canvassed. When the result has been
determined by a wisdom that can not err, the mind may inspire, or
impress the reality upon those who have not the sagacity or wisdom to
see it otherwise. It is to them, in their condition of ignorance, a
subject of hope. In like manner, when the workings of nature are traced
in their mysterious windings, and the complex conditions of cause and
effect are understood, the results of the same may be determined in
wisdom. This determination is also the result of causes, immutable as
mathematical demonstrations. Therefore, the seers of old were inspired
by the wisdom of a circle, capable of determining results of causes,
with the same unerring precision as the mathematician calculates the
time and duration of an eclipse, or the appearance and disappearance
of a comet. The whole result must be infallibly correct. The science
of mathematics is the science of this circle. Euclid has given rules.
Nature divulges more. The former are well. The latter are better.
The former were true to nature; but the science was not perfectly
understood only in degree. The latter comprises the infinite, the
former the finite. All development is progress. It is the accumulation
of facts in the mind. It is the power of wisdom.

“When the mathematician predicts an eclipse, or any wonderful phenomena
in the material world, the prediction does not make the fact, but the
fact is discovered by mathematical calculation. All causes and their
effects are considered, as well as the uniform and invariable laws of
nature. The result is sure. Demonstrations have prepared the mind to
calculate the movements of orbs, and the relation which they sustain
to each other. In like manner, an extended knowledge permits a mind
to calculate the movements of planets, and suns, and stars of other
systems. And, when the mind is sufficiently developed, it can calculate
the movement of mind. It can survey the influences which control it,
and calculate the wisdom which will be required to produce a desirable
result, or avoid an impending calamity.

“Minds are stars in this system of nature. They differ in wisdom,
power, and glory. The wisdom of the fifth circle is less than the
sixth. The sixth seal unveils the future with the exactness of
demonstration. It unlocks the mystery of prophecy. It makes hope a
wisdom of fact. It discloses the reality of the thing sought. It opens
a world of coming events, and saves the mind from all uncertainty.
It corrects the wisdom, which makes the natural supernatural. There
is nothing above nature but God. He is supreme. Nature is his work,
and it is the natural work of his wisdom and power. Mind is the
work of God. It is a star amid other stars. It is a sun amid other
suns. It is subject to law, as are planets and stars. It is moved
by laws. Attraction and repulsion control it. Like and dislike
exert an influence. When the condition of mind is understood, and
the amount of wisdom is possessed by another mind to calculate the
power of attraction and repulsion necessary to produce a result, its
position may be defined, and its movements determined for successive
generations. The weight of attraction is not the same in all materials,
and therefore, allowances must be made for the difference. One mind may
be very empty, and consequently light, when compared with another. The
force of attraction will accordingly be less. It weighs less than more
solid materials. The lower the circle, the less it weighs; because it
is empty of wisdom, or contains but a small fraction. Attractive forces
may be estimated by the distance between them, and the weight of those
forces. When mind is attracted by mind, it is because of the power
which one exerts over the other. The influence is proportioned to the
weight. The heavier body must control the lighter. The lighter can not
govern the heavier. Attraction is with the most weight. That weight is
wisdom. Consequently, the wisest attract the less wise; and it never
can happen, that the less wise can govern the wise by attraction.
Hence, in the philosophy of nature, two bodies unlike each other, repel
each other. They separate by natural law, as they unite by natural
law. The wisdom of this law is to avoid unlike associations. The minds
unlike separate by the law of repulsion, and there must be a violation
of the law to keep them together. So, with minds of like affinities.
The weight of attraction unites the two, and they can not be disunited
without a disturbance of the law which holds them together.

“Hence, you will see the reason why minds in this sphere are attracted
to a higher sphere, as we have been attracted to this. The weight
of wisdom is far removed from earth. As mind ascends from earth, so
attraction grows stronger, and hurries it along with greater rapidity.
But minds in the rudimental condition, being far removed from the
source of wisdom, are influenced in a less degree than those of higher
circles. But, as they are attracted by wisdom, it must be upward. No
forces attract downward but gross and impure. The downward force is
repulsion. It is not wisdom. Hence, folly and ignorance are attracted
by folly and ignorance, and, when thus attracted, the wretchedness of
mind is severe. Never will the wisdom of the wise be attracted with the
folly of the unwise.

“There will arise a work which will engage the wisdom of this circle.
Minds in the rudimental condition, will soon see a light from this
sphere. They will hear a voice from heaven. Messengers from this
circle will be employed to attract mind upward. They will see who can
be influenced by their presence. Affinities, approximating to this
circle, will be chosen as instruments of a great reform. Those who
will be uninfluenced by the gross works of darkness, will receive the
light of superior wisdom. Those who love the world of gold and silver,
and are under the control of sensuality and tyranny, will abide the
time of visitation, and seek their content in things that perish with
the using; but the independent and candid, the honest and true, will
rise upward in the resurrection of the just, and become partakers of
an inheritance that fadeth not away. When that time comes, and come
it will, the reform of the rudimental condition will be renewed with
unabating energy; and old systems of wrong and wretchedness will vanish
away. All circles in this sphere, capable of developing the rudimental
mind, will aid in the work. You will be controlled as wisdom shall
direct, and meet the evils of human society with a courage that never
falters. Hope will be imparted to the despondent, and confidence to the
fearful. All devoid of understanding will revile you, and many will
turn a deaf ear to the voice of wisdom. But some will receive the word
with gladness, and others with fear. The day will open upon mind the
reality of heaven. The day will unlock the mystery of revelation, and
give hope to all nations. The miracles of former ages will return,
and return to be understood. Human opinions and creeds will melt in
the sunshine of truth, and whole nations rise up in progress, and
call you blessed. As free as the light of the sun will the wisdom of
heaven smile upon mind; and the smile will subdue the wretchedness of
ignorance and folly.

“Pilgrims: you have received the promise. Hope, without fear, will grow
brighter and brighter, in this circle. You will receive wisdom, day by
day, until the seventh seal shall be unloosed. Then, the work of reform
will be commenced in wisdom, among the inhabitants of the earth.”

When he had concluded his speech, I desired to be informed in regard to
the mathematical calculation of future events, and the rules by which
such events are determined; when another mind responded: “Mathematical
rules are the rules of nature; or, as you will understand, the laws
of nature. The laws of nature control all things. Mind and matter,
gross and fine, are subject to laws. In harmony with these laws, are
cause and effect. When a cause produces an effect, the effect becomes
a cause of another effect. Thus, effects are causes, and causes are
the effects of other causes. But no effect will be inharmonious with
the cause. The likeness of the one will be found in the other. When
a cause transfers itself into an effect, or is productive of an
effect, it will be as nature has designed, the true likeness of the
cause. All variations are the result of combined causes, varying in
their effects the modification, in the proportion of the power which
each cause respectively exerts. Hence, by tracing one cause in its
productions, and other causes in their productions, until the whole
are mathematically balanced at any given period, the result will be
mathematically demonstrated. There can not be two results at variance,
when the law of cause and effect are understood and observed in the
calculation. One, and only one conclusion can be obtained by this
process of investigation.”

T. May not unseen causes disturb the result by their modifications?

“Causes differing essentially, will be repelled, whether seen or
unseen. Mind can not be affected by remote affinities. The near
affinities must control. Antagonistical elements can not control one
another. They repulse; and whatever is repulsive, has no influence to
change. The wisdom of the wise must be controlled by the wisdom of
the wiser; because folly is repulsive, and only excites disgust and
pity. By ascertaining the ratio of their progress, which is governed
by an immutable law, and the future development of their minds may be
determined at a given period; and what may be determined in regard
to one mind, may be in regard to all, when the condition of all is
understood. Hence, the aggregate result must be proportionate to the
aggregate of the present condition in the ratio of development, as
established by an immutable law controlling the development. When
the seventh seal is unloosed, a complete and perfect survey of the
aggregate condition of mind, having an influence on the rudimental
condition, will be open to your inspection. And as all the influence of
that seal comes through this circle to reach the rudimental condition,
so we know the amount and extent of that influence, and are, therefore,
able to make our calculations with the exactness of demonstration.
Prophecy is not supernatural, but as natural as the calculation by
numbers. It is a well ascertained fact, that numbers are just. Justice
is the principle which governs all arithmetical and mathematical rules.
This principle can not be invalidated. It is true; and because it is
true, there can be no conflicting results. From aggregate conditions,
and the ratio of progress made by those conditions, a result is always
attainable for any given period.”

We were then made acquainted with the principle by which communications
from the second to the rudimental sphere might be made. This principle
was known in an early period of the world. Prophets and sages, poets
and philosophers, have enjoyed, in nearly every century, the advantage
of inspiration, although in some ages in so moderate a degree, as to
be almost or quite imperceptible to the subject. Inspiration is the
influx of spirit impressions. When these impressions could not be
made by spirits, in consequence of the positive condition of mind,
manifestations have been made. Belshazzar, being positive, could
not be impressed by spirits; and the result shows that spirits made
an impression of a fact on his mind, by writing on a wall, through
the interpretation of a successful medium. Daniel could not have
interpreted the writing, had it not been impressed upon him. The
impression was so distinctly made upon his mind, that he could not
avoid its recital. This established the confidence of the people in the
truthfulness of his predictions. They were truthful, not because he was
more wise than many others, but because he was impressed by those who
were of this sphere.

But when inspiration comes from any mind below the sixth circle, it
should be regarded with caution, so far as the prediction of future
events is concerned. I will say, it should be regarded as an opinion of
the mind who communicates. That opinion may be correct, or incorrect.
And this is the reason, why inferior circles sometimes err, and results
show their errors. It was not intended as a deception, but as a
probable fact. It was opinion only. Spirits of the sixth circle predict
facts, and only facts. They do not always inform the lower circles, of
all the facts within the chain of events, but what they do predict is
true, and the prediction will be strictly verified.

“The circle of prophecy is a circle of purity. The refinement of mind
qualifies it to see with less obscurity. The wisdom of the pure will
not be disappointed. As all prophecy is the maturity of wisdom in
degree, so all purity is the result of this perfection. Mind in its
development, passes through successive degrees of refinement, until it
is qualified to understand things which, in its infancy, it could not
comprehend. The infancy of mind embraces limited views of nature. The
darkness of midnight surrounds the circle of its knowledge. A wild and
vacant waste of immensity brings no light, because light is obscured
by the grossness of perception; I will say, immensity is vacant to the
mind in an unrefined condition. It surveys only a small compass of
wisdom. The impurity of its condition predisposes it to judge according
to the measure of itself. It will not travel beyond its own circuit,
and is, therefore, compelled to render a decision compatible with its
survey. That survey is incomplete, even within its prescribed limits,
because intervening obstacles cast their shadows over the vision. The
polar star is distrusted, the magnet is rejected, and the wild sea
of wrong rages. All is dark, dreary night; all is wretched, hopeless
confusion. Terror, wild and dismal, reigns in the empire of their
minds. Nature seems a charnel house of corruption, and the ruler a
tyrant without mercy.

“Pilgrims: the cause is apparent to you, but not to them. Viewing the
economy of nature through their distorted vision, with their deceptive
suspicions to mislead, their ignorance to govern, and their impurities
to resist advancement, it does not surprise you to find them actually
forming gods after their own likeness, and distributing justice
according to their own measure. They can only comprehend their own
measure; they can only weigh with their own weights; and, hence, what
they measure and what they weigh, must not, and will not, exceed the
standard which they have established. All other conditions must yield
to their views of right and wrong. The pure and the impure are one or
the other, as their wisdom prescribes, and prescribes by such rules as
their wrongs have determined.

“Pilgrims: nature has her laws. When those laws are obeyed, the impure
will become pure. This is nature; shun evil, and do good. This is law,
and this is religion. This is right, and this right is pure in the
wisdom of this circle. You will, also, understand, that to the impure
all things are impure, which disagree with their rules. Their rules are
not your rules. They would control nature; you would be controlled by
nature. They would make war upon the laws of God; you would acquiesce
in their righteousness. They would control all things; you would be
submissive to nature’s decrees. They would circumscribe the teachings
of nature; you would listen to her voice. They would judge you; but you
would not judge them. They would aspire to your joy; but they have not
the wisdom to reform that they might attain it. They would dispute
the truth, because they have not the understanding to comprehend it.
They would reform from their errors, but their rules are bars against
reform. They would have peace, but they mock the voice that utters it.
They would be happy, but happiness is misunderstood through want of
experience. They would be pure, but purity is meaningless in the mouth
of folly. They would wrong no one, but wrong is right to them. Such are
the conditions of the impure and pure. The wisdom of this circle will
acknowledge no law but love, no religion but goodness, no worship but
worth, no ruler but God. His praise will be in your song; his wisdom
in your devotions; his truth in your minds; and his reward in your
works. The union of your hearts will be immortal. No wrong can mar your
felicity, no curse awe you into servitude; for you are free, in the
dominion of the free, to act, and do, and say, what the laws of your
mind require to make yourselves and others blest.

“I will now give you an introduction to a mystery, which will reveal
a circle of surpassing loveliness, outvieing all which you have
heretofore seen. It is the last seal of circles in this sphere. I will
ask, Will you follow me?”

“We will all.”

“Then you may rise with me to the court of Beauty.”

The whole circle ascended, and were introduced into a mansion resting
on twenty-four pillars, which were polished smooth as glass, and over
which stood the most wonderful mansion that my eyes had ever beheld. On
entering the mansion, I saw a white throne, and in front thereof were
written the words, “Purity, Perfection and Bliss.” Over the throne,
was written, “Nature unfolded by revelation.” Under it, the words,
“Justice, Liberty, Peace.” On the right was a representation of a
little child leading a lion, and a wolf nursing a lamb. On the left was
a wounded serpent with a spike driven through his head, and clinched in
a rock. Beneath our feet were pillars of wisdom, while over our heads
the beauty of sweet minstrels appeared, chanting,

  “Welcome, ye pilgrims, with gladness we raise
  The song of the pure, in anthems of praise;
  For wisdom, whose might sustains us in love,
  Calls you, with nature, to join us above.”

The minstrels were near a white cloud, and their countenances were
expressive of great delight, in the melody of their welcome song. When
they had concluded, a great multitude, which no mind could number,
were introduced. The first mind that addressed us, said: “The pillars,
on which this mansion rests, are not disproportioned, but harmonious
and beautiful. There are four and twenty. They are Justice, Honor,
Integrity, Fortitude, Generosity, Mercy, Forbearance, Humility,
Gratitude, Love, Peace, Order, Harmony, Wisdom, Progress, Truth, Power,
Industry, Forgiveness, Holiness, Sobriety, Sincerity, Candor, and
Veneration. In these virtues you have no need that I instruct you. They
have elevated you, and will sustain you, while I unloose the seventh
seal of wisdom, and unfold the beauty contained in this mansion.

“The white throne is not stained with blood. No monarch sits thereon,
to rule with steel, the residents of this mansion. No tyrant sways the
scepter of rule over us; for Justice will not suffer, though thrones be
vacant, and rulers become equals. The white throne has not been soiled
by the usurper, nor tarnished by cruelty. It is a throne--a throne of
power. It is power in purity, because love in perfection blesses every
mind in need. It is white as snow, and the wrong of injustice makes no
advance toward it. It is a throne unseen by ignorance, disdained by
weakness, and cherished and respected only by the pure in heart. It
is a throne of good, and an emblem of the righteous decisions of wise
minds.

“Your own minds are white thrones. As you are now pure, you can judge.
But no mind will judge you. All judgment is with you. Each mind will
judge itself, and not another. The judgment will be pure, because
purity resides in you. The judgment will be right, because it is the
judgment of self. You will decide upon your own works. No other mind
will assume to judge for you. This is your work, and what is your
work does not belong to another. Judge no mind but self. The throne
is within you. On that white throne determine your works. It is your
inalienable prerogative. It belongs to no one else.

“Before the white throne, are Purity, Perfection, and Bliss. They are
before your minds. In search of these things, consider that nature is
pure, and the perfection and bliss, after which you are seeking, may
be found in the adaptation of things to other things. This is the law
of mind. It will not attain perfection and bliss, without observing
this law. All things must harmonize to insure peace. The ignorant are
unhappy, because they do not adapt their conditions and themselves to
each other. The surrounding circumstances control them against their
happiness. They allow others, and even elect others, to judge them, and
ignorantly acquiesce in their decision, however unwise and unnatural
may be their judgment. Those whom they elect to decide the right and
wrong for them, are often wholly ignorant of the conditions upon which
nature suspends the harmony of cause and effect. They are incompetent
to render a righteous judgment, because they do not understand what
is right. Erring, in regard to what is right, they enter a judgment
in error. The error falls upon those whom they judge. The whole is
wrong. No mind can surrender the judgment of itself into the hands of
another, without jeopardizing its own happiness. It is this mistaken
policy which has robbed humanity of its birth-right. It has assented to
a common error, that no mind is capable of determining its own good,
without injustice to others: or, if capable, it would be dangerous to
the welfare of the majority to allow mind a decision in that which
personally concerned itself without the concurrence of others.

“The perfection of this circle will harmonize with bliss. The bliss
of one is the bliss of all. The purity of one is the purity of all.
The agreement of this circle is the wisdom of all. Each mind will be
its own judge, and perform its own work. Each mind will aid each.
That which is natural do; and that which is unnatural you will not
do. You can not do wrong, because you perceive that all wrong is a
contradiction of nature, and injurious to the doer. You can not do
wrong, because you are incapacitated to wrong yourselves. You can not
do wrong, because wrong is contrary to your judgment. You will do
right, because right injures no one. It is the judgment of ignorance
which injures another. It is the judgment of weakness which inflicts
wrong for wrong, and renders evil for evil. None but oppressors will
be cruel, vindictive, or unjust. Oppression is the power of folly. It
is the work of tyrants. It is the wrong of ignorance. Governments are
impure. They compel the ignorant to do wrong. They violate the laws of
nature. They impose burdens on the poor, and grant favors to the rich.
They levy contributions on property to give honor to the indolent. They
make laws for the people to restrain the enjoyment of mind; and they
punish crimes, which their laws have made, without mercy. They refuse
instruction from heaven, because heaven is not a monopoly adapted to
their selfish wisdom.

“They bow before a throne--a throne black as midnight. They bow in
darkness, and receive the lash of oppression. They bow in smiles, and
rise in tears. There is a tyrant on the throne. He judges evil good,
and good evil. He is judge; and he judges after his own heart. Alas!
the throne is impure. The pool of wisdom has not been polluted with his
infirmities. Nature will wash away the wrongs of ignorance. Experience
will remove the cruelty of darkness. Progress will unveil the miseries
of deception. Favoritism will not rob pauperism. Folly will not eclipse
wisdom. Fear will not paralyze industry, and wrong will not rule over
right. Then, purity will not center in profession without goodness, nor
perfection be a dead language in the throne of judgment.

“Pilgrims: all bliss is the exercise of goodness. Love is the divinity
of the universe. Hate is the hell of fools. Affection is the element
of heaven. Sympathy is the law of nature. Ignorance is the mother of
crime. Crime is the father of misery. Misery is hell--bliss is heaven.
Show yourselves pure, and heaven is within you. Show yourselves good,
and bliss will not forsake you. Show yourselves wise, and purity will
develop itself; and, when purity develops itself, no evil can befall
you. The righteous shall fear no evil. The pure shall see good. The
bliss of wisdom shall grow brighter and brighter, forever.

“Pilgrims: you will be required to develop great mysteries to the
rudimental world. Nature must be unfolded to the ignorant. The
undeveloped mind must be expanded. The angry waters of contention must
be stilled. The wild sea of disturbance must be calmed. The midnight
of deception must pass away. The clear sunlight of nature must open
the treasures of your path. You will transmit the realities of this
sphere to earth’s inhabitants. The mighty must overcome the weakness
of infancy. The strong must raise up the sorrowing, the despondent,
and the wretched. The wise must instruct the unwise; and upon you will
devolve the work of correcting the wrongs and errors of humanity.
The former days will return, when, through your instrumentality,
the wilderness of uncultivated mind shall arise in the strength of
wisdom, and nature smile with the song of redemption. You must go to
the boasted land of the free, and publish the tidings of immortality.
You will not sound an alarm of danger, but you will write the law of
love in the hearts of the children of men. You will inspire minds with
hope, and expel the darkness of the grave. You will turn many from
paths of folly, and put the wisdom of nature in their souls. You will
reform many, and the many will reform more, until the nations of the
earth shall seek peace, and bliss find a residence in the temple of
God. You will meet no opposition you will not overcome, nor will you
tire in your labor, until the poor shall be made rich, and the wants of
humanity shall become satisfied with the luxury of true blessedness.

“There is a light which you will emit in your pathway, that will
cause pure minds to rejoice, and the impure to tremble with fear.
Preparatory to the dawning of that day upon the world below, it will
be your work to get your means in readiness, so as to effectually
accomplish the pleasure of God, in the removal of wrong. You will need
wisdom, adapted to the conditions of those whom you will instruct,
and adequate to the great ends of human development. You will have
means. The means which nature affords are equal to every want. There
never can be a famine, when every want is supplied. The white throne
of judgment will admit no error. It is the throne of God, of nature,
and of your own hearts. It is within, around, above, and below you.
From this throne you will dispense justice to the needy, liberty to the
captive, and peace to the world. You will go where need calls you, and
where you can do good. You will not waste your strength in vain. You
will operate with great power, when circumstances make it expedient.
You will show signs of your presence, and the wisdom of the world will
be humbled. Philosophers will be confounded, and ignorance will mock,
but can not resist. You will teach the little child how to control the
lion that growls at the disclosure. You will lead the strong man by
an influence which he will not acknowledge. He will not yield until
the child commands. The world of mind will not yield to the voice of
nature, until nature reveals her philosophy. That world of mind is in
its boasted strength a lion, but the little child, the weak things, as
they will call your manifestations, will control the lion. Nature will
arm the weak with wisdom, to control a great multitude. They will be
strong, and the lion will feel his weakness. He will roar no more when
the child touches his heart. He will not harm, nor be harmed, when no
want induces him to seek for blood. The day will come, when the wants
of the lion will be satisfied without wrong. The day will come, when
the wants of mind will be satisfied with good things. The day will
come, when you will converse with the rudimental world, as you do with
each other. The day will come, when the wisdom of the two spheres will
meet. In that day you will rejoice, because great good will be done.
In that day, the invisible things of God will be clearly seen, being
manifest by the things which are made. They will be manifest through
you, and minds will be inspired to write the things which they have
seen. The works of nature will not retrograde; the progress of truth
will onward move, till one family, and no more, shall inhabit the
earth. That family shall be one, and all nations shall unite in it. The
common ties of sympathy and justice shall be felt, and neglect shall be
no more known, for all mind will be inspired with your love and peace.

“The representation of a serpent fastened in the rock, will show you,
that the subtlety and low sensuality of mind will be powerless against
your efforts. The serpent will not injure you, nor retard by his
energy the work committed to your hands. Indeed, you know that none
but such as hug the earth, as this serpent represents, can oppose the
wisdom you will disclose. They only who covet, like creeping things,
the earth, and who drag their bodies in a serpentine course along the
road of human life, will not look up to heaven for support and wisdom;
but you will not be overcome by their will; for their ignorance is not
unconquerable. You will receive, in due time, all the instructions
which will be necessary, and enter upon your mission with alacrity. But
you may ask, what may we do to get things in readiness? You will now
be instructed by another mind.”

When he had concluded, another mind said:

“Pilgrims: the means requisite to success, in your mission to the
rudimental sphere, are few and simple. You will need wisdom and
prudence. You will require patience and perseverance. With these
qualities, you will prosper in the work allotted you. In the first
place, you will be wise to select such mediums as will do good, and not
conceal the facts which shall be made manifest. You will select such as
will be faithful in the work of revealing the truth. You will select
such as you can find who will not turn aside from the manifestations
you will make, because popular scorn shall be hissed at the philosophy
you may teach. You will select such as will not crawl serpent-like
to gratify the low aspirations of a defunct religion, or a brutal,
deceptive, sensuality, which will envy what it has not the industry or
ambition to investigate, and reduce to practice. Take such as you can
find, who will not bow to the dust, because weakness is not able to
stand erect, and face the evils of misguided mind. Take such as will
not disown heaven to gratify lust and earth. Take such as will not
wrong your message by concealing it under a bushel. Take such as will
do the work of revealment.

“The mission will be commenced in about twenty-five years. It will
be opposed with great violence by religionists. The superstitious
will charge your work to evil spirits, and the skeptical will not.
The condition of mind in the rudimental world, will require a great
many manifestations to improve it. There will arise minds who will
not believe the evidence of their own senses. They will be moved,
and see things moved; and, when they see and know the facts, they
will seek to find some cause other than spirits, which they will
imagine have produced it. They will be moved, and say that they moved
themselves. They will be instructed, and say that instruction is of
themselves. They will contrive every possible means to gainsay the
facts. They will attribute the manifestations to a cause, which is not,
and never can be, the real one. They will say, mind is conscious and
unconscious. They will contradict themselves. No mind can be conscious
and unconscious. No mind can be moved, and move itself. No mind can do
what you will do, and not be conscious that it did it. You will write
what will be known and unknown to others. They will say, they thought
it, because you impressed the thought. They will say, they moved
themselves, because you moved them. They will write what you impress,
and as you move them; but they will say, it was their impressions and
not yours. They will write what is not impressed or known to them, and
they will impute the writing to others in the body. They will write
without impressions, and they will say, it is electricity. They will
turn all evidence into imagination, and then demand greater evidence
from you.

“Such will be the condition of mind. Others will receive the evidence
and progress in wisdom. You will give to every mind all within your
power; but you will bear this message to mind: That what may gratify
idle curiosity, is the work of idlers; but what is necessary to develop
mind, is a candid investigation of the laws by which it is governed.
The wise will reform, but the unwise will cavil, because they can not
control you. You will write what will do good, and when your message
shall be discarded, or your mission disputed, you will go to such as
will hear you, and be benefited by your efforts to do good.

“I shall now instruct you in regard to the serpent. I shall give you,
spike and a sledge. You will drive the spike through the head of the
serpent, and clinch it in a rock. The serpent is the adversary of
reform. It is the deceiver of mind. Its path is secluded and vile. It
loathes progress. It wishes the old den for its habitation. It lurks
among rocks, and secludes itself in crevices. It wants nothing new, and
bites to destroy. The spike is truth. Take it; use it; for that which
is evil, it is good to control. The evil is in mind. The serpent lives
only where evil reigns. Where evil reigns fix your weapon. The evil is
opposition to holiness; it is opposition to good; and when you fix your
weapon of truth in the head of error and wrong, let the mighty power of
wisdom drive the spike through the head of the serpent, that it may die
a death without mourning.

“The serpent is an emblem of earthly folly. It is deceptive and vile.
It shuns the path of the wise and good. It crawls noiselessly into the
mind. It bites the good of the soul. It induces despair and shame.
It wins minds from rectitude and confidence. It is not mind, but the
deceiver of mind. Its deceptions are practiced, where its influence
prevails. Its influence prevails where evils exist. It is evil. It is
nothing but evil. You will wrong no one by destroying it. To destroy
evil, you will use the wisdom of this circle. You will overcome the
evils of ignorance. But ignorance will war against the truth. All the
machinery of war will be brought against it. The work will commence in
a day of darkness, and the morning light will dissipate the gloom of
doubt. The sadness of despair will vanish before the joy of eternal
wisdom.

“The rudimental world is afflicted with great evils. These evils are
in all the conditions of human society. They enter into the composition
of all human governments, the religious institutions, all classes of
mind; and science and philosophy, as understood, have not the power
to correct them. Science and philosophy are corrupted with the errors
and wrongs of ignorance. The wisdom of this circle must displace those
wrongs. It must eradicate the woes, and harmonize the antagonisms of
mind. The old forms of government must give place to new. The new must
give order and beauty, purity and justice to universal mind. It must
correct the unhealthy current of wrong. It must vitalize the soul of
humanity with good. It must remove the poison of the serpent from
the hearts of men. It must satisfy the wants of nature with nature’s
blessings. It must overcome the wrongs of society with the rights of
mankind. These lights must be asserted and proclaimed, until they shall
be understood and appreciated, obeyed and adopted, as the rule of
happiness.

“Then, the dishonesty of mind will not hypocritically reverence what
it practically denies. Then, the votaries of creeds will not blush
to be the friends of truth, nor covet the wrongs of oppression to
correct the natural convictions of free inquiry. You will work a reform
of long-standing abuses. The stipendiaries of religious munificence
will not oppose the voice which gives freedom, and the old theories
of exclusive prerogatives, which subvert the equitable rights of
universal humanity, will be venerated no more. There must be a great
change in the social condition to remove the social evils of mind.
You will remove the barriers of progress, by removing the fears which
repel investigation. The wrong of fear must be overcome. The slave of
tyrannical rule must be set free from his chains. The mind must be
taught to respect its own rights, and disown the usurper’s pretensions.
It must be taught that wisdom is not tyranny, and that nature will not
justify submission. It must be taught the nature of its own powers, and
be inspired to respect its own competency to rule itself, without the
interposition of arbitrary force.”

Such is a brief synopsis of the instruction, appertaining to our
ingress into the seventh circle. I shall, hereafter, allude to some
other things, which I do not, at present see fit to disclose. When
the lectures were concluded, I was impressed with the importance
of commencing the work of reform among the circles of earth. It
was not my project exclusively, but the whole circle. We sought to
make manifestations in various places. I accompanied a great number
of minds to different localities, but saw the force of opposition,
and the predisposition of the minds in the rudimental sphere, to be
so tenaciously inclined to superstition and veneration of ancient
theologies, that we determined, in the first place, to overcome the
impediments in our path, by removing the superstition and relaxing the
confidence of mind in the multiplicity of opinions and dogmas, which
were being promulgated. Accordingly, we sought to prepare minds for the
influx of communications by special impressions of facts upon them. The
impressions have been verified, and the verification has induced wonder
on the part of the impressed. In many instances, future events have
been so impressed by spirits on the minds of susceptible persons, as to
leave no doubt of the reality. These impressions obtained the name of
presentiments. They were presentiments, and the presentiments of those
who dwelt in the second sphere. Impressions of facts have been regarded
also, as fore-warnings; and, in some instances, they were, but not
always. The mind has conjectured many things as the cause, without
suspecting the true one. It has felt afraid of acknowledging, that some
guardian spirit has produced these impressions, as though it would be a
dishonor to them, or that the thought would be impious and ridiculous.
Under these circumstances, we gradually affected mind, until it was
clearly seen, that public opinion would not justify martyrdom; when the
work of reforming minds from the abuses to which they had long been
exposed, was, commenced with a view to relieve it. That work is now in
progress. It is begun.




