CHAPTER V.

SECOND VISIT TO THE TEMPLE.

  Unity of work--Each receives a penny--Visits another temple--The
  Master’s charge to Thomas--Advice of the chief--Counsel of the
  commander--Explanation of the helmet, spear, sword with two edges,
  arrows and bow, sling and pebbles--Trumpet--Directions to revisit the
  castle.


On arriving at the temple, each mind took its proper position, and
Contentment was made wisdom to the workmen. “Thomas,” said William,
“art thou satisfied with thy journey?”

T. I am satisfied that I am not as others whom we have seen; but I
would that they were altogether as we are.

W. Thou wilt now prepare thyself for what thou wilt soon see disclosed
to thee. Thou art not as thou wilt be when the more excellent glory
shall be unfolded before thee. Take thy work, and bring it before the
inspector, that thou mayest receive thy reward; for thou hast borne the
banner, and wilt receive thy recompense.

T. Thou wilt not mark the work as mine; for what I have done, thou hast
aided me to do with thy fellow servants, our brethren.

W. Thou wilt come with us, and present thy work; for what we have done
is thy work, and thou hast done is our work. Our work and thine are
one, and thou wilt with us receive each a penny.

T. Then thou mayest give my wages to the poor.

W. Thy wages are thine, and what is thine, thou wilt receive. It will
not be as thou hast supposed. Wilt thou bring thy work?

T. Yea; and here it is.

“The work is well,” said the Inspector.

W. Take thy work to the second Inspector.

The work was laid before the Inspector, who said, “It is well, but thou
shouldst not hew the stone without a line. I will square thy work. It
is well with the square.”

“Take thy work to the third Inspector,” said William.

“Here is my work,” said I, advancing toward him.

Ins. Thy work will square itself. Take thy penny.

“Thy reward is well without the penny,” said I.

I. Thou wilt receive thy wages, because thou hast not worked thy work
by reason of the reward.

T. What wouldst thou have me to do with my wages?

I. Thou wilt serve thy brethren who have need.

T. Perchance, they will not receive the gift.

I. Thou wilt not need what thou hast, but what thou hast not, thou wilt
not refuse, till thou shalt have tried it by thy own experience, and
found it wanting. Thou wilt now receive a lesson, which will teach thee
how thou mayest not use thy wages, and remember that thy wages is what
thou wilt now receive, because thou hast been faithful in some things,
thou shalt be a ruler in many things.

Taking my arm, the mind said, “come.” We were soon in a more
magnificent temple than any which I had ever before beheld. There was
a great company of minds, who were seated on each side of a spacious
hall, adorned with brilliant gems on walls of light; while over our
heads were ministering spirits of a generation who shared the glory
of the Prince of peace. Directly before me stood superior minds, and
behind me a long line of warriors with broken spears and rusty guns
without locks. Their arms of warfare trailed in the march, and their
countenances betokened that they had won a victory without injury to
themselves or others.

“Thou wilt hear a lesson from the throne of mercy,” said William.
“Advance near thy Teacher, that he may place his hand on thy head.”

Advancing to the required position, the mind arose and said, “Thomas,
thou hast made a good profession in that thou hast been obedient unto
the commands of thy master. Thou wilt permit me to place this crown
upon thy head. It is not the crown of tyrants, nor of usurpation; but
it is a crown of glory, which the Lord of this tabernacle hath desired
me to put on thy head. Thou hast worn a crown of thorns, but now thou
hast sought and found the pearl of great price, even the wisdom which
seeks the good of those who need, without hope of gain or fear of loss;
because thou hast loved thy brethren, who have received thy aid, thou
mayest wear this crown of glory. See that thou keep thyself in the
way of wisdom, that thy crown may grow brighter and brighter with the
using, and not tarnish with rust. Thou wilt not work where thy wisdom
will be scorned, but thou wilt go with thy companions to a sorrowing
and dependent circle, who will receive thy message with gladness.
Thou wilt do the meek and the humble what thou canst not the proud
and the disdainful. Thou wilt now take with thee this helmet and this
spear, and this sword of two edges, and these arrows and bow, and these
stones and sling; and thou wilt also take this trumpet, that thou
mayest be armed with the armor which thy work requires of thee. And,
when thou needest aid, thou wilt sound the trumpet with the sound that
I teach thee, so shalt thou not work alone, but thy companions will
aid thee, as thou shalt find labor required. Soon thou wilt go on a
mission, which will require all thy wisdom to overcome the midnight of
darkness that surrounds the wretchedness of minds, led captive by the
deceitfulness of ignorance and folly. Be thou prepared to show thyself
a workman, that needeth not to be ashamed of thy calling, for in due
time thou wilt reap what thou hast sown; because what thou sowest will
bring forth an hundred fold to the glory of God and the good of mind.
Take with thee thy elder brother, whose counsel thou hast so wisely
received, and also thy companion to whom thou art allied by mutual
affinities, and we will wait thy summons. Turn now to the right, and
let the chief of this tabernacle give thee further advice.”

“Thou wilt go on thy mission, my friend, but before thou goest, it is
proper that thou shouldst receive some advice, which thou mayest need.
The crown which thou wearest will not suffer tarnish, because it is
thine. Thou hast not usurped it, nor hast thou deprived others of any
right which unto them belongeth. All they ever had, thou hast taken
nothing, but what thou hast is a crown, which we give thee for thy
glory. This crown is not the crown of a king, but of a ruler. Thou wilt
wear it ever in thy warfare, that thy mind may be loved as thou lovest
with unabated affection. Thy authority will not be increased by it;
but thou wilt shew thyself a ruler, whose counsel will be respected,
because wisdom will guide thee. When thou rulest, thou wilt not control
as do kings and emperors, but thou wilt exercise thy reason, and thy
reason will be respected. This crown is placed on thy head to make
known the majesty of truth, which is shielded by it from all harm. No
mind can fault a crown, when honored by wisdom in him who wears it.
The crown is well; but the abuse of power is not guarantied by this
gift. Thou wilt not abuse thy authority by contributing to the welfare
of the rich, from the industry of the poor. Such is not the authority
conferred on thee by this crown. But thou wilt contribute from the
income of the rich, to aid the poor. Those who need will receive thy
care, and thou wilt exercise thy wisdom to convince the rich that thy
crown should be worn by them. And when they come to lay their gifts
before thee, thou wilt say, ‘remember the needy,’ for these words
are written on this crown. Thou wilt also say, ‘take this crown from
my head, when I dishonor it, by refusing to obey its requirements.’
Therefore, let these words be true and faithful in thy way, and let thy
conduct show that our confidence has not been misplaced. My aid will be
given thee in the work of reform. Thou wilt now receive thy lesson from
the commander of this temple, who will tell thee what thou wilt do with
the warlike implements thou has received from the chief. Proceed to his
chair.”

Turning to the right, so as to face about, I came before the commander,
who addressed me as follows:

“Hast thou been a warrior?”

“I have not assumed to fight with such weapons.”

“Thou wilt now assume to fight the good fight of wisdom. The helmet
is thy protection against harm. Thou wilt wear it evermore. Thou wilt
not use it in mortal combat, for thou hast not enlisted for such
service. But thou hast engaged to do thy duty, and where thy duty calls
thee to scenes of wrong, this helmet will aid thee to overcome the
hostility of contending parties. It will shield thee from the wrongs
of the ignorant, and the assaults of the wicked. Thou seest the word
written thereon. It is Peace. The peace thou wilt bear in thy bosom,
will overcome the resistance of wrong, and war will cease. The helmet
will protect; for war never rages where peace reigns. Thou wilt bear
the banner and the helmet, and no foe will attack thee, because there
will be no resistance offered by thee, save the power which thy example
will inspire in the minds who wrangle with each other. Thou wilt first
publish thy motives in the camp of the enemy, and when they read thy
words, they will say thou art beside thyself, much peace hath made thee
insane. But thou wilt say, ‘much peace have they who love the law of
harmony and happiness.’ Thou wilt say, ‘this helmet is peace,’ and when
they shall unite with thee and thy companions, war will end with them.
This helmet will not tarnish. The wisdom of God hath made it, and what
God hath made, thou wilt wear with honor to thyself, and satisfaction
to thy friends.

“This spear is warlike. Thou wilt not war with thy brethren with this
weapon. It is given thee for a nobler purpose than the destruction of
enemies. It will serve thee in the battle thou wilt fight, because it
is not carnal. It is a spear that will touch the hearts of enemies.
It will make no wound, but it will heal the wounds which wrongs have
made. When the spear enters the hearts of warriors, it will touch a
well of sympathy. When the well is found, thou canst strike the spear
deep, and it will not harm. Thou wilt so use this weapon as to find
the heart, and when the heart is found, the victory is won. The heart
must be touched with the spear of love; and, therefore, thou seest the
importance of this instrument. Let thy warfare be such as will touch
the heart, and when thou shalt find thy weapon unavailing, thou wilt
take this sword with two edges, and lop off the dead branches which
overshadow thy efforts, and which yield no fruit. When thou hast cut
down the dead branches with thy sword, thou wilt take thy spear, and
engraft the fruitful olive branch therein. When thou hast done thy work
with thy spear and sword, thou wilt see a great reform in the tree, and
new branches will put forth, bearing much fruit to the husbandman.

“These arrows and bow will not make thee unfriendly, except thou
pervert them to works of injustice to thy brethren. Thou knowest the
history of David and Jonathan. When Saul sought the life of David,
he was forewarned by an arrow, which Jonathan shot. It was well with
David, and well with Jonathan, because they made a covenant with each
other to avert wrong. The arrows were united, and being united were
strong against resistance. Take these arrows as a sign of the covenant
thou hast made with us, that no wrong shall come unto thee without
warning; and take also this bow, which is the power of the covenant;
and, with it, do thy work as thou hast covenanted to do, in friendship,
love, and truth, and hope of mercy will descend without ending upon
thee in thy labor.

“Take also this sling and these pebbles; and, when thou goest on thy
mission, thou wilt not make war with those that oppose thee. They are
given thee for another purpose. Thy soul will need its rest. Thy sling
will bring thee rest. Thou wilt take the pebbles, one by one, and when
thy opposer shall make war with thee, thou wilt teach him this lesson:
That no wisdom is found in pebbles, and thou wilt say to him, ‘silver
and gold have I none, but such as I have, give I unto thee. Take this
sling and these pebbles, and when thou art without wrong, cast them at
me, for I too, am poor and needy, and what thou doest, do as thy wisdom
shall direct.’ Then shalt thou find thy sling and pebbles retained by
thee, and thy opposer will be thy follower in the great reform of mind.
And when thou shalt have need of our aid, blow the trumpet as thou hast
been instructed, and thy companions will join thee in the good fight of
reforming mind, without blood or treasure.

“Thou wilt now proceed on thy mission, and, when thou shalt aid with
thy wisdom the needy, thy work will be thy reward. Hitherto, thou hast
been instructed, but now thou wilt be an instructor of others. Thou
wilt work thy work of reform, as thou canst. Take what thou needest for
thy work, and go to the castle, where thou didst unfurl the banner, and
when thou shalt sound the trumpet, thy circle will obey thy summons.”




