CHAPTER I.

SICKNESS, DEATH, AND BURIAL OF THOMAS PAINE.

  Conversation with his physician, and his indifference about
  death--The minister sent for--Prayer--Meditation on life--Age
  of Reason--A swoon--Sees a spirit--The effort of the spirit
  to identify herself--His death--Funeral services--Doubting
  minister--Conversation with his spirit companion--Benediction,
  and opinions of the people--The end of wonders--Joy in his new
  sphere--The greeting--The woman and the doctor--His mother--Her
  welcome--His grave--The thoughts of the grave digger--Anxiety to
  reveal the truth--Promise to him of a coming time when it could
  be done with safety to mediums--Origin of sight--Thoughts of
  minds at his grave--Disclaims intentional wrong--Objections to
  religion--Visit to the minister--Conversation between the minister
  and servant--Prayer--Servant complains--Cheering conversation of
  Paine and his companion--Proposes to relate his experience, and signs
  his name.


In the progress of mind to the unseen world, there is no wonder
within the range of human perception, analogous to the transition
of the spirit in what is called death. I will relate the incidents
of my experience. For some weeks previous to my exit, my attending
physician gave me up as incurable. Still, he continued his visits,
and experimented in every possible way his ingenuity and wisdom could
devise, to control what he foresaw would terminate in my dissolution.
At length, approaching my bedside, he said in a tremulous tone, “I
fear you will not live to see the light of morning.” I replied, in a
whisper, “I see no one, then, to do what will be required at my demise.”

“What do you require?” said the doctor.

“Only that my body be decently interred,” I responded.

I saw he felt moved by my indifference, and I requested him to invite
the parish minister to make a prayer. He did so. I was still unmoved by
his pathetic appeals to Heaven to bless my soul with the outpourings
of his grace upon me. I felt no solicitude about my fate. All seemed
dark and hopeless, with no ray of light to gladden the soul of a dying
unbeliever in revelation. I was willing to see, but no light came
to my relief. In this state of awful gloom, when midnight blackness
offered no consolation, when the idolatry of monkish mockery gave no
satisfaction, and when no ostentatious show of worldly gain or honor
wearied my mind with their cares, I said, “what is life?” I answered,
“’tis but a dream.” “Then what have I done which is not a dream?” I
wondered. “There is my Age of Reason, and is that a dream?” I saw no
dream in that work. It was a reality. It was my work. I saw it was not
a dream. There was what the minister had not disturbed. He did not
overthrow what it contained. He prayed against my infidelity, but he
did not lessen my convictions in any position I had taken. No: weak
and worn out with disease as I was, he made no issue with my attack
upon his faith. He went away, and I saw him no more, till no more of
flesh and blood imprisoned my spirit. I was well satisfied he was
afraid of me. I was never more satisfied of the truth of my book.
Still, it was not what I wanted. It did not aid me in my lone chamber
of weakness and destitution. It gave me no solace, save the reflection
that I had served the cause of human freedom, and had triumphed over
the dogmatical assumptions of a miserable theology. I was not wholly
satisfied that I was altogether right, but I was very certain that
religionists were wrong. I saw the corruption and hypocrisy of those
who professed to be Christians, and I was persuaded that what they
taught upheld them in their hypocrisy. In this frame of mind, I neither
felt wounded by their assaults upon my work, nor was I afraid of what
would be my condition after death.

Near the close of my earthly life, I fell into a swoon, and I saw what
was more evidence to me of a future life, than all I had ever heard
or read. I saw my wisdom isolated, and torn in fragments. There came
near me one whom I loved in my youth; one who was dear to me when I
was in my years of prime; and who cherished an attachment for me,
which even death had no power to dissolve. She had passed away. I had
wept over her grave. I had mourned her death as the severest of all
possible calamities. We were united. Nothing but the form of marriage
was wanting to make us one in the sight of the world. We were married.
I loved her as I never loved another. She was my idol; and never was
homage more sincere and fervent than that which I gave her; never was
my soul so willingly captivated as when I enjoyed her affection. Never
was my distress equaled as when I saw her coffined for the grave. Oh,
sadness! thou hast no wisdom for the bereaved! From that day to the
period above related, I had no music like hers to cheer me onward
through the night of my corroded sympathy, nor was there hope that we
should meet on the plain of conjugal affinity which we now enjoy.

In that swoon, I saw her as in the bloom of her virgin innocence. She
came to me and said, “Thomas! be of good cheer, I am with you.”

“Half wise am I to believe in an apparition, or have I lost my reason
that I should see a ghost by my bedside?” I wondered to myself.

“Be not deceived. Do you not see me? Here is my hand, and here the ring
with my name engraved, and do you not know my voice?” she replied.

“Indeed, your voice I know; I know all; but what are you?” may I ask.

“I am your betrothed, your confiding companion. I have watched over
you with more care than you would have deemed necessary, had I been
formally united with you in marriage. I have come now as a spirit to
remove your doubts, and conduct you to a circle where the weariness of
the world will disturb no more.”

“A spirit! a spirit!” I said in amazement.

“Yes, a spirit, a spirit you mourned as dead, is with you.”

“Is it possible? it is not--no, it is not.”

“It is possible. Never question what you know, Thomas.”

“I doubt not my senses, but my sight.”

“Then take my hand, as you once plighted your love to me, and bear me
witness that what you feel is not a delusion, nor my speech a mockery
of heaven.”

I gave her my warm hand, and never doubted again. But, ere the morning
sun had appeared, I passed the portal of death, and saw the neighbors
and friends preparing for the funeral. The minister was sent for.
He came. With uplifted hands he besought God to comfort the weeping
circle; but I saw he had no confidence that his prayer would be
answered. He bewailed death as a curse, and mourned that Adam and all
his posterity had no hope in heaven, only in Jesus. He opened what he
said was the word of God, and read, “There is hope of a tree, if it
be cut down, that it will sprout again;” but what is man, that the
Almighty should call him to a new sphere, he did not seem to comprehend.

As I stood near him during the whole service, I felt moved to say, “Oh,
thou of little faith; wherefore dost thou doubt?” But my companion
said, “He will not believe though one go to him from the dead; he has
Moses and the prophets, Jesus and the apostles, but will he not dispute
their sayings?”

T. Can he dispute what he shall see and hear?

C. And did not _you_ doubt me, Thomas? When I spoke, and when you saw
me, you said, “It is not possible.” Though you saw my hand, and the
ring on my finger, you would not admit my presence. Then you said, “I
doubt my sight.”

T. And will he, a believer in spirits, do the same?

C. He will not deny spirits, neither will he admit what he sees.

T. Why?

C. He will say, as you said, “I doubt my sight.”

T. But will a believer in revelation doubt, as I doubted?

C. A believer in revelation doubts, and will doubt, his sight as soon
as an unbeliever. Both cavil with the only rule which nature has given
them to determine the existence of things, and their relation to each
other.

T. Who, then, are believers?

C. “Hath not God concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy
upon all?” All are unbelievers. The minister does not believe that you
and I are present, and hear his speech. He does not believe what we
know, that his belief is unbelief of the truth in many things: so is
his unbelief a denial of the truth in other things.

The minister concluded his service, and my body was deposited in
the grave. I waited to hear the benediction: “Dust unto dust is the
law of nature; but the spirit must appear before the bar of God to
receive the penalty of violated law,” he said, in mournful solemnity.
The circle departed, saying, “he was more charitable than was to be
expected. Paine was an infidel, and what could he do less than speak
what he believed. He was satisfied that the deceased had no eternal
life abiding in him, and it was his duty to warn his neighbors of their
danger.”

I left them, and said, “How long shall it be to the end of these
wonders?”

My companion replied, “The end is not yet. Progressive developments
of wisdom will appear, when the dark cloud of superstition shall be
removed, so that the light of heaven shall not involve those on whom
it falls in the trouble of wicked men. The spirits of this sphere have
waited for the coming of that day, and come it will, when opinions
shall not triumph over facts, and truth shall not be rejected because
it disagrees with the errors of religionists.”

But to return to my exit. When my companion gave me her hand, I faintly
said, “God be praised,” and languished into life. There was no other
spirit near me, when I closed my race on earth. I was not without her
presence a moment, though a short interval elapsed in which I saw no
one. She saw me in my chamber, and she came to conduct me to wisdom
which I had not known. As a dear spirit, I loved her; but when I found
myself where I could see the body I once bore, and the countenances I
was well acquainted with, it was a scene so wholly unexpected, that I
was overpowered with joy, and my whole nature suffused with intense
gratitude to that divine Being, whose name and mercies I had derided
in my weakness and ignorance.

The first object which I saw was my companion. She smiled and said,
“Thomas, thou hast passed over the valley; fear no evil; I am with
thee.” I could see what they were doing with my body, when I was
conversing with her.

It was not over an hour after I left it, till my spirit was conscious
of all that was passing in the house. I saw the woman, who occupied the
house, interested in preserving my features from discoloration, and
bathing my mortal casement with wet cloths. She was not well satisfied
with the physician. He wanted her to ask the minister to make a prayer,
but she refused. He told her it was customary on such occasions to
invite the minister to pray. She said “he would soon need something
more, and I am not in a condition to pay him for his services.” He told
her that he would settle all, if she desired. “I will not make a mock
of the thing,” she replied; “but to tell you the truth, doctor, I do
not believe in praying over the dead.”

The next wonder, which I was permitted to see, was the spirit of my
mother. She was a mother; I was now a spirit, and she came to me, and
said: “My son, my child, I call you, my child. The storm of contention
has passed. The angry tempest is now gone by. Here, my son, are the
realities of happiness. I have labored to make you wise in the wisdom
of nature, but alas! I was not successful, only in a degree. I have
now an opportunity to conduct you where wisdom will be unfolded in
measureless profusion.” So saying, she bade me follow her.

In the mean time, my companion stood by my side, and we both instantly
obeyed. The angel mother led our way to a grave, which was being dug
for my remains. “There,” said she, “is the end of all flesh. There is
the grave of your dust, and though it shall be deposited in it, your
spirit will live forever. Such will be the end of all living. Do you
not hear the workman?” I listened, and the thoughts of the poor man
came up to my spirit in wonderful sweetness, as he moved the shovel
with its load of earth. “Ah!” said he, “there are many who respect the
talents of the dead, but few who care for the living.”

I saw him as he filled the grave. I heard him say, mentally, “No man
liveth and dieth not. I have dug many graves, but where is the man who
will not work when human bodies need a burial? Oh! what would I give
to know that, when my body is wasted in dust, I shall live in heaven.
But, alas! what do I ask? My soul weeps to know what God has refused to
mortals.”

“Do you see,” said my mother, “that nature is true to human good, while
ignorance conceals her worth?”

“I see,” replied my companion, and we went away.

As we left the grave I was well satisfied that the reflections of the
poor man were mournfully true. I was not without misgivings that my Age
of Reason sought not to gratify the mind in its hope of immortality.
I said, “when will the day come that I can make known the truth, and
correct the errors of my work?”

My mother replied, “The world is not yet prepared to hear such news. I
will not wrong the truth by an attempt to reveal it.”

T. But will not a day come when spirits can unfold to mind in the body
the wonders of this sphere?

M. When minds emerge from the darkness of their superstition, and
spirits can control, without wrong to the medium, we can make known to
them the wonders of this world of life; but, while they are controlled
by their superstition, the revealment would subject the medium to
severe penal sufferings, and the execration of all who are not
controlled by us. The people are more tenacious of their creeds than
what is consistent with the safety of such, as will be required to act
in a wonderful manner to overcome their errors. I see, that when Jesus
came, he was not opposed with more violent measures than religionists
are prepared to adopt to suppress whatever contradicts their faith and
practice. But there will come a day when spirits can reveal the truth,
without involving the medium in trouble at the hands of its enemies,
and when the inalienable rights of mind will be protected by the voice
of public opinion. Be patient, therefore, my son; for the coming of
that day will change the gloom of the grave into the joy of immortal
rest. It will come with wonder, and mind will understand that the tomb
is not the home of the soul.

The sun was now sinking behind the western hills. Then I said, “why are
midnight and mid-day alike to spirits? Why is not the rudimental sphere
developed as mind is here?”

“I see you will wonder, Thomas. Are not the night and the day alike
unto God? Does he not make light, and create darkness? Are not light
and darkness the result of causes which harmonize in the well being of
mind in the body? Must not the spirit, wearied with its load of dust,
have hours of repose and rest?”

“Very true,” I replied; “but why do they not see as spirits see?”

“Our vision is not as theirs; when we see, it is because the
undulations of light, falling upon us, are unobstructed by other
things. You will find light without darkness in your path, because
there is more light in spiritual than earthly bodies. Light emanates
from particles of matter thrown off from dense globes in straight
lines, which coming in collision with each other, produce a concussion
in such rapid succession, as to evolve what is called light. The law
of what is called the solar system, governs worlds of other systems. A
ray diverging from the sun meets a ray from earth, which produces what
is called friction among the innumerable particles in their passage
from one point to another. This friction emits a blaze from the two
particles. These wonders are actually transpiring every instant, within
scarcely perceptible distances, so that no darkness can exist when they
occur. There is an ocean of rays commingling in their destined course,
and forced along their pathway by attractive and repulsive forces in
the great economy of nature. Now, it is only the grosser particles,
migrating from one globe to another, that make light to the inhabitants
of the rudimental sphere, while spirits are able to discover light, or,
as I would say, see the friction, or light, emitted by the friction of
lesser rays coming in contact with each other. When the sun is visible
to minds in the body, rays from it fall in direct lines to earth, and
rays from earth pass in direct lines to the sun. When rays pass in
direct lines and meet, the concussion or friction is greater than when
striking each other obliquely. Hence, the greater the friction, the
greater the light. And the nearer to earth the contact of the rays,
the more sensible the effect upon the retina of the human eye. This
accounts for the darkness called night, and the light called day. At
night, the rays, migrating from the sun to earth and earth to sun,
must strike each other obliquely, and at a greater distance from the
eye of man. But spirits are aided by the friction of infinitely more
refined particles of matter meeting the inconceivably more refined
particles of earth, occasioned by the influence of other planets upon
it. As the attractive and repulsive forces are equal to the density,
distance, and magnitude of the several orbs, so are the rays refined;
and you will find that the balances are in just proportion throughout
the immensity of the Creator’s works. We see that refined particles,
or rays, more clearly give light to us, than the grosser particles,
emitted by stronger attractions, do to minds in grosser organs of
sight. Every thing is adapted to its condition. Nothing is unwise in
the order of the divine government.”

But, when we were at the grave, I saw no mind relieved. “Thomas Paine
was an infidel,” said they. “He ridiculed the Bible. He was not moral,
even. He was addicted to intemperance. He lived with a strange woman.
He would not repent, and be converted; and he died without having
experienced religion. He must now atone for his conduct.”

I wished to say, but wishes were vain, “My wrongs were not wrongs of
injury intentional to others. I had erred; and I would, if I could,
have atoned for those errors; but my works were not worse than those
arrayed against me. I saw no religion worth possessing in the creeds
of men. I was not wise, but I could not find wisdom in the doctrines
taught by religionists. My desire was law and justice; but neither were
commended to my judgment, in the forms and ceremonies of the church.
A change of heart was more mystical to me than the mythology of the
pagans. A wise man hath said, ‘wisdom is mine,’ and what he said I
was not ashamed to allow: but I was ashamed to allow what I could
not explain, so that others could comprehend my meaning. I was not
without reverence for good, but what was good gave me some uneasiness
to determine. My rules were isolated, and sometimes contradictory.
Nevertheless, I would attempt to draw up rules which I thought
practicable, and when I saw what was not wise, I was never ashamed to
acknowledge it.”

During the evening of the day in which my body was interred, I was
with my companion and mother, who proposed to visit the house of the
parish minister. I wished not to go, for I was well satisfied of his
feelings. I was about to say so, when my companion resumed: “We may not
refuse crumbs when no more can be had. I see,” said she, “he will not
pray without wrath or doubting; but it is all we can expect under his
condition of mind. He is now waiting to call the family together for
prayers.”

“Then we will not stay long,” I replied.

“No longer than you wish,” she rejoined.

It was a still night. As we neared the house, the work of reading a
chapter was commenced by the servant of the house. She read, with
hurried words, the chapter which was offered her.

“That seems to be an awful lesson of judgment against the unbelieving,”
said the minister, with a sigh. “Oh! what would Paine give now, if he
had made his peace with God? I fear he is lost forever.”

“And why do you think so?” said the servant.

“Because he was a very wicked man,” said the minister.

“Are not all men wicked,” she faintly uttered?

M. Yes: but you know there is a sin unto death, for which even
Christians are not permitted to pray.

S. Did Paine commit that sin which is unto death?

M. I fear such will be found the case. He resisted the Holy Ghost. He
resisted prayer. He was opposed to religion. Alas! he is beyond the
reach of mercy. So saying, he arose, and said, “we will pray.”

He was nearly through with a long prayer, when he called upon God to
“remember all who remember not thee. Remember, Oh God!” said he, “all
who are out of the ark of safety; for we fear thou hast permitted one
of thy works to perish forever. Oh, God! spare thy rod, and let not
thine anger be kindled against thy enemies. Thou hast mercy for those
that love thee, and wilt thou not also have compassion on those who
need thy salvation?” When he had concluded, I heard the servant say to
herself, “Who is my judge?”

I responded, by a gentle impression on her mind, “He will judge others,
but not as he judges himself.”

“It is even so,” she seemed to answer. “I never was acquainted with
Paine,” she said, mentally; “but he was never convicted of any very
great crimes that I have ever heard; I wish others were as good as he.
Then, I should not be scorned because I am poor, and have to work for a
living. May be, it is all right, but I can’t see it.”

My companion rejoined, “Thus it is, and thus it will be, till wisdom
shall come from heaven, gentle as the dew, and free as the air, to
chase away the ignorance of a deceived world. Never will mind rise up
in the vigor of wisdom, till celestial light shall dissipate the wrongs
and woes of misguided mind. I have seen the mind of man groaning in
despair, and no one to lift the burden from his soul. I will not mock
my inferiors, nor envy my superiors; but I will lead you, Thomas, to
a fountain where no impurity can be seen, and where you may bathe in
water without shore or bound.”

“But where do we go?” I inquired.

“We go where the weary find rest, and the conflicting antagonisms of
human society disturb no more. We go where the pure will never become
vitiated with wrongs, and where rivers of light roll on, refreshing the
mind forever. We go where nature is understood, and her laws obeyed.
We go where truth is wisdom, and where no mockery of duty answers the
call of need. We go where we wish, and when we go, we will not cease
to remember that our return will be cheered with music, vibrating in
harmony with human redemption from the whirlpool of angry waters. We
will not tarry among the wrongs and evils of a mourning world, but we
will visit a wonder away from human cares, where order and harmony are
appreciated, and spirits concentrate to admire and glorify the Ruler
of unnumbered worlds. There is a world you have not seen, a music you
have not heard, a joy you have not experienced, where the storm of
contention lashes not against its shore, nor the groans of distress
reach the borders of my spirit home.”

We went in company. But, at every step of our journey, I saw new
wonders, which I propose to write, with the consent of this medium,
for the instruction and enjoyment of those who must ere long become
travelers over the same road, to a wisdom which none but celestial
beings enjoy. Therefore, wonder not who writes as you read; for my name
will be now recorded, as with the pen of a ready writer, by whose hand
I am permitted to subscribe myself,

                                                           THOMAS PAINE.




