CHAPTER IV.

The Castle described--The centurion alarmed--Faith proved by
works--Interpretations of the Bible disallowed--Penn called
an infidel--Dialogue between the centurion and Penn--Teacher
called--Dialogue continued--Theological opinions the cause of strife
and wrong--Paine and Penn retire--Conversation between them--Witnesses
beheaded--Dialogue between the Teacher and his Master--A wheel within a
wheel--Gold and silver the motive power--Attraction of affinities--Fear
and hope make slaves--The king’s palace--Conversation between Thomas
and William--Grand Master instructs Thomas--A new song--Consistency
wrong when minds are wrong--Experience the proper test of
principles--Some minds serve two masters--Works justify--Repentance is
salvation--Departure for the Temple.--[From page 64 to page 102.]


CHAPTER V.

Unity of work--Each receives a penny--Visits another temple--The
Master’s charge to Thomas--Advice of the chief--Counsel of the
commander--Explanation of the helmet, spear, sword with two edges,
arrows and bow, sling and pebbles--Trumpet--Directions to revisit the
castle.--[From page 102 to page 110.]


CHAPTER VI.

The deacon’s prayer--Thomas and Mary converse--Dialogue between the
deacon and Thomas on rewards, a day of judgment, and the atonement--The
deacon converted--Sung the new song--Departure for the temple--The
deacon initiated into the mysteries of wisdom, and the secret
explained--Thomas and the deacon revisit the castle.--[From page 110 to
page 126.]


CHAPTER VII.

The wonder in the castle--Dialogue between the chief, the deacon, and
Thomas--The senior consulted--The circle of the temple summoned by
the trumpet--Conversation between the Commander of the temple and the
senior of the castle on war--On rights--The conversion of 24 elders,
and 144,000--The Commander conducts them to the temple, where they were
initiated into that degree of wisdom.--[From page 126 to page 144.]


CHAPTER VIII.

Mission of Thomas and the elders--The king and guard--The elder
addresses the king--Conversation with him--He refuses wisdom--A
dialogue with a mind on fear--Calls a great multitude to the
elder--Address of the elder--Conversation with the circle--Imputed
righteousness--A thousand times ten thousand converted, and received
into the temple.--[From page 144 to page 165.]


CHAPTER IX.

Thomas finds two minds wrangling--Enters into conversation with
them--Refuses to give his name--Opposes teaching what the teacher does
not know--Opposes controversy--Rejects innate depravity--Discards
wrong views--Recommends facts for opinions--Explanation of sun and
moon, which stood still by the command of Joshua--Nature instructs
mind--Wrangling unwise--Wisdom will overcome wrong--Freedom induces
righteousness--Masters responsible for the doings of servants--Another
mind is converted--The work of the temple harmonious--Duty to avoid
discord--The assent is gained--The convert sees a light--William gives
him advice, and conducts him to the temple, when he receives a new
name, and a white stone.--[From page 165 to page 186.]


CHAPTER X.

Receives a visit from a superior mind--Proposition to advance
accepted--The seraphim sings--A pearl given--Enters a world of light
and song--Description of the works which he saw--The instruction of
the Worthy--The song of the free--Address of another mind on the key
of wisdom--The seven seals--Address of a third mind--Conducts to the
sixth circle--A lecture on social progress--Hope a reality--A lecture
on prophecy--Rules of prophecy the same as mathematical--Prediction
of communicating with the inhabitants of earth--Predictions,
opinions only of those below the sixth circle--A lecture on purity
and prophecy--Nature the standard by which to determine right and
wrong--Advancement to the seventh circle, or court of Beauty--Sees
a white throne and inscriptions--A little child leading a lion--A
serpent fastened to a rock--Twenty four pillars of wisdom--Minstrels
chant a welcome--Emblems explained--Prediction of events now taking
place--Contemplated mission to the rudimental sphere, and how it would
be received--The serpent to be destroyed--Evils to be overcome by
wisdom.--[From page 186 to page 235.]


CHAPTER XI.

Franklin, Swedenborg, Paine, and his companions visit a place near
the castle--Old things become new--Process of change--Identity
preserved--Self is a part of the body--All sympathize together
in good and ill--Governments defective--Opposition to capital
punishment--Origin of evil--How overcome--Success of the mission--Means
must be adapted to conditions--Contradictory communications develop
the condition of minds in the second sphere--Conflicting revealments
harmonious with different degrees of wisdom--Writing mediums--Societies
and forms of worship--Adaptation is harmony--Harmony should not be
disturbed--The mission of spirits will be to regulate minds--Minds
will change forms--Retire to a mansion--Onward is a passport--Dullness
reproved--Dedication of the Pilgrimage.--[From p. 235 to p. 259.]




PREFACE.


Agreeably to announcement in the “Light from the Spirit World,” I am
able to present this volume to the public, under circumstances which
will be gratifying to all those who are the friends of Progress and
Reform. No pains have been spared to present the precise words chosen
by the author, and preserve the style and sense of the original
manuscript. In regard to the merits of the production, it must speak
for itself; for, whatever of merit or demerit it may possess, I
am worthy of neither praise nor censure. Astounding as may be the
assertion, that I had no will to write it, or exercised any other
control, than to let my hand be moved by an invisible influence,
and write as it would, without any volition on my part, yet it is,
nevertheless, true. And, I am quite confident, that out of the two
thousand writing mediums, now in the United States, no one in a passive
condition will be able to contradict the assertion. Indeed, I have
found by actual experiment, that, in a great many instances, the spirit
who controls my hand, has succeeded in writing sentences contrary to
my will, and while I was endeavoring with all my volition, to write
something else.

But, so far as the orthography and punctuation of the Pilgrimage are
concerned, I have exercised supervision. And yet, much aid has been
afforded me by spirits in this matter. They arranged all the paragraphs
and sentences. The initials, which represent different minds, were
added by myself, to aid the general reader; and also the division
of the work into chapters, with the prefatory contents of the same.
Never having written a book in my life, excepting with the control of
spirits, who have now given two volumes to the public, in about eight
months, it may occur to the reader, that other divisions would have
been preferable; but I have made the divisions as they seemed to me
most natural.

This work has been written with uncommon despatch. Consequent upon
the issue of the “Light,” in November, 1851, I was seemingly wearied
with letters on business and inquiries, in regard to matters connected
with spirit developments; so that, in the brief period of four months,
I have received about two hundred, which demanded reading and reply.
This necessarily absorbed much of my time; especially, as very many
solicited information from spirits.

Near the close of December, 1851, I began to sit for this work. I
found my engagements such that I could only devote a part of each day,
and this part was frequently interrupted by strangers who desired
information on the subject. But the interruption did not seem to
disconcert the writer. Though often breaking off in the middle of a
sentence, the spirit knew exactly where to commence, even without any
reading of what had been written. Notwithstanding these embarrassments,
I found on the first of February, 1852, that my manuscript was nearly
equal to the desired contents for a book; at which time, I entered into
an arrangement with the publisher, Mr. Dewey, by which I am able to
give this work a more extended circulation, and at less cost, than I
otherwise could have done, which I trust will be abundantly obvious in
its mechanical execution and neatness.

Concerning my condition while writing this book, I will say, that when
writing, the whole subject matter was entirely in the dark to me. I
would take my pen, and place myself in the attitude of writing, when
all thought and care would be wholly abstracted from my mind. As my
thoughts vanished, my hand would generally begin to move, and a word
would be written. Then I would know what that word was. When the first
word was written, my hand would be uplifted so as to leave a space
between the words, and proceed as before. In this way the book was
written. But when the spirit chose, I found my mind often, very often,
though not always, impressed with the word which was being written. And
some mediums inform me that whole sentences are impressed upon their
minds at once; but with me it is a rare thing that I have more than one
word at a time, and that comes, as it were, while they are writing it.

Should the reader receive the instruction and pleasure from a perusal
of these pages, which I have while they were being written, the reward
will be very great. I shall condemn no one if they do not read it,
because, in my opinion, they will suffer sufficient loss without it.
There are none who need the consolation and reform which spirits
require, more than those who refuse to be instructed by them; but there
are many who will, as they have done, aim their darts at both. They
belong to a circle who deserve pity more than censure.

With the history and death of Thomas Paine, I know nothing, save what
has been written by an invisible influence with my hand. Having been
connected with the ministry for over twenty two years, I was not
inclined to read his productions; and since I have become a writing
Medium, I have found no leisure to read any book. In fact, my taste for
reading the productions of human wisdom is all absorbed in the divine.
The spirit proposes to write another volume, and when it is written, it
will be published.

The Diagram will serve to explain the circles of wisdom, as enjoyed
by minds in heaven. There are minds in the body who occupy the
first, second, third, and fourth circle, according to this diagram.
But I would inform the reader, that whatever may be the circle to
which minds belong, in the rudimental or second sphere, it does not
separate one from another by an impassable partition, so that one
can not hold intercourse with another, though occupying different
circles. As different circles in the body may converse together, so
different circles in the spirit world may do the same. The circles do
not represent arbitrary lines of division between spirits, but simply
degrees of wisdom. That the higher circles mingle with the lower, for
the purpose of making them wiser, is apparent from the whole body of
this work. I consider, therefore, that circles express the degrees of
wisdom and bliss which each spirit is qualified, as it is developed, to
enjoy, and not as forming a line of separation among the inhabitants
of heaven. The wisdom of heaven differs essentially from the wisdom of
earth, in regard to the real merits of the mind, and its qualifications
for enjoyment.

The style of some parts of this volume is unusual. A circle is
sometimes addressed in the singular number, where it would seem to
require the plural; but this departure from grammatical accuracy, may
be justified on the ground, that the circle were all of one mind, or
sentiment.

                                                             C. HAMMOND.

ROCHESTER, March, 1852.




[Illustration: DIAGRAM,

REPRESENTING THE DIFFERENT CIRCLES AND SPHERES

IN THE SPIRIT WORLD.]

[EXPLANATION.]

1. Wisdom, wholly selfish, or seeking selfish good.

2. Wisdom, controlled by popular opinion.

3. Wisdom, independent of popularity, but not perfect.

4. Wisdom, which seeks others’ good and not evil.

5. Wisdom, in purity, or a circle of Purity.

6. Wisdom, in perfection to prophecy.

7. Wisdom, to instruct all others of less wisdom.




