XI
LIFE IN SAMOA,
NOVEMBER 1890–DECEMBER 1892


TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                               _Vailima_, _Apia_, _Samoa_, _Nov._ 7, 1890.

I WISH you to add to the words at the end of the prologue; they run, I
think, thus, ‘And this is the yarn of Loudon Dodd’; add, ‘not as he told,
but as he wrote it afterwards for his diversion.’  This becomes the more
needful, because, when all is done, I shall probably revert to Tai-o-hae,
and give final details about the characters in the way of a conversation
between Dodd and Havers.  These little snippets of information and
_faits-divers_ have always a disjointed, broken-backed appearance; yet,
readers like them.  In this book we have introduced so many characters,
that this kind of epilogue will be looked for; and I rather hope, looking
far ahead, that I can lighten it in dialogue.

We are well past the middle now.  How does it strike you? and can you
guess my mystery?  It will make a fattish volume!

I say, have you ever read the _Highland Widow_?  I never had till
yesterday: I am half inclined, bar a trip or two, to think it Scott’s
masterpiece; and it has the name of a failure!  Strange things are
readers.

I expect proofs and revises in duplicate.

We have now got into a small barrack at our place.  We see the sea six
hundred feet below filling the end of two vales of forest.  On one hand
the mountain runs above us some thousand feet higher; great trees stand
round us in our clearing; there is an endless voice of birds; I have
never lived in such a heaven; just now, I have fever, which mitigates but
not destroys my gusto in my circumstances.—You may envy

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

. . . O, I don’t know if I mentioned that having seen your new tail to
the magazine, I cried off interference, at least for this trip.  Did I
ask you to send me my books and papers, and all the bound volumes of the
mag.? _quorum pars_.  I might add that were there a good book or so—new—I
don’t believe there is—such would be welcome.

I desire—I positively begin to awake—to be remembered to Scribner, Low,
St. Gaudens, Russell Sullivan.  Well, well, you fellows have the feast of
reason and the flow of soul; I have a better-looking place and climate:
you should hear the birds on the hill now!  The day has just wound up
with a shower; it is still light without, though I write within here at
the cheek of a lamp; my wife and an invaluable German are wrestling about
bread on the back verandah; and how the birds and the frogs are rattling,
and piping, and hailing from the woods!  Here and there a throaty
chuckle; here and there, cries like those of jolly children who have lost
their way; here and there, the ringing sleigh-bell of the tree frog.  Out
and away down below me on the sea it is still raining; it will be wet
under foot on schooners, and the house will leak; how well I know that!
Here the showers only patter on the iron roof, and sometimes roar; and
within, the lamp burns steady on the tafa-covered walls, with their dusky
tartan patterns, and the book-shelves with their thin array of books; and
no squall can rout my house or bring my heart into my mouth.—The
well-pleased South Sea Islander,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                             [_Vailima_, _December_ 1890.]

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—By some diabolical accident, I have mislaid your
last.  What was in it?  I know not, and here I am caught unexpectedly by
the American mail, a week earlier than by computation.  The computation,
not the mail, is supposed to be in error.  The vols. of _Scribner’s_ have
arrived, and present a noble appearance in my house, which is not a noble
structure at present.  But by autumn we hope to be sprawling in our
verandah, twelve feet, sir, by eighty-eight in front, and seventy-two on
the flank; view of the sea and mountains, sunrise, moonrise, and the
German fleet at anchor three miles away in Apia harbour.  I hope some day
to offer you a bowl of kava there, or a slice of a pineapple, or some
lemonade from my own hedge.  ‘I know a hedge where the lemons
grow’—_Shakespeare_.  My house at this moment smells of them strong; and
the rain, which a while ago roared there, now rings in minute drops upon
the iron roof.  I have no _Wrecker_ for you this mail, other things
having engaged me.  I was on the whole rather relieved you did not vote
for regular papers, as I feared the traces.  It is my design from time to
time to write a paper of a reminiscential (beastly word) description;
some of them I could scarce publish from different considerations; but
some of them—for instance, my long experience of gambling places—Homburg,
Wiesbaden, Baden-Baden, old Monaco, and new Monte Carlo—would make good
magazine padding, if I got the stuff handled the right way.  I never
could fathom why verse was put in magazines; it has something to do with
the making-up, has it not?  I am scribbling a lot just now; if you are
taken badly that way, apply to the South Seas.  I could send you some, I
believe, anyway, only none of it is thoroughly ripe.  If kept back the
volume of ballads, I’ll soon make it a respectable size if this fit
continue.  By the next mail you may expect some more _Wrecker_, or I
shall be displeased.  Probably no more than a chapter, however, for it is
a hard one, and I am denuded of my proofs, my collaborator having walked
away with them to England; hence some trouble in catching the just note.

I am a mere farmer: my talk, which would scarce interest you on Broadway,
is all of fuafua and tuitui, and black boys, and planting and weeding,
and axes and cutlasses; my hands are covered with blisters and full of
thorns; letters are, doubtless, a fine thing, so are beer and skittles,
but give me farmering in the tropics for real interest.  Life goes in
enchantment; I come home to find I am late for dinner; and when I go to
bed at night, I could cry for the weariness of my loins and thighs.  Do
not speak to me of vexation, the life brims with it, but with living
interest fairly.

Christmas I go to Auckland, to meet Tamate, the New Guinea missionary, a
man I love.  The rest of my life is a prospect of much rain, much weeding
and making of paths, a little letters, and devilish little to eat.—I am,
my dear Burlingame, with messages to all whom it may concern, very
sincerely yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                      _Vailima_, _Apia_, _Samoa_, _December_ 29_th_, 1890.

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—It is terrible how little everybody writes, and how
much of that little disappears in the capacious maw of the Post Office.
Many letters, both from and to me, I now know to have been lost in
transit: my eye is on the Sydney Post Office, a large ungainly structure
with a tower, as being not a hundred miles from the scene of
disappearance; but then I have no proof.  _The Tragic Muse_ you announced
to me as coming; I had already ordered it from a Sydney bookseller: about
two months ago he advised me that his copy was in the post; and I am
still tragically museless.

News, news, news.  What do we know of yours?  What do you care for ours?
We are in the midst of the rainy season, and dwell among alarms of
hurricanes, in a very unsafe little two-storied wooden box 650 feet above
and about three miles from the sea-beach.  Behind us, till the other
slope of the island, desert forest, peaks, and loud torrents; in front
green slopes to the sea, some fifty miles of which we dominate.  We see
the ships as they go out and in to the dangerous roadstead of Apia; and
if they lie far out, we can even see their topmasts while they are at
anchor.  Of sounds of men, beyond those of our own labourers, there reach
us, at very long intervals, salutes from the warships in harbour, the
bell of the cathedral church, and the low of the conch-shell calling the
labour boys on the German plantations.  Yesterday, which was Sunday—the
_quantième_ is most likely erroneous; you can now correct it—we had a
visitor—Baker of Tonga.  Heard you ever of him?  He is a great man here:
he is accused of theft, rape, judicial murder, private poisoning,
abortion, misappropriation of public moneys—oddly enough, not forgery,
nor arson: you would be amused if you knew how thick the accusations fly
in this South Sea world.  I make no doubt my own character is something
illustrious; or if not yet, there is a good time coming.

But all our resources have not of late been Pacific.  We have had
enlightened society: La Farge the painter, and your friend Henry Adams: a
great privilege—would it might endure.  I would go oftener to see them,
but the place is awkward to reach on horseback.  I had to swim my horse
the last time I went to dinner; and as I have not yet returned the
clothes I had to borrow, I dare not return in the same plight: it seems
inevitable—as soon as the wash comes in, I plump straight into the
American consul’s shirt or trousers!  They, I believe, would come oftener
to see me but for the horrid doubt that weighs upon our commissariat
department; we have _often_ almost nothing to eat; a guest would simply
break the bank; my wife and I have dined on one avocado pear; I have
several times dined on hard bread and onions.  What would you do with a
guest at such narrow seasons?—eat him? or serve up a labour boy
fricasseed?

Work? work is now arrested, but I have written, I should think, about
thirty chapters of the South Sea book; they will all want rehandling, I
dare say.  Gracious, what a strain is a long book!  The time it took me
to design this volume, before I could dream of putting pen to paper, was
excessive; and then think of writing a book of travels on the spot, when
I am continually extending my information, revising my opinions, and
seeing the most finely finished portions of my work come part by part in
pieces.  Very soon I shall have no opinions left.  And without an
opinion, how to string artistically vast accumulations of fact?  Darwin
said no one could observe without a theory; I suppose he was right; ’tis
a fine point of metaphysic; but I will take my oath, no man can write
without one—at least the way he would like to, and my theories melt,
melt, melt, and as they melt the thaw-waters wash down my writing, and
leave unideal tracts—wastes instead of cultivated farms.

Kipling is by far the most promising young man who has appeared
since—ahem—I appeared.  He amazes me by his precocity and various
endowment.  But he alarms me by his copiousness and haste.  He should
shield his fire with both hands ‘and draw up all his strength and
sweetness in one ball.’  (‘Draw all his strength and all His sweetness up
into one ball’?  I cannot remember Marvell’s words.)  So the critics have
been saying to me; but I was never capable of—and surely never guilty
of—such a debauch of production.  At this rate his works will soon fill
the habitable globe; and surely he was armed for better conflicts than
these succinct sketches and flying leaves of verse?  I look on, I admire,
I rejoice for myself; but in a kind of ambition we all have for our
tongue and literature I am wounded.  If I had this man’s fertility and
courage, it seems to me I could heave a pyramid.

Well, we begin to be the old fogies now; and it was high time _something_
rose to take our places.  Certainly Kipling has the gifts; the fairy
godmothers were all tipsy at his christening: what will he do with them?

Goodbye, my dear James; find an hour to write to us, and register your
letter.—Yours affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO RUDYARD KIPLING


                                                        [_Vailima_, 1891.]

SIR,—I cannot call to mind having written you, but I am so throng with
occupation this may have fallen aside.  I never heard tell I had any
friends in Ireland, and I am led to understand you are come of no
considerable family.  The gentleman I now serve with assures me, however,
you are a very pretty fellow and your letter deserves to be remarked.
It’s true he is himself a man of a very low descent upon the one side;
though upon the other he counts cousinship with a gentleman, my very good
friend, the late Mr. Balfour of the Shaws, in the Lothian; which I should
be wanting in good fellowship to forget.  He tells me besides you are a
man of your hands; I am not informed of your weapon; but if all be true
it sticks in my mind I would be ready to make exception in your favour,
and meet you like one gentleman with another.  I suppose this’ll be your
purpose in your favour, which I could very ill make out; it’s one I would
be sweir to baulk you of.  It seems, Mr. McIlvaine, which I take to be
your name, you are in the household of a gentleman of the name of
Coupling: for whom my friend is very much engaged.  The distances being
very uncommodious, I think it will be maybe better if we leave it to
these two to settle all that’s necessary to honour.  I would have you to
take heed it’s a very unusual condescension on my part, that bear a
King’s name; and for the matter of that I think shame to be mingled with
a person of the name of Coupling, which is doubtless a very good house
but one I never heard tell of, any more than Stevenson.  But your purpose
being laudable, I would be sorry (as the word goes) to cut off my nose to
spite my face.—I am, Sir, your humble servant,

                                                               A. STEWART,
                                                 _Chevalier de St. Louis_.

_To Mr. M’Ilvaine_,
      _Gentleman Private in a foot regiment_,
         _under cover to Mr. Coupling_.

He has read me some of your Barrack Room Ballants, which are not of so
noble a strain as some of mine in the Gaelic, but I could set some of
them to the pipes if this rencounter goes as it’s to be desired.  Let’s
first, as I understand you to move, do each other this rational
courtesys; and if either will survive, we may grow better acquaint.  For
your tastes for what’s martial and for poetry agree with mine.

                                                                     A. S.



TO MARCEL SCHWOB


                                         _Sydney_, _January_ 19_th_, 1891.

MY DEAR SIR,—_Sapristi_, _comme vous y allez_!  Richard III. and Dumas,
with all my heart; but not Hamlet.  Hamlet is great literature; Richard
III. a big, black, gross, sprawling melodrama, writ with infinite spirit
but with no refinement or philosophy by a man who had the world, himself,
mankind, and his trade still to learn.  I prefer the Vicomte de
Bragelonne to Richard III.; it is better done of its kind: I simply do
not mention the Vicomte in the same part of the building with Hamlet, or
Lear, or Othello, or any of those masterpieces that Shakespeare survived
to give us.

Also, _comme vous y allez_ in my commendation!  I fear my _solide
éducation classique_ had best be described, like Shakespeare’s, as
‘little Latin and no Greek,’ and I was educated, let me inform you, for
an engineer.  I shall tell my bookseller to send you a copy of _Memories
and Portraits_, where you will see something of my descent and education,
as it was, and hear me at length on my dear Vicomte.  I give you
permission gladly to take your choice out of my works, and translate what
you shall prefer, too much honoured that so clever a young man should
think it worth the pains.  My own choice would lie between _Kidnapped_
and the _Master of Ballantrae_.  Should you choose the latter, pray do
not let Mrs. Henry thrust the sword up to the hilt in the frozen
ground—one of my inconceivable blunders, an exaggeration to stagger Hugo.
Say ‘she sought to thrust it in the ground.’  In both these works you
should be prepared for Scotticisms used deliberately.

I fear my stepson will not have found time to get to Paris; he was
overwhelmed with occupation, and is already on his voyage back.  We live
here in a beautiful land, amid a beautiful and interesting people.  The
life is still very hard: my wife and I live in a two-roomed cottage,
about three miles and six hundred and fifty feet above the sea; we have
had to make the road to it; our supplies are very imperfect; in the wild
weather of this (the hurricane) season we have much discomfort: one night
the wind blew in our house so outrageously that we must sit in the dark;
and as the sound of the rain on the roof made speech inaudible, you may
imagine we found the evening long.  All these things, however, are
pleasant to me.  You say _l’artiste inconscient_ set off to travel: you
do not divide me right.  0.6 of me is artist; 0.4, adventurer.  First, I
suppose, come letters; then adventure; and since I have indulged the
second part, I think the formula begins to change: 0.55 of an artist,
0.45 of the adventurer were nearer true.  And if it had not been for my
small strength, I might have been a different man in all things.

Whatever you do, do not neglect to send me what you publish on Villon: I
look forward to that with lively interest.  I have no photograph at hand,
but I will send one when I can.  It would be kind if you would do the
like, for I do not see much chance of our meeting in the flesh: and a
name, and a handwriting, and an address, and even a style?  I know about
as much of Tacitus, and more of Horace; it is not enough between
contemporaries, such as we still are.  I have just remembered another of
my books, which I re-read the other day, and thought in places
good—_Prince Otto_.  It is not as good as either of the others; but it
has one recommendation—it has female parts, so it might perhaps please
better in France.

I will ask Chatto to send you, then—_Prince Otto_, _Memories and
Portraits_, _Underwoods_, and _Ballads_, none of which you seem to have
seen.  They will be too late for the New Year: let them be an Easter
present.

You must translate me soon; you will soon have better to do than to
transverse the work of others.—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON,
                                  With the worst pen in the South Pacific.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


   _SS._ ‘_Lübeck_,’ _at sea_ [_on the return voyage from Sydney_, _March_
                                                                    1891].

MY DEAR CHARLES,—Perhaps in my old days I do grow irascible; ‘the old man
virulent’ has long been my pet name for myself.  Well, the temper is at
least all gone now; time is good at lowering these distemperatures; far
better is a sharp sickness, and I am just (and scarce) afoot again after
a smoking hot little malady at Sydney.  And the temper being gone, I
still think the same. . . .  We have not our parents for ever; we are
never very good to them; when they go and we have lost our front-file
man, we begin to feel all our neglects mighty sensibly.  I propose a
proposal.  My mother is here on board with me; to-day for once I mean to
make her as happy as I am able, and to do that which I know she likes.
You, on the other hand, go and see your father, and do ditto, and give
him a real good hour or two.  We shall both be glad hereafter.—Yours
ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO H. B. BAILDON


                    _Vailima_, _Upolu_ [_Undated_, _but written in_ 1891].

MY DEAR BAILDON,—This is a real disappointment.  It was so long since we
had met, I was anxious to see where time had carried and stranded us.
Last time we saw each other—it must have been all ten years ago, as we
were new to the thirties—it was only for a moment, and now we’re in the
forties, and before very long we shall be in our graves.  Sick and well,
I have had a splendid life of it, grudge nothing, regret very little—and
then only some little corners of misconduct for which I deserve hanging,
and must infallibly be damned—and, take it all over, damnation and all,
would hardly change with any man of my time, unless perhaps it were
Gordon or our friend Chalmers: a man I admire for his virtues, love for
his faults, and envy for the really A1 life he has, with everything
heart—my heart, I mean—could wish.  It is curious to think you will read
this in the grey metropolis; go the first grey, east-windy day into the
Caledonian Station, if it looks at all as it did of yore: I met Satan
there.  And then go and stand by the cross, and remember the other
one—him that went down—my brother, Robert Fergusson.  It is a pity you
had not made me out, and seen me as patriarch and planter.  I shall look
forward to some record of your time with Chalmers: you can’t weary me of
that fellow, he is as big as a house and far bigger than any church,
where no man warms his hands.  Do you know anything of Thomson?  Of A—,
B—, C—, D—, E—, F—, at all?  As I write C.’s name mustard rises my nose;
I have never forgiven that weak, amiable boy a little trick he played me
when I could ill afford it: I mean that whenever I think of it, some of
the old wrath kindles, not that I would hurt the poor soul, if I got the
world with it.  And Old X—?  Is he still afloat?  Harmless bark!  I
gather you ain’t married yet, since your sister, to whom I ask to be
remembered, goes with you.  Did you see a silly tale, _John Nicholson’s
Predicament_, {220} or some such name, in which I made free with your
home at Murrayfield?  There is precious little sense in it, but it might
amuse.  Cassell’s published it in a thing called _Yule-Tide_ years ago,
and nobody that ever I heard of read or has ever seen _Yule-Tide_.  It is
addressed to a class we never met—readers of Cassell’s series and that
class of conscientious chaff, and my tale was dull, though I don’t recall
that it was conscientious.  Only, there’s the house at Murrayfield and a
dead body in it.  Glad the _Ballads_ amused you.  They failed to
entertain a coy public, at which I wondered, not that I set much account
by my verses, which are the verses of Prosator; but I do know how to tell
a yarn, and two of the yarns are great.  _Rahero_ is for its length a
perfect folk-tale: savage and yet fine, full of tailforemost morality,
ancient as the granite rocks; if the historian, not to say the
politician, could get that yarn into his head, he would have learned some
of his A B C. But the average man at home cannot understand antiquity; he
is sunk over the ears in Roman civilisation; and a tale like that of
_Rahero_ falls on his ears inarticulate.  The _Spectator_ said there was
no psychology in it; that interested me much: my grandmother (as I used
to call that able paper, and an able paper it is, and a fair one) cannot
so much as observe the existence of savage psychology when it is put
before it.  I am at bottom a psychologist and ashamed of it; the tale
seized me one-third because of its picturesque features, two-thirds
because of its astonishing psychology, and the _Spectator_ says there’s
none.  I am going on with a lot of island work, exulting in the knowledge
of a new world, ‘a new created world’ and new men; and I am sure my
income will DECLINE and FALL off; for the effort of comprehension is
death to the intelligent public, and sickness to the dull.

I do not know why I pester you with all this trash, above all as you
deserve nothing.  I give you my warm _talofa_ (‘my love to you,’ Samoan
salutation).  Write me again when the spirit moves you.  And some day, if
I still live, make out the trip again and let us hob-a-nob with our grey
pows on my verandah.—Yours sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO W. CRAIBE ANGUS


                                         _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _April_ 1891.

DEAR MR. ANGUS,—Surely I remember you!  It was W. C. Murray who made us
acquainted, and we had a pleasant crack.  I see your poet is not yet
dead.  I remember even our talk—or you would not think of trusting that
invaluable _Jolly Beggars_ to the treacherous posts, and the perils of
the sea, and the carelessness of authors.  I love the idea, but I could
not bear the risk.  However—

    ‘Hale be your heart, hale be your fiddle—’

it was kindly thought upon.

My interest in Burns is, as you suppose, perennial.  I would I could be
present at the exhibition, with the purpose of which I heartily
sympathise; but the _Nancy_ has not waited in vain for me, I have
followed my chest, the anchor is weighed long ago, I have said my last
farewell to the hills and the heather and the lynns: like Leyden, I have
gone into far lands to die, not stayed like Burns to mingle in the end
with Scottish soil.  I shall not even return like Scott for the last
scene.  Burns Exhibitions are all over.  ’Tis a far cry to Lochow from
tropical Vailima.

    ‘But still our hearts are true, our hearts are Highland,
    And we in dreams behold the Hebrides.’

When your hand is in, will you remember our poor Edinburgh Robin?  Burns
alone has been just to his promise; follow Burns, he knew best, he knew
whence he drew fire—from the poor, white-faced, drunken, vicious boy that
raved himself to death in the Edinburgh madhouse.  Surely there is more
to be gleaned about Fergusson, and surely it is high time the task was
set about.  I may tell you (because your poet is not dead) something of
how I feel: we are three Robins who have touched the Scots lyre this last
century.  Well, the one is the world’s, he did it, he came off, he is for
ever; but I and the other—ah! what bonds we have—born in the same city;
both sickly, both pestered, one nearly to madness, one to the madhouse,
with a damnatory creed; both seeing the stars and the dawn, and wearing
shoe-leather on the same ancient stones, under the same pends, down the
same closes, where our common ancestors clashed in their armour, rusty or
bright.  And the old Robin, who was before Burns and the flood, died in
his acute, painful youth, and left the models of the great things that
were to come; and the new, who came after, outlived his greensickness,
and has faintly tried to parody the finished work.  If you will collect
the strays of Robin Fergusson, fish for material, collect any last
re-echoing of gossip, command me to do what you prefer—to write the
preface—to write the whole if you prefer: anything, so that another
monument (after Burns’s) be set up to my unhappy predecessor on the
causey of Auld Reekie.  You will never know, nor will any man, how deep
this feeling is: I believe Fergusson lives in me.  I do, but tell it not
in Gath; every man has these fanciful superstitions, coming, going, but
yet enduring; only most men are so wise (or the poet in them so dead)
that they keep their follies for themselves.—I am, yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO EDMUND GOSSE


                                                  _Vailima_, _April_ 1891.

MY DEAR GOSSE,—I have to thank you and Mrs. Gosse for many mementoes,
chiefly for your _Life_ of your father.  There is a very delicate task,
very delicately done.  I noted one or two carelessnesses, which I meant
to point out to you for another edition; but I find I lack the time, and
you will remark them for yourself against a new edition.  They were two,
or perhaps three, flabbinesses of style which (in your work) amazed me.
Am I right in thinking you were a shade bored over the last chapters? or
was it my own fault that made me think them susceptible of a more
athletic compression?  (The flabbinesses were not there, I think, but in
the more admirable part, where they showed the bigger.)  Take it all
together, the book struck me as if you had been hurried at the last, but
particularly hurried over the proofs, and could still spend a very
profitable fortnight in earnest revision and (towards the end) heroic
compression.  The book, in design, subject, and general execution, is
well worth the extra trouble.  And even if I were wrong in thinking it
specially wanted, it will not be lost; for do we not know, in Flaubert’s
dread confession, that ‘prose is never done’?  What a medium to work in,
for a man tired, perplexed among different aims and subjects, and spurred
by the immediate need of ‘siller’!  However, it’s mine for what it’s
worth; and it’s one of yours, the devil take it; and you know, as well as
Flaubert, and as well as me, that it is _never done_; in other words, it
is a torment of the pit, usually neglected by the bards who (lucky
beggars!) approached the Styx in measure.  I speak bitterly at the
moment, having just detected in myself the last fatal symptom, three
blank verses in succession—and I believe, God help me, a hemistich at the
tail of them; hence I have deposed the labourer, come out of hell by my
private trap, and now write to you from my little place in purgatory.
But I prefer hell: would I could always dig in those red coals—or else be
at sea in a schooner, bound for isles unvisited: to be on shore and not
to work is emptiness—suicidal vacancy.

I was the more interested in your _Life_ of your father, because I
meditate one of mine, or rather of my family.  I have no such materials
as you, and (our objections already made) your attack fills me with
despair; it is direct and elegant, and your style is always admirable to
me—lenity, lucidity, usually a high strain of breeding, an elegance that
has a pleasant air of the accidental.  But beware of purple passages.  I
wonder if you think as well of your purple passages as I do of mine?  I
wonder if you think as ill of mine as I do of yours?  I wonder; I can
tell you at least what is wrong with yours—they are treated in the spirit
of verse.  The spirit—I don’t mean the measure, I don’t mean you fall
into bastard cadences; what I mean is that they seem vacant and smoothed
out, ironed, if you like.  And in a style which (like yours) aims more
and more successfully at the academic, one purple word is already much;
three—a whole phrase—is inadmissible.  Wed yourself to a clean austerity:
that is your force.  Wear a linen ephod, splendidly candid.  Arrange its
folds, but do not fasten it with any brooch.  I swear to you, in your
talking robes, there should be no patch of adornment; and where the
subject forces, let it force you no further than it must; and be ready
with a twinkle of your pleasantry.  Yours is a fine tool, and I see so
well how to hold it; I wonder if you see how to hold mine?  But then I am
to the neck in prose, and just now in the ‘dark _interstylar_ cave,’ all
methods and effects wooing me, myself in the midst impotent to follow
any.  I look for dawn presently, and a full flowing river of expression,
running whither it wills.  But these useless seasons, above all, when a
man _must_ continue to spoil paper, are infinitely weary.

We are in our house after a fashion; without furniture, ’tis true,
camping there, like the family after a sale.  But the bailiff has not yet
appeared; he will probably come after.  The place is beautiful beyond
dreams; some fifty miles of the Pacific spread in front; deep woods all
round; a mountain making in the sky a profile of huge trees upon our
left; about us, the little island of our clearing, studded with brave old
gentlemen (or ladies, or ‘the twa o’ them’) whom we have spared.  It is a
good place to be in; night and morning, we have Theodore Rousseaus
(always a new one) hung to amuse us on the walls of the world; and the
moon—this is our good season, we have a moon just now—makes the night a
piece of heaven.  It amazes me how people can live on in the dirty north;
yet if you saw our rainy season (which is really a caulker for wind, wet,
and darkness—howling showers, roaring winds, pit-blackness at noon) you
might marvel how we could endure that.  And we can’t.  But there’s a
winter everywhere; only ours is in the summer.  Mark my words: there will
be a winter in heaven—and in hell.  _Cela rentre dans les procédés du bon
Dieu_; _et vous verrez_!  There’s another very good thing about Vailima,
I am away from the little bubble of the literary life.  It is not all
beer and skittles, is it?  By the by, my _Ballads_ seem to have been dam
bad; all the crickets sing so in their crickety papers; and I have no
ghost of an idea on the point myself: verse is always to me the
unknowable.  You might tell me how it strikes a professional bard: not
that it really matters, for, of course, good or bad, I don’t think I
shall get into _that_ galley any more.  But I should like to know if you
join the shrill chorus of the crickets.  The crickets are the devil in
all to you: ’tis a strange thing, they seem to rejoice like a strong man
in their injustice.  I trust you got my letter about your Browning book.
In case it missed, I wish to say again that your publication of
Browning’s kind letter, as an illustration of _his_ character, was
modest, proper, and in radiant good taste.—In Witness whereof, etc.,
etc.,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS RAWLINSON


                                 _Vailima_, _Apia_, _Samoa_, _April_ 1891.

MY DEAR MAY,—I never think of you by any more ceremonial name, so I will
not pretend.  There is not much chance that I shall forget you until the
time comes for me to forget all this little turmoil in a corner (though
indeed I have been in several corners) of an inconsiderable planet.  You
remain in my mind for a good reason, having given me (in so short a time)
the most delightful pleasure.  I shall remember, and you must still be
beautiful.  The truth is, you must grow more so, or you will soon be
less.  It is not so easy to be a flower, even when you bear a flower’s
name.  And if I admired you so much, and still remember you, it is not
because of your face, but because you were then worthy of it, as you must
still continue.

Will you give my heartiest congratulations to Mr. S.?  He has my
admiration; he is a brave man; when I was young, I should have run away
from the sight of you, pierced with the sense of my unfitness.  He is
more wise and manly.  What a good husband he will have to be!  And
you—what a good wife!  Carry your love tenderly.  I will never forgive
him—or you—it is in both your hands—if the face that once gladdened my
heart should be changed into one sour or sorrowful.

What a person you are to give flowers!  It was so I first heard of you;
and now you are giving the May flower!

Yes, Skerryvore has passed; it was, for us.  But I wish you could see us
in our new home on the mountain, in the middle of great woods, and
looking far out over the Pacific.  When Mr. S. is very rich, he must
bring you round the world and let you see it, and see the old gentleman
and the old lady.  I mean to live quite a long while yet, and my wife
must do the same, or else I couldn’t manage it; so, you see, you will
have plenty of time; and it’s a pity not to see the most beautiful
places, and the most beautiful people moving there, and the real stars
and moon overhead, instead of the tin imitations that preside over
London.  I do not think my wife very well; but I am in hopes she will now
have a little rest.  It has been a hard business, above all for her; we
lived four months in the hurricane season in a miserable house, overborne
with work, ill-fed, continually worried, drowned in perpetual rain,
beaten upon by wind, so that we must sit in the dark in the evenings; and
then I ran away, and she had a month of it alone.  Things go better now;
the back of the work is broken; and we are still foolish enough to look
forward to a little peace.  I am a very different person from the
prisoner of Skerryvore.  The other day I was three-and-twenty hours in an
open boat; it made me pretty ill; but fancy its not killing me half-way!
It is like a fairy story that I should have recovered liberty and
strength, and should go round again among my fellow-men, boating, riding,
bathing, toiling hard with a wood-knife in the forest.  I can wish you
nothing more delightful than my fortune in life; I wish it you; and
better, if the thing be possible.

Lloyd is tinkling below me on the typewriter; my wife has just left the
room; she asks me to say she would have written had she been well enough,
and hopes to do it still.—Accept the best wishes of your admirer,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS ADELAIDE BOODLE


                                                  [_Vailima_, _May_ 1891.]

MY DEAR ADELAIDE,—I will own you just did manage to tread on my gouty
toe; and I beg to assure you with most people I should simply have turned
away and said no more.  My cudgelling was therefore in the nature of a
caress or testimonial.

God forbid, I should seem to judge for you on such a point; it was what
you seemed to set forth as your reasons that fluttered my old
Presbyterian spirit—for, mind you, I am a child of the Covenanters—whom I
do not love, but they are mine after all, my father’s and my mother’s—and
they had their merits too, and their ugly beauties, and grotesque
heroisms, that I love them for, the while I laugh at them; but in their
name and mine do what you think right, and let the world fall.  That is
the privilege and the duty of private persons; and I shall think the more
of you at the greater distance, because you keep a promise to your
fellow-man, your helper and creditor in life, by just so much as I was
tempted to think the less of you (O not much, or I would never have been
angry) when I thought you were the swallower of a (tinfoil) formula.

I must say I was uneasy about my letter, not because it was too strong as
an expression of my unregenerate sentiments, but because I knew full well
it should be followed by something kinder.  And the mischief has been in
my health.  I fell sharply sick in Sydney, was put aboard the _Lübeck_
pretty bad, got to Vailima, hung on a month there, and didn’t pick up as
well as my work needed; set off on a journey, gained a great deal, lost
it again; and am back at Vailima, still no good at my necessary work.  I
tell you this for my imperfect excuse that I should not have written you
again sooner to remove the bad taste of my last.

A road has been called Adelaide Road; it leads from the back of our house
to the bridge, and thence to the garden, and by a bifurcation to the pig
pen.  It is thus much traversed, particularly by Fanny.  An oleander, the
only one of your seeds that prospered in this climate, grows there; and
the name is now some week or ten days applied and published.  ADELAIDE
ROAD leads also into the bush, to the banana patch, and by a second
bifurcation over the left branch of the stream to the plateau and the
right hand of the gorges.  In short, it leads to all sorts of good, and
is, besides, in itself a pretty winding path, bound downhill among big
woods to the margin of the stream.

What a strange idea, to think me a Jew-hater!  Isaiah and David and Heine
are good enough for me; and I leave more unsaid.  Were I of Jew blood, I
do not think I could ever forgive the Christians; the ghettos would get
in my nostrils like mustard or lit gunpowder.  Just so you as being a
child of the Presbytery, I retain—I need not dwell on that.  The
ascendant hand is what I feel most strongly; I am bound in and in with my
forbears; were he one of mine, I should not be struck at all by Mr. Moss
of Bevis Marks, I should still see behind him Moses of the Mount and the
Tables and the shining face.  We are all nobly born; fortunate those who
know it; blessed those who remember.

I am, my dear Adelaide, most genuinely yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Write by return to say you are better, and I will try to do the same.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                 [_Vailima_], _Tuesday_, 19_th_ _May_ ’91.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—I don’t know what you think of me, not having written to
you at all during your illness.  I find two sheets begun with your name,
but that is no excuse. . . . I am keeping bravely; getting about better,
every day, and hope soon to be in my usual fettle.  My books begin to
come; and I fell once more on the Old Bailey session papers.  I have
1778, 1784, and 1786.  Should you be able to lay hands on any other
volumes, above all a little later, I should be very glad you should buy
them for me.  I particularly want _one_ or _two_ during the course of the
Peninsular War.  Come to think, I ought rather to have communicated this
want to Bain.  Would it bore you to communicate to that effect with the
great man?  The sooner I have them, the better for me.  ’Tis for Henry
Shovel.  But Henry Shovel has now turned into a work called ‘The Shovels
of Newton French: Including Memoirs of Henry Shovel, a Private in the
Peninsular War,’ which work is to begin in 1664 with the marriage of
Skipper, afterwards Alderman Shovel of Bristol, Henry’s
great-great-grandfather, and end about 1832 with his own second marriage
to the daughter of his runaway aunt.  Will the public ever stand such an
opus?  Gude kens, but it tickles me.  Two or three historical personages
will just appear: Judge Jeffreys, Wellington, Colquhoun, Grant, and I
think Townsend the runner.  I know the public won’t like it; let ’em lump
it then; I mean to make it good; it will be more like a saga.—Adieu,
yours ever affectionately,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                                _Vailima_ [_Summer_ 1891].

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—I find among my grandfather’s papers his own
reminiscences of his voyage round the north with Sir Walter, eighty years
ago, _labuntur anni_!  They are not remarkably good, but he was not a bad
observer, and several touches seem to me speaking.  It has occurred to me
you might like them to appear in the _Magazine_.  If you would, kindly
let me know, and tell me how you would like it handled.  My grandad’s MS.
runs to between six and seven thousand words, which I could abbreviate of
anecdotes that scarce touch Sir W.  Would you like this done?  Would you
like me to introduce the old gentleman?  I had something of the sort in
my mind, and could fill a few columns rather _à propos_.  I give you the
first offer of this, according to your request; for though it may
forestall one of the interests of my biography, the thing seems to me
particularly suited for prior appearance in a magazine.

I see the first number of the _Wrecker_; I thought it went lively enough;
and by a singular accident, the picture is not unlike Tai-o-hae!

Thus we see the age of miracles, etc.—Yours very sincerely,

                                                                  R. L. S.

Proofs for next mail.



TO W. CRAIBE ANGUS


                                                          [_Summer_ 1891.]

DEAR MR. ANGUS,—You can use my letter as you will.  The parcel has not
come; pray Heaven the next post bring it safe.  Is it possible for me to
write a preface here?  I will try if you like, if you think I must:
though surely there are Rivers in Assyria.  Of course you will send me
sheets of the catalogue; I suppose it (the preface) need not be long;
perhaps it should be rather very short?  Be sure you give me your views
upon these points.  Also tell me what names to mention among those of
your helpers, and do remember to register everything, else it is not
safe.

The true place (in my view) for a monument to Fergusson were the
churchyard of Haddington.  But as that would perhaps not carry many
votes, I should say one of the two following sites:—First, either as near
the site of the old Bedlam as we could get, or, second, beside the Cross,
the heart of his city.  Upon this I would have a fluttering butterfly,
and, I suggest, the citation,

   Poor butterfly, thy case I mourn.

For the case of Fergusson is not one to pretend about.  A more miserable
tragedy the sun never shone upon, or (in consideration of our climate) I
should rather say refused to brighten.—Yours truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Where Burns goes will not matter.  He is no local poet, like your Robin
the First; he is general as the casing air.  Glasgow, as the chief city
of Scottish men, would do well; but for God’s sake, don’t let it be like
the Glasgow memorial to Knox: I remember, when I first saw this, laughing
for an hour by Shrewsbury clock.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO H. C. IDE


                                             [_Vailima_, _June_ 19, 1891.]

DEAR MR. IDE,—Herewith please find the DOCUMENT, which I trust will prove
sufficient in law.  It seems to me very attractive in its eclecticism;
Scots, English, and Roman law phrases are all indifferently introduced,
and a quotation from the works of Haynes Bayly can hardly fail to attract
the indulgence of the Bench.—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

I, Robert Louis Stevenson, Advocate of the Scots Bar, author of _The
Master of Ballantrae_ and _Moral Emblems_, stuck civil engineer, sole
owner and patentee of the Palace and Plantation known as Vailima in the
island of Upolu, Samoa, a British Subject, being in sound mind, and
pretty well, I thank you, in body:

In consideration that Miss Annie H. Ide, daughter of H. C. Ide, in the
town of Saint Johnsbury, in the county of Caledonia, in the state of
Vermont, United States of America, was born, out of all reason, upon
Christmas Day, and is therefore out of all justice denied the consolation
and profit of a proper birthday;

And considering that I, the said Robert Louis Stevenson, have attained an
age when O, we never mention it, and that I have now no further use for a
birthday of any description;

And in consideration that I have met H. C. Ide, the father of the said
Annie H. Ide, and found him about as white a land commissioner as I
require:

_Have transferred_, and _do hereby transfer_, to the said Annie H. Ide,
_all and whole_ my rights and priviledges in the thirteenth day of
November, formerly my birthday, now, hereby, and henceforth, the birthday
of the said Annie H. Ide, to have, hold, exercise, and enjoy the same in
the customary manner, by the sporting of fine raiment, eating of rich
meats, and receipt of gifts, compliments, and copies of verse, according
to the manner of our ancestors;

_And I direct_ the said Annie H. Ide to add to the said name of Annie H.
Ide the name Louisa—at least in private; and I charge her to use my said
birthday with moderation and humanity, _et tamquam bona filia familiæ_,
the said birthday not being so young as it once was, and having carried
me in a very satisfactory manner since I can remember;

And in case the said Annie H. Ide shall neglect or contravene either of
the above conditions, I hereby revoke the donation and transfer my rights
in the said birthday to the President of the United States of America for
the time being:

In witness whereof I have hereto set my hand and seal this nineteenth day
of June in the year of grace eighteen hundred and ninety-one.

                                  [Picture: Circle with word ‘seal’ in it]

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_Witness_, LLOYD OSBOURNE,

_Witness_, HAROLD WATTS.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                              [_Vailima_, _October_ 1891.]

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—From this perturbed and hunted being expect but a
line, and that line shall be but a whoop for Adela.  O she’s delicious,
delicious; I could live and die with Adela—die, rather the better of the
two; you never did a straighter thing, and never will.

_David Balfour_, second part of _Kidnapped_, is on the stocks at last;
and is not bad, I think.  As for _The Wrecker_, it’s a machine, you
know—don’t expect aught else—a machine, and a police machine; but I
believe the end is one of the most genuine butcheries in literature; and
we point to our machine with a modest pride, as the only police machine
without a villain.  Our criminals are a most pleasing crew, and leave the
dock with scarce a stain upon their character.

What a different line of country to be trying to draw Adela, and trying
to write the last four chapters of _The Wrecker_!  Heavens, it’s like two
centuries; and ours is such rude, transpontine business, aiming only at a
certain fervour of conviction and sense of energy and violence in the
men; and yours is so neat and bright and of so exquisite a surface!
Seems dreadful to send such a book to such an author; but your name is on
the list.  And we do modestly ask you to consider the chapters on the
_Norah Creina_ with the study of Captain Nares, and the forementioned
last four, with their brutality of substance and the curious (and perhaps
unsound) technical manœuvre of running the story together to a point as
we go along, the narrative becoming more succinct and the details fining
off with every page.—Sworn affidavit of

                                                                  R. L. S.

_No person now alive has beaten Adela_: _I adore Adela and her maker_.
_Sic subscrib._

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

A Sublime Poem to follow.

   Adela, Adela, Adela Chart,
   What have you done to my elderly heart?
   Of all the ladies of paper and ink
   I count you the paragon, call you the pink.
   The word of your brother depicts you in part:
   ‘You raving maniac!’ Adela Chart;
   But in all the asylums that cumber the ground,
   So delightful a maniac was ne’er to be found.

   I pore on you, dote on you, clasp you to heart,
   I laud, love, and laugh at you, Adela Chart,
   And thank my dear maker the while I admire
   That I can be neither your husband nor sire.

   Your husband’s, your sire’s were a difficult part;
   You’re a byway to suicide, Adela Chart;
   But to read of, depicted by exquisite James,
   O, sure you’re the flower and quintessence of dames.

                                                                  R. L. S.

                          _Eructavit cor meum._

My heart was inditing a goodly matter about Adela Chart.

   Though oft I’ve been touched by the volatile dart,
   To none have I grovelled but Adela Chart,
   There are passable ladies, no question, in art—
   But where is the marrow of Adela Chart?
   I dreamed that to Tyburn I passed in the cart—
   I dreamed I was married to Adela Chart:
   From the first I awoke with a palpable start,
   The second dumfoundered me, Adela Chart!

Another verse bursts from me, you see; no end to the violence of the
Muse.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                                    _October_ 8_th_, 1891.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—All right, you shall have the _Tales of my
Grandfather_ soon, but I guess we’ll try and finish off _The Wrecker_
first.  _À propos_ of whom, please send some advanced sheets to
Cassell’s—away ahead of you—so that they may get a dummy out.

Do you wish to illustrate _My Grandfather_?  He mentions as excellent a
portrait of Scott by Basil Hall’s brother.  I don’t think I ever saw this
engraved; would it not, if you could get track of it, prove a taking
embellishment?  I suggest this for your consideration and inquiry.  A new
portrait of Scott strikes me as good.  There is a hard, tough,
constipated old portrait of my grandfather hanging in my aunt’s house,
Mrs. Alan Stevenson, 16 St. Leonard’s Terrace, Chelsea, which has never
been engraved—the better portrait, Joseph’s bust has been reproduced, I
believe, twice—and which, I am sure, my aunt would let you have a copy
of.  The plate could be of use for the book when we get so far, and thus
to place it in the _Magazine_ might be an actual saving.

I am swallowed up in politics for the first, I hope for the last, time in
my sublunary career.  It is a painful, thankless trade; but one thing
that came up I could not pass in silence.  Much drafting, addressing,
deputationising has eaten up all my time, and again (to my contrition) I
leave you Wreckerless.  As soon as the mail leaves I tackle it
straight.—Yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                                _Vailima_ [_Autumn_ 1891].

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—The time draws nigh, the mail is near due, and I
snatch a moment of collapse so that you may have at least some sort of a
scratch of note along with the

         end

                  of

                                   The

                                 Wrecker.

                                                                   Hurray!

which I mean to go herewith.  It has taken me a devil of a pull, but I
think it’s going to be ready.  If I did not know you were on the stretch
waiting for it and trembling for your illustrations, I would keep it for
another finish; but things being as they are, I will let it go the best
way I can get it.  I am now within two pages of the end of Chapter XXV.,
which is the last chapter, the end with its gathering up of loose
threads, being the dedication to Low, and addressed to him: this is my
last and best expedient for the knotting up of these loose cards.  ’Tis
possible I may not get that finished in time, in which case you’ll
receive only Chapters XXII. to XXV. by this mail, which is all that can
be required for illustration.

I wish you would send me _Memoirs of Baron Marbot_ (French);
_Introduction to the Study of the History of Language_, Strong, Logeman &
Wheeler; _Principles of Psychology_, William James; Morris & Magnusson’s
_Saga Library_, any volumes that are out; George Meredith’s _One of our
Conquerors_; _Là Bas_, by Huysmans (French); O’Connor Morris’s _Great
Commanders of Modern Times_; _Life’s Handicap_, by Kipling; of Taine’s
_Origines de la France Contemporaine_, I have only as far as _la
Révolution_, vol. iii.; if another volume is out, please add that.  There
is for a book-box.

I hope you will like the end; I think it is rather strong meat.  I have
got into such a deliberate, dilatory, expansive turn, that the effort to
compress this last yarn was unwelcome; but the longest yarn has to come
to an end sometime.  Please look it over for carelessnesses, and tell me
if it had any effect upon your jaded editorial mind.  I’ll see if ever I
have time to add more.

I add to my book-box list Adams’ _Historical Essays_; the Plays of A. W.
Pinero—all that have appeared, and send me the rest in course as they do
appear; _Noughts and Crosses_ by Q.; Robertson’s _Scotland under her
Early Kings_.

                                                                 _Sunday_.

The deed is done, didst thou not hear a noise?  ‘The end’ has been
written to this endless yarn, and I am once more a free man.  What will
he do with it?



TO W. CRAIBE ANGUS


                                      _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _November_ 1891.

MY DEAR MR. ANGUS,—Herewith the invaluable sheets.  They came months
after your letter, and I trembled; but here they are, and I have scrawled
my vile name on them, and ‘thocht shame’ as I did it.  I am expecting the
sheets of your catalogue, so that I may attack the preface.  Please give
me all the time you can.  The sooner the better; you might even send me
early proofs as they are sent out, to give me more incubation.  I used to
write as slow as judgment; now I write rather fast; but I am still ‘a
slow study,’ and sit a long while silent on my eggs.  Unconscious
thought, there is the only method: macerate your subject, let it boil
slow, then take the lid off and look in—and there your stuff is, good or
bad.  But the journalist’s method is the way to manufacture lies; it is
will-worship—if you know the luminous quaker phrase; and the will is only
to be brought in the field for study, and again for revision.  The
essential part of work is not an act, it is a state.

I do not know why I write you this trash.

Many thanks for your handsome dedication.  I have not yet had time to do
more than glance at Mrs. Begg; it looks interesting.—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS ANNIE H. IDE


                                     _Vailima_, _Samoa_ [_November_ 1891].

MY DEAR LOUISA,—Your picture of the church, the photograph of yourself
and your sister, and your very witty and pleasing letter, came all in a
bundle, and made me feel I had my money’s worth for that birthday.  I am
now, I must be, one of your nearest relatives; exactly what we are to
each other, I do not know, I doubt if the case has ever happened
before—your papa ought to know, and I don’t believe he does; but I think
I ought to call you in the meanwhile, and until we get the advice of
counsel learned in the law, my name-daughter.  Well, I was extremely
pleased to see by the church that my name-daughter could draw; by the
letter, that she was no fool; and by the photograph, that she was a
pretty girl, which hurts nothing.  See how virtues are rewarded!  My
first idea of adopting you was entirely charitable; and here I find that
I am quite proud of it, and of you, and that I chose just the kind of
name-daughter I wanted.  For I can draw too, or rather I mean to say I
could before I forgot how; and I am very far from being a fool myself,
however much I may look it; and I am as beautiful as the day, or at least
I once hoped that perhaps I might be going to be.  And so I might.  So
that you see we are well met, and peers on these important points.  I am
_very_ glad also that you are older than your sister.  So should I have
been, if I had had one.  So that the number of points and virtues which
you have inherited from your name-father is already quite surprising.

I wish you would tell your father—not that I like to encourage my
rival—that we have had a wonderful time here of late, and that they are
having a cold day on Mulinuu, and the consuls are writing reports, and I
am writing to the _Times_, and if we don’t get rid of our friends this
time I shall begin to despair of everything but my name-daughter.

You are quite wrong as to the effect of the birthday on your age.  From
the moment the deed was registered (as it was in the public press with
every solemnity), the 13th of November became your own _and only_
birthday, and you ceased to have been born on Christmas Day.  Ask your
father: I am sure he will tell you this is sound law.  You are thus
become a month and twelve days younger than you were, but will go on
growing older for the future in the regular and human manner from one
13th November to the next.  The effect on me is more doubtful; I may, as
you suggest, live for ever; I might, on the other hand, come to pieces
like the one-horse shay at a moment’s notice; doubtless the step was
risky, but I do not the least regret that which enables me to sign myself
your revered and delighted name-father,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO FRED ORR


                     _Vailima_, _Upolu_, _Samoa_, _November_ 28_th_, 1891.

DEAR SIR,—Your obliging communication is to hand.  I am glad to find that
you have read some of my books, and to see that you spell my name right.
This is a point (for some reason) of great difficulty; and I believe that
a gentleman who can spell Stevenson with a v at sixteen, should have a
show for the Presidency before fifty.  By that time

    I, nearer to the wayside inn,

predict that you will have outgrown your taste for autographs, but
perhaps your son may have inherited the collection, and on the morning of
the great day will recall my prophecy to your mind.  And in the papers of
1921 (say) this letter may arouse a smile.

Whatever you do, read something else besides novels and newspapers; the
first are good enough when they are good; the second, at their best, are
worth nothing.  Read great books of literature and history; try to
understand the Roman Empire and the Middle Ages; be sure you do not
understand when you dislike them; condemnation is non-comprehension.  And
if you know something of these two periods, you will know a little more
about to-day, and may be a good President.

I send you my best wishes, and am yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON,
                              _Author of a vast quantity of little books_.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                             [_Vailima_, _December_ 1891.]

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—The end of _The Wrecker_ having but just come in, you
will, I dare say, be appalled to receive three (possibly four) chapters
of a new book of the least attractive sort: a history of nowhere in a
corner, for no time to mention, running to a volume!  Well, it may very
likely be an illusion; it is very likely no one could possibly wish to
read it, but I wish to publish it.  If you don’t cotton to the idea,
kindly set it up at my expense, and let me know your terms for
publishing.  The great affair to me is to have per return (if it might
be) four or five—better say half a dozen—sets of the roughest proofs that
can be drawn.  There are a good many men here whom I want to read the
blessed thing, and not one would have the energy to read MS.  At the same
time, if you care to glance at it, and have the time, I should be very
glad of your opinion as to whether I have made any step at all towards
possibly inducing folk at home to read matter so extraneous and
outlandish.  I become heavy and owlish; years sit upon me; it begins to
seem to me to be a man’s business to leave off his damnable faces and say
his say.  Else I could have made it pungent and light and lively.  In
considering, kindly forget that I am R. L. S.; think of the four chapters
as a book you are reading, by an inhabitant of our ‘lovely but fatil’
islands; and see if it could possibly amuse the hebetated public.  I have
to publish anyway, you understand; I have a purpose beyond; I am
concerned for some of the parties to this quarrel.  What I want to hear
is from curiosity; what I want you to judge of is what we are to do with
the book in a business sense.  To me it is not business at all; I had
meant originally to lay all the profits to the credit of Samoa; when it
comes to the pinch of writing, I judge this unfair—I give too much—and I
mean to keep (if there be any profit at all) one-half for the artisan;
the rest I shall hold over to give to the Samoans _for that which I
choose and against work done_.  I think I have never heard of greater
insolence than to attempt such a subject; yet the tale is so strange and
mixed, and the people so oddly charactered—above all, the whites—and the
high note of the hurricane and the warships is so well prepared to take
popular interest, and the latter part is so directly in the day’s
movement, that I am not without hope but some may read it; and if they
don’t, a murrain on them!  Here is, for the first time, a tale of
Greeks—Homeric Greeks—mingled with moderns, and all true; Odysseus
alongside of Rajah Brooke, _proportion gardée_; and all true.  Here is
for the first time since the Greeks (that I remember) the history of a
handful of men, where all know each other in the eyes, and live close in
a few acres, narrated at length, and with the seriousness of history.
Talk of the modern novel; here is a modern history.  And if I had the
misfortune to found a school, the legitimate historian might lie down and
die, for he could never overtake his material.  Here is a little tale
that has not ‘caret’-ed its ‘vates’; ‘sacer’ is another point.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                                   _December_ 7_th_, 1891.

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—Thanks for yours; your former letter was lost; so it
appears was my long and masterly treatise on the _Tragic Muse_.  I
remember sending it very well, and there went by the same mail a long and
masterly tractate to Gosse about his daddy’s life, for which I have been
long expecting an acknowledgment, and which is plainly gone to the bottom
with the other.  If you see Gosse, please mention it.  These gems of
criticism are now lost literature, like the tomes of Alexandria.  I could
not do ’em again.  And I must ask you to be content with a dull head, a
weary hand, and short commons, for to-day, as I am physically tired with
hard work of every kind, the labours of the planter and the author both
piled upon me mountain deep.  I am delighted beyond expression by
Bourget’s book: he has phrases which affect me almost like Montaigne; I
had read ere this a masterly essay of his on Pascal; this book does it; I
write for all his essays by this mail, and shall try to meet him when I
come to Europe.  The proposal is to pass a summer in France, I think in
Royat, where the faithful could come and visit me; they are now not many.
I expect Henry James to come and break a crust or two with us.  I believe
it will be only my wife and myself; and she will go over to England, but
not I, or possibly incog. to Southampton, and then to Boscombe to see
poor Lady Shelley.  I am writing—trying to write in a Babel fit for the
bottomless pit; my wife, her daughter, her grandson and my mother, all
shrieking at each other round the house—not in war, thank God! but the
din is ultra martial, and the note of Lloyd joins in occasionally, and
the cause of this to-do is simply cacao, whereof chocolate comes.  You
may drink of our chocolate perhaps in five or six years from now, and not
know it.  It makes a fine bustle, and gives us some hard work, out of
which I have slunk for to-day.

I have a story coming out: God knows when or how; it answers to the name
of the _Beach of Falesà_, and I think well of it.  I was delighted with
the _Tragic Muse_; I thought the Muse herself one of your best works; I
was delighted also to hear of the success of your piece, as you know I am
a dam failure, {245} and might have dined with the dinner club that
Daudet and these parties frequented.

                                                               _Next day_.

I have just been breakfasting at Baiae and Brindisi, and the charm of
Bourget hag-rides me.  I wonder if this exquisite fellow, all made of
fiddle-strings and scent and intelligence, could bear any of my bald
prose.  If you think he could, ask Colvin to send him a copy of these
last essays of mine when they appear; and tell Bourget they go to him
from a South Sea Island as literal homage.  I have read no new book for
years that gave me the same literary thrill as his _Sensations d’Italie_.
If (as I imagine) my cut-and-dry literature would be death to him, and
worse than death—journalism—be silent on the point.  For I have a great
curiosity to know him, and if he doesn’t know my work, I shall have the
better chance of making his acquaintance.  I read _The Pupil_ the other
day with great joy; your little boy is admirable; why is there no little
boy like that unless he hails from the Great Republic?

Here I broke off, and wrote Bourget a dedication; no use resisting; it’s
a love affair.  O, he’s exquisite, I bless you for the gift of him.  I
have really enjoyed this book as I—almost as I—used to enjoy books when I
was going twenty—twenty-three; and these are the years for reading!

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                            [_Vailima_] _Jan._ 2_nd_, ’92.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—Overjoyed you were pleased with _Wrecker_, and shall
consider your protests.  There is perhaps more art than you think for in
the peccant chapter, where I have succeeded in packing into one a
dedication, an explanation, and a termination.  Surely you had not
recognised the phrase about boodle?  It was a quotation from Jim
Pinkerton, and seemed to me agreeably skittish.  However, all shall be
prayerfully considered.

To come to a more painful subject.  Herewith go three more chapters of
the wretched _History_; as you see, I approach the climax.  I expect the
book to be some 70,000 words, of which you have now 45.  Can I finish it
for next mail?  I am going to try!  ’Tis a long piece of journalism, and
full of difficulties here and there, of this kind and that, and will make
me a power of friends to be sure.  There is one Becker who will probably
put up a window to me in the church where he was baptized; and I expect a
testimonial from Captain Hand.

Sorry to let the mail go without the Scott; this has been a bad month
with me, and I have been below myself.  I shall find a way to have it
come by next, or know the reason why.  The mail after, anyway.

A bit of a sketch map appears to me necessary for my _History_; perhaps
two.  If I do not have any, ’tis impossible any one should follow; and I,
even when not at all interested, demand that I shall be able to follow;
even a tourist book without a map is a cross to me; and there must be
others of my way of thinking.  I inclose the very artless one that I
think needful.  Vailima, in case you are curious, is about as far again
behind Tanugamanono as that is from the sea.

M‘Clure is publishing a short story of mine, some 50,000 words, I think,
_The Beach of Falesà_; when he’s done with it, I want you and Cassell to
bring it out in a little volume; I shall send you a dedication for it; I
believe it good; indeed, to be honest, very good.  Good gear that pleases
the merchant.

The other map that I half threaten is a chart for the hurricane.  Get me
Kimberley’s report of the hurricane: not to be found here.  It is of most
importance; I _must_ have it with my proofs of that part, if I cannot
have it earlier, which now seems impossible.—Yours in hot haste,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO J. M. BARRIE


                                      _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _February_ 1892.

DEAR MR. BARRIE,—This is at least the third letter I have written you,
but my correspondence has a bad habit of not getting so far as the post.
That which I possess of manhood turns pale before the business of the
address and envelope.  But I hope to be more fortunate with this: for,
besides the usual and often recurrent desire to thank you for your
work-you are one of four that have come to the front since I was watching
and had a corner of my own to watch, and there is no reason, unless it be
in these mysterious tides that ebb and flow, and make and mar and murder
the works of poor scribblers, why you should not do work of the best
order.  The tides have borne away my sentence, of which I was weary at
any rate, and between authors I may allow myself so much freedom as to
leave it pending.  We are both Scots besides, and I suspect both rather
Scotty Scots; my own Scotchness tends to intermittency, but is at times
erisypelitous—if that be rightly spelt.  Lastly, I have gathered we had
both made our stages in the metropolis of the winds: our Virgil’s ‘grey
metropolis,’ and I count that a lasting bond.  No place so brands a man.

Finally, I feel it a sort of duty to you to report progress.  This may be
an error, but I believed I detected your hand in an article—it may be an
illusion, it may have been by one of those industrious insects who catch
up and reproduce the handling of each emergent man—but I’ll still hope it
was yours—and hope it may please you to hear that the continuation of
_Kidnapped_ is under way.  I have not yet got to Alan, so I do not know
if he is still alive, but David seems to have a kick or two in his
shanks.  I was pleased to see how the Anglo-Saxon theory fell into the
trap: I gave my Lowlander a Gaelic name, and even commented on the fact
in the text; yet almost all critics recognised in Alan and David a Saxon
and a Celt.  I know not about England; in Scotland at least, where Gaelic
was spoken in Fife little over the century ago, and in Galloway not much
earlier, I deny that there exists such a thing as a pure Saxon, and I
think it more than questionable if there be such a thing as a pure Celt.

But what have you to do with this? and what have I?  Let us continue to
inscribe our little bits of tales, and let the heathen rage!  Yours, with
sincere interest in your career,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO WILLIAM MORRIS


                                          _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _Feb._ 1892.

MASTER,—A plea from a place so distant should have some weight, and from
a heart so grateful should have some address.  I have been long in your
debt, Master, and I did not think it could be so much increased as you
have now increased it.  I was long in your debt and deep in your debt for
many poems that I shall never forget, and for _Sigurd_ before all, and
now you have plunged me beyond payment by the Saga Library.  And so now,
true to human nature, being plunged beyond payment, I come and bark at
your heels.

For surely, Master, that tongue that we write, and that you have
illustrated so nobly, is yet alive.  She has her rights and laws, and is
our mother, our queen, and our instrument.  Now in that living tongue
_where_ has one sense, _whereas_ another.  In the _Heathslayings Story_,
p. 241, line 13, it bears one of its ordinary senses.  Elsewhere and
usually through the two volumes, which is all that has yet reached me of
this entrancing publication, _whereas_ is made to figure for _where_.

For the love of God, my dear and honoured Morris, use _where_, and let us
know _whereas_ we are, wherefore our gratitude shall grow, whereby you
shall be the more honoured wherever men love clear language, whereas now,
although we honour, we are troubled.

Whereunder, please find inscribed to this very impudent but yet very
anxious document, the name of one of the most distant but not the
youngest or the coldest of those who honour you.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MRS. CHARLES FAIRCHILD


                                                [_Vailima_, _March_ 1892.]

MY DEAR MRS. FAIRCHILD,—I am guilty in your sight, but my affairs besiege
me.     The chief-justiceship of a family of nineteen persons is in
itself no sinecure, and sometimes occupies me for days: two weeks ago for
four days almost entirely, and for two days entirely.  Besides which, I
have in the last few months written all but one chapter of a _History of
Samoa_ for the last eight or nine years; and while I was unavoidably
delayed in the writing of this, awaiting material, put in one-half of
_David Balfour_, the sequel to _Kidnapped_.  Add the ordinary impediments
of life, and admire my busyness.  I am now an old, but healthy skeleton,
and degenerate much towards the machine.  By six at work: stopped at
half-past ten to give a history lesson to a step-grandson; eleven, lunch;
after lunch we have a musical performance till two; then to work again;
bath, 4.40, dinner, five; cards in the evening till eight; and then to
bed—only I have no bed, only a chest with a mat and blankets—and read
myself to sleep.  This is the routine, but often sadly interrupted.  Then
you may see me sitting on the floor of my verandah haranguing and being
harangued by squatting chiefs on a question of a road; or more privately
holding an inquiry into some dispute among our familiars, myself on my
bed, the boys on the floor—for when it comes to the judicial I play
dignity—or else going down to Apia on some more or less unsatisfactory
errand.  Altogether it is a life that suits me, but it absorbs me like an
ocean.  That is what I have always envied and admired in Scott; with all
that immensity of work and study, his mind kept flexible, glancing to all
points of natural interest.  But the lean hot spirits, such as mine,
become hypnotised with their bit occupations—if I may use Scotch to
you—it is so far more scornful than any English idiom.  Well, I can’t
help being a skeleton, and you are to take this devious passage for an
apology.

I thought _Aladdin_ capital fun; but why, in fortune, did he pretend it
was moral at the end?  The so-called nineteenth century, _où va-t-il se
nicher_?  ’Tis a trifle, but Pyle would do well to knock the passage out,
and leave his boguey tale a boguey tale, and a good one at that.

The arrival of your box was altogether a great success to the castaways.
You have no idea where we live.  Do you know, in all these islands there
are not five hundred whites, and no postal delivery, and only one
village—it is no more—and would be a mean enough village in Europe?  We
were asked the other day if Vailima were the name of our post town, and
we laughed.  Do you know, though we are but three miles from the village
metropolis, we have no road to it, and our goods are brought on the
pack-saddle?  And do you know—or I should rather say, can you believe—or
(in the famous old Tichborne trial phrase) would you be surprised to
learn, that all you have read of Vailima—or Subpriorsford, as I call
it—is entirely false, and we have no ice-machine, and no electric light,
and no water supply but the cistern of the heavens, and but one public
room, and scarce a bedroom apiece?  But, of course, it is well known that
I have made enormous sums by my evanescent literature, and you will smile
at my false humility.  The point, however, is much on our minds just now.
We are expecting an invasion of Kiplings; very glad we shall be to see
them; but two of the party are ladies, and I tell you we had to hold a
council of war to stow them.  You European ladies are so particular; with
all of mine, sleeping has long become a public function, as with natives
and those who go down much into the sea in ships.

Dear Mrs. Fairchild, I must go to my work.  I have but two words to say
in conclusion.

First, civilisation is rot.

Second, console a savage with more of the milk of that over civilised
being, your adorable schoolboy.

As I wrote these remarkable words, I was called down to eight o’clock
prayers, and have just worked through a chapter of Joshua and five
verses, with five treble choruses of a Samoan hymn; but the music was
good, our boys and precentress (’tis always a woman that leads) did
better than I ever heard them, and to my great pleasure I understood it
all except one verse.  This gave me the more time to try and identify
what the parts were doing, and further convict my dull ear.  Beyond the
fact that the soprano rose to the tonic above, on one occasion I could
recognise nothing.  This is sickening, but I mean to teach my ear better
before I am done with it or this vile carcase.

I think it will amuse you (for a last word) to hear that our
precentress—she is the washerwoman—is our shame.  She is a good, healthy,
comely, strapping young wench, full of energy and seriousness, a splendid
workwoman, delighting to train our chorus, delighting in the poetry of
the hymns, which she reads aloud (on the least provocation) with a great
sentiment of rhythm.  Well, then, what is curious?  Ah, we did not know!
but it was told us in a whisper from the cook-house—she is not of good
family.  Don’t let it get out, please; everybody knows it, of course,
here; there is no reason why Europe and the States should have the
advantage of me also.  And the rest of my housefolk are all chief-people,
I assure you.  And my late overseer (far the best of his race) is a
really serious chief with a good ‘name.’  Tina is the name; it is not in
the Almanach de Gotha, it must have got dropped at press.  The odd thing
is, we rather share the prejudice.  I have almost always—though not quite
always—found the higher the chief the better the man through all the
islands; or, at least, that the best man came always from a highish rank.
I hope Helen will continue to prove a bright exception.

With love to Fairchild and the Huge Schoolboy, I am, my dear Mrs.
Fairchild, yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                                [_Vailima_, _March_ 1892.]

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—Herewith Chapters IX. and X., and I am left face to
face with the horrors and dilemmas of the present regimen: pray for those
that go down to the sea in ships.  I have promised Henley shall have a
chance to publish the hurricane chapter if he like, so please let the
slips be sent _quam primum_ to C. Baxter, W.S., 11 S. Charlotte Street,
Edinburgh.  I got on mighty quick with that chapter—about five days of
the toughest kind of work.  God forbid I should ever have such another
pirn to wind!  When I invent a language, there shall be a direct and an
indirect pronoun differently declined—then writing would be some fun.

DIRECT      INDIRECT
  He          Tu
  Him         Tum
  His         Tus

Ex.: _He_ seized _tum_ by _tus_ throat; but _tu_ at the same moment
caught _him_ by _his_ hair.  A fellow could write hurricanes with an
inflection like that!  Yet there would he difficulties too.

Do what you please about _The Beach_; and I give you _carte blanche_ to
write in the matter to Baxter—or telegraph if the time press—to delay the
English contingent.  Herewith the two last slips of _The Wrecker_.  I
cannot go beyond.  By the way, pray compliment the printers on the proofs
of the Samoa racket, but hint to them that it is most unbusiness-like and
unscholarly to clip the edges of the galleys; these proofs should really
have been sent me on large paper; and I and my friends here are all put
to a great deal of trouble and confusion by the mistake.  For, as you
must conceive, in a matter so contested and complicated, the number of
corrections and the length of explanations is considerable.

Please add to my former orders—

_Le Chevalier Des Touches_          by Barbey d’Aurévilly.
_Les Diaboliques_
_Correspondance de Henri Beyle_     (Stendahl).

Yours sincerely,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO T. W. DOVER


              _Vailima Plantation_, _Upolu_, _Samoa_, _June_ 20_th_, 1892.

SIR,—In reply to your very interesting letter, I cannot fairly say that I
have ever been poor, or known what it was to want a meal.  I have been
reduced, however, to a very small sum of money, with no apparent prospect
of increasing it; and at that time I reduced myself to practically one
meal a day, with the most disgusting consequences to my health.  At this
time I lodged in the house of a working man, and associated much with
others.  At the same time, from my youth up, I have always been a good
deal and rather intimately thrown among the working-classes, partly as a
civil engineer in out-of-the-way places, partly from a strong and, I
hope, not ill-favoured sentiment of curiosity.  But the place where,
perhaps, I was most struck with the fact upon which you comment was the
house of a friend, who was exceedingly poor, in fact, I may say
destitute, and who lived in the attic of a very tall house entirely
inhabited by persons in varying stages of poverty.  As he was also in
ill-health, I made a habit of passing my afternoon with him, and when
there it was my part to answer the door.  The steady procession of people
begging, and the expectant and confident manner in which they presented
themselves, struck me more and more daily; and I could not but remember
with surprise that though my father lived but a few streets away in a
fine house, beggars scarce came to the door once a fortnight or a month.
From that time forward I made it my business to inquire, and in the
stories which I am very fond of hearing from all sorts and conditions of
men, learned that in the time of their distress it was always from the
poor they sought assistance, and almost always from the poor they got it.

Trusting I have now satisfactorily answered your question, which I thank
you for asking, I remain, with sincere compliments,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                                 _Vailima_, _Summer_ 1892.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—First of all, _you have all the corrections on_ ‘_The
Wrecker_.’  I found I had made what I meant and forgotten it, and was so
careless as not to tell you.

Second, of course, and by all means, charge corrections on the Samoa book
to me; but there are not near so many as I feared.  The Lord hath dealt
bountifully with me, and I believe all my advisers were amazed to see how
nearly correct I had got the truck, at least I was.  With this you will
receive the whole revise and a typewritten copy of the last chapter.  And
the thing now is Speed, to catch a possible revision of the treaty.  I
believe Cassells are to bring it out, but Baxter knows, and the thing has
to be crammed through _prestissimo_, _à la chasseur_.

You mention the belated Barbeys; what about the equally belated Pineros?
And I hope you will keep your bookshop alive to supplying me continuously
with the _Saga Library_.  I cannot get enough of _Sagas_; I wish there
were nine thousand; talk about realism!

All seems to flourish with you; I also prosper; none the less for being
quit of that abhorred task, Samoa.  I could give a supper party here were
there any one to sup.  Never was such a disagreeable task, but the thing
had to be told. . . .

There, I trust I am done with this cursed chapter of my career, bar the
rotten eggs and broken bottles that may follow, of course.  Pray
remember, speed is now all that can be asked, hoped, or wished.  I give
up all hope of proofs, revises, proof of the map, or sic like; and you on
your side will try to get it out as reasonably seemly as may be.

Whole Samoa book herewith.  Glory be to God.—Yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


      _Vailima Plantation_, _Upolu_, _Samoan Islands_, 18_th_ _July_ 1892.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—. . . I have been now for some time contending with
powers and principalities, and I have never once seen one of my own
letters to the _Times_.  So when you see something in the papers that you
think might interest the exiles of Upolu, do not think twice, out with
your saxpence, and send it flying to Vailima.  Of what you say of the
past, eh, man, it was a queer time, and awful miserable, but there’s no
sense in denying it was awful fun.  Do you mind the youth in Highland
garb and the tableful of coppers?  Do you mind the SIGNAL of Waterloo
Place?—Hey, how the blood stands to the heart at such a memory!—Hae ye
the notes o’t?  Gie’s them.—Gude’s sake, man, gie’s the notes o’t; I mind
ye made a tune o’t an’ played it on your pinanny; gie’s the notes.  Dear
Lord, that past.

Glad to hear Henley’s prospects are fair: his new volume is the work of a
real poet.  He is one of those who can make a noise of his own with
words, and in whom experience strikes an individual note.  There is
perhaps no more genuine poet living, bar the Big Guns.  In case I cannot
overtake an acknowledgment to himself by this mail, please let him hear
of my pleasure and admiration.  How poorly—compares!  He is all smart
journalism and cleverness: it is all bright and shallow and limpid, like
a business paper—a good one, _s’entend_; but there is no blot of heart’s
blood and the Old Night: there are no harmonics, there is scarce harmony
to his music; and in Henley—all of these; a touch, a sense within sense,
a sound outside the sound, the shadow of the inscrutable, eloquent beyond
all definition.  The First London Voluntary knocked me wholly.—Ever yours
affectionately, my dear Charles,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Kind memories to your father and all friends.



TO W. E. HENLEY


             _Vailima Plantation_, _Upolu_, _Samoa_, _August_ 1_st_, 1892.

MY DEAR HENLEY,—It is impossible to let your new volume pass in silence.
I have not received the same thrill of poetry since G. M.’s _Joy of
Earth_ volume and _Love in a Valley_; and I do not know that even that
was so intimate and deep.  Again and again, I take the book down, and
read, and my blood is fired as it used to be in youth.  _Andante con
moto_ in the _Voluntaries_, and the thing about the trees at night (No.
XXIV. I think) are up to date my favourites.  I did not guess you were so
great a magician; these are new tunes, this is an undertone of the true
Apollo; these are not verse, they are poetry—inventions, creations, in
language.  I thank you for the joy you have given me, and remain your old
friend and present huge admirer,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

The hand is really the hand of Esau, but under a course of threatened
scrivener’s cramp.

For the next edition of the Book of Verses, pray accept an emendation.
Last three lines of Echoes No. XLIV. read—

   ‘But life in act?  How should the grave
   Be victor over these,
   Mother, a mother of men?’

The two vocatives scatter the effect of this inimitable close.  If you
insist on the longer line, equip ‘grave’ with an epithet.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                  _Vailima_, _Upolu_, _August_ 1_st_, ’92.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—Herewith _My Grandfather_.  I have had rather a bad
time suppressing the old gentleman, who was really in a very garrulous
stage; as for getting him _in order_, I could do but little towards that;
however, there are one or two points of interest which may justify us in
printing.  The swinging of his stick and not knowing the sailor of
Coruiskin, in particular, and the account of how he wrote the lives in
the Bell Book particularly please me. I hope my own little introduction
is not egoistic; or rather I do not care if it is.  It was that old
gentleman’s blood that brought me to Samoa.

By the by, vols. vii., viii., and ix. of Adams’s _History_ have never
come to hand; no more have the dictionaries.

Please send me _Stonehenge on Horse_, _Stories and Interludes_ by Barry
Pain, and _Edinburgh Sketches and Memoirs_ by David Masson.  _The
Wrecker_ has turned up.  So far as I have seen, it is very satisfactory,
but on pp. 548, 549, there has been a devil of a miscarriage.  The two
Latin quotations instead of following each other being separated
(doubtless for printing considerations) by a line of prose.  My
compliments to the printers; there is doubtless such a thing as good
printing, but there is such a thing as good sense.

The sequel to _Kidnapped_, _David Balfour_ by name, is about
three-quarters done and gone to press for serial publication.  By what I
can find out it ought to be through hand with that and ready for volume
form early next spring.—Yours very sincerely,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO ANDREW LANG


                                               [_Vailima_, _August_ 1892.]

MY DEAR LANG,—I knew you would prove a trusty purveyor.  The books you
have sent are admirable.  I got the name of my hero out of Brown—Blair of
Balmyle—Francie Blair.  But whether to call the story _Blair of Balmyle_,
or whether to call it _The Young Chevalier_, I have not yet decided.  The
admirable Cameronian tract—perhaps you will think this a cheat—is to be
boned into _David Balfour_, where it will fit better, and really
furnishes me with a desired foothold over a boggy place.

_Later_; no, it won’t go in, and I fear I must give up ‘the idolatrous
occupant upon the throne,’ a phrase that overjoyed me beyond expression.
I am in a deuce of a flutter with politics, which I hate, and in which I
certainly do not shine; but a fellow cannot stand aside and look on at
such an exhibition as our government.  ’Taint decent; no gent can hold a
candle to it.  But it’s a grind to be interrupted by midnight messengers
and pass your days writing proclamations (which are never proclaimed) and
petitions (which ain’t petited) and letters to the _Times_, which it
makes my jaws yawn to re-read, and all your time have your heart with
David Balfour: he has just left Glasgow this morning for Edinburgh, James
More has escaped from the castle; it is far more real to me than the
Behring Sea or the Baring brothers either—he got the news of James More’s
escape from the Lord Advocate, and started off straight to comfort
Catriona.  You don’t know her; she’s James More’s daughter, and a
respectable young wumman; the Miss Grants think so—the Lord Advocate’s
daughters—so there can’t be anything really wrong.  Pretty soon we all go
to Holland, and be hanged; thence to Dunkirk, and be damned; and the tale
concludes in Paris, and be Poll-parrotted.  This is the last authentic
news.  You are not a real hard-working novelist; not a practical
novelist; so you don’t know the temptation to let your characters
maunder.  Dumas did it, and lived.  But it is not war; it ain’t
sportsmanlike, and I have to be stopping their chatter all the time.
Brown’s appendix is great reading.

   My only grief is that I can’t
   Use the idolatrous occupant.

Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.

Blessing and praising you for a useful (though idolatrous) occupant of
Kensington.




TO THE COUNTESS OF JERSEY


                                                        _August_ 14, 1745.

TO MISS AMELIA BALFOUR—MY DEAR COUSIN,—We are going an expedition to
leeward on Tuesday morning.  If a lady were perhaps to be encountered on
horseback—say, towards the Gasi-gasi river—about six A.M., I think we
should have an episode somewhat after the style of the ’45.  What a
misfortune, my dear cousin, that you should have arrived while your
cousin Graham was occupying my only guest-chamber—for Osterley Park is
not so large in Samoa as it was at home—but happily our friend Haggard
has found a corner for you!

The King over the Water—the Gasi-gasi water—will be pleased to see the
clan of Balfour mustering so thick around his standard.

I have (one serious word) been so lucky as to get a really secret
interpreter, so all is for the best in our little adventure into the
_Waverley Novels_.—I am your affectionate cousin,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Observe the stealth with which I have blotted my signature, but we must
be political _à outrance_.



TO THE COUNTESS OF JERSEY


MY DEAR COUSIN,—I send for your information a copy of my last letter to
the gentleman in question.  ’Tis thought more wise, in consideration of
the difficulty and peril of the enterprise, that we should leave the town
in the afternoon, and by several detachments.  If you would start for a
ride with the Master of Haggard and Captain Lockhart of Lee, say at three
o’clock of the afternoon, you would make some rencounters by the wayside
which might be agreeable to your political opinions.  All present will be
staunch.

The Master of Haggard might extend his ride a little, and return through
the marsh and by the nuns’ house (I trust that has the proper flavour),
so as a little to diminish the effect of separation.—I remain, your
affectionate cousin to command,

                                                               O TUSITALA.

_P.S._—It is to be thought this present year of grace will be historical.



TO MRS. CHARLES FAIRCHILD


                                               [_Vailima_, _August_ 1892.]

MY DEAR MRS. FAIRCHILD,—Thank you a thousand times for your letter.  You
are the Angel of (the sort of) Information (that I care about); I appoint
you successor to the newspaper press; and I beg of you, whenever you wish
to gird at the age, or think the bugs out of proportion to the roses, or
despair, or enjoy any cosmic or epochal emotion, to sit down again and
write to the Hermit of Samoa.  What do I think of it all?  Well, I love
the romantic solemnity of youth; and even in this form, although not
without laughter, I have to love it still.  They are such ducks!  But
what are they made of?  We were just as solemn as that about atheism and
the stars and humanity; but we were all for belief anyway—we held atheism
and sociology (of which none of us, nor indeed anybody, knew anything)
for a gospel and an iron rule of life; and it was lucky enough, or there
would have been more windows broken.  What is apt to puzzle one at first
sight in the New Youth is that, with such rickety and risky problems
always at heart, they should not plunge down a Niagara of Dissolution.
But let us remember the high practical timidity of youth.  I was a
particularly brave boy—this I think of myself, looking back—and plunged
into adventures and experiments, and ran risks that it still surprises me
to recall.  But, dear me, what a fear I was in of that strange blind
machinery in the midst of which I stood; and with what a compressed heart
and what empty lungs I would touch a new crank and await developments!  I
do not mean to say I do not fear life still; I do; and that terror (for
an adventurer like myself) is still one of the chief joys of living.

But it was different indeed while I was yet girt with the priceless robes
of inexperience; then the fear was exquisite and infinite.  And so, when
you see all these little Ibsens, who seem at once so dry and so
excitable, and faint in swathes over a play (I suppose—for a wager) that
would seem to me merely tedious, smile behind your hand, and remember the
little dears are all in a blue funk.  It must be very funny, and to a
spectator like yourself I almost envy it.  But never get desperate; human
nature is human nature; and the Roman Empire, since the Romans founded it
and made our European human nature what it is, bids fair to go on and to
be true to itself.  These little bodies will all grow up and become men
and women, and have heaps of fun; nay, and are having it now; and
whatever happens to the fashion of the age, it makes no difference—there
are always high and brave and amusing lives to be lived; and a change of
key, however exotic, does not exclude melody.  Even Chinamen, hard as we
find it to believe, enjoy being Chinese.  And the Chinaman stands alone
to be unthinkable; natural enough, as the representative of the only
other great civilisation.  Take my people here at my doors; their life is
a very good one; it is quite thinkable, quite acceptable to us.  And the
little dears will be soon skating on the other foot; sooner or later, in
each generation, the one-half of them at least begin to remember all the
material they had rejected when first they made and nailed up their
little theory of life; and these become reactionaries or conservatives,
and the ship of man begins to fill upon the other tack.

Here is a sermon, by your leave!  It is your own fault, you have amused
and interested me so much by your breath of the New Youth, which comes to
me from so far away, where I live up here in my mountain, and secret
messengers bring me letters from rebels, and the government sometimes
seizes them, and generally grumbles in its beard that Stevenson should
really be deported.  O, my life is the more lively, never fear!

It has recently been most amusingly varied by a visit from Lady Jersey.
I took her over mysteriously (under the pseudonym of my cousin, Miss
Amelia Balfour) to visit Mataafa, our rebel; and we had great fun, and
wrote a Ouida novel on our life here, in which every author had to
describe himself in the Ouida glamour, and of which—for the Jerseys
intend printing it—I must let you have a copy.  My wife’s chapter, and my
description of myself, should, I think, amuse you.  But there were finer
touches still; as when Belle and Lady Jersey came out to brush their
teeth in front of the rebel King’s palace, and the night guard squatted
opposite on the grass and watched the process; or when I and my
interpreter, and the King with his secretary, mysteriously disappeared to
conspire.—Ever yours sincerely,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO GORDON BROWNE


                                        _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _Autumn_ 1892.

          _To the Artist who did the illustrations to_ ‘_Uma_.’

DEAR SIR,—I only know you under the initials G. B., but you have done
some exceedingly spirited and satisfactory illustrations to my story _The
Beach of Falesà_, and I wish to write and thank you expressly for the
care and talent shown.  Such numbers of people can do good black and
whites!  So few can illustrate a story, or apparently read it.  You have
shown that you can do both, and your creation of Wiltshire is a real
illumination of the text.  It was exactly so that Wiltshire dressed and
looked, and you have the line of his nose to a nicety.  His nose is an
inspiration.  Nor should I forget to thank you for Case, particularly in
his last appearance.  It is a singular fact—which seems to point still
more directly to inspiration in your case—that your missionary actually
resembles the flesh-and-blood person from whom Mr. Tarleton was drawn.
The general effect of the islands is all that could be wished; indeed I
have but one criticism to make, that in the background of Case taking the
dollar from Mr. Tarleton’s head—head—not hand, as the fools have printed
it—the natives have a little too much the look of Africans.

But the great affair is that you have been to the pains to illustrate my
story instead of making conscientious black and whites of people sitting
talking.  I doubt if you have left unrepresented a single pictorial
incident.  I am writing by this mail to the editor in the hopes that I
may buy from him the originals, and I am, dear sir, your very much
obliged,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS MORSE


                       _Vailima_, _Samoan Islands_, _October_ 7_th_, 1892.

DEAR MADAM,—I have a great diffidence in answering your valued letter.
It would be difficult for me to express the feelings with which I read
it—and am now trying to re-read it as I dictate this.

You ask me to forgive what you say ‘must seem a liberty,’ and I find that
I cannot thank you sufficiently or even find a word with which to qualify
your letter.  Dear Madam, such a communication even the vainest man would
think a sufficient reward for a lifetime of labour.  That I should have
been able to give so much help and pleasure to your sister is the subject
of my grateful wonder.

That she, being dead, and speaking with your pen, should be able to repay
the debt with such a liberal interest, is one of those things that
reconcile us with the world and make us take hope again.  I do not know
what I have done to deserve so beautiful and touching a compliment; and I
feel there is but one thing fit for me to say here, that I will try with
renewed courage to go on in the same path, and to deserve, if not to
receive, a similar return from others.

You apologise for speaking so much about yourselves.  Dear Madam, I
thought you did so too little.  I should have wished to have known more
of those who were so sympathetic as to find a consolation in my work, and
so graceful and so tactful as to acknowledge it in such a letter as was
yours.

Will you offer to your mother the expression of a sympathy which (coming
from a stranger) must seem very airy, but which yet is genuine; and
accept for yourself my gratitude for the thought which inspired you to
write to me and the words which you found to express it.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


              _Vailima Plantation_, _Samoan Islands_, _Oct._ 10_th_, 1892.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—It is now, as you see, the 10th of October, and there
has not reached the Island of Upolu one single copy, or rag of a copy, of
the Samoa book.  I lie; there has come one, and that in the pocket of a
missionary man who is at daggers drawn with me, who lends it to all my
enemies, conceals it from all my friends, and is bringing a lawsuit
against me on the strength of expressions in the same which I have
forgotten, and now cannot see.  This is pretty tragic, I think you will
allow; and I was inclined to fancy it was the fault of the Post Office.
But I hear from my sister-in-law Mrs. Sanchez that she is in the same
case, and has received no ‘Footnote.’  I have also to consider that I had
no letter from you last mail, although you ought to have received by that
time ‘My Grandfather and Scott,’ and ‘Me and my Grandfather.’  Taking one
consideration with another, therefore, I prefer to conceive that No. 743
Broadway has fallen upon gentle and continuous slumber, and is become an
enchanted palace among publishing houses.  If it be not so, if the
‘Footnotes’ were really sent, I hope you will fall upon the Post Office
with all the vigour you possess.  How does _The Wrecker_ go in the
States?  It seems to be doing exceptionally well in England.—Yours
sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO J. M. BARRIE


           _Vailima Plantation_, _Samoan Islands_, _November_ 1_st_, 1892.

DEAR MR. BARRIE,—I can scarce thank you sufficiently for your extremely
amusing letter.  No, _The Auld Licht Idyls_ never reached me—I wish it
had, and I wonder extremely whether it would not be good for me to have a
pennyworth of the Auld Licht pulpit.  It is a singular thing that I
should live here in the South Seas under conditions so new and so
striking, and yet my imagination so continually inhabit that cold old
huddle of grey hills from which we come.  I have just finished _David
Balfour_; I have another book on the stocks, _The Young Chevalier_, which
is to be part in France and part in Scotland, and to deal with Prince
Charlie about the year 1749; and now what have I done but begun a third
which is to be all moorland together, and is to have for a centrepiece a
figure that I think you will appreciate—that of the immortal
Braxfield—Braxfield himself is my _grand premier_, or, since you are so
much involved in the British drama, let me say my heavy lead. . . .

Your descriptions of your dealings with Lord Rintoul are frightfully
unconscientious.  You should never write about anybody until you persuade
yourself at least for the moment that you love him, above all anybody on
whom your plot revolves.  It will always make a hole in the book; and, if
he has anything to do with the mechanism, prove a stick in your
machinery.  But you know all this better than I do, and it is one of your
most promising traits that you do not take your powers too seriously.
The _Little Minister_ ought to have ended badly; we all know it did; and
we are infinitely grateful to you for the grace and good feeling with
which you lied about it.  If you had told the truth, I for one could
never have forgiven you.  As you had conceived and written the earlier
parts, the truth about the end, though indisputably true to fact, would
have been a lie, or what is worse, a discord in art.  If you are going to
make a book end badly, it must end badly from the beginning.  Now your
book began to end well.  You let yourself fall in love with, and fondle,
and smile at your puppets.  Once you had done that, your honour was
committed—at the cost of truth to life you were bound to save them.  It
is the blot on _Richard Feverel_, for instance, that it begins to end
well; and then tricks you and ends ill.  But in that case there is worse
behind, for the ill-ending does not inherently issue from the plot—the
story _had_, in fact, _ended well_ after the great last interview between
Richard and Lucy—and the blind, illogical bullet which smashes all has no
more to do between the boards than a fly has to do with the room into
whose open window it comes buzzing.  It _might_ have so happened; it
needed not; and unless needs must, we have no right to pain our readers.
I have had a heavy case of conscience of the same kind about my Braxfield
story.  Braxfield—only his name is Hermiston—has a son who is condemned
to death; plainly, there is a fine tempting fitness about this; and I
meant he was to hang.  But now on considering my minor characters, I saw
there were five people who would—in a sense who must—break prison and
attempt his rescue.  They were capable, hardy folks, too, who might very
well succeed.  Why should they not then?  Why should not young Hermiston
escape clear out of the country? and be happy, if he could, with his—
But soft!  I will not betray my secret of my heroine.  Suffice it to
breathe in your ear that she was what Hardy calls (and others in their
plain way don’t) a Pure Woman.  Much virtue in a capital letter, such as
yours was.

Write to me again in my infinite distance.  Tell me about your new book.
No harm in telling _me_; I am too far off to be indiscreet; there are too
few near me who would care to hear.  I am rushes by the riverside, and
the stream is in Babylon: breathe your secrets to me fearlessly; and if
the Trade Wind caught and carried them away, there are none to catch them
nearer than Australia, unless it were the Tropic Birds.  In the
unavoidable absence of my amanuensis, who is buying eels for dinner, I
have thus concluded my despatch, like St. Paul, with my own hand.

And in the inimitable words of Lord Kames, Faur ye weel, ye bitch.—Yours
very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                 _Vailima Plantation_, _Nov._ 2_nd_, 1892.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—In the first place, I have to acknowledge receipt of
your munificent cheque for three hundred and fifty dollars.  Glad you
liked the Scott voyage; rather more than I did upon the whole.  As the
proofs have not turned up at all, there can be no question of returning
them, and I am therefore very much pleased to think you have arranged not
to wait.  The volumes of Adams arrived along with yours of October 6th.
One of the dictionaries has also blundered home, apparently from the
Colonies; the other is still to seek.  I note and sympathise with your
bewilderment as to _Falesà_.  My own direct correspondence with Mr.
Baxter is now about three months in abeyance.  Altogether you see how
well it would be if you could do anything to wake up the Post Office.
Not a single copy of the ‘Footnote’ has yet reached Samoa, but I hear of
one having come to its address in Hawaii.  Glad to hear good news of
Stoddard.—Yours sincerely,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.

_P.S._—Since the above was written an aftermath of post matter came in,
among which were the proofs of _My Grandfather_.  I shall correct and
return them, but as I have lost all confidence in the Post Office, I
shall mention here: first galley, 4th line from the bottom, for ‘AS’ read
‘OR.’

Should I ever again have to use my work without waiting for proofs, bear
in mind this golden principle.  From a congenital defect, I must suppose,
I am unable to write the word OR—wherever I write it the printer
unerringly puts AS—and those who read for me had better, wherever it is
possible, substitute _or_ for _as_.  This the more so since many writers
have a habit of using _as_ which is death to my temper and confusion to
my face.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO LIEUTENANT EELES


 _Vailima Plantation_, _Upolu_, _Samoan Islands_, _November_ 15_th_, 1892.

DEAR EELES,—In the first place, excuse me writing to you by another hand,
as that is the way in which alone all my correspondence gets effected.
Before I took to this method, or rather before I found a victim, it
_simply_ didn’t get effected.

Thank you again and again, first for your kind thought of writing to me,
and second for your extremely amusing and interesting letter.  You can
have no guess how immediately interesting it was to our family.  First of
all, the poor soul at Nukufetau is an old friend of ours, and we have
actually treated him ourselves on a former visit to the island.  I don’t
know if Hoskin would approve of our treatment; it consisted, I believe,
mostly in a present of stout and a recommendation to put nails in his
water-tank.  We also (as you seem to have done) recommended him to leave
the island; and I remember very well how wise and kind we thought his
answer.  He had half-caste children (he said) who would suffer and
perhaps be despised if he carried them elsewhere; if he left them there
alone, they would almost certainly miscarry; and the best thing was that
he should stay and die with them.  But the cream of the fun was your
meeting with Burn.  We not only know him, but (as the French say) we
don’t know anybody else; he is our intimate and adored original;
and—prepare your mind—he was, is, and ever will be, TOMMY HADDON! {271}
As I don’t believe you to be inspired, I suspect you to have suspected
this.  At least it was a mighty happy suspicion.  You are quite right:
Tommy is really ‘a good chap,’ though about as comic as they make them.

I was extremely interested in your Fiji legend, and perhaps even more so
in your capital account of the _Curaçoa’s_ misadventure.  Alas! we have
nothing so thrilling to relate.  All hangs and fools on in this isle of
misgovernment, without change, though not without novelty, but wholly
without hope, unless perhaps you should consider it hopeful that I am
still more immediately threatened with arrest.  The confounded thing is,
that if it comes off, I shall be sent away in the Ringarooma instead of
the _Curaçoa_.  The former ship burst upon by the run—she had been sent
off by despatch and without orders—and to make me a little more easy in
my mind she brought newspapers clamouring for my incarceration.  Since
then I have had a conversation with the German Consul.  He said he had
read a review of my Samoa book, and if the review were fair, must regard
it as an insult, and one that would have to be resented.  At the same
time, I learn that letters addressed to the German squadron lie for them
here in the Post Office.  Reports are current of other English ships
being on the way—I hope to goodness yours will be among the number.  And
I gather from one thing and another that there must be a holy row going
on between the powers at home, and that the issue (like all else
connected with Samoa) is on the knees of the gods.  One thing, however,
is pretty sure—if that issue prove to be a German Protectorate, I shall
have to tramp.  Can you give us any advice as to a fresh field of energy?
We have been searching the atlas, and it seems difficult to fill the
bill.  How would Rarotonga do?  I forget if you have been there.  The
best of it is that my new house is going up like winking, and I am
dictating this letter to the accompaniment of saws and hammers.  A
hundred black boys and about a score draught-oxen perished, or at least
barely escaped with their lives, from the mud-holes on our road, bringing
up the materials.  It will be a fine legacy to H.I.G.M.’s Protectorate,
and doubtless the Governor will take it for his country-house.  The
Ringarooma people, by the way, seem very nice.  I liked Stansfield
particularly.

Our middy {272} has gone up to San Francisco in pursuit of the phantom
Education.  We have good word of him, and I hope he will not be in
disgrace again, as he was when the hope of the British Navy—need I say
that I refer to Admiral Burney?—honoured us last.  The next time you
come, as the new house will be finished, we shall be able to offer you a
bed.  Nares and Meiklejohn may like to hear that our new room is to be
big enough to dance in.  It will be a very pleasant day for me to see the
Curaçoa in port again and at least a proper contingent of her officers
‘skipping in my ’all.’

We have just had a feast on my birthday at which we had three of the
Ringaromas, and I wish they had been three _Curaçoas_—say yourself,
Hoskin, and Burney the ever Great.  (Consider this an invitation.)  Our
boys had got the thing up regardless.  There were two huge sows—oh,
brutes of animals that would have broken down a hansom cab—four smaller
pigs, two barrels of beef, and a horror of vegetables and fowls.  We sat
down between forty and fifty in a big new native house behind the kitchen
that you have never seen, and ate and public spoke till all was blue.
Then we had about half an hour’s holiday with some beer and sherry and
brandy and soda to restrengthen the European heart, and then out to the
old native house to see a siva.  Finally, all the guests were packed off
in a trackless black night and down a road that was rather fitted for the
_Curaçoa_ than any human pedestrian, though to be sure I do not know the
draught of the _Curaçoa_.  My ladies one and all desire to be
particularly remembered to our friends on board, and all look forward, as
I do myself, in the hope of your return.—Yours sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

And let me hear from you again!



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                                         1_st_ _Dec._ ’92.

. . . I have a novel on the stocks to be called _The Justice-Clerk_.  It
is pretty Scotch, the Grand Premier is taken from Braxfield—(Oh, by the
by, send me Cockburn’s _Memorials_)—and some of the story is—well—queer.
The heroine is seduced by one man, and finally disappears with the other
man who shot him. . . . Mind you, I expect the _Justice-Clerk_ to be my
masterpiece.  My Braxfield is already a thing of beauty and a joy for
ever, and so far as he has gone _far_ my best character.

                                                                [_Later_.]

Second thought.  I wish Pitcairn’s _Criminal Trials quam primum_.  Also,
an absolutely correct text of the Scots judiciary oath.

Also, in case Pitcairn does not come down late enough, I wish as full a
report as possible of a Scotch murder trial between 1790–1820.
Understand, _the fullest possible_.

Is there any book which would guide me as to the following facts?

The Justice-Clerk tries some people capitally on circuit.  Certain
evidence cropping up, the charge is transferred to the J.-C.’s own son.
Of course, in the next trial the J.-C. is excluded, and the case is
called before the Lord-Justice General.

Where would this trial have to be?  I fear in Edinburgh, which would not
suit my view.  Could it be again at the circuit town?

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MRS. JENKIN


                                                   _December_ 5_th_, 1892.

MY DEAR MRS. JENKIN,—. . . So much said, I come with guilty speed to what
more immediately concerns myself.  Spare us a month or two for old sake’s
sake, and make my wife and me happy and proud.  We are only fourteen days
from San Francisco, just about a month from Liverpool; we have our new
house almost finished.  The thing _can_ be done; I believe we can make
you almost comfortable.  It is the loveliest climate in the world, our
political troubles seem near an end.  It can be done, it must!  Do,
please, make a virtuous effort, come and take a glimpse of a new world I
am sure you do not dream of, and some old friends who do often dream of
your arrival.

Alas, I was just beginning to get eloquent, and there goes the lunch
bell, and after lunch I must make up the mail.

Do come.  You must not come in February or March—bad months.  From April
on it is delightful.—Your sincere friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                                   _December_ 5_th_, 1892.

MY DEAR JAMES,—How comes it so great a silence has fallen?  The still
small voice of self-approval whispers me it is not from me.  I have
looked up my register, and find I have neither written to you nor heard
from you since June 22nd, on which day of grace that invaluable work
began.  This is not as it should be.  How to get back?  I remember
acknowledging with rapture the — of the _Master_, and I remember
receiving _Marbot_: was that our last relation?

Hey, well! anyway, as you may have probably gathered from the papers, I
have been in devilish hot water, and (what may be new to you) devilish
hard at work.  In twelve calendar months I finished _The Wrecker_, wrote
all of _Falesà_ but the first chapter (well, much of), the _History of
Samoa_, did something here and there to my _Life of my Grandfather_, and
began And Finished _David Balfour_.  What do you think of it for a year?
Since then I may say I have done nothing beyond draft three chapters of
another novel, _The Justice-Clerk_, which ought to be shorter and a
blower—at least if it don’t make a spoon, it will spoil the horn of an
Aurochs (if that’s how it should be spelt).

On the hot water side it may entertain you to know that I have been
actually sentenced to deportation by my friends on Mulinuu, C. J.
Cedercrantz, and Baron Senfft von Pilsach.  The awful doom, however,
declined to fall, owing to Circumstances over Which.  I only heard of it
(so to speak) last night.  I mean officially, but I had walked among
rumours.  The whole tale will be some day put into my hand, and I shall
share it with humorous friends.

It is likely, however, by my judgment, that this epoch of gaiety in Samoa
will soon cease; and the fierce white light of history will beat no
longer on Yours Sincerely and his fellows here on the beach.  We ask
ourselves whether the reason will more rejoice over the end of a
disgraceful business, or the unregenerate man more sorrow over the
stoppage of the fun.  For, say what you please, it has been a deeply
interesting time.  You don’t know what news is, nor what politics, nor
what the life of man, till you see it on so small a scale and with your
own liberty on the board for stake.  I would not have missed it for much.
And anxious friends beg me to stay at home and study human nature in
Brompton drawing-rooms!  _Farceurs_!  And anyway you know that such is
not my talent.  I could never be induced to take the faintest interest in
Brompton _qua_ Brompton or a drawing-room _qua_ a drawing-room.  I am an
Epick Writer with a k to it, but without the necessary genius.

Hurry up with another book of stories.  I am now reduced to two of my
contemporaries, you and Barrie—O, and Kipling—you and Barrie and Kipling
are now my Muses Three.  And with Kipling, as you know, there are
reservations to be made.  And you and Barrie don’t write enough.  I
should say I also read Anstey when he is serious, and can almost always
get a happy day out of Marion Crawford—_ce n’est pas toujours la guerre_,
but it’s got life to it and guts, and it moves.  Did you read the _Witch
of Prague_?  Nobody could read it twice, of course; and the first time
even it was necessary to skip.  _E pur si muove_.  But Barrie is a
beauty, the _Little Minister_ and the _Window in Thrums_, eh?  Stuff in
that young man; but he must see and not be too funny.  Genius in him, but
there’s a journalist at his elbow—there’s the risk.  Look, what a page is
the glove business in the _Window_! knocks a man flat; that’s guts, if
you please.

Why have I wasted the little time that is left with a sort of naked
review article?  I don’t know, I’m sure.  I suppose a mere ebullition of
congested literary talk I am beginning to think a visit from friends
would be due.  Wish you could come!

Let us have your news anyway, and forgive this silly stale
effusion.—Yours ever,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO J. M. BARRIE


                                             [_Vailima_, _December_ 1892.]

DEAR J. M. BARRIE,—You will be sick of me soon; I cannot help it.  I have
been off my work for some time, and re-read the _Edinburgh Eleven_, and
had a great mind to write a parody and give you all your sauce back
again, and see how you would like it yourself.  And then I read (for the
first time—I know not how) the _Window in Thrums_; I don’t say that it is
better than _The Minister_; it’s less of a tale—and there is a beauty, a
material beauty, of the tale _ipse_, which clever critics nowadays long
and love to forget; it has more real flaws; but somehow it is—well, I
read it last anyway, and it’s by Barrie.  And he’s the man for my money.
The glove is a great page; it is startlingly original, and as true as
death and judgment.  Tibbie Birse in the Burial is great, but I think it
was a journalist that got in the word ‘official.’  The same character
plainly had a word to say to Thomas Haggard.  Thomas affects me as a
lie—I beg your pardon; doubtless he was somebody you knew, that leads
people so far astray.  The actual is not the true.

I am proud to think you are a Scotchman—though to be sure I know nothing
of that country, being only an English tourist, quo’ Gavin Ogilvy.  I
commend the hard case of Mr. Gavin Ogilvy to J. M. Barrie, whose work is
to me a source of living pleasure and heartfelt national pride.  There
are two of us now that the Shirra might have patted on the head.  And
please do not think when I thus seem to bracket myself with you, that I
am wholly blinded with vanity.  Jess is beyond my frontier line; I could
not touch her skirt; I have no such glamour of twilight on my pen.  I am
a capable artist; but it begins to look to me as if you were a man of
genius.  Take care of yourself, for my sake.  It’s a devilish hard thing
for a man who writes so many novels as I do, that I should get so few to
read.  And I can read yours, and I love them.

A pity for you that my amanuensis is not on stock to-day, and my own hand
perceptibly worse than usual.—Yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

                                                   _December_ 5_th_, 1892.

_P.S._—They tell me your health is not strong.  Man, come out here and
try the Prophet’s chamber.  There’s only one bad point to us—we do rise
early.  The Amanuensis states that you are a lover of silence—and that
ours is a noisy house—and she is a chatterbox—I am not answerable for
these statements, though I do think there is a touch of garrulity about
my premises.  We have so little to talk about, you see.  The house is
three miles from town, in the midst of great silent forests.  There is a
burn close by, and when we are not talking you can hear the burn, and the
birds, and the sea breaking on the coast three miles away and six hundred
feet below us, and about three times a month a bell—I don’t know where
the bell is, nor who rings it; it may be the bell in Hans Andersen’s
story for all I know.  It is never hot here—86 in the shade is about our
hottest—and it is never cold except just in the early mornings.  Take it
for all in all, I suppose this island climate to be by far the healthiest
in the world—even the influenza entirely lost its sting.  Only two
patients died, and one was a man nearly eighty, and the other a child
below four months.  I won’t tell you if it is beautiful, for I want you
to come here and see for yourself.  Everybody on the premises except my
wife has some Scotch blood in their veins—I beg your pardon—except the
natives—and then my wife is a Dutchwoman—and the natives are the next
thing conceivable to Highlanders before the forty-five.  We would have
some grand cracks!

                                                                  R. L. S.

COME, it will broaden your mind, and be the making of me.




