XII
LIFE IN SAMOA,
_Continued_
JANUARY 1893–DECEMBER 1894


TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                                          [_April_, 1893.]

. . . About _The Justice-Clerk_, I long to go at it, but will first try
to get a short story done.  Since January I have had two severe
illnesses, my boy, and some heart-breaking anxiety over Fanny; and am
only now convalescing.  I came down to dinner last night for the first
time, and that only because the service had broken down, and to relieve
an inexperienced servant.  Nearly four months now I have rested my
brains; and if it be true that rest is good for brains, I ought to be
able to pitch in like a giant refreshed.  Before the autumn, I hope to
send you some _Justice-Clerk_, or _Weir of Hermiston_, as Colvin seems to
prefer; I own to indecision.  Received _Syntax_, _Dance of Death_, and
_Pitcairn_, which last I have read from end to end since its arrival,
with vast improvement.  What a pity it stops so soon!  I wonder is there
nothing that seems to prolong the series?  Why doesn’t some young man
take it up?  How about my old friend Fountainhall’s _Decisions_?  I
remember as a boy that there was some good reading there.  Perhaps you
could borrow me that, and send it on loan; and perhaps Laing’s
_Memorials_ therewith; and a work I’m ashamed to say I have never read,
_Balfour’s Letters_. . . . I have come by accident, through a
correspondent, on one very curious and interesting fact—namely, that
Stevenson was one of the names adopted by the MacGregors at the
proscription.  The details supplied by my correspondent are both
convincing and amusing; but it would be highly interesting to find out
more of this.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO A. CONAN DOYLE


                          _Vailima_, _Apia_, _Samoa_, _April_ 5_th_, 1893.

DEAR SIR,—You have taken many occasions to make yourself very agreeable
to me, for which I might in decency have thanked you earlier.  It is now
my turn; and I hope you will allow me to offer you my compliments on your
very ingenious and very interesting adventures of Sherlock Holmes.  That
is the class of literature that I like when I have the toothache.  As a
matter of fact, it was a pleurisy I was enjoying when I took the volume
up; and it will interest you as a medical man to know that the cure was
for the moment effectual.  Only the one thing troubles me: can this be my
old friend Joe Bell?—I am, yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—And lo, here is your address supplied me here in Samoa!  But do
not take mine, O frolic fellow Spookist, from the same source; mine is
wrong.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO S. R. CROCKETT


                                   _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _May_ 17_th_, 1893.

DEAR MR. CROCKETT,—I do not owe you two letters, nor yet nearly one, sir!
The last time I heard of you, you wrote about an accident, and I sent you
a letter to my lawyer, Charles Baxter, which does not seem to have been
presented, as I see nothing of it in his accounts.  Query, was that lost?
I should not like you to think I had been so unmannerly and so inhuman.
If you have written since, your letter also has miscarried, as is much
the rule in this part of the world, unless you register.

Your book is not yet to hand, but will probably follow next month.  I
detected you early in the _Bookman_, which I usually see, and noted you
in particular as displaying a monstrous ingratitude about the footnote.
Well, mankind is ungrateful; ‘Man’s ingratitude to man makes countless
thousands mourn,’ quo’ Rab—or words to that effect.  By the way, an
anecdote of a cautious sailor: ‘Bill, Bill,’ says I to him, ‘_or words to
that effect_.’

I shall never take that walk by the Fisher’s Tryst and Glencorse.  I
shall never see Auld Reekie.  I shall never set my foot again upon the
heather.  Here I am until I die, and here will I be buried.  The word is
out and the doom written.  Or, if I do come, it will be a voyage to a
further goal, and in fact a suicide; which, however, if I could get my
family all fixed up in the money way, I might, perhaps, perform, or
attempt.  But there is a plaguey risk of breaking down by the way; and I
believe I shall stay here until the end comes like a good boy, as I am.
If I did it, I should put upon my trunks: ‘Passenger to—Hades.’  How
strangely wrong your information is!  In the first place, I should never
carry a novel to Sydney; I should post it from here.  In the second
place, _Weir of Hermiston_ is as yet scarce begun.  It’s going to be
excellent, no doubt; but it consists of about twenty pages.  I have a
tale, a shortish tale in length, but it has proved long to do, _The Ebb
Tide_, some part of which goes home this mail.  It is by me and Mr.
Osbourne, and is really a singular work.  There are only four characters,
and three of them are bandits—well, two of them are, and the third is
their comrade and accomplice.  It sounds cheering, doesn’t it?  Barratry,
and drunkenness, and vitriol, and I cannot tell you all what, are the
beams of the roof.  And yet—I don’t know—I sort of think there’s
something in it.  You’ll see (which is more than I ever can) whether
Davis and Attwater come off or not.

_Weir of Hermiston_ is a much greater undertaking, and the plot is not
good, I fear; but Lord Justice-Clerk Hermiston ought to be a plum.  Of
other schemes, more or less executed, it skills not to speak.

I am glad to hear so good an account of your activity and interests, and
shall always hear from you with pleasure; though I am, and must continue,
a mere sprite of the inkbottle, unseen in the flesh.  Please remember me
to your wife and to the four-year-old sweetheart, if she be not too
engrossed with higher matters.  Do you know where the road crosses the
burn under Glencorse Church?  Go there, and say a prayer for me:
_moriturus salutat_.  See that it’s a sunny day; I would like it to be a
Sunday, but that’s not possible in the premises; and stand on the
right-hand bank just where the road goes down into the water, and shut
your eyes, and if I don’t appear to you! well, it can’t be helped, and
will be extremely funny.

I have no concern here but to work and to keep an eye on this distracted
people.  I live just now wholly alone in an upper room of my house,
because the whole family are down with influenza, bar my wife and myself.
I get my horse up sometimes in the afternoon and have a ride in the
woods; and I sit here and smoke and write, and rewrite, and destroy, and
rage at my own impotence, from six in the morning till eight at night,
with trifling and not always agreeable intervals for meals.

I am sure you chose wisely to keep your country charge.  There a minister
can be something, not in a town.  In a town, the most of them are empty
houses—and public speakers.  Why should you suppose your book will be
slated because you have no friends?  A new writer, if he is any good,
will be acclaimed generally with more noise than he deserves.  But by
this time you will know for certain.—I am, yours sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—Be it known to this fluent generation that I R. L. S., in the
forty-third of my age and the twentieth of my professional life, wrote
twenty-four pages in twenty-one days, working from six to eleven, and
again in the afternoon from two to four or so, without fail or
interruption.  Such are the gifts the gods have endowed us withal: such
was the facility of this prolific writer!

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO AUGUSTUS ST. GAUDENS


                                    _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _May_ 29_th_, 1893

MY DEAR GOD-LIKE SCULPTOR,—I wish in the most delicate manner in the
world to insinuate a few commissions:—

No. 1. Is for a couple of copies of my medallion, as gilt-edged and
high-toned as it is possible to make them.  One is for our house here,
and should be addressed as above.  The other is for my friend Sidney
Colvin, and should be addressed—Sidney Colvin, Esq., Keeper of the Print
Room, British Museum, London.

No. 2. This is a rather large order, and demands some explanation.  Our
house is lined with varnished wood of a dark ruddy colour, very beautiful
to see; at the same time, it calls very much for gold; there is a limit
to picture frames, and really you know there has to be a limit to the
pictures you put inside of them.  Accordingly, we have had an idea of a
certain kind of decoration, which, I think, you might help us to make
practical.  What we want is an alphabet of gilt letters (very much such
as people play with), and all mounted on spikes like drawing-pins; say
two spikes to each letter, one at top, and one at bottom.  Say that they
were this height, [Picture: large letter capital I about 4 times bigger
than normal size] and that you chose a model of some really exquisitely
fine, clear type from some Roman monument, and that they were made either
of metal or some composition gilt—the point is, could not you, in your
land of wooden houses, get a manufacturer to take the idea and
manufacture them at a venture, so that I could get two or three hundred
pieces or so at a moderate figure?  You see, suppose you entertain an
honoured guest, when he goes he leaves his name in gilt letters on your
walls; an infinity of fun and decoration can be got out of hospitable and
festive mottoes; and the doors of every room can be beautified by the
legend of their names.  I really think there is something in the idea,
and you might be able to push it with the brutal and licentious
manufacturer, using my name if necessary, though I should think the name
of the god-like sculptor would be more germane.  In case you should get
it started, I should tell you that we should require commas in order to
write the Samoan language, which is full of words written thus: la’u,
ti’e ti’e.  As the Samoan language uses but a very small proportion of
the consonants, we should require a double or treble stock of all vowels
and of F, G, L, U, N, P, S, T, and V.

The other day in Sydney, I think you might be interested to hear, I was
sculpt a second time by a man called —, as well as I can remember and
read.  I mustn’t criticise a present, and he had very little time to do
it in.  It is thought by my family to be an excellent likeness of Mark
Twain.  This poor fellow, by the by, met with the devil of an accident.
A model of a statue which he had just finished with a desperate effort
was smashed to smithereens on its way to exhibition.

Please be sure and let me know if anything is likely to come of this
letter business, and the exact cost of each letter, so that I may count
the cost before ordering.—Yours sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO EDMUND GOSSE


                                                      _June_ 10_th_, 1893.

MY DEAR GOSSE,—My mother tells me you never received the very long and
careful letter that I sent you more than a year ago; or is it two years?

I was indeed so much surprised at your silence that I wrote to Henry
James and begged him to inquire if you had received it; his reply was an
(if possible) higher power of the same silence; whereupon I bowed my head
and acquiesced.  But there is no doubt the letter was written and sent;
and I am sorry it was lost, for it contained, among other things, an
irrecoverable criticism of your father’s _Life_, with a number of
suggestions for another edition, which struck me at the time as
excellent.

Well, suppose we call that cried off, and begin as before?  It is
fortunate indeed that we can do so, being both for a while longer in the
day.  But, alas! when I see ‘works of the late J. A. S.,’ {292}  I can
see no help and no reconciliation possible.  I wrote him a letter, I
think, three years ago, heard in some roundabout way that he had received
it, waited in vain for an answer (which had probably miscarried), and in
a humour between frowns and smiles wrote to him no more.  And now the
strange, poignant, pathetic, brilliant creature is gone into the night,
and the voice is silent that uttered so much excellent discourse; and I
am sorry that I did not write to him again.  Yet I am glad for him; light
lie the turf!  The _Saturday_ is the only obituary I have seen, and I
thought it very good upon the whole.  I should be half tempted to write
an _In Memoriam_, but I am submerged with other work.  Are you going to
do it?  I very much admire your efforts that way; you are our only
academician.

So you have tried fiction?  I will tell you the truth: when I saw it
announced, I was so sure you would send it to me, that I did not order
it!  But the order goes this mail, and I will give you news of it.  Yes,
honestly, fiction is very difficult; it is a terrible strain to _carry_
your characters all that time.  And the difficulty of according the
narrative and the dialogue (in a work in the third person) is extreme.
That is one reason out of half a dozen why I so often prefer the first.
It is much in my mind just now, because of my last work, just off the
stocks three days ago, _The Ebb Tide_: a dreadful, grimy business in the
third person, where the strain between a vilely realistic dialogue and a
narrative style pitched about (in phrase) ‘four notes higher’ than it
should have been, has sown my head with grey hairs; or I believe so—if my
head escaped, my heart has them.

The truth is, I have a little lost my way, and stand bemused at the
cross-roads.  A subject?  Ay, I have dozens; I have at least four novels
begun, they are none good enough; and the mill waits, and I’ll have to
take second best.  _The Ebb Tide_ I make the world a present of; I
expect, and, I suppose, deserve to be torn to pieces; but there was all
that good work lying useless, and I had to finish it!

All your news of your family is pleasant to hear.  My wife has been very
ill, but is now better; I may say I am ditto, _The Ebb Tide_ having left
me high and dry, which is a good example of the mixed metaphor.  Our
home, and estate, and our boys, and the politics of the island, keep us
perpetually amused and busy; and I grind away with an odd, dogged, down
sensation—and an idea _in petto_ that the game is about played out.  I
have got too realistic, and I must break the trammels—I mean I would if I
could; but the yoke is heavy.  I saw with amusement that Zola says the
same thing; and truly the _Débâcle_ was a mighty big book, I have no need
for a bigger, though the last part is a mere mistake in my opinion.  But
the Emperor, and Sedan, and the doctor at the ambulance, and the horses
in the field of battle, Lord, how gripped it is!  What an epical
performance!  According to my usual opinion, I believe I could go over
that book and leave a masterpiece by blotting and no ulterior art.  But
that is an old story, ever new with me.  Taine gone, and Renan, and
Symonds, and Tennyson, and Browning; the suns go swiftly out, and I see
no suns to follow, nothing but a universal twilight of the
demi-divinities, with parties like you and me and Lang beating on toy
drums and playing on penny whistles about glow-worms.  But Zola is big
anyway; he has plenty in his belly; too much, that is all; he wrote the
_Débâcle_ and he wrote _La Bête humaine_, perhaps the most excruciatingly
silly book that I ever read to an end.  And why did I read it to an end,
W. E. G.?  Because the animal in me was interested in the lewdness.  Not
sincerely, of course, my mind refusing to partake in it; but the flesh
was slightly pleased.  And when it was done, I cast it from me with a
peal of laughter, and forgot it, as I would forget a Montépin.  Taine is
to me perhaps the chief of these losses; I did luxuriate in his
_Origines_; it was something beyond literature, not quite so good, if you
please, but so much more systematic, and the pages that had to be
‘written’ always so adequate.  Robespierre, Napoleon, were both excellent
good.

                                                        _June_ 18_th_, ’93

Well, I have left fiction wholly, and gone to my _Grandfather_, and on
the whole found peace.  By next month my _Grandfather_ will begin to be
quite grown up.  I have already three chapters about as good as done; by
which, of course, as you know, I mean till further notice or the next
discovery.  I like biography far better than fiction myself: fiction is
too free.  In biography you have your little handful of facts, little
bits of a puzzle, and you sit and think, and fit ’em together this way
and that, and get up and throw ’em down, and say damn, and go out for a
walk.  And it’s real soothing; and when done, gives an idea of finish to
the writer that is very peaceful.  Of course, it’s not really so finished
as quite a rotten novel; it always has and always must have the incurable
illogicalities of life about it, the fathoms of slack and the miles of
tedium.  Still, that’s where the fun comes in; and when you have at last
managed to shut up the castle spectre (dulness), the very outside of his
door looks beautiful by contrast.  There are pages in these books that
may seem nothing to the reader; but you _remember what they were_, _you
know what they might have been_, and they seem to you witty beyond
comparison.  In my _Grandfather_ I’ve had (for instance) to give up the
temporal order almost entirely; doubtless the temporal order is the great
foe of the biographer; it is so tempting, so easy, and lo! there you are
in the bog!—Ever yours,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.

With all kind messages from self and wife to you and yours.  My wife is
very much better, having been the early part of this year alarmingly ill.
She is now all right, only complaining of trifles, annoying to her, but
happily not interesting to her friends.  I am in a hideous state, having
stopped drink and smoking; yes, both.  No wine, no tobacco; and the
dreadful part of it is that—looking forward—I have—what shall I
say?—nauseating intimations that it ought to be for ever.



TO HENRY JAMES


              _Vailima Plantation_, _Samoan Islands_, _June_ 17_th_, 1893.

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—I believe I have neglected a mail in answering
yours.  You will be very sorry to hear that my wife was exceedingly ill,
and very glad to hear that she is better.  I cannot say that I feel any
more anxiety about her.  We shall send you a photograph of her taken in
Sydney in her customary island habit as she walks and gardens and shrilly
drills her brown assistants.  She was very ill when she sat for it, which
may a little explain the appearance of the photograph.  It reminds me of
a friend of my grandmother’s who used to say when talking to younger
women, ‘Aweel, when I was young, I wasnae just exactly what ye wad call
_bonny_, but I was pale, penetratin’, and interestin’.’  I would not
venture to hint that Fanny is ‘no bonny,’ but there is no doubt but that
in this presentment she is ‘pale, penetratin’, and interesting.’

As you are aware, I have been wading deep waters and contending with the
great ones of the earth, not wholly without success.  It is, you may be
interested to hear, a dreary and infuriating business.  If you can get
the fools to admit one thing, they will always save their face by denying
another.  If you can induce them to take a step to the right hand, they
generally indemnify themselves by cutting a caper to the left.  I always
held (upon no evidence whatever, from a mere sentiment or intuition) that
politics was the dirtiest, the most foolish, and the most random of human
employments.  I always held, but now I know it!  Fortunately, you have
nothing to do with anything of the kind, and I may spare you the horror
of further details.

I received from you a book by a man by the name of Anatole France.  Why
should I disguise it?  I have no use for Anatole.  He writes very
prettily, and then afterwards?  Baron Marbot was a different pair of
shoes.  So likewise is the Baron de Vitrolles, whom I am now perusing
with delight.  His escape in 1814 is one of the best pages I remember
anywhere to have read.  But Marbot and Vitrolles are dead, and what has
become of the living?  It seems as if literature were coming to a stand.
I am sure it is with me; and I am sure everybody will say so when they
have the privilege of reading _The Ebb Tide_.  My dear man, the grimness
of that story is not to be depicted in words.  There are only four
characters, to be sure, but they are such a troop of swine!  And their
behaviour is really so deeply beneath any possible standard, that on a
retrospect I wonder I have been able to endure them myself until the yarn
was finished.  Well, there is always one thing; it will serve as a
touchstone.  If the admirers of Zola admire him for his pertinent
ugliness and pessimism, I think they should admire this; but if, as I
have long suspected, they neither admire nor understand the man’s art,
and only wallow in his rancidness like a hound in offal, then they will
certainly be disappointed in _The Ebb Tide_.  _Alas_! poor little tale,
it is not _even_ rancid.

By way of an antidote or febrifuge, I am going on at a great rate with my
_History of the Stevensons_, which I hope may prove rather amusing, in
some parts at least.  The excess of materials weighs upon me.  My
grandfather is a delightful comedy part; and I have to treat him besides
as a serious and (in his way) a heroic figure, and at times I lose my
way, and I fear in the end will blur the effect.  However, _à la grâce de
Dieu_!  I’ll make a spoon or spoil a horn.  You see, I have to do the
Building of the Bell Rock by cutting down and packing my grandsire’s
book, which I rather hope I have done, but do not know.  And it makes a
huge chunk of a very different style and quality between Chapters II. and
IV.  And it can’t be helped!  It is just a delightful and exasperating
necessity.  You know, the stuff is really excellent narrative: only,
perhaps there’s too much of it!  There is the rub.  Well, well, it will
be plain to you that my mind is affected; it might be with less.  _The
Ebb Tide_ and _Northern Lights_ are a full meal for any plain man.

I have written and ordered your last book, _The Real Thing_, so be sure
and don’t send it.  What else are you doing or thinking of doing?  News I
have none, and don’t want any.  I have had to stop all strong drink and
all tobacco, and am now in a transition state between the two, which
seems to be near madness.  You never smoked, I think, so you can never
taste the joys of stopping it.  But at least you have drunk, and you can
enter perhaps into my annoyance when I suddenly find a glass of claret or
a brandy-and-water give me a splitting headache the next morning.  No
mistake about it; drink anything, and there’s your headache.  Tobacco
just as bad for me.  If I live through this breach of habit, I shall be a
white-livered puppy indeed.  Actually I am so made, or so twisted, that I
do not like to think of a life without the red wine on the table and the
tobacco with its lovely little coal of fire.  It doesn’t amuse me from a
distance.  I may find it the Garden of Eden when I go in, but I don’t
like the colour of the gate-posts.  Suppose somebody said to you, you are
to leave your home, and your books, and your clubs, and go out and camp
in mid-Africa, and command an expedition, you would howl, and kick, and
flee.  I think the same of a life without wine and tobacco; and if this
goes on, I’ve got to go and do it, sir, in the living flesh!

I thought Bourget was a friend of yours?  And I thought the French were a
polite race?  He has taken my dedication with a stately silence that has
surprised me into apoplexy.  Did I go and dedicate my book {298a} to the
nasty alien, and the ’norrid Frenchman, and the Bloody Furrineer?  Well,
I wouldn’t do it again; and unless his case is susceptible of
explanation, you might perhaps tell him so over the walnuts and the wine,
by way of speeding the gay hours.  Sincerely, I thought my dedication
worth a letter.

If anything be worth anything here below!  Do you know the story of the
man who found a button in his hash, and called the waiter?  ‘What do you
call that?’ says he.  ‘Well,’ said the waiter, ‘what d’you expect?
Expect to find a gold watch and chain?’  Heavenly apologue, is it not?  I
expected (rather) to find a gold watch and chain; I expected to be able
to smoke to excess and drink to comfort all the days of my life; and I am
still indignantly staring on this button!  It’s not even a button; it’s a
teetotal badge!—Ever yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                                      _Apia_, _July_ 1893.

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—Yes.  _Les Trophées_, on the whole, a book. {298b}
It is excellent; but is it a life’s work?  I always suspect _you_ of a
volume of sonnets up your sleeve; when is it coming down?  I am in one of
my moods of wholesale impatience with all fiction and all verging on it,
reading instead, with rapture, _Fountainhall’s Decisions_.  You never
read it: well, it hasn’t much form, and is inexpressibly dreary, I should
suppose, to others—and even to me for pages.  It’s like walking in a mine
underground, and with a damned bad lantern, and picking out pieces of
ore.  This, and war, will be my excuse for not having read your
(doubtless) charming work of fiction.  The revolving year will bring me
round to it; and I know, when fiction shall begin to feel a little
_solid_ to me again, that I shall love it, because it’s James.  Do you
know, when I am in this mood, I would rather try to read a bad book?
It’s not so disappointing, anyway.  And _Fountainhall_ is prime, two big
folio volumes, and all dreary, and all true, and all as terse as an
obituary; and about one interesting fact on an average in twenty pages,
and ten of them unintelligible for technicalities.  There’s literature,
if you like!  It feeds; it falls about you genuine like rain.  Rain:
nobody has done justice to rain in literature yet: surely a subject for a
Scot.  But then you can’t do rain in that ledger-book style that I am
trying for—or between a ledger-book and an old ballad.  How to get over,
how to escape from, the besotting _particularity_ of fiction.  ‘Roland
approached the house; it had green doors and window blinds; and there was
a scraper on the upper step.’  To hell with Roland and the scraper!—Yours
ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO A. CONAN DOYLE


                                               _Vailima_, _July_ 12, 1893.

MY DEAR DR. CONAN DOYLE,—The _White Company_ has not yet turned up; but
when it does—which I suppose will be next mail—you shall hear news of me.
I have a great talent for compliment, accompanied by a hateful, even a
diabolic frankness.

Delighted to hear I have a chance of seeing you and Mrs. Doyle; Mrs.
Stevenson bids me say (what is too true) that our rations are often
spare.  Are you Great Eaters?  Please reply.

As to ways and means, here is what you will have to do.  Leave San
Francisco by the down mail, get off at Samoa, and twelve days or a
fortnight later, you can continue your journey to Auckland per Upolu,
which will give you a look at Tonga and possibly Fiji by the way.  Make
this a _first part of your plans_.  A fortnight, even of Vailima diet,
could kill nobody.

We are in the midst of war here; rather a nasty business, with the
head-taking; and there seem signs of other trouble.  But I believe you
need make no change in your design to visit us.  All should be well over;
and if it were not, why! you need not leave the steamer.—Yours very
truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                                        19_th_ _July_ ’93.

. . . We are in the thick of war—see _Illustrated London News_—we have
only two outside boys left to us.  Nothing is doing, and _per contra_
little paying. . .  My life here is dear; but I can live within my income
for a time at least—so long as my prices keep up—and it seems a clear
duty to waste none of it on gadding about. . . .  My life of my family
fills up intervals, and should be an excellent book when it is done, but
big, damnably big.

My dear old man, I perceive by a thousand signs that we grow old, and are
soon to pass away!  I hope with dignity; if not, with courage at least.
I am myself very ready; or would be—will be—when I have made a little
money for my folks.  The blows that have fallen upon you are truly
terrifying; I wish you strength to bear them.  It is strange, I must seem
to you to blaze in a Birmingham prosperity and happiness; and to myself I
seem a failure.  The truth is, I have never got over the last influenza
yet, and am miserably out of heart and out of kilter.  Lungs pretty
right, stomach nowhere, spirits a good deal overshadowed; but we’ll come
through it yet, and cock our bonnets.  (I confess with sorrow that I am
not yet quite sure about the _intellects_; but I hope it is only one of
my usual periods of non-work.  They are more unbearable now, because I
cannot rest.  _No rest but the grave for Sir Walter_!  O the words ring
in a man’s head.)

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO A. CONAN DOYLE


                                         _Vailima_, _August_ 23_rd_, 1893.

MY DEAR DR. CONAN DOYLE,—I am reposing after a somewhat severe experience
upon which I think it my duty to report to you.  Immediately after dinner
this evening it occurred to me to re-narrate to my native overseer Simelè
your story of _The Engineer’s Thumb_.  And, sir, I have done it.  It was
necessary, I need hardly say, to go somewhat farther afield than you have
done.  To explain (for instance) what a railway is, what a steam hammer,
what a coach and horse, what coining, what a criminal, and what the
police.  I pass over other and no less necessary explanations.  But I did
actually succeed; and if you could have seen the drawn, anxious features
and the bright, feverish eyes of Simelè, you would have (for the moment
at least) tasted glory.  You might perhaps think that, were you to come
to Samoa, you might be introduced as the Author of _The Engineer’s
Thumb_.  Disabuse yourself.  They do not know what it is to make up a
story.  _The Engineer’s Thumb_ (God forgive me) was narrated as a piece
of actual and factual history.  Nay, and more, I who write to you have
had the indiscretion to perpetrate a trifling piece of fiction entitled
_The Bottle Imp_.  Parties who come up to visit my unpretentious mansion,
after having admired the ceilings by Vanderputty and the tapestry by
Gobbling, manifest towards the end a certain uneasiness which proves them
to be fellows of an infinite delicacy.  They may be seen to shrug a brown
shoulder, to roll up a speaking eye, and at last secret bursts from them:
‘Where is the bottle?’  Alas, my friends (I feel tempted to say), you
will find it by the Engineer’s Thumb!  Talofa-soifuia.

Oa’u, O lau no moni, O Tusitala.

More commonly known as,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.

Have read the _Refugees_; Condé and old P. Murat very good; Louis XIV.
and Louvois with the letter bag very rich.  You have reached a trifle
wide perhaps; too _many_ celebrities?  Though I was delighted to
re-encounter my old friend Du Chaylu.  Old Murat is perhaps your high
water mark; ’tis excellently human, cheerful and real.  Do it again.
Madame de Maintenon struck me as quite good.  Have you any document for
the decapitation?  It sounds steepish.  The devil of all that first part
is that you see old Dumas; yet your Louis XIV. is _distinctly good_.  I
am much interested with this book, which fulfils a good deal, and
promises more.  Question: How far a Historical Novel should be wholly
episodic?  I incline to that view, with trembling.  I shake hands with
you on old Murat.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO GEORGE MEREDITH


              _Sept._ 5_th_, 1893, _Vailima Plantation_, _Upolu_, _Samoa_.

MY DEAR MEREDITH,—I have again and again taken up the pen to write to
you, and many beginnings have gone into the waste paper basket (I have
one now—for the second time in my life—and feel a big man on the strength
of it).  And no doubt it requires some decision to break so long a
silence.  My health is vastly restored, and I am now living patriarchally
in this place six hundred feet above the sea on the shoulder of a
mountain of 1500.  Behind me, the unbroken bush slopes up to the backbone
of the island (3 to 4000) without a house, with no inhabitants save a few
runaway black boys, wild pigs and cattle, and wild doves and flying
foxes, and many parti-coloured birds, and many black, and many white: a
very eerie, dim, strange place and hard to travel.  I am the head of a
household of five whites, and of twelve Samoans, to all of whom I am the
chief and father: my cook comes to me and asks leave to marry—and his
mother, a fine old chief woman, who has never lived here, does the same.
You may be sure I granted the petition.  It is a life of great interest,
complicated by the Tower of Babel, that old enemy.  And I have all the
time on my hands for literary work.  My house is a great place; we have a
hall fifty feet long with a great red-wood stair ascending from it, where
we dine in state—myself usually dressed in a singlet and a pair of
trousers—and attended on by servants in a single garment, a kind of
kilt—also flowers and leaves—and their hair often powdered with lime.
The European who came upon it suddenly would think it was a dream.  We
have prayers on Sunday night—I am a perfect pariah in the island not to
have them oftener, but the spirit is unwilling and the flesh proud, and I
cannot go it more.  It is strange to see the long line of the brown folk
crouched along the wall with lanterns at intervals before them in the big
shadowy hall, with an oak cabinet at one end of it and a group of Rodin’s
(which native taste regards as _prodigieusement leste_) presiding over
all from the top—and to hear the long rambling Samoan hymn rolling up
(God bless me, what style!  But I am off business to-day, and this is not
meant to be literature.).

I have asked Colvin to send you a copy of _Catriona_, which I am
sometimes tempted to think is about my best work.  I hear word
occasionally of the _Amazing Marriage_.  It will be a brave day for me
when I get hold of it.  Gower Woodseer is now an ancient, lean, grim,
exiled Scot, living and labouring as for a wager in the tropics; still
active, still with lots of fire in him, but the youth—ah, the youth where
is it?  For years after I came here, the critics (those genial gentlemen)
used to deplore the relaxation of my fibre and the idleness to which I
had succumbed.  I hear less of this now; the next thing is they will tell
me I am writing myself out! and that my unconscientious conduct is
bringing their grey hairs with sorrow to the dust.  I do not know—I mean
I do know one thing.  For fourteen years I have not had a day’s real
health; I have wakened sick and gone to bed weary; and I have done my
work unflinchingly.  I have written in bed, and written out of it,
written in hemorrhages, written in sickness, written torn by coughing,
written when my head swam for weakness; and for so long, it seems to me I
have won my wager and recovered my glove.  I am better now, have been
rightly speaking since first I came to the Pacific; and still, few are
the days when I am not in some physical distress.  And the battle goes
on—ill or well, is a trifle; so as it goes.  I was made for a contest,
and the Powers have so willed that my battlefield should be this dingy,
inglorious one of the bed and the physic bottle.  At least I have not
failed, but I would have preferred a place of trumpetings and the open
air over my head.

This is a devilish egotistical yarn.  Will you try to imitate me in that
if the spirit ever moves you to reply?  And meantime be sure that away in
the midst of the Pacific there is a house on a wooded island where the
name of George Meredith is very dear, and his memory (since it must be no
more) is continually honoured.—Ever your friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Remember me to Mariette, if you please; and my wife sends her most kind
remembrances to yourself.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO AUGUSTUS ST. GAUDENS


                                              _Vailima_, _September_ 1893.

MY DEAR ST. GAUDENS,—I had determined not to write to you till I had seen
the medallion, but it looks as if that might mean the Greek Kalends or
the day after to-morrow.  Reassure yourself, your part is done, it is
ours that halts—the consideration of conveyance over our sweet little
road on boys’ backs, for we cannot very well apply the horses to this
work; there is only one; you cannot put it in a panier; to put it on the
horse’s back we have not the heart.  Beneath the beauty of R. L. S., to
say nothing of his verses, which the publishers find heavy enough, and
the genius of the god-like sculptor, the spine would snap and the
well-knit limbs of the (ahem) cart-horse would be loosed by death.  So
you are to conceive me, sitting in my house, dubitative, and the
medallion chuckling in the warehouse of the German firm, for some days
longer; and hear me meanwhile on the golden letters.

Alas! they are all my fancy painted, but the price is prohibitive.  I
cannot do it.  It is another day-dream burst.  Another gable of
Abbotsford has gone down, fortunately before it was builded, so there’s
nobody injured—except me.  I had a strong conviction that I was a great
hand at writing inscriptions, and meant to exhibit and test my genius on
the walls of my house; and now I see I can’t.  It is generally thus.  The
Battle of the Golden Letters will never be delivered.  On making
preparation to open the campaign, the King found himself face to face
with invincible difficulties, in which the rapacity of a mercenary
soldiery and the complaints of an impoverished treasury played an equal
part.—Ever yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

I enclose a bill for the medallion; have been trying to find your letter,
quite in vain, and therefore must request you to pay for the bronze
letters yourself and let me know the damage.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO J. HORNE STEVENSON


                               _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _November_ 5_th_, 1893.

MY DEAR STEVENSON,—A thousand thanks for your voluminous and delightful
collections.  Baxter—so soon as it is ready—will let you see a proof of
my introduction, which is only sent out as a sprat to catch whales.  And
you will find I have a good deal of what you have, only mine in a
perfectly desultory manner, as is necessary to an exile.  My uncle’s
pedigree is wrong; there was never a Stevenson of Caldwell, of course,
but they were tenants of the Muirs; the farm held by them is in my
introduction; and I have already written to Charles Baxter to have a
search made in the Register House.  I hope he will have had the
inspiration to put it under your surveillance.  Your information as to
your own family is intensely interesting, and I should not wonder but
what you and we and old John Stevenson, ‘land labourer in the parish of
Dailly,’ came all of the same stock.  Ayrshire—and probably
Cunningham—seems to be the home of the race—our part of it.  From the
distribution of the name—which your collections have so much extended
without essentially changing my knowledge of—we seem rather pointed to a
British origin.  What you say of the Engineers is fresh to me, and must
be well thrashed out.  This introduction of it will take a long while to
walk about!—as perhaps I may be tempted to let it become long; after all,
I am writing _this_ for my own pleasure solely.  Greetings to you and
other Speculatives of our date, long bygone, alas!—Yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—I have a different version of my grandfather’s arms—or my father
had if I could find it.

                                                                  R. L. S.




TO JOHN P—N


                               _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _December_ 3_rd_, 1893.

DEAR JOHNNIE,—Well, I must say you seem to be a tremendous fellow!
Before I was eight I used to write stories—or dictate them at least—and I
had produced an excellent history of Moses, for which I got £1 from an
uncle; but I had never gone the length of a play, so you have beaten me
fairly on my own ground.  I hope you may continue to do so, and thanking
you heartily for your nice letter, I shall beg you to believe me yours
truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO RUSSELL P—N


                               _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _December_ 3_rd_, 1893.

DEAR RUSSELL,—I have to thank you very much for your capital letter,
which came to hand here in Samoa along with your mother’s.  When you
‘grow up and write stories like me,’ you will be able to understand that
there is scarce anything more painful than for an author to hold a pen;
he has to do it so much that his heart sickens and his fingers ache at
the sight or touch of it; so that you will excuse me if I do not write
much, but remain (with compliments and greetings from one Scot to
another—though I was not born in Ceylon—you’re ahead of me there).—Yours
very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO ALISON CUNNINGHAM


                                            _Vailima_, _December_ 5, 1893.

MY DEAREST CUMMY,—This goes to you with a Merry Christmas and a Happy New
Year.  The Happy New Year anyway, for I think it should reach you about
_Noor’s Day_.  I dare say it may be cold and frosty.  Do you remember
when you used to take me out of bed in the early morning, carry me to the
back windows, show me the hills of Fife, and quote to me.

   ‘A’ the hills are covered wi’ snaw,
      An’ winter’s noo come fairly’?

There is not much chance of that here!  I wonder how my mother is going
to stand the winter.  If she can, it will be a very good thing for her.
We are in that part of the year which I like the best—the Rainy or
Hurricane Season.  ‘When it is good, it is very, very good; and when it
is bad, it is horrid,’ and our fine days are certainly fine like heaven;
such a blue of the sea, such green of the trees, and such crimson of the
hibiscus flowers, you never saw; and the air as mild and gentle as a
baby’s breath, and yet not hot!

The mail is on the move, and I must let up.—With much love, I am, your
laddie,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                                    6_th_ _December_ 1893.

    ‘_October_ 25, 1685.—At Privy Council, George Murray, Lieutenant of
    the King’s Guard, and others, did, on the 21st of September last,
    obtain a clandestine order of Privy Council to apprehend the person
    of Janet Pringle, daughter to the late Clifton, and she having
    retired out of the way upon information, he got an order against
    Andrew Pringle, her uncle, to produce her. . . . But she having
    married Andrew Pringle, her uncle’s son (to disappoint all their
    designs of selling her), a boy of thirteen years old.’  But my boy is
    to be fourteen, so I extract no further.—FOUNTAINHALL, i. 320.

    ‘_May_ 6, 1685.—Wappus Pringle of Clifton was still alive after all,
    and in prison for debt, and transacts with Lieutenant Murray, giving
    security for 7000 marks.’—i. 372.

No, it seems to have been _her_ brother who had succeeded.

                                * * * * *

MY DEAR CHARLES,—The above is my story, and I wonder if any light can be
thrown on it.  I prefer the girl’s father dead; and the question is, How
in that case could Lieutenant George Murray get his order to ‘apprehend’
and his power to ‘sell’ her in marriage?

Or—might Lieutenant G. be her tutor, and she fugitive to the Pringles,
and on the discovery of her whereabouts hastily married?

A good legal note on these points is very ardently desired by me; it will
be the corner-stone of my novel.

This is for—I am quite wrong to tell you—for you will tell others—and
nothing will teach you that all my schemes are in the air, and vanish and
reappear again like shapes in the clouds—it is for _Heathercat_: whereof
the first volume will be called _The Killing Time_, and I believe I have
authorities ample for that.  But the second volume is to be called (I
believe) _Darien_, and for that I want, I fear, a good deal of truck:—

  _Darien Papers_,
  _Carstairs Papers_,
  _Marchmont Papers_,
  _Jerviswoode Correspondence_,

I hope may do me.  Some sort of general history of the Darien affair (if
there is a decent one, which I misdoubt), it would also be well to
have—the one with most details, if possible.  It is singular how obscure
to me this decade of Scots history remains, 1690–1700—a deuce of a want
of light and grouping to it!  However, I believe I shall be mostly out of
Scotland in my tale; first in Carolina, next in Darien.  I want also—I am
the daughter of the horse-leech truly—‘Black’s new large map of
Scotland,’ sheets 3, 4, and 5, a 7s. 6d. touch.  I believe, if you can
get the

                            _Caldwell Papers_,

they had better come also; and if there be any reasonable work—but no, I
must call a halt. . . .

I fear the song looks doubtful, but I’ll consider of it, and I can
promise you some reminiscences which it will amuse me to write, whether
or not it will amuse the public to read of them.  But it’s an unco
business to _supply_ deid-heid coapy.



TO J. M. BARRIE


                               _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _December_ 7_th_, 1893.

MY DEAR BARRIE,—I have received duly the _magnum opus_, and it really is
a _magnum opus_. {311}  It is a beautiful specimen of Clark’s printing,
paper sufficient, and the illustrations all my fancy painted.  But the
particular flower of the flock to whom I have hopelessly lost my heart is
Tibby Birse.  I must have known Tibby Birse when she was a servant’s
mantua-maker in Edinburgh and answered to the name of Miss _Broddie_.
She used to come and sew with my nurse, sitting with her legs crossed in
a masculine manner; and swinging her foot emphatically, she used to pour
forth a perfectly unbroken stream of gossip.  I didn’t hear it, I was
immersed in far more important business with a box of bricks, but the
recollection of that thin, perpetual, shrill sound of a voice has echoed
in my ears sinsyne.  I am bound to say she was younger than Tibbie, but
there is no mistaking that and the indescribable and eminently Scottish
expression.

I have been very much prevented of late, having carried out thoroughly to
my own satisfaction two considerable illnesses, had a birthday, and
visited Honolulu, where politics are (if possible) a shade more
exasperating than they are with us.  I am told that it was just when I
was on the point of leaving that I received your superlative epistle
about the cricket eleven.  In that case it is impossible I should have
answered it, which is inconsistent with my own recollection of the fact.
What I remember is, that I sat down under your immediate inspiration and
wrote an answer in every way worthy.  If I didn’t, as it seems proved
that I couldn’t, it will never be done now.  However, I did the next best
thing, I equipped my cousin Graham Balfour with a letter of introduction,
and from him, if you know how—for he is rather of the Scottish
character—you may elicit all the information you can possibly wish to
have as to us and ours.  Do not be bluffed off by the somewhat stern and
monumental first impression that he may make upon you.  He is one of the
best fellows in the world, and the same sort of fool that we are, only
better-looking, with all the faults of Vailimans and some of his own—I
say nothing about virtues.

I have lately been returning to my wallowing in the mire.  When I was a
child, and indeed until I was nearly a man, I consistently read
Covenanting books.  Now that I am a grey-beard—or would be, if I could
raise the beard—I have returned, and for weeks back have read little else
but Wodrow, Walker, Shields, etc.  Of course this is with an idea of a
novel, but in the course of it I made a very curious discovery.  I have
been accustomed to hear refined and intelligent critics—those who know so
much better what we are than we do ourselves,—trace down my literary
descent from all sorts of people, including Addison, of whom I could
never read a word.  Well, laigh i’ your lug, sir—the clue was found.  My
style is from the Covenanting writers.  Take a particular case—the
fondness for rhymes.  I don’t know of any English prose-writer who rhymes
except by accident, and then a stone had better be tied around his neck
and himself cast into the sea.  But my Covenanting buckies rhyme all the
time—a beautiful example of the unconscious rhyme above referred to.

Do you know, and have you really tasted, these delightful works?  If not,
it should be remedied; there is enough of the Auld Licht in you to be
ravished.

I suppose you know that success has so far attended my banners—my
political banners I mean, and not my literary.  In conjunction with the
Three Great Powers I have succeeded in getting rid of My President and My
Chief-Justice.  They’ve gone home, the one to Germany, the other to
Souwegia.  I hear little echoes of footfalls of their departing footsteps
through the medium of the newspapers. . . .

Whereupon I make you my salute with the firm remark that it is time to be
done with trifling and give us a great book, and my ladies fall into line
with me to pay you a most respectful courtesy, and we all join in the
cry, ‘Come to Vailima!’

My dear sir, your soul’s health is in it—you will never do the great
book, you will never cease to work in L., etc., till you come to Vailima.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO R. LE GALLIENNE


                              _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _December_ 28_th_, 1893.

DEAR MR. LE GALLIENNE,—I have received some time ago, through our friend
Miss Taylor, a book of yours.  But that was by no means my first
introduction to your name.  The same book had stood already on my
shelves; I had read articles of yours in the _Academy_; and by a piece of
constructive criticism (which I trust was sound) had arrived at the
conclusion that you were ‘Log-roller.’  Since then I have seen your
beautiful verses to your wife.  You are to conceive me, then, as only too
ready to make the acquaintance of a man who loved good literature and
could make it.  I had to thank you, besides, for a triumphant exposure of
a paradox of my own: the literary-prostitute disappeared from view at a
phrase of yours—‘The essence is not in the pleasure but the sale.’  True:
you are right, I was wrong; the author is not the whore, but the
libertine; and yet I shall let the passage stand.  It is an error, but it
illustrated the truth for which I was contending, that
literature—painting—all art, are no other than pleasures, which we turn
into trades.

And more than all this, I had, and I have to thank you for the intimate
loyalty you have shown to myself; for the eager welcome you give to what
is good—for the courtly tenderness with which you touch on my defects.  I
begin to grow old; I have given my top note, I fancy;—and I have written
too many books.  The world begins to be weary of the old booth; and if
not weary, familiar with the familiarity that breeds contempt.  I do not
know that I am sensitive to criticism, if it be hostile; I am sensitive
indeed, when it is friendly; and when I read such criticism as yours, I
am emboldened to go on and praise God.

You are still young, and you may live to do much.  The little, artificial
popularity of style in England tends, I think, to die out; the British
pig returns to his true love, the love of the styleless, of the
shapeless, of the slapdash and the disorderly.  There is trouble coming,
I think; and you may have to hold the fort for us in evil days.

Lastly, let me apologise for the crucifixion that I am inflicting on you
(_bien à contre-cœur_) by my bad writing.  I was once the best of
writers; landladies, puzzled as to my ‘trade,’ used to have their honest
bosoms set at rest by a sight of a page of manuscript.—‘Ah,’ they would
say, ‘no wonder they pay you for that’;—and when I sent it in to the
printers, it was given to the boys!  I was about thirty-nine, I think,
when I had a turn of scrivener’s palsy; my hand got worse; and for the
first time, I received clean proofs.  But it has gone beyond that now, I
know I am like my old friend James Payn, a terror to correspondents; and
you would not believe the care with which this has been written.—Believe
me to be, very sincerely yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MRS. A. BAKER


                                                          _December_ 1893.

DEAR MADAM,—There is no trouble, and I wish I could help instead.  As it
is, I fear I am only going to put you to trouble and vexation.  This
Braille writing is a kind of consecration, and I would like if I could to
have your copy perfect.  The two volumes are to be published as Vols. I.
and II. of _The Adventures of David Balfour_.  1st, _Kidnapped_; 2nd,
_Catriona_.  I am just sending home a corrected _Kidnapped_ for this
purpose to Messrs. Cassell, and in order that I may if possible be in
time, I send it to you first of all.  Please, as soon as you have noted
the changes, forward the same to Cassell and Co., La Belle Sauvage Yard,
Ludgate Hill.

I am writing to them by this mail to send you _Catriona_.

You say, dear madam, you are good enough to say, it is ‘a keen pleasure’
to you to bring my book within the reach of the blind.

Conceive then what it is to me! and believe me, sincerely yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

   I was a barren tree before,
      I blew a quenchèd coal,
   I could not, on their midnight shore,
      The lonely blind console.

   A moment, lend your hand, I bring
      My sheaf for you to bind,
   And you can teach my words to sing
      In the darkness of the blind.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                                  _Apia_, _December_ 1893.

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—The mail has come upon me like an armed man three
days earlier than was expected; and the Lord help me!  It is impossible I
should answer anybody the way they should be.  Your jubilation over
_Catriona_ did me good, and still more the subtlety and truth of your
remark on the starving of the visual sense in that book.  ’Tis true, and
unless I make the greater effort—and am, as a step to that, convinced of
its necessity—it will be more true I fear in the future.  I _hear_ people
talking, and I _feel_ them acting, and that seems to me to be fiction.
My two aims may be described as—

  1_st_.  War to the adjective.

  2_nd_.  Death to the optic nerve.

Admitted we live in an age of the optic nerve in literature.  For how
many centuries did literature get along without a sign of it?  However,
I’ll consider your letter.

How exquisite is your character of the critic in _Essays in London_!  I
doubt if you have done any single thing so satisfying as a piece of style
and of insight.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                                      1_st_ _January_ ’94.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—I am delighted with your idea, and first, I will here
give an amended plan and afterwards give you a note of some of the
difficulties.

                 [Plan of the Edinburgh edition—14 vols.]

. . . It may be a question whether my _Times_ letters might not be
appended to the ‘Footnote’ with a note of the dates of discharge of
Cedercrantz and Pilsach.

I am particularly pleased with this idea of yours, because I am come to a
dead stop.  I never can remember how bad I have been before, but at any
rate I am bad enough just now, I mean as to literature; in health I am
well and strong.  I take it I shall be six months before I’m heard of
again, and this time I could put in to some advantage in revising the
text and (if it were thought desirable) writing prefaces.  I do not know
how many of them might be thought desirable.  I have written a paper on
_Treasure Island_, which is to appear shortly.  _Master of Ballantrae_—I
have one drafted.  _The Wrecker_ is quite sufficiently done already with
the last chapter, but I suppose an historic introduction to _David
Balfour_ is quite unavoidable.  _Prince Otto_ I don’t think I could say
anything about, and _Black Arrow_ don’t want to.  But it is probable I
could say something to the volume of _Travels_.  In the verse business I
can do just what I like better than anything else, and extend
_Underwoods_ with a lot of unpublished stuff.  _Apropos_, if I were to
get printed off a very few poems which are somewhat too intimate for the
public, could you get them run up in some luxuous manner, so that fools
might be induced to buy them in just a sufficient quantity to pay
expenses and the thing remain still in a manner private?  We could supply
photographs of the illustrations—and the poems are of Vailima and the
family—I should much like to get this done as a surprise for Fanny.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO H. B. BAILDON


                                        _Vailima_, _January_ 15_th_, 1894.

MY DEAR BAILDON,—Last mail brought your book and its Dedication.
‘Frederick Street and the gardens, and the short-lived Jack o’ Lantern,’
are again with me—and the note of the east wind, and Froebel’s voice, and
the smell of soup in Thomson’s stair.  Truly, you had no need to put
yourself under the protection of any other saint, were that saint our
Tamate himself!  Yourself were enough, and yourself coming with so rich a
sheaf.

For what is this that you say about the Muses?  They have certainly never
better inspired you than in ‘Jael and Sisera,’ and ‘Herodias and John the
Baptist,’ good stout poems, fiery and sound.  ‘’Tis but a mask and behind
it chuckles the God of the Garden,’ I shall never forget.  By the by, an
error of the press, page 49, line 4, ‘No infant’s lesson are the ways of
God.’  _The_ is dropped.

And this reminds me you have a bad habit which is to be comminated in my
theory of letters.  Same page, two lines lower: ‘But the vulture’s track’
is surely as fine to the ear as ‘But vulture’s track,’ and this latter
version has a dreadful baldness.  The reader goes on with a sense of
impoverishment, of unnecessary sacrifice; he has been robbed by footpads,
and goes scouting for his lost article!  Again, in the second Epode,
these fine verses would surely sound much finer if they began, ‘As a
hardy climber who has set his heart,’ than with the jejune ‘As hardy
climber.’  I do not know why you permit yourself this license with
grammar; you show, in so many pages, that you are superior to the paltry
sense of rhythm which usually dictates it—as though some poetaster had
been suffered to correct the poet’s text.  By the way, I confess to a
heartfelt weakness for _Auriculas_.—Believe me the very grateful and
characteristic pick-thank, but still sincere and affectionate,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO W. H. LOW.


                                          _Vailima_, _January_ 15th, 1894.

MY DEAR LOW,—. . . Pray you, stoop your proud head, and sell yourself to
some Jew magazine, and make the visit out.  I assure you, this is the
spot for a sculptor or painter.  This, and no other—I don’t say to stay
there, but to come once and get the living colour into them.  I am used
to it; I do not notice it; rather prefer my grey, freezing recollections
of Scotland; but there it is, and every morning is a thing to give thanks
for, and every night another—bar when it rains, of course.

About _The Wrecker_—rather late days, and I still suspect I had somehow
offended you; however, all’s well that ends well, and I am glad I am
forgiven—did you not fail to appreciate the attitude of Dodd?  He was a
fizzle and a stick, he knew it, he knew nothing else, and there is an
undercurrent of bitterness in him.  And then the problem that Pinkerton
laid down: why the artist can _do nothing else_? is one that continually
exercises myself.  He cannot: granted.  But Scott could.  And Montaigne.
And Julius Cæsar.  And many more.  And why can’t R. L. S.?  Does it not
amaze you?  It does me.  I think of the Renaissance fellows, and their
all-round human sufficiency, and compare it with the ineffable smallness
of the field in which we labour and in which we do so little.  I think
_David Balfour_ a nice little book, and very artistic, and just the thing
to occupy the leisure of a busy man; but for the top flower of a man’s
life it seems to me inadequate.  Small is the word; it is a small age,
and I am of it.  I could have wished to be otherwise busy in this world.
I ought to have been able to build lighthouses and write _David Balfours_
too.  _Hinc illae lacrymae_.  I take my own case as most handy, but it is
as illustrative of my quarrel with the age.  We take all these pains, and
we don’t do as well as Michael Angelo or Leonardo, or even Fielding, who
was an active magistrate, or Richardson, who was a busy bookseller.
_J’ai honte pour nous_; my ears burn.

I am amazed at the effect which this Chicago exhibition has produced upon
you and others.  It set Mrs. Fairchild literally mad—to judge by her
letters.  And I wish I had seen anything so influential.  I suppose there
was an aura, a halo, some sort of effulgency about the place; for here I
find you louder than the rest.  Well, it may be there is a time coming;
and I wonder, when it comes, whether it will be a time of little,
exclusive, one-eyed rascals like you and me, or parties of the old stamp
who can paint and fight, and write and keep books of double entry, and
sculp, and scalp.  It might be.  You have a lot of stuff in the kettle,
and a great deal of it Celtic.  I have changed my mind progressively
about England, practically the whole of Scotland is Celtic, and the
western half of England, and all Ireland, and the Celtic blood makes a
rare blend for art.  If it is stiffened up with Latin blood, you get the
French.  We were less lucky: we had only Scandinavians, themselves
decidedly artistic, and the Low-German lot.  However, that is a good
starting-point, and with all the other elements in your crucible, it may
come to something great very easily.  I wish you would hurry up and let
me see it.  Here is a long while I have been waiting for something _good_
in art; and what have I seen?  Zola’s _Débâcle_ and a few of Kipling’s
tales.  Are you a reader of Barbey d’Aurevilly?  He is a never-failing
source of pleasure to me, for my sins, I suppose.  What a work is the
_Rideau Cramoisi_! and _L’Ensorcelée_! and _Le Chevalier Des Touches_!

This is degenerating into mere twaddle.  So please remember us all most
kindly to Mrs. Low, and believe me ever yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—Were all your privateers voiceless in the war of 1812?  Did _no
one_ of them write memoirs?  I shall have to do my privateer from chic,
if you can’t help me. {320}  My application to Scribner has been quite in
vain.  See if you can get hold of some historic sharp in the club, and
tap him; they must some of them have written memoirs or notes of some
sort; perhaps still unprinted; if that be so, get them copied for me.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO H. B. BAILDON


                                        _Vailima_, _January_ 30_th_, 1894.

MY DEAR BAILDON,—‘Call not blessed.’—Yes, if I could die just now, or say
in half a year, I should have had a splendid time of it on the whole.
But it gets a little stale, and my work will begin to senesce; and
parties to shy bricks at me; and now it begins to look as if I should
survive to see myself impotent and forgotten.  It’s a pity suicide is not
thought the ticket in the best circles.

But your letter goes on to congratulate me on having done the one thing I
am a little sorry for; a little—not much—for my father himself lived to
think that I had been wiser than he.  But the cream of the jest is that I
have lived to change my mind; and think that he was wiser than I.  Had I
been an engineer, and literature my amusement, it would have been better
perhaps.  I pulled it off, of course, I won the wager, and it is pleasant
while it lasts; but how long will it last?  I don’t know, say the Bells
of Old Bow.

All of which goes to show that nobody is quite sane in judging himself.
Truly, had I given way and gone in for engineering, I should be dead by
now.  Well, the gods know best.

. . . I hope you got my letter about the _Rescue_.—Adieu,

                                                                  R. L. S.

True for you about the benefit: except by kisses, jests, song, _et hoc
genus omne_, man _cannot_ convey benefit to another.  The universal
benefactor has been there before him.



TO J. H. BATES


                                 _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _March_ 25_th_, 1894.

MY DEAR MR. JOE H. BATES,—I shall have the greatest pleasure in acceding
to your complimentary request.  I shall think it an honour to be
associated with your chapter, and I need not remind you (for you have
said it yourself) how much depends upon your own exertions whether to
make it to me a real honour or only a derision.  This is to let you know
that I accept the position that you have seriously offered to me in a
quite serious spirit.  I need scarce tell you that I shall always be
pleased to receive reports of your proceedings; and if I do not always
acknowledge them, you are to remember that I am a man very much occupied
otherwise, and not at all to suppose that I have lost interest in my
chapter.

In this world, which (as you justly say) is so full of sorrow and
suffering, it will always please me to remember that my name is connected
with some efforts after alleviation, nor less so with purposes of
innocent recreation which, after all, are the only certain means at our
disposal for bettering human life.

With kind regards, to yourself, to Mr. L. C. Congdon, to E. M. G. Bates,
and to Mr. Edward Hugh Higlee Bates, and the heartiest wishes for the
future success of the chapter, believe me, yours cordially,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO WILLIAM ARCHER


                                 _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _March_ 27_th_, 1894.

MY DEAR ARCHER,—Many thanks for your _Theatrical World_.  Do you know, it
strikes me as being really very good?  I have not yet read much of it,
but so far as I have looked, there is not a dull and not an empty page in
it.  Hazlitt, whom you must often have thought of, would have been
pleased.  Come to think of it, I shall put this book upon the Hazlitt
shelf.  You have acquired a manner that I can only call august;
otherwise, I should have to call it such amazing impudence.  The _Bauble
Shop_ and _Becket_ are examples of what I mean.  But it ‘sets you weel.’

Marjorie Fleming I have known, as you surmise, for long.  She was
possibly—no, I take back possibly—she was one of the greatest works of
God.  Your note about the resemblance of her verses to mine gave me great
joy, though it only proved me a plagiarist.  By the by, was it not over
_The Child’s Garden of Verses_ that we first scraped acquaintance?  I am
sorry indeed to hear that my esteemed correspondent Tomarcher has such
poor taste in literature. {323}  I fear he cannot have inherited this
trait from his dear papa.  Indeed, I may say I know it, for I remember
the energy of papa’s disapproval when the work passed through his hands
on its way to a second birth, which none regrets more than myself.  It is
an odd fact, or perhaps a very natural one; I find few greater pleasures
than reading my own works, but I never, O I never read _The Black Arrow_.
In that country Tomarcher reigns supreme.  Well, and after all, if
Tomarcher likes it, it has not been written in vain.

We have just now a curious breath from Europe.  A young fellow just
beginning letters, and no fool, turned up here with a letter of
introduction in the well-known blue ink and decorative hieroglyphs of
George Meredith.  His name may be known to you.  It is Sidney Lysaght.
He is staying with us but a day or two, and it is strange to me and not
unpleasant to hear all the names, old and new, come up again.  But oddly
the new are so much more in number.  If I revisited the glimpses of the
moon on your side of the ocean, I should know comparatively few of them.

My amanuensis deserts me—I should have said you, for yours is the loss,
my script having lost all bond with humanity.  One touch of nature makes
the whole world kin: that nobody can read my hand.  It is a humiliating
circumstance that thus evens us with printers!

You must sometimes think it strange—or perhaps it is only I that should
so think it—to be following the old round, in the gas lamps and the
crowded theatres, when I am away here in the tropical forest and the vast
silences!

My dear Archer, my wife joins me in the best wishes to yourself and Mrs.
Archer, not forgetting Tom; and I am yours very cordially,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO W. B. YEATS


                                     _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _April_ 14, 1894.

DEAR SIR,—Long since when I was a boy I remember the emotions with which
I repeated Swinburne’s poems and ballads.  Some ten years ago, a similar
spell was cast upon me by Meredith’s _Love in the Valley_; the stanzas
beginning ‘When her mother tends her’ haunted me and made me drunk like
wine; and I remember waking with them all the echoes of the hills about
Hyères.  It may interest you to hear that I have a third time fallen in
slavery: this is to your poem called the _Lake Isle of Innisfrae_.  It is
so quaint and airy, simple, artful, and eloquent to the heart—but I seek
words in vain.  Enough that ‘always night and day I hear lake water
lapping with low sounds on the shore,’ and am, yours gratefully,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO GEORGE MEREDITH


                                 _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _April_ 17_th_, 1894.

MY DEAR MEREDITH,—Many good things have the gods sent to me of late.
First of all there was a letter from you by the kind hand of Mariette, if
she is not too great a lady to be remembered in such a style; and then
there came one Lysaght with a charming note of introduction in the
well-known hand itself.  We had but a few days of him, and liked him
well.  There was a sort of geniality and inward fire about him at which I
warmed my hands.  It is long since I have seen a young man who has left
in me such a favourable impression; and I find myself telling myself, ‘O,
I must tell this to Lysaght,’ or, ‘This will interest him,’ in a manner
very unusual after so brief an acquaintance.  The whole of my family
shared in this favourable impression, and my halls have re-echoed ever
since, I am sure he will be amused to know, with _Widdicombe Fair_.

He will have told you doubtless more of my news than I could tell you
myself; he has your European perspective, a thing long lost to me.  I
heard with a great deal of interest the news of Box Hill.  And so I
understand it is to be enclosed!  Allow me to remark, that seems a far
more barbaric trait of manners than the most barbarous of ours.  We
content ourselves with cutting off an occasional head.

I hear we may soon expect the _Amazing Marriage_.  You know how long, and
with how much curiosity, I have looked forward to the book.  Now, in so
far as you have adhered to your intention, Gower Woodsere will be a
family portrait, age twenty-five, of the highly respectable and slightly
influential and fairly aged _Tusitala_.  You have not known that
gentleman; console yourself, he is not worth knowing.  At the same time,
my dear Meredith, he is very sincerely yours—for what he is worth, for
the memories of old times, and in the expectation of many pleasures still
to come.  I suppose we shall never see each other again; flitting youths
of the Lysaght species may occasionally cover these unconscionable
leagues and bear greetings to and fro.  But we ourselves must be content
to converse on an occasional sheet of notepaper, and I shall never see
whether you have grown older, and you shall never deplore that Gower
Woodsere should have declined into the pantaloon _Tusitala_.  It is
perhaps better so.  Let us continue to see each other as we were, and
accept, my dear Meredith, my love and respect.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—My wife joins me in the kindest messages to yourself and Mariette.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                             [_Vailima_], _April_ 17, ’94.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—_St. Ives_ is now well on its way into the second
volume.  There remains no mortal doubt that it will reach the three
volume standard.

I am very anxious that you should send me—

1_st_.  _Tom and Jerry_, a cheap edition.

2nd.  The book by Ashton—the _Dawn of the Century_, I think it was
called—which Colvin sent me, and which has miscarried, and

3rd.  If it is possible, a file of the _Edinburgh Courant_ for the years
1811, 1812, 1813, or 1814.  I should not care for a whole year.  If it
were possible to find me three months, winter months by preference, it
would do my business not only for _St. Ives_, but for the _Justice-Clerk_
as well.  Suppose this to be impossible, perhaps I could get the loan of
it from somebody; or perhaps it would be possible to have some one read a
file for me and make notes.  This would be extremely bad, as unhappily
one man’s food is another man’s poison, and the reader would probably
leave out everything I should choose.  But if you are reduced to that,
you might mention to the man who is to read for me that balloon
ascensions are in the order of the day.

4th.  It might be as well to get a book on balloon ascension,
particularly in the early part of the century.

                                . . . . .

III.  At last this book has come from Scribner, and, alas!  I have the
first six or seven chapters of _St. Ives_ to recast entirely.  Who could
foresee that they clothed the French prisoners in yellow?  But that one
fatal fact—and also that they shaved them twice a week—damns the whole
beginning.  If it had been sent in time, it would have saved me a deal of
trouble. . . .

I have had a long letter from Dr. Scott Dalgleish, 25 Mayfield Terrace,
asking me to put my name down to the Ballantyne Memorial Committee.  I
have sent him a pretty sharp answer in favour of cutting down the
memorial and giving more to the widow and children.  If there is to be
any foolery in the way of statues or other trash, please send them a
guinea; but if they are going to take my advice and put up a simple
tablet with a few heartfelt words, and really devote the bulk of the
subscriptions to the wife and family, I will go to the length of twenty
pounds, if you will allow me (and if the case of the family be at all
urgent), and at least I direct you to send ten pounds.  I suppose you had
better see Scott Dalgleish himself on the matter.  I take the opportunity
here to warn you that my head is simply spinning with a multitude of
affairs, and I shall probably forget a half of my business at last.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. SITWELL


                                                  _Vailima_, _April_ 1894.

MY DEAR FRIEND,—I have at last got some photographs, and hasten to send
you, as you asked, a portrait of Tusitala.  He is a strange person; not
so lean, say experts, but infinitely battered; mighty active again on the
whole; going up and down our break-neck road at all hours of the day and
night on horseback; holding meetings with all manner of chiefs; quite a
political personage—God save the mark!—in a small way, but at heart very
conscious of the inevitable flat failure that awaits every one.  I shall
never do a better book than _Catriona_, that is my high-water mark, and
the trouble of production increases on me at a great rate—and mighty
anxious about how I am to leave my family: an elderly man, with elderly
preoccupations, whom I should be ashamed to show you for your old friend;
but not a hope of my dying soon and cleanly, and ‘winning off the stage.’
Rather I am daily better in physical health.  I shall have to see this
business out, after all; and I think, in that case, they should have—they
might have—spared me all my ill-health this decade past, if it were not
to unbar the doors.  I have no taste for old age, and my nose is to be
rubbed in it in spite of my face.  I was meant to die young, and the gods
do not love me.

This is very like an epitaph, bar the handwriting, which is anything but
monumental, and I dare say I had better stop.  Fanny is down at her own
cottage planting or deplanting or replanting, I know not which, and she
will not be home till dinner, by which time the mail will be all closed,
else she would join me in all good messages and remembrances of love.  I
hope you will congratulate Burne Jones from me on his baronetcy.  I
cannot make out to be anything but raspingly, harrowingly sad; so I will
close, and not affect levity which I cannot feel.  Do not altogether
forget me; keep a corner of your memory for the exile

                                                                    LOUIS.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                                  [_Vailima_, _May_ 1894.]

MY DEAR CHARLES,—My dear fellow, I wish to assure you of the greatness of
the pleasure that this Edinburgh Edition gives me.  I suppose it was your
idea to give it that name.  No other would have affected me in the same
manner.  Do you remember, how many years ago—I would be afraid to hazard
a guess—one night when I communicated to you certain intimations of early
death and aspirations after fame?  I was particularly maudlin; and my
remorse the next morning on a review of my folly has written the matter
very deeply in my mind; from yours it may easily have fled.  If any one
at that moment could have shown me the Edinburgh Edition, I suppose I
should have died.  It is with gratitude and wonder that I consider ‘the
way in which I have been led.’  Could a more preposterous idea have
occurred to us in those days when we used to search our pockets for
coppers, too often in vain, and combine forces to produce the threepence
necessary for two glasses of beer, or wander down the Lothian Road
without any, than that I should be strong and well at the age of
forty-three in the island of Upolu, and that you should be at home
bringing out the Edinburgh Edition?  If it had been possible, I should
almost have preferred the Lothian Road Edition, say, with a picture of
the old Dutch smuggler on the covers.  I have now something heavy on my
mind.  I had always a great sense of kinship with poor Robert
Fergusson—so clever a boy, so wild, of such a mixed strain, so
unfortunate, born in the same town with me, and, as I always felt, rather
by express intimation than from evidence, so like myself.  Now the
injustice with which the one Robert is rewarded and the other left out in
the cold sits heavy on me, and I wish you could think of some way in
which I could do honour to my unfortunate namesake.  Do you think it
would look like affectation to dedicate the whole edition to his memory?
I think it would.  The sentiment which would dictate it to me is too
abstruse; and besides, I think my wife is the proper person to receive
the dedication of my life’s work.  At the same time, it is very odd—it
really looks like the transmigration of souls—I feel that I must do
something for Fergusson; Burns has been before me with the gravestone.
It occurs to me you might take a walk down the Canongate and see in what
condition the stone is.  If it be at all uncared for, we might repair it,
and perhaps add a few words of inscription.

I must tell you, what I just remembered in a flash as I was walking about
dictating this letter—there was in the original plan of the _Master of
Ballantrae_ a sort of introduction describing my arrival in Edinburgh on
a visit to yourself and your placing in my hands the papers of the story.
I actually wrote it, and then condemned the idea—as being a little too
like Scott, I suppose.  Now I must really find the MS. and try to finish
it for the E. E.  It will give you, what I should so much like you to
have, another corner of your own in that lofty monument.

Suppose we do what I have proposed about Fergusson’s monument, I wonder
if an inscription like this would look arrogant—

  This stone originally erected
  by Robert Burns has been
  repaired at the
  charges of Robert Louis Stevenson,
  and is by him re-dedicated to
  the memory of Robert Fergusson,
  as the gift of one Edinburgh
  lad to another.

In spacing this inscription I would detach the names of Fergusson and
Burns, but leave mine in the text.

Or would that look like sham modesty, and is it better to bring out the
three Roberts?



TO R. A. M. STEVENSON


                                                   _Vailima_, _June_ 1894.

MY DEAR BOB,—I must make out a letter this mail or perish in the attempt.
All the same, I am deeply stupid, in bed with a cold, deprived of my
amanuensis, and conscious of the wish but not the furnished will.  You
may be interested to hear how the family inquiries go.  It is now quite
certain that we are a second-rate lot, and came out of Cunningham or
Clydesdale, therefore _British_ folk; so that you are Cymry on both
sides, and I Cymry and Pict.  We may have fought with King Arthur and
known Merlin.  The first of the family, Stevenson of Stevenson, was quite
a great party, and dates back to the wars of Edward First.  The last male
heir of Stevenson of Stevenson died 1670, £220, 10s. to the bad, from
drink.  About the same time the Stevensons, who were mostly in Cunningham
before, crop up suddenly in the parish of Neilston, over the border in
Renfrewshire.  Of course, they may have been there before, but there is
no word of them in that parish till 1675 in any extracts I have.  Our
first traceable ancestor was a tenant farmer of Muir of Cauldwells—James
in Nether-Carsewell.  Presently two families of maltmen are found in
Glasgow, both, by re-duplicated proofs, related to James (the son of
James) in Nether Carsewell.  We descend by his second marriage from
Robert; one of these died 1733.  It is not very romantic up to now, but
has interested me surprisingly to fish out, always hoping for more—and
occasionally getting at least a little clearness and confirmation.  But
the earliest date, 1655, apparently the marriage of James in Nether
Carsewell, cannot as yet be pushed back.  From which of any number of
dozen little families in Cunningham we should derive, God knows!  Of
course, it doesn’t matter a hundred years hence, an argument fatal to all
human enterprise, industry, or pleasure.  And to me it will be a deadly
disappointment if I cannot roll this stone away!  One generation further
might be nothing, but it is my present object of desire, and we are so
near it!  There is a man in the same parish called Constantine; if I
could only trace to him, I could take you far afield by that one talisman
of the strange Christian name of Constantine.  But no such luck!  And I
kind of fear we shall stick at James.

So much, though all inchoate, I trouble you with, knowing that you, at
least, must take an interest in it.  So much is certain of that strange
Celtic descent, that the past has an interest for it apparently
gratuitous, but fiercely strong.  I wish to trace my ancestors a thousand
years, if I trace them by gallowses.  It is not love, not pride, not
admiration; it is an expansion of the identity, intimately pleasing, and
wholly uncritical; I can expend myself in the person of an inglorious
ancestor with perfect comfort; or a disgraced, if I could find one.  I
suppose, perhaps, it is more to me who am childless, and refrain with a
certain shock from looking forwards.  But, I am sure, in the solid
grounds of race, that you have it also in some degree. {332}

  I.  JAMES, a tenant of the Muirs, in Nether-Carsewell, Neilston,
  married (1665?) Jean Keir.

  II.  ROBERT (Maltman in Glasgow), died 1733, married 1st; married
  second, Elizabeth Cumming.

  [Of ROBERT and 1st marriage: William (Maltman in Glasgow), of him:
  ROBERT, MARION and ELIZABETH]

  III. ROBERT [of Robert and Elizabeth Cumming] (Maltman in Glasgow),
  married Margaret Fulton (had a large family).

  IV. ALAN, West India merchant, married Jean Lillie.

  V.  ROBERT, married Jean Smith.

  VI.  ALAN.—Margaret Jones.

  VII.  R. A. M. S.

  NOTE.—Between 1730–1766 flourished in Glasgow Alan the Coppersmith, who
  acts as a kind of a pin to the whole Stevenson system there.  He was
  caution to Robert the Second’s will, and to William’s will, and to the
  will of a John, another maltman.

Enough genealogy.  I do not know if you will be able to read my hand.
Unhappily, Belle, who is my amanuensis, is out of the way on other
affairs, and I have to make the unwelcome effort.  (O this is beautiful,
I am quite pleased with myself.)  Graham has just arrived last night (my
mother is coming by the other steamer in three days), and has told me of
your meeting, and he said you looked a little older than I did; so that I
suppose we keep step fairly on the downward side of the hill.  He thought
you looked harassed, and I could imagine that too.  I sometimes feel
harassed.  I have a great family here about me, a great anxiety.  The
loss (to use my grandfather’s expression), the ‘loss’ of our family is
that we are disbelievers in the morrow—perhaps I should say, rather, in
next year.  The future is _always_ black to us; it was to Robert
Stevenson; to Thomas; I suspect to Alan; to R. A. M. S. it was so almost
to his ruin in youth; to R. L. S., who had a hard hopeful strain in him
from his mother, it was not so much so once, but becomes daily more so.
Daily so much more so, that I have a painful difficulty in believing I
can ever finish another book, or that the public will ever read it.

I have so huge a desire to know exactly what you are doing, that I
suppose I should tell you what I am doing by way of an example.  I have a
room now, a part of the twelve-foot verandah sparred in, at the most
inaccessible end of the house.  Daily I see the sunrise out of my bed,
which I still value as a tonic, a perpetual tuning fork, a look of God’s
face once in the day.  At six my breakfast comes up to me here, and I
work till eleven.  If I am quite well, I sometimes go out and bathe in
the river before lunch, twelve.  In the afternoon I generally work again,
now alone drafting, now with Belle dictating.  Dinner is at six, and I am
often in bed by eight.  This is supposing me to stay at home.  But I must
often be away, sometimes all day long, sometimes till twelve, one, or two
at night, when you might see me coming home to the sleeping house,
sometimes in a trackless darkness, sometimes with a glorious tropic moon,
everything drenched with dew—unsaddling and creeping to bed; and you
would no longer be surprised that I live out in this country, and not in
Bournemouth—in bed.

My great recent interruptions have (as you know) come from politics; not
much in my line, you will say.  But it is impossible to live here and not
feel very sorely the consequences of the horrid white mismanagement.  I
tried standing by and looking on, and it became too much for me.  They
are such illogical fools; a logical fool in an office, with a lot of red
tape, is conceivable.  Furthermore, he is as much as we have any reason
to expect of officials—a thoroughly common-place, unintellectual lot.
But these people are wholly on wires; laying their ears down, skimming
away, pausing as though shot, and presto! full spread on the other tack.
I observe in the official class mostly an insane jealousy of the smallest
kind, as compared to which the artist’s is of a grave, modest
character—the actor’s, even; a desire to extend his little authority, and
to relish it like a glass of wine, that is _impayable_.  Sometimes, when
I see one of these little kings strutting over one of his
victories—wholly illegal, perhaps, and certain to be reversed to his
shame if his superiors ever heard of it—I could weep.  The strange thing
is that they _have nothing else_.  I auscultate them in vain; no real
sense of duty, no real comprehension, no real attempt to comprehend, no
wish for information—you cannot offend one of them more bitterly than by
offering information, though it is certain that you have _more_, and
obvious that you have _other_, information than they have; and talking of
policy, they could not play a better stroke than by listening to you, and
it need by no means influence their action.  _Tenez_, you know what a
French post office or railway official is?  That is the diplomatic card
to the life.  Dickens is not in it; caricature fails.

All this keeps me from my work, and gives me the unpleasant side of the
world.  When your letters are disbelieved it makes you angry, and that is
rot; and I wish I could keep out of it with all my soul.  But I have just
got into it again, and farewell peace!

My work goes along but slowly.  I have got to a crossing place, I
suppose; the present book, _Saint Ives_, is nothing; it is in no style in
particular, a tissue of adventures, the central character not very well
done, no philosophic pith under the yarn; and, in short, if people will
read it, that’s all I ask; and if they won’t, damn them!  I like doing it
though; and if you ask me why!—after that I am on _Weir of Hermiston_ and
_Heathercat_, two Scotch stories, which will either be something
different, or I shall have failed.  The first is generally designed, and
is a private story of two or three characters in a very grim vein.  The
second—alas! the thought—is an attempt at a real historical novel, to
present a whole field of time; the race—our own race—the west land and
Clydesdale blue bonnets, under the influence of their last trial, when
they got to a pitch of organisation in madness that no other peasantry
has ever made an offer at.  I was going to call it _The Killing Time_,
but this man Crockett has forestalled me in that.  Well, it’ll be a big
smash if I fail in it; but a gallant attempt.  All my weary reading as a
boy, which you remember well enough, will come to bear on it; and if my
mind will keep up to the point it was in a while back, perhaps I can pull
it through.

For two months past, Fanny, Belle, Austin (her child), and I have been
alone; but yesterday, as I mentioned, Graham Balfour arrived, and on
Wednesday my mother and Lloyd will make up the party to its full
strength.  I wish you could drop in for a month or a week, or two hours.
That is my chief want.  On the whole, it is an unexpectedly pleasant
corner I have dropped into for an end of it, which I could scarcely have
foreseen from Wilson’s shop, or the Princes Street Gardens, or the
Portobello Road.  Still, I would like to hear what my _alter ego_ thought
of it; and I would sometimes like to have my old _maître ès arts_ express
an opinion on what I do.  I put this very tamely, being on the whole a
quiet elderly man; but it is a strong passion with me, though
intermittent.  Now, try to follow my example and tell me something about
yourself, Louisa, the Bab, and your work; and kindly send me some
specimens of what you’re about.  I have only seen one thing by you, about
Notre Dame in the _Westminster_ or _St. James’s_, since I left England,
now I suppose six years ago.

I have looked this trash over, and it is not at all the letter I wanted
to write—not truck about officials, ancestors, and the like
rancidness—but you have to let your pen go in its own broken-down gait,
like an old butcher’s pony, stop when it pleases, and go on again as it
will.—Ever, my dear Bob, your affectionate cousin,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                            _Vailima_, _July_ 7_th_, 1894.

DEAR HENRY JAMES,—I am going to try and dictate to you a letter or a
note, and begin the same without any spark of hope, my mind being
entirely in abeyance.  This malady is very bitter on the literary man.  I
have had it now coming on for a month, and it seems to get worse instead
of better.  If it should prove to be softening of the brain, a melancholy
interest will attach to the present document.  I heard a great deal about
you from my mother and Graham Balfour; the latter declares that you could
take a First in any Samoan subject.  If that be so, I should like to hear
you on the theory of the constitution.  Also to consult you on the force
of the particles _o lo ’o_ and _ua_, which are the subject of a dispute
among local pundits.  You might, if you ever answer this, give me your
opinion on the origin of the Samoan race, just to complete the favour.

They both say that you are looking well, and I suppose I may conclude
from that that you are feeling passably.  I wish I was.  Do not suppose
from this that I am ill in body; it is the numskull that I complain of.
And when that is wrong, as you must be very keenly aware, you begin every
day with a smarting disappointment, which is not good for the temper.  I
am in one of the humours when a man wonders how any one can be such an
ass as to embrace the profession of letters, and not get apprenticed to a
barber or keep a baked-potato stall.  But I have no doubt in the course
of a week, or perhaps to-morrow, things will look better.

We have at present in port the model warship of Great Britain.  She is
called the _Curaçoa_, and has the nicest set of officers and men
conceivable.  They, the officers, are all very intimate with us, and the
front verandah is known as the Curaçoa Club, and the road up to Vailima
is known as the Curaçoa Track.  It was rather a surprise to me; many
naval officers have I known, and somehow had not learned to think
entirely well of them, and perhaps sometimes ask myself a little uneasily
how that kind of men could do great actions? and behold! the answer comes
to me, and I see a ship that I would guarantee to go anywhere it was
possible for men to go, and accomplish anything it was permitted man to
attempt.  I had a cruise on board of her not long ago to Manu’a, and was
delighted.  The goodwill of all on board; the grim playfulness of — {337}
quarters, with the wounded falling down at the word; the ambulances
hastening up and carrying them away; the Captain suddenly crying, ‘Fire
in the ward-room!’ and the squad hastening forward with the hose; and,
last and most curious spectacle of all, all the men in their
dust-coloured fatigue clothes, at a note of the bugle, falling
simultaneously flat on deck, and the ship proceeding with its prostrate
crew—_quasi_ to ram an enemy; our dinner at night in a wild open
anchorage, the ship rolling almost to her gunwales, and showing us
alternately her bulwarks up in the sky, and then the wild broken cliffy
palm-crested shores of the island with the surf thundering and leaping
close aboard.  We had the ward-room mess on deck, lit by pink wax tapers,
everybody, of course, in uniform but myself, and the first lieutenant
(who is a rheumaticky body) wrapped in a boat cloak.  Gradually the
sunset faded out, the island disappeared from the eye, though it remained
menacingly present to the ear with the voice of the surf; and then the
captain turned on the searchlight and gave us the coast, the beach, the
trees, the native houses, and the cliffs by glimpses of daylight, a kind
of deliberate lightning.  About which time, I suppose, we must have come
as far as the dessert, and were probably drinking our first glass of port
to Her Majesty.  We stayed two days at the island, and had, in addition,
a very picturesque snapshot at the native life.  The three islands of
Manu’a are independent, and are ruled over by a little slip of a
half-caste girl about twenty, who sits all day in a pink gown, in a
little white European house with about a quarter of an acre of roses in
front of it, looking at the palm-trees on the village street, and
listening to the surf.  This, so far as I could discover, was all she had
to do.  ‘This is a very dull place,’ she said.  It appears she could go
to no other village for fear of raising the jealousy of her own people in
the capital.  And as for going about ‘tafatafaoing,’ as we say here, its
cost was too enormous.  A strong able-bodied native must walk in front of
her and blow the conch shell continuously from the moment she leaves one
house until the moment she enters another.  Did you ever blow the conch
shell?  I presume not; but the sweat literally hailed off that man, and I
expected every moment to see him burst a blood-vessel.  We were
entertained to kava in the guest-house with some very original features.
The young men who run for the _kava_ have a right to misconduct
themselves _ad libitum_ on the way back; and though they were told to
restrain themselves on the occasion of our visit, there was a strange
hurly-burly at their return, when they came beating the trees and the
posts of the houses, leaping, shouting, and yelling like Bacchants.

I tasted on that occasion what it is to be great.  My name was called
next after the captain’s, and several chiefs (a thing quite new to me,
and not at all Samoan practice) drank to me by name.

And now, if you are not sick of the _Curaçoa_ and Manu’a, I am, at least
on paper.  And I decline any longer to give you examples of how not to
write.

By the by, you sent me long ago a work by Anatole France, which I confess
I did not _taste_.  Since then I have made the acquaintance of the _Abbé
Coignard_, and have become a faithful adorer.  I don’t think a better
book was ever written.

And I have no idea what I have said, and I have no idea what I ought to
have said, and I am a total ass, but my heart is in the right place, and
I am, my dear Henry James, yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MR. MARCEL SCHWOB


                              _Vailima_, _Upolu_, _Samoa_, _July_ 7, 1894.

DEAR MR. MARCEL SCHWOB,—Thank you for having remembered me in my exile.
I have read _Mimes_ twice as a whole; and now, as I write, I am reading
it again as it were by accident, and a piece at a time, my eye catching a
word and travelling obediently on through the whole number.  It is a
graceful book, essentially graceful, with its haunting agreeable
melancholy, its pleasing savour of antiquity.  At the same time, by its
merits, it shows itself rather as the promise of something else to come
than a thing final in itself.  You have yet to give us—and I am expecting
it with impatience—something of a larger gait; something daylit, not
twilit; something with the colours of life, not the flat tints of a
temple illumination; something that shall be _said_ with all the
clearnesses and the trivialities of speech, not _sung_ like a
semi-articulate lullaby.  It will not please yourself as well, when you
come to give it us, but it will please others better.  It will be more of
a whole, more worldly, more nourished, more commonplace—and not so
pretty, perhaps not even so beautiful.  No man knows better than I that,
as we go on in life, we must part from prettiness and the graces.  We but
attain qualities to lose them; life is a series of farewells, even in
art; even our proficiencies are deciduous and evanescent.  So here with
these exquisite pieces the XVIIth, XVIIIth, and IVth of the present
collection.  You will perhaps never excel them; I should think the
‘Hermes,’ never.  Well, you will do something else, and of that I am in
expectation.—Yours cordially,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO A. ST. GAUDENS


                                       _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _July_ 8, 1894.

MY DEAR ST. GAUDENS,—This is to tell you that the medallion has been at
last triumphantly transported up the hill and placed over my smoking-room
mantelpiece.  It is considered by everybody a first-rate but flattering
portrait.  We have it in a very good light, which brings out the artistic
merits of the god-like sculptor to great advantage.  As for my own
opinion, I believe it to be a speaking likeness, and not flattered at
all; possibly a little the reverse.  The verses (curse the rhyme) look
remarkably well.

Please do not longer delay, but send me an account for the expense of the
gilt letters.  I was sorry indeed that they proved beyond the means of a
small farmer.—Yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS ADELAIDE BOODLE


                                               _Vailima_, _July_ 14, 1894.

MY DEAR ADELAIDE,—. . . So, at last, you are going into mission work?
where I think your heart always was.  You will like it in a way, but
remember it is dreary long.  Do you know the story of the American tramp
who was offered meals and a day’s wage to chop with the back of an axe on
a fallen trunk.  ‘Damned if I can go on chopping when I can’t see the
chips fly!’  You will never see the chips fly in mission work, never; and
be sure you know it beforehand.  The work is one long dull
disappointment, varied by acute revulsions; and those who are by nature
courageous and cheerful and have grown old in experience, learn to rub
their hands over infinitesimal successes.  However, as I really believe
there is some good done in the long run—_gutta cavat lapidem non vi_ in
this business—it is a useful and honourable career in which no one should
be ashamed to embark.  Always remember the fable of the sun, the storm,
and the traveller’s cloak.  Forget wholly and for ever all small
pruderies, and remember that _you cannot change ancestral feelings of
right and wrong without what is practically soul-murder_.  Barbarous as
the customs may seem, always hear them with patience, always judge them
with gentleness, always find in them some seed of good; see that you
always develop them; remember that all you can do is to civilise the man
in the line of his own civilisation, such as it is.  And never expect,
never believe in, thaumaturgic conversions.  They may do very well for
St. Paul; in the case of an Andaman islander they mean less than nothing.
In fact, what you have to do is to teach the parents in the interests of
their great-grandchildren.

Now, my dear Adelaide, dismiss from your mind the least idea of fault
upon your side; nothing is further from the fact.  I cannot forgive you,
for I do not know your fault.  My own is plain enough, and the name of it
is cold-hearted neglect; and you may busy yourself more usefully in
trying to forgive me.  But ugly as my fault is, you must not suppose it
to mean more than it does; it does not mean that we have at all forgotten
you, that we have become at all indifferent to the thought of you.  See,
in my life of Jenkin, a remark of his, very well expressed, on the
friendships of men who do not write to each other.  I can honestly say
that I have not changed to you in any way; though I have behaved thus
ill, thus cruelly.  Evil is done by want of—well, principally by want of
industry.  You can imagine what I would say (in a novel) of any one who
had behaved as I have done.  _Deteriora sequor_.  And you must somehow
manage to forgive your old friend; and if you will be so very good,
continue to give us news of you, and let us share the knowledge of your
adventures, sure that it will be always followed with interest—even if it
is answered with the silence of ingratitude.  For I am not a fool; I know
my faults, I know they are ineluctable, I know they are growing on me.  I
know I may offend again, and I warn you of it.  But the next time I
offend, tell me so plainly and frankly like a lady, and don’t lacerate my
heart and bludgeon my vanity with imaginary faults of your own and purely
gratuitous penitence.  I might suspect you of irony!

We are all fairly well, though I have been off work and off—as you know
very well—letter-writing.  Yet I have sometimes more than twenty letters,
and sometimes more than thirty, going out each mail.  And Fanny has had a
most distressing bronchitis for some time, which she is only now
beginning to get over.  I have just been to see her; she is lying—though
she had breakfast an hour ago, about seven—in her big cool,
mosquito-proof room, ingloriously asleep.  As for me, you see that a doom
has come upon me: I cannot make marks with a pen—witness ‘ingloriously’
above; and my amanuensis not appearing so early in the day, for she is
then immersed in household affairs, and I can hear her ‘steering the
boys’ up and down the verandahs—you must decipher this unhappy letter for
yourself and, I fully admit, with everything against you.  A letter
should be always well written; how much more a letter of apology!
Legibility is the politeness of men of letters, as punctuality of kings
and beggars.  By the punctuality of my replies, and the beauty of my
hand-writing, judge what a fine conscience I must have!

Now, my dear gamekeeper, I must really draw to a close.  For I have much
else to write before the mail goes out three days hence.  Fanny being
asleep, it would not be conscientious to invent a message from her, so
you must just imagine her sentiments.  I find I have not the heart to
speak of your recent loss.  You remember perhaps, when my father died,
you told me those ugly images of sickness, decline, and impaired reason,
which then haunted me day and night, would pass away and be succeeded by
things more happily characteristic.  I have found it so.  He now haunts
me, strangely enough, in two guises; as a man of fifty, lying on a
hillside and carving mottoes on a stick, strong and well; and as a
younger man, running down the sands into the sea near North Berwick,
myself—_ætat_. 11—somewhat horrified at finding him so beautiful when
stripped!  I hand on your own advice to you in case you have forgotten
it, as I know one is apt to do in seasons of bereavement.—Ever yours,
with much love and sympathy,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MRS. BAKER


                                      _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _July_ 16, 1894.

DEAR MRS. BAKER,—I am very much obliged to you for your letter and the
enclosure from Mr. Skinner.  Mr. Skinner says he ‘thinks Mr. Stevenson
must be a very kind man’; he little knows me.  But I am very sure of one
thing, that you are a very kind woman.  I envy you—my amanuensis being
called away, I continue in my own hand, or what is left of it—unusually
legible, I am thankful to see—I envy you your beautiful choice of an
employment.  There must be no regrets at least for a day so spent; and
when the night falls you need ask no blessing on your work.

‘Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of these.’—Yours truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO J. M. BARRIE


                                               _Vailima_, _July_ 13, 1894.

MY DEAR BARRIE,—This is the last effort of an ulcerated conscience.  I
have been so long owing you a letter, I have heard so much of you, fresh
from the press, from my mother and Graham Balfour, that I have to write a
letter no later than to-day, or perish in my shame.  But the deuce of it
is, my dear fellow, that you write such a very good letter that I am
ashamed to exhibit myself before my junior (which you are, after all) in
the light of the dreary idiot I feel.  Understand that there will be
nothing funny in the following pages.  If I can manage to be rationally
coherent, I shall be more than satisfied.

In the first place, I have had the extreme satisfaction to be shown that
photograph of your mother.  It bears evident traces of the hand of an
amateur.  How is it that amateurs invariably take better photographs than
professionals?  I must qualify invariably.  My own negatives have always
represented a province of chaos and old night in which you might dimly
perceive fleecy spots of twilight, representing nothing; so that, if I am
right in supposing the portrait of your mother to be yours, I must salute
you as my superior.  Is that your mother’s breakfast?  Or is it only
afternoon tea?  If the first, do let me recommend to Mrs. Barrie to add
an egg to her ordinary.  Which, if you please, I will ask her to eat to
the honour of her son, and I am sure she will live much longer for it, to
enjoy his fresh successes.  I never in my life saw anything more
deliciously characteristic.  I declare I can hear her speak.  I wonder my
mother could resist the temptation of your proposed visit to Kirriemuir,
which it was like your kindness to propose.  By the way, I was twice in
Kirriemuir, I believe in the year ’71, when I was going on a visit to
Glenogil.  It was Kirriemuir, was it not?  I have a distinct recollection
of an inn at the end—I think the upper end—of an irregular open place or
square, in which I always see your characters evolve.  But, indeed, I did
not pay much attention; being all bent upon my visit to a shooting-box,
where I should fish a real trout-stream, and I believe preserved.  I did,
too, and it was a charming stream, clear as crystal, without a trace of
peat—a strange thing in Scotland—and alive with trout; the name of it I
cannot remember, it was something like the Queen’s River, and in some
hazy way connected with memories of Mary Queen of Scots.  It formed an
epoch in my life, being the end of all my trout-fishing.  I had always
been accustomed to pause and very laboriously to kill every fish as I
took it.  But in the Queen’s River I took so good a basket that I forgot
these niceties; and when I sat down, in a hard rain shower, under a bank,
to take my sandwiches and sherry, lo! and behold, there was the basketful
of trouts still kicking in their agony.  I had a very unpleasant
conversation with my conscience.  All that afternoon I persevered in
fishing, brought home my basket in triumph, and sometime that night, ‘in
the wee sma’ hours ayont the twal,’ I finally forswore the gentle craft
of fishing.  I dare say your local knowledge may identify this historic
river; I wish it could go farther and identify also that particular Free
kirk in which I sat and groaned on Sunday.  While my hand is in I must
tell you a story.  At that antique epoch you must not fall into the
vulgar error that I was myself ancient.  I was, on the contrary, very
young, very green, and (what you will appreciate, Mr. Barrie) very shy.
There came one day to lunch at the house two very formidable old
ladies—or one very formidable, and the other what you please—answering to
the honoured and historic name of the Miss C— A—’s of Balnamoon.  At
table I was exceedingly funny, and entertained the company with tales of
geese and bubbly-jocks.  I was great in the expression of my terror for
these bipeds, and suddenly this horrid, severe, and eminently matronly
old lady put up a pair of gold eye-glasses, looked at me awhile in
silence, and pronounced in a clangorous voice her verdict.  ‘You give me
very much the effect of a coward, Mr. Stevenson!’  I had very nearly left
two vices behind me at Glenogil—fishing and jesting at table.  And of one
thing you may be very sure, my lips were no more opened at that meal.

                                                             _July_ 29_th_

No, Barrie, ’tis in vain they try to alarm me with their bulletins.  No
doubt, you’re ill, and unco ill, I believe; but I have been so often in
the same case that I know pleurisy and pneumonia are in vain against
Scotsmen who can write, (I once could.)  You cannot imagine probably how
near me this common calamity brings you.  _Ce que j’ai toussé dans ma
vie_!  How often and how long have I been on the rack at night and
learned to appreciate that noble passage in the Psalms when somebody or
other is said to be more set on something than they ‘who dig for hid
treasures—yea, than those who long for the morning’—for all the world, as
you have been racked and you have longed.  Keep your heart up, and you’ll
do.  Tell that to your mother, if you are still in any danger or
suffering.  And by the way, if you are at all like me—and I tell myself
you are very like me—be sure there is only one thing good for you, and
that is the sea in hot climates.  Mount, sir, into ‘a little frigot’ of
5000 tons or so, and steer peremptorily for the tropics; and what if the
ancient mariner, who guides your frigot, should startle the silence of
the ocean with the cry of land ho!—say, when the day is dawning—and you
should see the turquoise mountain tops of Upolu coming hand over fist
above the horizon?  Mr. Barrie, sir, ’tis then there would be larks!  And
though I cannot be certain that our climate would suit you (for it does
not suit some), I am sure as death the voyage would do you good—would do
you _Best_—and if Samoa didn’t do, you needn’t stay beyond the month, and
I should have had another pleasure in my life, which is a serious
consideration for me.  I take this as the hand of the Lord preparing your
way to Vailima—in the desert, certainly—in the desert of Cough and by the
ghoul-haunted woodland of Fever—but whither that way points there can be
no question—and there will be a meeting of the twa Hoasting Scots Makers
in spite of fate, fortune, and the Devil.  _Absit omen_!

My dear Barrie, I am a little in the dark about this new work of yours
{347}: what is to become of me afterwards?  You say carefully—methought
anxiously—that I was no longer me when I grew up?  I cannot bear this
suspense: what is it?  It’s no forgery?  And AM I HANGIT?  These are the
elements of a very pretty lawsuit which you had better come to Samoa to
compromise.  I am enjoying a great pleasure that I had long looked
forward to, reading Orme’s _History of Indostan_; I had been looking out
for it everywhere; but at last, in four volumes, large quarto, beautiful
type and page, and with a delectable set of maps and plans, and all the
names of the places wrongly spelled—it came to Samoa, little Barrie.  I
tell you frankly, you had better come soon.  I am sair failed a’ready;
and what I may be if you continue to dally, I dread to conceive.  I may
be speechless; already, or at least for a month or so, I’m little better
than a teetoller—I beg pardon, a teetotaller.  It is not exactly
physical, for I am in good health, working four or five hours a day in my
plantation, and intending to ride a paper-chase next Sunday—ay, man,
that’s a fact, and I havena had the hert to breathe it to my mother
yet—the obligation’s poleetical, for I am trying every means to live well
with my German neighbours—and, O Barrie, but it’s no easy!  To be sure,
there are many exceptions.  And the whole of the above must be regarded
as private—strictly private.  Breathe it not in Kirriemuir: tell it not
to the daughters of Dundee!  What a nice extract this would make for the
daily papers! and how it would facilitate my position here! . . .

                                                           _August_ 5_th_.

This is Sunday, the Lord’s Day.  ‘The hour of attack approaches.’  And it
is a singular consideration what I risk; I may yet be the subject of a
tract, and a good tract too—such as one which I remember reading with
recreant awe and rising hair in my youth, of a boy who was a very good
boy, and went to Sunday Schule, and one day kipped from it, and went and
actually bathed, and was dashed over a waterfall, and he was the only son
of his mother, and she was a widow.  A dangerous trade, that, and one
that I have to practise.  I’ll put in a word when I get home again, to
tell you whether I’m killed or not.  ‘Accident in the (Paper) Hunting
Field: death of a notorious author.  We deeply regret to announce the
death of the most unpopular man in Samoa, who broke his neck at the
descent of Magagi, from the misconduct of his little raving lunatic of an
old beast of a pony.  It is proposed to commemorate the incident by the
erection of a suitable pile.  The design (by our local architect, Mr.
Walker) is highly artificial, with a rich and voluminous Crockett at each
corner, a small but impervious Barrièer at the entrance, an arch at the
top, an Archer of a pleasing but solid character at the bottom; the
colour will be genuine William-Black; and Lang, lang may the ladies sit
wi’ their fans in their hands.’  Well, well, they may sit as they sat for
me, and little they’ll reck, the ungrateful jauds!  Muckle they cared
about Tusitala when they had him!  But now ye can see the difference;
now, leddies, ye can repent, when ower late, o’ your former cauldness and
what ye’ll perhaps allow me to ca’ your _tepeedity_!  He was beautiful as
the day, but his day is done!  And perhaps, as he was maybe gettin’ a wee
thing fly-blawn, it’s nane too shüne.

                                                 _Monday_, _August_ 6_th_.

Well, sir, I have escaped the dangerous conjunction of the widow’s only
son and the Sabbath Day.  We had a most enjoyable time, and Lloyd and I
were 3 and 4 to arrive; I will not tell here what interval had elapsed
between our arrival and the arrival of 1 and 2; the question, sir, is
otiose and malign; it deserves, it shall have no answer.  And now without
further delay to the main purpose of this hasty note.  We received and we
have already in fact distributed the gorgeous fahbrics of Kirriemuir.
Whether from the splendour of the robes themselves, or from the direct
nature of the compliments with which you had directed us to accompany the
presentations, one young lady blushed as she received the proofs of your
munificence. . . . Bad ink, and the dregs of it at that, but the heart in
the right place.  Still very cordially interested in my Barrie and
wishing him well through his sickness, which is of the body, and long
defended from mine, which is of the head, and by the impolite might be
described as idiocy.  The whole head is useless, and the whole sitting
part painful: reason, the recent Paper Chase.

   There was racing and chasing in Vailile plantation,
         And vastly we enjoyed it,
   But, alas! for the state of my foundation,
         For it wholly has destroyed it.

Come, my mind is looking up.  The above is wholly impromptu.—On oath,

                                                                 TUSITALA.

                                                         _August_ 12, 1894

And here, Mr. Barrie, is news with a vengeance.  Mother Hubbard’s dog is
well again—what did I tell you?  Pleurisy, pneumonia, and all that kind
of truck is quite unavailing against a Scotchman who can write—and not
only that, but it appears the perfidious dog is married.  This incident,
so far as I remember, is omitted from the original epic—

   She went to the graveyard
   To see him get him buried,
   And when she came back
   The Deil had got merried.

It now remains to inform you that I have taken what we call here ‘German
offence’ at not receiving cards, and that the only reparation I will
accept is that Mrs. Barrie shall incontinently upon the receipt of this
Take and Bring you to Vailima in order to apologise and be pardoned for
this offence.  The commentary of Tamaitai upon the event was brief but
pregnant: ‘Well, it’s a comfort our guest-room is furnished for two.’

This letter, about nothing, has already endured too long.  I shall just
present the family to Mrs. Barrie—Tamaitai, Tamaitai Matua, Teuila,
Palema, Loia, and with an extra low bow, Yours,

                                                                 TUSITALA.



TO DR. BAKEWELL


                                              _Vailima_, _August_ 7, 1894.

DEAR DR. BAKEWELL,—I am not more than human.  I am more human than is
wholly convenient, and your anecdote was welcome.  What you say about
_unwilling work_, my dear sir, is a consideration always present with me,
and yet not easy to give its due weight to.  You grow gradually into a
certain income; without spending a penny more, with the same sense of
restriction as before when you painfully scraped two hundred a year
together, you find you have spent, and you cannot well stop spending, a
far larger sum; and this expense can only be supported by a certain
production.  However, I am off work this month, and occupy myself instead
in weeding my cacao, paper chases, and the like.  I may tell you, my
average of work in favourable circumstances is far greater than you
suppose: from six o’clock till eleven at latest, {350} and often till
twelve, and again in the afternoon from two to four.  My hand is quite
destroyed, as you may perceive, to-day to a really unusual extent.  I can
sometimes write a decent fist still; but I have just returned with my
arms all stung from three hours’ work in the cacao.—Yours, etc.,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO JAMES PAYN


                          _Vailima_, _Upolu_, _Samoa_ [_August_ 11, 1894].

MY DEAR JAMES PAYN,—I hear from Lang that you are unwell, and it reminds
me of two circumstances: First, that it is a very long time since you had
the exquisite pleasure of hearing from me; and second, that I have been
very often unwell myself, and sometimes had to thank you for a grateful
anodyne.

They are not good, the circumstances, to write an anodyne letter.  The
hills and my house at less than (boom) a minute’s interval quake with
thunder; and though I cannot hear that part of it, shells are falling
thick into the fort of Luatuanu’u (boom).  It is my friends of the
_Curaçoa_, the _Falke_, and the _Bussard_ bombarding (after all
these—boom—months) the rebels of Atua.  (Boom-boom.)  It is most
distracting in itself; and the thought of the poor devils in their fort
(boom) with their bits of rifles far from pleasant.  (Boom-boom.)  You
can see how quick it goes, and I’ll say no more about Mr. Bow-wow, only
you must understand the perpetual accompaniment of this discomfortable
sound, and make allowances for the value of my copy.  It is odd, though,
I can well remember, when the Franco-Prussian war began, and I was in
Eilean Earraid, far enough from the sound of the loudest cannonade, I
could _hear_ the shots fired, and I felt the pang in my breast of a man
struck.  It was sometimes so distressing, so instant, that I lay in the
heather on the top of the island, with my face hid, kicking my heels for
agony.  And now, when I can hear the actual concussion of the air and
hills, when I _know_ personally the people who stand exposed to it, I am
able to go on _tant bien que mal_ with a letter to James Payn!  The
blessings of age, though mighty small, are tangible.  I have heard a
great deal of them since I came into the world, and now that I begin to
taste of them—Well!  But this is one, that people do get cured of the
excess of sensibility; and I had as lief these people were shot at as
myself—or almost, for then I should have some of the fun, such as it is.

You are to conceive me, then, sitting in my little gallery room, shaken
by these continual spasms of cannon, and with my eye more or less singly
fixed on the imaginary figure of my dear James Payn.  I try to see him in
bed; no go.  I see him instead jumping up in his room in Waterloo Place
(where _ex hypothesi_ he is not), sitting on the table, drawing out a
very black briar-root pipe, and beginning to talk to a slim and
ill-dressed visitor in a voice that is good to hear and with a smile that
is pleasant to see.  (After a little more than half an hour, the voice
that was ill to hear has ceased, the cannonade is over.)  And I am
thinking how I can get an answering smile wafted over so many leagues of
land and water, and can find no way.

I have always been a great visitor of the sick; and one of the sick I
visited was W. E. Henley, which did not make very tedious visits, so I’ll
not get off much purgatory for them.  That was in the Edinburgh
Infirmary, the old one, the true one, with Georgius Secundus standing and
pointing his toe in a niche of the façade; and a mighty fine building it
was!  And I remember one winter’s afternoon, in that place of misery,
that Henley and I chanced to fall in talk about James Payn himself.  I am
wishing you could have heard that talk!  I think that would make you
smile.  We had mixed you up with John Payne, for one thing, and stood
amazed at your extraordinary, even painful, versatility; and for another,
we found ourselves each students so well prepared for examinations on the
novels of the real Mackay.  Perhaps, after all, this is worth something
in life—to have given so much pleasure to a pair so different in every
way as were Henley and I, and to be talked of with so much interest by
two such (beg pardon) clever lads!

The cheerful Lang has neglected to tell me what is the matter with you;
so, I’m sorry to say, I am cut off from all the customary consolations.
I can’t say, ‘Think how much worse it would be if you had a broken leg!’
when you may have the crushing repartee up your sleeve, ‘But it is my leg
that is broken.’  This is a pity.  But there are consolations.  You are
an Englishman (I believe); you are a man of letters; you have never been
made C.B.; your hair was not red; you have played cribbage and whist; you
did not play either the fiddle or the banjo; you were never an æsthete;
you never contributed to —_’s Journal_; your name is not Jabez Balfour;
you are totally unconnected with the Army and Navy departments; I
understand you to have lived within your income—why, cheer up! here are
many legitimate causes of congratulation.  I seem to be writing an
obituary notice.  _Absit omen_!  But I feel very sure that these
considerations will have done you more good than medicine.

By the by, did you ever play piquet?  I have fallen a victim to this
debilitating game.  It is supposed to be scientific; God save the mark,
what self-deceivers men are!  It is distinctly less so than cribbage.
But how fascinating!  There is such material opulence about it, such vast
ambitions may be realised—and are not; it may be called the Monte Cristo
of games.  And the thrill with which you take five cards partakes of the
nature of lust—and you draw four sevens and a nine, and the seven and
nine of a suit that you discarded, and O! but the world is a desert!  You
may see traces of discouragement in my letter: all due to piquet!  There
has been a disastrous turn of the luck against me; a month or two ago I
was two thousand ahead; now, and for a week back, I have been anything
from four thousand eight hundred to five thousand two hundred astern.  If
I have a sixième, my beast of a partner has a septième; and if I have
three aces, three kings, three queens, and three knaves (excuse the
slight exaggeration), the devil holds quatorze of tens!—I remain, my dear
James Payn, your sincere and obliged friend—old friend let me say,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS MIDDLETON


                                  _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _September_ 9, 1894.

DEAR MISS MIDDLETON,—Your letter has been like the drawing up of a
curtain.  Of course I remember you very well, and the Skye terrier to
which you refer—a heavy, dull, fatted, graceless creature he grew up to
be—was my own particular pet.  It may amuse you, perhaps, as much as ‘The
Inn’ amused me, if I tell you what made this dog particularly mine.  My
father was the natural god of all the dogs in our house, and poor Jura
took to him of course.  Jura was stolen, and kept in prison somewhere for
more than a week, as I remember.  When he came back Smeoroch had come and
taken my father’s heart from him.  He took his stand like a man, and
positively never spoke to my father again from that day until the day of
his death.  It was the only sign of character he ever showed.  I took him
up to my room and to be my dog in consequence, partly because I was sorry
for him, and partly because I admired his dignity in misfortune.

With best regards and thanks for having reminded me of so many pleasant
days, old acquaintances, dead friends, and—what is perhaps as pathetic as
any of them—dead dogs, I remain, yours truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO A. CONAN DOYLE


                                  _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _September_ 9, 1894.

MY DEAR CONAN DOYLE,—If you found anything to entertain you in my
_Treasure Island_ article, it may amuse you to know that you owe it
entirely to yourself.  _Your_ ‘First Book’ was by some accident read
aloud one night in my Baronial ’All.  I was consumedly amused by it, so
was the whole family, and we proceeded to hunt up back _Idlers_ and read
the whole series.  It is a rattling good series, even people whom you
would not expect came in quite the proper tone—Miss Braddon, for
instance, who was really one of the best where all are good—or all but
one! . . .  In short, I fell in love with ‘The First Book’ series, and
determined that it should be all our first books, and that I could not
hold back where the white plume of Conan Doyle waved gallantly in the
front.  I hope they will republish them, though it’s a grievous thought
to me that that effigy in the German cap—likewise the other effigy of the
noisome old man with the long hair, telling indelicate stories to a
couple of deformed negresses in a rancid shanty full of wreckage—should
be perpetuated.  I may seem to speak in pleasantry—it is only a
seeming—that German cap, sir, would be found, when I come to die,
imprinted on my heart.  Enough—my heart is too full.  Adieu.—Yours very
truly,

                                                    ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON
                                              (in a German cap, damn ’em!)



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                            [_Vailima_, _September_ 1894.]

MY DEAR CHARLES,—. . . Well, there is no more Edmund Baxter now; and I
think I may say I know how you feel.  He was one of the best, the
kindest, and the most genial men I ever knew.  I shall always remember
his brisk, cordial ways and the essential goodness which he showed me
whenever we met with gratitude.  And the always is such a little while
now!  He is another of the landmarks gone; when it comes to my own turn
to lay my weapons down, I shall do so with thankfulness and fatigue; and
whatever be my destiny afterward, I shall be glad to lie down with my
fathers in honour.  It is human at least, if not divine.  And these
deaths make me think of it with an ever greater readiness.  Strange that
you should be beginning a new life, when I, who am a little your junior,
am thinking of the end of mine.  But I have had hard lines; I have been
so long waiting for death, I have unwrapped my thoughts from about life
so long, that I have not a filament left to hold by; I have done my
fiddling so long under Vesuvius, that I have almost forgotten to play,
and can only wait for the eruption, and think it long of coming.
Literally, no man has more wholly outlived life than I.  And still it’s
good fun.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO R. A. M. STEVENSON


                                            [_Vailima_, _September_ 1894.]

DEAR BOB,—You are in error about the Picts.  They were a Gaelic race,
spoke a Celtic tongue, and we have no evidence that I know of that they
were blacker than other Celts.  The Balfours, I take it, were plainly
Celts; their name shows it—the ‘cold croft,’ it means; so does their
country.  Where the _black_ Scotch come from nobody knows; but I
recognise with you the fact that the whole of Britain is rapidly and
progressively becoming more pigmented; already in one man’s life I can
decidedly trace a difference in the children about a school door.  But
colour is not an essential part of a man or a race.  Take my Polynesians,
an Asiatic people probably from the neighbourhood of the Persian gulf.
They range through any amount of shades, from the burnt hue of the Low
Archipelago islander, which seems half negro, to the ‘bleached’ pretty
women of the Marquesas (close by on the map), who come out for a festival
no darker than an Italian; their colour seems to vary directly with the
degree of exposure to the sun.  And, as with negroes, the babes are born
white; only it should seem a _little sack_ of pigment at the lower part
of the spine, which presently spreads over the whole field.  Very
puzzling.  But to return.  The Picts furnish to-day perhaps a third of
the population of Scotland, say another third for Scots and Britons, and
the third for Norse and Angles is a bad third.  Edinburgh was a Pictish
place.  But the fact is, we don’t know their frontiers.  Tell some of
your journalist friends with a good style to popularise old Skene; or say
your prayers, and read him for yourself; he was a Great Historian, and I
was his blessed clerk, and did not know it; and you will not be in a
state of grace about the Picts till you have studied him.  J. Horne
Stevenson (do you know him?) is working this up with me, and the fact
is—it’s not interesting to the public—but it’s interesting, and very
interesting, in itself, and just now very embarrassing—this rural parish
supplied Glasgow with such a quantity of Stevensons in the beginning of
last century!  There is just a link wanting; and we might be able to go
back to the eleventh century, always undistinguished, but clearly
traceable.  When I say just a link, I guess I may be taken to mean a
dozen.  What a singular thing is this undistinguished perpetuation of a
family throughout the centuries, and the sudden bursting forth of
character and capacity that began with our grandfather!  But as I go on
in life, day by day, I become more of a bewildered child; I cannot get
used to this world, to procreation, to heredity, to sight, to hearing;
the commonest things are a burthen.  The prim obliterated polite face of
life, and the broad, bawdy, and orgiastic—or mænadic—foundations, form a
spectacle to which no habit reconciles me; and ‘I could wish my days to
be bound each to each’ by the same open-mouthed wonder.  They _are_
anyway, and whether I wish it or not.

I remember very well your attitude to life, this conventional surface of
it.  You had none of that curiosity for the social stage directions, the
trivial _ficelles_ of the business; it is simian, but that is how the
wild youth of man is captured; you wouldn’t imitate, hence you kept
free—a wild dog, outside the kennel—and came dam’ near starving for your
pains.  The key to the business is of course the belly; difficult as it
is to keep that in view in the zone of three miraculous meals a day in
which we were brought up.  Civilisation has become reflex with us; you
might think that hunger was the name of the best sauce; but hunger to the
cold solitary under a bush of a rainy night is the name of something
quite different.  I defend civilisation for the thing it is, for the
thing it has _come_ to be, the standpoint of a real old Tory.  My ideal
would be the Female Clan.  But how can you turn these crowding dumb
multitudes _back_?  They don’t do anything _because_; they do things,
write able articles, stitch shoes, dig, from the purely simian impulse.
Go and reason with monkeys!

No, I am right about Jean Lillie.  Jean Lillie, our double
great-grandmother, the daughter of David Lillie, sometime Deacon of the
Wrights, married, first, Alan Stevenson, who died May 26, 1774, ‘at Santt
Kittes of a fiver,’ by whom she had Robert Stevenson, born 8th June 1772;
and, second, in May or June 1787, Thomas Smith, a widower, and already
the father of our grandmother.  This improbable double connection always
tends to confuse a student of the family, Thomas Smith being doubly our
great-grandfather.

I looked on the perpetuation of our honoured name with veneration.  My
mother collared one of the photos, of course; the other is stuck up on my
wall as the chief of our sept.  Do you know any of the Gaelic-Celtic
sharps? you might ask what the name means.  It puzzles me.  I find a
_M‘Stein_ and a _MacStephane_; and our own great-grandfather always
called himself Steenson, though he wrote it Stevenson.  There are at
least three _places_ called Stevenson—_Stevenson_ in Cunningham,
_Stevenson_ in Peebles, and _Stevenson_ in Haddington.  And it was not
the Celtic trick, I understand, to call places after people.  I am going
to write to Sir Herbert Maxwell about the name, but you might find some
one.

Get the Anglo-Saxon heresy out of your head; they superimposed their
language, they scarce modified the race; only in Berwickshire and
Roxburgh have they very largely affected the place names.  The
Scandinavians did much more to Scotland than the Angles.  The Saxons
didn’t come.

Enough of this sham antiquarianism.  Yes, it is in the matter of the
book, {359} of course, that collaboration shows; as for the manner, it is
superficially all mine, in the sense that the last copy is all in my
hand.  Lloyd did not even put pen to paper in the Paris scenes or the
Barbizon scene; it was no good; he wrote and often rewrote all the rest;
I had the best service from him on the character of Nares.  You see, we
had been just meeting the man, and his memory was full of the man’s words
and ways.  And Lloyd is an impressionist, pure and simple.  The great
difficulty of collaboration is that you can’t explain what you mean.  I
know what kind of effect I mean a character to give—what kind of _tache_
he is to make; but how am I to tell my collaborator in words?  Hence it
was necessary to say, ‘Make him So-and-so’; and this was all right for
Nares and Pinkerton and Loudon Dodd, whom we both knew, but for Bellairs,
for instance—a man with whom I passed ten minutes fifteen years ago—what
was I to say? and what could Lloyd do?  I, as a personal artist, can
begin a character with only a haze in my head, but how if I have to
translate the haze into words before I begin?  In our manner of
collaboration (which I think the only possible—I mean that of one person
being responsible, and giving the _coup de pouce_ to every part of the
work) I was spared the obviously hopeless business of trying to explain
to my collaborator what _style_ I wished a passage to be treated in.
These are the times that illustrate to a man the inadequacy of spoken
language.  Now—to be just to written language—I can (or could) find a
language for my every mood, but how could I _tell_ any one beforehand
what this effect was to be, which it would take every art that I
possessed, and hours and hours of deliberate labour and selection and
rejection, to produce?  These are the impossibilities of collaboration.
Its immediate advantage is to focus two minds together on the stuff, and
to produce in consequence an extraordinarily greater richness of purview,
consideration, and invention.  The hardest chapter of all was ‘Cross
Questions and Crooked Answers.’  You would not believe what that cost us
before it assumed the least unity and colour.  Lloyd wrote it at least
thrice, and I at least five times—this is from memory.  And was that last
chapter worth the trouble it cost?  Alas, that I should ask the question!
Two classes of men—the artist and the educationalist—are sworn, on soul
and conscience, not to ask it.  You get an ordinary, grinning, red-headed
boy, and you have to educate him.  Faith supports you; you give your
valuable hours, the boy does not seem to profit, but that way your duty
lies, for which you are paid, and you must persevere.  Education has
always seemed to me one of the few possible and dignified ways of life.
A sailor, a shepherd, a schoolmaster—to a less degree, a soldier—and (I
don’t know why, upon my soul, except as a sort of schoolmaster’s
unofficial assistant, and a kind of acrobat in tights) an artist, almost
exhaust the category.

If I had to begin again—I know not—_si jeunesse savait_, _si vieillesse
pouvait_ . . . I know not at all—I believe I should try to honour Sex
more religiously.  The worst of our education is that Christianity does
not recognise and hallow Sex.  It looks askance at it, over its shoulder,
oppressed as it is by reminiscences of hermits and Asiatic self-tortures.
It is a terrible hiatus in our modern religions that they cannot see and
make venerable that which they ought to see first and hallow most.  Well,
it is so; I cannot be wiser than my generation.

But no doubt there is something great in the half-success that has
attended the effort of turning into an emotional religion, Bald Conduct,
without any appeal, or almost none, to the figurative, mysterious, and
constitutive facts of life.  Not that conduct is not constitutive, but
dear! it’s dreary!  On the whole, conduct is better dealt with on the
cast-iron ‘gentleman’ and duty formula, with as little fervour and poetry
as possible; stoical and short.

. . . There is a new something or other in the wind, which exercises me
hugely: anarchy,—I mean, anarchism.  People who (for pity’s sake) commit
dastardly murders very basely, die like saints, and leave beautiful
letters behind ’em (did you see Vaillant to his daughter? it was the New
Testament over again); people whose conduct is inexplicable to me, and
yet their spiritual life higher than that of most.  This is just what the
early Christians must have seemed to the Romans.  Is this, then, a new
_drive_ {361} among the monkeys?  Mind you, Bob, if they go on being
martyred a few years more, the gross, dull, not unkindly bourgeois may
get tired or ashamed or afraid of going on martyring; and the anarchists
come out at the top just like the early Christians.  That is, of course,
they will step into power as a _personnel_, but God knows what they may
believe when they come to do so; it can’t be stranger or more improbable
than what Christianity had come to be by the same time.

Your letter was easily read, the pagination presented no difficulty, and
I read it with much edification and gusto.  To look back, and to
stereotype one bygone humour—what a hopeless thing!  The mind runs ever
in a thousand eddies like a river between cliffs.  You (the ego) are
always spinning round in it, east, west, north, and south.  You are
twenty years old, and forty, and five, and the next moment you are
freezing at an imaginary eighty; you are never the plain forty-four that
you should be by dates.  (The most philosophical language is the Gaelic,
which has _no present tense_—and the most useless.)  How, then, to choose
some former age, and stick there?

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO SIR HERBERT MAXWELL


                                 _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _September_ 10, 1894.

DEAR SIR HERBERT MAXWELL,—I am emboldened by reading your very
interesting Rhind Lectures to put to you a question: What is my name,
Stevenson?

I find it in the forms Stevinetoun, Stevensoune, Stevensonne, Stenesone,
Stewinsoune, M’Stein, and MacStephane.  My family, and (as far as I can
gather) the majority of the inglorious clan, hailed from the borders of
Cunningham and Renfrew, and the upper waters of the Clyde.  In the Barony
of Bothwell was the seat of the laird Stevenson of Stevenson; but, as of
course you know, there is a parish in Cunningham and places in Peebles
and Haddington bearing the same name.

If you can at all help me, you will render me a real service which I wish
I could think of some manner to repay.—Believe me, yours truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—I should have added that I have perfect evidence before me that
(for some obscure reason) Stevenson was a favourite alias with the
M‘Gregors.



TO ALISON CUNNINGHAM


                                        [_Vailima_], _October_ 8_th_ 1894.

MY DEAR CUMMY,—So I hear you are ailing?  Think shame to yourself!  So
you think there is nothing better to be done with time than that? and be
sure we can all do much ourselves to decide whether we are to be ill or
well! like a man on the gymnastic bars.  We are all pretty well.  As for
me, there is nothing the matter with me in the world, beyond the
disgusting circumstance that I am not so young as once I was.  Lloyd has
a gymnastic machine, and practises upon it every morning for an hour: he
is beginning to be a kind of young Samson.  Austin grows fat and brown,
and gets on not so ill with his lessons, and my mother is in great price.
We are having knock-me-down weather for heat; I never remember it so hot
before, and I fancy it means we are to have a hurricane again this year,
I think; since we came here, we have not had a single gale of wind!  The
Pacific is but a child to the North Sea; but when she does get excited,
and gets up and girds herself, she can do something good.  We have had a
very interesting business here.  I helped the chiefs who were in prison;
and when they were set free, what should they do but offer to make a part
of my road for me out of gratitude?  Well, I was ashamed to refuse, and
the trumps dug my road for me, and put up this inscription on a board:—

‘_Considering the great love of His Excellency Tusitala in his loving
care of us in our tribulation in the prison we have made this great
gift_; _it shall never be muddy_, _it shall go on for ever_, _this road
that we have dug_!’  We had a great feast when it was done, and I read
them a kind of lecture, which I dare say Auntie will have, and can let
you see.  Weel, guid bye to ye, and joy be wi’ ye!  I hae nae time to say
mair.  They say I’m gettin’ _fat_—a fact!—Your laddie, with all love,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO JAMES PAYN


                                       _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _Nov._ 4, 1894.

MY DEAR JAMES PAYN,—I am asked to relate to you a little incident of
domestic life at Vailima.  I had read your _Gleams of Memory_, No. 1; it
then went to my wife, to Osbourne, to the cousin that is within my gates,
and to my respected amanuensis, Mrs. Strong.  Sunday approached.  In the
course of the afternoon I was attracted to the great ’all—the winders is
by Vanderputty, which upon entering I beheld a memorable scene.  The
floor was bestrewn with the forms of midshipmen from the
_Curaçoa_—‘boldly say a wilderness of gunroom’—and in the midst of this
sat Mrs. Strong throned on the sofa and reading aloud _Gleams of Memory_.
They had just come the length of your immortal definition of boyhood in
the concrete, and I had the pleasure to see the whole party dissolve
under its influence with inextinguishable laughter.  I thought this was
not half bad for arthritic gout!  Depend upon it, sir, when I go into the
arthritic gout business, I shall be done with literature, or at least
with the funny business.  It is quite true I have my battlefields behind
me.  I have done perhaps as much work as anybody else under the most
deplorable conditions.  But two things fall to be noticed: In the first
place, I never was in actual pain; and in the second, I was never funny.
I’ll tell you the worst day that I remember.  I had a hæmorrhage, and was
not allowed to speak; then, induced by the devil, or an errant doctor, I
was led to partake of that bowl which neither cheers nor inebriates—the
castor-oil bowl.  Now, when castor-oil goes right, it is one thing; but
when it goes wrong, it is another.  And it went _wrong_ with me that day.
The waves of faintness and nausea succeeded each other for twelve hours,
and I do feel a legitimate pride in thinking that I stuck to my work all
through and wrote a good deal of Admiral Guinea (which I might just as
well not have written for all the reward it ever brought me) in spite of
the barbarous bad conditions.  I think that is my great boast; and it
seems a little thing alongside of your _Gleams of Memory_ illustrated by
spasms of arthritic gout.  We really should have an order of merit in the
trade of letters.  For valour, Scott would have had it; Pope too; myself
on the strength of that castor-oil; and James Payn would be a Knight
Commander.  The worst of it is, though Lang tells me you exhibit the
courage of Huish, that not even an order can alleviate the wretched
annoyance of the business.  I have always said that there is nothing like
pain; toothache, dumb-ague, arthritic gout, it does not matter what you
call it, if the screw is put upon the nerves sufficiently strong, there
is nothing left in heaven or in earth that can interest the sufferer.
Still, even to this there is the consolation that it cannot last for
ever.  Either you will be relieved and have a good hour again before the
sun goes down, or else you will be liberated.  It is something after all
(although not much) to think that you are leaving a brave example; that
other literary men love to remember, as I am sure they will love to
remember, everything about you—your sweetness, your brightness, your
helpfulness to all of us, and in particular those one or two really
adequate and noble papers which you have been privileged to write during
these last years.—With the heartiest and kindest good-will, I remain,
yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO LIEUTENANT EELES


                                  _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _November_ 24, 1894.

MY DEAR EELES,—The hand, as you will perceive (and also the spelling!),
is Teuila’s, but the scrannel voice is what remains of Tusitala’s.  First
of all, for business.  When you go to London you are to charter a hansom
cab and proceed to the Museum.  It is particular fun to do this on
Sundays when the Monument is shut up.  Your cabman expostulates with you,
you persist.  The cabman drives up in front of the closed gates and says,
‘I told you so, sir.’  You breathe in the porter’s ears the mystic name
of _Colvin_, and he immediately unfolds the iron barrier.  You drive in,
and doesn’t your cabman think you’re a swell.  A lord mayor is nothing to
it.  Colvin’s door is the only one in the eastern gable of the building.
Send in your card to him with ‘From R. L. S.’ in the corner, and the
machinery will do the rest.  Henry James’s address is 34 De Vere Mansions
West.  I cannot remember where the place is; I cannot even remember on
which side of the park.  But it’s one of those big Cromwell Road-looking
deserted thoroughfares out west in Kensington or Bayswater, or between
the two; and anyway, Colvin will be able to put you on the direct track
for Henry James.  I do not send formal introductions, as I have taken the
liberty to prepare both of them for seeing you already.

Hoskyn is staying with us.

It is raining dismally.  The Curaçoa track is hardly passable, but it
must be trod to-morrow by the degenerate feet of their successor the
Wallaroos.  I think it a very good account of these last that we don’t
think them either deformed or habitual criminals—they seem to be a kindly
lot.

The doctor will give you all the gossip.  I have preferred in this letter
to stick to the strictly solid and necessary.  With kind messages from
all in the house to all in the wardroom, all in the gunroom, and (may we
dare to breathe it) to him who walks abaft, believe me, my dear Eeles,
yours ever,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO SIR HERBERT MAXWELL


                                   _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _December_ 1, 1894.

DEAR SIR HERBERT,—Thank you very much for your long and kind letter.  I
shall certainly take your advice and call my cousin, the Lyon King, into
council.  It is certainly a very interesting subject, though I don’t
suppose it can possibly lead to anything, this connection between the
Stevensons and M’Gregors.  Alas! your invitation is to me a mere
derision.  My chances of visiting Heaven are about as valid as my chances
of visiting Monreith.  Though I should like well to see you, shrunken
into a cottage, a literary Lord of Ravenscraig.  I suppose it is the
inevitable doom of all those who dabble in Scotch soil; but really your
fate is the more blessed.  I cannot conceive anything more grateful to
me, or more amusing or more picturesque, than to live in a cottage
outside your own park-walls.—With renewed thanks, believe me, dear Sir
Herbert, yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO ANDREW LANG


                                   _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _December_ 1, 1894.

MY DEAR LANG,—For the portrait of Braxfield, much thanks!  It is engraved
from the same Raeburn portrait that I saw in ’76 or ’77 with so extreme a
gusto that I have ever since been Braxfield’s humble servant, and am now
trying, as you know, to stick him into a novel.  Alas! one might as well
try to stick in Napoleon.  The picture shall be framed and hung up in my
study.  Not only as a memento of you, but as a perpetual encouragement to
do better with his Lordship.  I have not yet received the transcripts.
They must be very interesting.  Do you know, I picked up the other day an
old _Longman’s_, where I found an article of yours that I had missed,
about Christie’s?  I read it with great delight.  The year ends with us
pretty much as it began, among wars and rumours of wars, and a vast and
splendid exhibition of official incompetence.—Yours ever,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO EDMUND GOSSE


                                   _Vailima_, _Samoa_, _December_ 1, 1894.

I AM afraid, MY DEAR WEG, that this must be the result of bribery and
corruption!  The volume to which the dedication stands as preface seems
to me to stand alone in your work; it is so natural, so personal, so
sincere, so articulate in substance, and what you always were sure of—so
rich in adornment.

Let me speak first of the dedication.  I thank you for it from the heart.
It is beautifully said, beautifully and kindly felt; and I should be a
churl indeed if I were not grateful, and an ass if I were not proud.  I
remember when Symonds dedicated a book to me; I wrote and told him of
‘the pang of gratified vanity’ with which I had read it.  The pang was
present again, but how much more sober and autumnal—like your volume.
Let me tell you a story, or remind you of a story.  In the year of grace
something or other, anything between ’76 and ’78 I mentioned to you in my
usual autobiographical and inconsiderate manner that I was hard up.  You
said promptly that you had a balance at your banker’s, and could make it
convenient to let me have a cheque, and I accepted and got the money—how
much was it?—twenty or perhaps thirty pounds?  I know not—but it was a
great convenience.  The same evening, or the next day, I fell in
conversation (in my usual autobiographical and . . . see above) with a
denizen of the Savile Club, name now gone from me, only his figure and a
dim three-quarter view of his face remaining.  To him I mentioned that
you had given me a loan, remarking easily that of course it didn’t matter
to you.  Whereupon he read me a lecture, and told me how it really stood
with you financially.  He was pretty serious; fearing, as I could not
help perceiving, that I should take too light a view of the
responsibility and the service (I was always thought too light—the
irresponsible jester—you remember.  O, _quantum mutatus ab illo_!)  If I
remember rightly, the money was repaid before the end of the week—or, to
be more exact and a trifle pedantic, the sennight—but the service has
never been forgotten; and I send you back this piece of ancient history,
_consule Planco_, as a salute for your dedication, and propose that we
should drink the health of the nameless one, who opened my eyes as to the
true nature of what you did for me on that occasion.

But here comes my Amanuensis, so we’ll get on more swimmingly now.  You
will understand perhaps that what so particularly pleased me in the new
volume, what seems to me to have so personal and original a note, are the
middle-aged pieces in the beginning.  The whole of them, I may say,
though I must own an especial liking to—

   ‘I yearn not for the fighting fate,
      That holds and hath achieved;
   I live to watch and meditate
      And dream—and be deceived.’

You take the change gallantly.  Not I, I must confess.  It is all very
well to talk of renunciation, and of course it has to be done.  But, for
my part, give me a roaring toothache!  I do like to be deceived and to
dream, but I have very little use for either watching or meditation.  I
was not born for age.  And, curiously enough, I seem to see a contrary
drift in my work from that which is so remarkable in yours.  You are
going on sedately travelling through your ages, decently changing with
the years to the proper tune.  And here am I, quite out of my true
course, and with nothing in my foolish elderly head but love-stories.
This must repose upon some curious distinction of temperaments.  I gather
from a phrase, boldly autobiographical, that you are—well, not precisely
growing thin.  Can that be the difference?

It is rather funny that this matter should come up just now, as I am at
present engaged in treating a severe case of middle age in one of my
stories—‘The Justice-Clerk.’  The case is that of a woman, and I think
that I am doing her justice.  You will be interested, I believe, to see
the difference in our treatments.  _Secreta Vitæ_, comes nearer to the
case of my poor Kirstie.  Come to think of it, Gosse, I believe the main
distinction is that you have a family growing up around you, and I am a
childless, rather bitter, very clear-eyed, blighted youth.  I have, in
fact, lost the path that makes it easy and natural for you to descend the
hill.  I am going at it straight.  And where I have to go down it is a
precipice.

I must not forget to give you a word of thanks for _An English Village_.
It reminds me strongly of Keats, which is enough to say; and I was
particularly pleased with the petulant sincerity of the concluding
sentiment.

Well, my dear Gosse, here’s wishing you all health and prosperity, as
well as to the mistress and the bairns.  May you live long, since it
seems as if you would continue to enjoy life.  May you write many more
books as good as this one—only there’s one thing impossible, you can
never write another dedication that can give the same pleasure to the
vanished

                                                                 TUSITALA.




FOOTNOTES


{11}  In _Underwoods_ the lines thus queried stand with the change: ‘Life
is over; life was gay.’

{12}  _Prince Otto_.

{20}  The name of the hero in Dostoieffsky’s _Le Crime et le Châtiment_.

{37}  _Suite anglaise_.

{48a}  _The Merry Men_.

{48b}  _Memories and Portraits_.

{48c}  _Underwoods_.

{66}  The sum was really £700.

{70}  ‘But she was more than usual calm,
She did not give a single dam.’—_Marjorie Fleming_.

{83}  The secretary was really, I believe, Lord Pollington.

{86}  ‘Smith opens out his cauld harangues
On practice and on morals.’

The Rev. George Smith of Galston, the minister thus referred to by Burns
(in the _Holy Fair_), was a great-grandfather of Stevenson on the
mother’s side; and against Stevenson himself, in his didactic moods, the
passage was often quoted by his friends when they wished to tease him.

{114}  The French; the Marquesas, Paumotus, and Tahiti being all
dependencies of France.

{132}  King Kalakaua.

{133}  This is the Canadian poet Mr. Archibald Lampman, the news of whose
death reaches England as these sheets are preparing for the press.

{137}  Stevenson’s stepdaughter, Mrs. Strong, who was at this time living
at Honolulu, and joined his party and family for good when they continued
their voyage from thence in the following June.

{141}  The following is the letter in question:—

    ‘I make you to know my great affection.  At the hour when you left
    us, I was filled with tears; my wife, Rui Telime, also, and all of my
    household.  When you embarked I felt a great sorrow.  It is for this
    that I went upon the road, and you looked from that ship, and I
    looked at you on the ship with great grief until you had raised the
    anchor and hoisted the sails.  When the ship started I ran along the
    beach to see you still; and when you were on the open sea I cried out
    to you, “Farewell Louis”; and when I was coming back to my house I
    seemed to hear your voice crying “Rui farewell.”  Afterwards I
    watched the ship as long as I could until the night fell; and when it
    was dark I said to myself, “If I had wings I should fly to the ship
    to meet you, and to sleep amongst you, so that I might be able to
    come back to shore and to tell Rui Telime, ‘I have slept upon the
    ship of Teriitera.’”  After that we passed that night in the
    impatience of grief.  Towards eight o’clock I seemed to hear your
    voice, “Teriitera—Rui—here is the hour for _putter_ and _tiro_”
    (cheese and syrup).  I did not sleep that night, thinking continually
    of you, my very dear friend, until the morning; being then still
    awake, I went to see Tapina Tutu on her bed, and alas, she was not
    there.  Afterwards I looked into your rooms; they did not please me
    as they used to do. I did not hear your voice saying, “Hail Rui”; I
    thought then that you had gone, and that you had left me.  Rising up,
    I went to the beach to see your ship, and I could not see it.  I
    wept, then, until the night, telling myself continually, “Teriitera
    returns into his own country and leaves his dear Rui in grief, so
    that I suffer for him, and weep for him.”  I will not forget you in
    my memory.  Here is the thought: I desire to meet you again.  It is
    my dear Teriitera makes the only riches I desire in this world.  It
    is your eyes that I desire to see again.  It must be that your body
    and my body shall eat together at one table: there is what would make
    my heart content.  But now we are separated.  May God be with you
    all.  May His word and His mercy go with you, so that you may be well
    and we also, according to the words of Paul.

    ORI A ORI, that is to say, RUI.’

{152}  The Polynesian name for white men.

{170}  Table of chapter headings follows.

{187}  French _bâtons rompus_: disconnected thoughts or studies.

{190}  The Rev. Dr. Hyde, of Honolulu: in reference to Stevenson’s letter
on Father Damien.

{198}  Afterwards re-named _The Ebb Tide_.

{201}  His letters.

{220}  _The Misadventures of John Nicholson_.

{245}  _i.e._ On the stage.

{271}  A character in _The Wrecker_.

{272}  The lad Austin Strong.

{292}  John Addington Symonds.

{298a}  _Across the Plains_.

{298b}  Volume of Sonnets by José Maria de Hérédia.

{311}  _The Window in Thrums_, with illustrations by W. Hole, R.S.A.
Hodder and Stoughton. 1892.

{320}  This question is with a view to the adventures of the hero in _St.
Ives_, who, according to Stevenson’s original plan, was to have been
picked up from his foundered balloon by an American privateer.

{323}  As to admire _The Black Arrow_.

{332}  In the book the genealogy is given as a diagram.  It has been
converted to text for this transcription so it’s available for everyone,
with the original diagram below.—DP.

                         [Picture: The Genealogy]

{337}  Word omitted in MS.

{347}  _Sentimental Tommy_: whose chief likeness to R. L. S. was meant to
be in the literary temperament and passion for the _mot propre_.

{350}  _Sic_: query ‘least’?

{359}  Of _The Wrecker_.

{361}  _Trieb_, impulse




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LETTERS OF ROBERT LOUIS
STEVENSON TO HIS FAMILY AND FRIENDS - VOLUME 2 [OF 2]***


******* This file should be named 637-0.txt or 637-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/3/637


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


