Part II.  It is annoying to find the American public as stupid as the
English, but they will waken up in time: I wonder what they will think of
_Two Nations_? . . .

This, dear James, is a valedictory.  On June 15th the schooner yacht
_Casco_ will (weather and a jealous providence permitting) steam through
the Golden Gates for Honolulu, Tahiti, the Galapagos, Guayaquil, and—I
hope _not_ the bottom of the Pacific.  It will contain your obedient
’umble servant and party.  It seems too good to be true, and is a very
good way of getting through the green-sickness of maturity which, with
all its accompanying ills, is now declaring itself in my mind and life.
They tell me it is not so severe as that of youth; if I (and the _Casco_)
are spared, I shall tell you more exactly, as I am one of the few people
in the world who do not forget their own lives.

Good-bye, then, my dear fellow, and please write us a word; we expect to
have three mails in the next two months: Honolulu, Tahiti, and Guayaquil.
But letters will be forwarded from Scribner’s, if you hear nothing more
definite directly.  In 3 (three) days I leave for San Francisco.—Ever
yours most cordially,

                                                                  R. L. S.




X
PACIFIC VOYAGES
JUNE 1888-NOVEMBER 1890


TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                               _Yacht_ ‘_Casco_,’ _Anaho Bay_, _Nukahiva_,
                                        _Marquesas Islands_ [_July_ 1888].

MY DEAR COLVIN,—From this somewhat (ahem) out of the way place, I write
to say how d’ye do.  It is all a swindle: I chose these isles as having
the most beastly population, and they are far better, and far more
civilised than we.  I know one old chief Ko-o-amua, a great cannibal in
his day, who ate his enemies even as he walked home from killing ’em, and
he is a perfect gentleman and exceedingly amiable and simple-minded: no
fool, though.

The climate is delightful; and the harbour where we lie one of the
loveliest spots imaginable.  Yesterday evening we had near a score
natives on board; lovely parties.  We have a native god; very rare now.
Very rare and equally absurd to view.

This sort of work is not favourable to correspondence: it takes me all
the little strength I have to go about and see, and then come home and
note, the strangeness around us.  I shouldn’t wonder if there came
trouble here some day, all the same.  I could name a nation that is not
beloved in certain islands—and it does not know it! {114}  Strange: like
ourselves, perhaps, in India!  Love to all and much to yourself.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                         _Yacht_ ‘_Casco_,’ _at sea_, _near the Paumotus_,
                   7 A.M., _September_ 6_th_, 1888, _with a dreadful pen_.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—Last night as I lay under my blanket in the cockpit,
courting sleep, I had a comic seizure.  There was nothing visible but the
southern stars, and the steersman there out by the binnacle lamp; we were
all looking forward to a most deplorable landfall on the morrow, praying
God we should fetch a tuft of palms which are to indicate the Dangerous
Archipelago; the night was as warm as milk, and all of a sudden I had a
vision of—Drummond Street.  It came on me like a flash of lightning: I
simply returned thither, and into the past.  And when I remember all I
hoped and feared as I pickled about Rutherford’s in the rain and the east
wind; how I feared I should make a mere shipwreck, and yet timidly hoped
not; how I feared I should never have a friend, far less a wife, and yet
passionately hoped I might; how I hoped (if I did not take to drink) I
should possibly write one little book, etc. etc.  And then now—what a
change!  I feel somehow as if I should like the incident set upon a brass
plate at the corner of that dreary thoroughfare for all students to read,
poor devils, when their hearts are down.  And I felt I must write one
word to you.  Excuse me if I write little: when I am at sea, it gives me
a headache; when I am in port, I have my diary crying ‘Give, give.’  I
shall have a fine book of travels, I feel sure; and will tell you more of
the South Seas after very few months than any other writer has
done—except Herman Melville perhaps, who is a howling cheese.  Good luck
to you, God bless you.—Your affectionate friend,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                  _Fakarava_, _Low Archipelago_, _September_ 21_st_, 1888.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—Only a word.  Get out your big atlas, and imagine a
straight line from San Francisco to Anaho, the N.E. corner of Nukahiva,
one of the Marquesas Islands; imagine three weeks there: imagine a day’s
sail on August 12th round the eastern end of the island to Tai-o-hae, the
capital; imagine us there till August 22nd: imagine us skirt the east
side of Ua-pu—perhaps Rona-Poa on your atlas—and through the Bondelais
straits to Taaka-uku in Hiva-Oa, where we arrive on the 23rd; imagine us
there until September 4th, when we sailed for Fakarava, which we reached
on the 9th, after a very difficult and dangerous passage among these
isles.  Tuesday, we shall leave for Taiti, where I shall knock off and do
some necessary work ashore.  It looks pretty bald in the atlas; not in
fact; nor I trust in the 130 odd pages of diary which I have just been
looking up for these dates: the interest, indeed, has been _incredible_:
I did not dream there were such places or such races.  My health has
stood me splendidly; I am in for hours wading over the knees for shells;
I have been five hours on horseback: I have been up pretty near all night
waiting to see where the _Casco_ would go ashore, and with my diary all
ready—simply the most entertaining night of my life.  Withal I still have
colds; I have one now, and feel pretty sick too; but not as at home:
instead of being in bed, for instance, I am at this moment sitting
snuffling and writing in an undershirt and trousers; and as for colour,
hands, arms, feet, legs, and face, I am browner than the berry: only my
trunk and the aristocratic spot on which I sit retain the vile whiteness
of the north.

Please give my news and kind love to Henley, Henry James, and any whom
you see of well-wishers.  Accept from me the very best of my affection:
and believe me ever yours,

                                                     THE OLD MAN VIRULENT.

                                * * * * *

                                           _Taiti_, _October_ 7_th_, 1888.

Never having found a chance to send this off, I may add more of my news.
My cold took a very bad turn, and I am pretty much out of sorts at this
particular, living in a little bare one-twentieth-furnished house,
surrounded by mangoes, etc.  All the rest are well, and I mean to be
soon.  But these Taiti colds are very severe and, to children, often
fatal; so they were not the thing for me.  Yesterday the brigantine came
in from San Francisco, so we can get our letters off soon.  There are in
Papeete at this moment, in a little wooden house with grated verandahs,
two people who love you very much, and one of them is

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                             _Taiti_, _as ever was_, 6_th_ _October_ 1888.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—. . . You will receive a lot of mostly very bad proofs
of photographs: the paper was so bad.  Please keep them very private, as
they are for the book.  We send them, having learned so dread a fear of
the sea, that we wish to put our eggs in different baskets.  We have been
thrice within an ace of being ashore: we were lost (!) for about twelve
hours in the Low Archipelago, but by God’s blessing had quiet weather all
the time; and once, in a squall, we cam’ so near gaun heels ower hurdies,
that I really dinnae ken why we didnae athegither.  Hence, as I say, a
great desire to put our eggs in different baskets, particularly on the
Pacific (aw-haw-haw) Pacific Ocean.

You can have no idea what a mean time we have had, owing to incidental
beastlinesses, nor what a glorious, owing to the intrinsic interest of
these isles.  I hope the book will be a good one; nor do I really very
much doubt that—the stuff is so curious; what I wonder is, if the public
will rise to it.  A copy of my journal, or as much of it as is made,
shall go to you also; it is, of course, quite imperfect, much being to be
added and corrected; but O, for the eggs in the different baskets.

All the rest are well enough, and all have enjoyed the cruise so far, in
spite of its drawbacks.  We have had an awfae time in some ways, Mr.
Baxter; and if I wasnae sic a verra patient man (when I ken that I _have_
to be) there wad hae been a braw row; and ance if I hadnae happened to be
on deck about three in the marnin’, I _think_ there would have been
_murder_ done.  The American Mairchant Marine is a kent service; ye’ll
have heard its praise, I’m thinkin’; an’ if ye never did, ye can get _Twa
Years Before the Mast_, by Dana, whaur forbye a great deal o’ pleisure,
ye’ll get a’ the needcessary information.  Love to your father and all
the family.—Ever your affectionate friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS ADELAIDE BOODLE


                                          _Taiti_, _October_ 10_th_, 1888.

DEAR GIVER,—I am at a loss to conceive your object in giving me to a
person so locomotory as my proprietor.  The number of thousand miles that
I have travelled, the strange bed-fellows with which I have been made
acquainted, I lack the requisite literary talent to make clear to your
imagination.  I speak of bed-fellows; pocket-fellows would be a more
exact expression, for the place of my abode is in my master’s righthand
trouser-pocket; and there, as he waded on the resounding beaches of
Nukahiva, or in the shallow tepid water on the reef of Fakarava, I have
been overwhelmed by and buried among all manner of abominable South Sea
shells, beautiful enough in their way, I make no doubt, but singular
company for any self-respecting paper-cutter.  He, my master—or as I more
justly call him, my bearer; for although I occasionally serve him, does
not he serve me daily and all day long, carrying me like an African
potentate on my subject’s legs?—_he_ is delighted with these isles, and
this climate, and these savages, and a variety of other things.  He now
blows a flageolet with singular effects: sometimes the poor thing appears
stifled with shame, sometimes it screams with agony; he pursues his
career with truculent insensibility.  Health appears to reign in the
party.  I was very nearly sunk in a squall.  I am sorry I ever left
England, for here there are no books to be had, and without books there
is no stable situation for, dear Giver, your affectionate

                                                      WOODEN PAPER-CUTTER.

A neighbouring pair of scissors snips a kiss in your direction.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                          _Taiti_, _October_ 16_th_, 1888.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—The cruiser for San Francisco departs to-morrow morning
bearing you some kind of a scratch.  This much more important packet will
travel by way of Auckland.  It contains a ballant; and I think a better
ballant than I expected ever to do.  I can imagine how you will wag your
pow over it; and how ragged you will find it, etc., but has it not spirit
all the same? and though the verse is not all your fancy painted it, has
it not some life?  And surely, as narrative, the thing has considerable
merit!  Read it, get a typewritten copy taken, and send me that and your
opinion to the Sandwiches.  I know I am only courting the most
excruciating mortification; but the real cause of my sending the thing is
that I could bear to go down myself, but not to have much MS. go down
with me.  To say truth, we are through the most dangerous; but it has
left in all minds a strong sense of insecurity, and we are all for
putting eggs in various baskets.

We leave here soon, bound for Uahiva, Reiatea, Bora-Bora, and the
Sandwiches.

   O, how my spirit languishes
   To step ashore on the Sanguishes;
   For there my letters wait,
   There shall I know my fate.
   O, how my spirit languidges
   To step ashore on the Sanguidges.

18_th_.—I think we shall leave here if all is well on Monday.  I am quite
recovered, astonishingly recovered. It must be owned these climates and
this voyage have given me more strength than I could have thought
possible.  And yet the sea is a terrible place, stupefying to the mind
and poisonous to the temper, the sea, the motion, the lack of space, the
cruel publicity, the villainous tinned foods, the sailors, the captain,
the passengers—but you are amply repaid when you sight an island, and
drop anchor in a new world.  Much trouble has attended this trip, but I
must confess more pleasure.  Nor should I ever complain, as in the last
few weeks, with the curing of my illness indeed, as if that were the
bursting of an abscess, the cloud has risen from my spirits and to some
degree from my temper.  Do you know what they called the _Casco_ at
Fakarava?  The _Silver Ship_.  Is that not pretty?  Pray tell Mrs.
Jenkin, _die silberne Frau_, as I only learned it since I wrote her.  I
think of calling the book by that name: _The Cruise of the Silver
Ship_—so there will be one poetic page at least—the title.  At the
Sandwiches we shall say farewell to the _S. S._ with mingled feelings.
She is a lovely creature: the most beautiful thing at this moment in
Taiti.

Well, I will take another sheet, though I know I have nothing to say.
You would think I was bursting: but the voyage is all stored up for the
book, which is to pay for it, we fondly hope; and the troubles of the
time are not worth telling; and our news is little.

Here I conclude (Oct. 24th, I think), for we are now stored, and the Blue
Peter metaphorically flies.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO WILLIAM AND THOMAS ARCHER


                                          _Taiti_, _October_ 17_th_, 1888.

DEAR ARCHER,—Though quite unable to write letters, I nobly send you a
line signifying nothing.  The voyage has agreed well with all; it has had
its pains, and its extraordinary pleasures; nothing in the world can
equal the excitement of the first time you cast anchor in some bay of a
tropical island, and the boats begin to surround you, and the tattooed
people swarm aboard.  Tell Tomarcher, with my respex, that hide-and-seek
is not equal to it; no, nor hidee-in-the-dark; which, for the matter of
that, is a game for the unskilful: the artist prefers daylight, a
good-sized garden, some shrubbery, an open paddock, and—come on, Macduff.

TOMARCHER, I am now a distinguished litterytour, but that was not the
real bent of my genius.  I was the best player of hide-and-seek going;
not a good runner, I was up to every shift and dodge, I could jink very
well, I could crawl without any noise through leaves, I could hide under
a carrot plant, it used to be my favourite boast that I always _walked_
into the den.  You may care to hear, Tomarcher, about the children in
these parts; their parents obey them, they do not obey their parents; and
I am sorry to tell you (for I dare say you are already thinking the idea
a good one) that it does not pay one halfpenny.  There are three sorts of
civilisation, Tomarcher: the real old-fashioned one, in which children
either had to find out how to please their dear papas, or their dear
papas cut their heads off.  This style did very well, but is now out of
fashion.  Then the modern European style: in which children have to
behave reasonably well, and go to school and say their prayers, or their
dear papas _will know the reason why_.  This does fairly well.  Then
there is the South Sea Island plan, which does not do one bit.  The
children beat their parents here; it does not make their parents any
better; so do not try it.

Dear Tomarcher, I have forgotten the address of your new house, but will
send this to one of your papa’s publishers.  Remember us all to all of
you, and believe me, yours respectably,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                 _Tautira_ (_The Garden of the World_), _otherwise called_
                        _Hans-Christian-Andersen-ville_ [_November_ 1888].

MY DEAR CHARLES,—Whether I have a penny left in the wide world, I know
not, nor shall know, till I get to Honolulu, where I anticipate a devil
of an awakening.  It will be from a mighty pleasant dream at least:
Tautira being mere Heaven.  But suppose, for the sake of argument, any
money to be left in the hands of my painful doer, what is to be done with
it?  Save us from exile would be the wise man’s choice, I suppose; for
the exile threatens to be eternal.  But yet I am of opinion—in case there
should be _some_ dibs in the hand of the P.D., _i.e._ painful doer;
because if there be none, I shall take to my flageolet on the high-road,
and work home the best way I can, having previously made away with my
family—I am of opinion that if — and his are in the customary state, and
you are thinking of an offering, and there should be still some funds
over, you would be a real good P.D. to put some in with yours and tak’
the credit o’t, like a wee man!  I know it’s a beastly thing to ask; but
it, after all, does no earthly harm, only that much good.  And besides,
like enough there’s nothing in the till, and there is an end.  Yet I live
here in the full lustre of millions; it is thought I am the richest son
of man that has yet been to Tautira: I!—and I am secretly eaten with the
fear of lying in pawn, perhaps for the remainder of my days, in San
Francisco.  As usual, my colds have much hashed my finances.

Do tell Henley I write this just after having dismissed Ori the
sub-chief, in whose house I live, Mrs. Ori, and Pairai, their adopted
child, from the evening hour of music: during which I Publickly (with a
k) Blow on the Flageolet.  These are words of truth.  Yesterday I told
Ori about W. E. H., counterfeited his playing on the piano and the pipe,
and succeeded in sending the six feet four there is of that sub-chief
somewhat sadly to his bed; feeling that his was not the genuine article
after all.  Ori is exactly like a colonel in the Guards.—I am, dear
Charles, ever yours affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.

                                         _Tautira_, 10_th_ _November_ ’88.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—Our mainmast is dry-rotten, and we are all to the devil;
I shall lie in a debtor’s jail.  Never mind, Tautira is first chop.  I am
so besotted that I shall put on the back of this my attempt at words to
Wandering Willie; if you can conceive at all the difficulty, you will
also conceive the vanity with which I regard any kind of result; and
whatever mine is like, it has some sense, and Burns’s has none.

   Home no more home to me, whither must I wander?
      Hunger my driver, I go where I must.
   Cold blows the winter wind over hill and heather;
      Thick drives the rain, and my roof is in the dust.
   Loved of wise men was the shade of my roof-tree.
      The true word of welcome was spoken in the door—
   Dear days of old, with the faces in the firelight,
      Kind folks of old, you come again no more.

   Home was home then, my dear, full of kindly faces,
      Home was home then, my dear, happy for the child.
   Fire and the windows bright glittered on the moorland;
      Song, tuneful song, built a palace in the wild.
   Now, when day dawns on the brow of the moorland,
      Lone stands the house, and the chimney-stone is cold.
   Lone let it stand, now the friends are all departed,
      The kind hearts, the true hearts, that loved the place of old.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO J. A. SYMONDS


                                                   _November_ 11_th_ 1888.

_One November night_, _in the village of Tautira_, _we sat at the high
table in the hall of assembly_, _hearing the natives sing_.  _It was dark
in the hall_, _and very warm_; _though at times the land wind blew a
little shrewdly through the chinks_, _and at times_, _through the larger
openings_, _we could see the moonlight on the lawn_.  _As the songs arose
in the rattling Tahitian chorus_, _the chief translated here and there a
verse_.  _Farther on in the volume you shall read the songs themselves_;
_and I am in hopes that not you only_, _but all who can find a savour in
the ancient poetry of places_, _will read them with some pleasure_.  _You
are to conceive us_, _therefore_, _in strange circumstances and very
pleasing_; _in a strange land and climate_, _the most beautiful on
earth_; _surrounded by a foreign race that all travellers have agreed to
be the most engaging_; _and taking a double interest in two foreign
arts_.

_We came forth again at last_, _in a cloudy moonlight_, _on the forest
lawn which is the street of Tautira_.  _The Pacific roared outside upon
the reef_.  _Here and there one of the scattered palm-built lodges shone
out under the shadow of the wood_, _the lamplight bursting through the
crannies of the wall_.  _We went homeward slowly_, _Ori a Ori carrying
behind us the lantern and the chairs_, _properties with which we had just
been enacting our part of the distinguished visitor_.  _It was one of
those moments in which minds not altogether churlish recall the names and
deplore the absence of congenial friends_; _and it was your name that
first rose upon our lips_.  ‘_How Symonds would have enjoyed this
evening_!’ _said one_, _and then another_.  _The word caught in my mind_;
_I went to bed_, _and it was still there_.  _The glittering_, _frosty
solitudes in which your days are cast arose before me_: _I seemed to see
you walking there in the late night_, _under the pine-trees and the
stars_; _and I received the image with something like remorse_.

_There is a modern attitude towards fortune_; _in this place I will not
use a graver name_.  _Staunchly to withstand her buffets and to enjoy
with equanimity her favours was the code of the virtuous of old_.  _Our
fathers_, _it should seem_, _wondered and doubted how they had merited
their misfortunes_: _we_, _rather how we have deserved our happiness_.
_And we stand often abashed and sometimes revolted_, _at those
partialities of fate by which we profit most_.  _It was so with me on
that November night_: _I felt that our positions should be changed_.  _It
was you_, _dear Symonds_, _who should have gone upon that voyage and
written this account_.  _With your rich stores of knowledge_, _you could
have remarked and understood a thousand things of interest and beauty
that escaped my ignorance_; _and the brilliant colours of your style
would have carried into a thousand sickrooms the sea air and the strong
sun of tropic islands_.  _It was otherwise decreed_.  _But suffer me at
least to connect you_, _if only in name and only in the fondness of
imagination_, _with the voyage of the_ ‘Silver Ship.’

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

DEAR SYMONDS,—I send you this (November 11th), the morning of its
completion.  If I ever write an account of this voyage, may I place this
letter at the beginning?  It represents—I need not tell you, for you too
are an artist—a most genuine feeling, which kept me long awake last
night; and though perhaps a little elaborate, I think it a good piece of
writing.  We are _in heaven here_.  Do not forget

                                                                  R. L. S.

Please keep this: I have no perfect copy.

_Tautira_, _on the peninsula of Tahiti_.



TO THOMAS ARCHER


                          _Tautira_, _Island of Tahiti_ [_November_ 1888].

DEAR TOMARCHER,—This is a pretty state of things! seven o’clock and no
word of breakfast!  And I was awake a good deal last night, for it was
full moon, and they had made a great fire of cocoa-nut husks down by the
sea, and as we have no blinds or shutters, this kept my room very bright.
And then the rats had a wedding or a school-feast under my bed.  And then
I woke early, and I have nothing to read except Virgil’s _Æneid_, which
is not good fun on an empty stomach, and a Latin dictionary, which is
good for naught, and by some humorous accident, your dear papa’s article
on Skerryvore.  And I read the whole of that, and very impudent it is,
but you must not tell your dear papa I said so, or it might come to a
battle in which you might lose either a dear papa or a valued
correspondent, or both, which would be prodigal.  And still no breakfast;
so I said ‘Let’s write to Tomarcher.’

This is a much better place for children than any I have hitherto seen in
these seas.  The girls (and sometimes the boys) play a very elaborate
kind of hopscotch.  The boys play horses exactly as we do in Europe; and
have very good fun on stilts, trying to knock each other down, in which
they do not often succeed.  The children of all ages go to church and are
allowed to do what they please, running about the aisles, rolling balls,
stealing mamma’s bonnet and publicly sitting on it, and at last going to
sleep in the middle of the floor.  I forgot to say that the whips to play
horses, and the balls to roll about the church—at least I never saw them
used elsewhere—grow ready made on trees; which is rough on toy-shops.
The whips are so good that I wanted to play horses myself; but no such
luck! my hair is grey, and I am a great, big, ugly man.  The balls are
rather hard, but very light and quite round.  When you grow up and become
offensively rich, you can charter a ship in the port of London, and have
it come back to you entirely loaded with these balls; when you could
satisfy your mind as to their character, and give them away when done
with to your uncles and aunts.  But what I really wanted to tell you was
this: besides the tree-top toys (Hush-a-by, toy-shop, on the tree-top!),
I have seen some real _made_ toys, the first hitherto observed in the
South Seas.

This was how.  You are to imagine a four-wheeled gig; one horse; in the
front seat two Tahiti natives, in their Sunday clothes, blue coat, white
shirt, kilt (a little longer than the Scotch) of a blue stuff with big
white or yellow flowers, legs and feet bare; in the back seat me and my
wife, who is a friend of yours; under our feet, plenty of lunch and
things: among us a great deal of fun in broken Tahitian, one of the
natives, the sub-chief of the village, being a great ally of mine.
Indeed we have exchanged names; so that he is now called Rui, the nearest
they can come to Louis, for they have no _l_ and no _s_ in their
language.  Rui is six feet three in his stockings, and a magnificent man.
We all have straw hats, for the sun is strong.  We drive between the sea,
which makes a great noise, and the mountains; the road is cut through a
forest mostly of fruit trees, the very creepers, which take the place of
our ivy, heavy with a great and delicious fruit, bigger than your head
and far nicer, called Barbedine.  Presently we came to a house in a
pretty garden, quite by itself, very nicely kept, the doors and windows
open, no one about, and no noise but that of the sea.  It looked like a
house in a fairy-tale, and just beyond we must ford a river, and there we
saw the inhabitants.  Just in the mouth of the river, where it met the
sea waves, they were ducking and bathing and screaming together like a
covey of birds: seven or eight little naked brown boys and girls as happy
as the day was long; and on the banks of the stream beside them, real
toys—toy ships, full rigged, and with their sails set, though they were
lying in the dust on their beam ends.  And then I knew for sure they were
all children in a fairy-story, living alone together in that lonely house
with the only toys in all the island; and that I had myself driven, in my
four-wheeled gig, into a corner of the fairy-story, and the question was,
should I get out again?  But it was all right; I guess only one of the
wheels of the gig had got into the fairy-story; and the next jolt the
whole thing vanished, and we drove on in our sea-side forest as before,
and I have the honour to be Tomarcher’s valued correspondent, TERIITEPA,
which he was previously known as

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                      _Yacht_ ‘_Casco_,’ _at Sea_, 14_th_ _January_, 1889.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—Twenty days out from Papeete.  Yes, sir, all that, and
only (for a guess) in 4° north or at the best 4° 30′, though already the
wind seems to smell a little of the North Pole.  My handwriting you must
take as you get, for we are speeding along through a nasty swell, and I
can only keep my place at the table by means of a foot against the divan,
the unoccupied hand meanwhile gripping the ink-bottle.  As we begin (so
very slowly) to draw near to seven months of correspondence, we are all
in some fear; and I want to have letters written before I shall be
plunged into that boiling pot of disagreeables which I constantly expect
at Honolulu.  What is needful can be added there.

We were kept two months at Tautira in the house of my dear old friend,
Ori a Ori, till both the masts of this invaluable yacht had been
repaired.  It was all for the best: Tautira being the most beautiful
spot, and its people the most amiable, I have ever found.  Besides which,
the climate suited me to the ground; I actually went sea-bathing almost
every day, and in our feasts (we are all huge eaters in Taiarapu) have
been known to apply four times for pig.  And then again I got wonderful
materials for my book, collected songs and legends on the spot; songs
still sung in chorus by perhaps a hundred persons, not two of whom can
agree on their translation; legends, on which I have seen half a dozen
seniors sitting in conclave and debating what came next.  Once I went a
day’s journey to the other side of the island to Tati, the high chief of
the Tevas—_my_ chief that is, for I am now a Teva and Teriitera, at your
service—to collect more and correct what I had already.  In the meanwhile
I got on with my work, almost finished the _Master of Ballantrae_, which
contains more human work than anything of mine but _Kidnapped_, and wrote
the half of another ballad, the _Song of Rahero_, on a Taiarapu legend of
my own clan, sir—not so much fire as the _Feast of Famine_, but promising
to be more even and correct.  But the best fortune of our stay at Tautira
was my knowledge of Ori himself, one of the finest creatures extant.  The
day of our parting was a sad one.  We deduced from it a rule for
travellers: not to stay two months in one place—which is to cultivate
regrets.

At last our contemptible ship was ready; to sea we went, bound for
Honolulu and the letter-bag, on Christmas Day; and from then to now have
experienced every sort of minor misfortune, squalls, calms, contrary
winds and seas, pertinacious rains, declining stores, till we came almost
to regard ourselves as in the case of Vanderdecken.  Three days ago our
luck seemed to improve, we struck a leading breeze, got creditably
through the doldrums, and just as we looked to have the N.E. trades and a
straight run, the rains and squalls and calms began again about midnight,
and this morning, though there is breeze enough to send us along, we are
beaten back by an obnoxious swell out of the north.  Here is a page of
complaint, when a verse of thanksgiving had perhaps been more in place.
For all this time we must have been skirting past dangerous weather, in
the tail and circumference of hurricanes, and getting only annoyance
where we should have had peril, and ill-humour instead of fear.

I wonder if I have managed to give you any news this time, or whether the
usual damn hangs over my letter?  ‘The midwife whispered, Be thou dull!’
or at least inexplicit.  Anyway I have tried my best, am exhausted with
the effort, and fall back into the land of generalities.  I cannot tell
you how often we have planned our arrival at the Monument: two nights
ago, the 12th January, we had it all planned out, arrived in the lights
and whirl of Waterloo, hailed a hansom, span up Waterloo Road, over the
bridge, etc. etc., and hailed the Monument gate in triumph and with
indescribable delight.  My dear Custodian, I always think we are too
sparing of assurances: Cordelia is only to be excused by Regan and
Goneril in the same nursery; I wish to tell you that the longer I live,
the more dear do you become to me; nor does my heart own any stronger
sentiment.  If the bloody schooner didn’t send me flying in every sort of
direction at the same time, I would say better what I feel so much; but
really, if you were here, you would not be writing letters, I believe;
and even I, though of a more marine constitution, am much perturbed by
this bobbery and wish—O ye Gods, how I wish!—that it was done, and we had
arrived, and I had Pandora’s Box (my mail bag) in hand, and was in the
lively hope of something eatable for dinner instead of salt horse, tinned
mutton, duff without any plums, and pie fruit, which now make up our
whole repertory.  O Pandora’s Box!  I wonder what you will contain.  As
like as not you will contain but little money: if that be so, we shall
have to retire to ’Frisco in the _Casco_, and thence by sea _via_ Panama
to Southampton, where we should arrive in April.  I would like fine to
see you on the tug: ten years older both of us than the last time you
came to welcome Fanny and me to England.  If we have money, however, we
shall do a little differently: send the _Casco_ away from Honolulu empty
of its high-born lessees, for that voyage to ’Frisco is one long dead
beat in foul and at last in cold weather; stay awhile behind, follow by
steamer, cross the States by train, stay awhile in New York on business,
and arrive probably by the German Line in Southampton.  But all this is a
question of money.  We shall have to lie very dark awhile to recruit our
finances: what comes from the book of the cruise, I do not want to touch
until the capital is repaid.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                               _Honolulu_, _January_ 1889.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—Here at last I have arrived.  We could not get away
from Tahiti till Christmas Day, and then had thirty days of calms and
squalls, a deplorable passage.  This has thrown me all out of gear in
every way.  I plunge into business.

1.  _The Master_: Herewith go three more parts.  You see he grows in
balk; this making ten already, and I am not yet sure if I can finish it
in an eleventh; which shall go to you _quam primum_—I hope by next mail.

2.  _Illustrations to M_.  I totally forgot to try to write to Hole.  It
was just as well, for I find it impossible to forecast with sufficient
precision.  You had better throw off all this and let him have it at
once.  _Please do_: _all_, _and at once_: _see further_; and I should
hope he would still be in time for the later numbers.  The three pictures
I have received are so truly good that I should bitterly regret having
the volume imperfectly equipped.  They are the best illustrations I have
seen since I don’t know when.

3.  _Money_.  To-morrow the mail comes in, and I hope it will bring me
money either from you or home, but I will add a word on that point.

4.  My address will be Honolulu—no longer Yacht _Casco_, which I am
packing off—till probably April.

5.  As soon as I am through with _The Master_, I shall finish the _Game
of Bluff_—now rechristened _The Wrong Box_.  This I wish to sell, cash
down.  It is of course copyright in the States; and I offer it to you for
five thousand dollars.  Please reply on this by return.  Also please tell
the typewriter who was so good as to be amused by our follies that I am
filled with admiration for his piece of work.

6.  _Master_ again.  Please see that I haven’t the name of the Governor
of New York wrong (1764 is the date) in part ten.  I have no book of
reference to put me right.  Observe you now have up to August inclusive
in hand, so you should begin to feel happy.

Is this all?  I wonder, and fear not.  Henry the Trader has not yet
turned up: I hope he may to-morrow, when we expect a mail.  Not one word
of business have I received either from the States or England, nor
anything in the shape of coin; which leaves me in a fine uncertainty and
quite penniless on these islands.  H.M. {132} (who is a gentleman of a
courtly order and much tinctured with letters) is very polite; I may
possibly ask for the position of palace doorkeeper.  My voyage has been a
singular mixture of good and ill-fortune.  As far as regards interest and
material, the fortune has been admirable; as far as regards time, money,
and impediments of all kinds, from squalls and calms to rotten masts and
sprung spars, simply detestable.  I hope you will be interested to hear
of two volumes on the wing.  The cruise itself, you are to know, will
make a big volume with appendices; some of it will first appear as (what
they call) letters in some of M’Clure’s papers.  I believe the book when
ready will have a fair measure of serious interest: I have had great
fortune in finding old songs and ballads and stories, for instance, and
have many singular instances of life in the last few years among these
islands.

The second volume is of ballads.  You know _Ticonderoga_.  I have written
another: _The Feast of Famine_, a Marquesan story.  A third is half done:
_The Song of Rahero_, a genuine Tahitian legend.  A fourth dances before
me.  A Hawaiian fellow this, _The Priest’s Drought_, or some such name.
If, as I half suspect, I get enough subjects out of the islands,
_Ticonderoga_ shall be suppressed, and we’ll call the volume _South Sea
Ballads_.  In health, spirits, renewed interest in life, and, I do
believe, refreshed capacity for work, the cruise has proved a wise folly.
Still we’re not home, and (although the friend of a crowned head) are
penniless upon these (as one of my correspondents used to call them)
‘lovely but _fatil_ islands.’  By the way, who wrote the _Lion of the
Nile_?  My dear sir, that is Something Like.  Overdone in bits, it has a
true thought and a true ring of language.  Beg the anonymous from me, to
delete (when he shall republish) the two last verses, and end on ‘the
lion of the Nile.’  One Lampman has a good sonnet on a ‘Winter Evening’
in, I think, the same number: he seems ill named, but I am tempted to
hope a man is not always answerable for his name. {133}  For instance,
you would think you knew mine.  No such matter.  It is—at your service
and Mr. Scribner’s and that of all of the faithful—Teriitera (pray
pronounce Tayree-Tayra) or (_gallicé_) Téri-téra.

                                                                  R. L. S.

More when the mail shall come.

                                * * * * *

I am an idiot.  I want to be clear on one point.  Some of Hole’s drawings
must of course be too late; and yet they seem to me so excellent I would
fain have the lot complete.  It is one thing for you to pay for drawings
which are to appear in that soul-swallowing machine, your magazine: quite
another if they are only to illustrate a volume.  I wish you to take a
brisk (even a fiery) decision on the point; and let Hole know.  To resume
my desultory song, I desire you would carry the same fire (hereinbefore
suggested) into your decision on the _Wrong Box_; for in my present state
of benighted ignorance as to my affairs for the last seven months—I know
not even whether my house or my mother’s house have been let—I desire to
see something definite in front of me—outside the lot of palace
doorkeeper.  I believe the said _Wrong Box_ is a real lark; in which, of
course, I may be grievously deceived; but the typewriter is with me.  I
may also be deceived as to the numbers of _The Master_ now going and
already gone; but to me they seem First Chop, sir, First Chop.  I hope I
shall pull off that damned ending; but it still depresses me: this is
your doing, Mr. Burlingame: you would have it there and then, and I fear
it—I fear that ending.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                       _Honolulu_, _February_ 8_th_, 1889.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—Here we are at Honolulu, and have dismissed the yacht,
and lie here till April anyway, in a fine state of haze, which I am yet
in hopes some letter of yours (still on the way) may dissipate.  No
money, and not one word as to money!  However, I have got the yacht paid
off in triumph, I think; and though we stay here impignorate, it should
not be for long, even if you bring us no extra help from home.  The
cruise has been a great success, both as to matter, fun, and health; and
yet, Lord, man! we’re pleased to be ashore!  Yon was a very fine voyage
from Tahiti up here, but—the dry land’s a fine place too, and we don’t
mind squalls any longer, and eh, man, that’s a great thing.  Blow, blow,
thou wintry wind, thou hast done me no appreciable harm beyond a few grey
hairs!  Altogether, this foolhardy venture is achieved; and if I have but
nine months of life and any kind of health, I shall have both eaten my
cake and got it back again with usury.  But, man, there have been days
when I felt guilty, and thought I was in no position for the head of a
house.

Your letter and accounts are doubtless at S. F., and will reach me in
course.  My wife is no great shakes; she is the one who has suffered
most.  My mother has had a Huge Old Time; Lloyd is first chop; I so well
that I do not know myself—sea-bathing, if you please, and what is far
more dangerous, entertaining and being entertained by His Majesty here,
who is a very fine intelligent fellow, but O, Charles! what a crop for
the drink!  He carries it, too, like a mountain with a sparrow on its
shoulders.  We calculated five bottles of champagne in three hours and a
half (afternoon), and the sovereign quite presentable, although
perceptibly more dignified at the end. . . .

The extraordinary health I enjoy and variety of interests I find among
these islands would tempt me to remain here; only for Lloyd, who is not
well placed in such countries for a permanency; and a little for Colvin,
to whom I feel I owe a sort of filial duty.  And these two considerations
will no doubt bring me back—to go to bed again—in England.—Yours ever
affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO R. A. M. STEVENSON


                          _Honolulu_, _Hawaiian Islands_, _February_ 1889.

MY DEAR BOB,—My extremely foolhardy venture is practically over.  How
foolhardy it was I don’t think I realised.  We had a very small schooner,
and, like most yachts, over-rigged and over-sparred, and like many
American yachts on a very dangerous sail plan.  The waters we sailed in
are, of course, entirely unlighted, and very badly charted; in the
Dangerous Archipelago, through which we were fools enough to go, we were
perfectly in ignorance of where we were for a whole night and half the
next day, and this in the midst of invisible islands and rapid and
variable currents; and we were lucky when we found our whereabouts at
last.  We have twice had all we wanted in the way of squalls: once, as I
came on deck, I found the green sea over the cockpit coamings and running
down the companion like a brook to meet me; at that same moment the
foresail sheet jammed and the captain had no knife; this was the only
occasion on the cruise that ever I set a hand to a rope, but I worked
like a Trojan, judging the possibility of hæmorrhage better than the
certainty of drowning.  Another time I saw a rather singular thing: our
whole ship’s company as pale as paper from the captain to the cook; we
had a black squall astern on the port side and a white squall ahead to
starboard; the complication passed off innocuous, the black squall only
fetching us with its tail, and the white one slewing off somewhere else.
Twice we were a long while (days) in the close vicinity of hurricane
weather, but again luck prevailed, and we saw none of it.  These are
dangers incident to these seas and small craft.  What was an amazement,
and at the same time a powerful stroke of luck, both our masts were
rotten, and we found it out—I was going to say in time, but it was
stranger and luckier than that.  The head of the mainmast hung over so
that hands were afraid to go to the helm; and less than three weeks
before—I am not sure it was more than a fortnight—we had been nearly
twelve hours beating off the lee shore of Eimeo (or Moorea, next island
to Tahiti) in half a gale of wind with a violent head sea: she would
neither tack nor wear once, and had to be boxed off with the mainsail—you
can imagine what an ungodly show of kites we carried—and yet the mast
stood.  The very day after that, in the southern bight of Tahiti, we had
a near squeak, the wind suddenly coming calm; the reefs were close in
with, my eye! what a surf!  The pilot thought we were gone, and the
captain had a boat cleared, when a lucky squall came to our rescue.  My
wife, hearing the order given about the boats, remarked to my mother,
‘Isn’t that nice?  We shall soon be ashore!’  Thus does the female mind
unconsciously skirt along the verge of eternity.  Our voyage up here was
most disastrous—calms, squalls, head sea, waterspouts of rain, hurricane
weather all about, and we in the midst of the hurricane season, when even
the hopeful builder and owner of the yacht had pronounced these seas
unfit for her.  We ran out of food, and were quite given up for lost in
Honolulu: people had ceased to speak to Belle {137} about the _Casco_, as
a deadly subject.

But the perils of the deep were part of the programme; and though I am
very glad to be done with them for a while and comfortably ashore, where
a squall does not matter a snuff to any one, I feel pretty sure I shall
want to get to sea again ere long.  The dreadful risk I took was
financial, and double-headed.  First, I had to sink a lot of money in the
cruise, and if I didn’t get health, how was I to get it back?  I have got
health to a wonderful extent; and as I have the most interesting matter
for my book, bar accidents, I ought to get all I have laid out and a
profit.  But, second (what I own I never considered till too late), there
was the danger of collisions, of damages and heavy repairs, of
disablement, towing, and salvage; indeed, the cruise might have turned
round and cost me double.  Nor will this danger be quite over till I hear
the yacht is in San Francisco; for though I have shaken the dust of her
deck from my feet, I fear (as a point of law) she is still mine till she
gets there.

From my point of view, up to now the cruise has been a wonderful success.
I never knew the world was so amusing.  On the last voyage we had grown
so used to sea-life that no one wearied, though it lasted a full month,
except Fanny, who is always ill.  All the time our visits to the islands
have been more like dreams than realities: the people, the life, the
beachcombers, the old stories and songs I have picked up, so interesting;
the climate, the scenery, and (in some places) the women, so beautiful.
The women are handsomest in Tahiti, the men in the Marquesas; both as
fine types as can be imagined.  Lloyd reminds me, I have not told you one
characteristic incident of the cruise from a semi-naval point of view.
One night we were going ashore in Anaho Bay; the most awful noise on
deck; the breakers distinctly audible in the cabin; and there I had to
sit below, entertaining in my best style a negroid native chieftain, much
the worse for rum!  You can imagine the evening’s pleasure.

This naval report on cruising in the South Seas would be incomplete
without one other trait.  On our voyage up here I came one day into the
dining-room, the hatch in the floor was open, the ship’s boy was below
with a baler, and two of the hands were carrying buckets as for a fire;
this meant that the pumps had ceased working.

One stirring day was that in which we sighted Hawaii.  It blew fair, but
very strong; we carried jib, foresail, and mainsail, all single-reefed,
and she carried her lee rail under water and flew.  The swell, the
heaviest I have ever been out in—I tried in vain to estimate the height,
_at least_ fifteen feet—came tearing after us about a point and a half
off the wind.  We had the best hand—old Louis—at the wheel; and, really,
he did nobly, and had noble luck, for it never caught us once.  At times
it seemed we must have it; Louis would look over his shoulder with the
queerest look and dive down his neck into his shoulders; and then it
missed us somehow, and only sprays came over our quarter, turning the
little outside lane of deck into a mill race as deep as to the cockpit
coamings.  I never remember anything more delightful and exciting.
Pretty soon after we were lying absolutely becalmed under the lee of
Hawaii, of which we had been warned; and the captain never confessed he
had done it on purpose, but when accused, he smiled.  Really, I suppose
he did quite right, for we stood committed to a dangerous race, and to
bring her to the wind would have been rather a heart-sickening manœuvre.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MARCEL SCHWOB


                   _Honolulu_, _Sandwich Islands_, _February_ 8_th_, 1889.

DEAR SIR,—I thank you—from the midst of such a flurry as you can imagine,
with seven months’ accumulated correspondence on my table—for your two
friendly and clever letters.  Pray write me again.  I shall be home in
May or June, and not improbably shall come to Paris in the summer.  Then
we can talk; or in the interval I may be able to write, which is to-day
out of the question.  Pray take a word from a man of crushing
occupations, and count it as a volume.  Your little _conte_ is
delightful.  Ah yes, you are right, I love the eighteenth century; and so
do you, and have not listened to its voice in vain.—The Hunted One,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                           _Honolulu_, 8_th_ _March_ 1889.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—At last I have the accounts: the Doer has done
excellently, and in the words of —, ‘I reciprocate every step of your
behaviour.’ . .  I send a letter for Bob in your care, as I don’t know
his Liverpool address, by which (for he is to show you part of it) you
will see we have got out of this adventure—or hope to have—with wonderful
fortune.  I have the retrospective horrors on me when I think of the
liabilities I incurred; but, thank God, I think I’m in port again, and I
have found one climate in which I can enjoy life.  Even Honolulu is too
cold for me; but the south isles were a heaven upon earth to a puir,
catarrhal party like Johns’one.  We think, as Tahiti is too complete a
banishment, to try Madeira.  It’s only a week from England, good
communications, and I suspect in climate and scenery not unlike our dear
islands; in people, alas! there can be no comparison.  But friends could
go, and I could come in summer, so I should not be quite cut off.

Lloyd and I have finished a story, _The Wrong Box_.  If it is not funny,
I am sure I do not know what is.  I have split over writing it.  Since I
have been here, I have been toiling like a galley slave: three numbers of
_The Master_ to rewrite, five chapters of the _Wrong Box_ to write and
rewrite, and about five hundred lines of a narrative poem to write,
rewrite, and re-rewrite.  Now I have _The Master_ waiting me for its
continuation, two numbers more; when that’s done, I shall breathe.  This
spasm of activity has been chequered with champagne parties: Happy and
Glorious, Hawaii Ponoi paua: kou moi—(Native Hawaiians, dote upon your
monarch!) Hawaiian God save the King.  (In addition to my other labours,
I am learning the language with a native moonshee.)  Kalakaua is a
terrible companion; a bottle of fizz is like a glass of sherry to him, he
thinks nothing of five or six in an afternoon as a whet for dinner.  You
should see a photograph of our party after an afternoon with H. H. M.:
my! what a crew!—Yours ever affectionately,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                                _Honolulu_ [_March_ 1889].

MY DEAR JAMES,—Yes—I own up—I am untrue to friendship and (what is less,
but still considerable) to civilisation.  I am not coming home for
another year.  There it is, cold and bald, and now you won’t believe in
me at all, and serve me right (says you) and the devil take me.  But look
here, and judge me tenderly.  I have had more fun and pleasure of my life
these past months than ever before, and more health than any time in ten
long years.  And even here in Honolulu I have withered in the cold; and
this precious deep is filled with islands, which we may still visit; and
though the sea is a deathful place, I like to be there, and like squalls
(when they are over); and to draw near to a new island, I cannot say how
much I like.  In short, I take another year of this sort of life, and
mean to try to work down among the poisoned arrows, and mean (if it may
be) to come back again when the thing is through, and converse with Henry
James as heretofore; and in the meanwhile issue directions to H. J. to
write to me once more.  Let him address here at Honolulu, for my views
are vague; and if it is sent here it will follow and find me, if I am to
be found; and if I am not to be found the man James will have done his
duty, and we shall be at the bottom of the sea, where no post-office
clerk can be expected to discover us, or languishing on a coral island,
the philosophic drudges of some barbarian potentate: perchance, of an
American Missionary.  My wife has just sent to Mrs. Sitwell a translation
(_tant bien que mal_) of a letter I have had from my chief friend in this
part of the world: go and see her, and get a hearing of it; it will do
you good; it is a better method of correspondence than even Henry
James’s. {141}  I jest, but seriously it is a strange thing for a tough,
sick, middle-aged scrivener like R. L. S. to receive a letter so
conceived from a man fifty years old, a leading politician, a crack
orator, and the great wit of his village: boldly say, ‘the highly popular
M.P. of Tautira.’  My nineteenth century strikes here, and lies alongside
of something beautiful and ancient.  I think the receipt of such a letter
might humble, shall I say even —? and for me, I would rather have
received it than written _Redgauntlet_ or the _Sixth Æneid_.  All told,
if my books have enabled or helped me to make this voyage, to know Rui,
and to have received such a letter, they have (in the old prefatorial
expression) not been writ in vain.  It would seem from this that I have
been not so much humbled as puffed up; but, I assure you, I have in fact
been both.  A little of what that letter says is my own earning; not all,
but yet a little; and the little makes me proud, and all the rest
ashamed; and in the contrast, how much more beautiful altogether is the
ancient man than him of to-day!

Well, well, Henry James is pretty good, though he _is_ of the nineteenth
century, and that glaringly.  And to curry favour with him, I wish I
could be more explicit; but, indeed, I am still of necessity extremely
vague, and cannot tell what I am to do, nor where I am to go for some
while yet.  As soon as I am sure, you shall hear.  All are fairly
well—the wife, your countrywoman, least of all; troubles are not entirely
wanting; but on the whole we prosper, and we are all affectionately
yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                          _Honolulu_, _April_ 2_nd_, 1889.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—I am beginning to be ashamed of writing on to you without
the least acknowledgment, like a tramp; but I do not care—I am hardened;
and whatever be the cause of your silence, I mean to write till all is
blue.  I am outright ashamed of my news, which is that we are not coming
home for another year.  I cannot but hope it may continue the vast
improvement of my health: I think it good for Fanny and Lloyd; and we
have all a taste for this wandering and dangerous life.  My mother I send
home, to my relief, as this part of our cruise will be (if we can carry
it out) rather difficult in places.  Here is the idea: about the middle
of June (unless the Boston Board objects) we sail from Honolulu in the
missionary ship (barquentine auxiliary steamer) _Morning Star_: she takes
us through the Gilberts and Marshalls, and drops us (this is my great
idea) on Ponape, one of the volcanic islands of the Carolines.  Here we
stay marooned among a doubtful population, with a Spanish vice-governor
and five native kings, and a sprinkling of missionaries all at
loggerheads, on the chance of fetching a passage to Sydney in a trader, a
labour ship, or (maybe, but this appears too bright) a ship of war.  If
we can’t get the _Morning Star_ (and the Board has many reasons that I
can see for refusing its permission) I mean to try to fetch Fiji, hire a
schooner there, do the Fijis and Friendlies, hit the course of the
_Richmond_ at Tonga Tabu, make back by Tahiti, and so to S. F., and home:
perhaps in June 1890.  For the latter part of the cruise will likely be
the same in either case.  You can see for yourself how much variety and
adventure this promises, and that it is not devoid of danger at the best;
but if we can pull it off in safety, gives me a fine book of travel, and
Lloyd a fine lecture and diorama, which should vastly better our
finances.

I feel as if I were untrue to friendship; believe me, Colvin, when I look
forward to this absence of another year, my conscience sinks at thought
of the Monument; but I think you will pardon me if you consider how much
this tropical weather mends my health.  Remember me as I was at home, and
think of me sea-bathing and walking about, as jolly as a sandboy: you
will own the temptation is strong; and as the scheme, bar fatal
accidents, is bound to pay into the bargain, sooner or later, it seems it
would be madness to come home now, with an imperfect book, no
illustrations to speak of, no diorama, and perhaps fall sick again by
autumn.  I do not think I delude myself when I say the tendency to
catarrh has visibly diminished.

It is a singular tiring that as I was packing up old papers ere I left
Skerryvore, I came on the prophecies of a drunken Highland sibyl, when I
was seventeen.  She said I was to be very happy, to visit America, and
_to be much upon the sea_.  It seems as if it were coming true with a
vengeance.  Also, do you remember my strong, old, rooted belief that I
shall die by drowning?  I don’t want that to come true, though it is an
easy death; but it occurs to me oddly, with these long chances in front.
I cannot say why I like the sea; no man is more cynically and constantly
alive to its perils; I regard it as the highest form of gambling; and yet
I love the sea as much as I hate gambling.  Fine, clean emotions; a world
all and always beautiful; air better than wine; interest unflagging;
there is upon the whole no better life.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                               [_Honolulu_, _April_ 1889.]

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—This is to announce the most prodigious change of
programme.  I have seen so much of the South Seas that I desire to see
more, and I get so much health here that I dread a return to our vile
climates.  I have applied accordingly to the missionary folk to let me go
round in the _Morning Star_; and if the Boston Board should refuse, I
shall get somehow to Fiji, hire a trading schooner, and see the Fijis and
Friendlies and Samoa.  He would be a South Seayer, Mr. Burlingame.  Of
course, if I go in the _Morning Star_, I see all the eastern (or
western?) islands.

Before I sail, I shall make out to let you have the last of _The Master_:
though I tell you it sticks!—and I hope to have had some proofs forbye,
of the verses anyway.  And now to business.

I want (if you can find them) in the British sixpenny edition, if not, in
some equally compact and portable shape—Seaside Library, for instance—the
Waverley Novels entire, or as entire as you can get ’em, and the
following of Marryat: _Phantom Ship_, _Peter Simple_, _Percival Keene_,
_Privateersman_, _Children of the New Forest_, _Frank Mildmay_, _Newton
Forster_, _Dog Fiend_ (_Snarleyyow_).  Also _Midshipman Easy_,
_Kingsburn_, Carlyle’s _French Revolution_, Motley’s _Dutch Republic_,
Lang’s _Letters on Literature_, a complete set of my works, _Jenkin_, in
duplicate; also _Familiar Studies_, ditto.

I have to thank you for the accounts, which are satisfactory indeed, and
for the cheque for $1000.  Another account will have come and gone before
I see you.  I hope it will be equally roseate in colour.  I am quite
worked out, and this cursed end of _The Master_ hangs over me like the
arm of the gallows; but it is always darkest before dawn, and no doubt
the clouds will soon rise; but it is a difficult thing to write, above
all in Mackellarese; and I cannot yet see my way clear.  If I pull this
off, _The Master_ will be a pretty good novel or I am the more deceived;
and even if I don’t pull it off, it’ll still have some stuff in it.

We shall remain here until the middle of June anyway; but my mother
leaves for Europe early in May.  Hence our mail should continue to come
here; but not hers.  I will let you know my next address, which will
probably be Sydney.  If we get on the _Morning Star_, I propose at
present to get marooned on Ponape, and take my chance of getting a
passage to Australia.  It will leave times and seasons mighty vague, and
the cruise is risky; but I shall know something of the South Seas when it
is done, or else the South Seas will contain all there is of me.  It
should give me a fine book of travels, anyway.

Low will probably come and ask some dollars of you.  Pray let him have
them, they are for outfit.  O, another complete set of my books should go
to Captain A. H. Otis, care of Dr. Merritt, Yacht _Casco_, Oakland, Cal.
In haste,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MISS ADELAIDE BOODLE


                                          _Honolulu_, _April_ 6_th_, 1889.

MY DEAR MISS BOODLE,—Nobody writes a better letter than my Gamekeeper: so
gay, so pleasant, so engagingly particular, answering (by some delicate
instinct) all the questions she suggests.  It is a shame you should get
such a poor return as I can make, from a mind essentially and originally
incapable of the art epistolary.  I would let the paper-cutter take my
place; but I am sorry to say the little wooden seaman did after the
manner of seamen, and deserted in the Societies.  The place he seems to
have stayed at—seems, for his absence was not observed till we were near
the Equator—was Tautira, and, I assure you, he displayed good taste,
Tautira being as ‘nigh hand heaven’ as a paper-cutter or anybody has a
right to expect.

I think all our friends will be very angry with us, and I give the
grounds of their probable displeasure bluntly—we are not coming home for
another year.  My mother returns next month.  Fanny, Lloyd, and I push on
again among the islands on a trading schooner, the _Equator_—first for
the Gilbert group, which we shall have an opportunity to explore
thoroughly; then, if occasion serve, to the Marshalls and Carolines; and
if occasion (or money) fail, to Samoa, and back to Tahiti.  I own we are
deserters, but we have excuses.  You cannot conceive how these climates
agree with the wretched house-plant of Skerryvore: he wonders to find
himself sea-bathing, and cutting about the world loose, like a grown-up
person.  They agree with Fanny too, who does not suffer from her
rheumatism, and with Lloyd also.  And the interest of the islands is
endless; and the sea, though I own it is a fearsome place, is very
delightful.  We had applied for places in the American missionary ship,
the _Morning Star_, but this trading schooner is a far preferable idea,
giving us more time and a thousandfold more liberty; so we determined to
cut off the missionaries with a shilling.

The Sandwich Islands do not interest us very much; we live here,
oppressed with civilisation, and look for good things in the future.  But
it would surprise you if you came out to-night from Honolulu (all shining
with electric lights, and all in a bustle from the arrival of the mail,
which is to carry you these lines) and crossed the long wooden causeway
along the beach, and came out on the road through Kapiolani park, and
seeing a gate in the palings, with a tub of gold-fish by the wayside,
entered casually in.  The buildings stand in three groups by the edge of
the beach, where an angry little spitfire sea continually spirts and
thrashes with impotent irascibility, the big seas breaking further out
upon the reef.  The first is a small house, with a very large summer
parlour, or _lanai_, as they call it here, roofed, but practically open.
There you will find the lamps burning and the family sitting about the
table, dinner just done: my mother, my wife, Lloyd, Belle, my wife’s
daughter, Austin her child, and to-night (by way of rarity) a guest.  All
about the walls our South Sea curiosities, war clubs, idols, pearl
shells, stone axes, etc.; and the walls are only a small part of a lanai,
the rest being glazed or latticed windows, or mere open space.  You will
see there no sign of the Squire, however; and being a person of a humane
disposition, you will only glance in over the balcony railing at the
merry-makers in the summer parlour, and proceed further afield after the
Exile.  You look round, there is beautiful green turf, many trees of an
outlandish sort that drop thorns—look out if your feet are bare; but I
beg your pardon, you have not been long enough in the South Seas—and many
oleanders in full flower.  The next group of buildings is ramshackle, and
quite dark; you make out a coach-house door, and look in—only some
cocoanuts; you try round to the left and come to the sea front, where
Venus and the moon are making luminous tracks on the water, and a great
swell rolls and shines on the outer reef; and here is another door—all
these places open from the outside—and you go in, and find photography,
tubs of water, negatives steeping, a tap, and a chair and an inkbottle,
where my wife is supposed to write; round a little further, a third door,
entering which you find a picture upon the easel and a table sticky with
paints; a fourth door admits you to a sort of court, where there is a hen
sitting—I believe on a fallacious egg.  No sign of the Squire in all
this.  But right opposite the studio door you have observed a third
little house, from whose open door lamplight streams and makes hay of the
strong moonlight shadows.  You had supposed it made no part of the
grounds, for a fence runs round it lined with oleander; but as the Squire
is nowhere else, is it not just possible he may be here?  It is a grim
little wooden shanty; cobwebs bedeck it; friendly mice inhabit its
recesses; the mailed cockroach walks upon the wall; so also, I regret to
say, the scorpion.  Herein are two pallet beds, two mosquito curtains,
strung to the pitch-boards of the roof, two tables laden with books and
manuscripts, three chairs, and, in one of the beds, the Squire busy
writing to yourself, as it chances, and just at this moment somewhat
bitten by mosquitoes.  He has just set fire to the insect powder, and
will be all right in no time; but just now he contemplates large white
blisters, and would like to scratch them, but knows better.  The house is
not bare; it has been inhabited by Kanakas, and—you know what children
are!—the bare wood walls are pasted over with pages from the _Graphic_,
_Harper’s Weekly_, etc.  The floor is matted, and I am bound to say the
matting is filthy.  There are two windows and two doors, one of which is
condemned; on the panels of that last a sheet of paper is pinned up, and
covered with writing.  I cull a few plums:—

    ‘A duck-hammock for each person.

    A patent organ like the commandant’s at Taiohae.

    Cheap and bad cigars for presents.

    Revolvers.

    Permanganate of potass.

    Liniment for the head and sulphur.

    Fine tooth-comb.’

What do you think this is?  Simply life in the South Seas foreshortened.
These are a few of our desiderata for the next trip, which we jot down as
they occur.

There, I have really done my best and tried to send something like a
letter—one letter in return for all your dozens.  Pray remember us all to
yourself, Mrs. Boodle, and the rest of your house.  I do hope your mother
will be better when this comes.  I shall write and give you a new address
when I have made up my mind as to the most probable, and I do beg you
will continue to write from time to time and give us airs from home.
To-morrow—think of it—I must be off by a quarter to eight to drive in to
the palace and breakfast with his Hawaiian Majesty at 8.30: I shall be
dead indeed.  Please give my news to Scott, I trust he is better; give
him my warm regards.  To you we all send all kinds of things, and I am
the absentee Squire,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                                 _Honolulu_, _April_ 1889.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—As usual, your letter is as good as a cordial, and I
thank you for it, and all your care, kindness, and generous and
thoughtful friendship, from my heart.  I was truly glad to hear a word of
Colvin, whose long silence has terrified me; and glad to hear that you
condoned the notion of my staying longer in the South Seas, for I have
decided in that sense.  The first idea was to go in the _Morning Star_,
missionary ship; but now I have found a trading schooner, the _Equator_,
which is to call for me here early in June and carry us through the
Gilberts.  What will happen then, the Lord knows.  My mother does not
accompany us: she leaves here for home early in May, and you will hear of
us from her; but not, I imagine, anything more definite.  We shall get
dumped on Butaritari, and whether we manage to go on to the Marshalls and
Carolines, or whether we fall back on Samoa, Heaven must decide; but I
mean to fetch back into the course of the _Richmond_—(to think you don’t
know what the _Richmond_ is!—the steamer of the Eastern South Seas,
joining New Zealand, Tongatabu, the Samoas, Taheite, and Rarotonga, and
carrying by last advices sheep in the saloon!)—into the course of the
_Richmond_ and make Taheite again on the home track.  Would I like to see
the _Scots Observer_?  Wouldn’t I not?  But whaur?  I’m direckit at
space.  They have nae post offishes at the Gilberts, and as for the
Car’lines!  Ye see, Mr. Baxter, we’re no just in the punkshewal _centre_
o’ civ’lisation.  But pile them up for me, and when I’ve decided on an
address, I’ll let you ken, and ye’ll can send them stavin’ after me.—Ever
your affectionate,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                            _Honolulu_, 10_th_ _May_ 1889.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—I am appalled to gather from your last just to hand that
you have felt so much concern about the letter.  Pray dismiss it from
your mind.  But I think you scarce appreciate how disagreeable it is to
have your private affairs and private unguarded expressions getting into
print.  It would soon sicken any one of writing letters.  I have no doubt
that letter was very wisely selected, but it just shows how things crop
up.  There was a raging jealousy between the two yachts; our captain was
nearly in a fight over it.  However, no more; and whatever you think, my
dear fellow, do not suppose me angry with you or —; although I was
_annoyed at the circumstance_—a very different thing.  But it is
difficult to conduct life by letter, and I continually feel I may be
drifting into some matter of offence, in which my heart takes no part.

I must now turn to a point of business.  This new cruise of ours is
somewhat venturesome; and I think it needful to warn you not to be in a
hurry to suppose us dead.  In these ill-charted seas, it is quite on the
cards we might be cast on some unvisited, or very rarely visited, island;
that there we might lie for a long time, even years, unheard of; and yet
turn up smiling at the hinder end.  So do not let me be ‘rowpit’ till you
get some certainty we have gone to Davie Jones in a squall, or graced the
feast of some barbarian in the character of Long Pig.

I have just been a week away alone on the lee coast of Hawaii, the only
white creature in many miles, riding five and a half hours one day,
living with a native, seeing four lepers shipped off to Molokai, hearing
native causes, and giving my opinion as _amicus curiæ_ as to the
interpretation of a statute in English; a lovely week among God’s best—at
least God’s sweetest works—Polynesians.  It has bettered me greatly.  If
I could only stay there the time that remains, I could get my work done
and be happy; but the care of my family keeps me in vile Honolulu, where
I am always out of sorts, amidst heat and cold and cesspools and beastly
_haoles_. {152}  What is a haole?  You are one; and so, I am sorry to
say, am I.  After so long a dose of whites, it was a blessing to get
among Polynesians again even for a week.

Well, Charles, there are waur haoles than yoursel’, I’ll say that for ye;
and trust before I sail I shall get another letter with more about
yourself.—Ever your affectionate friend

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO W. H. LOW


                                   _Honolulu_, (_about_) 20_th_ _May_ ’89.

MY DEAR LOW,—. . . The goods have come; many daughters have done
virtuously, but thou excellest them all.—I have at length finished _The
Master_; it has been a sore cross to me; but now he is buried, his body’s
under hatches,—his soul, if there is any hell to go to, gone to hell; and
I forgive him: it is harder to forgive Burlingame for having induced me
to begin the publication, or myself for suffering the induction.—Yes, I
think Hole has done finely; it will be one of the most adequately
illustrated books of our generation; he gets the note, he tells the
story—_my_ story: I know only one failure—the Master standing on the
beach.—You must have a letter for me at Sydney—till further notice.
Remember me to Mrs. Will. H., the godlike sculptor, and any of the
faithful.  If you want to cease to be a republican, see my little
Kaiulani, as she goes through—but she is gone already.  You will die a
red, I wear the colours of that little royal maiden, _Nous allons chanter
à la ronde_, _si vous voulez_! only she is not blonde by several chalks,
though she is but a half-blood, and the wrong half Edinburgh Scots like
mysel’.  But, O Low, I love the Polynesian: this civilisation of ours is
a dingy, ungentlemanly business; it drops out too much of man, and too
much of that the very beauty of the poor beast: who has his beauties in
spite of Zola and Co.  As usual, here is a whole letter with no news: I
am a bloodless, inhuman dog; and no doubt Zola is a better
correspondent.—Long live your fine old English admiral—yours, I mean—the
U.S.A. one at Samoa; I wept tears and loved myself and mankind when I
read of him: he is not too much civilised.  And there was Gordon, too;
and there are others, beyond question.  But if you could live, the only
white folk, in a Polynesian village; and drink that warm, light _vin du
pays_ of human affection, and enjoy that simple dignity of all about
you—I will not gush, for I am now in my fortieth year, which seems highly
unjust, but there it is, Mr. Low, and the Lord enlighten your
affectionate

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. R. L. STEVENSON


                                        _Kalawao_, _Molokai_ [_May_ 1889].

DEAR FANNY,—I had a lovely sail up.  Captain Cameron and Mr. Gilfillan,
both born in the States, yet the first still with a strong Highland, and
the second still with a strong Lowland accent, were good company; the
night was warm, the victuals plain but good.  Mr. Gilfillan gave me his
berth, and I slept well, though I heard the sisters sick in the next
stateroom, poor souls.  Heavy rolling woke me in the morning; I turned in
all standing, so went right on the upper deck.  The day was on the peep
out of a low morning bank, and we were wallowing along under stupendous
cliffs.  As the lights brightened, we could see certain abutments and
buttresses on their front where wood clustered and grass grew brightly.
But the whole brow seemed quite impassable, and my heart sank at the
sight.  Two thousand feet of rock making 19° (the Captain guesses) seemed
quite beyond my powers.  However, I had come so far; and, to tell you the
truth, I was so cowed with fear and disgust that I dared not go back on
the adventure in the interests of my own self-respect.  Presently we came
up with the leper promontory: lowland, quite bare and bleak and harsh, a
little town of wooden houses, two churches, a landing-stair, all
unsightly, sour, northerly, lying athwart the sunrise, with the great
wall of the pali cutting the world out on the south.  Our lepers were
sent on the first boat, about a dozen, one poor child very horrid, one
white man, leaving a large grown family behind him in Honolulu, and then
into the second stepped the sisters and myself.  I do not know how it
would have been with me had the sisters not been there.  My horror of the
horrible is about my weakest point; but the moral loveliness at my elbow
blotted all else out; and when I found that one of them was crying, poor
soul, quietly under her veil, I cried a little myself; then I felt as
right as a trivet, only a little crushed to be there so uselessly.  I
thought it was a sin and a shame she should feel unhappy; I turned round
to her, and said something like this: ‘Ladies, God Himself is here to
give you welcome.  I’m sure it is good for me to be beside you; I hope it
will be blessed to me; I thank you for myself and the good you do me.’
It seemed to cheer her up; but indeed I had scarce said it when we were
at the landing-stairs, and there was a great crowd, hundreds of (God save
us!) pantomime masks in poor human flesh, waiting to receive the sisters
and the new patients.

Every hand was offered: I had gloves, but I had made up my mind on the
boat’s voyage _not_ to give my hand; that seemed less offensive than the
gloves.  So the sisters and I went up among that crew, and presently I
got aside (for I felt I had no business there) and set off on foot across
the promontory, carrying my wrap and the camera.  All horror was quite
gone from me: to see these dread creatures smile and look happy was
beautiful.  On my way through Kalaupapa I was exchanging cheerful
_alohas_ with the patients coming galloping over on their horses; I was
stopping to gossip at house-doors; I was happy, only ashamed of myself
that I was here for no good.  One woman was pretty, and spoke good
English, and was infinitely engaging and (in the old phrase) towardly;
she thought I was the new white patient; and when she found I was only a
visitor, a curious change came in her face and voice—the only sad thing,
morally sad, I mean—that I met that morning.  But for all that, they tell
me none want to leave.  Beyond Kalaupapa the houses became rare; dry
stone dykes, grassy, stony land, one sick pandanus; a dreary country;
from overhead in the little clinging wood shogs of the pali chirruping of
birds fell; the low sun was right in my face; the trade blew pure and
cool and delicious; I felt as right as ninepence, and stopped and chatted
with the patients whom I still met on their horses, with not the least
disgust.  About half-way over, I met the superintendent (a leper) with a
horse for me, and O, wasn’t I glad!  But the horse was one of those
curious, dogged, cranky brutes that always dully want to go somewhere
else, and my traffic with him completed my crushing fatigue.  I got to
the guest-house, an empty house with several rooms, kitchen, bath, etc.
There was no one there, and I let the horse go loose in the garden, lay
down on the bed, and fell asleep.

Dr. Swift woke me and gave me breakfast, then I came back and slept again
while he was at the dispensary, and he woke me for dinner; and I came
back and slept again, and he woke me about six for supper; and then in
about an hour I felt tired again, and came up to my solitary guest-house,
played the flageolet, and am now writing to you.  As yet, you see, I have
seen nothing of the settlement, and my crushing fatigue (though I believe
that was moral and a measure of my cowardice) and the doctor’s opinion
make me think the pali hopeless.  ‘You don’t look a strong man,’ said the
doctor; ‘but are you sound?’  I told him the truth; then he said it was
out of the question, and if I were to get up at all, I must be carried
up.  But, as it seems, men as well as horses continually fall on this
ascent: the doctor goes up with a change of clothes—it is plain that to
be carried would in itself be very fatiguing to both mind and body; and I
should then be at the beginning of thirteen miles of mountain road to be
ridden against time.  How should I come through?  I hope you will think
me right in my decision: I mean to stay, and shall not be back in
Honolulu till Saturday, June first.  You must all do the best you can to
make ready.

Dr. Swift has a wife and an infant son, beginning to toddle and run, and
they live here as composed as brick and mortar—at least the wife does, a
Kentucky German, a fine enough creature, I believe, who was quite amazed
at the sisters shedding tears!  How strange is mankind!  Gilfillan too, a
good fellow I think, and far from a stupid, kept up his hard Lowland
Scottish talk in the boat while the sister was covering her face; but I
believe he knew, and did it (partly) in embarrassment, and part perhaps
in mistaken kindness.  And that was one reason, too, why I made my speech
to them.  Partly, too, I did it, because I was ashamed to do so, and
remembered one of my golden rules, ‘When you are ashamed to speak, speak
up at once.’  But, mind you, that rule is only golden with strangers;
with your own folks, there are other considerations.  This is a strange
place to be in.  A bell has been sounded at intervals while I wrote, now
all is still but a musical humming of the sea, not unlike the sound of
telegraph wires; the night is quite cool and pitch dark, with a small
fine rain; one light over in the leper settlement, one cricket whistling
in the garden, my lamp here by my bedside, and my pen cheeping between my
inky fingers.

Next day, lovely morning, slept all night, 80° in the shade, strong,
sweet Anaho trade-wind.

                                                                    LOUIS.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                                  _Honolulu_, _June_ 1889.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—I am just home after twelve days journey to Molokai,
seven of them at the leper settlement, where I can only say that the
sight of so much courage, cheerfulness, and devotion strung me too high
to mind the infinite pity and horror of the sights.  I used to ride over
from Kalawao to Kalaupapa (about three miles across the promontory, the
cliff-wall, ivied with forest and yet inaccessible from steepness, on my
left), go to the Sisters’ home, which is a miracle of neatness, play a
game of croquet with seven leper girls (90° in the shade), got a little
old-maid meal served me by the Sisters, and ride home again, tired
enough, but not too tired.  The girls have all dolls, and love dressing
them.  You who know so many ladies delicately clad, and they who know so
many dressmakers, please make it known it would be an acceptable gift to
send scraps for doll dressmaking to the Reverend Sister Maryanne, Bishop
Home, Kalaupapa, Molokai, Hawaiian Islands.

I have seen sights that cannot be told, and heard stories that cannot be
repeated: yet I never admired my poor race so much, nor (strange as it
may seem) loved life more than in the settlement.  A horror of moral
beauty broods over the place: that’s like bad Victor Hugo, but it is the
only way I can express the sense that lived with me all these days.  And
this even though it was in great part Catholic, and my sympathies flew
never with so much difficulty as towards Catholic virtues.  The pass-book
kept with heaven stirs me to anger and laughter.  One of the sisters
calls the place ‘the ticket office to heaven.’  Well, what is the odds?
They do their darg and do it with kindness and efficiency incredible; and
we must take folk’s virtues as we find them, and love the better part.
Of old Damien, whose weaknesses and worse perhaps I heard fully, I think
only the more.  It was a European peasant: dirty, bigoted, untruthful,
unwise, tricky, but superb with generosity, residual candour and
fundamental good-humour: convince him he had done wrong (it might take
hours of insult) and he would undo what he had done and like his
corrector better.  A man, with all the grime and paltriness of mankind,
but a saint and hero all the more for that.  The place as regards scenery
is grand, gloomy, and bleak.  Mighty mountain walls descending sheer
along the whole face of the island into a sea unusually deep; the front
of the mountain ivied and furred with clinging forest, one viridescent
cliff: about half-way from east to west, the low, bare, stony promontory
edged in between the cliff and the ocean; the two little towns (Kalawao
and Kalaupapa) seated on either side of it, as bare almost as bathing
machines upon a beach; and the population—gorgons and chimaeras dire.
All this tear of the nerves I bore admirably; and the day after I got
away, rode twenty miles along the opposite coast and up into the
mountains: they call it twenty, I am doubtful of the figures: I should
guess it nearer twelve; but let me take credit for what residents allege;
and I was riding again the day after, so I need say no more about health.
Honolulu does not agree with me at all: I am always out of sorts there,
with slight headache, blood to the head, etc.  I had a good deal of work
to do and did it with miserable difficulty; and yet all the time I have
been gaining strength, as you see, which is highly encouraging.  By the
time I am done with this cruise I shall have the material for a very
singular book of travels: names of strange stories and characters,
cannibals, pirates, ancient legends, old Polynesian poetry,—never was so
generous a farrago.  I am going down now to get the story of a
shipwrecked family, who were fifteen months on an island with a murderer:
there is a specimen.  The Pacific is a strange place; the nineteenth
century only exists there in spots: all round, it is a no man’s land of
the ages, a stir-about of epochs and races, barbarisms and civilisations,
virtues and crimes.

It is good of you to let me stay longer, but if I had known how ill you
were, I should be now on my way home.  I had chartered my schooner and
made all arrangements before (at last) we got definite news.  I feel
highly guilty; I should be back to insult and worry you a little.  Our
address till further notice is to be c/o R. Towns and Co., Sydney.  That
is final: I only got the arrangement made yesterday; but you may now
publish it abroad.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO JAMES PAYN


                                  _Honolulu_, _H.I._, _June_ 13_th_, 1889.

MY DEAR JAMES PAYN,—I get sad news of you here at my offsetting for
further voyages: I wish I could say what I feel.  Sure there was never
any man less deserved this calamity; for I have heard you speak time and
again, and I remember nothing that was unkind, nothing that was untrue,
nothing that was not helpful, from your lips.  It is the ill-talkers that
should hear no more.  God knows, I know no word of consolation; but I do
feel your trouble.  You are the more open to letters now; let me talk to
you for two pages.  I have nothing but happiness to tell; and you may
bless God you are a man so sound-hearted that (even in the freshness of
your calamity) I can come to you with my own good fortune unashamed and
secure of sympathy.  It is a good thing to be a good man, whether deaf or
whether dumb; and of all our fellow-craftsmen (whom yet they count a
jealous race), I never knew one but gave you the name of honesty and
kindness: come to think of it gravely, this is better than the finest
hearing.  We are all on the march to deafness, blindness, and all
conceivable and fatal disabilities; we shall not all get there with a
report so good.  My good news is a health astonishingly reinstated.  This
climate; these voyagings; these landfalls at dawn; new islands peaking
from the morning bank; new forested harbours; new passing alarms of
squalls and surf; new interests of gentle natives,—the whole tale of my
life is better to me than any poem.

I am fresh just now from the leper settlement of Molokai, playing croquet
with seven leper girls, sitting and yarning with old, blind, leper
beachcombers in the hospital, sickened with the spectacle of abhorrent
suffering and deformation amongst the patients, touched to the heart by
the sight of lovely and effective virtues in their helpers: no stranger
time have I ever had, nor any so moving.  I do not think it a little
thing to be deaf, God knows, and God defend me from the same!—but to be a
leper, of one of the self-condemned, how much more awful! and yet there’s
a way there also.  ‘There are Molokais everywhere,’ said Mr. Dutton,
Father Damien’s dresser; you are but new landed in yours; and my dear and
kind adviser, I wish you, with all my soul, that patience and courage
which you will require.  Think of me meanwhile on a trading schooner,
bound for the Gilbert Islands, thereafter for the Marshalls, with a diet
of fish and cocoanut before me; bound on a cruise of—well, of
investigation to what islands we can reach, and to get (some day or
other) to Sydney, where a letter addressed to the care of R. Towns & Co.
will find me sooner or later; and if it contain any good news, whether of
your welfare or the courage with which you bear the contrary, will do me
good.—Yours affectionately (although so near a stranger),

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


          _Schooner_ ‘_Equator_,’ _Apaiang Lagoon_, _August_ 22_nd_, 1889.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—The missionary ship is outside the reef trying (vainly)
to get in; so I may have a chance to get a line off.  I am glad to say I
shall be home by June next for the summer, or we shall know the reason
why.  For God’s sake be well and jolly for the meeting.  I shall be, I
believe, a different character from what you have seen this long while.
This cruise is up to now a huge success, being interesting, pleasant, and
profitable.  The beachcomber is perhaps the most interesting character
here; the natives are very different, on the whole, from Polynesians:
they are moral, stand-offish (for good reasons), and protected by a dark
tongue.  It is delightful to meet the few Hawaiians (mostly missionaries)
that are dotted about, with their Italian _brio_ and their ready
friendliness.  The whites are a strange lot, many of them good, kind,
pleasant fellows; others quite the lowest I have ever seen even in the
slums of cities.  I wish I had time to narrate to you the doings and
character of three white murderers (more or less proven) I have met.
One, the only undoubted assassin of the lot, quite gained my affection in
his big home out of a wreck, with his New Hebrides wife in her savage
turban of hair and yet a perfect lady, and his three adorable little
girls in Rob Roy Macgregor dresses, dancing to the hand organ, performing
circus on the floor with startling effects of nudity, and curling up
together on a mat to sleep, three sizes, three attitudes, three Rob Roy
dresses, and six little clenched fists: the murderer meanwhile brooding
and gloating over his chicks, till your whole heart went out to him; and
yet his crime on the face of it was dark: disembowelling, in his own
house, an old man of seventy, and him drunk.

It is lunch-time, I see, and I must close up with my warmest love to you.
I wish you were here to sit upon me when required.  Ah! if you were but a
good sailor!  I will never leave the sea, I think; it is only there that
a Briton lives: my poor grandfather, it is from him I inherit the taste,
I fancy, and he was round many islands in his day; but I, please God,
shall beat him at that before the recall is sounded.  Would you be
surprised to learn that I contemplate becoming a shipowner?  I do, but it
is a secret.  Life is far better fun than people dream who fall asleep
among the chimney stacks and telegraph wires.

Love to Henry James and others near.—Ever yours, my dear fellow,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

                                * * * * *

                                _Equator Town_, _Apemama_, _October_ 1889.

No _Morning Star_ came, however; and so now I try to send this to you by
the schooner _J. L. Tiernan_.  We have been about a month ashore, camping
out in a kind of town the king set up for us: on the idea that I was
really a ‘big chief’ in England.  He dines with us sometimes, and sends
up a cook for a share of our meals when he does not come himself.  This
sounds like high living! alas, undeceive yourself.  Salt junk is the
mainstay; a low island, except for cocoanuts, is just the same as a ship
at sea: brackish water, no supplies, and very little shelter.  The king
is a great character—a thorough tyrant, very much of a gentleman, a poet,
a musician, a historian, or perhaps rather more a genealogist—it is
strange to see him lying in his house among a lot of wives (nominal
wives) writing the History of Apemama in an account-book; his description
of one of his own songs, which he sang to me himself, as ‘about
sweethearts, and trees, and the sea—and no true, all-the-same lie,’ seems
about as compendious a definition of lyric poetry as a man could ask.
Tembinoka is here the great attraction: all the rest is heat and tedium
and villainous dazzle, and yet more villainous mosquitoes.  We are like
to be here, however, many a long week before we get away, and then
whither?  A strange trade this voyaging: so vague, so bound-down, so
helpless.  Fanny has been planting some vegetables, and we have actually
onions and radishes coming up: ah, onion-despiser, were you but awhile in
a low island, how your heart would leap at sight of a coster’s barrow!  I
think I could shed tears over a dish of turnips.  No doubt we shall all
be glad to say farewell to low islands—I had near said for ever.  They
are very tame; and I begin to read up the directory, and pine for an
island with a profile, a running brook, or were it only a well among the
rocks.  The thought of a mango came to me early this morning and set my
greed on edge; but you do not know what a mango is, so—.

I have been thinking a great deal of you and the Monument of late, and
even tried to get my thoughts into a poem, hitherto without success.  God
knows how you are: I begin to weary dreadfully to see you—well, in nine
months, I hope; but that seems a long time.  I wonder what has befallen
me too, that flimsy part of me that lives (or dwindles) in the public
mind; and what has befallen _The Master_, and what kind of a Box the
Merry Box has been found.  It is odd to know nothing of all this.  We had
an old woman to do devil-work for you about a month ago, in a Chinaman’s
house on Apaiang (August 23rd or 24th).  You should have seen the crone
with a noble masculine face, like that of an old crone [_sic_], a body
like a man’s (naked all but the feathery female girdle), knotting
cocoanut leaves and muttering spells: Fanny and I, and the good captain
of the _Equator_, and the Chinaman and his native wife and sister-in-law,
all squatting on the floor about the sibyl; and a crowd of dark faces
watching from behind her shoulder (she sat right in the doorway) and
tittering aloud with strange, appalled, embarrassed laughter at each
fresh adjuration.  She informed us you were in England, not travelling
and now no longer sick; she promised us a fair wind the next day, and we
had it, so I cherish the hope she was as right about Sidney Colvin.  The
shipownering has rather petered out since I last wrote, and a good many
other plans beside.

Health?  Fanny very so-so; I pretty right upon the whole, and getting
through plenty work: I know not quite how, but it seems to me not bad and
in places funny.

South Sea Yarns:

  1. _The Wrecker_

  2. _The Pearl Fisher_

  3. _The Beachcombers_

                                                  by R. L. S. and Lloyd O.

_The Pearl Fisher_, part done, lies in Sydney.  It is _The Wrecker_ we
are now engaged upon: strange ways of life, I think, they set forth:
things that I can scarce touch upon, or even not at all, in my travel
book; and the yarns are good, I do believe.  _The Pearl Fisher_ is for
the _New York Ledger_: the yarn is a kind of Monte Cristo one.  _The
Wrecker_ is the least good as a story, I think; but the characters seem
to me good.  _The Beachcombers_ is more sentimental.  These three scarce
touch the outskirts of the life we have been viewing; a hot-bed of
strange characters and incidents: Lord, how different from Europe or the
Pallid States!  Farewell.  Heaven knows when this will get to you.  I
burn to be in Sydney and have news.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                  _Schooner_ ‘_Equator_,’ _at sea_. 190 _miles off Samoa_.
                                          _Monday_, _December_ 2_nd_, 1889

MY DEAR COLVIN,—We are just nearing the end of our long cruise.  Rain,
calms, squalls, bang—there’s the foretopmast gone; rain, calm, squalls,
away with the staysail; more rain, more calm, more squalls; a prodigious
heavy sea all the time, and the _Equator_ staggering and hovering like a
swallow in a storm; and the cabin, a great square, crowded with wet human
beings, and the rain avalanching on the deck, and the leaks dripping
everywhere: Fanny, in the midst of fifteen males, bearing up wonderfully.
But such voyages are at the best a trial.  We had one particularity:
coming down on Winslow Reef, p. d. (position doubtful): two positions in
the directory, a third (if you cared to count that) on the chart; heavy
sea running, and the night due.  The boats were cleared, bread put on
board, and we made up our packets for a boat voyage of four or five
hundred miles, and turned in, expectant of a crash.  Needless to say it
did not come, and no doubt we were far to leeward.  If we only had
twopenceworth of wind, we might be at dinner in Apia to-morrow evening;
but no such luck: here we roll, dead before a light air—and that is no
point of sailing at all for a fore and aft schooner—the sun blazing
overhead, thermometer 88°, four degrees above what I have learned to call
South Sea temperature; but for all that, land so near, and so much grief
being happily astern, we are all pretty gay on board, and have been
photographing and draught-playing and sky-larking like anything.  I am
minded to stay not very long in Samoa and confine my studies there (as
far as any one can forecast) to the history of the late war.  My book is
now practically modelled: if I can execute what is designed, there are
few better books now extant on this globe, bar the epics, and the big
tragedies, and histories, and the choice lyric poetics and a novel or
so—none.  But it is not executed yet; and let not him that putteth on his
armour, vaunt himself.  At least, nobody has had such stuff; such wild
stories, such beautiful scenes, such singular intimacies, such manners
and traditions, so incredible a mixture of the beautiful and horrible,
the savage and civilised.  I will give you here some idea of the table of
contents, which ought to make your mouth water.  I propose to call the
book _The South Seas_: it is rather a large title, but not many people
have seen more of them than I, perhaps no one—certainly no one capable of
using the material.

  _Part I_.  _General_.  ‘_Of schooners_, _islands_, _and maroons_.’
