CHAPTER              I.  Marine.
                    II.  Contraband (smuggling, barratry, labour
                         traffic).
                   III.  The Beachcomber.
                    IV.  Beachcomber stories.  i. The Murder of the
                         Chinaman.  ii. Death of a Beachcomber.  iii.
                         A Character.  iv. The Apia Blacksmith.
                     _Part II_.  _The Marquesas_.
                     V.  Anaho.  i. Arrival.  ii. Death.  iii. The
                         Tapu.  iv. Morals.  v. Hoka.
                    VI.  Tai-o-hae.  i. Arrival.  ii. The French.
                         iii. The Royal Family.  iv. Chiefless Folk.
                         v. The Catholics.  vi. Hawaiian
                         Missionaries.
                   VII.  Observations of a Long Pig.  i. Cannibalism.
                         ii. Hatiheu.  iii. Frère Michel.  iv.
                         Toahauka and Atuona.  v. The Vale of Atuona.
                         vi. Moipu.  vii. Captain Hati.
              _Part III_.  _The Dangerous Archipelago_.
                  VIII.  The Group.
                    IX.  A House to let in a Low Island.
                     X.  A Paumotuan Funeral.  i. The Funeral.  ii.
                         Tales of the Dead.
                        _Part IV_.  _Tahiti_.
                    XI.  Tautira.
                   XII.  Village Government in Tahiti.
                  XIII.  A Journey in Quest of Legends.
                   XIV.  Legends and Songs.
                    XV.  Life in Eden.
                   XVI.  Note on the French Regimen.
                   _Part V_.  _The Eight Islands_.
                  XVII.  A Note on Missions.
                 XVIII.  The Kona Coast of Hawaii.  i. Hookena.  ii.
                         A Ride in the Forest.  iii. A Law Case.  iv.
                         The City of Refuge.  v. The Lepers.
                   XIX.  Molokai.  i. A Week in the Precinct.  ii.
                         History of the Leper Settlement.  iii. The
                         Mokolii.  iv. The Free Island.
                     _Part VI_.  _The Gilberts_.
                    XX.  The Group.  ii. Position of Woman.  iii. The
                         Missions.  iv. Devilwork.  v. Republics.
                   XXI.  Rule and Misrule on Makin.  i. Butaritari,
                         its King and Court.  ii. History of Three
                         Kings.  iii. The Drink Question.
                  XXII.  A Butaritarian Festival.
                 XXIII.  The King of Apemama.  i. First Impressions.
                         ii. Equator Town and the Palace.  iii. The
                         Three Corselets.
                        _Part VII_.  _Samoa_.
                    which I have not yet reached.

Even as so sketched it makes sixty chapters, not less than 300 _Cornhill_
pages; and I suspect not much under 500.  Samoa has yet to be accounted
for: I think it will be all history, and I shall work in observations on
Samoan manners, under the similar heads in other Polynesian islands.  It
is still possible, though unlikely, that I may add a passing visit to
Fiji or Tonga, or even both; but I am growing impatient to see yourself,
and I do not want to be later than June of coming to England.  Anyway,
you see it will be a large work, and as it will be copiously illustrated,
the Lord knows what it will cost.  We shall return, God willing, by
Sydney, Ceylon, Suez and, I guess, Marseilles the many-masted (copyright
epithet).  I shall likely pause a day or two in Paris, but all that is
too far ahead—although now it begins to look near—so near, and I can hear
the rattle of the hansom up Endell Street, and see the gates swing back,
and feel myself jump out upon the Monument steps—Hosanna!—home again.  My
dear fellow, now that my father is done with his troubles, and 17 Heriot
Row no more than a mere shell, you and that gaunt old Monument in
Bloomsbury are all that I have in view when I use the word home; some
passing thoughts there may be of the rooms at Skerryvore, and the
black-birds in the chine on a May morning; but the essence is S. C. and
the Museum.  Suppose, by some damned accident, you were no more: well, I
should return just the same, because of my mother and Lloyd, whom I now
think to send to Cambridge; but all the spring would have gone out of me,
and ninety per cent. of the attraction lost.  I will copy for you here a
copy of verses made in Apemama.

   I heard the pulse of the besieging sea
   Throb far away all night.  I heard the wind
   Fly crying, and convulse tumultuous palms.
   I rose and strolled.  The isle was all bright sand,
   And flailing fans and shadows of the palm:
   The heaven all moon, and wind, and the blind vault—
   The keenest planet slain, for Venus slept.
   The King, my neighbour, with his host of wives,
   Slept in the precinct of the palisade:
   Where single, in the wind, under the moon,
   Among the slumbering cabins, blazed a fire,
   Sole street-lamp and the only sentinel.
      To other lands and nights my fancy turned,
   To London first, and chiefly to your house,
   The many-pillared and the well-beloved.
   There yearning fancy lighted; there again
   In the upper room I lay and heard far off
   The unsleeping city murmur like a shell;
   The muffled tramp of the Museum guard
   Once more went by me; I beheld again
   Lamps vainly brighten the dispeopled street;
   Again I longed for the returning morn,
   The awaking traffic, the bestirring birds,
   The consentaneous trill of tiny song
   That weaves round monumental cornices
   A passing charm of beauty: most of all,
   For your light foot I wearied, and your knock
   That was the glad réveillé of my day.
      Lo, now, when to your task in the great house
   At morning through the portico you pass,
   One moment glance where, by the pillared wall,
   Far-voyaging island gods, begrimed with smoke,
   Sit now unworshipped, the rude monument
   Of faiths forgot and races undivined;
   Sit now disconsolate, remembering well
   The priest, the victim, and the songful crowd,
   The blaze of the blue noon, and that huge voice
   Incessant, of the breakers on the shore.
   As far as these from their ancestral shrine,
   So far, so foreign, your divided friends
   Wander, estranged in body, not in mind.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


     _Schooner_ ‘_Equator_,’ _at sea_, _Wednesday_, 4_th_ _December_ 1889.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—We are now about to rise, like whales, from this long
dive, and I make ready a communication which is to go to you by the first
mail from Samoa.  How long we shall stay in that group I cannot forecast;
but it will be best still to address at Sydney, where I trust, when I
shall arrive, perhaps in one month from now, more probably in two or
three, to find all news.

_Business_.—Will you be likely to have a space in the Magazine for a
serial story, which should be, ready, I believe, by April, at latest by
autumn?  It is called _The Wrecker_; and in book form will appear as
number 1 of South Sea Yarns by R. L. S. and Lloyd Osbourne.  Here is the
table as far as fully conceived, and indeed executed. {170} . . .

The story is founded on fact, the mystery I really believe to be
insoluble; the purchase of a wreck has never been handled before, no more
has San Francisco.  These seem all elements of success.  There is,
besides, a character, Jim Pinkerton, of the advertising American, on whom
we build a good deal; and some sketches of the American merchant marine,
opium smuggling in Honolulu, etc.  It should run to (about) three hundred
pages of my MS.  I would like to know if this tale smiles upon you, if
you will have a vacancy, and what you will be willing to pay.  It will of
course be copyright in both the States and England.  I am a little
anxious to have it tried serially, as it tests the interest of the
mystery.

_Pleasure_.—We have had a fine time in the Gilbert group, though four
months on low islands, which involves low diet, is a largish order; and
my wife is rather down.  I am myself, up to now, a pillar of health,
though our long and vile voyage of calms, squalls, cataracts of rain,
sails carried away, foretopmast lost, boats cleared and packets made on
the approach of a p. d. reef, etc., has cured me of salt brine, and
filled me with a longing for beef steak and mangoes not to be depicted.
The interest has been immense.  Old King Tembinoka of Apemama, the
Napoleon of the group, poet, tyrant, altogether a man of mark, gave me
the woven corselets of his grandfather, his father and his uncle, and,
what pleased me more, told me their singular story, then all manner of
strange tales, facts and experiences for my South Sea book, which should
be a Tearer, Mr. Burlingame: no one at least has had such stuff.

We are now engaged in the hell of a dead calm, the heat is cruel—it is
the only time when I suffer from heat: I have nothing on but a pair of
serge trousers, and a singlet without sleeves of Oxford gauze—O, yes, and
a red sash about my waist; and yet as I sit here in the cabin, sweat
streams from me.  The rest are on deck under a bit of awning; we are not
much above a hundred miles from port, and we might as well be in
Kamschatka.  However, I should be honest: this is the first calm I have
endured without the added bane of a heavy swell, and the intoxicated
blue-bottle wallowings and knockings of the helpless ship.

I wonder how you liked the end of _The Master_; that was the hardest job
I ever had to do; did I do it?

My wife begs to be remembered to yourself and Mrs. Burlingame.  Remember
all of us to all friends, particularly Low, in case I don’t get a word
through for him.—I am, yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                               _Samoa_, [_December_ 1889].

MY DEAR BAXTER,—. . . I cannot return until I have seen either Tonga or
Fiji or both: and I must not leave here till I have finished my
collections on the war—a very interesting bit of history, the truth often
very hard to come at, and the search (for me) much complicated by the
German tongue, from the use of which I have desisted (I suppose) these
fifteen years.  The last two days I have been mugging with a dictionary
from five to six hours a day; besides this, I have to call upon, keep
sweet, and judiciously interview all sorts of persons—English, American,
German, and Samoan.  It makes a hard life; above all, as after every
interview I have to come and get my notes straight on the nail.  I
believe I should have got my facts before the end of January, when I
shall make our Tonga or Fiji.  I am down right in the hurricane season;
but they had so bad a one last year, I don’t imagine there will be much
of an edition this.  Say that I get to Sydney some time in April, and I
shall have done well, and be in a position to write a very singular and
interesting book, or rather two; for I shall begin, I think, with a
separate opuscule on the Samoan Trouble, about as long as _Kidnapped_,
not very interesting, but valuable—and a thing proper to be done.  And
then, hey! for the big South Sea Book: a devil of a big one, and full of
the finest sport.

This morning as I was going along to my breakfast a little before seven,
reading a number of _Blackwood’s Magazine_, I was startled by a soft
_talofa_, _alii_ (note for my mother: they are quite courteous here in
the European style, quite unlike Tahiti), right in my ear: it was Mataafa
coming from early mass in his white coat and white linen kilt, with three
fellows behind him.  Mataafa is the nearest thing to a hero in my
history, and really a fine fellow; plenty sense, and the most dignified,
quiet, gentle manners.  Talking of _Blackwood_—a file of which I was
lucky enough to find here in the lawyer’s—Mrs. Oliphant seems in a
staggering state: from the _Wrong Box_ to _The Master_ I scarce recognise
either my critic or myself.  I gather that _The Master_ should do well,
and at least that notice is agreeable reading.  I expect to be home in
June: you will have gathered that I am pretty well.  In addition to my
labours, I suppose I walk five or six miles a day, and almost every day I
ride up and see Fanny and Lloyd, who are in a house in the bush with Ah
Fu.  I live in Apia for history’s sake with Moors, an American trader.
Day before yesterday I was arrested and fined for riding fast in the
street, which made my blood bitter, as the wife of the manager of the
German Firm has twice almost ridden me down, and there seems none to say
her nay.  The Germans have behaved pretty badly here, but not in all ways
so ill as you may have gathered: they were doubtless much provoked; and
if the insane Knappe had not appeared upon the scene, might have got out
of the muddle with dignity.  I write along without rhyme or reason, as
things occur to me.

I hope from my outcries about printing you do not think I want you to
keep my news or letters in a Blue Beard closet.  I like all friends to
hear of me; they all should if I had ninety hours in the day, and
strength for all of them; but you must have gathered how hard worked I
am, and you will understand I go to bed a pretty tired man.

                                                29_th_ _December_, [1889].

To-morrow (Monday, I won’t swear to my day of the month; this is the
Sunday between Christmas and New Year) I go up the coast with Mr. Clarke,
one of the London Society missionaries, in a boat to examine schools, see
Tamasese, etc.  Lloyd comes to photograph.  Pray Heaven we have good
weather; this is the rainy season; we shall be gone four or five days;
and if the rain keep off, I shall be glad of the change; if it rain, it
will be beastly.  This explains still further how hard pressed I am, as
the mail will be gone ere I return, and I have thus lost the days I meant
to write in.  I have a boy, Henry, who interprets and copies for me, and
is a great nuisance.  He said he wished to come to me in order to learn
‘long expressions.’  Henry goes up along with us; and as I am not fond of
him, he may before the trip is over hear some ‘strong expressions.’  I am
writing this on the back balcony at Moors’, palms and a hill like the
hill of Kinnoull looking in at me; myself lying on the floor, and (like
the parties in Handel’s song) ‘clad in robes of virgin white’; the ink is
dreadful, the heat delicious, a fine going breeze in the palms, and from
the other side of the house the sudden angry splash and roar of the
Pacific on the reef, where the warships are still piled from last year’s
hurricane, some under water, one high and dry upon her side, the
strangest figure of a ship was ever witnessed; the narrow bay there is
full of ships; the men-of-war covered with sail after the rains, and
(especially the German ship, which is fearfully and awfully top heavy)
rolling almost yards in, in what appears to be calm water.

Samoa, Apia at least, is far less beautiful than the Marquesas or Tahiti:
a more gentle scene, gentler acclivities, a tamer face of nature; and
this much aided, for the wanderer, by the great German plantations with
their countless regular avenues of palms.  The island has beautiful
rivers, of about the bigness of our waters in the Lothians, with pleasant
pools and waterfalls and overhanging verdure, and often a great volume of
sound, so that once I thought I was passing near a mill, and it was only
the voice of the river.  I am not specially attracted by the people; but
they are courteous; the women very attractive, and dress lovely; the men
purposelike, well set up, tall, lean, and dignified.  As I write the
breeze is brisking up, doors are beginning to slam: and shutters; a
strong draught sweeps round the balcony; it looks doubtful for to-morrow.
Here I shut up.—Ever your affectionate,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO DR. SCOTT


                                  _Apia_, _Samoa_, _January_ 20_th_, 1890.

MY DEAR SCOTT,—Shameful indeed that you should not have heard of me
before!  I have now been some twenty months in the South Seas, and am (up
to date) a person whom you would scarce know.  I think nothing of long
walks and rides: I was four hours and a half gone the other day, partly
riding, partly climbing up a steep ravine.  I have stood a six months’
voyage on a copra schooner with about three months ashore on coral
atolls, which means (except for cocoanuts to drink) no change whatever
from ship’s food.  My wife suffered badly—it was too rough a business
altogether—Lloyd suffered—and, in short, I was the only one of the party
who ‘kept my end up.’

I am so pleased with this climate that I have decided to settle; have
even purchased a piece of land from three to four hundred acres, I know
not which till the survey is completed, and shall only return next summer
to wind up my affairs in England; thenceforth I mean to be a subject of
the High Commissioner.

Now you would have gone longer yet without news of your truant patient,
but that I have a medical discovery to communicate.  I find I can (almost
immediately) fight off a cold with liquid extract of coca; two or (if
obstinate) three teaspoonfuls in the day for a variable period of from
one to five days sees the cold generally to the door.  I find it at once
produces a glow, stops rigour, and though it makes one very
uncomfortable, prevents the advance of the disease.  Hearing of this
influenza, it occurred to me that this might prove remedial; and perhaps
a stronger exhibition—injections of cocaine, for instance—still better.

If on my return I find myself let in for this epidemic, which seems
highly calculated to nip me in the bud, I shall feel very much inclined
to make the experiment.  See what a gulf you may save me from if you
shall have previously made it on _anima vili_, on some less important
sufferer, and shall have found it worse than useless.

How is Miss Boodle and her family?  Greeting to your brother and all
friends in Bournemouth, yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                                 _Februar den_ 3_en_ 1890.

                                _Dampfer Lübeck zwischen Apia und Sydney_.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—I have got one delightful letter from you, and heard
from my mother of your kindness in going to see her.  Thank you for that:
you can in no way more touch and serve me. . . . Ay, ay, it is sad to
sell 17; sad and fine were the old days: when I was away in Apemama, I
wrote two copies of verse about Edinburgh and the past, so ink black, so
golden bright.  I will send them, if I can find them, for they will say
something to you, and indeed one is more than half addressed to you.
This is it—

                            TO MY OLD COMRADES

   Do you remember—can we e’er forget?—
   How, in the coiled perplexities of youth,
   In our wild climate, in our scowling town,
   We gloomed and shivered, sorrowed, sobbed, and feared?
   The belching winter wind, the missile rain,
   The rare and welcome silence of the snows,
   The laggard morn, the haggard day, the night,
   The grimy spell of the nocturnal town,
   Do you remember?—Ah, could one forget!
   As when the fevered sick that all night long
   Listed the wind intone, and hear at last
   The ever-welcome voice of the chanticleer
   Sing in the bitter hour before the dawn,—
   With sudden ardour, these desire the day:

(Here a squall sends all flying.)

   So sang in the gloom of youth the bird of hope;
   So we, exulting, hearkened and desired.
   For lo! as in the palace porch of life
   We huddled with chimeras, from within—
   How sweet to hear!—the music swelled and fell,
   And through the breach of the revolving doors
   What dreams of splendour blinded us and fled!
   I have since then contended and rejoiced;
   Amid the glories of the house of life
   Profoundly entered, and the shrine beheld:
   Yet when the lamp from my expiring eyes
   Shall dwindle and recede, the voice of love
   Fall insignificant on my closing ears,
   What sound shall come but the old cry of the wind
   In our inclement city? what return
   But the image of the emptiness of youth,
   Filled with the sound of footsteps and that voice
   Of discontent and rapture and despair?
   So, as in darkness, from the magic lamp,
   The momentary pictures gleam and fade
   And perish, and the night resurges—these
   Shall I remember, and then all forget.

They’re pretty second-rate, but felt.  I can’t be bothered to copy the
other.

I have bought 314½ acres of beautiful land in the bush behind Apia; when
we get the house built, the garden laid, and cattle in the place, it will
be something to fall back on for shelter and food; and if the island
could stumble into political quiet, it is conceivable it might even bring
a little income. . . . We range from 600 to 1500 feet, have five streams,
waterfalls, precipices, profound ravines, rich tablelands, fifty head of
cattle on the ground (if any one could catch them), a great view of
forest, sea, mountains, the warships in the haven: really a noble place.
Some day you are to take a long holiday and come and see us: it has been
all planned.

With all these irons in the fire, and cloudy prospects, you may be sure I
was pleased to hear a good account of business.  I believed _The Master_
was a sure card: I wonder why Henley thinks it grimy; grim it is, God
knows, but sure not grimy, else I am the more deceived.  I am sorry he
did not care for it; I place it on the line with _Kidnapped_ myself.
We’ll see as time goes on whether it goes above or falls below.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


               _SS. Lübeck_, [_between Apia and Sydney_, _February_] 1890.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—I desire nothing better than to continue my relation
with the Magazine, to which it pleases me to hear I have been useful.
The only thing I have ready is the enclosed barbaric piece.  As soon as I
have arrived in Sydney I shall send you some photographs, a portrait of
Tembinoka, perhaps a view of the palace or of the ‘matted men’ at their
singing; also T.’s flag, which my wife designed for him: in a word, what
I can do best for you.  It will be thus a foretaste of my book of
travels.  I shall ask you to let me have, if I wish it, the use of the
plates made, and to make up a little tract of the verses and
illustrations, of which you might send six copies to H. M. Tembinoka,
King of Apemama _via_ Butaritari, Gilbert Islands.  It might be best to
send it by Crawford and Co., S. F.  There is no postal service; and
schooners must take it, how they may and when.  Perhaps some such note as
this might be prefixed:

_At my departure from the island of Apemama_, _for which you will look in
vain in most atlases_, _the king and I agreed_, _since we both set up to
be in the poetical way_, _that we should celebrate our separation in
verse_.  _Whether or not his majesty has been true to his bargain_, _the
laggard posts of the Pacific may perhaps inform me in six months_,
_perhaps not before a year_.  _The following lines represent my part of
the contract_, _and it is hoped_, _by their pictures of strange manners_,
_they may entertain a civilised audience_.  _Nothing throughout has been
invented or exaggerated_; _the lady herein referred to as the author’s
Muse_, _has confined herself to stringing into rhyme facts and legends
that I saw or heard during two months’ residence upon the island_.

                                                                  R. L. S.

You will have received from me a letter about _The Wrecker_.  No doubt it
is a new experiment for me, being disguised so much as a study of
manners, and the interest turning on a mystery of the detective sort, I
think there need be no hesitation about beginning it in the fall of the
year.  Lloyd has nearly finished his part, and I shall hope to send you
very soon the MS. of about the first four-sevenths.  At the same time, I
have been employing myself in Samoa, collecting facts about the recent
war; and I propose to write almost at once and to publish shortly a small
volume, called I know not what—the War In Samoa, the Samoa Trouble, an
Island War, the War of the Three Consuls, I know not—perhaps you can
suggest.  It was meant to be a part of my travel book; but material has
accumulated on my hands until I see myself forced into volume form, and I
hope it may be of use, if it come soon.  I have a few photographs of the
war, which will do for illustrations.  It is conceivable you might wish
to handle this in the Magazine, although I am inclined to think you
won’t, and to agree with you.  But if you think otherwise, there it is.
The travel letters (fifty of them) are already contracted for in papers;
these I was quite bound to let M’Clure handle, as the idea was of his
suggestion, and I always felt a little sore as to one trick I played him
in the matter of the end-papers.  The war-volume will contain some very
interesting and picturesque details: more I can’t promise for it.  Of
course the fifty newspaper letters will be simply patches chosen from the
travel volume (or volumes) as it gets written.

But you see I have in hand:—

Say half done.                      1. _The Wrecker_.
Lloyd’s copy half done, mine not    2. _The Pearl Fisher_ (a novel
touched.                            promised to the _Ledger_, and
                                    which will form, when it comes in
                                    book form, No. 2 of our _South
                                    Sea Yarns_).
Not begun, but all material         3. _The War Volume_.
ready.
Ditto.                              4. _The Big Travel Book_, which
                                    includes the letters.
You know how they stand.            5. _The Ballads_.

_Excusez du peu_!  And you see what madness it would be to make any fresh
engagement.  At the same time, you have _The Wrecker_ and the _War
Volume_, if you like either—or both—to keep my name in the Magazine.

It begins to look as if I should not be able to get any more ballads done
this somewhile.  I know the book would sell better if it were all
ballads; and yet I am growing half tempted to fill up with some other
verses.  A good few are connected with my voyage, such as the ‘Home of
Tembinoka’ sent herewith, and would have a sort of slight affinity to the
_South Sea Ballads_.  You might tell me how that strikes a stranger.

In all this, my real interest is with the travel volume, which ought to
be of a really extraordinary interest.

I am sending you ‘Tembinoka’ as he stands; but there are parts of him
that I hope to better, particularly in stanzas III. and II.  I scarce
feel intelligent enough to try just now; and I thought at any rate you
had better see it, set it up if you think well, and let me have a proof;
so, at least, we shall get the bulk of it straight.  I have spared you
Teñkoruti, Tenbaitake, Tembinatake, and other barbarous names, because I
thought the dentists in the States had work enough without my assistance;
but my chiefs name is TEMBINOKA, pronounced, according to the present
quite modern habit in the Gilberts, Tembinok’.  Compare in the margin
Tengkorootch; a singular new trick, setting at defiance all South Sea
analogy, for nowhere else do they show even the ability, far less the
will, to end a word upon a consonant.  Loia is Lloyd’s name, ship becomes
shipé, teapot, tipoté, etc.  Our admirable friend Herman Melville, of
whom, since I could judge, I have thought more than ever, had no ear for
languages whatever: his Hapar tribe should be Hapaa, etc.

But this is of no interest to you: suffice it, you see how I am as usual
up to the neck in projects, and really all likely bairns this time.  When
will this activity cease?  Too soon for me, I dare to say.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO JAMES PAYN


                                 _February_ 4_th_, 1890, _SS._ ‘_Lübeck_.’

MY DEAR JAMES PAYN,—In virtue of confessions in your last, you would at
the present moment, if you were along of me, be sick; and I will ask you
to receive that as an excuse for my hand of write.  Excuse a plain seaman
if he regards with scorn the likes of you pore land-lubbers ashore now.
(Reference to nautical ditty.)  Which I may however be allowed to add
that when eight months’ mail was laid by my side one evening in Apia, and
my wife and I sat up the most of the night to peruse the same—(precious
indisposed we were next day in consequence)—no letter, out of so many,
more appealed to our hearts than one from the pore, stick-in-the-mud,
land-lubbering, common (or garden) Londoner, James Payn.  Thank you for
it; my wife says, ‘Can’t I see him when we get back to London?’  I have
told her the thing appeared to me within the spear of practical politix.
(Why can’t I spell and write like an honest, sober, god-fearing litry
gent?  I think it’s the motion of the ship.)  Here I was interrupted to
play chess with the chief engineer; as I grow old, I prefer the ‘athletic
sport of cribbage,’ of which (I am sure I misquote) I have just been
reading in your delightful _Literary Recollections_.  How you skim along,
you and Andrew Lang (different as you are), and yet the only two who can
keep a fellow smiling every page, and ever and again laughing out loud.
I joke wi’ deeficulty, I believe; I am not funny; and when I am, Mrs.
Oliphant says I’m vulgar, and somebody else says (in Latin) that I’m a
whore, which seems harsh and even uncalled for: I shall stick to weepers;
a 5s. weeper, 2s. 6d. laugher, 1s. shocker.

My dear sir, I grow more and more idiotic; I cannot even feign sanity.
Sometime in the month of June a stalwart weather-beaten man, evidently of
seafaring antecedents, shall be observed wending his way between the
Athenæum Club and Waterloo Place.  Arrived off No. 17, he shall be
observed to bring his head sharply to the wind, and tack into the outer
haven.  ‘Captain Payn in the harbour?’—‘Ay, ay, sir.  What
ship?’—‘Barquentin R. L. S., nine hundred and odd days out from the port
of Bournemouth, homeward bound, with yarns and curiosities.’

Who was it said, ‘For God’s sake, don’t speak of it!’ about Scott and his
tears?  He knew what he was saying.  The fear of that hour is the
skeleton in all our cupboards; that hour when the pastime and the
livelihood go together; and—I am getting hard of hearing myself; a pore
young child of forty, but new come frae my Mammy, O!

Excuse these follies, and accept the expression of all my regards.—Yours
affectionately,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                              _Union Club_, _Sydney_, _March_ 7_th_, 1890.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—I did not send off the enclosed before from laziness;
having gone quite sick, and being a blooming prisoner here in the club,
and indeed in my bedroom.  I was in receipt of your letters and your
ornamental photo, and was delighted to see how well you looked, and how
reasonably well I stood. . . . I am sure I shall never come back home
except to die; I may do it, but shall always think of the move as
suicidal, unless a great change comes over me, of which as yet I see no
symptom.  This visit to Sydney has smashed me handsomely; and yet I made
myself a prisoner here in the club upon my first arrival.  This is not
encouraging for further ventures; Sydney winter—or, I might almost say,
Sydney spring, for I came when the worst was over—is so small an affair,
comparable to our June depression at home in Scotland. . . . The pipe is
right again; it was the springs that had rusted, and ought to have been
oiled.  Its voice is now that of an angel; but, Lord! here in the club I
dare not wake it!  Conceive my impatience to be in my own backwoods and
raise the sound of minstrelsy.  What pleasures are to be compared with
those of the Unvirtuous Virtuoso.—Yours ever affectionately, the
Unvirtuous Virtuoso,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                      _SS._ ‘_Janet Nicoll_,’ _off Upolu_ [_Spring_ 1890].

MY DEAREST COLVIN,—I was sharply ill at Sydney, cut off, right out of
bed, in this steamer on a fresh island cruise, and have already reaped
the benefit.  We are excellently found this time, on a spacious vessel,
with an excellent table; the captain, supercargo, our one
fellow-passenger, etc., very nice; and the charterer, Mr. Henderson, the
very man I could have chosen.  The truth is, I fear, this life is the
only one that suits me; so long as I cruise in the South Seas, I shall be
well and happy—alas, no, I do not mean that, and _absit omen_!—I mean
that, so soon as I cease from cruising, the nerves are strained, the
decline commences, and I steer slowly but surely back to bedward.  We
left Sydney, had a cruel rough passage to Auckland, for the _Janet_ is
the worst roller I was ever aboard of.  I was confined to my cabin, ports
closed, self shied out of the berth, stomach (pampered till the day I
left on a diet of perpetual egg-nogg) revolted at ship’s food and ship
eating, in a frowsy bunk, clinging with one hand to the plate, with the
other to the glass, and using the knife and fork (except at intervals)
with the eyelid.  No matter: I picked up hand over hand.  After a day in
Auckland, we set sail again; were blown up in the main cabin with calcium
fires, as we left the bay.  Let no man say I am unscientific: when I ran,
on the alert, out of my stateroom, and found the main cabin incarnadined
with the glow of the last scene of a pantomime, I stopped dead: ‘What is
this?’ said I.  ‘This ship is on fire, I see that; but why a pantomime?’
And I stood and reasoned the point, until my head was so muddled with the
fumes that I could not find the companion.  A few seconds later, the
captain had to enter crawling on his belly, and took days to recover (if
he has recovered) from the fumes.  By singular good fortune, we got the
hose down in time and saved the ship, but Lloyd lost most of his clothes
and a great part of our photographs was destroyed.  Fanny saw the native
sailors tossing overboard a blazing trunk; she stopped them in time, and
behold, it contained my manuscripts.  Thereafter we had three (or two)
days fine weather: then got into a gale of wind, with rain and a
vexatious sea.  As we drew into our anchorage in a bight of Savage
Island, a man ashore told me afterwards the sight of the _Janet Nicoll_
made him sick; and indeed it was rough play, though nothing to the night
before.  All through this gale I worked four to six hours per diem,
spearing the ink-bottle like a flying fish, and holding my papers
together as I might.  For, of all things, what I was at was history—the
Samoan business—and I had to turn from one to another of these piles of
manuscript notes, and from one page to another in each, until I should
have found employment for the hands of Briareus.  All the same, this
history is a godsend for a voyage; I can put in time, getting events
co-ordinated and the narrative distributed, when my much-heaving numskull
would be incapable of finish or fine style.  At Savage we met the
missionary barque _John Williams_.  I tell you it was a great day for
Savage Island: the path up the cliffs was crowded with gay islandresses
(I like that feminine plural) who wrapped me in their embraces, and
picked my pockets of all my tobacco, with a manner which a touch would
have made revolting, but as it was, was simply charming, like the Golden
Age.  One pretty, little, stalwart minx, with a red flower behind her
ear, had searched me with extraordinary zeal; and when, soon after, I
missed my matches, I accused her (she still following us) of being the
thief.  After some delay, and with a subtle smile, she produced the box,
gave me _one match_, and put the rest away again.  Too tired to add
more.—Your most affectionate,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


           _S.S._ ‘_Janet Nicoll_,’ _off Peru Island_, _Kingsmills Group_,
                                                       _July_ 13_th_, ’90.

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—I am moved to write to you in the matter of the end
papers.  I am somewhat tempted to begin them again.  Follow the reasons
_pro_ and _con_:—

1st.  I must say I feel as if something in the nature of the end paper
were a desirable finish to the number, and that the substitutes of
occasional essays by occasional contributors somehow fail to fill the
bill.  Should you differ with me on this point, no more is to be said.
And what follows must be regarded as lost words.

2nd.  I am rather taken with the idea of continuing the work.  For
instance, should you have no distaste for papers of the class called
_Random Memories_, I should enjoy continuing them (of course at
intervals), and when they were done I have an idea they might make a
readable book.  On the other hand, I believe a greater freedom of choice
might be taken, the subjects more varied and more briefly treated, in
somewhat approaching the manner of Andrew Lang in the _Sign of the Ship_;
it being well understood that the broken sticks {187} method is one not
very suitable (as Colonel Burke would say) to my genius, and not very
likely to be pushed far in my practice.  Upon this point I wish you to
condense your massive brain.  In the last lot I was promised, and I
fondly expected to receive, a vast amount of assistance from intelligent
and genial correspondents.  I assure you, I never had a scratch of a pen
from any one above the level of a village idiot, except once, when a lady
sowed my head full of grey hairs by announcing that she was going to
direct her life in future by my counsels.  Will the correspondents be
more copious and less irrelevant in the future?  Suppose that to be the
case, will they be of any use to me in my place of exile?  Is it possible
for a man in Samoa to be in touch with the great heart of the People?
And is it not perhaps a mere folly to attempt, from so hopeless a
distance, anything so delicate as a series of papers?  Upon these points,
perpend, and give me the results of your perpensions.

3rd.  The emolument would be agreeable to your humble servant.

I have now stated all the _pros_, and the most of the _cons_ are come in
by the way.  There follows, however, one immense Con (with a capital
‘C’), which I beg you to consider particularly.  I fear that, to be of
any use for your magazine, these papers should begin with the beginning
of a volume.  Even supposing my hands were free, this would be now
impossible for next year.  You have to consider whether, supposing you
have no other objection, it would be worth while to begin the series in
the middle of a volume, or desirable to delay the whole matter until the
beginning of another year.

Now supposing that the _cons_ have it, and you refuse my offer, let me
make another proposal, which you will be very inclined to refuse at the
first off-go, but which I really believe might in time come to something.
You know how the penny papers have their answers to correspondents.  Why
not do something of the same kind for the ‘culchawed’?  Why not get men
like Stimson, Brownell, Professor James, Goldwin Smith, and others who
will occur to you more readily than to me, to put and to answer a series
of questions of intellectual and general interest, until at last you
should have established a certain standard of matter to be discussed in
this part of the Magazine?

I want you to get me bound volumes of the Magazine from its start.  The
Lord knows I have had enough copies; where they are I know not.  A
wandering author gathers no magazines.

_The Wrecker_ is in no forrader state than in last reports.  I have
indeed got to a period when I cannot well go on until I can refresh
myself on the proofs of the beginning.  My respected collaborator, who
handles the machine which is now addressing you, has indeed carried his
labours farther, but not, I am led to understand, with what we used to
call a blessing; at least, I have been refused a sight of his latest
labours.  However, there is plenty of time ahead, and I feel no anxiety
about the tale, except that it may meet with your approval.

All this voyage I have been busy over my _Travels_, which, given a very
high temperature and the saloon of a steamer usually going before the
wind, and with the cabins in front of the engines, has come very near to
prostrating me altogether.  You will therefore understand that there are
no more poems.  I wonder whether there are already enough, and whether
you think that such a volume would be worth the publishing?  I shall hope
to find in Sydney some expression of your opinion on this point.  Living
as I do among—not the most cultured of mankind (‘splendidly educated and
perfect gentlemen when sober’)—I attach a growing importance to friendly
criticisms from yourself.

I believe that this is the most of our business.  As for my health, I got
over my cold in a fine style, but have not been very well of late.  To my
unaffected annoyance, the blood-spitting has started again.  I find the
heat of a steamer decidedly wearing and trying in these latitudes, and I
am inclined to think the superior expedition rather dearly paid for.
Still, the fact that one does not even remark the coming of a squall, nor
feel relief on its departure, is a mercy not to be acknowledged without
gratitude.  The rest of the family seem to be doing fairly well; both
seem less run down than they were on the _Equator_, and Mrs. Stevenson
very much less so.  We have now been three months away, have visited
about thirty-five islands, many of which were novel to us, and some
extremely entertaining; some also were old acquaintances, and pleasant to
revisit.  In the meantime, we have really a capital time aboard ship, in
the most pleasant and interesting society, and with (considering the
length and nature of the voyage) an excellent table.  Please remember us
all to Mr. Scribner, the young chieftain of the house, and the lady,
whose health I trust is better.  To Mrs. Burlingame we all desire to be
remembered, and I hope you will give our news to Low, St. Gaudens, Faxon,
and others of the faithful in the city.  I shall probably return to Samoa
direct, having given up all idea of returning to civilisation in the
meanwhile.  There, on my ancestral acres, which I purchased six months
ago from a blind Scots blacksmith, you will please address me until
further notice.  The name of the ancestral acres is going to be Vailima;
but as at the present moment nobody else knows the name, except myself
and the co-patentees, it will be safer, if less ambitious, to address R.
L. S., Apia, Samoa.  The ancestral acres run to upwards of three hundred;
they enjoy the ministrations of five streams, whence the name.  They are
all at the present moment under a trackless covering of magnificent
forest, which would be worth a great deal if it grew beside a railway
terminus.  To me, as it stands, it represents a handsome deficit.
Obliging natives from the Cannibal Islands are now cutting it down at my
expense.  You would be able to run your magazine to much greater
advantage if the terms of authors were on the same scale with those of my
cannibals.  We have also a house about the size of a manufacturer’s
lodge.  ’Tis but the egg of the future palace, over the details of which
on paper Mrs. Stevenson and I have already shed real tears; what it will
be when it comes to paying for it, I leave you to imagine.  But if it can
only be built as now intended, it will be with genuine satisfaction and a
growunded pride that I shall welcome you at the steps of my Old Colonial
Home, when you land from the steamer on a long-merited holiday.  I speak
much at my ease; yet I do not know, I may be now an outlaw, a bankrupt,
the abhorred of all good men.  I do not know, you probably do.  Has Hyde
{190} turned upon me?  Have I fallen, like Danvers Carew?

It is suggested to me that you might like to know what will be my future
society.  Three consuls, all at logger-heads with one another, or at the
best in a clique of two against one; three different sects of
missionaries, not upon the best of terms; and the Catholics and
Protestants in a condition of unhealable ill-feeling as to whether a
wooden drum ought or ought not to be beaten to announce the time of
school.  The native population, very genteel, very songful, very
agreeable, very good-looking, chronically spoiling for a fight (a
circumstance not to be entirely neglected in the design of the palace).
As for the white population of (technically, ‘The Beach’), I don’t
suppose it is possible for any person not thoroughly conversant with the
South Seas to form the smallest conception of such a society, with its
grog-shops, its apparently unemployed hangers-on, its merchants of all
degrees of respectability and the reverse.  The paper, of which I must
really send you a copy—if yours were really a live magazine, you would
have an exchange with the editor: I assure you, it has of late contained
a great deal of matter about one of your contributors—rejoices in the
name of _Samoa Times and South Sea Advertiser_.  The advertisements in
the _Advertiser_ are permanent, being simply subsidies for its existence.
A dashing warfare of newspaper correspondence goes on between the various
residents, who are rather fond of recurring to one another’s antecedents.
But when all is said, there are a lot of very nice, pleasant people, and
I don’t know that Apia is very much worse than half a hundred towns that
I could name.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                              _Hotel Sebastopol_, _Noumea_, _August_ 1890.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—I have stayed here a week while Lloyd and my wife
continue to voyage in the _Janet Nicoll_; this I did, partly to see the
convict system, partly to shorten my stay in the extreme cold—hear me
with my extreme! _moi qui suis originaire d’Edinbourg_—of Sydney at this
season.  I am feeling very seedy, utterly fatigued, and overborne with
sleep.  I have a fine old gentleman of a doctor, who attends and cheers
and entertains, if he does not cure me; but even with his ministrations I
am almost incapable of the exertion sufficient for this letter; and I am
really, as I write, falling down with sleep.  What is necessary to say, I
must try to say shortly.  Lloyd goes to clear out our establishments:
pray keep him in funds, if I have any; if I have not, pray try to raise
them.  Here is the idea: to install ourselves, at the risk of bankruptcy,
in Samoa.  It is not the least likely it will pay (although it may); but
it is almost certain it will support life, with very few external
expenses.  If I die, it will be an endowment for the survivors, at least
for my wife and Lloyd; and my mother, who might prefer to go home, has
her own.  Hence I believe I shall do well to hurry my installation.  The
letters are already in part done; in part done is a novel for Scribner;
in the course of the next twelve months I should receive a considerable
amount of money.  I am aware I had intended to pay back to my capital
some of this.  I am now of opinion I should act foolishly.  Better to
build the house and have a roof and farm of my own; and thereafter, with
a livelihood assured, save and repay . . .  There is my livelihood, all
but books and wine, ready in a nutshell; and it ought to be more easy to
save and to repay afterwards.  Excellent, say you, but will you save and
will you repay?  I do not know, said the Bell of Old Bow. . . . It seems
clear to me. . . . The deuce of the affair is that I do not know when I
shall see you and Colvin.  I guess you will have to come and see me: many
a time already we have arranged the details of your visit in the yet
unbuilt house on the mountain.  I shall be able to get decent wine from
Noumea.  We shall be able to give you a decent welcome, and talk of old
days.  _Apropos_ of old days, do you remember still the phrase we heard
in Waterloo Place?  I believe you made a piece for the piano on that
phrase.  Pray, if you remember it, send it me in your next.  If you find
it impossible to write correctly, send it me _à la récitative_, and
indicate the accents.  Do you feel (you must) how strangely heavy and
stupid I am?  I must at last give up and go sleep; I am simply a rag.

The morrow: I feel better, but still dim and groggy.  To-night I go to
the governor’s; such a lark—no dress clothes—twenty-four hours’
notice—able-bodied Polish tailor—suit made for a man with the figure of a
puncheon—same hastily altered for self with the figure of a bodkin—sight
inconceivable.  Never mind; dress clothes, ‘which nobody can deny’; and
the officials have been all so civil that I liked neither to refuse nor
to appear in mufti.  Bad dress clothes only prove you are a grisly ass;
no dress clothes, even when explained, indicate a want of respect.  I
wish you were here with me to help me dress in this wild raiment, and to
accompany me to M. Noel-Pardon’s.  I cannot say what I would give if
there came a knock now at the door and you came in.  I guess Noel-Pardon
would go begging, and we might burn the fr. 200 dress clothes in the back
garden for a bonfire; or what would be yet more expensive and more
humorous, get them once more expanded to fit you, and when that was done,
a second time cut down for my gossamer dimensions.

I hope you never forget to remember me to your father, who has always a
place in my heart, as I hope I have a little in his.  His kindness helped
me infinitely when you and I were young; I recall it with gratitude and
affection in this town of convicts at the world’s end.  There are very
few things, my dear Charles, worth mention: on a retrospect of life, the
day’s flash and colour, one day with another, flames, dazzles, and puts
to sleep; and when the days are gone, like a fast-flying thaumatrope,
they make but a single pattern.  Only a few things stand out; and among
these—most plainly to me—Rutland Square,—Ever, my dear Charles, your
affectionate friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—Just returned from trying on the dress clo’.  Lord, you should see
the coat!  It stands out at the waist like a bustle, the flaps cross in
front, the sleeves are like bags.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                   _Union Club_, _Sydney_ [_August_ 1890].

MY DEAR BURLINGAME,—

                                _Ballads_.

The deuce is in this volume.  It has cost me more botheration and dubiety
than any other I ever took in hand.  On one thing my mind is made up: the
verses at the end have no business there, and throw them down.  Many of
them are bad, many of the rest want nine years’ keeping, and the
remainder are not relevant—throw them down; some I never want to hear of
more, others will grow in time towards decent items in a second
_Underwoods_—and in the meanwhile, down with them!  At the same time, I
have a sneaking idea the ballads are not altogether without merit—I don’t
know if they’re poetry, but they’re good narrative, or I’m deceived.
(You’ve never said one word about them, from which I astutely gather you
are dead set against: ‘he was a diplomatic man’—extract from epitaph of
E. L. B.—‘and remained on good terms with Minor Poets.’)  You will have
to judge: one of the Gladstonian trinity of paths must be chosen.  (1st)
Either publish the five ballads, such as they are, in a volume called
_Ballads_; in which case pray send sheets at once to Chatto and Windus.
Or (2nd) write and tell me you think the book too small, and I’ll try and
get into the mood to do some more.  Or (3rd) write and tell me the whole
thing is a blooming illusion; in which case draw off some twenty copies
for my private entertainment, and charge me with the expense of the whole
dream.

In the matter of rhyme no man can judge himself; I am at the world’s end,
have no one to consult, and my publisher holds his tongue.  I call it
unfair and almost unmanly.  I do indeed begin to be filled with
animosity; Lord, wait till you see the continuation of _The Wrecker_,
when I introduce some New York publishers. . . It’s a good scene; the
quantities you drink and the really hideous language you are represented
as employing may perhaps cause you one tithe of the pain you have
inflicted by your silence on, sir, The Poetaster,

                                                                  R. L. S.

Lloyd is off home; my wife and I dwell sundered: she in lodgings,
preparing for the move; I here in the club, and at my old
trade—bedridden.  Naturally, the visit home is given up; we only wait our
opportunity to get to Samoa, where, please, address me.

Have I yet asked you to despatch the books and papers left in your care
to me at Apia, Samoa?  I wish you would, _quam primum_.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                    _Union Club_, _Sydney_, _August_ 1890.

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—Kipling is too clever to live.  The _Bête Humaine_ I
had already perused in Noumea, listening the while to the strains of the
convict band.  He a Beast; but not human, and, to be frank, not very
interesting.  ‘Nervous maladies: the homicidal ward,’ would be the better
name: O, this game gets very tedious.

Your two long and kind letters have helped to entertain the old familiar
sickbed.  So has a book called _The Bondman_, by Hall Caine; I wish you
would look at it.  I am not half-way through yet.  Read the book, and
communicate your views.  Hall Caine, by the way, appears to take Hugo’s
view of History and Chronology.  (_Later_; the book doesn’t keep up; it
gets very wild.)

I must tell you plainly—I can’t tell Colvin—I do not think I shall come
to England more than once, and then it’ll be to die.  Health I enjoy in
the tropics; even here, which they call sub- or semi-tropical, I come
only to catch cold.  I have not been out since my arrival; live here in a
nice bedroom by the fireside, and read books and letters from Henry
James, and send out to get his _Tragic Muse_, only to be told they can’t
be had as yet in Sydney, and have altogether a placid time.  But I can’t
go out!  The thermometer was nearly down to 50° the other day—no
temperature for me, Mr. James: how should I do in England?  I fear not at
all.  Am I very sorry?  I am sorry about seven or eight people in
England, and one or two in the States.  And outside of that, I simply
prefer Samoa.  These are the words of honesty and soberness.  (I am
fasting from all but sin, coughing, _The Bondman_, a couple of eggs and a
cup of tea.)  I was never fond of towns, houses, society, or (it seems)
civilisation.  Nor yet it seems was I ever very fond of (what is
technically called) God’s green earth.  The sea, islands, the islanders,
the island life and climate, make and keep me truly happier.  These last
two years I have been much at sea, and I have _never wearied_; sometimes
I have indeed grown impatient for some destination; more often I was
sorry that the voyage drew so early to an end; and never once did I lose
my fidelity to blue water and a ship.  It is plain, then, that for me my
exile to the place of schooners and islands can be in no sense regarded
as a calamity.

Good-bye just now: I must take a turn at my proofs.

_N.B._—Even my wife has weakened about the sea.  She wearied, the last
time we were ashore, to get afloat again.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MARCEL SCHWOB


                            _Union Club_, _Sydney_, _August_ 19_th_, 1890.

MY DEAR MR. SCHWOB,—_Mais_, _alors_, _vous avez tous les bonheurs_,
_vous_!  More about Villon; it seems incredible: when it is put in order,
pray send it me.

You wish to translate the _Black Arrow_: dear sir, you are hereby
authorised; but I warn you, I do not like the work.  Ah, if you, who know
so well both tongues, and have taste and instruction—if you would but
take a fancy to translate a book of mine that I myself admired—for we
sometimes admire our own—or I do—with what satisfaction would the
authority be granted!  But these things are too much to expect.  _Vous ne
détestez pas alors mes bonnes femmes_? _moi_, _je les déteste_.  I have
never pleased myself with any women of mine save two character parts, one
of only a few lines—the Countess of Rosen, and Madame Desprez in the
_Treasure of Franchard_.

I had indeed one moment of pride about my poor _Black Arrow_: Dickon
Crookback I did, and I do, think is a spirited and possible figure.
Shakespeare’s—O, if we can call that cocoon Shakespeare!—Shakespeare’s is
spirited—one likes to see the untaught athlete butting against the
adamantine ramparts of human nature, head down, breach up; it reminds us
how trivial we are to-day, and what safety resides in our triviality.
For spirited it may be, but O, sure not possible!  I love Dumas and I
love Shakespeare: you will not mistake me when I say that the Richard of
the one reminds me of the Porthos of the other; and if by any sacrifice
of my own literary baggage I could clear the _Vicomte de Bragelonne_ of
Porthos, _Jekyll_ might go, and the _Master_, and the _Black Arrow_, you
may be sure, and I should think my life not lost for mankind if half a
dozen more of my volumes must be thrown in.

The tone of your pleasant letters makes me egotistical; you make me take
myself too gravely.  Comprehend how I have lived much of my time in
France, and loved your country, and many of its people, and all the time
was learning that which your country has to teach—breathing in rather
that atmosphere of art which can only there be breathed; and all the time
knew—and raged to know—that I might write with the pen of angels or of
heroes, and no Frenchman be the least the wiser!  And now steps in M.
Marcel Schwob, writes me the most kind encouragement, and reads and
understands, and is kind enough to like my work.

I am just now overloaded with work.  I have two huge novels on hand—_The
Wrecker_ and the _Pearl Fisher_, {198} in collaboration with my stepson:
the latter, the _Pearl Fisher_, I think highly of, for a black, ugly,
trampling, violent story, full of strange scenes and striking characters.
And then I am about waist-deep in my big book on the South Seas: _the_
big book on the South Seas it ought to be, and shall.  And besides, I
have some verses in the press, which, however, I hesitate to publish.
For I am no judge of my own verse; self-deception is there so facile.
All this and the cares of an impending settlement in Samoa keep me very
busy, and a cold (as usual) keeps me in bed.

Alas, I shall not have the pleasure to see you yet awhile, if ever.  You
must be content to take me as a wandering voice, and in the form of
occasional letters from recondite islands; and address me, if you will be
good enough to write, to Apia, Samoa.  My stepson, Mr. Osbourne, goes
home meanwhile to arrange some affairs; it is not unlikely he may go to
Paris to arrange about the illustrations to my South Seas; in which case
I shall ask him to call upon you, and give you some word of our
outlandish destinies.  You will find him intelligent, I think; and I am
sure, if (_par hasard_) you should take any interest in the islands, he
will have much to tell you.—Herewith I conclude, and am your obliged and
interested correspondent,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—The story you refer to has got lost in the post.



TO ANDREW LANG


                                   _Union Club_, _Sydney_ [_August _1890].

MY DEAR LANG,—I observed with a great deal of surprise and interest that
a controversy in which you have been taking sides at home, in yellow
London, hinges in part at least on the Gilbert Islanders and their
customs in burial.  Nearly six months of my life has been passed in the
group: I have revisited it but the other day; and I make haste to tell
you what I know.  The upright stones—I enclose you a photograph of one on
Apemama—are certainly connected with religion; I do not think they are
adored.  They stand usually on the windward shore of the islands, that is
to say, apart from habitation (on _enclosed islands_, where the people
live on the sea side, I do not know how it is, never having lived on
one).  I gathered from Tembinoka, Rex Apemamae, that the pillars were
supposed to fortify the island from invasion: spiritual martellos.  I
think he indicated they were connected with the cult of Tenti—pronounce
almost as chintz in English, the _t_ being explosive; but you must take
this with a grain of salt, for I knew no word of Gilbert Island; and the
King’s English, although creditable, is rather vigorous than exact.  Now,
here follows the point of interest to you: such pillars, or standing
stones, have no connection with graves.  The most elaborate grave that I
have ever seen in the group—to be certain—is in the form of a _raised
border_ of gravel, usually strewn with broken glass.  One, of which I
cannot be sure that it was a grave, for I was told by one that it was,
and by another that it was not—consisted of a mound about breast high in
an excavated taro swamp, on the top of which was a child’s house, or
rather _maniapa_—that is to say, shed, or open house, such as is used in
the group for social or political gatherings—so small that only a child
could creep under its eaves.  I have heard of another great tomb on
Apemama, which I did not see; but here again, by all accounts, no sign of
a standing stone.  My report would be—no connection between standing
stones and sepulture.  I shall, however, send on the terms of the problem
to a highly intelligent resident trader, who knows more than perhaps any
one living, white or native, of the Gilbert group; and you shall have the
result.  In Samoa, whither I return for good, I shall myself make
inquiries; up to now, I have neither seen nor heard of any standing
stones in that group.—Yours,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.



TO MRS. CHARLES FAIRCHILD


                                _Union Club_, _Sydney_ [_September_ 1890].

MY DEAR MRS. FAIRCHILD,—I began a letter to you on board the _Janet
Nicoll_ on my last cruise, wrote, I believe, two sheets, and ruthlessly
destroyed the flippant trash.  Your last has given me great pleasure and
some pain, for it increased the consciousness of my neglect.  Now, this
must go to you, whatever it is like.

. . . You are quite right; our civilisation is a hollow fraud, all the
fun of life is lost by it; all it gains is that a larger number of
persons can continue to be contemporaneously unhappy on the surface of
the globe.  O, unhappy!—there is a big word and a false—continue to be
not nearly—by about twenty per cent.—so happy as they might be: that
would be nearer the mark.

When—observe that word, which I will write again and larger—WHEN you come
to see us in Samoa, you will see for yourself a healthy and happy people.

You see, you are one of the very few of our friends rich enough to come
and see us; and when my house is built, and the road is made, and we have
enough fruit planted and poultry and pigs raised, it is undeniable that
you must come—must is the word; that is the way in which I speak to
ladies.  You and Fairchild, anyway—perhaps my friend Blair—we’ll arrange
details in good time.  It will be the salvation of your souls, and make
you willing to die.

Let me tell you this: In ’74 or 5 there came to stay with my father and
mother a certain Mr. Seed, a prime minister or something of New Zealand.
He spotted what my complaint was; told me that I had no business to stay
in Europe; that I should find all I cared for, and all that was good for
me, in the Navigator Islands; sat up till four in the morning persuading
me, demolishing my scruples.  And I resisted: I refused to go so far from
my father and mother.  O, it was virtuous, and O, wasn’t it silly!  But
my father, who was always my dearest, got to his grave without that pang;
and now in 1890, I (or what is left of me) go at last to the Navigator
Islands.  God go with us!  It is but a Pisgah sight when all is said; I
go there only to grow old and die; but when you come, you will see it is
a fair place for the purpose.

Flaubert {201} has not turned up; I hope he will soon; I knew of him only
through Maxime Descamps.—With kindest messages to yourself and all of
yours, I remain,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.




