letter came.  I had a good many troubles; was regretting a high average
of sins; had been recently reminded that I had outlived some friends, and
wondering if I had not outlived some friendships; and had just, while
boasting of better health, been struck down again by my haunting enemy,
an enemy who was exciting at first, but has now, by the iteration of his
strokes, become merely annoying and inexpressibly irksome.  Can you fancy
that to a person drawing towards the elderly this sort of conjunction of
circumstances brings a rather aching sense of the past and the future?
Well, it was just then that your letter and your photograph were brought
to me in bed; and there came to me at once the most agreeable sense of
triumph.  My books were still young; my words had their good health and
could go about the world and make themselves welcome; and even (in a
shadowy and distant sense) make something in the nature of friends for
the sheer hulk that stays at home and bites his pen over the manuscripts.
It amused me very much to remember that I had been in Chicago, not so
many years ago, in my proper person; where I had failed to awaken much
remark, except from the ticket collector; and to think how much more
gallant and persuasive were the fellows that I now send instead of me,
and how these are welcome in that quarter to the sitter of Herr Platz,
while their author was not very welcome even in the villainous restaurant
where he tried to eat a meal and rather failed.

And this leads me directly to a confession.  The photograph which shall
accompany this is not chosen as the most like, but the best-looking.  Put
yourself in my place, and you will call this pardonable.  Even as it is,
even putting forth a flattered presentment, I am a little pained; and
very glad it is a photograph and not myself that has to go; for in this
case, if it please you, you can tell yourself it is my image—and if it
displeased you, you can lay the blame on the photographer; but in that,
there were no help, and the poor author might belie his labours.

_Kidnapped_ should soon appear; I am afraid you may not like it, as it is
very unlike _Prince Otto_ in every way; but I am myself a great admirer
of the two chief characters, Alan and David.  _Virginibus Puerisque_ has
never been issued in the States.  I do not think it is a book that has
much charm for publishers in any land; but I am to bring out a new
edition in England shortly, a copy of which I must try to remember to
send you.  I say try to remember, because I have some superficial
acquaintance with myself: and I have determined, after a galling
discipline, to promise nothing more until the day of my death: at least,
in this way, I shall no more break my word, and I must now try being
churlish instead of being false.

I do not believe you to be the least like Seraphina.  Your photograph has
no trace of her, which somewhat relieves me, as I am a good deal afraid
of Seraphinas—they do not always go into the woods and see the sunrise,
and some are so well-mailed that even that experience would leave them
unaffected and unsoftened.  The ‘hair and eyes of several complexions’
was a trait taken from myself; and I do not bind myself to the opinions
of Sir John.  In this case, perhaps—but no, if the peculiarity is shared
by two such pleasant persons as you and I (as you and me—the grammatical
nut is hard), it must be a very good thing indeed, and Sir John must be
an ass.

The _Book Reader_ notice was a strange jumble of fact and fancy.  I wish
you could have seen my father’s old assistant and present partner when he
heard my father described as an ‘inspector of lighthouses,’ for we are
all very proud of the family achievements, and the name of my house here
in Bournemouth is stolen from one of the sea-towers of the Hebrides which
are our pyramids and monuments.  I was never at Cambridge, again; but
neglected a considerable succession of classes at Edinburgh.  But to
correct that friendly blunderer were to write an autobiography.—And so
now, with many thanks, believe me yours sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO R. A. M. STEVENSON


                                 _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _July_ 1886.

SIR,—Your foolish letter was unduly received.  There may be hidden
fifths, and if there are, it shows how dam spontaneous the thing was.  I
could tinker and tic-tac-toe on a piece of paper, but scorned the act
with a Threnody, which was poured forth like blood and water on the
groaning organ.  If your heart (which was what I addressed) remained
unmoved, let us refer to the affair no more: crystallised emotion, the
statement and the reconciliation of the sorrows of the race and the
individual, is obviously no more to you than supping sawdust.  Well,
well.  If ever I write another Threnody!  My next op. will probably be a
Passepied and fugue in G (or D).

The mind is in my case shrunk to the size and sp. gr. of an aged Spanish
filbert.  O, I am so jolly silly.  I now pickle with some freedom (1) the
refrain of _Martini’s Moutons_; (2) _Sul margine d’un rio_, arranged for
the infant school by the Aged Statesman; (3) the first phrase of Bach’s
musette (Sweet Englishwoman, No. 3), {37} the rest of the musette being
one prolonged cropper, which I take daily for the benefit of my health.
All my other works (of which there are many) are either arranged (by R.
L. Stevenson) for the manly and melodious forefinger, or else prolonged
and melancholy croppers. . . . I find one can get a notion of music very
nicely.  I have been pickling deeply in the Magic Flute; and have
arranged _La dove prende_, almost to the end, for two melodious
forefingers.  I am next going to score the really nobler _Colomba o
tortorella_ for the same instruments.

                          This day is published
                    The works of Ludwig van Beethoven
                                 arranged
                       and wiederdurchgearbeiteted
                      for two melodious forefingers
                                   by,
                       Sir,—Your obedient servant,

                                                         PIMPERLY STIPPLE.

That’s a good idea?  There’s a person called Lenz who actually does
it—beware his den; I lost eighteenpennies on him, and found the bleeding
corpses of pieces of music divorced from their keys, despoiled of their
graces, and even changed in time; I do not wish to regard music (nor to
be regarded) through that bony Lenz.  You say you are ‘a spumfed idiot’;
but how about Lenz?  And how about me, sir, me?

I yesterday sent Lloyd by parcel post, at great expense, an empty
matchbox and empty cigarette-paper book, a bell from a cat’s collar, an
iron kitchen spoon, and a piece of coal more than half the superficies of
this sheet of paper.  They are now (appropriately enough) speeding
towards the Silly Isles; I hope he will find them useful.  By that, and
my telegram with prepaid answer to yourself, you may judge of my
spiritual state.  The finances have much brightened; and if _Kidnapped_
keeps on as it has begun, I may be solvent.—Yours,

                                                          THRENODIÆ AVCTOR
                                           (The authour of ane Threnodie).

Op. 2: Scherzo (in G Major) expressive of the Sense of favours to come.



TO R. A. M. STEVENSON


                                _Skerryvore_ [_Bournemouth_, _July_ 1886].

DEAR BOB,—Herewith another shy; more melancholy than before, but I think
not so abjectly idiotic.  The musical terms seem to be as good as in
Beethoven, and that, after all, is the great affair.  Bar the dam
bareness of the base, it looks like a piece of real music from a
distance.  I am proud to say it was not made one hand at a time; the base
was of synchronous birth with the treble; they are of the same age, sir,
and may God have mercy on their souls!—Yours,

                                                              THE MAESTRO.



TO MR. AND MRS. THOMAS STEVENSON


                          _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _July_ 7_th_, 1886.

MY DEAR PEOPLE,—It is probably my fault, and not yours, that I did not
understand.  I think it would be well worth trying the winter in
Bournemouth; but I would only take the house by the month—this after
mature discussion.  My leakage still pursues its course; if I were only
well, I have a notion to go north and get in (if I could) at the inn at
Kirkmichael, which has always smiled upon me much.  If I did well there,
we might then meet and do what should most smile at the time.

Meanwhile, of course, I must not move, and am in a rancid box here,
feeling the heat a great deal, and pretty tired of things.  Alexander did
a good thing of me at last; it looks like a mixture of an aztec idol, a
lion, an Indian Rajah, and a woman; and certainly represents a mighty
comic figure.  F. and Lloyd both think it is the best thing that has been
done of me up to now.

You should hear Lloyd on the penny whistle, and me on the piano!  Dear
powers, what a concerto!  I now live entirely for the piano, he for the
whistle; the neighbours, in a radius of a furlong and a half, are packing
up in quest of brighter climes.—Ever yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.

_P.S._—Please say if you can afford to let us have money for this trip,
and if so, how much.  I can see the year through without help, I believe,
and supposing my health to keep up; but can scarce make this change on my
own metal.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                               [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _July_ 1886].

DEAR CHARLES,—Doubtless, if all goes well, towards the 1st of August we
shall be begging at your door.  Thanks for a sight of the papers, which I
return (you see) at once, fearing further responsibility.

Glad you like Dauvit; but eh, man, yon’s terrible strange conduc’ o’ thon
man Rankeillor.  Ca’ him a legal adviser!  It would make a bonny
law-shuit, the Shaws case; and yon paper they signed, I’m thinking,
wouldnae be muckle thought o’ by Puggy Deas.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO THOMAS STEVENSON


                           [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], _July_ 28, 1886.

MY DEAR FATHER,—We have decided not to come to Scotland, but just to do
as Dobell wished, and take an outing.  I believe this is wiser in all
ways; but I own it is a disappointment.  I am weary of England; like
Alan, ‘I weary for the heather,’ if not for the deer.  Lloyd has gone to
Scilly with Katharine and C., where and with whom he should have a good
time.  David seems really to be going to succeed, which is a pleasant
prospect on all sides.  I am, I believe, floated financially; a book that
sells will be a pleasant novelty.  I enclose another review; mighty
complimentary, and calculated to sell the book too.

Coolin’s tombstone has been got out, honest man! and it is to be
polished, for it has got scratched, and have a touch of gilding in the
letters, and be sunk in the front of the house.  Worthy man, he, too,
will maybe weary for the heather, and the bents of Gullane, where (as I
dare say you remember) he gaed clean gyte, and jumped on to his crown
from a gig, in hot and hopeless chase of many thousand rabbits.  I can
still hear the little cries of the honest fellow as he disappeared; and
my mother will correct me, but I believe it was two days before he turned
up again at North Berwick: to judge by his belly, he had caught not one
out of these thousands, but he had had some exercise.

I keep well.—Ever your affectionate son,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. THOMAS STEVENSON


                                 _British Museum_ [_August_ 10_th_, 1886].

MY DEAR MOTHER,—We are having a capital holiday, and I am much better,
and enjoying myself to the nines.  Richmond is painting my portrait.
To-day I lunch with him, and meet Burne-Jones; to-night Browning dines
with us.  That sounds rather lofty work, does it not?  His path was paved
with celebrities.  To-morrow we leave for Paris, and next week, I
suppose, or the week after, come home.  Address here, as we may not reach
Paris.  I am really very well.—Ever your affectionate son,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO T. WATTS-DUNTON


                           _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_ [_September_ 1886].

DEAR MR. WATTS, The sight of the last _Athenæum_ reminds me of you, and
of my debt, now too long due.  I wish to thank you for your notice of
_Kidnapped_; and that not because it was kind, though for that also I
valued it, but in the same sense as I have thanked you before now for a
hundred articles on a hundred different writers.  A critic like you is
one who fights the good fight, contending with stupidity, and I would
fain hope not all in vain; in my own case, for instance, surely not in
vain.

What you say of the two parts in _Kidnapped_ was felt by no one more
painfully than by myself.  I began it partly as a lark, partly as a
pot-boiler; and suddenly it moved, David and Alan stepped out from the
canvas, and I found I was in another world.  But there was the cursed
beginning, and a cursed end must be appended; and our old friend Byles
the butcher was plainly audible tapping at the back door.  So it had to
go into the world, one part (as it does seem to me) alive, one part
merely galvanised: no work, only an essay.  For a man of tentative
method, and weak health, and a scarcity of private means, and not too
much of that frugality which is the artist’s proper virtue, the days of
sinecures and patrons look very golden: the days of professional
literature very hard.  Yet I do not so far deceive myself as to think I
should change my character by changing my epoch; the sum of virtue in our
books is in a relation of equality to the sum of virtues in ourselves;
and my _Kidnapped_ was doomed, while still in the womb and while I was
yet in the cradle, to be the thing it is.

And now to the more genial business of defence.  You attack my fight on
board the _Covenant_: I think it literal.  David and Alan had every
advantage on their side—position, arms, training, a good conscience; a
handful of merchant sailors, not well led in the first attack, not led at
all in the second, could only by an accident have taken the round-house
by attack; and since the defenders had firearms and food, it is even
doubtful if they could have been starved out.  The only doubtful point
with me is whether the seamen would have ever ventured on the second
onslaught; I half believe they would not; still the illusion of numbers
and the authority of Hoseason would perhaps stretch far enough to justify
the extremity.—I am, dear Mr. Watts, your very sincere admirer,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO FREDERICK LOCKER-LAMPSON


                                        _Skerryvore_, _September_ 4, 1886.

   NOT roses to the rose, I trow,
      The thistle sends, nor to the bee
   Do wasps bring honey.  Wherefore now
      Should Locker ask a verse from me?

   Martial, perchance,—but he is dead,
      And Herrick now must rhyme no more;
   Still burning with the muse, they tread
      (And arm in arm) the shadowy shore.

   They, if they lived, with dainty hand,
      To music as of mountain brooks,
   Might bring you worthy words to stand
      Unshamed, dear Locker, in your books.

   But tho’ these fathers of your race
      Be gone before, yourself a sire,
   To-day you see before your face
      Your stalwart youngsters touch the lyre—

   On these—on Lang, or Dobson—call,
      Long leaders of the songful feast.
   They lend a verse your laughing fall—
      A verse they owe you at the least.



TO FREDERICK LOCKER-LAMPSON


                          [_Skerryvore_], _Bournemouth_, _September_ 1886.

DEAR LOCKER,—You take my verses too kindly, but you will admit, for such
a bluebottle of a versifier to enter the house of Gertrude, where her
necklace hangs, was not a little brave.  Your kind invitation, I fear,
must remain unaccented; and yet—if I am very well—perhaps next
spring—(for I mean to be very well)—my wife might. . . .  But all that is
in the clouds with my better health.  And now look here: you are a rich
man and know many people, therefore perhaps some of the Governors of
Christ’s Hospital.  If you do, I know a most deserving case, in which I
would (if I could) do anything.  To approach you, in this way, is not
decent; and you may therefore judge by my doing it, how near this matter
lies to my heart.  I enclose you a list of the Governors, which I beg you
to return, whether or not you shall be able to do anything to help me.

The boy’s name is —; he and his mother are very poor.  It may interest
you in her cause if I tell you this: that when I was dangerously ill at
Hyères, this brave lady, who had then a sick husband of her own (since
dead) and a house to keep and a family of four to cook for, all with her
own hands, for they could afford no servant, yet took watch-about with my
wife, and contributed not only to my comfort, but to my recovery in a
degree that I am not able to limit.  You can conceive how much I suffer
from my impotence to help her, and indeed I have already shown myself a
thankless friend.  Let not my cry go up before you in vain!—Yours in
hope,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO FREDERICK LOCKER-LAMPSON


                            _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _September_ 1886.

MY DEAR LOCKER,—That I should call myself a man of letters, and land
myself in such unfathomable ambiguities!  No, my dear Locker, I did not
want a cheque; and in my ignorance of business, which is greater even
than my ignorance of literature, I have taken the liberty of drawing a
pen through the document and returning it; should this be against the
laws of God or man, forgive me.  All that I meant by my excessively
disgusting reference to your material well-being was the vague notion
that a man who is well off was sure to know a Governor of Christ’s
Hospital; though how I quite arrived at this conclusion I do not see.  A
man with a cold in the head does not necessarily know a ratcatcher; and
the connection is equally close—as it now appears to my awakened and
somewhat humbled spirit.  For all that, let me thank you in the warmest
manner for your friendly readiness to contribute.  You say you have hopes
of becoming a miser: I wish I had; but indeed I believe you deceive
yourself, and are as far from it as ever.  I wish I had any excuse to
keep your cheque, for it is much more elegant to receive than to return;
but I have my way of making it up to you, and I do sincerely beg you to
write to the two Governors.  This extraordinary outpouring of
correspondence would (if you knew my habits) convince you of my great
eagerness in this matter.  I would promise gratitude; but I have made a
promise to myself to make no more promises to anybody else, having broken
such a host already, and come near breaking my heart in consequence; and
as for gratitude, I am by nature a thankless dog, and was spoiled from a
child up.  But if you can help this lady in the matter of the Hospital,
you will have helped the worthy.  Let me continue to hope that I shall
make out my visit in the spring, and believe me, yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

It may amuse you to know that a very long while ago, I broke my heart to
try to imitate your verses, and failed hopelessly.  I saw some of the
evidences the other day among my papers, and blushed to the heels.

                                                                  R. L. S.

I give up finding out your name in the meantime, and keep to that by
which you will be known—Frederick Locker.



TO FREDERICK LOCKER-LAMPSON


                   [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], 24_th_ _September_ 1886.

MY DEAR LOCKER,—You are simply an angel of light, and your two letters
have gone to the post; I trust they will reach the hearts of the
recipients—at least, that could not be more handsomely expressed.  About
the cheque: well now, I am going to keep it; but I assure you Mrs. — has
never asked me for money, and I would not dare to offer any till she did.
For all that I shall stick to the cheque now, and act to that amount as
your almoner.  In this way I reward myself for the ambiguity of my
epistolary style.

I suppose, if you please, you may say your verses are thin (would you so
describe an arrow, by the way, and one that struck the gold?  It scarce
strikes me as exhaustively descriptive), and, thin or not, they are (and
I have found them) inimitably elegant.  I thank you again very sincerely
for the generous trouble you have taken in this matter which was so near
my heart, and you may be very certain it will be the fault of my health
and not my inclination, if I do not see you before very long; for all
that has past has made me in more than the official sense sincerely
yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                            _Skerryvore_, _Dec._ 14, 1886.

MY DEAR COLVIN,—This is first-rate of you, the Lord love you for it!  I
am truly much obliged.  He—my father—is very changeable; at times, he
seems only a slow quiet edition of himself; again, he will be very heavy
and blank; but never so violent as last spring; and therefore, to my
mind, better on the whole.

Fanny is pretty peepy; I am splendid.  I have been writing much
verse—quite the bard, in fact; and also a dam tale to order, which will
be what it will be: I don’t love it, but some of it is passable in its
mouldy way, _The Misadventures of John Nicholson_.  All my bardly
exercises are in Scotch; I have struck my somewhat ponderous guitar in
that tongue to no small extent: with what success, I know not, but I
think it’s better than my English verse; more marrow and fatness, and
more ruggedness.

How goes _Keats_?  Pray remark, if he (Keats) hung back from Shelley, it
was not to be wondered at, _when so many of his friends were Shelley’s
pensioners_.  I forget if you have made this point; it has been borne in
upon me reading Dowden and the _Shelley Papers_; and it will do no harm
if you have made it.  I finished a poem to-day, and writ 3000 words of a
story, _tant bien que mal_; and have a right to be sleepy, and (what is
far nobler and rarer) am so.—My dear Colvin, ever yours,

                                                          THE REAL MACKAY.



TO FREDERICK LOCKER-LAMPSON


                      _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _February_ 5_th_, 1887.

MY DEAR LOCKER,—Here I am in my bed as usual, and it is indeed a long
while since I went out to dinner.  You do not know what a crazy fellow
this is.  My winter has not so far been luckily passed, and all hope of
paying visits at Easter has vanished for twelve calendar months.  But
because I am a beastly and indurated invalid, I am not dead to human
feelings; and I neither have forgotten you nor will forget you.  Some day
the wind may round to the right quarter and we may meet; till then I am
still truly yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                           [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _February_ 1887.]

MY DEAR JAMES,—My health has played me it in once more in the absurdest
fashion, and the creature who now addresses you is but a stringy and
white-faced _bouilli_ out of the pot of fever, with the devil to pay in
every corner of his economy.  I suppose (to judge by your letter) I need
not send you these sheets, which came during my collapse by the rush.  I
am on the start with three volumes, that one of tales, {48a} a second one
of essays, {48b} and one of—ahem—verse. {48c}  This is a great order, is
it not?  After that I shall have empty lockers.  All new work stands
still; I was getting on well with Jenkin when this blessed malady
unhorsed me, and sent me back to the dung-collecting trade of the
republisher.  I shall re-issue _Virg. Puer._ as Vol. I. of _Essays_, and
the new vol. as Vol. II. of ditto; to be sold, however, separately.  This
is but a dry maundering; however, I am quite unfit—‘I am for action quite
unfit Either of exercise or wit.’  My father is in a variable state; many
sorrows and perplexities environ the house of Stevenson; my mother shoots
north at this hour on business of a distinctly rancid character; my
father (under my wife’s tutorage) proceeds to-morrow to Salisbury; I
remain here in my bed and whistle; in no quarter of heaven is anything
encouraging apparent, except that the good Colvin comes to the hotel here
on a visit.  This dreary view of life is somewhat blackened by the fact
that my head aches, which I always regard as a liberty on the part of the
powers that be.  This is also my first letter since my recovery.  God
speed your laudatory pen!

My wife joins in all warm messages.—Yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO W. H. LOW


                                                           (_April_ 1887.)

MY DEAR LOW,—The fares to London may be found in any continental Bradshaw
or sich; from London to Bournemouth impoverished parties who can stoop to
the third class get their ticket for the matter of 10s., or, as my wife
loves to phrase it, ‘a half a pound.’  You will also be involved in a 3s.
fare to get to Skerryvore; but this, I dare say, friends could help you
in on your arrival; so that you may reserve your energies for the two
tickets—costing the matter of a pound—and the usual gratuities to
porters.  This does not seem to me much: considering the intellectual
pleasures that await you here, I call it dirt cheap.  I _believe_ the
third class from Paris to London (_viâ_ Dover) is _about_ forty francs,
but I cannot swear.  Suppose it to be fifty.

50 × 2=100                                                         100
The expense of spirit or spontaneous lapse of coin                  10
on the journey, at 5 frcs. a head, 5 × 2=10
Victuals on ditto, at 5 frcs. a head, 5 × 2 = 10                    10
Gratuity to stewardess, in case of severe                            3
prostration, at 3 francs
One night in London, on a modest footing, say 20                    20
Two tickets to Bournemouth at 12.50, 12.50 × 2=25                   25
Porters and general devilment, say 5                                 5
Cabs in London, say 2 shillings, and in                           6.25
Bournemouth, 3 shillings=5 shillings, 6 frcs. 25
frcs.                                                           179.25
Or, the same in pounds,                                   £7, 3s. 6½d.
Or, the same in dollars,                                        $35.45

if there be any arithmetical virtue in me.  I have left out dinner in
London in case you want to blow out, which would come extry, and with the
aid of _vangs fangs_ might easily double the whole amount—above all if
you have a few friends to meet you.

In making this valuable project, or budget, I discovered for the first
time a reason (frequently overlooked) for the singular costliness of
travelling with your wife.  Anybody would count the tickets double; but
how few would have remembered—or indeed has any one ever remembered?—to
count the spontaneous lapse of coin double also?  Yet there are two of
you, each must do his daily leakage, and it must be done out of your
travelling fund.  You will tell me, perhaps, that you carry the coin
yourself: my dear sir, do you think you can fool your Maker?  Your wife
has to lose her quota; and by God she will—if you kept the coin in a
belt.  One thing I have omitted: you will lose a certain amount on the
exchange, but this even I cannot foresee, as it is one of the few things
that vary with the way a man has.—I am, dear sir, yours financially,

                                                           SAMUEL BUDGETT.



TO ALISON CUNNINGHAM


                                       _Skerryvore_, _April_ 16_th_, 1887.

MY DEAREST CUMMY,—As usual, I have been a dreary bad fellow and not
written for ages; but you must just try to forgive me, to believe (what
is the truth) that the number of my letters is no measure of the number
of times I think of you, and to remember how much writing I have to do.
The weather is bright, but still cold; and my father, I’m afraid, feels
it sharply.  He has had—still has, rather—a most obstinate jaundice,
which has reduced him cruelly in strength, and really upset him
altogether.  I hope, or think, he is perhaps a little better; but he
suffers much, cannot sleep at night, and gives John and my mother a
severe life of it to wait upon him.  My wife is, I think, a little
better, but no great shakes.  I keep mightily respectable myself.

Coolin’s Tombstone is now built into the front wall of Skerryvore, and
poor Bogie’s (with a Latin inscription also) is set just above it.  Poor,
unhappy wee man, he died, as you must have heard, in fight, which was
what he would have chosen; for military glory was more in his line than
the domestic virtues.  I believe this is about all my news, except that,
as I write, there is a blackbird singing in our garden trees, as it were
at Swanston.  I would like fine to go up the burnside a bit, and sit by
the pool and be young again—or no, be what I am still, only there instead
of here, for just a little.  Did you see that I had written about John
Todd?  In this month’s _Longman_ it was; if you have not seen it, I will
try and send it you.  Some day climb as high as Halkerside for me (I am
never likely to do it for myself), and sprinkle some of the well water on
the turf.  I am afraid it is a pagan rite, but quite harmless, and _ye
can sain it wi’ a bit prayer_.  Tell the Peewies that I mind their
forbears well.  My heart is sometimes heavy, and sometimes glad to mind
it all.  But for what we have received, the Lord make us truly thankful.
Don’t forget to sprinkle the water, and do it in my name; I feel a
childish eagerness in this.

Remember me most kindly to James, and with all sorts of love to yourself,
believe me, your laddie,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—I suppose Mrs. Todd ought to see the paper about her man; judge of
that, and if you think she would not dislike it, buy her one from me, and
let me know.  The article is called ‘Pastoral,’ in _Longman’s Magazine_
for April.  I will send you the money; I would to-day, but it’s the
Sabbie day, and I cannae.

                                                                  R. L. S.

Remembrances from all here.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                               [_Edinburgh_, _June_ 1887.]

MY DEAR S. C.,—At last I can write a word to you.  Your little note in
the _P. M. G._ was charming.  I have written four pages in the
_Contemporary_, which Bunting found room for: they are not very good, but
I shall do more for his memory in time.

About the death, I have long hesitated, I was long before I could tell my
mind; and now I know it, and can but say that I am glad.  If we could
have had my father, that would have been a different thing.  But to keep
that changeling—suffering changeling—any longer, could better none and
nothing.  Now he rests; it is more significant, it is more like himself.
He will begin to return to us in the course of time, as he was and as we
loved him.

My favourite words in literature, my favourite scene—‘O let him pass,’
Kent and Lear—was played for me here in the first moment of my return.  I
believe Shakespeare saw it with his own father.  I had no words; but it
was shocking to see.  He died on his feet, you know; was on his feet the
last day, knowing nobody—still he would be up.  This was his constant
wish; also that he might smoke a pipe on his last day.  The funeral would
have pleased him; it was the largest private funeral in man’s memory
here.

We have no plans, and it is possible we may go home without going through
town.  I do not know; I have no views yet whatever; nor can have any at
this stage of my cold and my business.—Ever yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.




