letter is slow and (let me be consistent) aleatory; by telegram is as
near as may be impossible.

I had some experience of American appreciation; I liked a little of it,
but there is too much; a little of that would go a long way to spoil a
man; and I like myself better in the woods.  I am so damned candid and
ingenuous (for a cynic), and so much of a ‘cweatu’ of impulse—aw’ (if you
remember that admirable Leech), that I begin to shirk any more taffy; I
think I begin to like it too well.  But let us trust the Gods; they have
a rod in pickle; reverently I doff my trousers, and with screwed eyes
await the _amari aliquid_ of the great God Busby.

I thank you for the article in all ways, and remain yours affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO W. H. LOW


                                              [_Saranac_, _October_ 1887.]

SIR,—I have to trouble you with the following _paroles bien senties_.  We
are here at a first-rate place.  ‘Baker’s’ is the name of our house, but
we don’t address there; we prefer the tender care of the Post-Office, as
more aristocratic (it is no use to telegraph even to the care of the
Post-Office who does not give a single damn {70}).  Baker’s has a
prophet’s chamber, which the hypercritical might describe as a garret
with a hole in the floor: in that garret, sir, I have to trouble you and
your wife to come and slumber.  Not now, however: with manly hospitality,
I choke off any sudden impulse.  Because first, my wife and my mother are
gone (a note for the latter, strongly suspected to be in the hand of your
talented wife, now sits silent on the mantel shelf), one to Niagara and
t’other to Indianapolis.  Because, second, we are not yet installed.  And
because third, I won’t have you till I have a buffalo robe and leggings,
lest you should want to paint me as a plain man, which I am not, but a
rank Saranacker and wild man of the woods.—Yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO WILLIAM ARCHER.


                                           _Saranac Lake_, _October_ 1887.

DEAR ARCHER,—Many thanks for the Wondrous Tale.  It is scarcely a work of
genius, as I believe you felt.  Thanks also for your pencillings; though
I defend ‘shrew,’ or at least many of the shrews.

We are here (I suppose) for the winter in the Adirondacks, a hill and
forest country on the Canadian border of New York State, very unsettled
and primitive and cold, and healthful, or we are the more bitterly
deceived.  I believe it will do well for me; but must not boast.

My wife is away to Indiana to see her family; my mother, Lloyd, and I
remain here in the cold, which has been exceeding sharp, and the hill
air, which is inimitably fine.  We all eat bravely, and sleep well, and
make great fires, and get along like one o’clock.

I am now a salaried party; I am a _bourgeois_ now; I am to write a weekly
paper for Scribner’s, at a scale of payment which makes my teeth ache for
shame and diffidence.  The editor is, I believe, to apply to you; for we
were talking over likely men, and when I instanced you, he said he had
had his eye upon you from the first.  It is worth while, perhaps, to get
in tow with the Scribners; they are such thorough gentlefolk in all ways
that it is always a pleasure to deal with them.  I am like to be a
millionaire if this goes on, and be publicly hanged at the social
revolution: well, I would prefer that to dying in my bed; and it would be
a godsend to my biographer, if ever I have one.  What are you about?  I
hope you are all well and in good case and spirits, as I am now, after a
most nefast experience of despondency before I left; but indeed I was
quite run down.  Remember me to Mrs. Archer, and give my respects to
Tom.—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                         [_Saranac Lake_, _October_ 1887.]
                                      I know not the day; but the month it
                                               is the drear October by the
                                            ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—This is to say _First_, the voyage was a huge
success.  We all enjoyed it (bar my wife) to the ground: sixteen days at
sea with a cargo of hay, matches, stallions, and monkeys, and in a ship
with no style on, and plenty of sailors to talk to, and the endless
pleasures of the sea—the romance of it, the sport of the scratch dinner
and the smashing crockery, the pleasure—an endless pleasure—of balancing
to the swell: well, it’s over.

_Second_, I had a fine time, rather a troubled one, at Newport and New
York; saw much of and liked hugely the Fairchilds, St. Gaudens the
sculptor, Gilder of the _Century_—just saw the dear Alexander—saw a lot
of my old and admirable friend Will Low, whom I wish you knew and
appreciated—was medallioned by St. Gaudens, and at last escaped to

_Third_, Saranac Lake, where we now are, and which I believe we mean to
like and pass the winter at.  Our house—emphatically ‘Baker’s’—is on a
hill, and has a sight of a stream turning a corner in the valley—bless
the face of running water!—and sees some hills too, and the paganly
prosaic roofs of Saranac itself; the Lake it does not see, nor do I
regret that; I like water (fresh water I mean) either running swiftly
among stones, or else largely qualified with whisky.  As I write, the sun
(which has been long a stranger) shines in at my shoulder; from the next
room, the bell of Lloyd’s typewriter makes an agreeable music as it
patters off (at a rate which astonishes this experienced novelist) the
early chapters of a humorous romance; from still further off—the walls of
Baker’s are neither ancient nor massive—rumours of Valentine about the
kitchen stove come to my ears; of my mother and Fanny I hear nothing, for
the excellent reason that they have gone sparking off, one to Niagara,
one to Indianapolis.  People complain that I never give news in my
letters.  I have wiped out that reproach.

But now, _Fourth_, I have seen the article; and it may be from natural
partiality, I think it the best you have written.  O—I remember the
Gautier, which was an excellent performance; and the Balzac, which was
good; and the Daudet, over which I licked my chops; but the R. L. S. is
better yet.  It is so humorous, and it hits my little frailties with so
neat (and so friendly) a touch; and Alan is the occasion for so much
happy talk, and the quarrel is so generously praised.  I read it twice,
though it was only some hours in my possession; and Low, who got it for
me from the _Century_, sat up to finish it ere he returned it; and, sir,
we were all delighted.  Here is the paper out, nor will anything, not
even friendship, not even gratitude for the article, induce me to begin a
second sheet; so here with the kindest remembrances and the warmest good
wishes, I remain, yours affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                        _Saranac_, 18_th_ _November_ 1887.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—No likely I’m going to waste a sheet of paper. . . .  I
am offered £1600 ($8000) for the American serial rights on my next story!
As you say, times are changed since the Lothian Road.  Well, the Lothian
Road was grand fun too; I could take an afternoon of it with great
delight.  But I’m awfu’ grand noo, and long may it last!

Remember me to any of the faithful—if there are any left.  I wish I could
have a crack with you.—Yours ever affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.

I find I have forgotten more than I remembered of business. . . .  Please
let us know (if you know) for how much Skerryvore is let; you will here
detect the female mind; I let it for what I could get; nor shall the
possession of this knowledge (which I am happy to have forgot) increase
the amount by so much as the shadow of a sixpenny piece; but my females
are agog.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES SCRIBNER


                                 [_Saranac_, _November_ 20 _or_ 21, 1887.]

MY DEAR MR. SCRIBNER,—Heaven help me, I am under a curse just now.  I
have played fast and loose with what I said to you; and that, I beg you
to believe, in the purest innocence of mind.  I told you you should have
the power over all my work in this country; and about a fortnight ago,
when M’Clure was here, I calmly signed a bargain for the serial
publication of a story.  You will scarce believe that I did this in mere
oblivion; but I did; and all that I can say is that I will do so no more,
and ask you to forgive me.  Please write to me soon as to this.

Will you oblige me by paying in for three articles, as already sent, to
my account with John Paton & Co., 52 William Street?  This will be most
convenient for us.

The fourth article is nearly done; and I am the more deceived, or it is
_A Buster_.

Now as to the first thing in this letter, I do wish to hear from you
soon; and I am prepared to hear any reproach, or (what is harder to hear)
any forgiveness; for I have deserved the worst.—Yours sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                               _Saranac_, _November_ 1887.

DEAR MR. BURLINGAME,—I enclose corrected proof of _Beggars_, which seems
good.  I mean to make a second sermon, which, if it is about the same
length as _Pulvis et Umbra_, might go in along with it as two sermons, in
which case I should call the first ‘The Whole Creation,’ and the second
‘Any Good.’  We shall see; but you might say how you like the notion.

One word: if you have heard from Mr. Scribner of my unhappy oversight in
the matter of a story, you will make me ashamed to write to you, and yet
I wish to beg you to help me into quieter waters.  The oversight
committed—and I do think it was not so bad as Mr. Scribner seems to think
it-and discovered, I was in a miserable position.  I need not tell you
that my first impulse was to offer to share or to surrender the price
agreed upon when it should fall due; and it is almost to my credit that I
arranged to refrain.  It is one of these positions from which there is no
escape; I cannot undo what I have done.  And I wish to beg you—should Mr.
Scribner speak to you in the matter—to try to get him to see this neglect
of mine for no worse than it is: unpardonable enough, because a breach of
an agreement; but still pardonable, because a piece of sheer carelessness
and want of memory, done, God knows, without design and since most
sincerely regretted.  I have no memory.  You have seen how I omitted to
reserve the American rights in _Jekyll_: last winter I wrote and
demanded, as an increase, a less sum than had already been agreed upon
for a story that I gave to Cassell’s.  For once that my forgetfulness
has, by a cursed fortune, seemed to gain, instead of lose, me money, it
is painful indeed that I should produce so poor an impression on the mind
of Mr. Scribner.  But I beg you to believe, and if possible to make him
believe, that I am in no degree or sense a _faiseur_, and that in matters
of business my design, at least, is honest.  Nor (bating bad memory and
self-deception) am I untruthful in such affairs.

If Mr. Scribner shall have said nothing to you in the matter, please
regard the above as unwritten, and believe me, yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                               _Saranac_, _November_ 1887.

DEAR MR. BURLINGAME,—The revise seemed all right, so I did not trouble
you with it; indeed, my demand for one was theatrical, to impress that
obdurate dog, your reader.  Herewith a third paper: it has been a cruel
long time upon the road, but here it is, and not bad at last, I fondly
hope.  I was glad you liked the _Lantern Bearers_; I did, too.  I thought
it was a good paper, really contained some excellent sense, and was
ingeniously put together.  I have not often had more trouble than I have
with these papers; thirty or forty pages of foul copy, twenty is the very
least I have had.  Well, you pay high; it is fit that I should have to
work hard, it somewhat quiets my conscience.—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO J. A. SYMONDS


                                   _Saranac Lake_, _Adirondack Mountains_,
                                _New York_, _U.S.A._, _November_ 21, 1887.

MY DEAR SYMONDS,—I think we have both meant and wanted to write to you
any time these months; but we have been much tossed about, among new
faces and old, and new scenes and old, and scenes (like this of Saranac)
which are neither one nor other.  To give you some clue to our affairs, I
had best begin pretty well back.  We sailed from the Thames in a vast
bucket of iron that took seventeen days from shore to shore.  I cannot
describe how I enjoyed the voyage, nor what good it did me; but on the
Banks I caught friend catarrh.  In New York and then in Newport I was
pretty ill; but on my return to New York, lying in bed most of the time,
with St. Gaudens the sculptor sculping me, and my old friend Low around,
I began to pick up once more.  Now here we are in a kind of wilderness of
hills and firwoods and boulders and snow and wooden houses.  So far as we
have gone the climate is grey and harsh, but hungry and somnolent; and
although not charming like that of Davos, essentially bracing and
briskening.  The country is a kind of insane mixture of Scotland and a
touch of Switzerland and a dash of America, and a thought of the British
Channel in the skies.  We have a decent house—

                                                         _December_ 6_th_.

—A decent house, as I was saying, sir, on a hill-top, with a look down a
Scottish river in front, and on one hand a Perthshire hill; on the other,
the beginnings and skirts of the village play hide and seek among other
hills.  We have been below zero, I know not how far (10 at 8 A.M. once),
and when it is cold it is delightful; but hitherto the cold has not held,
and we have chopped in and out from frost to thaw, from snow to rain,
from quiet air to the most disastrous north-westerly curdlers of the
blood.  After a week of practical thaw, the ice still bears in favoured
places.  So there is hope.

I wonder if you saw my book of verses?  It went into a second edition,
because of my name, I suppose, and its _prose_ merits.  I do not set up
to be a poet.  Only an all-round literary man: a man who talks, not one
who sings.  But I believe the very fact that it was only speech served
the book with the public.  Horace is much a speaker, and see how popular!
most of Martial is only speech, and I cannot conceive a person who does
not love his Martial; most of Burns, also, such as ‘The Louse,’ ‘The
Toothache,’ ‘The Haggis,’ and lots more of his best.  Excuse this little
apology for my house; but I don’t like to come before people who have a
note of song, and let it be supposed I do not know the difference.

To return to the more important—news.  My wife again suffers in high and
cold places; I again profit.  She is off to-day to New York for a change,
as heretofore to Berne, but I am glad to say in better case than then.
Still it is undeniable she suffers, and you must excuse her (at least) if
we both prove bad correspondents.  I am decidedly better, but I have been
terribly cut up with business complications: one disagreeable, as
threatening loss; one, of the most intolerable complexion, as involving
me in dishonour.  The burthen of consistent carelessness: I have lost
much by it in the past; and for once (to my damnation) I have gained.  I
am sure you will sympathise.  It is hard work to sleep; it is hard to be
told you are a liar, and have to hold your peace, and think, ‘Yes, by
God, and a thief too!’  You remember my lectures on Ajax, or the
Unintentional Sin?  Well, I know all about that now.  Nothing seems so
unjust to the sufferer: or is more just in essence.  _Laissez passer la
justice de Dieu_.

Lloyd has learned to use the typewriter, and has most gallantly completed
upon that the draft of a tale, which seems to me not without merit and
promise, it is so silly, so gay, so absurd, in spots (to my partial eyes)
so genuinely humorous.  It is true, he would not have written it but for
the New Arabian Nights; but it is strange to find a young writer funny.
Heavens, but I was depressing when I took the pen in hand!  And now I
doubt if I am sadder than my neighbours.  Will this beginner move in the
inverse direction?

Let me have your news, and believe me, my dear Symonds, with genuine
affection, yours,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO W. E. HENLEY


                                              _Saranac_ [_December_ 1887].

MY DEAR LAD,—I was indeed overjoyed to hear of the Dumas.  In the matter
of the dedication, are not cross dedications a little awkward?  Lang and
Rider Haggard did it, to be sure.  Perpend.  And if you should conclude
against a dedication, there is a passage in _Memories and Portraits_
written _at_ you, when I was most desperate (to stir you up a bit), which
might be quoted: something about Dumas still waiting his biographer.  I
have a decent time when the weather is fine; when it is grey, or windy,
or wet (as it too often is), I am merely degraded to the dirt.  I get
some work done every day with a devil of a heave; not extra good ever;
and I regret my engagement.  Whiles I have had the most deplorable
business annoyances too; have been threatened with having to refund
money; got over that; and found myself in the worse scrape of being a
kind of unintentional swindler.  These have worried me a great deal; also
old age with his stealing steps seems to have clawed me in his clutch to
some tune.

Do you play All Fours?  We are trying it; it is still all haze to me.
Can the elder hand _beg_ more than once?  The Port Admiral is at Boston
mingling with millionaires.  I am but a weed on Lethe wharf.  The wife is
only so-so.  The Lord lead us all: if I can only get off the stage with
clean hands, I shall sing Hosanna.  ‘Put’ is described quite differently
from your version in a book I have; what are your rules?  The Port
Admiral is using a game of put in a tale of his, the first copy of which
was gloriously finished about a fortnight ago, and the revise gallantly
begun: _The Finsbury Tontine_ it is named, and might fill two volumes,
and is quite incredibly silly, and in parts (it seems to me) pretty
humorous.—Love to all from

                                                          AN OLD, OLD MAN.

I say, Taine’s _Origines de la France Contemporaine_ is no end; it would
turn the dead body of Charles Fox into a living Tory.



TO MRS. FLEEMING JENKIN


                                        [_Saranac Lake_, _December_ 1887.]

MY DEAR MRS. JENKIN,—The Opal is very well; it is fed with glycerine when
it seems hungry.  I am very well, and get about much more than I could
have hoped.  My wife is not very well; there is no doubt the high level
does not agree with her, and she is on the move for a holiday to New
York.  Lloyd is at Boston on a visit, and I hope has a good time.  My
mother is really first-rate; she and I, despairing of other games for
two, now play All Fours out of a gamebook, and have not yet discovered
its niceties, if any.

You will have heard, I dare say, that they made a great row over me here.
They also offered me much money, a great deal more than my works are
worth: I took some of it, and was greedy and hasty, and am now very
sorry.  I have done with big prices from now out.  Wealth and
self-respect seem, in my case, to be strangers.

We were talking the other day of how well Fleeming managed to grow rich.
Ah, that is a rare art; something more intellectual than a virtue.  The
book has not yet made its appearance here; the life alone, with a little
preface, is to appear in the States; and the Scribners are to send you
half the royalties.  I should like it to do well, for Fleeming’s sake.

Will you please send me the Greek water-carrier’s song?  I have a
particular use for it.

Have I any more news, I wonder?—and echo wonders along with me.  I am
strangely disquieted on all political matters; and I do not know if it is
‘the signs of the times’ or the sign of my own time of life.  But to me
the sky seems black both in France and England, and only partly clear in
America.  I have not seen it so dark in my time; of that I am sure.

Please let us have some news; and, excuse me, for the sake of my
well-known idleness; and pardon Fanny, who is really not very well, for
this long silence.—Very sincerely your friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS ADELAIDE BOODLE


                                        [_Saranac Lake_, _December_ 1887.]

MY DEAR MISS BOODLE,—I am so much afraid, our gamekeeper may weary of
unacknowledged reports!  Hence, in the midst of a perfect horror of
detestable weathers of a quite incongruous strain, and with less desire
for correspondence than—well, than—well, with no desire for
correspondence, behold me dash into the breach.  Do keep up your letters.
They are most delightful to this exiled backwoods family; and in your
next, we shall hope somehow or other to hear better news of you and
yours—that in the first place—and to hear more news of our beasts and
birds and kindly fruits of earth and those human tenants who are (truly)
too much with us.

I am very well; better than for years: that is for good.  But then my
wife is no great shakes; the place does not suit her—it is my private
opinion that no place does—and she is now away down to New York for a
change, which (as Lloyd is in Boston) leaves my mother and me and
Valentine alone in our wind-beleaguered hilltop hatbox of a house.  You
should hear the cows butt against the walls in the early morning while
they feed; you should also see our back log when the thermometer goes (as
it does go) away—away below zero, till it can be seen no more by the eye
of man—not the thermometer, which is still perfectly visible, but the
mercury, which curls up into the bulb like a hibernating bear; you should
also see the lad who ‘does chores’ for us, with his red stockings and his
thirteen year old face, and his highly manly tramp into the room; and his
two alternative answers to all questions about the weather: either
‘Cold,’ or with a really lyrical movement of the voice,
‘_Lovely_—raining!’

Will you take this miserable scarp for what it is worth?  Will you also
understand that I am the man to blame, and my wife is really almost too
much out of health to write, or at least doesn’t write?—And believe me,
with kind remembrance to Mrs. Boodle and your sisters, very sincerely
yours,

                                                    ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                         _Saranac_, 12_th_ _December_ ’87.

Give us news of all your folk.  A Merry Christmas from all of us.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—Will you please send £20 to — for a Christmas gift from
—?  Moreover, I cannot remember what I told you to send to —; but as God
has dealt so providentially with me this year, I now propose to make it
£20.

I beg of you also to consider my strange position.  I jined a club which
it was said was to defend the Union; and had a letter from the secretary,
which his name I believe was Lord Warmingpan (or words to that effect),
to say I am elected, and had better pay up a certain sum of money, I
forget what.  Now I cannae verra weel draw a blank cheque and send to—

                LORD WARMINGPAN (or words to that effect),
                             London, England.

And, man, if it was possible, I would be dooms glad to be out o’ this bit
scrapie.  Mebbe the club was ca’d ‘The Union,’ but I wouldnae like to
sweir; and mebbe it wasnae, or mebbe only words to that effec’—but I
wouldnae care just exac’ly about sweirin’.  Do ye no think Henley, or
Pollick, or some o’ they London fellies, micht mebbe perhaps find out for
me? and just what the soom was?  And that you would aiblins pay for me?
For I thocht I was sae dam patriotic jinin’, and it would be a kind o’ a
come-doun to be turned out again.  Mebbe Lang would ken; or mebbe Rider
Haggyard: they’re kind o’ Union folks.  But it’s my belief his name was
Warmingpan whatever. Yours,

                                                                  THOMSON,
                                           _alias_ ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Could it be Warminster? {83}



TO MISS MONROE


                         _Saranac Lake_, _New York_ [_December_ 19, 1887].

DEAR MISS MONROE,—Many thanks for your letter and your good wishes.  It
was much my desire to get to Chicago: had I done—or if I yet do—so, I
shall hope to see the original of my photograph, which is one of my show
possessions; but the fates are rather contrary.  My wife is far from
well; I myself dread worse than almost any other imaginable peril, that
miraculous and really insane invention the American Railroad Car.  Heaven
help the man—may I add the woman—that sets foot in one!  Ah, if it were
only an ocean to cross, it would be a matter of small thought to me—and
great pleasure.  But the railroad car—every man has his weak point; and I
fear the railroad car as abjectly as I do an earwig, and, on the whole,
on better grounds.  You do not know how bitter it is to have to make such
a confession; for you have not the pretension nor the weakness of a man.
If I do get to Chicago, you will hear of me: so much can be said.  And do
you never come east?

I was pleased to recognise a word of my poor old Deacon in your letter.
It would interest me very much to hear how it went and what you thought
of piece and actors; and my collaborator, who knows and respects the
photograph, would be pleased too.—Still in the hope of seeing you, I am,
yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                          _Saranac Lake_, _Winter_ 1887–8.

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES,—It may please you to know how our family has been
employed.  In the silence of the snow the afternoon lamp has lighted an
eager fireside group: my mother reading, Fanny, Lloyd, and I devoted
listeners; and the work was really one of the best works I ever heard;
and its author is to be praised and honoured; and what do you suppose is
the name of it? and have you ever read it yourself? and (I am bound I
will get to the bottom of the page before I blow the gaff, if I have to
fight it out on this line all summer; for if you have not to turn a leaf,
there can be no suspense, the conspectory eye being swift to pick out
proper names; and without suspense, there can be little pleasure in this
world, to my mind at least)—and, in short, the name of it is _Roderick
Hudson_, if you please.  My dear James, it is very spirited, and very
sound, and very noble too.  Hudson, Mrs. Hudson, Rowland, O, all
first-rate: Rowland a very fine fellow; Hudson as good as he can stick
(did you know Hudson?  I suspect you did), Mrs. H. his real born mother,
a thing rarely managed in fiction.

We are all keeping pretty fit and pretty hearty; but this letter is not
from me to you, it is from a reader of _R. H._ to the author of the same,
and it says nothing, and has nothing to say, but thank you.

We are going to re-read _Casamassima_ as a proper pendant.  Sir, I think
these two are your best, and care not who knows it.

May I beg you, the next time _Roderick_ is printed off, to go over the
sheets of the last few chapters, and strike out ‘immense’ and
‘tremendous’?  You have simply dropped them there like your
pocket-handkerchief; all you have to do is to pick them up and pouch
them, and your room—what do I say?—your cathedral!—will be swept and
garnished.—I am, dear sir, your delighted reader,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—Perhaps it is a pang of causeless honesty, perhaps.  I hope it
will set a value on my praise of _Roderick_, perhaps it’s a burst of the
diabolic, but I must break out with the news that I can’t bear the
_Portrait of a Lady_.  I read it all, and I wept too; but I can’t stand
your having written it; and I beg you will write no more of the like.
_Infra_, sir; Below you: I can’t help it—it may be your favourite work,
but in my eyes it’s BELOW YOU to write and me to read.  I thought
_Roderick_ was going to be another such at the beginning; and I cannot
describe my pleasure as I found it taking bones and blood, and looking
out at me with a moved and human countenance, whose lineaments are
written in my memory until my last of days.

                                                                  R. L. S.

My wife begs your forgiveness; I believe for her silence.

                     [Picture: Manuscript of letter]

                     [Picture: Manuscript of letter]



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                         _Saranac Lake_ [_December_ 1887].

MY DEAR COLVIN,—This goes to say that we are all fit, and the place is
very bleak and wintry, and up to now has shown no such charms of climate
as Davos, but is a place where men eat and where the cattarh, catarrh
(cattarrh, or cattarrhh) appears to be unknown.  I walk in my verandy in
the snaw, sir, looking down over one of those dabbled wintry landscapes
that are (to be frank) so chilly to the human bosom, and up at a grey,
English—nay, _mehercle_, Scottish—heaven; and I think it pretty bleak;
and the wind swoops at me round the corner, like a lion, and fluffs the
snow in my face; and I could aspire to be elsewhere; but yet I do not
catch cold, and yet, when I come in, I eat.  So that hitherto Saranac, if
not deliriously delectable, has not been a failure; nay, from the mere
point of view of the wicked body, it has proved a success.  But I wish I
could still get to the woods; alas, _nous n’irons plus au bois_ is my
poor song; the paths are buried, the dingles drifted full, a little walk
is grown a long one; till spring comes, I fear the burthen will hold
good.

I get along with my papers for _Scribner_ not fast, nor so far specially
well; only this last, the fourth one (which makes a third part of my
whole task), I do believe is pulled off after a fashion.  It is a mere
sermon: ‘Smith opens out’; {86} but it is true, and I find it touching
and beneficial, to me at least; and I think there is some fine writing in
it, some very apt and pregnant phrases.  _Pulvis et Umbra_, I call it; I
might have called it a Darwinian Sermon, if I had wanted.  Its
sentiments, although parsonic, will not offend even you, I believe.  The
other three papers, I fear, bear many traces of effort, and the ungenuine
inspiration of an income at so much per essay, and the honest desire of
the incomer to give good measure for his money.  Well, I did my damndest
anyway.

We have been reading H. James’s _Roderick Hudson_, which I eagerly press
you to get at once: it is a book of a high order—the last volume in
particular.  I wish Meredith would read it.  It took my breath away.

I am at the seventh book of the _Æneid_, and quite amazed at its merits
(also very often floored by its difficulties).  The Circe passage at the
beginning, and the sublime business of Amata with the simile of the boy’s
top—O Lord, what a happy thought!—have specially delighted me.—I am, dear
sir, your respected friend,

                                  JOHN GREGG GILLSON, J.P., M.R.I.A., etc.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                         [_Saranac_, _December_ 24, 1887.]

MY DEAR COLVIN,—Thank you for your explanations.  I have done no more
Virgil since I finished the seventh book, for I have, first been eaten up
with Taine, and next have fallen head over heels into a new tale, _The
Master of Ballantrae_.  No thought have I now apart from it, and I have
got along up to page ninety-two of the draft with great interest.  It is
to me a most seizing tale: there are some fantastic elements; the most is
a dead genuine human problem—human tragedy, I should say rather.  It will
be about as long, I imagine, as _Kidnapped_.

                            DRAMATIS PERSONAE:

  (1) My old Lord Durrisdeer.

  (2) The Master of Ballantrae, _and_

  (3) Henry Durie, _his sons_.

  (4) Clementina, _engaged to the first_, _married to the second_.

  (5) Ephraim Mackellar, _land steward at Durrisdeer and narrator of the
  most of the book_.

  (6) Francis Burke, Chevalier de St. Louis, _one of Prince Charlie’s
  Irishmen and narrator of the rest_.

Besides these, many instant figures, most of them dumb or nearly so:
Jessie Brown the whore, Captain Crail, Captain MacCombie, our old friend
Alan Breck, our old friend Riach (both only for an instant), Teach the
pirate (vulgarly Blackbeard), John Paul and Macconochie, servants at
Durrisdeer.  The date is from 1745 to ’65 (about).  The scene, near
Kirkcudbright, in the States, and for a little moment in the French East
Indies.  I have done most of the big work, the quarrel, duel between the
brothers, and announcement of the death to Clementina and my
Lord—Clementina, Henry, and Mackellar (nicknamed Squaretoes) are really
very fine fellows; the Master is all I know of the devil.  I have known
hints of him, in the world, but always cowards; he is as bold as a lion,
but with the same deadly, causeless duplicity I have watched with so much
surprise in my two cowards.  ’Tis true, I saw a hint of the same nature
in another man who was not a coward; but he had other things to attend
to; the Master has nothing else but his devilry.  Here come my
visitors—and have now gone, or the first relay of them; and I hope no
more may come.  For mark you, sir, this is our ‘day’—Saturday, as ever
was, and here we sit, my mother and I, before a large wood fire and await
the enemy with the most steadfast courage; and without snow and greyness:
and the woman Fanny in New York for her health, which is far from good;
and the lad Lloyd at the inn in the village because he has a cold; and
the handmaid Valentine abroad in a sleigh upon her messages; and
to-morrow Christmas and no mistake.  Such is human life: _la carrière
humaine_.  I will enclose, if I remember, the required autograph.

I will do better, put it on the back of this page.  Love to all, and
mostly, my very dear Colvin, to yourself.  For whatever I say or do, or
don’t say or do, you may be very sure I am,—Yours always affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MISS ADELAIDE BOODLE


        _Saranac Lake_, _Adirondacks_, _N.Y._, _U.S.A._, _Christmas_ 1887.

MY DEAR MISS BOODLE,—And a very good Christmas to you all; and better
fortune; and if worse, the more courage to support it—which I think is
the kinder wish in all human affairs.  Somewhile—I fear a good
while—after this, you should receive our Christmas gift; we have no tact
and no taste, only a welcome and (often) tonic brutality; and I dare say
the present, even after my friend Baxter has acted on and reviewed my
hints, may prove a White Elephant.  That is why I dread presents.  And
therefore pray understand if any element of that hamper prove unwelcome,
_it is to be exchanged_.  I will not sit down under the name of a giver
of White Elephants.  I never had any elephant but one, and his initials
were R. L. S.; and he trod on my foot at a very early age.  But this is a
fable, and not in the least to the point: which is that if, for once in
my life, I have wished to make things nicer for anybody but the Elephant
(see fable), do not suffer me to have made them ineffably more
embarrassing, and exchange—ruthlessly exchange!

For my part, I am the most cockered up of any mortal being; and one of
the healthiest, or thereabout, at some modest distance from the bull’s
eye.  I am condemned to write twelve articles in _Scribner’s Magazine_
for the love of gain; I think I had better send you them; what is far
more to the purpose, I am on the jump with a new story which has
bewitched me—I doubt it may bewitch no one else.  It is called _The
Master of Ballantrae_—pronounce Bällän-tray.  If it is not good, well,
mine will be the fault; for I believe it is a good tale.

The greetings of the season to you, and your mother, and your sisters.
My wife heartily joins.—And I am, yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—You will think me an illiterate dog: I am, for the first time,
reading _Robertson’s Sermons_.  I do not know how to express how much I
think of them.  If by any chance you should be as illiterate as I, and
not know them, it is worth while curing the defect.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


                                            _Saranac Lake_, _January_ ’88.

DEAR CHARLES,—You are the flower of Doers. . . . Will my doer collaborate
thus much in my new novel?  In the year 1794 or 5, Mr. Ephraim Mackellar,
A.M., late steward on the Durrisdeer estates, completed a set of
memoranda (as long as a novel) with regard to the death of the (then)
late Lord Durrisdeer, and as to that of his attainted elder brother,
called by the family courtesy title the Master of Ballantrae.  These he
placed in the hands of John Macbrair.  W.S., the family agent, on the
understanding they were to be sealed until 1862, when a century would
have elapsed since the affair in the wilderness (my lord’s death).  You
succeeded Mr. Macbrair’s firm; the Durrisdeers are extinct; and last
year, in an old green box, you found these papers with Macbrair’s
indorsation.  It is that indorsation of which I want a copy; you may
remember, when you gave me the papers, I neglected to take that, and I am
sure you are a man too careful of antiquities to have let it fall aside.
I shall have a little introduction descriptive of my visit to Edinburgh,
arrival there, denner with yoursel’, and first reading of the papers in
your smoking-room: all of which, of course, you well remember.—Ever yours
affectionately,

                                                                   R. L S.

Your name is my friend Mr. Johnstone Thomson, W.S.!!!



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                               _Saranac_, _Winter_ 1887–8.

DEAR MR. BURLINGAME,—I am keeping the sermon to see if I can’t add
another.  Meanwhile, I will send you very soon a different paper which
may take its place.  Possibly some of these days soon I may get together
a talk on things current, which should go in (if possible) earlier than
either.  I am now less nervous about these papers; I believe I can do the
trick without great strain, though the terror that breathed on my back in
the beginning is not yet forgotten.

_The Master of Ballantrae_ I have had to leave aside, as I was quite
worked out.  But in about a week I hope to try back and send you the
first four numbers: these are all drafted, it is only the revision that
has broken me down, as it is often the hardest work.  These four I
propose you should set up for me at once, and we’ll copyright ’em in a
pamphlet.  I will tell you the names of the _bona fide_ purchasers in
England.

The numbers will run from twenty to thirty pages of my manuscript.  You
can give me that much, can you not?  It is a howling good tale—at least
these first four numbers are; the end is a trifle more fantastic, but
’tis all picturesque.

Don’t trouble about any more French books; I am on another scent, you
see, just now.  Only the _French in Hindustan_ I await with impatience,
as that is for _Ballantrae_.  The scene of that romance is Scotland—the
States—Scotland—India—Scotland—and the States again; so it jumps like a
flea.  I have enough about the States now, and very much obliged I am;
yet if Drake’s _Tragedies of the Wilderness_ is (as I gather) a
collection of originals, I should like to purchase it.  If it is a
picturesque vulgarisation, I do not wish to look it in the face.
Purchase, I say; for I think it would be well to have some such
collection by me with a view to fresh works.—Yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—If you think of having the _Master_ illustrated, I suggest that
Hole would be very well up to the Scottish, which is the larger part.  If
you have it done here, tell your artist to look at the hall of Craigievar
in Billing’s _Baronial and Ecclesiastical Antiquities_, and he will get a
broad hint for the hall at Durrisdeer: it is, I think, the chimney of
Craigievar and the roof of Pinkie, and perhaps a little more of Pinkie
altogether; but I should have to see the book myself to be sure.  Hole
would be invaluable for this.  I dare say if you had it illustrated, you
could let me have one or two for the English edition.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO WILLIAM ARCHER


                                             [_Saranac_, _Winter_ 1887–8.]

MY DEAR ARCHER,—What am I to say?  I have read your friend’s book with
singular relish.  If he has written any other, I beg you will let me see
it; and if he has not, I beg him to lose no time in supplying the
deficiency.  It is full of promise; but I should like to know his age.
There are things in it that are very clever, to which I attach small
importance; it is the shape of the age.  And there are passages,
particularly the rally in presence of the Zulu king, that show genuine
and remarkable narrative talent—a talent that few will have the wit to
understand, a talent of strength, spirit, capacity, sufficient vision,
and sufficient self-sacrifice, which last is the chief point in a
narrator.

As a whole, it is (of course) a fever dream of the most feverish.  Over
Bashville the footman I howled with derision and delight; I dote on
Bashville—I could read of him for ever; _de Bashville je suis le
fervent_—there is only one Bashville, and I am his devoted slave;
_Bashville est magnifique_, _mais il n’est guère possible_.  He is the
note of the book.  It is all mad, mad and deliriously delightful; the
author has a taste in chivalry like Walter Scott’s or Dumas’, and then he
daubs in little bits of socialism; he soars away on the wings of the
romantic griffon—even the griffon, as he cleaves air, shouting with
laughter at the nature of the quest—and I believe in his heart he thinks
he is labouring in a quarry of solid granite realism.

It is this that makes me—the most hardened adviser now extant—stand back
and hold my peace.  If Mr. Shaw is below five-and-twenty, let him go his
path; if he is thirty, he had best be told that he is a romantic, and
pursue romance with his eyes open;—or perhaps he knows it;—God knows!—my
brain is softened.

It is HORRID FUN.  All I ask is more of it.  Thank you for the pleasure
you gave us, and tell me more of the inimitable author.

(I say, Archer, my God, what women!)—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO WILLIAM ARCHER


                                               _Saranac_, _February_ 1888.

MY DEAR ARCHER,—Pretty sick in bed; but necessary to protest and continue
your education.

Why was Jenkin an amateur in my eyes?  You think because not amusing (I
think he often was amusing).  The reason is this: I never, or almost
never, saw two pages of his work that I could not have put in one without
the smallest loss of material.  That is the only test I know of writing.
If there is anywhere a thing said in two sentences that could have been
as clearly and as engagingly and as forcibly said in one, then it’s
amateur work.  Then you will bring me up with old Dumas.  Nay, the object
of a story is to be long, to fill up hours; the story-teller’s art of
writing is to water out by continual invention, historical and technical,
and yet not seem to water; seem on the other hand to practise that same
wit of conspicuous and declaratory condensation which is the proper art
of writing.  That is one thing in which my stories fail: I am always
cutting the flesh off their bones.

I would rise from the dead to preach!

Hope all well.  I think my wife better, but she’s not allowed to write;
and this (only wrung from me by desire to Boss and Parsonise and
Dominate, strong in sickness) is my first letter for days, and will
likely be my last for many more.  Not blame my wife for her silence:
doctor’s orders.  All much interested by your last, and fragment from
brother, and anecdotes of Tomarcher.—The sick but still Moral

                                                                  R. L. S.

Tell Shaw to hurry up: I want another.



TO WILLIAM ARCHER


                                               [_Saranac_, _Spring_ 1888?]

MY DEAR ARCHER,—It happened thus.  I came forth from that performance in
a breathing heat of indignation.  (Mind, at this distance of time and
with my increased knowledge, I admit there is a problem in the piece; but
I saw none then, except a problem in brutality; and I still consider the
problem in that case not established.)  On my way down the _Français_
stairs, I trod on an old gentleman’s toes, whereupon with that suavity
that so well becomes me, I turned about to apologise, and on the instant,
repenting me of that intention, stopped the apology midway, and added
something in French to this effect: No, you are one of the _lâches_ who
have been applauding that piece.  I retract my apology.  Said the old
Frenchman, laying his hand on my arm, and with a smile that was truly
heavenly in temperance, irony, good-nature, and knowledge of the world,
‘Ah, monsieur, vous êtes bien jeune!’—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                              _Saranac_ [_February_ 1888].

DEAR MR. BURLINGAME,—Will you send me (from the library) some of the
works of my dear old G. P. R. James.  With the following especially I
desire to make or to renew acquaintance: _The Songster_, _The Gipsy_,
_The Convict_, _The Stepmother_, _The Gentleman of the Old School_, _The
Robber_.

_Excusez du peu_.

This sudden return to an ancient favourite hangs upon an accident.  The
‘Franklin County Library’ contains two works of his, _The Cavalier_ and
_Morley Ernstein_.  I read the first with indescribable amusement—it was
worse than I had feared, and yet somehow engaging; the second (to my
surprise) was better than I had dared to hope: a good honest, dull,
interesting tale, with a genuine old-fashioned talent in the invention
when not strained; and a genuine old-fashioned feeling for the English
language.  This experience awoke appetite, and you see I have taken steps
to stay it.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO E. L. BURLINGAME


                                             [_Saranac_, _February_ 1888.]

DEAR MR. BURLINGAME,—1.  Of course then don’t use it.  Dear Man, I write
these to please you, not myself, and you know a main sight better than I
do what is good.  In that case, however, I enclose another paper, and
return the corrected proof of _Pulvis et Umbra_, so that we may be
afloat.

2.  I want to say a word as to the _Master_.  (_The Master of Ballantrae_
shall be the name by all means.)  If you like and want it, I leave it to
you to make an offer.  You may remember I thought the offer you made when
I was still in England too small; by which I did not at all mean, I
thought it less than it was worth, but too little to tempt me to undergo
the disagreeables of serial publication.  This tale (if you want it) you
are to have; for it is the least I can do for you; and you are to observe
that the sum you pay me for my articles going far to meet my wants, I am
quite open to be satisfied with less than formerly.  I tell you I do
dislike this battle of the dollars.  I feel sure you all pay too much
here in America; and I beg you not to spoil me any more.  For I am
getting spoiled: I do not want wealth, and I feel these big sums
demoralise me.

My wife came here pretty ill; she had a dreadful bad night; to-day she is
better.  But now Valentine is ill; and Lloyd and I have got breakfast,
and my hand somewhat shakes after washing dishes.—Yours very sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

_P.S._—Please order me the _Evening Post_ for two months.  My
subscription is run out.  The _Mutiny_ and _Edwardes_ to hand.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                                [_Saranac_, _March_ 1888.]

MY DEAR COLVIN,—Fanny has been very unwell.  She is not long home, has
been ill again since her return, but is now better again to a degree.
You must not blame her for not writing, as she is not allowed to write at
all, not even a letter.  To add to our misfortunes, Valentine is quite
ill and in bed.  Lloyd and I get breakfast; I have now, 10.15, just got
the dishes washed and the kitchen all clear, and sit down to give you as
much news as I have spirit for, after such an engagement.  Glass is a
thing that really breaks my spirit: I do not like to fail, and with glass
I cannot reach the work of my high calling—the artist’s.

I am, as you may gather from this, wonderfully better: this harsh, grey,
glum, doleful climate has done me good.  You cannot fancy how sad a
climate it is.  When the thermometer stays all day below 10°, it is
really cold; and when the wind blows, O commend me to the result.
Pleasure in life is all delete; there is no red spot left, fires do not
radiate, you burn your hands all the time on what seem to be cold stones.
It is odd, zero is like summer heat to us now; and we like, when the
thermometer outside is really low, a room at about 48°: 60° we find
oppressive.  Yet the natives keep their holes at 90° or even 100°.

This was interrupted days ago by household labours.  Since then I have
had and (I tremble to write it, but it does seem as if I had) beaten off
an influenza.  The cold is exquisite.  Valentine still in bed.  The
proofs of the first part of the _Master of Ballantrae_ begin to come in;
soon you shall have it in the pamphlet form; and I hope you will like it.
The second part will not be near so good; but there—we can but do as
it’ll do with us.  I have every reason to believe this winter has done me
real good, so far as it has gone; and if I carry out my scheme for next
winter, and succeeding years, I should end by being a tower of strength.
I want you to save a good holiday for next winter; I hope we shall be
able to help you to some larks.  Is there any Greek Isle you would like
to explore? or any creek in Asia Minor?—Yours ever affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO THE REV. DR. CHARTERIS


                                     [_Saranac Lake_, _Winter_ 1887–1888.]

MY DEAR DR. CHARTERIS,—I have asked Douglas and Foulis to send you my
last volume, so that you may possess my little paper on my father in a
permanent shape; not for what that is worth, but as a tribute of respect
to one whom my father regarded with such love, esteem, and affection.
Besides, as you will see, I have brought you under contribution, and I
have still to thank you for your letter to my mother; so more than kind;
in much, so just.  It is my hope, when time and health permit, to do
something more definite for my father’s memory.  You are one of the very
few who can (if you will) help me.  Pray believe that I lay on you no
obligation; I know too well, you may believe me, how difficult it is to
put even two sincere lines upon paper, where all, too, is to order.  But
if the spirit should ever move you, and you should recall something
memorable of your friend, his son will heartily thank you for a note of
it.—With much respect, believe me, yours sincerely,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                           [_Saranac Lake_, _March_ 1888.]

MY DEAR DELIGHTFUL JAMES,—To quote your heading to my wife, I think no
man writes so elegant a letter, I am sure none so kind, unless it be
Colvin, and there is more of the stern parent about him.  I was vexed at
your account of my admired Meredith: I wish I could go and see him; as it
is I will try to write.  I read with indescribable admiration your
_Emerson_.  I begin to long for the day when these portraits of yours
shall be collected: do put me in.  But Emerson is a higher flight.  Have
you a _Tourgueneff_?  You have told me many interesting things of him,
and I seem to see them written, and forming a graceful and _bildend_
sketch.  My novel is a tragedy; four parts out of six or seven are
written, and gone to Burlingame.  Five parts of it are sound, human
tragedy; the last one or two, I regret to say, not so soundly designed; I
almost hesitate to write them; they are very picturesque, but they are
fantastic; they shame, perhaps degrade, the beginning.  I wish I knew;
that was how the tale came to me however.  I got the situation; it was an
old taste of mine: The older brother goes out in the ’45, the younger
stays; the younger, of course, gets title and estate and marries the
bride designate of the elder—a family match, but he (the younger) had
always loved her, and she had really loved the elder.  Do you see the
situation?  Then the devil and Saranac suggested this _dénouement_, and I
joined the two ends in a day or two of constant feverish thought, and
began to write.  And now—I wonder if I have not gone too far with the
fantastic?  The elder brother is an INCUBUS: supposed to be killed at
Culloden, he turns up again and bleeds the family of money; on that
stopping he comes and lives with them, whence flows the real tragedy, the
nocturnal duel of the brothers (very naturally, and indeed, I think,
inevitably arising), and second supposed death of the elder.  Husband and
wife now really make up, and then the cloven hoof appears.  For the third
supposed death and the manner of the third reappearance is steep; steep,
sir.  It is even very steep, and I fear it shames the honest stuff so
far; but then it is highly pictorial, and it leads up to the death of the
elder brother at the hands of the younger in a perfectly cold-blooded
murder, of which I wish (and mean) the reader to approve.  You see how
daring is the design.  There are really but six characters, and one of
these episodic, and yet it covers eighteen years, and will be, I imagine,
the longest of my works.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.

_Read Gosse’s Raleigh_.  First-rate.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO THE REV. DR. CHARTERIS


                                            _Saranac Lake_, _Adirondacks_,
                                      _New York_, _U.S.A._, _Spring_ 1888.

MY DEAR DR. CHARTERIS,—The funeral letter, your notes, and many other
things, are reserved for a book, _Memorials of a Scottish Family_, if
ever I can find time and opportunity.  I wish I could throw off all else
and sit down to it to-day.  Yes, my father was a ‘distinctly religious
man,’ but not a pious.  The distinction painfully and pleasurably recalls
old conflicts; it used to be my great gun—and you, who suffered for the
whole Church, know how needful it was to have some reserve artillery!
His sentiments were tragic; he was a tragic thinker.  Now, granted that
life is tragic to the marrow, it seems the proper function of religion to
make us accept and serve in that tragedy, as officers in that other and
comparable one of war.  Service is the word, active service, in the
military sense; and the religious man—I beg pardon, the pious man—is he
who has a military joy in duty—not he who weeps over the wounded.  We can
do no more than try to do our best.  Really, I am the grandson of the
manse—I preach you a kind of sermon.  Box the brat’s ears!

My mother—to pass to matters more within my competence—finely enjoys
herself.  The new country, some new friends we have made, the interesting
experiment of this climate-which (at least) is tragic—all have done her
good.  I have myself passed a better winter than for years, and now that
it is nearly over have some diffident hopes of doing well in the summer
and ‘eating a little more air’ than usual.

I thank you for the trouble you are taking, and my mother joins with me
in kindest regards to yourself and Mrs. Charteris.—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO S. R. CROCKETT


                                          [_Saranac Lake_, _Spring_ 1888.]

DEAR MINISTER OF THE FREE KIRK AT PENICUIK,—For O, man, I cannae read
your name!—That I have been so long in answering your delightful letter
sits on my conscience badly.  The fact is I let my correspondence
accumulate until I am going to leave a place; and then I pitch in,
overhaul the pile, and my cries of penitence might be heard a mile about.
Yesterday I despatched thirty-five belated letters: conceive the state of
my conscience, above all as the Sins of Omission (see boyhood’s guide,
the Shorter Catechism) are in my view the only serious ones; I call it my
view, but it cannot have escaped you that it was also Christ’s.  However,
all that is not to the purpose, which is to thank you for the sincere
pleasure afforded by your charming letter.  I get a good few such; how
few that please me at all, you would be surprised to learn—or have a
singularly just idea of the dulness of our race; how few that please me
as yours did, I can tell you in one word—_None_.  I am no great kirkgoer,
for many reasons—and the sermon’s one of them, and the first prayer
another, but the chief and effectual reason is the stuffiness.  I am no
great kirkgoer, says I, but when I read yon letter of yours, I thought I
would like to sit under ye.  And then I saw ye were to send me a bit
buik, and says I, I’ll wait for the bit buik, and then I’ll mebbe can
read the man’s name, and anyway I’ll can kill twa birds wi’ ae stane.
And, man! the buik was ne’er heard tell o’!

That fact is an adminicle of excuse for my delay.

And now, dear minister of the illegible name, thanks to you, and greeting
to your wife, and may you have good guidance in your difficult labours,
and a blessing on your life.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

              (No just so young sae young’s he was, though—
                       I’m awfae near forty, man.)

                                      Address c/o CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS,
                                                   743 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

Don’t put ‘N.B.’ in your paper: put _Scotland_, and be done with it.
Alas, that I should be thus stabbed in the home of my friends!  The name
of my native land is not _North Britain_, whatever may be the name of
yours.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MISS FERRIER


                                           [_Saranac Lake_, _April_ 1888.]

MY DEAREST COGGIE,—I wish I could find the letter I began to you some
time ago when I was ill; but I can’t and I don’t believe there was much
in it anyway.  We have all behaved like pigs and beasts and barn-door
poultry to you; but I have been sunk in work, and the lad is lazy and
blind and has been working too; and as for Fanny, she has been (and still
is) really unwell.  I had a mean hope you might perhaps write again
before I got up steam: I could not have been more ashamed of myself than
I am, and I should have had another laugh.

They always say I cannot give news in my letters: I shall shake off that
reproach.  On Monday, if she is well enough, Fanny leaves for California
to see her friends; it is rather an anxiety to let her go alone; but the
doctor simply forbids it in my case, and she is better anywhere than
here—a bleak, blackguard, beggarly climate, of which I can say no good
except that it suits me and some others of the same or similar
persuasions whom (by all rights) it ought to kill.  It is a form of
Arctic St. Andrews, I should imagine; and the miseries of forty degrees
below zero, with a high wind, have to be felt to be appreciated.  The
greyness of the heavens here is a circumstance eminently revolting to the
soul; I have near forgot the aspect of the sun—I doubt if this be news;
it is certainly no news to us.  My mother suffers a little from the
inclemency of the place, but less on the whole than would be imagined.
Among other wild schemes, we have been projecting yacht voyages; and I
beg to inform you that Cogia Hassan was cast for the part of passenger.
They may come off!—Again this is not news.  The lad?  Well, the lad wrote
a tale this winter, which appeared to me so funny that I have taken it in
hand, and some of these days you will receive a copy of a work entitled
‘_A Game of Bluff_, by Lloyd Osbourne and Robert Louis Stevenson.’

Otherwise he (the lad) is much as usual.  There remains, I believe, to be
considered only R. L. S., the house-bond, prop, pillar, bread-winner, and
bully of the establishment.  Well, I do think him much better; he is
making piles of money; the hope of being able to hire a yacht ere long
dances before his eyes; otherwise he is not in very high spirits at this
particular moment, though compared with last year at Bournemouth an angel
of joy.

And now is this news, Cogia, or is it not?  It all depends upon the point
of view, and I call it news.  The devil of it is that I can think of
nothing else, except to send you all our loves, and to wish exceedingly
you were here to cheer us all up.  But we’ll see about that on board the
yacht.—Your affectionate friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                    [_Saranac Lake_], _April_ 9_th_!! 1888

MY DEAR COLVIN,—I have been long without writing to you, but am not to
blame, I had some little annoyances quite for a private eye, but they ran
me so hard that I could not write without lugging them in, which (for
several reasons) I did not choose to do.  Fanny is off to San Francisco,
and next week I myself flit to New York: address Scribner’s.  Where we
shall go I know not, nor (I was going to say) care; so bald and bad is my
frame of mind.  Do you know our—ahem!—fellow clubman, Colonel Majendie?
I had such an interesting letter from him.  Did you see my sermon?  It
has evoked the worst feeling: I fear people don’t care for the truth, or
else I don’t tell it.  Suffer me to wander without purpose.  I have sent
off twenty letters to-day, and begun and stuck at a twenty-first, and
taken a copy of one which was on business, and corrected several galleys
of proof, and sorted about a bushel of old letters; so if any one has a
right to be romantically stupid it is I—and I am.  Really deeply stupid,
and at that stage when in old days I used to pour out words without any
meaning whatever and with my mind taking no part in the performance.  I
suspect that is now the case.  I am reading with extraordinary pleasure
the life of Lord Lawrence: Lloyd and I have a mutiny novel—

(_Next morning_, _after twelve other letters_)—mutiny novel on hand—a
tremendous work—so we are all at Indian books.  The idea of the novel is
Lloyd’s: I call it a novel.  ’Tis a tragic romance, of the most tragic
sort: I believe the end will be almost too much for human endurance—when
the hero is thrown to the ground with one of his own (Sepoy) soldier’s
knees upon his chest, and the cries begin in the Beebeeghar.  O truly,
you know it is a howler!  The whole last part is—well the difficulty is
that, short of resuscitating Shakespeare, I don’t know who is to write
it.

I still keep wonderful.  I am a great performer before the Lord on the
penny whistle.  Dear sir, sincerely yours,

                                                           ANDREW JACKSON.



TO MISS ADELAIDE BOODLE


                                           [_Saranac Lake_, _April_ 1888.]
                                    _Address c/o Messrs. Scribner’s Sons_,
                                                    743 _Broadway_, _N.Y._

MY DEAR GAMEKEEPER,—Your p. c. (proving you a good student of Micawber)
has just arrived, and it paves the way to something I am anxious to say.
I wrote a paper the other day—_Pulvis et Umbra_;—I wrote it with great
feeling and conviction: to me it seemed bracing and healthful, it is in
such a world (so seen by me), that I am very glad to fight out my battle,
and see some fine sunsets, and hear some excellent jests between whiles
round the camp fire.  But I find that to some people this vision of mine
is a nightmare, and extinguishes all ground of faith in God or pleasure
in man.  Truth I think not so much of; for I do not know it.  And I could
wish in my heart that I had not published this paper, if it troubles folk
too much: all have not the same digestion, nor the same sight of things.
And it came over me with special pain that perhaps this article (which I
was at the pains to send to her) might give dismalness to my _Gamekeeper
at Home_.  Well, I cannot take back what I have said; but yet I may add
this.  If my view be everything but the nonsense that it may be—to me it
seems self-evident and blinding truth—surely of all things it makes this
world holier.  There is nothing in it but the moral side—but the great
battle and the breathing times with their refreshments.  I see no more
and no less.  And if you look again, it is not ugly, and it is filled
with promise.

Pray excuse a desponding author for this apology.  My wife is away off to
the uttermost parts of the States, all by herself.  I shall be off, I
hope, in a week; but where?  Ah! that I know not.  I keep wonderful, and
my wife a little better, and the lad flourishing.  We now perform duets
on two D tin whistles; it is no joke to make the bass; I think I must
really send you one, which I wish you would correct . . . I may be said
to live for these instrumental labours now, but I have always some
childishness on hand.—I am, dear Gamekeeper, your indulgent but
intemperate Squire,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO CHARLES BAXTER


          _Union House_, _Manasquan_, _N.J._, _but address to Scribner’s_,
                                                        11_th_ _May_ 1888.

MY DEAR CHARLES,—I have found a yacht, and we are going the full pitch
for seven months.  If I cannot get my health back (more or less), ’tis
madness; but, of course, there is the hope, and I will play big. . . . If
this business fails to set me up, well, £2000 is gone, and I know I can’t
get better.  We sail from San Francisco, June 15th, for the South Seas in
the yacht _Casco_.—With a million thanks for all your dear friendliness,
ever yours affectionately,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HOMER ST. GAUDENS


                             _Manasquan_, _New Jersey_, 27_th_ _May_ 1888.

DEAR HOMER ST. GAUDENS,—Your father has brought you this day to see me,
and he tells me it is his hope you may remember the occasion.  I am going
to do what I can to carry out his wish; and it may amuse you, years
after, to see this little scrap of paper and to read what I write.  I
must begin by testifying that you yourself took no interest whatever in
the introduction, and in the most proper spirit displayed a single-minded
ambition to get back to play, and this I thought an excellent and
admirable point in your character.  You were also (I use the past tense,
with a view to the time when you shall read, rather than to that when I
am writing) a very pretty boy, and (to my European views) startlingly
self-possessed.  My time of observation was so limited that you must
pardon me if I can say no more: what else I marked, what restlessness of
foot and hand, what graceful clumsiness, what experimental designs upon
the furniture, was but the common inheritance of human youth.  But you
may perhaps like to know that the lean flushed man in bed, who interested
you so little, was in a state of mind extremely mingled and unpleasant:
harassed with work which he thought he was not doing well, troubled with
difficulties to which you will in time succeed, and yet looking forward
to no less a matter than a voyage to the South Seas and the visitation of
savage and desert islands.—Your father’s friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO HENRY JAMES


                  _Manasquan_ (_ahem_!), _New Jersey_, _May_ 28_th_, 1888.

MY DEAR JAMES,—With what a torrent it has come at last!  Up to now, what
I like best is the first number of a _London Life_.  You have never done
anything better, and I don’t know if perhaps you have ever done anything
so good as the girl’s outburst: tip-top.  I have been preaching your
later works in your native land.  I had to present the Beltraffio volume
to Low, and it has brought him to his knees; he was _amazed_ at the first
part of Georgina’s Reasons, although (like me) not so well satisfied with
