The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Letters of Robert Louis Stevenson to his
Family and Friends - Volume 2 [of 2], by Robert Louis Stevenson, Edited by
Sidney Colvin


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Letters of Robert Louis Stevenson to his Family and Friends - Volume 2 [of 2]


Author: Robert Louis Stevenson

Editor: Sidney Colvin

Release Date: August 27, 2019  [eBook #637]
[This file was first posted on July 11, 1996]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LETTERS OF ROBERT LOUIS
STEVENSON TO HIS FAMILY AND FRIENDS - VOLUME 1 [OF 2]***


Transcribed from the 1906 Methuen and Co edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                          [Picture: Book cover]

                    [Picture: Robert Louis Stevenson]





                              THE LETTERS OF
                               ROBERT LOUIS
                                STEVENSON


                        TO HIS FAMILY AND FRIENDS

                         SELECTED AND EDITED WITH
                        NOTES AND INTRODUCTION BY

                              SIDNEY COLVIN

                                VOLUME II

                                * * * * *

                                  LONDON
                             METHUEN AND CO.
                             36 ESSEX STREET

                            _Seventh Edition_

_First Published_    _November 1899_
_Second Edition_     _November 1899_
_Third Edition_      _April 1900_
_Fourth Edition_     _November 1900_
_Fifth Edition_      _January 1901_
_Sixth Edition_      _October 1902_
_Seventh Edition_    _December 1906_




CONTENTS

                        VIII                                 6
           LIFE AT BOURNEMOUTH—_Continued_
                         IX                                 59
               THE UNITED STATES AGAIN
              WINTER IN THE ADIRONDACKS
                          X                                114
                   PACIFIC VOYAGES
                         XI                                209
                    LIFE IN SAMOA
                         XII                               285
              LIFE IN SAMOA—_continued_




VIII
LIFE AT BOURNEMOUTH,
_Continued_,
JANUARY 1886-JULY 1887.


TO MRS. DE MATTOS


                     [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], _January_ 1_st_, 1886.

DEAREST KATHARINE,—Here, on a very little book and accompanied with lame
verses, I have put your name.  Our kindness is now getting well on in
years; it must be nearly of age; and it gets more valuable to me with
every time I see you.  It is not possible to express any sentiment, and
it is not necessary to try, at least between us.  You know very well that
I love you dearly, and that I always will.  I only wish the verses were
better, but at least you like the story; and it is sent to you by the one
that loves you—Jekyll, and not Hyde.

                                                                  R. L. S.

                                  _Ave_!

   Bells upon the city are ringing in the night;
   High above the gardens are the houses full of light;
   On the heathy Pentlands is the curlew flying free;
   And the broom is blowing bonnie in the north countrie.

   We cannae break the bonds that God decreed to bind,
   Still we’ll be the children of the heather and the wind;
   Far away from home, O, it’s still for you and me
   That the broom is blowing bonnie in the north countrie!

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO ALISON CUNNINGHAM


                               [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], 1_st_, 1886.

MY DEAR KINNICUM,—I am a very bad dog, but not for the first time.  Your
book, which is very interesting, came duly; and I immediately got a very
bad cold indeed, and have been fit for nothing whatever.  I am a bit
better now, and aye on the mend; so I write to tell you, I thought of you
on New Year’s Day; though, I own, it would have been more decent if I had
thought in time for you to get my letter then.  Well, what can’t be cured
must be endured, Mr. Lawrie; and you must be content with what I give.
If I wrote all the letters I ought to write, and at the proper time, I
should be very good and very happy; but I doubt if I should do anything
else.

I suppose you will be in town for the New Year; and I hope your health is
pretty good.  What you want is diet; but it is as much use to tell you
that as it is to tell my father.  And I quite admit a diet is a beastly
thing.  I doubt, however, if it be as bad as not being allowed to speak,
which I have tried fully, and do not like.  When, at the same time, I was
not allowed to read, it passed a joke.  But these are troubles of the
past, and on this day, at least, it is proper to suppose they won’t
return.  But we are not put here to enjoy ourselves: it was not God’s
purpose; and I am prepared to argue, it is not our sincere wish.  As for
our deserts, the less said of them the better, for somebody might hear,
and nobody cares to be laughed at.  A good man is a very noble thing to
see, but not to himself; what he seems to God is, fortunately, not our
business; that is the domain of faith; and whether on the first of
January or the thirty-first of December, faith is a good word to end on.

My dear Cummy, many happy returns to you and my best love.—The worst
correspondent in the world,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MR. AND MRS. THOMAS STEVENSON


                     [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], _January_ 1_st_, 1886.

MY DEAR PEOPLE,—Many happy returns of the day to you all; I am fairly
well and in good spirits; and much and hopefully occupied with dear
Jenkin’s life.  The inquiry in every detail, every letter that I read,
makes me think of him more nobly.  I cannot imagine how I got his
friendship; I did not deserve it.  I believe the notice will be
interesting and useful.

My father’s last letter, owing to the use of a quill pen and the neglect
of blotting-paper, was hopelessly illegible.  Every one tried, and every
one failed to decipher an important word on which the interest of one
whole clause (and the letter consisted of two) depended.

I find I can make little more of this; but I’ll spare the blots.—Dear
people, ever your loving son,

                                                                  R. L. S.

I will try again, being a giant refreshed by the house being empty.  The
presence of people is the great obstacle to letter-writing.  I deny that
letters should contain news (I mean mine; those of other people should).
But mine should contain appropriate sentiments and humorous nonsense, or
nonsense without the humour.  When the house is empty, the mind is seized
with a desire—no, that is too strong—a willingness to pour forth
unmitigated rot, which constitutes (in me) the true spirit of
correspondence.  When I have no remarks to offer (and nobody to offer
them to), my pen flies, and you see the remarkable consequence of a page
literally covered with words and genuinely devoid of sense.  I can always
do that, if quite alone, and I like doing it; but I have yet to learn
that it is beloved by correspondents.  The deuce of it is, that there is
no end possible but the end of the paper; and as there is very little
left of that—if I cannot stop writing—suppose you give up reading.  It
would all come to the same thing; and I think we should all be happier . . .



TO W. H. LOW


                        [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], _Jan._ 2_nd_, 1886.

MY DEAR LOW,—_Lamia_ has come, and I do not know how to thank you, not
only for the beautiful art of the designs, but for the handsome and apt
words of the dedication.  My favourite is ‘Bathes unseen,’ which is a
masterpiece; and the next, ‘Into the green recessed woods,’ is perhaps
more remarkable, though it does not take my fancy so imperiously.  The
night scene at Corinth pleases me also.  The second part offers fewer
opportunities.  I own I should like to see both _Isabella_ and the _Eve_
thus illustrated; and then there’s _Hyperion_—O, yes, and _Endymion_!  I
should like to see the lot: beautiful pictures dance before me by
hundreds: I believe _Endymion_ would suit you best.  It also is in
faery-land; and I see a hundred opportunities, cloudy and flowery
glories, things as delicate as the cobweb in the bush; actions, not in
themselves of any mighty purport, but made for the pencil: the feast of
Pan, Peona’s isle, the ‘slabbed margin of a well,’ the chase of the
butterfly, the nymph, Glaucus, Cybele, Sleep on his couch, a farrago of
unconnected beauties.  But I divagate; and all this sits in the bosom of
the publisher.

What is more important, I accept the terms of the dedication with a frank
heart, and the terms of your Latin legend fairly.  The sight of your
pictures has once more awakened me to my right mind; something may come
of it; yet one more bold push to get free of this prisonyard of the
abominably ugly, where I take my daily exercise with my contemporaries.
I do not know, I have a feeling in my bones, a sentiment which may take
on the forms of imagination, or may not.  If it does, I shall owe it to
you; and the thing will thus descend from Keats even if on the wrong side
of the blanket.  If it can be done in prose—that is the puzzle—I divagate
again.  Thank you again: you can draw and yet you do not love the ugly:
what are you doing in this age?  Flee, while it is yet time; they will
have your four limbs pinned upon a stable door to scare witches.  The
ugly, my unhappy friend, is _de rigueur_: it is the only wear!  What a
chance you threw away with the serpent!  Why had Apollonius no pimples?
Heavens, my dear Low, you do not know your business. . . .

I send you herewith a Gothic gnome for your Greek nymph; but the gnome is
interesting, I think, and he came out of a deep mine, where he guards the
fountain of tears.  It is not always the time to rejoice.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.

The gnome’s name is _Jekyll & Hyde_; I believe you will find he is
likewise quite willing to answer to the name of Low or Stevenson.

_Same day_.—I have copied out on the other sheet some bad verses, which
somehow your picture suggested; as a kind of image of things that I
pursue and cannot reach, and that you seem—no, not to have reached—but to
have come a thought nearer to than I.  This is the life we have chosen:
well, the choice was mad, but I should make it again.

What occurs to me is this: perhaps they might be printed in (say) the
_Century_ for the sake of my name; and if that were possible, they might
advertise your book.  It might be headed as sent in acknowledgment of
your _Lamia_.  Or perhaps it might be introduced by the phrases I have
marked above.  I dare say they would stick it in: I want no payment,
being well paid by _Lamia_.  If they are not, keep them to yourself.



TO WILL H. LOW


            _Damned bad lines in return for a beautiful book_

   Youth now flees on feathered foot.
   Faint and fainter sounds the flute;
   Rarer songs of Gods.
                                    And still,
   Somewhere on the sunny hill,
   Or along the winding stream,
   Through the willows, flits a dream;
   Flits, but shows a smiling face,
   Flees, but with so quaint a grace,
   None can choose to stay at home,
   All must follow—all must roam.
   This is unborn beauty: she
   Now in air floats high and free,
   Takes the sun, and breaks the blue;—
   Late, with stooping pinion flew
   Raking hedgerow trees, and wet
   Her wing in silver streams, and set
   Shining foot on temple roof.
   Now again she flies aloof,
   Coasting mountain clouds, and kissed
   By the evening’s amethyst.
   In wet wood and miry lane
   Still we pound and pant in vain;
   Still with earthy foot we chase
   Waning pinion, fainting face;
   Still, with grey hair, we stumble on
   Till—behold!—the vision gone!
   Where has fleeting beauty led?
   To the doorway of the dead!
   qy. omit? [Life is gone, but life was gay:
   We have come the primrose way!] {11}

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO EDMUND GOSSE


                          _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _Jan._ 2_nd_, 1886.

MY DEAR GOSSE,—Thank you for your letter, so interesting to my vanity.
There is a review in the St. James’s, which, as it seems to hold somewhat
of your opinions, and is besides written with a pen and not a poker, we
think may possibly be yours.  The _Prince_ {12} has done fairly well in
spite of the reviews, which have been bad: he was, as you doubtless saw,
well slated in the _Saturday_; one paper received it as a child’s story;
another (picture my agony) described it as a ‘Gilbert comedy.’  It was
amusing to see the race between me and Justin M’Carthy: the Milesian has
won by a length.

That is the hard part of literature.  You aim high, and you take longer
over your work, and it will not be so successful as if you had aimed low
and rushed it.  What the public likes is work (of any kind) a little
loosely executed; so long as it is a little wordy, a little slack, a
little dim and knotless, the dear public likes it; it should (if
possible) be a little dull into the bargain.  I know that good work
sometimes hits; but, with my hand on my heart, I think it is by an
accident.  And I know also that good work must succeed at last; but that
is not the doing of the public; they are only shamed into silence or
affectation.  I do not write for the public; I do write for money, a
nobler deity; and most of all for myself, not perhaps any more noble, but
both more intelligent and nearer home.

Let us tell each other sad stories of the bestiality of the beast whom we
feed.  What he likes is the newspaper; and to me the press is the mouth
of a sewer, where lying is professed as from an university chair, and
everything prurient, and ignoble, and essentially dull, finds its abode
and pulpit.  I do not like mankind; but men, and not all of these—and
fewer women.  As for respecting the race, and, above all, that fatuous
rabble of burgesses called ‘the public,’ God save me from such
irreligion!—that way lies disgrace and dishonour.  There must be
something wrong in me, or I would not be popular.

This is perhaps a trifle stronger than my sedate and permanent opinion.
Not much, I think.  As for the art that we practise, I have never been
able to see why its professors should be respected.  They chose the
primrose path; when they found it was not all primroses, but some of it
brambly, and much of it uphill, they began to think and to speak of
themselves as holy martyrs.  But a man is never martyred in any honest
sense in the pursuit of his pleasure; and _delirium tremens_ has more of
the honour of the cross.  We were full of the pride of life, and chose,
like prostitutes, to live by a pleasure.  We should be paid if we give
the pleasure we pretend to give; but why should we be honoured?

I hope some day you and Mrs. Gosse will come for a Sunday; but we must
wait till I am able to see people.  I am very full of Jenkin’s life; it
is painful, yet very pleasant, to dig into the past of a dead friend, and
find him, at every spadeful, shine brighter.  I own, as I read, I wonder
more and more why he should have taken me to be a friend.  He had many
and obvious faults upon the face of him; the heart was pure gold.  I feel
it little pain to have lost him, for it is a loss in which I cannot
believe; I take it, against reason, for an absence; if not to-day, then
to-morrow, I still fancy I shall see him in the door; and then, now when
I know him better, how glad a meeting!  Yes, if I could believe in the
immortality business, the world would indeed be too good to be true; but
we were put here to do what service we can, for honour and not for hire:
the sods cover us, and the worm that never dies, the conscience, sleeps
well at last; these are the wages, besides what we receive so lavishly
day by day; and they are enough for a man who knows his own frailty and
sees all things in the proportion of reality.  The soul of piety was
killed long ago by that idea of reward.  Nor is happiness, whether
eternal or temporal, the reward that mankind seeks.  Happinesses are but
his wayside campings; his soul is in the journey; he was born for the
struggle, and only tastes his life in effort and on the condition that he
is opposed.  How, then, is such a creature, so fiery, so pugnacious, so
made up of discontent and aspiration, and such noble and uneasy
passions—how can he be rewarded but by rest?  I would not say it aloud;
for man’s cherished belief is that he loves that happiness which he
continually spurns and passes by; and this belief in some ulterior
happiness exactly fits him.  He does not require to stop and taste it; he
can be about the rugged and bitter business where his heart lies; and yet
he can tell himself this fairy tale of an eternal tea-party, and enjoy
the notion that he is both himself and something else; and that his
friends will yet meet him, all ironed out and emasculate, and still be
lovable,—as if love did not live in the faults of the beloved only, and
draw its breath in an unbroken round of forgiveness!  But the truth is,
we must fight until we die; and when we die there can be no quiet for
mankind but complete resumption into—what?—God, let us say—when all these
desperate tricks will lie spellbound at last.

Here came my dinner and cut this sermon short—_excusez_.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO JAMES PAYN


                          _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _Jan._ 2_nd_, 1886.

DEAR JAMES PAYN,—Your very kind letter came very welcome; and still more
welcome the news that you see —’s tale.  I will now tell you (and it was
very good and very wise of me not to tell it before) that he is one of
the most unlucky men I know, having put all his money into a pharmacy at
Hyères, when the cholera (certainly not his fault) swept away his
customers in a body.  Thus you can imagine the pleasure I have to
announce to him a spark of hope, for he sits to-day in his pharmacy,
doing nothing and taking nothing, and watching his debts inexorably mount
up.

To pass to other matters: your hand, you are perhaps aware, is not one of
those that can be read running; and the name of your daughter remains for
me undecipherable.  I call her, then, your daughter—and a very good name
too—and I beg to explain how it came about that I took her house.  The
hospital was a point in my tale; but there is a house on each side.  Now
the true house is the one before the hospital: is that No. 11?  If not,
what do you complain of?  If it is, how can I help what is true?
Everything in the _Dynamiter_ is not true; but the story of the Brown Box
is, in almost every particular; I lay my hand on my heart and swear to
it.  It took place in that house in 1884; and if your daughter was in
that house at the time, all I can say is she must have kept very bad
society.

But I see you coming.  Perhaps your daughter’s house has not a balcony at
the back?  I cannot answer for that; I only know that side of Queen
Square from the pavement and the back windows of Brunswick Row.  Thence I
saw plenty of balconies (terraces rather); and if there is none to the
particular house in question, it must have been so arranged to spite me.

I now come to the conclusion of this matter.  I address three questions
to your daughter:—

  1st.   Has her house the proper terrace?

  2nd.  Is it on the proper side of the hospital?

  3rd.  Was she there in the summer of 1884?

You see, I begin to fear that Mrs. Desborough may have deceived me on
some trifling points, for she is not a lady of peddling exactitude.  If
this should prove to be so, I will give your daughter a proper
certificate, and her house property will return to its original value.

Can man say more?—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

I saw the other day that the Eternal had plagiarised from _Lost Sir
Massingberd_: good again, sir!  I wish he would plagiarise the death of
Zero.



TO W. H. LOW


            _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _Jan. Somethingorother-th_, 1886.

MY DEAR LOW,—I send you two photographs: they are both done by Sir Percy
Shelley, the poet’s son, which may interest.  The sitting down one is, I
think, the best; but if they choose that, see that the little reflected
light on the nose does not give me a turn-up; that would be tragic.
Don’t forget ‘Baronet’ to Sir Percy’s name.

We all think a heap of your book; and I am well pleased with my
dedication.—Yours ever,

                                                          R. L. STEVENSON.

_P.S._—_Apropos_ of the odd controversy about Shelley’s nose: I have
before me four photographs of myself, done by Shelley’s son: my nose is
hooked, not like the eagle, indeed, but like the accipitrine family in
man: well, out of these four, only one marks the bend, one makes it
straight, and one suggests a turn-up.  This throws a flood of light on
calumnious man—and the scandal-mongering sun.  For personally I cling to
my curve.  To continue the Shelley controversy: I have a look of him, all
his sisters had noses like mine; Sir Percy has a marked hook; all the
family had high cheek-bones like mine; what doubt, then, but that this
turn-up (of which Jeaffreson accuses the poet, along with much other
_fatras_) is the result of some accident similar to what has happened in
my photographs by his son?

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO THOMAS STEVENSON


                        [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _January_ 25, 1886.]

MY DEAR FATHER,—Many thanks for a letter quite like yourself.  I quite
agree with you, and had already planned a scene of religion in _Balfour_;
the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge furnishes me with
a catechist whom I shall try to make the man.  I have another catechist,
the blind, pistol-carrying highway robber, whom I have transferred from
the Long Island to Mull.  I find it a most picturesque period, and wonder
Scott let it escape.  The _Covenant_ is lost on one of the Tarrans, and
David is cast on Earraid, where (being from inland) he is nearly starved
before he finds out the island is tidal; then he crosses Mull to
Toronsay, meeting the blind catechist by the way; then crosses Morven
from Kinlochaline to Kingairloch, where he stays the night with the good
catechist; that is where I am; next day he is to be put ashore in Appin,
and be present at Colin Campbell’s death.  To-day I rest, being a little
run down.  Strange how liable we are to brain fag in this scooty family!
But as far as I have got, all but the last chapter, I think David is on
his feet, and (to my mind) a far better story and far sounder at heart
than _Treasure Island_.

I have no earthly news, living entirely in my story, and only coming out
of it to play patience.  The Shelleys are gone; the Taylors kinder than
can be imagined.  The other day, Lady Taylor drove over and called on me;
she is a delightful old lady, and great fun.  I mentioned a story about
the Duchess of Wellington which I had heard Sir Henry tell; and though he
was very tired, he looked it up and copied it out for me in his own
hand.—Your most affectionate son,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO C. W. STODDARD


                         _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _Feb._ 13_th_, 1886.

MY DEAR STODDARD,—I am a dreadful character; but, you see, I have at last
taken pen in hand; how long I may hold it, God knows.  This is already my
sixth letter to-day, and I have many more waiting; and my wrist gives me
a jog on the subject of scrivener’s cramp, which is not encouraging.

I gather you were a little down in the jaw when you wrote your last.  I
am as usual pretty cheerful, but not very strong.  I stay in the house
all winter, which is base; but, as you continue to see, the pen goes from
time to time, though neither fast enough nor constantly enough to please
me.

My wife is at Bath with my father and mother, and the interval of
widowery explains my writing.  Another person writing for you when you
have done work is a great enemy to correspondence.  To-day I feel out of
health, and shan’t work; and hence this so much overdue reply.

I was re-reading some of your South Sea Idyls the other day: some of the
chapters are very good indeed; some pages as good as they can be.

How does your class get along?  If you like to touch on _Otto_, any day
in a by-hour, you may tell them—as the author’s last dying
confession—that it is a strange example of the difficulty of being ideal
in an age of realism; that the unpleasant giddy-mindedness, which spoils
the book and often gives it a wanton air of unreality and juggling with
air-bells, comes from unsteadiness of key; from the too great realism of
some chapters and passages—some of which I have now spotted, others I
dare say I shall never spot—which disprepares the imagination for the
cast of the remainder.

Any story can be made _true_ in its own key; any story can be made
_false_ by the choice of a wrong key of detail or style: Otto is made to
reel like a drunken—I was going to say man, but let us substitute
cipher—by the variations of the key.  Have you observed that the famous
problem of realism and idealism is one purely of detail?  Have you seen
my ‘Note on Realism’ in Cassell’s _Magazine of Art_; and ‘Elements of
Style’ in the _Contemporary_; and ‘Romance’ and ‘Humble Apology’ in
_Longman’s_?  They are all in your line of business; let me know what you
have not seen and I’ll send ’em.

I am glad I brought the old house up to you.  It was a pleasant old spot,
and I remember you there, though still more dearly in your own strange
den upon a hill in San Francisco; and one of the most San Francisco-y
parts of San Francisco.

Good-bye, my dear fellow, and believe me your friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO J. A. SYMONDS


                              _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_ [_Spring_ 1886].

MY DEAR SYMONDS,—If we have lost touch, it is (I think) only in a
material sense; a question of letters, not hearts.  You will find a warm
welcome at Skerryvore from both the lightkeepers; and, indeed, we never
tell ourselves one of our financial fairy tales, but a run to Davos is a
prime feature.  I am not changeable in friendship; and I think I can
promise you you have a pair of trusty well-wishers and friends in
Bournemouth: whether they write or not is but a small thing; the flag may
not be waved, but it is there.

Jekyll is a dreadful thing, I own; but the only thing I feel dreadful
about is that damned old business of the war in the members.  This time
it came out; I hope it will stay in, in future.

Raskolnikoff {20} is easily the greatest book I have read in ten years; I
am glad you took to it.  Many find it dull: Henry James could not finish
it: all I can say is, it nearly finished me.  It was like having an
illness.  James did not care for it because the character of Raskolnikoff
was not objective; and at that I divined a great gulf between us, and, on
further reflection, the existence of a certain impotence in many minds of
to-day, which prevents them from living _in_ a book or a character, and
keeps them standing afar off, spectators of a puppet show.  To such I
suppose the book may seem empty in the centre; to the others it is a
room, a house of life, into which they themselves enter, and are tortured
and purified.  The Juge d’Instruction I thought a wonderful, weird,
touching, ingenious creation: the drunken father, and Sonia, and the
student friend, and the uncircumscribed, protaplasmic humanity of
Raskolnikoff, all upon a level that filled me with wonder: the execution
also, superb in places.  Another has been translated—_Humiliés et
Offensés_.  It is even more incoherent than _Le Crime et le Châtiment_,
but breathes much of the same lovely goodness, and has passages of power.
Dostoieffsky is a devil of a swell, to be sure.  Have you heard that he
became a stout, imperialist conservative?  It is interesting to know.  To
something of that side, the balance leans with me also in view of the
incoherency and incapacity of all.  The old boyish idea of the march on
Paradise being now out of season, and all plans and ideas that I hear
debated being built on a superb indifference to the first principles of
human character, a helpless desire to acquiesce in anything of which I
know the worst assails me.  Fundamental errors in human nature of two
sorts stand on the skyline of all this modern world of aspirations.
First, that it is happiness that men want; and second, that happiness
consists of anything but an internal harmony.  Men do not want, and I do
not think they would accept, happiness; what they live for is rivalry,
effort, success—the elements our friends wish to eliminate.  And, on the
other hand, happiness is a question of morality—or of immorality, there
is no difference—and conviction.  Gordon was happy in Khartoum, in his
worst hours of danger and fatigue; Marat was happy, I suppose, in his
ugliest frenzy; Marcus Aurelius was happy in the detested camp; Pepys was
pretty happy, and I am pretty happy on the whole, because we both
somewhat crowingly accepted a _via media_, both liked to attend to our
affairs, and both had some success in managing the same.  It is quite an
open question whether Pepys and I ought to be happy; on the other hand,
there is no doubt that Marat had better be unhappy.  He was right (if he
said it) that he was _la misère humaine_, cureless misery—unless perhaps
by the gallows.  Death is a great and gentle solvent; it has never had
justice done it, no, not by Whitman.  As for those crockery chimney-piece
ornaments, the bourgeois (_quorum pars_), and their cowardly dislike of
dying and killing, it is merely one symptom of a thousand how utterly
they have got out of touch of life.  Their dislike of capital punishment
and their treatment of their domestic servants are for me the two
flaunting emblems of their hollowness.

God knows where I am driving to.  But here comes my lunch.

Which interruption, happily for you, seems to have stayed the issue.  I
have now nothing to say, that had formerly such a pressure of twaddle.
Pray don’t fail to come this summer.  It will be a great disappointment,
now it has been spoken of, if you do.—Yours ever,

                                                    ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON




TO W. H. LOW


                              [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _March_ 1886.]

MY DEAR LOW,—This is the most enchanting picture.  Now understand my
state: I am really an invalid, but of a mysterious order.  I might be a
_malade imaginaire_, but for one too tangible symptom, my tendency to
bleed from the lungs.  If we could go, (1_st_)  We must have money enough
to travel with _leisure and comfort_—especially the first.  (_2nd_)  You
must be prepared for a comrade who would go to bed some part of every day
and often stay silent (3_rd_)  You would have to play the part of a
thoughtful courier, sparing me fatigue, looking out that my bed was
warmed, etc. (4_th_)  If you are very nervous, you must recollect a bad
hæmorrhage is always on the cards, with its concomitants of anxiety and
horror for those who are beside me.

Do you blench?  If so, let us say no more about it.

If you are still unafraid, and the money were forthcoming, I believe the
trip might do me good, and I feel sure that, working together, we might
produce a fine book.  The Rhone is the river of Angels.  I adore it: have
adored it since I was twelve, and first saw it from the train.

Lastly, it would depend on how I keep from now on.  I have stood the
winter hitherto with some credit, but the dreadful weather still
continues, and I cannot holloa till I am through the wood.

Subject to these numerous and gloomy provisos, I embrace the prospect
with glorious feelings.

I write this from bed, snow pouring without, and no circumstance of
pleasure except your letter.  That, however, counts for much.  I am glad
you liked the doggerel: I have already had a liberal cheque, over which I
licked my fingers with a sound conscience.  I had not meant to make money
by these stumbling feet, but if it comes, it is only too welcome in my
handsome but impecunious house.

Let me know soon what is to be expected—as far as it does not hang by
that inconstant quantity, my want of health.  Remember me to Madam with
the best thanks and wishes; and believe me your friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MRS. FLEEMING JENKIN


                              [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _April_ 1886.]

MY DEAR MRS. JENKIN,—I try to tell myself it is good nature, but I know
it is vanity that makes me write.

I have drafted the first part of Chapter VI., Fleeming and his friends,
his influence on me, his views on religion and literature, his part at
the Savile; it should boil down to about ten pages, and I really do think
it admirably good.  It has so much evoked Fleeming for myself that I
found my conscience stirred just as it used to be after a serious talk
with him: surely that means it is good?  I had to write and tell you,
being alone.

I have excellent news of Fanny, who is much better for the change.  My
father is still very yellow, and very old, and very weak, but yesterday
he seemed happier, and smiled, and followed what was said; even laughed,
I think.  When he came away, he said to me, ‘Take care of yourself, my
dearie,’ which had a strange sound of childish days, and will not leave
my mind.

You must get Litolf’s _Gavottes Célèbres_: I have made another trover
there: a musette of Lully’s.  The second part of it I have not yet got
the hang of; but the first—only a few bars!  The gavotte is beautiful and
pretty hard, I think, and very much of the period; and at the end of it,
this musette enters with the most really thrilling effect of simple
beauty.  O—it’s first-rate.  I am quite mad over it.  If you find other
books containing Lully, Rameau, Martini, please let me know; also you
might tell me, you who know Bach, where the easiest is to be found.  I
write all morning, come down, and never leave the piano till about five;
write letters, dine, get down again about eight, and never leave the
piano till I go to bed.  This is a fine life.—Yours most sincerely,

                                                                  R. L. S.

If you get the musette (Lully’s), please tell me if I am right, and it
was probably written for strings.  Anyway, it is as neat as—as neat as
Bach—on the piano; or seems so to my ignorance.

I play much of the Rigadoon but it is strange, it don’t come off _quite_
so well with me!

                          [Picture: Music store]

There is the first part of the musette copied (from memory, so I hope
there’s nothing wrong).  Is it not angelic?  But it ought, of course, to
have the gavotte before.  The gavotte is in G, and ends on the keynote
thus (if I remember):—

                          [Picture: Music store]

staccato, I think.  Then you sail into the musette.

_N.B._—Where I have put an ‘A,’ is that a dominant eleventh, or what? or
just a seventh on the D? and if the latter, is that allowed?  It sounds
very funny.  Never mind all my questions; if I begin about music (which
is my leading ignorance and curiosity), I have always to babble
questions: all my friends know me now, and take no notice whatever.  The
whole piece is marked allegro; but surely could easily be played too
fast?  The dignity must not be lost; the periwig feeling.



TO THOMAS STEVENSON


                              [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _March_ 1886.]

MY DEAR FATHER,—The David problem has to-day been decided.  I am to leave
the door open for a sequel if the public take to it, and this will save
me from butchering a lot of good material to no purpose.  Your letter
from Carlisle was pretty like yourself, sir, as I was pleased to see; the
hand of Jekyll, not the hand of Hyde.  I am for action quite unfit, and
even a letter is beyond me; so pray take these scraps at a vast deal more
than their intrinsic worth.  I am in great spirits about David, Colvin
agreeing with Henley, Fanny, and myself in thinking it far the most human
of my labours hitherto.  As to whether the long-eared British public may
take to it, all think it more than doubtful; I wish they would, for I
could do a second volume with ease and pleasure, and Colvin thinks it sin
and folly to throw away David and Alan Breck upon so small a field as
this one.—Ever your affectionate son,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MRS. FLEEMING JENKIN


    [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], _April_ 15 _or_ 16 (_the hour not being
                                                            known_), 1886.

MY DEAR MRS. JENKIN,—It is I know not what hour of the night; but I
cannot sleep, have lit the gas, and here goes.

First, all your packet arrived: I have dipped into the Schumann already
with great pleasure.  Surely, in what concerns us there is a sweet little
chirrup; the _Good Words_ arrived in the morning just when I needed it,
and the famous notes that I had lost were recovered also in the nick of
time.

And now I am going to bother you with my affairs: premising, first, that
this is _private_; second, that whatever I do the _Life_ shall be done
first, and I am getting on with it well; and third, that I do not quite
know why I consult you, but something tells me you will hear with
fairness.

Here is my problem.  The Curtin women are still miserable prisoners; no
one dare buy their farm of them, all the manhood of England and the world
stands aghast before a threat of murder.  (1) Now, my work can be done
anywhere; hence I can take up without loss a back-going Irish farm, and
live on, though not (as I had originally written) in it: First Reason.
(2) If I should be killed, there are a good many who would feel it:
writers are so much in the public eye, that a writer being murdered would
attract attention, throw a bull’s-eye light upon this cowardly business:
Second Reason.  (3) I am not unknown in the States, from which the funds
come that pay for these brutalities: to some faint extent, my death (if I
should be killed) would tell there: Third Reason.  (4) _Nobody else is
taking up this obvious and crying duly_: Fourth Reason.  (5) I have a
crazy health and may die at any moment, my life is of no purchase in an
insurance office, it is the less account to husband it, and the business
of husbanding a life is dreary and demoralising: Fifth Reason.

I state these in no order, but as they occur to me.  And I shall do the
like with the objections.

First Objection: It will do no good; you have seen Gordon die and nobody
minded; nobody will mind if you die.  This is plainly of the devil.
Second Objection: You will not even be murdered, the climate will
miserably kill you, you will strangle out in a rotten damp heat, in
congestion, etc.  Well, what then?  It changes nothing: the purpose is to
brave crime; let me brave it, for such time and to such an extent as God
allows.  Third Objection: The Curtin women are probably highly
uninteresting females.  I haven’t a doubt of it.  But the Government
cannot, men will not, protect them.  If I am the only one to see this
public duty, it is to the public and the Right I should perform it—not to
Mesdames Curtin.  Fourth Objection: I am married.  ‘I have married a
wife!’  I seem to have heard it before.  It smells ancient! what was the
context?  Fifth Objection: My wife has had a mean life (1), loves me (2),
could not bear to lose me (3).  (1) I admit: I am sorry.  (2) But what
does she love me for? and (3) she must lose me soon or late.  And after
all, because we run this risk, it does not follow we should fail.  Sixth
Objection: My wife wouldn’t like it.  No, she wouldn’t.  Who would?  But
the Curtins don’t like it.  And all those who are to suffer if this goes
on, won’t like it.  And if there is a great wrong, somebody must suffer.
Seventh Objection: I won’t like it.  No, I will not; I have thought it
through, and I will not.  But what of that?  And both she and I may like
it more than we suppose.  We shall lose friends, all comforts, all
society: so has everybody who has ever done anything; but we shall have
some excitement, and that’s a fine thing; and we shall be trying to do
the right, and that’s not to be despised.  Eighth Objection: I am an
author with my work before me.  See Second Reason.  Ninth Objection: But
am I not taken with the hope of excitement?  I was at first.  I am not
much now.  I see what a dreary, friendless, miserable, God-forgotten
business it will be.  And anyway, is not excitement the proper reward of
doing anything both right and a little dangerous?  Tenth Objection: But
am I not taken with a notion of glory?  I dare say I am.  Yet I see quite
clearly how all points to nothing coming, to a quite inglorious death by
disease and from the lack of attendance; or even if I should be knocked
on the head, as these poor Irish promise, how little any one will care.
It will be a smile at a thousand breakfast-tables.  I am nearly forty
now; I have not many illusions.  And if I had?  I do not love this
health-tending, housekeeping life of mine.  I have a taste for danger,
which is human, like the fear of it.  Here is a fair cause; a just cause;
no knight ever set lance in rest for a juster.  Yet it needs not the
strength I have not, only the passive courage that I hope I could muster,
and the watchfulness that I am sure I could learn.

Here is a long midnight dissertation; with myself; with you.  Please let
me hear.  But I charge you this: if you see in this idea of mine the
finger of duty, do not dissuade me.  I am nearing forty, I begin to love
my ease and my home and my habits, I never knew how much till this arose;
do not falsely counsel me to put my head under the bed-clothes.  And I
will say this to you: my wife, who hates the idea, does not refuse.  ‘It
is nonsense,’ says she, ‘but if you go, I will go.’  Poor girl, and her
home and her garden that she was so proud of!  I feel her garden most of
all, because it is a pleasure (I suppose) that I do not feel myself to
share.

  1.  Here is a great wrong.

  2.  ,, growing wrong.

  3.  ,, wrong founded on crime.

  4.  ,, crime that the Government cannot prevent.

  5.  ,, crime that it occurs to no man to defy.

  6.  But it has occurred to me.

  7.  Being a known person, some will notice my defiance.

  8.  Being a writer, I can _make_ people notice it.

  9.  And, I think, _make_ people imitate me.

  10.  Which would destroy in time this whole scaffolding of oppression.

  11.  And if I fail, however ignominiously, that is not my concern.  It
  is, with an odd mixture of reverence and humorous remembrances of
  Dickens, be it said—it is A-nother’s.

And here, at I cannot think what hour of the morning, I shall dry up, and
remain,—Yours, really in want of a little help,

                                                                   R. L S.

Sleepless at midnight’s      dewy hour.
      ,,          ,,         witching ,,
      ,,          ,,         maudlin ,,
      ,,          ,,         etc.

_Next morning_.—Eleventh Objection: I have a father and mother.  And who
has not?  Macduff’s was a rare case; if we must wait for a Macduff.
Besides, my father will not perhaps be long here.  Twelfth Objection: The
cause of England in Ireland is not worth supporting.  _À qui le
dites-vous_?  And I am not supporting that.  Home Rule, if you like.
Cause of decency, the idea that populations should not be taught to gain
public ends by private crime, the idea that for all men to bow before a
threat of crime is to loosen and degrade beyond redemption the whole
fabric of man’s decency.



TO MRS. FLEEMING JENKIN


                              [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _April_ 1886.]

MY DEAR MRS. JENKIN,—The Book—It is all drafted: I hope soon to send you
for comments Chapters III., IV., and V.  Chapter VII. is roughly but
satisfactorily drafted: a very little work should put that to rights.
But Chapter VI. is no joke; it is a _mare magnum_: I swim and drown and
come up again; and it is all broken ends and mystification: moreover, I
perceive I am in want of more matter.  I must have, first of all, a
little letter from Mr. Ewing about the phonograph work: _If_ you think he
would understand it is quite a matter of chance whether I use a word or a
fact out of it.  If you think he would not: I will go without.  Also,
could I have a look at Ewing’s _précis_?  And lastly, I perceive I must
interview you again about a few points; they are very few, and might come
to little; and I propose to go on getting things as well together as I
can in the meanwhile, and rather have a final time when all is ready and
only to be criticised.  I do still think it will be good.  I wonder if
Trélat would let me cut?  But no, I think I wouldn’t after all; ’tis so
quaint and pretty and clever and simple and French, and gives such a good
sight of Fleeming: the plum of the book, I think.

You misunderstood me in one point: I always hoped to found such a
society; that was the outside of my dream, and would mean entire success.
_But_—I cannot play Peter the Hermit.  In these days of the Fleet Street
journalist, I cannot send out better men than myself, with wives or
mothers just as good as mine, and sisters (I may at least say) better, to
a danger and a long-drawn dreariness that I do not share.  My wife says
it’s cowardice; what brave men are the leader-writers!  Call it
cowardice; it is mine.  Mind you, I may end by trying to do it by the pen
only: I shall not love myself if I do; and is it ever a good thing to do
a thing for which you despise yourself?—even in the doing?  And if the
thing you do is to call upon others to do the thing you neglect?  I have
never dared to say what I feel about men’s lives, because my own was in
the wrong: shall I dare to send them to death?  The physician must heal
himself; he must honestly _try_ the path he recommends: if he does not
even try, should he not be silent?

I thank you very heartily for your letter, and for the seriousness you
brought to it.  You know, I think when a serious thing is your own, you
keep a saner man by laughing at it and yourself as you go.  So I do not
write possibly with all the really somewhat sickened gravity I feel.  And
indeed, what with the book, and this business to which I referred, and
Ireland, I am scarcely in an enviable state.  Well, I ought to be glad,
after ten years of the worst training on earth—valetudinarianism—that I
can still be troubled by a duty.  You shall hear more in time; so far, I
am at least decided: I will go and see Balfour when I get to London.

We have all had a great pleasure: a Mrs. Rawlinson came and brought with
her a nineteen-year-old daughter, simple, human, as beautiful as—herself;
I never admired a girl before, you know it was my weakness: we are all
three dead in love with her.  How nice to be able to do so much good to
harassed people by—yourself!  Ever yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MISS RAWLINSON


                              [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _April_ 1886.]

   OF the many flowers you brought me,
      Only some were meant to stay,
   And the flower I thought the sweetest
      Was the flower that went away.

   Of the many flowers you brought me,
      All were fair and fresh and gay,
   But the flower I thought the sweetest
      Was the blossom of the May.

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS MONROE


                          _Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _May_ 25_th_, 1886.

DEAR MISS MONROE,—(I hope I have this rightly) I must lose no time in
thanking you for a letter singularly pleasant to receive.  It may
interest you to know that I read to the signature without suspecting my
correspondent was a woman; though in one point (a reference to the
Countess) I might have found a hint of the truth.  You are not pleased
with Otto; since I judge you do not like weakness; and no more do I.  And
yet I have more than tolerance for Otto, whose faults are the faults of
weakness, but never of ignoble weakness, and who seeks before all to be
both kind and just.  Seeks, not succeeds.  But what is man?  So much of
cynicism to recognise that nobody does right is the best equipment for
those who do not wish to be cynics in good earnest.  Think better of
Otto, if my plea can influence you; and this I mean for your own sake—not
his, poor fellow, as he will never learn your opinion; but for yours,
because, as men go in this world (and women too), you will not go far
wrong if you light upon so fine a fellow; and to light upon one and not
perceive his merits is a calamity.  In the flesh, of course, I mean; in
the book the fault, of course, is with my stumbling pen.  Seraphina made
a mistake about her Otto; it begins to swim before me dimly that you may
have some traits of Seraphina?

With true ingratitude you see me pitch upon your exception; but it is
easier to defend oneself gracefully than to acknowledge praise.  I am
truly glad that you should like my books; for I think I see from what you
write that you are a reader worth convincing.  Your name, if I have
properly deciphered it, suggests that you may be also something of my
countrywoman; for it is hard to see where Monroe came from, if not from
Scotland.  I seem to have here a double claim on your good nature: being
myself pure Scotch and having appreciated your letter, make up two
undeniable merits which, perhaps, if it should be quite without trouble,
you might reward with your photograph.—Yours truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MISS MONROE


                               [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_, _June_ 1886.]

MY DEAR MISS MONROE,—I am ill in bed and stupid, incoherently stupid; yet
I have to answer your letter, and if the answer is incomprehensible you
must forgive me.  You say my letter caused you pleasure; I am sure, as it
fell out, not near so much as yours has brought to me.  The interest
taken in an author is fragile: his next book, or your next year of
culture, might see the interest frosted or outgrown; and himself, in
spite of all, you might probably find the most distasteful person upon
earth.  My case is different.  I have bad health, am often condemned to
silence for days together—was so once for six weeks, so that my voice was
awful to hear when I first used it, like the whisper of a shadow—have
outlived all my chief pleasures, which were active and adventurous, and
ran in the open air: and being a person who prefers life to art, and who
knows it is a far finer thing to be in love, or to risk a danger, than to
paint the finest picture or write the noblest book, I begin to regard
what remains to me of my life as very shadowy.  From a variety of
reasons, I am ashamed to confess I was much in this humour when your
