IX
THE UNITED STATES AGAIN:
WINTER IN THE ADIRONDACKS
AUGUST 1887-OCTOBER 1888


TO W. E. HENLEY


                             [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], _August_ 1887.

DEAR LAD,—I write to inform you that Mr. Stevenson’s well-known work,
_Virginibus Puerisque_, is about to be reprinted.  At the same time a
second volume called _Memories and Portraits_ will issue from the roaring
loom.  Its interest will be largely autobiographical, Mr. S. having
sketched there the lineaments of many departed friends, and dwelt fondly,
and with a m’istened eye, upon byegone pleasures.  The two will be issued
under the common title of _Familiar Essays_; but the volumes will be
vended separately to those who are mean enough not to hawk at both.

The blood is at last stopped: only yesterday.  I began to think I should
not get away.  However, I hope—I hope—remark the word—no boasting—I hope
I may luff up a bit now.  Dobell, whom I saw, gave as usual a good
account of my lungs, and expressed himself, like his neighbours,
hopefully about the trip.  He says, my uncle says, Scott says, Brown
says—they all say—You ought not to be in such a state of health; you
should recover.  Well, then, I mean to.  My spirits are rising again
after three months of black depression: I almost begin to feel as if I
should care to live: I would, by God!  And so I believe I shall.—Yours,

                                                        BULLETIN M‘GURDER.

How has the Deacon gone?



TO W. H. LOW


                        [_Skerryvore_, _Bournemouth_], August 6_th_, 1887.

MY DEAR LOW,—We—my mother, my wife, my stepson, my maidservant, and
myself, five souls—leave, if all is well, Aug. 20th, per Wilson line SS.
_Ludgate Hill_.  Shall probably evade N. Y. at first, cutting straight to
a watering-place: Newport, I believe, its name.  Afterwards we shall
steal incognito into _la bonne villa_, and see no one but you and the
Scribners, if it may be so managed.  You must understand I have been very
seedy indeed, quite a dead body; and unless the voyage does miracles, I
shall have to draw it dam fine.  Alas, ‘The Canoe Speaks’ is now out of
date; it will figure in my volume of verses now imminent.  However, I may
find some inspiration some day.—Till very soon, yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO MISS ADELAIDE BOODLE


                                     _Bournemouth_, _August_ 19_th_, 1887.

MY DEAR MISS BOODLE,—I promise you the paper-knife shall go to sea with
me; and if it were in my disposal, I should promise it should return with
me too.  All that you say, I thank you for very much; I thank you for all
the pleasantness that you have brought about our house; and I hope the
day may come when I shall see you again in poor old Skerryvore, now left
to the natives of Canada, or to worse barbarians, if such exist.  I am
afraid my attempt to jest is rather _à contre-cœur_.  Good-bye—_au
revoir_—and do not forget your friend,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO MESSRS. CHATTO AND WINDUS


                                            _Bournemouth_ [_August_ 1887].

DEAR SIRS,—I here enclose the two titles.  Had you not better send me the
bargains to sign?  I shall be here till Saturday; and shall have an
address in London (which I shall send you) till Monday, when I shall
sail.  Even if the proofs do not reach you till Monday morning, you could
send a clerk from Fenchurch Street Station at 10.23 A.M. for Galleons
Station, and he would find me embarking on board the _Ludgate Hill_,
Island Berth, Royal Albert Dock.  Pray keep this in case it should be
necessary to catch this last chance.  I am most anxious to have the
proofs with me on the voyage.—Yours very truly,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                                   _H.M.S._ ‘_Vulgarium_,’

               _Off Havre de Grace_, _this_ 22_nd_ _day of August_ [1887].

SIR,—The weather has been hitherto inimitable.  Inimitable is the only
word that I can apply to our fellow-voyagers, whom a categorist, possibly
premature, has been already led to divide into two classes—the better
sort consisting of the baser kind of Bagman, and the worser of
undisguised Beasts of the Field.  The berths are excellent, the pasture
swallowable, the champagne of H. James (to recur to my favourite
adjective) inimitable.  As for the Commodore, he slept awhile in the
evening, tossed off a cup of Henry James with his plain meal, walked the
deck till eight, among sands and floating lights and buoys and wrecked
brigantines, came down (to his regret) a minute too soon to see Margate
lit up, turned in about nine, slept, with some interruptions, but on the
whole sweetly, until six, and has already walked a mile or so of deck,
among a fleet of other steamers waiting for the tide, within view of
Havre, and pleasantly entertained by passing fishing-boats, hovering
sea-gulls, and Vulgarians pairing on deck with endearments of primitive
simplicity.  There, sir, can be viewed the sham quarrel, the sham desire
for information, and every device of these two poor ancient sexes (who
might, you might think, have learned in the course of the ages something
new) down to the exchange of head-gear.—I am, sir, yours,

                                                       BOLD BOB BOLTSPRIT.

B. B. B. (_alias_ the Commodore) will now turn to his proofs.  Havre de
Grace is a city of some show.  It is for-ti-fied; and, so far as I can
see, is a place of some trade.  It is situ-ated in France, a country of
Europe.  You always complain there are no facts in my letters.

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                             _Newport_, _R. I. U.S.A._ [_September_ 1887].

MY DEAR COLVIN,—So long it went excellent well, and I had a time I am
glad to have had; really enjoying my life.  There is nothing like being
at sea, after all.  And O, why have I allowed myself to rot so long on
land?  But on the Banks I caught a cold, and I have not yet got over it.
My reception here was idiotic to the last degree. . . .  It is very
silly, and not pleasant, except where humour enters; and I confess the
poor interviewer lads pleased me.  They are too good for their trade;
avoided anything I asked them to avoid, and were no more vulgar in their
reports than they could help.  I liked the lads.

O, it was lovely on our stable-ship, chock full of stallions.  She rolled
heartily, rolled some of the fittings out of our state-room, and I think
a more dangerous cruise (except that it was summer) it would be hard to
imagine.  But we enjoyed it to the masthead, all but Fanny; and even she
perhaps a little.  When we got in, we had run out of beer, stout, cocoa,
soda-water, water, fresh meat, and (almost) of biscuit.  But it was a
thousandfold pleasanter than a great big Birmingham liner like a new
hotel; and we liked the officers, and made friends with the
quartermasters, and I (at least) made a friend of a baboon (for we
carried a cargo of apes), whose embraces have pretty near cost me a coat.
The passengers improved, and were a very good specimen lot, with no
drunkard, no gambling that I saw, and less grumbling and backbiting than
one would have asked of poor human nature.  Apes, stallions, cows,
matches, hay, and poor men-folk, all, or almost all, came successfully to
land.—Yours ever,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO HENRY JAMES


                                  [_Newport_, _U.S.A._, _September_ 1887.]

MY DEAR JAMES,—Here we are at Newport in the house of the good
Fairchilds; and a sad burthen we have laid upon their shoulders.  I have
been in bed practically ever since I came.  I caught a cold on the Banks
after having had the finest time conceivable, and enjoyed myself more
than I could have hoped on board our strange floating menagerie:
stallions and monkeys and matches made our cargo; and the vast continent
of these incongruities rolled the while like a haystack; and the
stallions stood hypnotised by the motion, looking through the ports at
our dinner-table, and winked when the crockery was broken; and the little
monkeys stared at each other in their cages, and were thrown overboard
like little bluish babies; and the big monkey, Jacko, scoured about the
ship and rested willingly in my arms, to the ruin of my clothing; and the
man of the stallions made a bower of the black tarpaulin, and sat therein
at the feet of a raddled divinity, like a picture on a box of chocolates;
and the other passengers, when they were not sick, looked on and laughed.
Take all this picture, and make it roll till the bell shall sound
unexpected notes and the fittings shall break lose in our state-room, and
you have the voyage of the _Ludgate Hill_.  She arrived in the port of
New York, without beer, porter, soda-water, curaçoa, fresh meat, or fresh
water; and yet we lived, and we regret her.

My wife is a good deal run down, and I am no great shakes.

America is, as I remarked, a fine place to eat in, and a great place for
kindness; but, Lord, what a silly thing is popularity!  I envy the cool
obscurity of Skerryvore.  If it even paid, said Meanness! and was abashed
at himself.—Yours most sincerely,

                                                                   R. L S.



TO SIDNEY COLVIN


                                    [_New York_: _end of September_ 1887.]

MY DEAR S. C.,—Your delightful letter has just come, and finds me in a
New York hotel, waiting the arrival of a sculptor (St. Gaudens) who is
making a medallion of yours truly and who is (to boot) one of the
handsomest and nicest fellows I have seen.  I caught a cold on the Banks;
fog is not for me; nearly died of interviewers and visitors, during
twenty-four hours in New York; cut for Newport with Lloyd and Valentine,
a journey like fairy-land for the most engaging beauties, one little
rocky and pine-shaded cove after another, each with a house and a boat at
anchor, so that I left my heart in each and marvelled why American
authors had been so unjust to their country; caught another cold on the
train; arrived at Newport to go to bed and to grow worse, and to stay in
bed until I left again; the Fairchilds proving during this time kindness
itself; Mr. Fairchild simply one of the most engaging men in the world,
and one of the children, Blair, _aet._ ten, a great joy and amusement in
his solemn adoring attitude to the author of _Treasure Island_.

Here I was interrupted by the arrival of my sculptor.  I have begged him
to make a medallion of himself and give me a copy.  I will not take up
the sentence in which I was wandering so long, but begin fresh.  I was
ten or twelve days at Newport; then came back convalescent to New York.
Fanny and Lloyd are off to the Adirondacks to see if that will suit; and
the rest of us leave Monday (this is Saturday) to follow them up.  I hope
we may manage to stay there all winter.  I have a splendid appetite and
have on the whole recovered well after a mighty sharp attack.  I am now
on a salary of £500 a year for twelve articles in _Scribner’s Magazine_
on what I like; it is more than £500, but I cannot calculate more
precisely.  You have no idea how much is made of me here; I was offered
£2000 for a weekly article—eh heh! how is that? but I refused that
lucrative job.  The success of _Underwoods_ is gratifying.  You see, the
verses are sane; that is their strong point, and it seems it is strong
enough to carry them.

A thousand thanks for your grand letter, ever yours,

                                                                  R. L. S.



TO W. E. HENLEY


                                             _New York_ [_September_ 1887]

MY DEAR LAD,—Herewith verses for Dr. Hake, which please communicate.  I
did my best with the interviewers; I don’t know if Lloyd sent you the
result; my heart was too sick: you can do nothing with them; and
yet—literally sweated with anxiety to please, and took me down in long
hand!

I have been quite ill, but go better.  I am being not busted, but
medallioned, by St. Gaudens, who is a first-rate, plain, high-minded
artist and honest fellow; you would like him down to the ground.  I
believe sculptors are fine fellows when they are not demons.  O, I am now
a salaried person, £600 a year, {66} to write twelve articles in
_Scribner’s Magazine_; it remains to be seen if it really pays, huge as
the sum is, but the slavery may overweigh me.  I hope you will like my
answer to Hake, and specially that he will.

Love to all.—Yours affectionately,

                                                                  R. L. S.
                                                           (_le salarie_).



TO R. A. M. STEVENSON


                                            _Saranac Lake_, _Adirondacks_,
                                    _New York_, _U.S.A._ [_October_ 1887].

MY DEAR BOB,—The cold [of Colorado] was too rigorous for me; I could not
risk the long railway voyage, and the season was too late to risk the
Eastern, Cape Hatteras side of the steamer one; so here we stuck and
stick.  We have a wooden house on a hill-top, overlooking a river, and a
village about a quarter of a mile away, and very wooded hills; the whole
scene is very Highland, bar want of heather and the wooden houses.

I have got one good thing of my sea voyage: it is proved the sea agrees
heartily with me, and my mother likes it; so if I get any better, or no
worse, my mother will likely hire a yacht for a month or so in summer.
Good Lord!  What fun!  Wealth is only useful for two things: a yacht and
a string quartette.  For these two I will sell my soul.  Except for these
I hold that £700 a year is as much as anybody can possibly want; and I
have had more, so I know, for the extry coins were for no use, excepting
for illness, which damns everything.

I was so happy on board that ship, I could not have believed it possible.
We had the beastliest weather, and many discomforts; but the mere fact of
its being a tramp-ship gave us many comforts; we could cut about with the
men and officers, stay in the wheel-house, discuss all manner of things,
and really be a little at sea.  And truly there is nothing else.  I had
literally forgotten what happiness was, and the full mind—full of
external and physical things, not full of cares and labours and rot about
a fellow’s behaviour.  My heart literally sang; I truly care for nothing
so much as for that.  We took so north a course, that we saw
Newfoundland; no one in the ship had ever seen it before.

It was beyond belief to me how she rolled; in seemingly smooth water, the
bell striking, the fittings bounding out of our state-room.  It is worth
having lived these last years, partly because I have written some better
books, which is always pleasant, but chiefly to have had the joy of this
voyage.  I have been made a lot of here, and it is sometimes pleasant,
sometimes the reverse; but I could give it all up, and agree that—was the
author of my works, for a good seventy ton schooner and the coins to keep
her on.  And to think there are parties with yachts who would make the
exchange!  I know a little about fame now; it is no good compared to a
yacht; and anyway there is more fame in a yacht, more genuine fame; to
cross the Atlantic and come to anchor in Newport (say) with the Union
Jack, and go ashore for your letters and hang about the pier, among the
holiday yachtsmen—that’s fame, that’s glory, and nobody can take it away;
they can’t say your book is bad; you _have_ crossed the Atlantic.  I
should do it south by the West Indies, to avoid the damned Banks; and
probably come home by steamer, and leave the skipper to bring the yacht
home.

Well, if all goes well, we shall maybe sail out of Southampton water some
of these days and take a run to Havre, and try the Baltic, or somewhere.

Love to you all.—Ever your afft.,

                                                   ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



TO EDMUND GOSSE


                                       _Saranac Lake_, _Oct._ 8_th_, 1887.

MY DEAR GOSSE,—I have just read your article twice, with cheers of
approving laughter.  I do not believe you ever wrote anything so funny:
Tyndall’s ‘shell,’ the passage on the Davos press and its invaluable
issues, and that on V. Hugo and Swinburne, are exquisite; so, I say it
more ruefully, is the touch about the doctors.  For the rest, I am very
glad you like my verses so well; and the qualities you ascribe to them
seem to me well found and well named.  I own to that kind of candour you
attribute to me: when I am frankly interested, I suppose I fancy the
public will be so too; and when I am moved, I am sure of it.  It has been
my luck hitherto to meet with no staggering disillusion.  ‘Before’ and
‘After’ may be two; and yet I believe the habit is now too thoroughly
ingrained to be altered.  About the doctors, you were right, that
dedication has been the subject of some pleasantries that made me grind,
and of your happily touched reproof which made me blush.  And to miscarry
in a dedication is an abominable form of book-wreck; I am a good captain,
I would rather lose the tent and save my dedication.

I am at Saranac Lake in the Adirondacks, I suppose for the winter: it
seems a first-rate place; we have a house in the eye of many winds, with
a view of a piece of running water—Highland, all but the dear hue of
peat—and of many hills—Highland also, but for the lack of heather.  Soon
the snow will close on us; we are here some twenty miles—twenty-seven,
they say, but this I profoundly disbelieve—in the woods; communication by
