LETTER III.

OF TRUE LEGISLATION. THAT EVERY MAN MAY BE A LAW TO HIMSELF.


                                                _February 17, 1867._

9. No, I have not been much worse in health; but I was asked by a
friend to look over some work in which you will all be deeply
interested one day, so that I could not write again till now. I was
the more sorry, because there were several things I wished to note in
your last letter; one especially leads me directly to what I in any
case was desirous of urging upon you. You say, "In vol. 6th of
'Frederick the Great' I find a great deal that I feel quite certain,
if our Queen or Government could make law, thousands of our English
workmen would hail with a shout of joy and gladness." I do not
remember to what you especially allude, but whatever the rules you
speak of may be, unless there be anything in them contrary to the
rights of present English property, why should you care whether the
Government makes them law or not? Can you not, you thousands of
English workmen, simply make them a law to yourselves, by practising
them?

It is now some five or six years since I first had occasion to speak
to the members of the London Working Men's College on the subject of
Reform, and the substance of what I said to them was this: "You are
all agape, my friends, for this mighty privilege of having your
opinions represented in Parliament. The concession might be
desirable,--at all events courteous,--if only it were quite certain
you had got any opinions to represent. But have you? Are you agreed on
any single thing you systematically want? Less work and more wages, of
course; but how much lessening of work do you suppose is possible? Do
you think the time will ever come for everybody to have _no_ work and
_all_ wages? Or have you yet taken the trouble so much as to think out
the nature of the true connection between wages and work, and to
determine, even approximately, the real quantity of the one, that can,
according to the laws of God and nature, be given for the other; for,
rely on it, make what laws you like, that quantity only can you at
last get.

10. "Do you know how many mouths can be fed on an acre of land, or how
fast those mouths multiply? and have you considered what is to be done
finally with unfeedable mouths? 'Send them to be fed elsewhere,' do
you say? Have you, then, formed any opinion as to the time at which
emigration should begin, or the countries to which it should
preferably take place, or the kind of population which should be left
at home? Have you planned the permanent state which you would wish
England to hold, emigrating over her edges, like a full well,
constantly? How full would you have her be of people, first? and of
what sort of people? Do you want her to be nothing but a large
workshop and forge, so that the name of 'Englishman' shall be
synonymous with 'ironmonger,' all over the world? or would you like to
keep some of your lords and landed gentry still, and a few green
fields and trees?

11. "You know well enough that there is not one of these questions, I
do not say which you can answer, but which you have ever _thought_ of
answering; and yet you want to have voices in Parliament! Your voices
are not worth a rat's squeak, either in Parliament or out of it, till
you have some ideas to utter with them; and when you have the
thoughts, you will not want to utter them, for you will see that your
way to the fulfilling of them does not lie through speech. You think
such matters need debating about? By all means debate about them; but
debate among yourselves, and with such honest helpers of your thoughts
as you can find; if by that way you cannot get at the truth, do you
suppose you could get at it sooner in the House of Commons, where the
only aim of many of the members would be to refute every word uttered
in your favor; and where the settlement of any question whatever
depends merely on the perturbations of the balance of conflicting
interests?"

12. That was, in main particulars, what I then said to the men of the
Working Men's College; and in this recurrent agitation about Reform,
that is what I would steadfastly say again. Do you think it is only
under the lacquered splendors of Westminster,--you working men of
England,--that your affairs can be rationally talked over? You have
perfect liberty and power to talk over, and establish for yourselves,
whatever laws you please; so long as you do not interfere with other
people's liberties or properties. Elect a parliament of your own.
Choose the best men among you, the best at least you can find, by
whatever system of election you think likeliest to secure such
desirable result. Invite trustworthy persons of other classes to join
your council; appoint time and place for its stated sittings, and let
this parliament, chosen after your own hearts, deliberate upon the
possible modes of the regulation of industry, and advisablest schemes
for helpful discipline of life; and so lay before you the best laws
they can devise, which such of you as were wise might submit to, and
teach their children to obey. And if any of the laws thus determined
appear to be inconsistent with the present circumstances or customs of
trade, do not make a noise about them, nor try to enforce them
suddenly on others, nor embroider them on flags, nor call meetings in
parks about them, in spite of railings and police; but keep them in
your thoughts and sight, as objects of patient purpose and future
achievement by peaceful strength.

13. For you need not think that even if you obtained a majority of
representatives in the existing parliament, you could immediately
compel any system of business, broadly contrary to that now
established by custom. If you could pass laws to-morrow, wholly
favorable to yourselves, as you might think, because unfavorable to
your masters, and to the upper classes of society,--the only result
would be that the riches of the country would at once leave it, and
you would perish in riot and famine. Be assured that no great change
for the better can ever be easily accomplished, or quickly; nor by
impulsive, ill-regulated effort, nor by bad men; nor even by good men,
without much suffering. The suffering must, indeed, come, one way or
another, in all greatly critical periods; the only question, for us,
is whether we will reach our ends (if we ever reach them) through a
chain of involuntary miseries, many of them useless, and all ignoble;
or whether we will know the worst at once, and deal with it by the
wisely sharp methods of Godsped courage.

14. This, I repeat to you, it is wholly in your own power to do, but
it is in your power on one condition only, that of steadfast truth to
yourselves, and to all men. If there is not, in the sum of it, honesty
enough among you to teach you to frame, and strengthen you to obey,
_just_ laws of trade, there is no hope left for you. No political
constitution can ennoble knaves; no privileges can assist them; no
possessions enrich them. Their gains are occult curses; comfortless
loss their truest blessing; failure and pain Nature's only mercy to
them. Look to it, therefore, first that you get some wholesome honesty
for the foundation of all things. Without the resolution in your
hearts to do good work, so long as your right hands have motion in
them; and to do it whether the issue be that you die or live, no life
worthy the name will ever be possible to you, while, in once forming
the resolution that your work is to be well done, life is really won,
here and for ever. And to make your children capable of such
resolution, is the beginning of all true education, of which I have
more to say in a future letter.




