The Project Gutenberg eBook of Time and Tide by Weare and Tyne
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Time and Tide by Weare and Tyne

Author: John Ruskin


        
Release date: February 6, 2010 [eBook #31196]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/31196

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       [Illustration: CONISTON
                          FROM A PHOTOGRAPH]


                           Library Edition

                          THE COMPLETE WORKS
                                  OF
                             JOHN RUSKIN


                         CROWN OF WILD OLIVE
                            TIME AND TIDE
                           QUEEN OF THE AIR
                    LECTURES ON ART AND LANDSCAPE
                           ARATRA PENTELICI


                     NATIONAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION
                     NEW YORK             CHICAGO




                            TIME AND TIDE

                                  BY

                            WEARE AND TYNE


                         TWENTY-FIVE LETTERS
                                  TO
                     A WORKING MAN OF SUNDERLAND
                                  ON
                          THE LAWS OF WORK.




CONTENTS.


                                                                PAGE
      PREFACE                                                    ix

  LETTER
      I. CO-OPERATION                                              1
          The two kinds of Co-operation.--In its highest
          sense it is not yet thought of.

     II. CONTENTMENT                                               4
          Co-operation, as hitherto understood, is perhaps
          not expedient.

    III. LEGISLATION                                               7
          Of True Legislation.--That every Man may be a Law
          to himself.

     IV. EXPENDITURE                                              11
          The Expenses for Art and for War.

      V. ENTERTAINMENT                                            13
          The Corruption of Modern Pleasure.--(Covent Garden
          Pantomime.)

     VI. DEXTERITY                                                18
          The Corruption of Modern Pleasure.--(The Japanese
          Jugglers.)

    VII. FESTIVITY                                                20
          Of the Various Expressions of National Festivity.

   VIII. THINGS WRITTEN                                           22
          The Four Possible Theories respecting the
          Authority of the Bible.

     IX. THANKSGIVING                                             27
          The Use of Music and Dancing under the Jewish
          Theocracy, compared with their Use by the Modern
          French.

      X. WHEAT-SIFTING                                            32
          The Meaning, and Actual Operation, of Satanic or
          Demoniacal Influence.

     XI. THE GOLDEN BOUGH                                         38
          The Satanic Power is mainly Twofold: the Power of
          causing Falsehood and the Power of causing Pain.
          The Resistance is by Law of Honor and Law of
          Delight.

    XII. DICTATORSHIP                                             41
          The Necessity of Imperative Law to the Prosperity
          of States.

   XIII. EPISCOPACY AND DUKEDOM                                   45
          The Proper Offices of the Bishop and Duke; or,
          "Overseer" and "Leader."

    XIV. TRADE-WARRANT                                            51
          The First Group of Essential Laws.--Against Theft
          by False Work, and by Bankruptcy.--Necessary
          Publicity of Accounts.

     XV. PER-CENTAGE                                              54
          The Nature of Theft by Unjust Profits.--Crime can
          finally be arrested only by Education.

    XVI. EDUCATION                                                59
          Of Public Education irrespective of Class
          distinction. It consists essentially in giving
          Habits of Mercy, and Habits of Truth. (_Gentleness
          and Justice._)

   XVII. DIFFICULTIES                                             66
          The Relations of Education to Position in Life.

  XVIII. HUMILITY                                                 68
          The harmful Effects of Servile Employments. The
          possible Practice and Exhibition of sincere
          Humility by Religious Persons.

    XIX. BROKEN REEDS                                             73
          The General Pressure of Excessive and Improper
          Work, in English Life.

     XX. ROSE-GARDENS                                             78
          Of Improvidence in Marriage in the Middle Classes;
          and of the advisable Restrictions of it.

    XXI. GENTILLESSE                                              83
          Of the Dignity of the Four Fine Arts; and of the
          Proper System of Retail Trade.

   XXII. THE MASTER                                               88
          Of the Normal Position and Duties of the Upper
          Classes. General Statement of the Land Question.

  XXIII. LANDMARKS                                                93
          Of the Just Tenure of Lands; and the Proper
          Functions of high Public Officers.

   XXIV. THE ROD AND HONEYCOMB                                   101
          The Office of the Soldier.

    XXV. HYSSOP                                                  108
          Of inevitable Distinction of Rank, and necessary
          Submission to Authority. The Meaning of
          Pure-Heartedness. Conclusion.




APPENDICES.


  APPENDIX                                                      PAGE
    I. Expenditure on Science and Art                            119
   II. Legislation of Frederick the Great                        120
  III. Effect of Modern Entertainments on the Mind of Youth      124
   IV. Drunkenness as the Cause of Crime                         124
    V. Abuse of Food                                             126
   VI. Regulations of Trade                                      128
  VII. Letter to the Editor of the _Pall Mall Gazette_           130




PREFACE.


The following Letters were written to Mr. Thomas Dixon, a working
cork-cutter of Sunderland, during the agitation for Reform in the
spring of the present year. They contain, in the plainest terms I
could use, the substance of what I then desired to say to our English
workmen, which was briefly this:--"The reform you desire may give you
more influence in Parliament; but your influence there will of course
be useless to you,--perhaps worse than useless, until you have wisely
made up your minds what you wish Parliament to do for you; and when
you _have_ made up your minds about that, you will find, not only that
you can do it for yourselves, without the intervention of Parliament;
but that eventually nobody _but_ yourselves can do it. And to help
you, as far as one of your old friends may, in so making up your
minds, such and such things are what it seems to me you should ask
for, and, moreover, strive for with your heart and might."

The letters now published relate only to one division of the laws
which I desired to recommend to the consideration of our
operatives,--those, namely, bearing upon honesty of work, and honesty
of exchange. I hope in the course of next year that I may be able to
complete the second part of the series, [I could not; but 'Fors
Clavigera' is now (1872) answering the same end:] which will relate to
the possible comforts and wholesome laws, of familiar household life,
and the share which a laboring nation may attain in the skill, and the
treasures, of the higher arts.

The letters are republished as they were written, with, here and
there, correction of a phrase, and omission of one or two passages of
merely personal or temporary interest; the headings only are added, in
order to give the reader some clue to the general aim of necessarily
desultory discussion; and the portions of Mr. Dixon's letters in
reply, referred to in the text, are added in the Appendix, and will be
found well deserving of attention.

  DENMARK HILL,
      _December 14, 1867._




TIME AND TIDE,

BY

WEARE AND TYNE.




LETTER I.

THE TWO KINDS OF CO-OPERATION.--IN ITS HIGHEST SENSE IT IS NOT YET
THOUGHT OF.


                                   DENMARK HILL, _February 4, 1867._

MY DEAR FRIEND,

1. You have now everything I have yet published on political economy;
but there are several points in these books of mine which I intended
to add notes to, and it seems little likely I shall get that soon
done. So I think the best way of making up for the want of these is to
write you a few simple letters, which you can read to other people, or
send to be printed, if you like, in any of your journals where you
think they may be useful.

I especially want you, for one thing, to understand the sense in which
the word "co-operation" is used in my books. You will find I am always
pleading for it; and yet I don't at all mean the co-operation of
partnership (as opposed to the system of wages) which is now so
gradually extending itself among our great firms. I am glad to see it
doing so, yet not altogether glad: for none of you who are engaged in
the immediate struggle between the system of co-operation and the
system of mastership know how much the dispute involves; and none of
us know the results to which it may finally lead. For the alternative
is not, in reality, only between two modes of conducting business--it
is between two different states of society. It is not the question
whether an amount of wages, no greater in the end than that at present
received by the men, may be paid to them in a way which shall give
them share in the risks and interest in the prosperity of the
business. The question is, really, whether the profits which are at
present taken, as his own right, by the person whose capital, or
energy, or ingenuity, has made him head of the firm, are not in some
proportion to be divided among the subordinates of it.

2. I do not wish, for the moment, to enter into any inquiry as to the
just claims of capital, or as to the proportions in which profits
ought to be, or are in actually existing firms, divided. I merely take
the one assured and essential condition, that a somewhat larger income
will be in co-operative firms secured to the subordinates, by the
diminution of the income of the chief. And the general tendency of
such a system is to increase the facilities of advancement among the
subordinates; to stimulate their ambition; to enable them to lay by,
if they are provident, more ample and more early provision for
declining years; and to form in the end a vast class of persons wholly
different from the existing operative:--members of society, possessing
each a moderate competence; able to procure, therefore, not indeed
many of the luxuries, but all the comforts of life; and to devote some
leisure to the attainments of liberal education, and to the other
objects of free life. On the other hand, by the exact sum which is
divided among them, more than their present wages, the fortune of the
man who, under the present system, takes all the profits of the
business, will be diminished; and the acquirement of large private
fortune by regular means, and all the conditions of life belonging to
such fortune, will be rendered impossible in the mercantile community.

3. Now, the magnitude of the social change hereby involved, and the
consequent differences in the moral relations between individuals,
have not as yet been thought of,--much less estimated,--by any of your
writers on commercial subjects; and it is because I do not yet feel
able to grapple with them that I have left untouched, in the books I
send you, the question of co-operative labor. When I use the word
"co-operation," it is not meant to refer to these new constitutions of
firms at all. I use the word in a far wider sense, as opposed, not to
masterhood, but to _competition_. I do not mean, for instance, by
co-operation, that all the master bakers in a town are to give a share
of their profits to the men who go out with the bread; but that the
masters are not to try to undersell each other, nor seek each to get
the other's business, but are all to form one society, selling to the
public under a common law of severe penalty for unjust dealing, and at
an established price. I do not mean that all bankers' clerks should be
partners in the bank; but I do mean that all bankers should be members
of a great national body, answerable as a society for all deposits;
and that the private business of speculating with other people's money
should take another name than that of "banking." And, for final
instance, I mean by "co-operation" not only fellowships between
trading _firms_, but between trading _nations_; so that it shall no
more be thought (as it is now, with ludicrous and vain selfishness) an
advantage for one nation to undersell another; and take its occupation
away from it; but that the primal and eternal law of vital commerce
shall be of all men understood--namely, that every nation is fitted by
its character, and the nature of its territories, for some particular
employments or manufactures; and that it is the true interest of every
other nation to encourage it in such speciality, and by no means to
interfere with, but in all ways forward and protect, its efforts,
ceasing all rivalship with it, so soon as it is strong enough to
occupy its proper place. You see, therefore, that the idea of
co-operation, in the sense in which I employ it, has hardly yet
entered into the minds of political inquirers; and I will not pursue
it at present; but return to that system which is beginning to obtain
credence and practice among us. This, however, must be in a following
letter.




