LETTER XVII.

THE RELATIONS OF EDUCATION TO POSITION IN LIFE.


                                                    _April 3, 1867._

103. I am not quite sure that you will feel the awkwardness of the
dilemma I got into at the end of last letter, as much as I do myself.
You working men have been crowing and peacocking at such a rate
lately; and setting yourselves forth so confidently for the cream of
society, and the top of the world, that perhaps you will not
anticipate any of the difficulties which suggest themselves to a
thoroughbred Tory and Conservative, like me. Perhaps you will expect a
youth properly educated--a good rider--musician--and well-grounded
scholar in natural philosophy, to think it a step of promotion when he
has to go and be made a tailor of, or a coalheaver? If you do, I
should very willingly admit that you might be right, and go on to the
farther development of my notions without pausing at this
stumbling-block, were it not that, unluckily, all the wisest men whose
sayings I ever heard or read, agree in expressing (one way or another)
just such contempt for those useful occupations, as I dread on the
part of my foolishly refined scholars. Shakespeare and Chaucer,--Dante
and Virgil,--Horace and Pindar,--Homer, Æschylus, and Plato,--all the
men of any age or country who seem to have had Heaven's music on their
lips, agree in their scorn of mechanic life. And I imagine that the
feeling of prudent Englishmen, and sensible as well as sensitive
Englishwomen, on reading my last letter, would mostly be--"Is the man
mad, or laughing at us, to propose educating the working classes this
way? He could not, if his wild scheme were possible, find a better
method of making them acutely wretched."

104. It may be so, my sensible and polite friends; and I am heartily
willing, as well as curious, to hear you develop your own scheme of
operative education, so only that it be universal, orderly, and
careful. I do not say that I shall be prepared to advocate my
athletics and philosophies instead. Only, observe what you admit, or
imply, in bringing forward your possibly wiser system. You imply that
a certain portion of mankind must be employed in degrading work; and
that, to fit them for this work, it is necessary to limit their
knowledge, their active powers, and their enjoyments, from childhood
upwards, so that they may not be able to conceive of any state better
than the one they were born in, nor possess any knowledge or
acquirements inconsistent with the coarseness, or disturbing the
monotony, of their vulgar occupation. And by their labor in this
contracted state of mind, we superior beings are to be maintained; and
always to be curtseyed to by the properly ignorant little girls, and
capped by the properly ignorant little boys, whenever we pass by.

105. Mind, I do not say that this is _not_ the right state of things.
Only, if it be, you need not be so over-particular about the
slave-trade, it seems to me. What is the use of arguing so
pertinaciously that a black's skull will hold as much as a white's,
when you are declaring in the same breath that a white's skull must
not hold as much as it can, or it will be the worse for him? It does
not appear to me at all a profound state of slavery to be whipped into
doing a piece of low work that I don't like; but it is a very profound
state of slavery to be kept, myself, low in the forehead, that I may
not dislike low work.

106. You see, my friend, the dilemma is really an awkward one,
whichever way you look at it. But, what is still worse, I am not
puzzled only, at this part of my scheme, about the boys I shall have
to make _workmen_ of; I am just as much puzzled about the boys I
shall have to make _nothing_ of! Grant, that by hook or crook, by
reason or rattan, I persuade a certain number of the roughest ones
into some serviceable business, and get coats and shoes made for the
rest,--what is the business of "the rest" to be? Naturally, according
to the existing state of things, one supposes they are to belong to
some of the gentlemanly professions; to be soldiers, lawyers, doctors,
or clergymen. But alas, I shall not want any soldiers of special skill
or pugnacity. _All_ my boys will be soldiers. So far from wanting any
lawyers, of the kind that live by talking, I shall have the strongest
possible objection to their appearance in the country. For doctors, I
shall always entertain a profound respect; but when I get my athletic
education fairly established, of what help to them will my respect be?
They will all starve! And for clergymen, it is true, I shall have a
large number of episcopates--one over every hundred families--(and
many positions of civil authority also, for civil officers, above them
and below), but all these places will involve much hard work, and be
anything but covetable; while, of clergymen's usual work, admonition,
theological demonstration, and the like, I shall want very little done
indeed, and that little done for nothing! for I will allow no man to
admonish anybody, until he has previously earned his own dinner by
more productive work than admonition.

Well, I wish, my friend, you would write me a word or two in answer to
this, telling me your own ideas as to the proper issue out of these
difficulties. I should like to know what you think, and what you
suppose others will think, before I tell you my own notions about the
matter.




LETTER XVIII.

THE HARMFUL EFFECTS OF SERVILE EMPLOYMENTS. THE POSSIBLE PRACTICE AND
EXHIBITION OF SINCERE HUMILITY BY RELIGIOUS PERSONS.


                                                    _April 7, 1867._

107. I have been waiting these three days to know what you would say
to my last questions; and now you send me two pamphlets of Combe's to
read! I never read anything in spring-time (except the Ai, Ai, on the
"sanguine flower inscribed with woe"); and, besides, if, as I gather
from your letter, Combe thinks that among well-educated boys there
would be a percentage constitutionally inclined to be cobblers, or
looking forward with unction to establishment in the oil and tallow
line, or fretting themselves for a flunkey's uniform, nothing that he
could say would make me agree with him. I know, as well as he does,
the unconquerable differences in the clay of the human creature: and I
know that, in the outset, whatever system of education you adopted, a
large number of children could be made nothing of, and would
necessarily fall out of the ranks, and supply candidates enough for
degradation to common mechanical business: but this enormous
difference in bodily and mental capacity has been mainly brought about
by difference in occupation, and by direct maltreatment; and in a few
generations, if the poor were cared for, their marriages looked after,
and sanitary law enforced, a beautiful type of face and form, and a
high intelligence, would become all but universal, in a climate like
this of England. Even as it is, the marvel is always to me, how the
race resists, at least in its childhood, influences of ill-regulated
birth, poisoned food, poisoned air, and soul neglect. I often see
faces of children, as I walk through the black district of St. Giles's
(lying, as it does, just between my own house and the British Museum),
which, through all their pale and corrupt misery, recall the old "Non
Angli," and recall it, not by their beauty, but by their sweetness of
expression, even though signed already with trace and cloud of the
coming life,--a life so bitter that it would make the curse of the
137th Psalm true upon our modern Babylon, though we were to read it
thus, "Happy shall _thy children_ be, if one taketh and dasheth them
against the stones."

108. Yes, very solemnly I repeat to you that in those worst treated
children of the English race, I yet see the making of gentlemen and
gentlewomen--not the making of dog-stealers and gin-drinkers, such as
their parents were; and the child of the average English tradesman or
peasant, even at this day, well schooled, will show no innate
disposition such as must fetter him forever to the clod or the
counter. You say that many a boy runs away, or would run away if he
could, from good positions to go to sea. Of course he does. I never
said I should have any difficulty in finding sailors, but I shall in
finding fishmongers. I am at no loss for gardeners either, but what
am I to do for greengrocers?

109. The fact is, a great number of quite necessary employments are,
in the accuratest sense, "Servile;" that is, they sink a man to the
condition of a serf, or unthinking worker, the proper state of an
animal, but more or less unworthy of men; nay, unholy in some sense,
so that a day is made "holy" by the fact of its being commanded, "Thou
shalt do no _servile_ work therein." And yet, if undertaken in a
certain spirit, such work might be the holiest of all. If there were
but a thread or two of sound fiber here and there left in our modern
religion, so that the stuff of it would bear a real strain, one might
address our two opposite groups of evangelicals and ritualists
somewhat after this fashion:--"Good friends, these differences of
opinion between you cannot but be painful to your Christian charity,
and they are unseemly to us, the profane; and prevent us from learning
from you what, perhaps, we ought. But, as we read your Book, we, for
our part, gather from it that you might, without danger to your own
souls, set an undivided example to us, for the benefit of ours. You,
both of you, as far as we understand, agree in the necessity of
humility to the perfection of your character. We often hear you, of
Calvinistic persuasion, speaking of yourselves as 'sinful dust and
ashes,'--would it then be inconsistent with your feelings to make
yourselves into 'serviceable' dust and ashes? We observe that of late
many of our roads have been hardened and mended with cinders; now, if,
in a higher sense, you could allow us to mend the roads of the world
with _you_ a little, it would be a great proof to us of your
sincerity. Suppose, only for a little while, in the present difficulty
and distress, you were to make it a test of conversion that a man
should regularly give Zaccheus's portion, half his goods, to the
poor, and at once adopt some disagreeable and despised, but thoroughly
useful, trade? You cannot think that this would finally be to your
disadvantage; you doubtless believe the texts, 'He that giveth to the
poor lendeth to the Lord,' and 'He that would be chief among you, let
him be your servant.' The more you parted with, and the lower you
stooped, the greater would be your final reward, and final exaltation.
You profess to despise human learning and worldly riches; leave both
of these to _us_; undertake for us the illiterate and ill-paid
employments which must deprive you of the privileges of society and
the pleasures of luxury. You cannot possibly preach your faith so
forcibly to the world by any quantity of the finest words, as by a few
such simple and painful acts; and over your counters, in honest retail
business, you might preach a gospel that would sound in more ears than
any that was ever proclaimed over pulpit cushions or tabernacle rails.
And, whatever may be your gifts of utterance, you cannot but feel
(studying St. Paul's Epistles as carefully as you do) that you might
more easily and modestly emulate the practical teaching of the silent
Apostle of the Gentiles than the speech or writing of his companion.
Amidst the present discomforts of your brethren you may surely, with
greater prospect of good to them, seek the title of Sons of
Consolation, than of Sons of Thunder, and be satisfied with Barnabas's
confession of faith, (if you can reach no farther,) who, 'having land,
sold it, and brought the money and laid it at the Apostles' feet.'

110. "To you, on the other hand, gentlemen of the embroidered robe,
who neither despise learning nor the arts, we know that sacrifices
such as these would be truly painful, and might at first appear
inexpedient. But the doctrine of self-mortification is not a new one
to you; and we should be sorry to think--we would not, indeed, for a
moment dishonor you by thinking--that these melodious chants, and
prismatic brightnesses of vitreous pictures, and floral graces of
deep-wrought stone, were in any wise intended for your own poor
pleasures, whatever profane attraction they may exercise on more
fleshly-minded persons. And as you have certainly received no definite
order for the painting, carving, or lighting up of churches, while the
temple of the body of so many poor living Christians is so pale, so
mis-shapen, and so ill-lighted; but have, on the contrary, received
very definite orders for the feeding and clothing of such sad
humanity, we may surely ask you, not unreasonably, to humiliate
yourselves in the most complete way--not with a voluntary, but a
sternly _in_voluntary humility--not with a show of wisdom in
will-worship, but with practical wisdom, in all honor, to the
satisfying of the flesh; and to associate yourselves in monasteries
and convents for the better practice of useful and humble trades. Do
not burn any more candles, but mould some; do not paint any more
windows, but mend a few where the wind comes in, in winter time, with
substantial clear glass and putty. Do not vault any more high roofs,
but thatch some low ones; and embroider rather on backs which are
turned to the cold, than only on those which are turned to
congregations. And you will have your reward afterwards, and attain,
with all your flocks thus tended, to a place where you may have as
much gold, and painted glass, and singing, as you like."

Thus much, it seems to me, one might say with some hope of acceptance,
to any very earnest member of either of our two great religious
parties, if, as I say, their faith could stand a strain. I have not,
however, based any of my imaginary political arrangements on the
probability of its doing so; and I trust only to such general good
nature and willingness to help each other, as I presume may be found
among men of the world; to whom I should have to make quite another
sort of speech, which I will endeavor to set down the heads of, for
you, in next letter.




