LETTER XXV.

OF INEVITABLE DISTINCTION OF RANK, AND NECESSARY SUBMISSION TO
AUTHORITY. THE MEANING OF PURE-HEARTEDNESS. CONCLUSION.


169. I was interrupted yesterday, just as I was going to set my
soldiers to work; and to-day, here comes the pamphlet you promised me,
containing the Debates about Church-going, in which I find so
interesting a text for my concluding letter that I must still let my
soldiers stand at ease for a little while. Look at its twenty-fifth
page, and you will find, in the speech of Mr. Thomas, (carpenter,)
this beautiful explanation of the admitted change in the general
public mind, of which Mr. Thomas, for his part, highly approves, (the
getting out of the unreasonable habit of paying respect to anybody.)
There were many reasons to Mr. Thomas's mind why the working classes
did not attend places of worship: one was, that "the parson was
regarded as an object of reverence. In the little town he came from,
if a poor man did not make a bow to the parson he was a marked man.
This was no doubt wearing away to a great extent" (the base habit of
making bows), "because, the poor man was beginning to get education,
and to think for himself. It was only while the priest kept the press
from him that he was kept ignorant, and was compelled to bow, as it
were, to the parson.... It was the case all over England. The
clergyman seemed to think himself something superior. Now he (Mr.
Thomas) did not admit there was any inferiority" (laughter, audience
throughout course of meeting mainly in the right), "except, perhaps,
on the score of his having received a classical education, which the
poor man could not get."

Now, my dear friend, here is the element which is the veriest devil of
all that have got into modern flesh; this infidelity of the nineteenth
century St. Thomas in there being anything better than himself
alive;[A] coupled, as it always is, with the farther resolution--if
unwillingly convinced of the fact,--to seal the Better living thing
down again out of his way, under the first stone handy. I had not
intended, till we entered on the second section of our inquiry,
namely, into the influence of gentleness (having hitherto, you see,
been wholly concerned with that of justice), to give you the clue out
of our dilemma about equalities produced by education; but by the
speech of our superior carpenter, I am driven into it at once, and it
is perhaps as well.

    [A] Compare 'Crown of Wild Olive,' § 136.

170. The speech is not, observe, without its own root of truth at the
bottom of it, nor at all, as I think, ill intended by the speaker; but
you have in it a clear instance of what I was saying in the sixteenth
of these letters,--that education _was desired by the lower orders
because they thought it would make them upper orders_, and be a
leveler and effacer of distinctions. They will be mightily astonished,
when they really get it, to find that it is, on the contrary, the
fatalest of all discerners and enforcers of distinctions; piercing,
even to the division of the joints and marrow, to find out wherein
your body and soul are less, or greater, than other bodies and souls,
and to sign deed of separation with unequivocal seal.

171. Education is, indeed, of all differences not divinely appointed,
an instant effacer and reconciler. Whatever is undivinely poor, it
will make rich; whatever is undivinely maimed, and halt, and blind, it
will make whole, and equal, and seeing. The blind and the lame are to
it as to David at the siege of the Tower of the Kings, "hated of
David's soul." But there are other divinely-appointed differences,
eternal as the ranks of the everlasting hills, and as the strength of
their ceaseless waters. And these, education does _not_ do away with;
but measures, manifests, and employs.

In the handful of shingle which you gather from the sea-beach, which
the indiscriminate sea, with equality of fraternal foam, has only
educated to be, every one, round, you will see little difference
between the noble and mean stones. But the jeweler's trenchant
education of them will tell you another story. Even the meanest will
be better for it, but the noblest so much better that you can class
the two together no more. The fair veins and colors are all clear now,
and so stern is nature's intent regarding this, that not only will the
polish show which is best, but the best will take most polish. You
shall not merely see they have more virtue than the others, but see
that more of virtue more clearly; and the less virtue there is, the
more dimly you shall see what there is of it.

172. And the law about education, which is sorrowfulest to vulgar
pride, is this--that all its gains are at compound interest; so that,
as our work proceeds, every hour throws us farther behind the greater
men with whom we began on equal terms. Two children go to school hand
in hand, and spell for half an hour over the same page. Through all
their lives, never shall they spell from the same page more. One is
presently a page ahead,--two pages, ten pages,--and evermore, though
each toils equally, the interval enlarges--at birth nothing, at death,
infinite.

173. And by this you may recognize true education from false. False
education is a delightful thing, and warms you, and makes you every
day think more of yourself. And true education is a deadly cold thing
with a Gorgon's head on her shield, and makes you every day think
worse of yourself.

Worse in two ways, also, more's the pity. It is perpetually increasing
the personal sense of ignorance and the personal sense of fault. And
this last is the truth which is at the bottom of the common
evangelical notion about conversion, and which the Devil has got hold
of, and hidden, until, instead of seeing and confessing personal
ignorance and fault, as compared with the sense and virtue of others,
people see nothing but corruption in human nature, and shelter their
own sins under accusation of their race (the worst of all assertions
of equality and fraternity). And so they avoid the blessed and
strengthening pain of finding out wherein they are fools, as compared
with other men, by calling everybody else a fool too; and avoid the
pain of discerning their own faults, by vociferously claiming their
share in the great capital of original sin.

I must also, therefore, tell you here what properly ought to have
begun the next following section of our subject--the point usually
unnoticed in the parable of the Prodigal Son.

174. First, have you ever observed that all Christ's main teachings,
by direct order, by earnest parable, and by His own permanent emotion,
regard the use and misuse of _money_? We might have thought, if we had
been asked what a divine teacher was most likely to teach, that he
would have left inferior persons to give directions about money; and
himself spoken only concerning faith and love, and the discipline of
the passions, and the guilt of the crimes of soul against soul. But
not so. He speaks in general terms of these. But He does not speak
parables about them for all men's memory, nor permit Himself fierce
indignation against them, in all men's sight. The Pharisees bring Him
an adulteress. He writes her forgiveness on the dust of which He had
formed her. Another, despised of all for known sin, He recognized as a
giver of unknown love. But He acknowledges no love in buyers and
sellers in His house. One should have thought there were people in
that house twenty times worse than they;--Caiaphas and his like--false
priests, false prayer-makers, false leaders of the people--who needed
putting to silence, or to flight, with darkest wrath. But the scourge
is only against the _traffickers and thieves_. The two most intense of
all the parables: the two which lead the rest in love and terror (this
of the Prodigal, and of Dives), relate, both of them, to management of
riches. The practical order given to the only seeker of advice, of
whom it is recorded that Christ "loved him," is briefly about his
property. "Sell that thou hast."

And the arbitrament of the day of the Last Judgment is made to rest
wholly, neither on belief in God, nor in any spiritual virtue in man,
nor on freedom from stress of stormy crime, but on this only, "I was
an hungered and ye gave me drink; naked, and ye clothed me; sick, and
ye came unto me."

175. Well, then, the first thing I want you to notice in the parable
of the Prodigal Son (and the last thing which people usually _do_
notice in it), is--that it is about a Prodigal! He begins by asking
for his share of his father's goods; he gets it, carries it off, and
wastes it. It is true that he wastes it in riotous living, but you are
not asked to notice in what kind of riot; he spends it with
harlots--but it is not the harlotry which his elder brother accuses
him of mainly, but of having devoured his father's living. Nay, it is
not the sensual life which he accuses himself of--or which the manner
of his punishment accuses him of. But the _wasteful_ life. It is not
said that he had become debauched in soul, or diseased in body, by his
vice; but that at last he would fain have filled his belly with husks,
and could not. It is not said that he was struck with remorse for the
consequences of his evil passions, but only that he remembered there
was bread enough and to spare, even for the servants, at home.

Now, my friend, do not think I want to extenuate sins of passion
(though, in very truth, the sin of Magdalene is a light one compared
to that of Judas); but observe, sins of passion, if of _real_ passion,
are often the errors and backfalls of noble souls; but prodigality is
mere and pure selfishness, and essentially the sin of an ignoble or
undeveloped creature; and I would rather, ten times rather, hear of a
youth that (certain degrees of temptation and conditions of resistance
being understood) he had fallen into any sin you chose to name, of all
the mortal ones, than that he was in the habit of running bills which
he could not pay.

Farther, though I hold that the two crowning and most accursed sins of
the society of this present day are the carelessness with which it
regards the betrayal of women, and the brutality with which it suffers
the neglect of children, both these head and chief crimes, and all
others, are rooted first in abuse of the laws, and neglect of the
duties concerning wealth. And thus the love of money, with the
parallel (and, observe, _mathematically commensurate_ looseness in
management of it), the "mal tener," followed necessarily by the "mal
dare," is, indeed, the root of all evil.

176. Then, secondly, I want you to note that when the prodigal comes
to his senses, he complains of nobody but himself, and speaks of no
unworthiness but his own. He says nothing against any of the women
who tempted him--nothing against the citizen who left him to feed on
husks--nothing of the false friends of whom "no man gave unto
him"--above all, nothing of the "corruption of human nature," or the
corruption of things in general. He says that _he himself_ is
unworthy, as distinguished from honorable persons, and that _he
himself_ has sinned, as distinguished from righteous persons. And
_that_ is the hard lesson to learn, and the beginning of faithful
lessons. All right and fruitful humility, and purging of heart, and
seeing of God, is in that. It is easy to call yourself the chief of
sinners, expecting every sinner round you to decline--or return--the
compliment; but learn to measure the real degrees of your own relative
baseness, and to be ashamed, not in heaven's sight, but in man's
sight; and redemption is indeed begun. Observe the phrase, I have
sinned "_against_ heaven," against the great law of that, and _before_
thee, visibly degraded before my human sire and guide, unworthy any
more of being esteemed of his blood, and desirous only of taking the
place I deserve among his servants.

177. Now, I do not doubt but that I shall set many a reader's teeth on
edge by what he will think my carnal and material rendering of this
"beautiful" parable. But I am just as ready to spiritualize it as he
is, provided I am sure first that we understand it. If we want to
understand the parable of the sower, we must first think of it as of
literal husbandry; if we want to understand the parable of the
prodigal, we must first understand it as of literal prodigality. And
the story has also for us a precious lesson in this literal sense of
it, namely this, which I have been urging upon you throughout these
letters, that all redemption must begin in subjection and in the
recovery of the sense of Fatherhood and authority, as all ruin and
desolation begin in the loss of that sense. The lost son began by
claiming his rights. He is found when he resigns them. He is lost by
flying from his father, when his father's authority was only paternal.
He is found by returning to his father, and desiring that his
authority may be absolute, as over a hired stranger.

And this is the practical lesson I want to leave with you, and all
other working men.

178. You are on the eve of a great political crisis; and every rascal
with a tongue in his head will try to make his own stock out of you.
Now this is the test you must try them with. Those that say to you,
"Stand up for your rights--get your division of living--be sure that
you are as well off as others, and have what they have!--don't let any
man dictate to you--have not you all a right to your opinion?--are you
not all as good as everybody else?--let us have no governors, or
fathers--let us all be free and alike." Those, I say, who speak thus
to you, take Nelson's rough order for--and hate them as you do the
Devil, for they _are_ his ambassadors. But those, the few, who have
the courage to say to you, "My friends, you and I, and all of us, have
somehow got very wrong; we've been hardly treated, certainly; but here
we are in a piggery, mainly by our own fault, hungry enough, and for
ourselves, anything but respectable: we _must_ get out of this; there
are certainly laws we may learn to live by, and there are wiser people
than we are in the world, and kindly ones, if we can find our way to
them; and an infinitely wise and kind Father, above all of them and
us, if we can but find our way to _Him_, and ask Him to take us for
servants, and put us to any work He will, so that we may never leave
Him more." The people who will say that to you, and (for by _no_
saying, but by their fruits, only, you shall finally know them) who
are themselves orderly and kindly, and do their own business
well,--take _those_ for your guides, and trust them; on ice and rock
alike, tie yourselves well together with them, and with much scrutiny,
and cautious walking (perhaps nearly as much back as forward, at
first), you will verily get off the glacier, and into meadow land, in
God's time.

179. I meant to have written much to you respecting the meaning of
that word "hired servants," and to have gone on to the duties of
soldiers, for you know "Soldier" means a person who is paid to fight
with regular pay--literally with "soldi" or "sous"--the "penny a day"
of the vineyard laborers; but I can't now: only just this much, that
our whole system of work must be based on the nobleness of
soldiership--so that we shall all be soldiers of either plowshare or
sword; and literally all our actual and professed soldiers, whether
professed for a time only, or for life, must be kept to hard work of
hand, when not in actual war; their honor consisting in being set to
service of more pain and danger than others; to life-boat service; to
redeeming of ground from furious rivers or sea--or mountain ruin; to
subduing wild and unhealthy land, and extending the confines of
colonies in the front of miasm and famine, and savage races.

And much of our harder home work must be done in a kind of
soldiership, by bands of trained workers sent from place to place and
town to town; doing, with strong and sudden hand, what is needed for
help, and setting all things in more prosperous courses for the
future.

Of all which I hope to speak in its proper place after we know what
offices the higher arts of gentleness have among the lower ones of
force, and how their prevalence may gradually change spear to
pruning-hook, over the face of all the earth.

180. And now--but one word more--either for you, or any other readers
who may be startled at what I have been saying, as to the peculiar
stress laid by the Founder of our religion on right dealing with
wealth. Let them be assured that it is with no fortuitous choice among
the attributes or powers of evil, that "Mammon" is assigned for the
direct adversary of the Master whom they are bound to serve. You
cannot, by any artifice of reconciliation, be God's soldier, and his.
Nor while the desire of gain is within your heart, can any true
knowledge of the Kingdom of God come there. No one shall enter its
stronghold,--no one receive its blessing, except, "he that hath clean
hands and a pure heart;" clean hands that have done no cruel
deed,--pure heart, that knows no base desire. And, therefore, in the
highest spiritual sense that can be given to words, be assured, not
respecting the literal temple of stone and gold, but of the living
temple of your body and soul, that no redemption, nor teaching, nor
hallowing, will be anywise possible for it, until these two verses
have been, for it also, fulfilled:--

"And He went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that bought. And He taught daily in the temple."




APPENDICES.




APPENDIX I.

Page 21.--_Expenditure on Science and Art._


The following is the passage referred to. The fact it relates is so
curious, and so illustrative of our national interest in science, that
I do not apologize for the repetition:--

"Two years ago there was a collection of the fossils of Solenhofen to
be sold in Bavaria; the best in existence, containing many specimens
unique for perfectness, and one, unique as an example of a species (a
whole kingdom of unknown living creatures being announced by that
fossil). This collection, of which the mere market worth, among
private buyers, would probably have been some thousand or twelve
hundred pounds, was offered to the English nation for seven hundred:
but we would not give seven hundred, and the whole series would have
been in the Munich museum at this moment, if Professor Owen[A] had
not, with loss of his own time, and patient tormenting of the British
public in the person of its representatives, got leave to give four
hundred pounds at once, and himself become answerable for the other
three!--which the said public will doubtless pay him eventually, but
sulkily, and caring nothing about the matter all the while; only
always ready to cackle if any credit comes of it. Consider, I beg of
you, arithmetically, what this fact means. Your annual expenditure for
public purposes (a third of it for military apparatus) is at least
fifty millions. Now seven hundred pounds is to fifty million pounds,
roughly, as seven pence to two thousand pounds. Suppose, then, a
gentleman of unknown income, but whose wealth was to be conjectured
from the fact that he spent two thousand a year on his park walls and
footmen only, professes himself fond of science; and that one of his
servants comes eagerly to tell him that an unique collection of
fossils, giving clue to a new era of creation, is to be had for the
sum of sevenpence sterling; and that the gentleman who is fond of
science, and spends two thousand a year on his park, answers, after
keeping his servant waiting several months, 'Well, I'll give you
fourpence for them, if you will be answerable for the extra threepence
yourself till next year.'"

    [A] I originally stated this fact without Professor Owen's
    permission; which, of course, he could not with propriety
    have granted, had I asked it; but I considered it so
    important that the public should be aware of the fact, that I
    did what seemed to me right, though rude.




APPENDIX II.

Page 33.--_Legislation of Frederick the Great._


The following are the portions of Mr. Dixon's letters referred to:--

"Well, I am now busy with Frederick the Great; I am not now astonished
that Carlyle calls him Great, neither that this work of his should
have had such a sad effect upon him in producing it, when I see the
number of volumes he must have had to wade through to produce such a
clear terse set of utterances; and yet I do not feel the work as a
book likely to do a reader of it the good that some of his other books
will do. It is truly awful to read these battles after battles, lies
after lies, called Diplomacy; it's fearful to read all this, and one
wonders how he that set himself to this--He, of all men--could have
the rare patience to produce such a labored, heart-rending piece of
work. Again, when one reads of the stupidity, the shameful waste of
our moneys by our forefathers, to see our National Debt (the curse to
our labor now, the millstone to our commerce, to our fair chance of
competition in our day) thus created, and for what? Even Carlyle
cannot tell; then how are we to tell? Now, who will deliver us? that
is the question; who will help us in these days of _idle or no work_,
while our foreign neighbors have plenty and are actually selling their
produce to our men of capital cheaper than we can make it? House-rent
getting dearer, taxes getting dearer, rates, clothing, food, etc. Sad
times, my master, do seem to have fallen upon us. And the cause of
nearly all this lies embedded in that Frederick; and yet, so far as I
know of it, no critic has yet given an exposition of such laying
there. For our behoof, is there no one that will take this, that there
lies so woven in with much other stuff so sad to read, to any man that
does not believe man was made to fight alone, to be a butcher of his
fellow-man? Who will do this work, or piece of work, so that all who
care may know how it is that our debt grew so large, and a great deal
more that we ought to know?--that clearly is one great reason why the
book was written and was printed. Well, I hope some day all this will
be clear to our people, and some man or men will arise and sweep us
clear of these hindrances, these sad drawbacks to the vitality of our
work in this world."


                         "57, Nile Street, Sunderland, Feb. 7, 1867.

"DEAR SIR,--

"I beg to acknowledge the receipt of two letters as additions to your
books, which I have read with deep interest, and shall take care of
them, and read them over again, so that I may thoroughly comprehend
them, and be able to think of them for future use. I myself am not
fully satisfied with our co-operation, and never have been; it is too
much tinged with the very elements that they complain of in our
present systems of trade--selfishness. I have for years been trying to
direct the attention of the editor of the _Co-operator_ to such evils
that I see in it. Now further, I may state that I find you and Carlyle
seem to agree quite on the idea of the _Masterhood_ qualification.
There again I find you both feel and write as all working men consider
just. I can assure you there is not an honest, noble working man that
would not by far serve under such _master_-hood, than be the employé
or workman of a co-operative store. Working men do not as a rule make
good masters; neither do they treat each other with that courtesy as a
noble master treats his working man. George Fox shadows forth some
such treatment that Friends ought to make law and guidance for their
working men and slaves, such as you speak of in your letters. I will
look the passage up, as it is quite to the point, so far as I now
remember it. In Vol. VI. of _Frederick the Great_, I find a great deal
there that I feel quite certain, if our Queen or Government could make
law, thousands of English working men would hail it with such a shout
of joy and gladness as would astonish the Continental world. These
changes suggested by Carlyle and placed before the thinkers of
England, are the noblest, the truest utterances on real kinghood, that
I have ever read; the more I think over them, the more I feel the
truth, the justness, and also the fitness of them, to our nation's
present dire necessities; yet this is the man, and these are the
thoughts of his, that our critics seem never to see, or if seen, don't
think worth printing or in any way wisely directing the attention of
the public thereto, alas! All this and much more fills me with such
sadness that I am driven almost to despair. I see from the newspapers,
Yorkshire, Lancashire, and other places are sternly endeavoring to
carry out the short time movement until such times as trade revives,
and I find the masters and men seem to adopt it with a good grace and
friendly spirit. I also beg to inform you I see a Mr. Morley, a large
manufacturer at Nottingham, has been giving pensions to all his old
workmen. I hope such a noble example will be followed by other wealthy
masters. It would do more to make a master loved, honored, and cared
for, than thousands of pounds expended in other ways. The Government
Savings Banks is one of the wisest acts of late years done by our
Government. I, myself, often wish the Government held all our banks
instead of private men; that would put an end to false speculations,
such as we too often in the provinces suffer so severely by, so I hail
with pleasure and delight the shadowing forth by you of these noble
plans for the future: I feel glad and uplifted to think of the good
that such teaching will do for us all.

                                          "Yours truly,
                                                     "THOMAS DIXON."


                        "57, Nile Street, Sunderland, Feb. 24, 1867.

"DEAR SIR,--

"I now give you the references to _Frederick the Great_. Vol. VI.:
Land Question, 365 page, where he increases the number of small
farmers to 4,000 (202, 204). English soldiers and T. C.'s remarks on
our system of purchase, etc. His law, (620, 623, 624). State of Poland
and how he repaired it, (487, 488, 489, 490). I especially value the
way he introduced all kinds of industries therein, and so soon changed
the chaos into order. Again, the school-masters also are given (not
yet in England, says T. C.). Again the use he made of 15,000_l._
surplus in Brandenburg; how it was applied to better his staff of
masters. To me, the Vol. VI. is one of the wisest pieces of modern
thought in our language. I only wish I had either your power, C.
Kingsley, Maurice, or some such able pen-generalship, to illustrate
and show forth all the wise teaching on law, government, and social
life I see in it, and shining like a star through all its pages.[A] I
feel also the truth of all you have written, and will do all I can to
make such men or women that care for such thoughts, see it, or read
it. I am copying the letters as fast and as well as I can, and will
use my utmost endeavor to have them done that justice to they merit.

                                          "Yours truly,
                                                     "THOMAS DIXON."

    [A] I have endeavored to arrange some of the passages to
    which Mr. Dixon here refers, in a form enabling the reader to
    see their bearing on each other more distinctly, as a sequel
    to the essay on War in the 'Crown of Wild Olive.'




APPENDIX III.

Page 33.--_Effect of Modern Entertainments on the Mind of Youth._


The letter of the _Times'_ correspondent referred to contained an
account of one of the most singular cases of depravity ever brought
before a criminal court; but it is unnecessary to bring any of its
details under the reader's attention, for nearly every other number of
our journals has of late contained some instances of atrocities before
unthought of, and, it might have seemed, impossible to humanity.
The connection of these with the modern love of excitement in the
sensational novel and drama may not be generally understood, but it is
direct and constant; all furious pursuit of pleasure ending in actual
desire of horror and delight in death. I entered into some fuller
particulars on this subject in a lecture given in the spring at the
Royal Institution.

[Any part of the Lecture referred to likely to be of permanent
interest will be printed, somewhere, in this series.]




APPENDIX IV.

Page 76.--_Drunkenness as the Cause of Crime._


The following portions of Mr. Dixon's letter referred to, will be
found interesting:--


"DEAR SIR,--

"Your last letter, I think, will arouse the attention of thinkers more
than any of the series, it being on topics they in general feel more
interested in than the others, especially as in these you do not
assail their pockets so much as in the former ones. Since you seem
interested with the notes or rough sketches on gin, G * * * of Dublin
was the man I alluded to as making his money by drink, and then giving
the results of such traffic to repair the Cathedral of Dublin. It was
thousands of pounds. I call such charity robbing Peter to pay Paul!
Immense fortunes are made in the _Liquor Traffic_, and I will tell you
why; it is all paid for in cash, at least such as the poor people buy;
they get credit for clothes, butchers' meat, groceries, etc., while
they give the gin-palace keeper _cash_; they never begrudge the price
of a glass of gin or beer, they never haggle over _its_ price, never
once think of doing that; but in the purchase of almost every other
article they haggle and begrudge its price. To give you an idea of its
profits--there are houses here whose average weekly takings in cash at
their bars is 50_l._, 60_l._, 70_l._, 80_l._, 90l_._, to 150_l._, per
week. Nearly all the men of intelligence in it, say it is the curse of
the working classes. Men whose earnings are, say 20_s._ to 30_s._ per
week, spend on the average 3_s._ to 6_s._ per week (some even 10_s._).
It's my mode of living to supply these houses with corks that makes me
see so much of the drunkenness; and that is the cause why I never
really cared for _my trade_, seeing the misery that was entailed on my
fellow men and women by the use of this stuff. Again, a house with a
license to sell spirits, wine, and ale, to be consumed on the
premises, is worth two to three times more money than any other class
of property. One house here worth nominally 140_l._ sold the other day
for 520_l._; another one worth 200_l._ sold for 800_l._ I know
premises with a license that were sold for 1,300_l._, and then sold
again two years after for 1,800_l._; another place was rented for
50_l._, now rents at 100_l._--this last is a house used by working men
and laborers chiefly! No, I honor men like _Sir W. Trevelyan_, that
are teetotalers, or total abstainers, as an example to poor men, and,
to prevent his work-people being tempted, will not allow any
public-house on his estate. If our land had a few such men it would
help the cause. We possess one such a man here, a banker. I feel sorry
to say the progress of temperance is not so great as I would like to
see it. The only religious body that approaches to your ideas of
political economy is Quakerism as taught by George Fox. Carlyle seems
deeply tinged with their teachings. _Silence_ to them is as valuable
to him. Again, why should people howl and shriek over the law that the
Alliance is now trying to carry out in our land called the Permissive
Bill? If we had just laws we then would not be so miserable or so much
annoyed now and then with cries of Reform and cries of Distress. I
send you two pamphlets;--one gives the working man's reasons why he
don't go to church; in it you will see a few opinions expressed very
much akin to those you have written to me. The other gives an account
how it is the poor Indians have died of _Famine_, simply because they
have destroyed the very system of Political Economy, or one having
some approach to it, that you are now endeavoring to direct the
attention of thinkers to in our country. The _Sesame and Lilies_ I
have read as you requested. I feel now fully the aim and object you
have in view in the Letters, but I cannot help directing your
attention to that portion where you mention or rather exclaim against
the Florentines pulling down their _Ancient Walls_ to build a
_Boulevard_. That passage is one that would gladden the hearts of all
true _Italians_, especially men that love _Italy and Dante_!"




APPENDIX V.

Page 78.--_Abuse of Food._


Paragraphs cut from 'Manchester Examiner' of March 16, 1867:--


"A PARISIAN CHARACTER.--A celebrated character has disappeared from
the Palais Royal. René Lartique was a Swiss, and a man of about sixty.
He actually spent the last fifteen years in the Palais Royal--that is
to say, he spent the third of his life at dinner. Every morning at ten
o'clock he was to be seen going into a restaurant (usually Tissat's),
and in a few moments was installed in a corner, which he only quitted
about three o'clock in the afternoon, after having drunk at least six
or seven bottles of different kinds of wine. He then walked up and
down the garden till the clock struck five, when he made his
appearance again at the same restaurant, and always at the same place.
His second meal, at which he drank quite as much as at the first,
invariably lasted till half-past nine. Therefore, he devoted nine
hours a day to eating and drinking. His dress was most wretched--his
shoes broken, his trousers torn, his paletôt without any lining and
patched, his waistcoat without buttons, his hat a rusty red from old
age, and the whole surmounted by a dirty white beard. One day he went
up to the _comptoir_, and asked the presiding divinity there to allow
him to run in debt for one day's dinner. He perceived some hesitation
in complying with the request, and immediately called one of the
waiters, and desired him to follow him. He went into the office,
unbuttoned a certain indispensable garment, and, taking off a broad
leather belt, somewhat startled the waiter by displaying two hundred
gold pieces, each worth one hundred francs. Taking up one of them, he
tossed it to the waiter, and desired him to pay whatever he owed. He
never again appeared at that restaurant, and died a few days ago of
indigestion."


"REVENGE IN A BALL-ROOM.--A distressing event lately took place at
Castellaz, a little commune of the Alpes-Maritimes, near Mentone. All
the young people of the place being assembled in a dancing-room, one
of the young men was seen to fall suddenly to the ground, whilst a
young woman, his partner, brandished a poniard, and was preparing to
inflict a second blow on him, having already desperately wounded him
in the stomach. The author of the crime was at once arrested. She
declared her name to be Marie P----, twenty-one years of age, and
added that she had acted from a motive of revenge, the young man
having led her astray formerly with a promise of marriage, which he
had never fulfilled. In the morning of that day she had summoned him
to keep his word, and, upon his refusal, had determined on making the
dancing-room the scene of her revenge. She was at first locked up in
the prison of Mentone, and afterwards sent on to Nice. The young man
continues in an alarming state."




APPENDIX VI.

Page 94.--_Regulations of Trade._


I print portions of two letters of Mr. Dixon's in this place; one
referring to our former discussion respecting the sale of votes:--


                       "57, Nile Street, Sunderland, March 21, 1867.

"I only wish I could write in some tolerable good style, so that I
could idealize, or rather realize to folks, the life and love, and
marriage of a working man and his wife. It is in my opinion a working
man that really does know what a true wife is, for his every want, his
every comfort in life depends on her; and his children's home, their
daily lives and future lives, are shaped by her. Napoleon wisely said,
'France needs good mothers more than brave men. Good mothers are the
makers or shapers of good and brave men.' I cannot say that these are
the words, but it is the import of his speech on the topic. We have a
saying amongst us: 'The man may spend and money lend, if his wife be
_ought_,'--_i. e._ good wife;--'but he may work and try to save, but
will have _nought_, if his wife be nought,'--_i. e._ bad or thriftless
wife.

"Now, since you are intending to treat of the working man's parliament
and its duties, I will just throw out a few suggestions of what I
consider should be the questions or measures that demand an early
inquiry into and debate on. That guilds be established in every town,
where masters and men may meet, so as to avoid the temptations of the
public-house and _drink_. And then, let it be made law that every lad
should serve an apprenticeship of not less than seven years to a trade
or art, before he is allowed to be a member of such guild; also, that
all wages be based on a rate of so much _per hour_, and not day, as at
present; and let every man prove his workmanship before such a guild,
and then allow to him such payment per hour as his craft merits. Let
there be three grades, and then let there be trials of skill in
workmanship every year; and then, if the workman of the third grade
prove that he has made progress in his craft, reward him accordingly.
Then, before a lad is put to any trade, why not see what he is
naturally fitted for? Combe's book, entitled _The Constitution of
Man_, throws a good deal of truth on to these matters. Now, here are
two branches of the science of life that, so far, have never once been
given trial of in this way. We certainly use them after a _crime_ has
been committed, but not till then.

"Next to that, cash, payment for all and everything needed in life.
_Credit is a curse_ to him that gives it, and that takes it. He that
lives by credit lives in general carelessly. If there was no credit,
people then would have to live on what they earned! Then, after that,
the Statute of Limitations of Fortune you propose. By the hour system,
not a single man _need be idle_; it would give employment to all, and
even two hours per day would realize more to a man than _breaking
stones_. Thus you would make every one self-dependent--also no fear of
being out of work altogether. Then let there be a Government fund for
all the savings of the working man. I am afraid you will think this a
wild, discursive sort of a letter.

                                          "Yours truly,
                                                     "THOMAS DIXON."


"I have read your references to the _Times_ on 'Bribery.' Well, that
has long been my own opinion; they simply have a vote to sell, and
sell it the same way as they sell potatoes, or a coat, or any other
salable article. Voters generally say, 'What does this gentleman want
in Parliament? Why, to help himself and his family or friends; he does
not spend all the money he spends over his election for pure good of
his country! No: it's to benefit his pocket, to be sure. Why should I
not make a penny with my vote, as well as he does with his in
Parliament?' I think that if the system of canvassing or election
agents were done away with, and all personal canvassing for votes
entirely abolished, it would help to put down bribery. Let each
gentleman send to the electors his political opinions in a circular,
and then let papers be sent, or cards, to each elector, and then let
them go and record their votes in the same way they do for a
councillor in the Corporation. It would save a great deal of expense,
and prevent those scenes of drunkenness so common in our towns during
elections. _Bewick's opinions_ of these matters are quite to the
purpose, I think (_see page 201 of Memoir_). Again, respecting the
Paris matter referred to in your last letter, I have read it. Does it
not manifest plainly enough that Europeans are also in a measure
possessed with that same _demoniacal spirit like the Japanese_?"




APPENDIX VII.


The following letter did not form part of the series written to Mr.
Dixon; but is perhaps worth reprinting. I have not the date of the
number of the _Gazette_ in which it appeared, but it was during the
tailors' strike in London.


  "TO THE EDITOR OF THE _Pall Mall Gazette_.

"Sir,--

"In your yesterday's article on strikes you have very neatly and
tersely expressed the primal fallacy of modern political economy--to
wit, that 'the value of any piece of labor cannot be defined'--and
that 'all that can be ascertained is simply whether any man can be got
to do it for a certain sum.' Now, sir, the 'value' of any piece of
labor, that is to say, the quantity of food and air which will enable
a man to perform it without losing actually any of his flesh or his
nervous energy, is as absolutely fixed a quantity as the weight of
powder necessary to carry a given ball a given distance. And within
limits varying by exceedingly minor and unimportant circumstances, it
is an ascertainable quantity. I told the public this five years
ago--and under pardon of your politico-economical contributors--it is
not a 'sentimental,' but a chemical fact.

"Let any half-dozen of recognized London physicians state in precise
terms the quantity and kind of food, and space of lodging, they
consider approximately necessary for the healthy life of a laborer in
any given manufacture, and the number of hours he may, without
shortening his life, work at such business daily, if so sustained.

"And let all masters be bound to give their men a choice between an
order for that quantity of food and lodging, or such wages as the
market may offer for that number of hours' work.

"Proper laws for the maintenance of families would require further
concession--but, in the outset, let but _this_ law of wages be
established, and if then we have any more strikes you may denounce
them without one word of remonstrance either from sense or
sensibility.

                                  "I am, Sir,
                                         "Your obedient servant,
                                                      "JOHN RUSKIN."





End of Project Gutenberg's Time and Tide by Weare and Tyne, by John Ruskin



