CHAPTER VIII.

OF DEFINITION.


§ 1. One necessary part of the theory of Names and of Propositions
remains to be treated of in this place: the theory of Definitions. As
being the most important of the class of propositions which we have
characterized as purely verbal, they have already received some notice
in the chapter preceding the last. But their fuller treatment was at
that time postponed, because definition is so closely connected with
classification, that, until the nature of the latter process is in some
measure understood, the former cannot be discussed to much purpose.

The simplest and most correct notion of a Definition is, a proposition
declaratory of the meaning of a word; namely, either the meaning which
it bears in common acceptation, or that which the speaker or writer, for
the particular purposes of his discourse, intends to annex to it.

The definition of a word being the proposition which enunciates its
meaning, words which have no meaning are unsusceptible of definition.
Proper names, therefore, cannot be defined. A proper name being a mere
mark put upon an individual, and of which it is the characteristic
property to be destitute of meaning, its meaning cannot of course be
declared; though we may indicate by language, as we might indicate still
more conveniently by pointing with the finger, upon what individual that
particular mark has been, or is intended to be, put. It is no definition
of "John Thomson" to say he is "the son of General Thomson;" for the
name John Thomson does not express this. Neither is it any definition of
"John Thomson" to say he is "the man now crossing the street." These
propositions may serve to make known who is the particular man to whom
the name belongs, but that may be done still more unambiguously by
pointing to him, which, however, has not been esteemed one of the modes
of definition.

In the case of connotative names, the meaning, as has been so often
observed, is the connotation; and the definition of a connotative name,
is the proposition which declares its connotation. This might be done
either directly or indirectly. The direct mode would be by a proposition
in this form: "Man" (or whatsoever the word may be) "is a name connoting
such and such attributes," or "is a name which, when predicated of
anything, signifies the possession of such and such attributes by that
thing." Or thus: Man is everything which possesses such and such
attributes: Man is everything which possesses corporeity, organization,
life, rationality, and certain peculiarities of external form.

This form of definition is the most precise and least equivocal of any;
but it is not brief enough, and is besides too technical for common
discourse. The more usual mode of declaring the connotation of a name,
is to predicate of it another name or names of known signification,
which connote the same aggregation of attributes. This may be done
either by predicating of the name intended to be defined, another
connotative name exactly synonymous, as, "Man is a human being," which
is not commonly accounted a definition at all; or by predicating two or
more connotative names, which make up among them the whole connotation
of the name to be defined. In this last case, again, we may either
compose our definition of as many connotative names as there are
attributes, each attribute being connoted by one, as, Man is a
corporeal, organized, animated, rational being, shaped so and so; or we
may employ names which connote several of the attributes at once, as,
Man is a rational _animal_, shaped so and so.

The definition of a name, according to this view of it, is the sum total
of all the _essential_ propositions which can be framed with that name
for their subject. All propositions the truth of which is implied in the
name, all those which we are made aware of by merely hearing the name,
are included in the definition, if complete, and may be evolved from it
without the aid of any other premises; whether the definition expresses
them in two or three words, or in a larger number. It is, therefore, not
without reason that Condillac and other writers have affirmed a
definition to be an _analysis_. To resolve any complex whole into the
elements of which it is compounded, is the meaning of analysis: and this
we do when we replace one word which connotes a set of attributes
collectively, by two or more which connote the same attributes singly,
or in smaller groups.


§ 2. From this, however, the question naturally arises, in what manner
are we to define a name which connotes only a single attribute: for
instance, "white," which connotes nothing but whiteness; "rational,"
which connotes nothing but the possession of reason. It might seem that
the meaning of such names could only be declared in two ways; by a
synonymous term, if any such can be found; or in the direct way already
alluded to: "White is a name connoting the attribute whiteness." Let us
see, however, whether the analysis of the meaning of the name, that is,
the breaking down of that meaning into several parts, admits of being
carried farther. Without at present deciding this question as to the
word _white_, it is obvious that in the case of _rational_ some further
explanation may be given of its meaning than is contained in the
proposition, "Rational is that which possesses the attribute of reason;"
since the attribute reason itself admits of being defined. And here we
must turn our attention to the definitions of attributes, or rather of
the names of attributes, that is, of abstract names.

In regard to such names of attributes as are connotative, and express
attributes of those attributes, there is no difficulty: like other
connotative names they are defined by declaring their connotation. Thus,
the word _fault_ may be defined, "a quality productive of evil or
inconvenience." Sometimes, again, the attribute to be defined is not one
attribute, but an union of several: we have only, therefore, to put
together the names of all the attributes taken separately, and we obtain
the definition of the name which belongs to them all taken together; a
definition which will correspond exactly to that of the corresponding
concrete name. For, as we define a concrete name by enumerating the
attributes which it connotes, and as the attributes connoted by a
concrete name form the entire signification of the corresponding
abstract name, the same enumeration will serve for the definition of
both. Thus, if the definition of _a human being_ be this, "a being,
corporeal, animated, rational, shaped so and so," the definition of
_humanity_ will be corporeity and animal life, combined with
rationality, and with such and such a shape.

When, on the other hand, the abstract name does not express a
complication of attributes, but a single attribute, we must remember
that every attribute is grounded on some fact or phenomenon, from which,
and which alone, it derives its meaning. To that fact or phenomenon,
called in a former chapter the foundation of the attribute, we must,
therefore, have recourse for its definition. Now, the foundation of the
attribute may be a phenomenon of any degree of complexity, consisting of
many different parts, either coexistent or in succession. To obtain a
definition of the attribute, we must analyse the phenomenon into these
parts. Eloquence, for example, is the name of one attribute only; but
this attribute is grounded on external effects of a complicated nature,
flowing from acts of the person to whom we ascribed the attribute; and
by resolving this phenomenon of causation into its two parts, the cause
and the effect, we obtain a definition of eloquence, viz. the power of
influencing the feelings by speech or writing.

A name, therefore, whether concrete or abstract, admits of definition,
provided we are able to analyse, that is, to distinguish into parts, the
attribute or set of attributes which constitute the meaning both of the
concrete name and of the corresponding abstract: if a set of attributes,
by enumerating them; if a single attribute, by dissecting the fact or
phenomenon (whether of perception or of internal consciousness) which is
the foundation of the attribute. But, further, even when the fact is one
of our simple feelings or states of consciousness, and therefore
unsusceptible of analysis, the names both of the object and of the
attribute still admit of definition: or rather, would do so if all our
simple feelings had names. Whiteness may be defined, the property or
power of exciting the sensation of white. A white object may be defined,
an object which excites the sensation of white. The only names which are
unsusceptible of definition, because their meaning is unsusceptible of
analysis, are the names of the simple feelings themselves. These are in
the same condition as proper names. They are not indeed, like proper
names, unmeaning; for the words _sensation of white_ signify, that the
sensation which I so denominate resembles other sensations which I
remember to have had before, and to have called by that name. But as we
have no words by which to recal those former sensations, except the very
word which we seek to define, or some other which, being exactly
synonymous with it, requires definition as much, words cannot unfold the
signification of this class of names; and we are obliged to make a
direct appeal to the personal experience of the individual whom we
address.


§ 3. Having stated what seems to be the true idea of a Definition, we
proceed to examine some opinions of philosophers, and some popular
conceptions on the subject, which conflict more or less with that idea.

The only adequate definition of a name is, as already remarked, one
which declares the facts, and the whole of the facts, which the name
involves in its signification. But with most persons the object of a
definition does not embrace so much; they look for nothing more, in a
definition, than a guide to the correct use of the term--a protection
against applying it in a manner inconsistent with custom and convention.
Anything, therefore, is to them a sufficient definition of a term, which
will serve as a correct index to what the term denotes; though not
embracing the whole, and sometimes, perhaps, not even any part, of what
it connotes. This gives rise to two sorts of imperfect, or unscientific
definition; Essential but incomplete Definitions, and Accidental
Definitions, or Descriptions. In the former, a connotative name is
defined by a part only of its connotation; in the latter, by something
which forms no part of the connotation at all.

An example of the first kind of imperfect definitions is the
following:--Man is a rational animal. It is impossible to consider this
as a complete definition of the word Man, since (as before remarked) if
we adhered to it we should be obliged to call the Houyhnhnms men; but as
there happen to be no Houyhnhnms, this imperfect definition is
sufficient to mark out and distinguish from all other things, the
objects at present denoted by "man;" all the beings actually known to
exist, of whom the name is predicable. Though the word is defined by
some only among the attributes which it connotes, not by all, it happens
that all known objects which possess the enumerated attributes, possess
also those which are omitted; so that the field of predication which the
word covers, and the employment of it which is conformable to usage, are
as well indicated by the inadequate definition as by an adequate one.
Such definitions, however, are always liable to be overthrown by the
discovery of new objects in nature.

Definitions of this kind are what logicians have had in view, when they
laid down the rule, that the definition of a species should be _per
genus et differentiam_. Differentia being seldom taken to mean the whole
of the peculiarities constitutive of the species, but some one of those
peculiarities only, a complete definition would be _per genus et
differentias_, rather than _differentiam_. It would include, with the
name of the superior genus, not merely _some_ attribute which
distinguishes the species intended to be defined from all other species
of the same genus, but _all_ the attributes implied in the name of the
species, which the name of the superior genus has not already implied.
The assertion, however, that a definition must of necessity consist of a
genus and differentiæ, is not tenable. It was early remarked by
logicians, that the _summum genus_ in any classification, having no
genus superior to itself, could not be defined in this manner. Yet we
have seen that all names, except those of our elementary feelings, are
susceptible of definition in the strictest sense; by setting forth in
words the constituent parts of the fact or phenomenon, of which the
connotation of every word is ultimately composed.


§ 4. Although the first kind of imperfect definition, (which defines a
connotative term by a part only of what it connotes, but a part
sufficient to mark out correctly the boundaries of its denotation,) has
been considered by the ancients, and by logicians in general, as a
complete definition; it has always been deemed necessary that the
attributes employed should really form part of the connotation; for the
rule was that the definition must be drawn from the _essence_ of the
class; and this would not have been the case if it had been in any
degree made up of attributes not connoted by the name. The second kind
of imperfect definition, therefore, in which the name of a class is
defined by any of its accidents,--that is, by attributes which are not
included in its connotation,--has been rejected from the rank of genuine
Definition by all logicians, and has been termed Description.

This kind of imperfect definition, however, takes its rise from the same
cause as the other, namely, the willingness to accept as a definition
anything which, whether it expounds the meaning of the name or not,
enables us to discriminate the things denoted by the name from all other
things, and consequently to employ the term in predication without
deviating from established usage. This purpose is duly answered by
stating any (no matter what) of the attributes which are common to the
whole of the class, and peculiar to it; or any combination of attributes
which happens to be peculiar to it, though separately each of those
attributes may be common to it with some other things. It is only
necessary that the definition (or description) thus formed, should be
_convertible_ with the name which it professes to define; that is,
should be exactly co-extensive with it, being predicable of everything
of which it is predicable, and of nothing of which it is not predicable;
though the attributes specified may have no connexion with those which
mankind had in view when they formed or recognised the class, and gave
it a name. The following are correct definitions of Man, according to
this test: Man is a mammiferous animal, having (by nature) two hands
(for the human species answers to this description, and no other animal
does): Man is an animal who cooks his food: Man is a featherless biped.

What would otherwise be a mere description, may be raised to the rank of
a real definition by the peculiar purpose which the speaker or writer
has in view. As was seen in the preceding chapter, it may, for the ends
of a particular art or science, or for the more convenient statement of
an author's particular doctrines, be advisable to give to some general
name, without altering its denotation, a special connotation, different
from its ordinary one. When this is done, a definition of the name by
means of the attributes which make up the special connotation, though in
general a mere accidental definition or description, becomes on the
particular occasion and for the particular purpose a complete and
genuine definition. This actually occurs with respect to one of the
preceding examples, "Man is a mammiferous animal having two hands,"
which is the scientific definition of man, considered as one of the
species in Cuvier's distribution of the animal kingdom.

In cases of this sort, though the definition is still a declaration of
the meaning which in the particular instance the name is appointed to
convey, it cannot be said that to state the meaning of the word is the
purpose of the definition. The purpose is not to expound a name, but a
classification. The special meaning which Cuvier assigned to the word
Man, (quite foreign to its ordinary meaning, though involving no change
in the denotation of the word,) was incidental to a plan of arranging
animals into classes on a certain principle, that is, according to a
certain set of distinctions. And since the definition of Man according
to the ordinary connotation of the word, though it would have answered
every other purpose of a definition, would not have pointed out the
place which the species ought to occupy in that particular
classification; he gave the word a special connotation, that he might be
able to define it by the kind of attributes on which, for reasons of
scientific convenience, he had resolved to found his division of
animated nature.

Scientific definitions, whether they are definitions of scientific
terms, or of common terms used in a scientific sense, are almost always
of the kind last spoken of: their main purpose is to serve as the
landmarks of scientific classification. And since the classifications in
any science are continually modified as scientific knowledge advances,
the definitions in the sciences are also constantly varying. A striking
instance is afforded by the words Acid and Alkali, especially the
former. As experimental discovery advanced, the substances classed with
acids have been constantly multiplying, and by a natural consequence the
attributes connoted by the word have receded and become fewer. At first
it connoted the attributes, of combining with an alkali to form a
neutral substance (called a salt); being compounded of a base and
oxygen; causticity to the taste and touch; fluidity, &c. The true
analysis of muriatic acid, into chlorine and hydrogen, caused the second
property, composition from a base and oxygen, to be excluded from the
connotation. The same discovery fixed the attention of chemists upon
hydrogen as an important element in acids; and more recent discoveries
having led to the recognition of its presence in sulphuric, nitric, and
many other acids, where its existence was not previously suspected,
there is now a tendency to include the presence of this element in the
connotation of the word. But carbonic acid, silica, sulphurous acid,
have no hydrogen in their composition; that property cannot therefore be
connoted by the term, unless those substances are no longer to be
considered acids. Causticity and fluidity have long since been excluded
from the characteristics of the class, by the inclusion of silica and
many other substances in it; and the formation of neutral bodies by
combination with alkalis, together with such electro-chemical
peculiarities as this is supposed to imply, are now the only
_differentiæ_ which form the fixed connotation of the word Acid, as a
term of chemical science.

What is true of the definition of any term of science, is of course true
of the definition of a science itself: and accordingly, (as observed in
the Introductory Chapter of this work,) the definition of a science must
necessarily be progressive and provisional. Any extension of knowledge
or alteration in the current opinions respecting the subject matter, may
lead to a change more or less extensive in the particulars included in
the science; and its composition being thus altered, it may easily
happen that a different set of characteristics will be found better
adapted as differentiæ for defining its name.

In the same manner in which a special or technical definition has for
its object to expound the artificial classification out of which it
grows; the Aristotelian logicians seem to have imagined that it was also
the business of ordinary definition to expound the ordinary, and what
they deemed the natural, classification of things, namely, the division
of them into Kinds; and to show the place which each Kind occupies, as
superior, collateral, or subordinate, among other Kinds. This notion
would account for the rule that all definition must necessarily be _per
genus et differentiam_, and would also explain why a single differentia
was deemed sufficient. But to expound, or express in words, a
distinction of Kind, has already been shown to be an impossibility: the
very meaning of a Kind is, that the properties which distinguish it do
not grow out of one another, and cannot therefore be set forth in words,
even by implication, otherwise than by enumerating them all: and all are
not known, nor are ever likely to be so. It is idle, therefore, to look
to this as one of the purposes of a definition: while, if it be only
required that the definition of a Kind should indicate what Kinds
include it or are included by it, any definitions which expound the
connotation of the names will do this: for the name of each class must
necessarily connote enough of its properties to fix the boundaries of
the class. If the definition, therefore, be a full statement of the
connotation, it is all that a definition can be required to be.


§ 5. Of the two incomplete and popular modes of definition, and in what
they differ from the complete or philosophical mode, enough has now been
said. We shall next examine an ancient doctrine, once generally
prevalent and still by no means exploded, which I regard as the source
of a great part of the obscurity hanging over some of the most important
processes of the understanding in the pursuit of truth. According to
this, the definitions of which we have now treated are only one of two
sorts into which definitions may be divided, viz. definitions of names,
and definitions of things. The former are intended to explain the
meaning of a term; the latter, the nature of a thing; the last being
incomparably the most important.

This opinion was held by the ancient philosophers, and by their
followers, with the exception of the Nominalists; but as the spirit of
modern metaphysics, until a recent period, has been on the whole a
Nominalist spirit, the notion of definitions of things has been to a
certain extent in abeyance, still continuing, however, to breed
confusion in logic, by its consequences indeed rather than by itself.
Yet the doctrine in its own proper form now and then breaks out, and has
appeared (among other places) where it was scarcely to be expected, in a
justly admired work, Archbishop Whately's _Logic_.[27] In a review of
that work published by me in the _Westminster Review_ for January 1828,
and containing some opinions which I no longer entertain, I find the
following observations on the question now before us; observations with
which my present view of that question is still sufficiently in
accordance.

"The distinction between nominal and real definitions, between
definitions of words and what are called definitions of things, though
conformable to the ideas of most of the Aristotelian logicians, cannot,
as it appears to us, be maintained. We apprehend that no definition is
ever intended to 'explain and unfold the nature of a thing.' It is some
confirmation of our opinion, that none of those writers who have thought
that there were definitions of things, have ever succeeded in
discovering any criterion by which the definition of a thing can be
distinguished from any other proposition relating to the thing. The
definition, they say, unfolds the nature of the thing: but no definition
can unfold its whole nature; and every proposition in which any quality
whatever is predicated of the thing, unfolds some part of its nature.
The true state of the case we take to be this. All definitions are of
names, and of names only; but, in some definitions, it is clearly
apparent, that nothing is intended except to explain the meaning of the
word; while in others, besides explaining the meaning of the word, it is
intended to be implied that there exists a thing, corresponding to the
word. Whether this be or be not implied in any given case, cannot be
collected from the mere form of the expression. 'A centaur is an animal
with the upper parts of a man and the lower parts of a horse,' and 'A
triangle is a rectilineal figure with three sides,' are, in form,
expressions precisely similar; although in the former it is not implied
that any _thing_, conformable to the term, really exists, while in the
latter it is; as may be seen by substituting, in both definitions, the
word _means_ for _is_. In the first expression, 'A centaur means an
animal,' &c., the sense would remain unchanged: in the second, 'A
triangle means,' &c., the meaning would be altered, since it would be
obviously impossible to deduce any of the truths of geometry from a
proposition expressive only of the manner in which we intend to employ a
particular sign.

"There are, therefore, expressions, commonly passing for definitions,
which include in themselves more than the mere explanation of the
meaning of a term. But it is not correct to call an expression of this
sort a peculiar kind of definition. Its difference from the other kind
consists in this, that it is not a definition, but a definition and
something more. The definition above given of a triangle, obviously
comprises not one, but two propositions, perfectly distinguishable. The
one is, 'There may exist a figure, bounded by three straight lines;' the
other, 'And this figure may be termed a triangle.' The former of these
propositions is not a definition at all: the latter is a mere nominal
definition, or explanation of the use and application of a term. The
first is susceptible of truth or falsehood, and may therefore be made
the foundation of a train of reasoning. The latter can neither be true
nor false; the only character it is susceptible of is that of conformity
or disconformity to the ordinary usage of language."

There is a real distinction, then, between definitions of names, and
what are erroneously called definitions of things; but it is, that the
latter, along with the meaning of a name, covertly asserts a matter of
fact. This covert assertion is not a definition, but a postulate. The
definition is a mere identical proposition, which gives information only
about the use of language, and from which no conclusions affecting
matters of fact can possibly be drawn. The accompanying postulate, on
the other hand, affirms a fact, which may lead to consequences of every
degree of importance. It affirms the actual or possible existence of
Things possessing the combination of attributes set forth in the
definition; and this, if true, may be foundation sufficient on which to
build a whole fabric of scientific truth.

We have already made, and shall often have to repeat, the remark, that
the philosophers who overthrew Realism by no means got rid of the
consequences of Realism, but retained long afterwards, in their own
philosophy, numerous propositions which could only have a rational
meaning as part of a Realistic system. It had been handed down from
Aristotle, and probably from earlier times, as an obvious truth, that
the science of Geometry is deduced from definitions. This, so long as a
definition was considered to be a proposition "unfolding the nature of
the thing," did well enough. But Hobbes followed, and rejected utterly
the notion that a definition declares the nature of the thing, or does
anything but state the meaning of a name; yet he continued to affirm as
broadly as any of his predecessors, that the [Greek: archai],
_principia_, or original premises of mathematics, and even of all
science, are definitions; producing the singular paradox, that systems
of scientific truth, nay, all truths whatever at which we arrive by
reasoning, are deduced from the arbitrary conventions of mankind
concerning the signification of words.

To save the credit of the doctrine that definitions are the premises of
scientific knowledge, the proviso is sometimes added, that they are so
only under a certain condition, namely, that they be framed conformably
to the phenomena of nature; that is, that they ascribe such meanings to
terms as shall suit objects actually existing. But this is only an
instance of the attempt so often made, to escape from the necessity of
abandoning old language after the ideas which it expresses have been
exchanged for contrary ones. From the meaning of a name (we are told) it
is possible to infer physical facts, provided the name has corresponding
to it an existing thing. But if this proviso be necessary, from which of
the two is the inference really drawn? From the existence of a thing
having the properties, or from the existence of a name meaning them?

Take, for instance, any of the definitions laid down as premises in
Euclid's Elements; the definition, let us say, of a circle. This, being
analysed, consists of two propositions; the one an assumption with
respect to a matter of fact, the other a genuine definition. "A figure
may exist, having all the points in the line which bounds it equally
distant from a single point within it:" "Any figure possessing this
property is called a circle." Let us look at one of the demonstrations
which are said to depend on this definition, and observe to which of the
two propositions contained in it the demonstration really appeals.
"About the centre A, describe the circle B C D." Here is an assumption
that a figure, such as the definition expresses, _may_ be described;
which is no other than the postulate, or covert assumption, involved in
the so-called definition. But whether that figure be called a circle or
not is quite immaterial. The purpose would be as well answered, in all
respects except brevity, were we to say, "Through the point B, draw a
line returning into itself, of which every point shall be at an equal
distance from the point A." By this the definition of a circle would be
got rid of, and rendered needless; but not the postulate implied in it;
without that the demonstration could not stand. The circle being now
described, let us proceed to the consequence. "Since B C D is a circle,
the radius B A is equal to the radius C A." B A is equal to C A, not
because B C D is a circle, but because B C D is a figure with the radii
equal. Our warrant for assuming that such a figure about the centre A,
with the radius B A, may be made to exist, is the postulate. Whether the
admissibility of these postulates rests on intuition, or on proof, may
be a matter of dispute; but in either case they are the premises on
which the theorems depend; and while these are retained it would make no
difference in the certainty of geometrical truths, though every
definition in Euclid, and every technical term therein defined, were
laid aside.

It is, perhaps, superfluous to dwell at so much length on what is so
nearly self-evident; but when a distinction, obvious as it may appear,
has been confounded, and by powerful intellects, it is better to say too
much than too little for the purpose of rendering such mistakes
impossible in future. I will, therefore, detain the reader while I point
out one of the absurd consequences flowing from the supposition that
definitions, as such, are the premises in any of our reasonings, except
such as relate to words only. If this supposition were true, we might
argue correctly from true premises, and arrive at a false conclusion. We
should only have to assume as a premise the definition of a nonentity;
or rather of a name which has no entity corresponding to it. Let this,
for instance, be our definition:

  A dragon is a serpent breathing flame.

This proposition, considered only as a definition, is indisputably
correct. A dragon _is_ a serpent breathing flame: the word _means_ that.
The tacit assumption, indeed, (if there were any such understood
assertion), of the existence of an object with properties corresponding
to the definition, would, in the present instance, be false. Out of this
definition we may carve the premises of the following syllogism:

  A dragon is a thing which breathes flame:
  A dragon is a serpent:

From which the conclusion is,

  Therefore some serpent or serpents breathe flame:--

an unexceptionable syllogism in the first mode of the third figure, in
which both premises are true and yet the conclusion false; which every
logician knows to be an absurdity. The conclusion being false and the
syllogism correct, the premises cannot be true. But the premises,
considered as parts of a definition, are true. Therefore, the premises
considered as parts of a definition cannot be the real ones. The real
premises must be--

  A dragon is a _really existing_ thing which breathes flame:
  A dragon is a _really existing_ serpent:

which implied premises being false, the falsity of the conclusion
presents no absurdity.

If we would determine what conclusion follows from the same ostensible
premises when the tacit assumption of real existence is left out, let
us, according to the recommendation in a previous page, substitute
_means_ for _is_. We then have--

  Dragon is _a word meaning_ a thing which breathes flame:
  Dragon is _a word meaning_ a serpent:

From which the conclusion is,

  Some _word or words which mean_ a serpent, also mean a thing which
  breathes flame:

where the conclusion (as well as the premises) is true, and is the only
kind of conclusion which can ever follow from a definition, namely, a
proposition relating to the meaning of words.

There is still another shape into which we may transform this syllogism.
We may suppose the middle term to be the designation neither of a thing
nor of a name, but of an idea. We then have--

  The _idea of_ a dragon is _an idea of_ a thing which breathes
    flame:
  The _idea of_ a dragon is _an idea of_ a serpent:
  Therefore, there is _an idea of_ a serpent, which is _an idea of_
    a thing breathing flame.

Here the conclusion is true, and also the premises; but the premises are
not definitions. They are propositions affirming that an idea existing
in the mind, includes certain ideal elements. The truth of the
conclusion follows from the existence of the psychological phenomenon
called the idea of a dragon; and therefore still from the tacit
assumption of a matter of fact.[28]

When, as in this last syllogism, the conclusion is a proposition
respecting an idea, the assumption on which it depends may be merely
that of the existence of an idea. But when the conclusion is a
proposition concerning a Thing, the postulate involved in the definition
which stands as the apparent premise, is the existence of a thing
conformable to the definition, and not merely of an idea conformable to
it. This assumption of real existence will always convey the impression
that we intend to make, when we profess to define any name which is
already known to be a name of really existing objects. On this account
it is, that the assumption was not necessarily implied in the definition
of a dragon, while there was no doubt of its being included in the
definition of a circle.


§ 6. One of the circumstances which have contributed to keep up the
notion, that demonstrative truths follow from definitions rather than
from the postulates implied in those definitions, is, that the
postulates, even in those sciences which are considered to surpass all
others in demonstrative certainty, are not always exactly true. It is
not true that a circle exists, or can be described, which has all its
radii _exactly_ equal. Such accuracy is ideal only; it is not found in
nature, still less can it be realized by art. People had a difficulty,
therefore, in conceiving that the most certain of all conclusions could
rest on premises which, instead of being certainly true, are certainly
not true to the full extent asserted. This apparent paradox will be
examined when we come to treat of Demonstration; where we shall be able
to show that as much of the postulate is true, as is required to support
as much as is true of the conclusion. Philosophers, however, to whom
this view had not occurred, or whom it did not satisfy, have thought it
indispensable that there should be found in definitions something _more_
certain, or at least more accurately true, than the implied postulate of
the real existence of a corresponding object. And this something they
flattered themselves they had found, when they laid it down that a
definition is a statement and analysis not of the mere meaning of a
word, nor yet of the nature of a thing, but of an idea. Thus, the
proposition, "A circle is a plane figure bounded by a line all the
points of which are at an equal distance from a given point within it,"
was considered by them, not as an assertion that any real circle has
that property, (which would not be exactly true,) but that we _conceive_
a circle as having it; that our abstract idea of a circle is an idea of
a figure with its radii exactly equal.

Conformably to this it is said, that the subject-matter of mathematics,
and of every other demonstrative science, is not things as they really
exist, but abstractions of the mind. A geometrical line is a line
without breadth; but no such line exists in nature; it is a notion
merely suggested to the mind by its experience of nature. The definition
(it is said) is a definition of this mental line, not of any actual
line: and it is only of the mental line, not of any line existing in
nature, that the theorems of geometry are accurately true.

Allowing this doctrine respecting the nature of demonstrative truth to
be correct (which, in a subsequent place, I shall endeavour to prove
that it is not;) even on that supposition, the conclusions which seem to
follow from a definition, do not follow from the definition as such, but
from an implied postulate. Even if it be true that there is no object in
nature answering to the definition of a line, and that the geometrical
properties of lines are not true of any lines in nature, but only of the
idea of a line; the definition, at all events, postulates the real
existence of such an idea: it assumes that the mind can frame, or rather
has framed, the notion of length without breadth, and without any other
sensible property whatever. To me, indeed, it appears that the mind
cannot form any such notion; it cannot conceive length without breadth;
it can only, in contemplating objects, attend to their length,
exclusively of their other sensible qualities, and so determine what
properties may be predicated of them in virtue of their length alone. If
this be true, the postulate involved in the geometrical definition of a
line, is the real existence, not of length without breadth, but merely
of length, that is, of long objects. This is quite enough to support all
the truths of geometry, since every property of a geometrical line is
really a property of all physical objects in so far as possessing
length. But even what I hold to be the false doctrine on the subject,
leaves the conclusion that our reasonings are grounded on the matters of
fact postulated in definitions, and not on the definitions themselves,
entirely unaffected; and accordingly this conclusion is one which I have
in common with Dr. Whewell, in his _Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences_: though, on the nature of demonstrative truth, Dr. Whewell's
opinions are greatly at variance with mine. And here, as in many other
instances, I gladly acknowledge that his writings are eminently
serviceable in clearing from confusion the initial steps in the analysis
of the mental processes, even where his views respecting the ultimate
analysis are such as (though with unfeigned respect) I cannot but regard
as fundamentally erroneous.


§ 7. Although, according to the opinion here presented, Definitions are
properly of names only, and not of things, it does not follow from this
that definitions are arbitrary. How to define a name, may not only be an
inquiry of considerable difficulty and intricacy, but may involve
considerations going deep into the nature of the things which are
denoted by the name. Such, for instance, are the inquiries which form
the subjects of the most important of Plato's Dialogues; as, "What is
rhetoric?" the topic of the Gorgias, or "What is justice?" that of the
Republic. Such, also, is the question scornfully asked by Pilate, "What
is truth?" and the fundamental question with speculative moralists in
all ages, "What is virtue?"

It would be a mistake to represent these difficult and noble inquiries
as having nothing in view beyond ascertaining the conventional meaning
of a name. They are inquiries not so much to determine what is, as what
should be, the meaning of a name; which, like other practical questions
of terminology, requires for its solution that we should enter, and
sometimes enter very deeply, into the properties not merely of names but
of the things named.

Although the meaning of every concrete general name resides in the
attributes which it connotes, the objects were named before the
attributes; as appears from the fact that in all languages, abstract
names are mostly compounds or other derivatives of the concrete names
which correspond to them. Connotative names, therefore, were, after
proper names, the first which were used: and in the simpler cases, no
doubt, a distinct connotation was present to the minds of those who
first used the name, and was distinctly intended by them to be conveyed
by it. The first person who used the word white, as applied to snow or
to any other object, knew, no doubt, very well what quality he intended
to predicate, and had a perfectly distinct conception in his mind of the
attribute signified by the name.

But where the resemblances and differences on which our classifications
are founded are not of this palpable and easily determinable kind;
especially where they consist not in any one quality but in a number of
qualities, the effects of which being blended together are not very
easily discriminated, and referred each to its true source; it often
happens that names are applied to nameable objects, with no distinct
connotation present to the minds of those who apply them. They are only
influenced by a general resemblance between the new object and all or
some of the old familiar objects which they have been accustomed to call
by that name. This, as we have seen, is the law which even the mind of
the philosopher must follow, in giving names to the simple elementary
feelings of our nature: but, where the things to be named are complex
wholes, a philosopher is not content with noticing a general
resemblance; he examines what the resemblance consists in: and he only
gives the same name to things which resemble one another in the same
definite particulars. The philosopher, therefore, habitually employs his
general names with a definite connotation. But language was not made,
and can only in some small degree be mended, by philosophers. In the
minds of the real arbiters of language, general names, especially where
the classes they denote cannot be brought before the tribunal of the
outward senses to be identified and discriminated, connote little more
than a vague gross resemblance to the things which they were earliest,
or have been most, accustomed to call by those names. When, for
instance, ordinary persons predicate the words _just_ or _unjust_ of any
action, _noble_ or _mean_ of any sentiment, expression, or demeanour,
_statesman_ or _charlatan_ of any personage figuring in politics, do
they mean to affirm of those various subjects any determinate
attributes, of whatever kind? No: they merely recognise, as they think,
some likeness, more or less vague and loose, between these and some
other things which they have been accustomed to denominate or to hear
denominated by those appellations.

Language, as Sir James Mackintosh used to say of governments, "is not
made, but grows." A name is not imposed at once and by previous purpose
upon a _class_ of objects, but is first applied to one thing, and then
extended by a series of transitions to another and another. By this
process (as has been remarked by several writers, and illustrated with
great force and clearness by Dugald Stewart in his Philosophical Essays)
a name not unfrequently passes by successive links of resemblance from
one object to another, until it becomes applied to things having nothing
in common with the first things to which the name was given; which,
however, do not, for that reason, drop the name; so that it at last
denotes a confused huddle of objects, having nothing whatever in common;
and connotes nothing, not even a vague and general resemblance. When a
name has fallen into this state, in which by predicating it of any
object we assert literally nothing about the object, it has become unfit
for the purposes either of thought or of the communication of thought;
and can only be made serviceable by stripping it of some part of its
multifarious denotation, and confining it to objects possessed of some
attributes in common, which it may be made to connote. Such are the
inconveniences of a language which "is not made, but grows." Like the
governments which are in a similar case, it may be compared to a road
which is not made but has made itself: it requires continual mending in
order to be passable.

From this it is already evident, why the question respecting the
definition of an abstract name is often one of so much difficulty. The
question, What is justice? is, in other words, What is the attribute
which mankind mean to predicate when they call an action just? To which
the first answer is, that having come to no precise agreement on the
point, they do not mean to predicate distinctly any attribute at all.
Nevertheless, all believe that there is some common attribute belonging
to all the actions which they are in the habit of calling just. The
question then must be, whether there is any such common attribute? and,
in the first place, whether mankind agree sufficiently with one another
as to the particular actions which they do or do not call just, to
render the inquiry, what quality those actions have in common, a
possible one: if so, whether the actions really have any quality in
common; and if they have, what it is. Of these three, the first alone is
an inquiry into usage and convention; the other two are inquiries into
matters of fact. And if the second question (whether the actions form a
class at all) has been answered negatively, there remains a fourth,
often more arduous than all the rest, namely, how best to form a class
artificially, which the name may denote.

And here it is fitting to remark, that the study of the spontaneous
growth of languages is of the utmost importance to those who would
logically remodel them. The classifications rudely made by established
language, when retouched, as they almost all require to be, by the hands
of the logician, are often in themselves excellently suited to his
purposes. As compared with the classifications of a philosopher, they
are like the customary law of a country, which has grown up as it were
spontaneously, compared with laws methodized and digested into a code:
the former are a far less perfect instrument than the latter; but being
the result of a long, though unscientific, course of experience, they
contain a mass of materials which may be made very usefully available in
the formation of the systematic body of written law. In like manner, the
established grouping of objects under a common name, even when founded
only on a gross and general resemblance, is evidence, in the first
place, that the resemblance is obvious, and therefore considerable;
and, in the next place, that it is a resemblance which has struck great
numbers of persons during a series of years and ages. Even when a name,
by successive extensions, has come to be applied to things among which
there does not exist this gross resemblance common to them all, still at
every step in its progress we shall find such a resemblance. And these
transitions of the meaning of words are often an index to real
connexions between the things denoted by them, which might otherwise
escape the notice of thinkers; of those at least who, from using a
different language, or from any difference in their habitual
associations, have fixed their attention in preference on some other
aspect of the things. The history of philosophy abounds in examples of
such oversights, committed for want of perceiving the hidden link that
connected together the seemingly disparate meanings of some ambiguous
word.[29]

Whenever the inquiry into the definition of the name of any real object
consists of anything else than a mere comparison of authorities, we
tacitly assume that a meaning must be found for the name, compatible
with its continuing to denote, if possible all, but at any rate the
greater or the more important part, of the things of which it is
commonly predicated. The inquiry, therefore, into the definition, is an
inquiry into the resemblances and differences among those things:
whether there be any resemblance running through them all; if not,
through what portion of them such a general resemblance can be traced:
and finally, what are the common attributes, the possession of which
gives to them all, or to that portion of them, the character of
resemblance which has led to their being classed together. When these
common attributes have been ascertained and specified, the name which
belongs in common to the resembling objects acquires a distinct instead
of a vague connotation; and by possessing this distinct connotation,
becomes susceptible of definition.

In giving a distinct connotation to the general name, the philosopher
will endeavour to fix upon such attributes as, while they are common to
all the things usually denoted by the name, are also of greatest
importance in themselves; either directly, or from the number, the
conspicuousness, or the interesting character, of the consequences to
which they lead. He will select, as far as possible, such _differentiæ_
as lead to the greatest number of interesting _propria_. For these,
rather than the more obscure and recondite qualities on which they often
depend, give that general character and aspect to a set of objects,
which determine the groups into which they naturally fall. But to
penetrate to the more hidden agreement on which these obvious and
superficial agreements depend, is often one of the most difficult of
scientific problems. As it is among the most difficult, so it seldom
fails to be among the most important. And since upon the result of this
inquiry respecting the causes of the properties of a class of things,
there incidentally depends the question what shall be the meaning of a
word; some of the most profound and most valuable investigations which
philosophy presents to us, have been introduced by, and have offered
themselves under the guise of, inquiries into the definition of a name.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Computation or Logic_, chap. ii.

[2] In the original "had, _or had not_." These last words, as involving
a subtlety foreign to our present purpose, I have forborne to quote.

[3] Vide infra, note at the end of § 3, book ii. ch. ii.

[4] _Notare_, to mark; _con_notare, to mark _along with_; to mark one
thing _with_ or _in addition to_ another.

[5] Archbishop Whately, who, in the later editions of his _Elements of
Logic_, aided in reviving the important distinction treated of in the
text, proposes the term "Attributive" as a substitute for "Connotative"
(p. 22, 9th ed.) The expression is, in itself, appropriate; but as it
has not the advantage of being connected with any verb, of so markedly
distinctive a character as "to connote," it is not, I think, fitted to
supply the place of the word Connotative in scientific use.

[6] A writer who entitles his book _Philosophy; or, the Science of
Truth_, charges me in his very first page (referring at the foot of it
to this passage) with asserting that _general_ names have properly no
signification. And he repeats this statement many times in the course of
his volume, with comments, not at all flattering, thereon. It is well to
be now and then reminded to how great a length perverse misquotation
(for, strange as it appears, I do not believe that the writer is
dishonest) can sometimes go. It is a warning to readers, when they see
an author accused, with volume and page referred to, and the apparent
guarantee of inverted commas, of maintaining something more than
commonly absurd, not to give implicit credence to the assertion without
verifying the reference.

[7] Before quitting the subject of connotative names, it is proper to
observe, that the first writer who, in our times, has adopted from the
schoolmen the word _to connote_, Mr. James Mill, in his _Analysis of the
Phenomena of the Human Mind_, employs it in a signification different
from that in which it is here used. He uses the word in a sense
coextensive with its etymology, applying it to every case in which a
name, while pointing directly to one thing, (which is consequently
termed its signification,) includes also a tacit reference to some other
thing. In the case considered in the text, that of concrete general
names, his language and mine are the converse of one another.
Considering (very justly) the signification of the name to lie in the
attribute, he speaks of the word as _noting_ the attribute, and
_connoting_ the things possessing the attribute. And he describes
abstract names as being properly concrete names with their connotation
dropped: whereas, in my view, it is the _de_notation which would be said
to be dropped, what was previously connoted becoming the whole
signification.

In adopting a phraseology at variance with that which so high an
authority, and one which I am less likely than any other person to
undervalue, has deliberately sanctioned, I have been influenced by the
urgent necessity for a term exclusively appropriated to express the
manner in which a concrete general name serves to mark the attributes
which are involved in its signification. This necessity can scarcely be
felt in its full force by any one who has not found by experience how
vain is the attempt to communicate clear ideas on the philosophy of
language without such a word. It is hardly an exaggeration to say, that
some of the most prevalent of the errors with which logic has been
infected, and a large part of the cloudiness and confusion of ideas
which have enveloped it, would, in all probability, have been avoided,
if a term had been in common use to express exactly what I have
signified by the term to connote. And the schoolmen, to whom we are
indebted for the greater part of our logical language, gave us this
also, and in this very sense. For though some of their general
expressions countenance the use of the word in the more extensive and
vague acceptation in which it is taken by Mr. Mill, yet when they had to
define it specifically as a technical term, and to fix its meaning as
such, with that admirable precision which always characterizes their
definitions, they clearly explained that nothing was said to be connoted
except _forms_, which word may generally, in their writings, be
understood as synonymous with _attributes_.

Now, if the word _to connote_, so well suited to the purpose to which
they applied it, be diverted from that purpose by being taken to fulfil
another, for which it does not seem to me to be at all required; I am
unable to find any expression to replace it, but such as are commonly
employed in a sense so much more general, that it would be useless
attempting to associate them peculiarly with this precise idea. Such are
the words, to involve, to imply, &c. By employing these, I should fail
of attaining the object for which alone the name is needed, namely, to
distinguish this particular kind of involving and implying from all
other kinds, and to assure to it the degree of habitual attention which
its importance demands.

[8] Or rather, all objects except itself and the percipient mind; for,
as we shall see hereafter, to ascribe any attribute to an object,
necessarily implies a mind to perceive it.

The simple and clear explanation given in the text, of relation and
relative names, a subject so long the opprobrium of metaphysics, was
given (as far as I know) for the first time, by Mr. James Mill, in his
Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind.

[9] _Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_, vol. i. p. 40.

[10] _Discussions on Philosophy_, &c. Appendix I. pp. 643-4.

[11] It is to be regretted that Sir William Hamilton, though he often
strenuously insists on this doctrine, and though, in the passage quoted,
he states it with a comprehensiveness and force which leave nothing to
be desired, did not consistently adhere to his own doctrine, but
maintained along with it opinions with which it is utterly
irreconcileable. See the third and other chapters of _An Examination of
Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy_.

[12] "Nous savons qu'il existe quelque chose hors de nous, parceque nous
ne pouvons expliquer nos perceptions sans les rattacher à des causes
distinctes de nous-mêmes; nous savons de plus que ces causes, dont nous
ne connaissons pas d'ailleurs l'essence, produisent les effets les plus
variables, les plus divers, et même les plus contraires, selon qu'elles
rencontrent telle nature ou telle disposition du sujet. Mais savons-nous
quelque chose de plus? et même, vu le caractère indéterminé des causes
que nous concevons dans les corps, y a-t-il quelque chose de plus à
savoir? Y a-t-il lieu de nous enquérir si nous percevons les choses
telles qu'elles sont? Non évidemment.... Je ne dis pas que le problème
est insoluble, _je dis qu'il est absurde et enferme une contradiction_.
Nous _ne savons pas ce que ces causes sont en elles-mêmes_, et la raison
nous défend de chercher à le connaître: mais il est bien évident _à
priori_, qu'_elles ne sont pas en elles-mêmes ce qu'elles sont par
rapport à nous_, puisque la présence du sujet modifie nécessairement
leur action. Supprimez tout sujet sentant, il est certain que ces causes
agiraient encore puisqu'elles continueraient d'exister; mais elles
agiraient autrement; elles seraient encore des qualités et des
propriétés, mais qui ne ressembleraient à rien de ce que nous
connaissons. Le feu ne manifesterait plus aucune des propriétés que nous
lui connaissons: que serait-il? C'est ce que nous ne saurons jamais.
_C'est d'ailleurs peut-être un problème qui ne répugne pas seulement à
la nature de notre esprit, mais à l'essence même des choses._ Quand même
en effet on supprimerait par la pensée tous les sujets sentants, il
faudrait encore admettre que nul corps ne manifesterait ses propriétés
autrement qu'en relation avec un sujet quelconque, et dans ce cas _ses
propriétés ne seraient encore que relatives_: en sorte qu'il me paraît
fort raisonnable d'admettre que les propriétés déterminées des corps
n'existent pas indépendamment d'un sujet quelconque, et que quand on
demande si les propriétés de la matière sont telles que nous les
percevons, il faudrait voir auparavant si elles sont en tant que
déterminées, et dans quel sens il est vrai de dire qu'elles
sont."--_Cours d'Histoire de la Philosophie Morale au 18me siècle_, 8me
leçon.

[13] An attempt, indeed, has been made by Reid and others, to establish
that although some of the properties we ascribe to objects exist only in
our sensations, others exist in the things themselves, being such as
cannot possibly be copies of any impression upon the senses; and they
ask, from what sensations our notions of extension and figure have been
derived? The gauntlet thrown down by Reid was taken up by Brown, who,
applying greater powers of analysis than had previously been applied to
the notions of extension and figure, pointed out that the sensations
from which those notions are derived, are sensations of touch, combined
with sensations of a class previously too little adverted to by
metaphysicians, those which have their seat in our muscular frame. His
analysis, which was adopted and followed up by James Mill, has been
further and greatly improved upon in Professor Bain's profound work,
_The Senses and the Intellect_, and in the chapters on "Perception" of a
work of eminent analytic power, Mr. Herbert Spencer's _Principles of
Psychology_.

On this point M. Cousin may again be cited in favour of the better
doctrine. M. Cousin recognises, in opposition to Reid, the essential
subjectivity of our conceptions of what are called the primary qualities
of matter, as extension, solidity, &c., equally with those of colour,
heat, and the remainder of the so-called secondary qualities.--_Cours_,
ut supra, 9me leçon.

[14] This doctrine, which is the most complete form of the philosophical
theory known as the Relativity of Human Knowledge, has, since the recent
revival in this country of an active interest in metaphysical
speculation, been the subject of a greatly increased amount of
discussion and controversy; and dissentients have manifested themselves
in considerably greater number than I had any knowledge of when the
passage in the text was written. The doctrine has been attacked from two
sides. Some thinkers, among whom are the late Professor Ferrier, in his
_Institutes of Metaphysic_, and Professor John Grote in his _Exploratio
Philosophica_, appear to deny altogether the reality of Noumena, or
Things in themselves--of an unknowable substratum or support for the
sensations which we experience, and which, according to the theory,
constitute all our knowledge of an external world. It seems to me,
however, that in Professor Grote's case at least, the denial of Noumena
is only apparent, and that he does not essentially differ from the other
class of objectors, including Mr. Bailey in his valuable _Letters on the
Philosophy of the Human Mind_, and (in spite of the striking passage
quoted in the text) also Sir William Hamilton, who contend for a direct
knowledge by the human mind of more than the sensations--of certain
attributes or properties as they exist not in us, but in the Things
themselves.

With the first of these opinions, that which denies Noumena, I have, as
a metaphysician, no quarrel; but, whether it be true or false, it is
irrelevant to Logic. And since all the forms of language are in
contradiction to it, nothing but confusion could result from its
unnecessary introduction into a treatise, every essential doctrine of
which could stand equally well with the opposite and accredited opinion.
The other and rival doctrine, that of a direct perception or intuitive
knowledge of the outward object as it is in itself, considered as
distinct from the sensations we receive from it, is of far greater
practical moment. But even this question, depending on the nature and
laws of Intuitive Knowledge, is not within the province of Logic. For
the grounds of my own opinion concerning it, I must content myself with
referring to a work already mentioned--_An Examination of Sir William
Hamilton's Philosophy_; several chapters of which are devoted to a full
discussion of the questions and theories relating to the supposed direct
perception of external objects.

[15] _Analysis of the Human Mind_, i. 126 et seq.

[16] It may, however, be considered as equivalent to an universal
proposition with a different predicate, viz. "All wine is good _quâ_
wine," or "is good in respect of the qualities which constitute it
wine."

[17] Dr. Whewell (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 242) questions this
statement, and asks, "Are we to say that a mole cannot dig the ground,
except he has an idea of the ground, and of the snout and paws with
which he digs it?" I do not know what passes in a mole's mind, nor what
amount of mental apprehension may or may not accompany his instinctive
actions. But a human being does not use a spade by instinct; and he
certainly could not use it unless he had knowledge of a spade, and of
the earth which he uses it upon.

[18] "From hence also this may be deduced, that the first truths were
arbitrarily made by those that first of all imposed names upon things,
or received them from the imposition of others. For it is true (for
example) that _man is a living creature_, but it is for this reason,
that it pleased men to impose both these names on the same
thing."--_Computation or Logic_, ch. iii. sect. 8.

[19] "Men are subject to err not only in affirming and denying, but also
in perception, and in silent cogitation.... Tacit errors, or the errors
of sense and cogitation, are made by passing from one imagination to the
imagination of another different thing; or by feigning that to be past,
or future, which never was, nor ever shall be; as when by seeing the
image of the sun in water, we imagine the sun itself to be there; or by
seeing swords, that there has been, or shall be, fighting, because it
uses to be so for the most part; or when from promises we feign the mind
of the promiser to be such and such; or, lastly, when from any sign we
vainly imagine something to be signified which is not. And errors of
this sort are common to all things that have sense."--_Computation or
Logic_, ch. v. sect. 1.

[20] Ch. iii. sect. 3.

[21] To the preceding statement it has been objected, that "we naturally
construe the subject of a proposition in its extension, and the
predicate (which therefore may be an adjective) in its intension,
(connotation): and that consequently coexistence of attributes does not,
any more than the opposite theory of equation of groups, correspond with
the living processes of thought and language." I acknowledge the
distinction here drawn, which, indeed, I had myself laid down and
exemplified a few pages back (p. 104). But though it is true that we
naturally "construe the subject of a proposition in its extension," this
extension, or in other words, the extent of the class denoted by the
name, is not apprehended or indicated directly. It is both apprehended
and indicated solely through the attributes. In the "living processes of
thought and language" the extension, though in this case really thought
of (which in the case of the predicate it is not), is thought of only
through the medium of what my acute and courteous critic terms the
"intension."

For further illustrations of this subject, see _Examination of Sir
William Hamilton's Philosophy_, ch. xxii.

[22] Book iv. ch. vii.

[23] The doctrines which prevented the real meaning of Essences from
being understood, had not assumed so settled a shape in the time of
Aristotle and his immediate followers, as was afterwards given to them
by the Realists of the middle ages. Aristotle himself (in his Treatise
on the Categories) expressly denies that the [Greek: deuterai ousiai],
or Substantiæ Secundæ, inhere in a subject. They are only, he says,
predicated of it.

[24] The always acute and often profound author of _An Outline of
Sematology_ (Mr. B. H. Smart) justly says, "Locke will be much more
intelligible if, in the majority of places, we substitute 'the knowledge
of' for what he calls 'the Idea of'" (p. 10). Among the many criticisms
on Locke's use of the word Idea, this is the one which, as it appears to
me, most nearly hits the mark; and I quote it for the additional reason
that it precisely expresses the point of difference respecting the
import of Propositions, between my view and what I have spoken of as the
Conceptualist view of them. Where a Conceptualist says that a name or a
proposition expresses our Idea of a thing, I should generally say
(instead of our Idea) our Knowledge, or Belief, concerning the thing
itself.

[25] This distinction corresponds to that which is drawn by Kant and
other metaphysicians between what they term _analytic_, and _synthetic_,
judgments; the former being those which can be evolved from the meaning
of the terms used.

[26] If we allow a differentia to what is not really a species. For the
distinction of Kinds, in the sense explained by us, not being in any way
applicable to attributes, it of course follows that although attributes
may be put into classes, those classes can be admitted to be genera or
species only by courtesy.

[27] In the fuller discussion which Archbishop Whately has given to this
subject in his later editions, he almost ceases to regard the
definitions of names and those of things as, in any important sense,
distinct. He seems (9th ed. p. 145) to limit the notion of a Real
Definition to one which "explains anything _more_ of the nature of the
thing than is implied in the name;" (including under the word "implied,"
not only what the name connotes, but everything which can be deduced by
reasoning from the attributes connoted). Even this, as he adds, is
usually called, not a Definition, but a Description; and (as it seems to
me) rightly so called. A Description, I conceive, can only be ranked
among Definitions, when taken (as in the case of the zoological
definition of man) to fulfil the true office of a Definition, by
declaring the connotation given to a word in some special use, as a term
of science or art: which special connotation of course would not be
expressed by the proper definition of the word in its ordinary
employment.

Mr. De Morgan, exactly reversing the doctrine of Archbishop Whately,
understands by a Real Definition one which contains _less_ than the
Nominal Definition, provided only that what it contains is sufficient
for distinction. "By _real_ definition I mean such an explanation of the
word, be it the whole of the meaning or only part, as will be sufficient
to separate the things contained under that word from all others. Thus
the following, I believe, is a complete definition of an elephant: An
animal which naturally drinks by drawing the water into its nose, and
then spurting it into its mouth."--_Formal Logic_, p. 36. Mr. De
Morgan's general proposition and his example are at variance; for the
peculiar mode of drinking of the elephant certainly forms no part of the
meaning of the word elephant. It could not be said, because a person
happened to be ignorant of this property, that he did not know what an
elephant means.

[28] In the only attempt which, so far as I know, has been made to
refute the preceding argumentation, it is maintained that in the first
form of the syllogism,

  A dragon is a thing which breathes flame,
  A dragon is a serpent,
  Therefore some serpent or serpents breathe flame,

"there is just as much truth in the conclusion as there is in the
premises, or rather, no more in the latter than in the former. If the
general name serpent includes both real and imaginary serpents, there is
no falsity in the conclusion; if not, there is falsity in the minor
premise."

Let us, then, try to set out the syllogism on the hypothesis that the
name serpent includes imaginary serpents. We shall find that it is now
necessary to alter the predicates; for it cannot be asserted that an
imaginary creature breathes flame: in predicating of it such a fact, we
assert by the most positive implication that it is real and not
imaginary. The conclusion must run thus, "Some serpent or serpents
either do or are _imagined_ to breathe flame." And to prove this
conclusion by the instance of dragons, the premises must be, A dragon is
_imagined_ as breathing flame, A dragon is a (real or imaginary)
serpent: from which it undoubtedly follows, that there are serpents
which are imagined to breathe flame; but the major premise is not a
definition, nor part of a definition; which is all that I am concerned
to prove.

Let us now examine the other assertion--that if the word serpent stands
for none but real serpents, the minor premise (a dragon is a serpent) is
false. This is exactly what I have myself said of the premise,
considered as a statement of fact: but it is not false as part of the
definition of a dragon; and since the premises, or one of them, must be
false, (the conclusion being so,) the real premise cannot be the
definition, which is true, but the statement of fact, which is false.

[29] "Few people" (I have said in another place) "have reflected how
great a knowledge of Things is required to enable a man to affirm that
any given argument turns wholly upon words. There is, perhaps, not one
of the leading terms of philosophy which is not used in almost
innumerable shades of meaning, to express ideas more or less widely
different from one another. Between two of these ideas a sagacious and
penetrating mind will discern, as it were intuitively, an unobvious link
of connexion, upon which, though perhaps unable to give a logical
account of it, he will found a perfectly valid argument, which his
critic, not having so keen an insight into the Things, will mistake for
a fallacy turning on the double meaning of a term. And the greater the
genius of him who thus safely leaps over the chasm, the greater will
probably be the crowing and vain-glory of the mere logician, who,
hobbling after him, evinces his own superior wisdom by pausing on its
brink, and giving up as desperate his proper business of bridging it
over."




