CHAPTER VII.

EXAMINATION OF SOME OPINIONS OPPOSED TO THE PRECEDING DOCTRINES.


§ 1. Polemical discussion is foreign to the plan of this work. But an
opinion which stands in need of much illustration, can often receive it
most effectually, and least tediously, in the form of a defence against
objections. And on subjects concerning which speculative minds are still
divided, a writer does but half his duty by stating his own doctrine, if
he does not also examine, and to the best of his ability judge, those of
other thinkers.

In the dissertation which Mr. Herbert Spencer has prefixed to his, in
many respects, highly philosophical treatise on the Mind,[39] he
criticises some of the doctrines of the two preceding chapters, and
propounds a theory of his own on the subject of first principles. Mr.
Spencer agrees with me in considering axioms to be "simply our earliest
inductions from experience." But he differs from me "widely as to the
worth of the test of inconceivableness." He thinks that it is the
ultimate test of all beliefs. He arrives at this conclusion by two
steps. First, we never can have any stronger ground for believing
anything, than that the belief of it "invariably exists." Whenever any
fact or proposition is invariably believed; that is, if I understand Mr.
Spencer rightly, believed by all persons, and by oneself at all times;
it is entitled to be received as one of the primitive truths, or
original premises of our knowledge. Secondly, the criterion by which we
decide whether anything is invariably believed to be true, is our
inability to conceive it as false. "The inconceivability of its negation
is the test by which we ascertain whether a given belief invariably
exists or not." "For our primary beliefs, the fact of invariable
existence, tested by an abortive effort to cause their non-existence, is
the only reason assignable." He thinks this the sole ground of our
belief in our own sensations. If I believe that I feel cold, I only
receive this as true because I cannot conceive that I am not feeling
cold. "While the proposition remains true, the negation of it remains
inconceivable." There are numerous other beliefs which Mr. Spencer
considers to rest on the same basis; being chiefly those, or a part of
those, which the metaphysicians of the Reid and Stewart school consider
as truths of immediate intuition. That there exists a material world;
that this is the very world which we directly and immediately perceive,
and not merely the hidden cause of our perceptions; that Space, Time,
Force, Extension, Figure, are not modes of our consciousness, but
objective realities; are regarded by Mr. Spencer as truths known by the
inconceivableness of their negatives. We cannot, he says, by any effort,
conceive these objects of thought as mere states of our mind; as not
having an existence external to us. Their real existence is, therefore,
as certain as our sensations themselves. The truths which are the
subject of direct knowledge, being, according to this doctrine, known to
be truths only by the inconceivability of their negation; and the truths
which are not the object of direct knowledge, being known as inferences
from those which are; and those inferences being believed to follow from
the premises, only because we cannot conceive them not to follow;
inconceivability is thus the ultimate ground of all assured beliefs.

Thus far, there is no very wide difference between Mr. Spencer's
doctrine and the ordinary one of philosophers of the intuitive school,
from Descartes to Dr. Whewell; but at this point Mr. Spencer diverges
from them. For he does not, like them, set up the test of
inconceivability as infallible. On the contrary, he holds that it may be
fallacious, not from any fault in the test itself, but because "men have
mistaken for inconceivable things, some things which were not
inconceivable." And he himself, in this very book, denies not a few
propositions usually regarded as among the most marked examples of
truths whose negations are inconceivable. But occasional failure, he
says, is incident to all tests. If such failure vitiates "the test of
inconceivableness," it "must similarly vitiate all tests whatever. We
consider an inference logically drawn from established premises to be
true. Yet in millions of cases men have been wrong in the inferences
they have thought thus drawn. Do we therefore argue that it is absurd to
consider an inference true on no other ground than that it is logically
drawn from established premises? No: we say that though men may have
taken for logical inferences, inferences that were not logical, there
nevertheless _are_ logical inferences, and that we are justified in
assuming the truth of what seem to us such, until better instructed.
Similarly, though men may have thought some things inconceivable which
were not so, there may still be inconceivable things; and the inability
to conceive the negation of a thing, may still be our best warrant for
believing it.... Though occasionally it may prove an imperfect test,
yet, as our most certain beliefs are capable of no better, to doubt any
one belief because we have no higher guarantee for it, is really to
doubt all beliefs." Mr. Spencer's doctrine, therefore, does not erect
the curable, but only the incurable limitations of the human conceptive
faculty, into laws of the outward universe.


§ 2. The doctrine, that "a belief which is proved by the
inconceivableness of its negation to invariably exist, is true," Mr.
Spencer enforces by two arguments, one of which may be distinguished as
positive, and the other as negative.

The positive argument is, that every such belief represents the
aggregate of all past experience. "Conceding the entire truth of" the
"position, that during any phase of human progress, the ability or
inability to form a specific conception wholly depends on the
experiences men have had; and that, by a widening of their experiences,
they may, by and by, be enabled to conceive things before inconceivable
to them; it may still be argued that as, at any time, the best warrant
men can have for a belief is the perfect agreement of all pre-existing
experience in support of it, it follows that, at any time, the
inconceivableness of its negation is the deepest test any belief admits
of.... Objective facts are ever impressing themselves upon us; our
experience is a register of these objective facts; and the
inconceivableness of a thing implies that it is wholly at variance with
the register. Even were this all, it is not clear how, if every truth is
primarily inductive, any better test of truth could exist. But it must
be remembered that whilst many of these facts, impressing themselves
upon us, are occasional; whilst others again are very general; some are
universal and unchanging. These universal and unchanging facts are, by
the hypothesis, certain to establish beliefs of which the negations are
inconceivable; whilst the others are not certain to do this; and if they
do, subsequent facts will reverse their action. Hence if, after an
immense accumulation of experiences, there remain beliefs of which the
negations are still inconceivable, most, if not all of them, must
correspond to universal objective facts. If there be ... certain
absolute uniformities in nature; if these uniformities produce, as they
must, absolute uniformities in our experience; and if ... these absolute
uniformities in our experience disable us from conceiving the negations
of them; then answering to each absolute uniformity in nature which we
can cognize, there must exist in us a belief of which the negation is
inconceivable, and which is absolutely true. In this wide range of cases
subjective inconceivableness must correspond to objective impossibility.
Further experience will produce correspondence where it may not yet
exist; and we may expect the correspondence to become ultimately
complete. In nearly all cases this test of inconceivableness must be
valid now;" (I wish I could think we were so nearly arrived at
omniscience) "and where it is not, it still expresses the net result of
our experience up to the present time; which is the most that any test
can do."

To this I answer: Even if it were true that inconceivableness represents
"the net result" of all past experience, why should we stop at the
representative when we can get at the thing represented? If our
incapacity to conceive the negation of a given supposition is proof of
its truth, because proving that our experience has hitherto been
uniform in its favour, the real evidence for the supposition is not the
inconceivableness, but the uniformity of experience. Now this, which is
the substantial and only proof, is directly accessible. We are not
obliged to presume it from an incidental consequence. If all past
experience is in favour of a belief, let this be stated, and the belief
openly rested on that ground: after which the question arises, what that
fact may be worth as evidence of its truth? For uniformity of experience
is evidence in very different degrees: in some cases it is strong
evidence, in others weak, in others it scarcely amounts to evidence at
all. That all metals sink in water, was an uniform experience, from the
origin of the human race to the discovery of potassium in the present
century by Sir Humphry Davy. That all swans are white, was an uniform
experience down to the discovery of Australia. In the few cases in which
uniformity of experience does amount to the strongest possible proof, as
with such propositions as these, Two straight lines cannot inclose a
space, Every event has a cause, it is not because their negations are
inconceivable, which is not always the fact; but because the experience,
which has been thus uniform, pervades all nature. It will be shown in
the following Book that none of the conclusions either of induction or
of deduction can be considered certain, except as far as their truth is
shown to be inseparably bound up with truths of this class.

I maintain then, first, that uniformity of past experience is very far
from being universally a criterion of truth. But secondly,
inconceivableness is still farther from being a test even of that test.
Uniformity of contrary experience is only one of many causes of
inconceivability. Tradition handed down from a period of more limited
knowledge, is one of the commonest. The mere familiarity of one mode of
production of a phenomenon, often suffices to make every other mode
appear inconceivable. Whatever connects two ideas by a strong
association may, and continually does, render their separation in
thought impossible; as Mr. Spencer, in other parts of his speculations,
frequently recognises. It was not for want of experience that the
Cartesians were unable to conceive that one body could produce motion
in another without contact. They had as much experience of other modes
of producing motion, as they had of that mode. The planets had revolved,
and heavy bodies had fallen, every hour of their lives. But they fancied
these phenomena to be produced by a hidden machinery which they did not
see, because without it they were unable to conceive what they did see.
The inconceivableness, instead of representing their experience,
dominated and overrode their experience. It is needless to dwell farther
on what I have termed the positive argument of Mr. Spencer in support of
his criterion of truth. I pass to his negative argument, on which he
lays more stress.


§ 3. The negative argument is, that, whether inconceivability be good
evidence or bad, no stronger evidence is to be obtained. That what is
inconceivable cannot be true, is postulated in every act of thought. It
is the foundation of all our original premises. Still more it is assumed
in all conclusions from those premises. The invariability of belief,
tested by the inconceivableness of its negation, "is our sole warrant
for every demonstration. Logic is simply a systematization of the
process by which we indirectly obtain this warrant for beliefs that do
not directly possess it. To gain the strongest conviction possible
respecting any complex fact, we either analytically descend from it by
successive steps, each of which we unconsciously test by the
inconceivableness of its negation, until we reach some axiom or truth
which we have similarly tested; or we synthetically ascend from such
axiom or truth by such steps. In either case we connect some isolated
belief, with a belief which invariably exists, by a series of
intermediate beliefs which invariably exist." The following passage sums
up the whole theory: "When we perceive that the negation of the belief
is inconceivable, we have all possible warrant for asserting the
invariability of its existence: and in asserting this, we express alike
our logical justification of it, and the inexorable necessity we are
under of holding it.... We have seen that this is the assumption on
which every conclusion whatever ultimately rests. We have no other
guarantee for the reality of consciousness, of sensations, of personal
existence; we have no other guarantee for any axiom; we have no other
guarantee for any step in a demonstration. Hence, as being taken for
granted in every act of the understanding, it must be regarded as the
Universal Postulate." But as this postulate which we are under an
"inexorable necessity" of holding true, is sometimes false; as "beliefs
that once were shown by the inconceivableness of their negations to
invariably exist, have since been found untrue," and as "beliefs that
now possess this character may some day share the same fate;" the canon
of belief laid down by Mr. Spencer is, that "the most certain
conclusion" is that "which involves the postulate the fewest times."
Reasoning, therefore, never ought to prevail against one of the
immediate beliefs (the belief in Matter, in the outward reality of
Extension, Space, and the like), because each of these involves the
postulate only once; while an argument, besides involving it in the
premises, involves it again in every step of the ratiocination, no one
of the successive acts of inference being recognised as valid except
because we cannot conceive the conclusion not to follow from the
premises.

It will be convenient to take the last part of this argument first. In
every reasoning, according to Mr. Spencer, the assumption of the
postulate is renewed at every step. At each inference we judge that the
conclusion follows from the premises, our sole warrant for that judgment
being that we cannot conceive it not to follow. Consequently if the
postulate is fallible, the conclusions of reasoning are more vitiated by
that uncertainty than direct intuitions; and the disproportion is
greater, the more numerous the steps of the argument.

To test this doctrine, let us first suppose an argument consisting only
of a single step, which would be represented by one syllogism. This
argument does rest on an assumption, and we have seen in the preceding
chapters what the assumption is. It is, that whatever has a mark, has
what it is a mark of. The evidence of this axiom I shall not consider at
present;[40] let us suppose it (with Mr. Spencer) to be the
inconceivableness of its reverse.

Let us now add a second step to the argument: we require, what? Another
assumption? No: the same assumption a second time; and so on to a third,
and a fourth. I confess I do not see how, on Mr. Spencer's own
principles, the repetition of the assumption at all weakens the force of
the argument. If it were necessary the second time to assume some other
axiom, the argument would no doubt be weakened, since it would be
necessary to its validity that both axioms should be true, and it might
happen that one was true and not the other: making two chances of error
instead of one. But since it is the _same_ axiom, if it is true once it
is true every time; and if the argument, being of a hundred links,
assumed the axiom a hundred times, these hundred assumptions would make
but one chance of error among them all. It is satisfactory that we are
not obliged to suppose the deductions of pure mathematics to be among
the most uncertain of argumentative processes, which on Mr. Spencer's
theory they could hardly fail to be, since they are the longest. But the
number of steps in an argument does not subtract from its reliableness,
if no new _premises_, of an uncertain character, are taken up by the
way.

To speak next of the premises. Our assurance of their truth, whether
they be generalities or individual facts, is grounded, in Mr. Spencer's
opinion, on the inconceivableness of their being false. It is necessary
to advert to a double meaning of the word inconceivable, which Mr.
Spencer is aware of, and would sincerely disclaim founding an argument
upon, but from which his case derives no little advantage
notwithstanding. By inconceivableness is sometimes meant, inability to
form or get rid of an _idea_; sometimes, inability to form or get rid of
a _belief_. The former meaning is the most conformable to the analogy of
language; for a conception always means an idea, and never a belief.
The wrong meaning of "inconceivable" is, however, fully as frequent in
philosophical discussion as the right meaning, and the intuitive school
of metaphysicians could not well do without either. To illustrate the
difference, we will take two contrasted examples. The early physical
speculators considered antipodes incredible, because inconceivable. But
antipodes were not inconceivable in the primitive sense of the word. An
idea of them could be formed without difficulty: they could be
completely pictured to the mental eye. What was difficult, and as it
then seemed, impossible, was to apprehend them as believable. The idea
could be put together, of men sticking on by their feet to the under
side of the earth; but the belief _would_ follow, that they must fall
off. Antipodes were not unimaginable, but they were unbelievable.

On the other hand, when I endeavour to conceive an end to extension, the
two ideas refuse to come together. When I attempt to form a conception
of the last point of space, I cannot help figuring to myself a vast
space beyond that last point. The combination is, under the conditions
of our experience, unimaginable. This double meaning of inconceivable it
is very important to bear in mind, for the argument from
inconceivableness almost always turns on the alternate substitution of
each of those meanings for the other.

In which of these two senses does Mr. Spencer employ the term, when he
makes it a test of the truth of a proposition that its negation is
inconceivable? Until Mr. Spencer expressly stated the contrary, I
inferred from the course of his argument, that he meant unbelievable. He
has, however, in a paper published in the fifth number of the
_Fortnightly Review_, disclaimed this meaning, and declared that by an
inconceivable proposition he means, now and always, "one of which the
terms cannot, by any effort, be brought before consciousness in that
relation which the proposition asserts between them--a proposition of
which the subject and predicate offer an insurmountable resistance to
union in thought." We now, therefore, know positively that Mr. Spencer
always endeavours to use the word inconceivable in this, its proper,
sense: but it may yet be questioned whether his endeavour is always
successful; whether the other, and popular use of the word does not
sometimes creep in with its associations, and prevent him from
maintaining a clear separation between the two. When, for example, he
says, that when I feel cold, I cannot conceive that I am not feeling
cold, this expression cannot be translated into, "I cannot conceive
myself not feeling cold," for it is evident that I can: the word
conceive, therefore, is here used to express the recognition of a matter
of fact--the perception of truth or falsehood; which I apprehend to be
exactly the meaning of an act of belief, as distinguished from simple
conception. Again, Mr. Spencer calls the attempt to conceive something
which is inconceivable, "an abortive effort to cause the non-existence"
not of a conception or mental representation, but of a belief. There is
need, therefore, to revise a considerable part of Mr. Spencer's
language, if it is to be kept always consistent with his definition of
inconceivability. But in truth the point is of little importance; since
inconceivability, in Mr. Spencer's theory, is only a test of truth,
inasmuch as it is a test of believability. The inconceivableness of a
supposition is the extreme case of its unbelievability. This is the very
foundation of Mr. Spencer's doctrine. The invariability of the belief is
with him the real guarantee. The attempt to conceive the negative, is
made in order to test the inevitableness of the belief. It should be
called, an attempt to _believe_ the negative. When Mr. Spencer says that
while looking at the sun a man cannot conceive that he is looking into
darkness, he should have said that a man cannot _believe_ that he is
doing so. For it is surely possible, in broad daylight, to _imagine_
oneself looking into darkness.[41] As Mr. Spencer himself says, speaking
of the belief of our own existence: "That he _might_ not exist, he can
conceive well enough; but that he _does_ not exist, he finds it
impossible to conceive," _i.e._ to believe. So that the statement
resolves itself into this: That I exist, and that I have sensations, I
believe, because I cannot believe otherwise. And in this case every one
will admit that the necessity is real. Any one's present sensations, or
other states of subjective consciousness, that one person inevitably
believes. They are facts known _per se_: it is impossible to ascend
beyond them. Their negative is really unbelievable, and therefore there
is never any question about believing it. Mr. Spencer's theory is not
needed for these truths.

But according to Mr. Spencer there are other beliefs, relating to other
things than our own subjective feelings, for which we have the same
guarantee--which are, in a similar manner, invariable and necessary.
With regard to these other beliefs, they cannot be necessary, since they
do not always exist. There have been, and are, many persons who do not
believe the reality of an external world, still less the reality of
extension and figure as the forms of that external world; who do not
believe that space and time have an existence independent of the
mind--nor any other of Mr. Spencer's objective intuitions. The negations
of these alleged invariable beliefs are not unbelievable, for they are
believed. It may be maintained, without obvious error, that we cannot
_imagine_ tangible objects as mere states of our own and other people's
consciousness; that the perception of them irresistibly suggests to us
the _idea_ of something external to ourselves: and I am not in a
condition to say that this is not the fact (though I do not think any
one is entitled to affirm it of any person besides himself). But many
thinkers have believed, whether they could conceive it or not, that what
we represent to ourselves as material objects, are mere modifications of
consciousness; complex feelings of touch and of muscular action. Mr.
Spencer may think the inference correct from the unimaginable to the
unbelievable, because he holds that belief itself is but the persistence
of an idea, and that what we can succeed in imagining, we cannot at the
moment help apprehending as believable. But of what consequence is it
what we apprehend at the moment, if the moment is in contradiction to
the permanent state of our mind? A person who has been frightened when
an infant by stories of ghosts, though he disbelieves them in after
years (and perhaps disbelieved them at first), may be unable all his
life to be in a dark place, in circumstances stimulating to the
imagination, without mental discomposure. The idea of ghosts, with all
its attendant terrors, is irresistibly called up in his mind by the
outward circumstances. Mr. Spencer may say, that while he is under the
influence of this terror he does not disbelieve in ghosts, but has a
temporary and uncontrollable belief in them. Be it so; but allowing it
to be so, which would it be truest to say of this man on the whole--that
he believes in ghosts, or that he does not believe in them? Assuredly
that he does not believe in them. The case is similar with those who
disbelieve a material world. Though they cannot get rid of the idea;
though while looking at a solid object they cannot help having the
conception, and therefore, according to Mr. Spencer's metaphysics, the
momentary belief, of its externality; even at that moment they would
sincerely deny holding that belief: and it would be incorrect to call
them other than disbelievers of the doctrine. The belief therefore is
not invariable; and the test of inconceivableness fails in the only
cases to which there could ever be any occasion to apply it.

That a thing may be perfectly believable, and yet may not have become
conceivable, and that we may habitually believe one side of an
alternative, and conceive only in the other, is familiarly exemplified
in the state of mind of educated persons respecting sunrise and sunset.
All educated persons either know by investigation, or believe on the
authority of science, that it is the earth and not the sun which moves:
but there are probably few who habitually _conceive_ the phenomenon
otherwise than as the ascent or descent of the sun. Assuredly no one can
do so without a prolonged trial; and it is probably not easier now than
in the first generation after Copernicus. Mr. Spencer does not say, "In
looking at sunrise it is impossible not to conceive that it is the sun
which moves, therefore this is what everybody believes, and we have all
the evidence for it that we can have for any truth." Yet this would be
an exact parallel to his doctrine about the belief in matter.

The existence of matter, and other Noumena, as distinguished from the
phenomenal world, remains a question of argument, as it was before; and
the very general, but neither necessary nor universal, belief in them,
stands as a psychological phenomenon to be explained, either on the
hypothesis of its truth, or on some other. The belief is not a
conclusive proof of its own truth, unless there are no such things as
_idola tribûs_; but, being a fact, it calls on antagonists to show, from
what except the real existence of the thing believed, so general and
apparently spontaneous a belief can have originated. And its opponents
have never hesitated to accept this challenge.[42] The amount of their
success in meeting it will probably determine the ultimate verdict of
philosophers on the question.


§ 4. Sir William Hamilton holds as I do, that inconceivability is no
criterion of impossibility. "There is no ground for inferring a certain
fact to be impossible, merely from our inability to conceive its
possibility." "Things there are which _may_, nay _must_, be true, of
which the understanding is wholly unable to construe to itself the
possibility."[43] Sir William Hamilton is however a firm believer in the
_à priori_ character of many axioms, and of the sciences deduced from
them; and is so far from considering those axioms to rest on the
evidence of experience, that he declares certain of them to be true even
of Noumena--of the Unconditioned--of which it is one of the principal
aims of his philosophy to prove that the nature of our faculties debars
us from having any knowledge. The axioms to which he attributes this
exceptional emancipation from the limits which confine all our other
possibilities of knowledge; the chinks through which, as he represents,
one ray of light finds its way to us from behind the curtain which veils
from us the mysterious world of Things in themselves,--are the two
principles, which he terms, after the schoolmen, the Principle of
Contradiction, and the Principle of Excluded Middle: the first, that two
contradictory propositions cannot both be true; the second, that they
cannot both be false. Armed with these logical weapons, we may boldly
face Things in themselves, and tender to them the double alternative,
sure that they must absolutely elect one or the other side, though we
may be for ever precluded from discovering which. To take his favourite
example, we cannot conceive the infinite divisibility of matter, and we
cannot conceive a minimum, or end to divisibility: yet one or the other
must be true.

As I have hitherto said nothing of the two axioms in question, those of
Contradiction and of Excluded Middle, it is not unseasonable to consider
them here. The former asserts that an affirmative proposition and the
corresponding negative proposition cannot both be true; which has
generally been held to be intuitively evident. Sir William Hamilton and
the Germans consider it to be the statement in words of a form or law of
our thinking faculty. Other philosophers, not less deserving of
consideration, deem it to be an identical proposition; an assertion
involved in the meaning of terms; a mode of defining Negation, and the
word Not.

I am able to go one step with these last. An affirmative assertion and
its negative are not two independent assertions, connected with each
other only as mutually incompatible. That if the negative be true, the
affirmative must be false, really is a mere identical proposition; for
the negative proposition asserts nothing but the falsity of the
affirmative, and has no other sense or meaning whatever. The Principium
Contradictionis should therefore put off the ambitious phraseology which
gives it the air of a fundamental antithesis pervading nature, and
should be enunciated in the simpler form, that the same proposition
cannot at the same time be false and true. But I can go no farther with
the Nominalists; for I cannot look upon this last as a merely verbal
proposition. I consider it to be, like other axioms, one of our first
and most familiar generalizations from experience. The original
foundation of it I take to be, that Belief and Disbelief are two
different mental states, excluding one another. This we know by the
simplest observation of our own minds. And if we carry our observation
outwards, we also find that light and darkness, sound and silence,
motion and quiescence, equality and inequality, preceding and following,
succession and simultaneousness, any positive phenomenon whatever and
its negative, are distinct phenomena, pointedly contrasted, and the one
always absent where the other is present. I consider the maxim in
question to be a generalization from all these facts.

In like manner as the Principle of Contradiction (that one of two
contradictories must be false) means that an assertion cannot be _both_
true and false, so the Principle of Excluded Middle, or that one of two
contradictories must be true, means that an assertion must be _either_
true or false: either the affirmative is true, or otherwise the negative
is true, which means that the affirmative is false. I cannot help
thinking this principle a surprising specimen of a so-called necessity
of Thought, since it is not even true, unless with a large
qualification. A proposition must be either true or false, _provided_
that the predicate be one which can in any intelligible sense be
attributed to the subject; (and as this is always assumed to be the case
in treatises on logic, the axiom is always laid down there as of
absolute truth). "Abracadabra is a second intention" is neither true nor
false. Between the true and the false there is a third possibility, the
Unmeaning: and this alternative is fatal to Sir William Hamilton's
extension of the maxim to Noumena. That Matter must either have a
minimum of divisibility or be infinitely divisible, is more than we can
ever know. For in the first place, Matter, in any other than the
phenomenal sense of the term, may not exist: and it will scarcely be
said that a non-entity must be either infinitely or finitely
divisible.[44] In the second place, though matter, considered as the
occult cause of our sensations, do really exist, yet what we call
divisibility may be an attribute only of our sensations of sight and
touch, and not of their uncognizable cause. Divisibility may not be
predicable at all, in any intelligible sense, of Things in themselves,
nor therefore of Matter in itself; and the assumed necessity of being
either infinitely or finitely divisible, may be an inapplicable
alternative.

On this question I am happy to have the full concurrence of Mr. Herbert
Spencer, from whose paper in the _Fortnightly Review_ I extract the
following passage. The germ of an idea identical with that of Mr.
Spencer may be found in the present chapter, about a page back, but in
Mr. Spencer it is not an undeveloped thought, but a philosophical
theory.

"When remembering a certain thing as in a certain place, the place and
the thing are mentally represented together; while to think of the
non-existence of the thing in that place, implies a consciousness in
which the place is represented, but not the thing. Similarly, if instead
of thinking of an object as colourless, we think of its having colour,
the change consists in the addition to the concept of an element that
was before absent from it--the object cannot be thought of first as red
and then as not red, without one component of the thought being totally
expelled from the mind by another. The law of the Excluded Middle, then,
is simply a generalization of the universal experience that some mental
states are directly destructive of other states. It formulates a certain
absolutely constant law, that the appearance of any positive mode of
consciousness cannot occur without excluding a correlative negative
mode; and that the negative mode cannot occur without excluding the
correlative positive mode: the antithesis of positive and negative
being, indeed, merely an expression of this experience. Hence it follows
that if consciousness is not in one of the two modes it must be in the
other."[45]

I must here close this supplementary chapter, and with it the Second
Book. The theory of Induction, in the most comprehensive sense of the
term, will form the subject of the Third.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] As Sir William Hamilton has pointed out, "Some A is not B" may also
be converted in the following form: "No B is _some_ A." Some men are not
negroes; therefore, No negroes are _some_ men (_e.g._ Europeans).

[2]
  All A is B } contraries.
  No  A is B }

  Some A is B     } subcontraries.
  Some A is not B }

  All  A is B     } contradictories.
  Some A is not B }

  No   A is B } also contradictories.
  Some A is B }

  All  A is B } and  No   A is B     } respectively subalternate.
  Some A is B }      Some A is not B }

[3] His conclusions are, "The first figure is suited to the discovery or
proof of the properties of a thing; the second to the discovery or proof
of the distinctions between things; the third to the discovery or proof
of instances and exceptions; the fourth to the discovery, or exclusion,
of the different species of a genus." The reference of syllogisms in the
last three figures to the _dictum de omni et nullo_ is, in Lambert's
opinion, strained and unnatural: to each of the three belongs, according
to him, a separate axiom, co-ordinate and of equal authority with that
_dictum_, and to which he gives the names of _dictum de diverso_ for the
second figure, _dictum de exemplo_ for the third, and _dictum de
reciproco_ for the fourth. See part i. or _Dianoiologie_, chap. iv. §
229 _et seqq._ Mr. Bailey, (_Theory of Reasoning_, 2nd ed. pp. 70-74)
takes a similar view of the subject.

[4] Since this chapter was written, two treatises have appeared (or
rather a treatise and a fragment of a treatise), which aim at a further
improvement in the theory of the forms of ratiocination: Mr. De Morgan's
"Formal Logic; or, the Calculus of Inference, Necessary and Probable;"
and the "New Analytic of Logical Forms," attached as an Appendix to Sir
William Hamilton's _Discussions on Philosophy_, and at greater length,
to his posthumous _Lectures on Logic_.

In Mr. De Morgan's volume--abounding, in its more popular parts, with
valuable observations felicitously expressed--the principal feature of
originality is an attempt to bring within strict technical rules the
cases in which a conclusion can be drawn from premises of a form usually
classed as particular. Mr. De Morgan observes, very justly, that from
the premises Most Bs are Cs, most Bs are As, it may be concluded with
certainty that some As are Cs, since two portions of the class B, each
of them comprising more than half, must necessarily in part consist of
the same individuals. Following out this line of thought, it is equally
evident that if we knew exactly what proportion the "most" in each of
the premises bear to the entire class B, we could increase in a
corresponding degree the definiteness of the conclusion. Thus if 60 per
cent of B are included in C, and 70 per cent in A, 30 per cent at least
must be common to both; in other words, the number of As which are Cs,
and of Cs which are As, must be at least equal to 30 per cent of the
class B. Proceeding on this conception of "numerically definite
propositions," and extending it to such forms as these:--"45 Xs (or
more) are each of them one of 70 Ys," or "45 Xs (or more) are no one of
them to be found among 70 Ys," and examining what inferences admit of
being drawn from the various combinations which may be made of premises
of this description, Mr. De Morgan establishes universal formulæ for
such inferences; creating for that purpose not only a new technical
language, but a formidable array of symbols analogous to those of
algebra.

Since it is undeniable that inferences, in the cases examined by Mr. De
Morgan, can legitimately be drawn, and that the ordinary theory takes no
account of them, I will not say that it was not worth while to show in
detail how these also could be reduced to formulæ as rigorous as those
of Aristotle. What Mr. De Morgan has done was worth doing once (perhaps
more than once, as a school exercise); but I question if its results are
worth studying and mastering for any practical purpose. The practical
use of technical forms of reasoning is to bar out fallacies: but the
fallacies which require to be guarded against in ratiocination properly
so called, arise from the incautious use of the common forms of
language; and the logician must track the fallacy into that territory,
instead of waiting for it on a territory of his own. While he remains
among propositions which have acquired the numerical precision of the
Calculus of Probabilities, the enemy is left in possession of the only
ground on which he can be formidable. And since the propositions (short
of universal) on which a thinker has to depend, either for purposes of
speculation or of practice, do not, except in a few peculiar cases,
admit of any numerical precision; common reasoning cannot be translated
into Mr. De Morgan's forms, which therefore cannot serve any purpose as
a test of it.

Sir William Hamilton's theory of the "quantification of the predicate"
(concerning the originality of which in his case there can be no doubt,
however Mr. De Morgan may have also, and independently, originated an
equivalent doctrine) may be briefly described as follows:--

"Logically" (I quote his own words) "we ought to take into account the
quantity, always understood in thought, but usually, for manifest
reasons, elided in its expression, not only of the subject, but also of
the predicate of a judgment." All A is B, is equivalent to all A is
_some_ B. No A is B, to No A is _any_ B. Some A is B, is tantamount to
some A is _some_ B. Some A is not B, to Some A is _not any_ B. As in
these forms of assertion the predicate is exactly coextensive with the
subject, they all admit of simple conversion; and by this we obtain two
additional forms--Some B is _all_ A, and No B is _some_ A. We may also
make the assertion All A is all B, which will be true if the classes A
and B are exactly coextensive. The last three forms, though conveying
real assertions, have no place in the ordinary classification of
Propositions. All propositions, then, being supposed to be translated
into this language, and written each in that one of the preceding forms
which answers to its signification, there emerges a new set of
syllogistic rules, materially different from the common ones. A general
view of the points of difference may be given in the words of Sir W.
Hamilton (_Discussions_, 2nd ed. p. 651):--

"The revocation of the two terms of a Proposition to their true
relation; a proposition being always an _equation_ of its subject and
its predicate.

"The consequent reduction of the Conversion of Propositions from three
species to one--that of Simple Conversion.

"The reduction of all the _General Laws_ of Categorical Syllogisms to a
single Canon.

"The evolution from that one canon of all the Species and varieties of
Syllogisms.

"The abrogation of all the _Special Laws_ of Syllogism.

"A demonstration of the exclusive possibility of Three syllogistic
Figures; and (on new grounds) the scientific and final abolition of the
Fourth.

"A manifestation that Figure is an unessential variation in syllogistic
form; and the consequent absurdity of Reducing the syllogisms of the
other figures to the first.

"An enouncement of _one Organic Principle_ for each Figure.

"A determination of the true number of the Legitimate Moods; with

"Their amplification in number (thirty-six);

"Their numerical equality under all the figures; and

"Their relative equivalence, or virtual identity, throughout every
schematic difference.

"That, in the second and third figures, the extremes holding both the
same relation to the middle term, there is not, as in the first, an
opposition and subordination between a term major and a term minor,
mutually containing and contained, in the counter wholes of Extension
and Comprehension.

"Consequently, in the second and third figures, there is no determinate
major and minor premise, and there are two indifferent conclusions:
whereas in the first the premises are determinate, and there is a single
proximate conclusion."

This doctrine, like that of Mr. De Morgan previously noticed, is a real
addition to the syllogistic theory; and has moreover this advantage over
Mr. De Morgan's "numerically definite Syllogism," that the forms it
supplies are really available as a test of the correctness of
ratiocination; since propositions in the common form may always have
their predicates quantified, and so be made amenable to Sir W.
Hamilton's rules. Considered however as a contribution to the _Science_
of Logic, that is, to the analysis of the mental processes concerned in
reasoning, the new doctrine appears to me, I confess, not merely
superfluous, but erroneous; since the form in which it clothes
propositions does not, like the ordinary form, express what is in the
mind of the speaker when he enunciates the proposition. I cannot think
Sir William Hamilton right in maintaining that the quantity of the
predicate is "always understood in thought." It is implied, but is not
present to the mind of the person who asserts the proposition. The
quantification of the predicate, instead of being a means of bringing
out more clearly the meaning of the proposition, actually leads the mind
out of the proposition, into another order of ideas. For when we say,
All men are mortal, we simply mean to affirm the attribute mortality of
all men; without thinking at all of the _class_ mortal in the concrete,
or troubling ourselves about whether it contains any other beings or
not. It is only for some artificial purpose that we ever look at the
proposition in the aspect in which the predicate also is thought of as a
class-name, either including the subject only, or the subject and
something more. (See above, p. 104.)

For a fuller discussion of this subject, see the twenty-second chapter
of a work already referred to, "An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's
Philosophy."

[5] Mr. Herbert Spencer (_Principles of Psychology_, pp. 125-7), though
his theory of the syllogism coincides with all that is essential of
mine, thinks it a logical fallacy to present the two axioms in the text,
as the regulating principles of syllogism. He charges me with falling
into the error pointed out by Archbishop Whately and myself, of
confounding exact likeness with literal identity; and maintains, that we
ought not to say that Socrates possesses _the same_ attributes which are
connoted by the word Man, but only that he possesses attributes _exactly
like_ them: according to which phraseology, Socrates, and the attribute
mortality, are not two things coexisting with the same thing, as the
axiom asserts, but two things coexisting with two different things.

The question between Mr. Spencer and me is merely one of language; for
neither of us (if I understand Mr. Spencer's opinions rightly) believes
an attribute to be a real thing, possessed of objective existence; we
believe it to be a particular mode of naming our sensations, or our
expectations of sensation, when looked at in their relation to an
external object which excites them. The question raised by Mr. Spencer
does not, therefore, concern the properties of any really existing
thing, but the comparative appropriateness, for philosophical purposes,
of two different modes of using a name. Considered in this point of
view, the phraseology I have employed, which is that commonly used by
philosophers, seems to me to be the best. Mr. Spencer is of opinion that
because Socrates and Alcibiades are not the same man, the attribute
which constitutes them men should not be called the same attribute; that
because the humanity of one man and that of another express themselves
to our senses not by the same individual sensations but by sensations
exactly alike, humanity ought to be regarded as a different attribute in
every different man. But on this showing, the humanity even of any one
man should be considered as different attributes now and half-an-hour
hence; for the sensations by which it will then manifest itself to my
organs will not be a continuation of my present sensations, but a
repetition of them; fresh sensations, not identical with, but only
exactly like the present. If every general conception, instead of being
"the One in the Many," were considered to be as many different
conceptions as there are things to which it is applicable, there would
be no such thing as general language. A name would have no general
meaning if _man_ connoted one thing when predicated of John, and
another, though closely resembling, thing when predicated of William.
Accordingly a recent pamphlet asserts the impossibility of general
knowledge on this precise ground.

The meaning of any general name is some outward or inward phenomenon,
consisting, in the last resort, of feelings; and these feelings, if
their continuity is for an instant broken, are no longer the same
feelings, in the sense of individual identity. What, then, is the common
something which gives a meaning to the general name? Mr. Spencer can
only say, it is the similarity of the feelings; and I rejoin, the
attribute is precisely that similarity. The names of attributes are in
their ultimate analysis names for the resemblances of our sensations (or
other feelings). Every general name, whether abstract or concrete,
denotes or connotes one or more of those resemblances. It will not,
probably, be denied, that if a hundred sensations are undistinguishably
alike, their resemblance ought to be spoken of as one resemblance, and
not a hundred resemblances which merely _resemble_ one another. The
things compared are many, but the something common to all of them must
be conceived as one, just as the name is conceived as one, though
corresponding to numerically different sensations of sound each time it
is pronounced. The general term _man_ does not connote the sensations
derived once from one man, which, once gone, can no more occur again
than the same flash of lightning. It connotes the general type of the
sensations derived always from all men, and the power (always thought of
as one) of producing sensations of that type. And the axiom might be
thus worded: Two _types of sensation_ each of which coexists with a
third type, coexist with another; or Two _powers_ each of which coexists
with a third power coexist with one another.

Mr. Spencer has misunderstood me in another particular. He supposes that
the coexistence spoken of in the axiom, of two things with the same
third thing, means simultaneousness in time. The coexistence meant is
that of being jointly attributes of the same subject. The attribute of
being born without teeth, and the attribute of having thirty-two teeth
in mature age, are in this sense coexistent, both being attributes of
man, though _ex vi termini_ never of the same man at the same time.

[6] Supra, p. 128.

[7] _Logic_, p. 239 (9th ed.).

[8] It is hardly necessary to say, that I am not contending for any such
absurdity as that we _actually_ "ought to have known" and considered the
case of every individual man, past, present, and future, before
affirming that all men are mortal: although this interpretation has
been, strangely enough, put upon the preceding observations. There is no
difference between me and Archbishop Whately, or any other defender of
the syllogism, on the practical part of the matter; I am only pointing
out an inconsistency in the logical theory of it, as conceived by almost
all writers. I do not say that a person who affirmed, before the Duke of
Wellington was born, that all men are mortal, _knew_ that the Duke of
Wellington was mortal; but I do say that he _asserted_ it; and I ask for
an explanation of the apparent logical fallacy, of adducing in proof of
the Duke of Wellington's mortality, a general statement which
presupposes it. Finding no sufficient resolution of this difficulty in
any of the writers on Logic, I have attempted to supply one.

[9] The language of ratiocination would, I think, be brought into closer
agreement with the real nature of the process, if the general
propositions employed in reasoning, instead of being in the form All men
are mortal, or Every man is mortal, were expressed in the form Any man
is mortal. This mode of expression, exhibiting as the type of all
reasoning from experience "The men A, B, C, &c. are so and so, therefore
_any_ man is so and so," would much better manifest the true idea--that
inductive reasoning is always, at bottom, inference from particulars to
particulars, and that the whole function of general propositions in
reasoning, is to vouch for the legitimacy of such inferences.

[10] Review of Quetelet on Probabilities, _Essays_, p. 367.

[11] _Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 289.

[12] _Theory of Reasoning_, ch. iv. to which I may refer for an able
statement and enforcement of the grounds of the doctrine.

[13] It is very probable that the doctrine is not new, and that it was,
as Sir John Herschel thinks, substantially anticipated by Berkeley. But
I certainly am not aware that it is (as has been affirmed by one of my
ablest and most candid critics) "among the standing marks of what is
called the empirical philosophy."

[14] _Logic_, book iv. ch. i. sect. 1.

[15] See the important chapter on Belief, in Professor Bain's great
treatise, _The Emotions and the Will_, pp. 581-4.

[16] A writer in the "British Quarterly Review" (August 1846), in a
review of this treatise, endeavours to show that there is no _petitio
principii_ in the syllogism, by denying that the proposition, All men
are mortal, asserts or assumes that Socrates is mortal. In support of
this denial, he argues that we may, and in fact do, admit the general
proposition that all men are mortal, without having particularly
examined the case of Socrates, and even without knowing whether the
individual so named is a man or something else. But this of course was
never denied. That we can and do draw conclusions concerning cases
specifically unknown to us, is the datum from which all who discuss this
subject must set out. The question is, in what terms the evidence, or
ground, on which we draw these conclusions, may best be
designated--whether it is most correct to say, that the unknown case is
proved by known cases, or that it is proved by a general proposition
including both sets of cases, the unknown and the known? I contend for
the former mode of expression. I hold it an abuse of language to say,
that the proof that Socrates is mortal, is that all men are mortal. Turn
it in what way we will, this seems to me to be asserting that a thing is
the proof of itself. Whoever pronounces the words, All men are mortal,
has affirmed that Socrates is mortal, though he may never have heard of
Socrates; for since Socrates, whether known to be so or not, really is a
man, he is included in the words, All men, and in every assertion of
which they are the subject. If the reviewer does not see that there is a
difficulty here, I can only advise him to reconsider the subject until
he does: after which he will be a better judge of the success or failure
of an attempt to remove the difficulty. That he had reflected very
little on the point when he wrote his remarks, is shown by his oversight
respecting the _dictum de omni et nullo_. He acknowledges that this
maxim as commonly expressed,--"Whatever is true of a class, is true of
everything included in the class," is a mere identical proposition,
since the class _is_ nothing but the things included in it. But he
thinks this defect would be cured by wording the maxim thus,--"Whatever
is true of a class, is true of everything which _can be shown_ to be a
member of the class:" as if a thing could "be shown" to be a member of
the class without being one. If a class means the sum of all the things
included in the class, the things which can "be shown" to be included in
it are part of the sum, and the _dictum_ is as much an identical
proposition with respect to them as to the rest. One would almost
imagine that, in the reviewer's opinion, things are not members of a
class until they are called up publicly to take their place in it--that
so long, in fact, as Socrates is not known to be a man, he _is not_ a
man, and any assertion which can be made concerning men does not at all
regard him, nor is affected as to its truth or falsity by anything in
which he is concerned.

The difference between the reviewer's theory and mine may be thus
stated. Both admit that when we say, All men are mortal, we make an
assertion reaching beyond the sphere of our knowledge of individual
cases; and that when a new individual, Socrates, is brought within the
field of our knowledge by means of the minor premise, we learn that we
have already made an assertion respecting Socrates without knowing it:
our own general formula being, to that extent, for the first time
_interpreted_ to us. But according to the reviewer's theory, the smaller
assertion is proved by the larger: while I contend, that both assertions
are proved together, by the same evidence, namely, the grounds of
experience on which the general assertion was made, and by which it must
be justified.

The reviewer says, that if the major premise included the conclusion,
"we should be able to affirm the conclusion without the intervention of
the minor premise; but every one sees that that is impossible." A
similar argument is urged by Mr. De Morgan (_Formal Logic_, p. 259):
"The whole objection tacitly assumes the superfluity of the minor; that
is, tacitly assumes we know Socrates[46] to be a man as soon as we know
him to be Socrates." The objection would be well grounded if the
assertion that the major premise includes the conclusion, meant that it
individually specifies all it includes. As however the only indication
it gives is a description by marks, we have still to compare any new
individual with the marks; and to show that this comparison has been
made, is the office of the minor. But since, by supposition, the new
individual has the marks, whether we have ascertained him to have them
or not; if we have affirmed the major premise, we have asserted him to
be mortal. Now my position is that this assertion cannot be a necessary
part of the argument. It cannot be a necessary condition of reasoning
that we should begin by making an assertion, which is afterwards to be
employed in proving a part of itself. I can conceive only one way out of
this difficulty, viz. that what really forms the proof is _the other_
part of the assertion; the portion of it, the truth of which has been
ascertained previously: and that the unproved part is bound up in one
formula with the proved part in mere anticipation, and as a memorandum
of the nature of the conclusions which we are prepared to prove.

With respect to the minor premise in its formal shape, the minor as it
stands in the syllogism, predicating of Socrates a definite class name,
I readily admit that it is no more a necessary part of reasoning than
the major. When there is a major, doing its work by means of a class
name, minors are needed to interpret it: but reasoning can be carried on
without either the one or the other. They are not the conditions of
reasoning, but a precaution against erroneous reasoning. The only minor
premise necessary to reasoning in the example under consideration, is,
Socrates is _like_ A, B, C, and the other individuals who are known to
have died. And this is the only universal type of that step in the
reasoning process which is represented by the minor. Experience,
however, of the uncertainty of this loose mode of inference, teaches the
expediency of determining beforehand what _kind_ of likeness to the
cases observed, is necessary to bring an unobserved case within the same
predicate; and the answer to this question is the major. Thus the
syllogistic major and the syllogistic minor start into existence
together, and are called forth by the same exigency. When we conclude
from personal experience without referring to any record--to any general
theorems, either written, or traditional, or mentally registered by
ourselves as conclusions of our own drawing, we do not use, in our
thoughts, either a major or a minor, such as the syllogism puts into
words. When, however, we revise this rough inference from particulars to
particulars, and substitute a careful one, the revision consists in
selecting two syllogistic premises. But this neither alters nor adds to
the evidence we had before; it only puts us in a better position for
judging whether our inference from particulars to particulars is well
grounded.

[17] Infra, book iii. ch. ii.

[18] Infra, book iii. ch. iv. § 3, and elsewhere.

[19] _Mechanical Euclid_, pp. 149 _et seqq._

[20] We might, it is true, insert this property into the definition of
parallel lines, framing the definition so as to require, both that when
produced indefinitely they shall never meet, and also that any straight
line which intersects one of them shall, if prolonged, meet the other.
But by doing this we by no means get rid of the assumption; we are still
obliged to take for granted the geometrical truth, that all straight
lines in the same plane, which have the former of these properties, have
also the latter. For if it were possible that they should not, that is,
if any straight lines other than those which are parallel according to
the definition, had the property of never meeting although indefinitely
produced, the demonstrations of the subsequent portions of the theory of
parallels could not be maintained.

[21] Some persons find themselves prevented from believing that the
axiom, Two straight lines cannot inclose a space, could ever become
known to us through experience, by a difficulty which may be stated as
follows. If the straight lines spoken of are those contemplated in the
definition--lines absolutely without breadth and absolutely
straight;--that such are incapable of inclosing a space is not proved by
experience, for lines such as these do not present themselves in our
experience. If, on the other hand, the lines meant are such straight
lines as we do meet with in experience, lines straight enough for
practical purposes, but in reality slightly zigzag, and with some,
however trifling, breadth; as applied to these lines the axiom is not
true, for two of them may, and sometimes do, inclose a small portion of
space. In neither case, therefore, does experience prove the axiom.

Those who employ this argument to show that geometrical axioms cannot be
proved by induction, show themselves unfamiliar with a common and
perfectly valid mode of inductive proof; proof by approximation. Though
experience furnishes us with no lines so unimpeachably straight that two
of them are incapable of inclosing the smallest space, it presents us
with gradations of lines possessing less and less either of breadth or
of flexure, of which series the straight line of the definition is the
ideal limit. And observation shows that just as much, and as nearly, as
the straight lines of experience approximate to having no breadth or
flexure, so much and so nearly does the space-inclosing power of any two
of them approach to zero. The inference that if they had no breadth or
flexure at all, they would inclose no space at all, is a correct
inductive inference from these facts, conformable to one of the four
Inductive Methods hereinafter characterized, the Method of Concomitant
Variations; of which the mathematical Doctrine of Limits presents the
extreme case.

[22] Whewell's _History of Scientific Ideas_, i. 140.

[23] Dr. Whewell (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 289) thinks it
unreasonable to contend that we know by experience, that our idea of a
line exactly resembles a real line. "It does not appear," he says, "how
we can compare our ideas with the realities, since we know the realities
only by our ideas." We know the realities (I conceive) by our senses.
Dr. Whewell surely does not hold the "doctrine of perception by means of
ideas," which Reid gave himself so much trouble to refute.

If Dr. Whewell doubts whether we compare our ideas with the
corresponding sensations, and assume that they resemble, let me ask on
what evidence do we judge that a portrait of a person not present is
like the original. Surely because it is like our idea, or mental image
of the person, and because our idea is like the man himself.

Dr. Whewell also says, that it does not appear why this resemblance of
ideas to the sensations of which they are copies, should be spoken of as
if it were a peculiarity of one class of ideas, those of space. My reply
is, that I do not so speak of it. The peculiarity I contend for is only
one of degree. All our ideas of sensation of course resemble the
corresponding sensations, but they do so with very different degrees of
exactness and of reliability. No one, I presume, can recal in
imagination a colour or an odour with the same distinctness and accuracy
with which almost every one can mentally reproduce an image of a
straight line or a triangle. To the extent, however, of their
capabilities of accuracy, our recollections of colours or of odours may
serve as subjects of experimentation, as well as those of lines and
spaces, and may yield conclusions which will be true of their external
prototypes. A person in whom, either from natural gift or from
cultivation, the impressions of colour were peculiarly vivid and
distinct, if asked which of two blue flowers was of the darkest tinge,
though he might never have compared the two, or even looked at them
together, might be able to give a confident answer on the faith of his
distinct recollection of the colours; that is, he might examine his
mental pictures, and find there a property of the outward objects. But
in hardly any case except that of simple geometrical forms, could this
be done by mankind generally, with a degree of assurance equal to that
which is given by a contemplation of the objects themselves. Persons
differ most widely in the precision of their recollection, even of
forms: one person, when he has looked any one in the face for half a
minute, can draw an accurate likeness of him from memory; another may
have seen him every day for six months, and hardly know whether his nose
is long or short. But everybody has a perfectly distinct mental image of
a straight line, a circle, or a rectangle. And every one concludes
confidently from these mental images to the corresponding outward
things. The truth is, that we may, and continually do, study nature in
our recollections, when the objects themselves are absent; and in the
case of geometrical forms we can perfectly, but in most other cases only
imperfectly, trust our recollections.

[24] _History of Scientific Ideas_, i. 65-67.

[25] Ibid. 60.

[26] _History of Scientific Ideas_, i. 58, 59.

[27] "If all mankind had spoken one language, we cannot doubt that there
would have been a powerful, perhaps a universal, school of philosophers,
who would have believed in the inherent connexion between names and
things, who would have taken the sound _man_ to be the mode of agitating
the air which is essentially communicative of the ideas of reason,
cookery, bipedality, &c."--De Morgan, _Formal Logic_, p. 246.

[28] It would be difficult to name a man more remarkable at once for the
greatness and the wide range of his mental accomplishments, than
Leibnitz. Yet this eminent man gave as a reason for rejecting Newton's
scheme of the solar system, that God _could not_ make a body revolve
round a distant centre, unless either by some impelling mechanism, or by
miracle:--"Tout ce qui n'est pas explicable" says he in a letter to the
Abbé Conti, "par la nature des créatures, est miraculeux. Il ne suffit
pas de dire: Dieu a fait une telle loi de nature; donc la chose est
naturelle. Il faut que la loi soit exécutable par les natures des
créatures. Si Dieu donnait cette loi, par exemple, à un corps libre, de
tourner à l'entour d'un certain centre, _il faudrait ou qu'il y joignît
d'autres corps qui par leur impulsion l'obligeassent de rester toujours
dans son orbite circulaire, ou qu'il mît un ange à ses trousses, ou
enfin il faudrait qu'il y concourût extraordinairement_; car
naturellement il s'écartera par la tangente."--_Works of Leibnitz_, ed.
Dutens, iii. 446.

[29] _Novum Organum Renovatum_, pp. 32, 33.

[30] _History of Scientific Ideas_, i. 264.

[31] _Hist. Sc. Id._, i. 263.

[32] Ibid. 240.

[33] _Hist. Sc. Id._, ii. 25, 26.

[34] _Phil. of Disc._, p. 339.

[35] _Phil. of Disc._, p. 338.

[36] Ib. p. 463.

[37] _Phil. of Disc._, pp. 472, 473.

[38] The _Quarterly Review_ for June 1841, contained an article of great
ability on Dr. Whewell's two great works (since acknowledged and
reprinted in Sir John Herschel's Essays) which maintains, on the subject
of axioms, the doctrine advanced in the text, that they are
generalizations from experience, and supports that opinion by a line of
argument strikingly coinciding with mine. When I state that the whole of
the present chapter (except the last four pages, added in the fifth
edition) was written before I had seen the article, (the greater part,
indeed, before it was published,) it is not my object to occupy the
reader's attention with a matter so unimportant as the degree of
originality which may or may not belong to any portion of my own
speculations, but to obtain for an opinion which is opposed to reigning
doctrines, the recommendation derived from a striking concurrence of
sentiment between two inquirers entirely independent of one another. I
embrace the opportunity of citing from a writer of the extensive
acquirements in physical and metaphysical knowledge and the capacity of
systematic thought which the article evinces, passages so remarkably in
unison with my own views as the following:--

"The truths of geometry are summed up and embodied in its definitions
and axioms.... Let us turn to the axioms, and what do we find? A string
of propositions concerning magnitude in the abstract, which are equally
true of space, time, force, number, and every other magnitude
susceptible of aggregation and subdivision. Such propositions, where
they are not mere definitions, as some of them are, carry their
inductive origin on the face of their enunciation.... Those which
declare that two straight lines cannot inclose a space, and that two
straight lines which cut one another cannot both be parallel to a third,
are in reality the only ones which express characteristic properties of
space, and these it will be worth while to consider more nearly. Now the
only clear notion we can form of straightness is uniformity of
direction, for space in its ultimate analysis is nothing but an
assemblage of distances and directions. And (not to dwell on the notion
of continued contemplation, _i.e._, mental experience, as included in
the very idea of uniformity; nor on that of transfer of the
contemplating being from point to point, and of experience, during such
transfer, of the homogeneity of the interval passed over) we cannot even
propose the proposition in an intelligible form to any one whose
experience ever since he was born has not assured him of the fact. The
unity of direction, or that we cannot march from a given point by more
than one path direct to the same object, is matter of practical
experience long before it can by possibility become matter of abstract
thought. _We cannot attempt mentally to exemplify the conditions of the
assertion in an imaginary case opposed to it, without violating our
habitual recollection of this experience, and defacing our mental
picture of space as grounded on it._ What but experience, we may ask,
can possibly assure us of the homogeneity of the parts of distance,
time, force, and measurable aggregates in general, on which the truth of
the other axioms depends? As regards the latter axiom, after what has
been said it must be clear that the very same course of remarks equally
applies to its case, and that its truth is quite as much forced on the
mind as that of the former by daily and hourly experience, ...
_including always, be it observed, in our notion of experience, that
which is gained by contemplation of the inward picture which the mind
forms to itself in any proposed case, or which it arbitrarily selects as
an example--such picture, in virtue of the extreme simplicity of these
primary relations, being called up by the imagination with as much
vividness and clearness as could be done by any external impression,
which is the only meaning we can attach to the word intuition, as
applied to such relations_."

And again, of the axioms of mechanics:--"As we admit no such
propositions, other than as truths inductively collected from
observation, even in geometry itself, it can hardly be expected that, in
a science of obviously contingent relations, we should acquiesce in a
contrary view. Let us take one of these axioms and examine its evidence:
for instance, that equal forces perpendicularly applied at the opposite
ends of equal arms of a straight lever will balance each other. What but
experience, we may ask, in the first place, can possibly inform us that
a force so applied will have any tendency to turn the lever on its
centre at all? or that force can be so transmitted along a rigid line
perpendicular to its direction, as to act elsewhere in space than along
its own line of action? Surely this is so far from being self-evident
that it has even a paradoxical appearance, which is only to be removed
by giving our lever thickness, material composition, and molecular
powers. Again, we conclude, that the two forces, being equal and applied
under precisely similar circumstances, must, if they exert any effort at
all to turn the lever, exert equal and opposite efforts: but what _à
priori_ reasoning can possibly assure us that they _do_ act under
precisely similar circumstances? that points which differ in place _are_
similarly circumstanced as regards the exertion of force? that universal
space may not have relations to universal force--or, at all events, that
the organization of the material universe may not be such as to place
that portion of space occupied by it in such relations to the forces
exerted in it, as may invalidate the absolute similarity of
circumstances assumed? Or we may argue, what have we to do with the
notion of angular movement in the lever at all? The case is one of rest,
and of quiescent destruction of force by force. Now how is this
destruction effected? Assuredly by the counter-pressure which supports
the fulcrum. But would not this destruction equally arise, and by the
same amount of counter-acting force, if each force simply pressed its
own half of the lever against the fulcrum? And what can assure us that
it is not so, except removal of one or other force, and consequent
tilting of the lever? The other fundamental axiom of statics, that the
pressure on the point of support is the sum of the weights ... is merely
a scientific transformation and more refined mode of stating a coarse
and obvious result of universal experience, viz. that the weight of a
rigid body is the same, handle it or suspend it in what position or by
what point we will, and that whatever sustains it sustains its total
weight. Assuredly, as Mr. Whewell justly remarks, 'No one probably ever
made a trial for the purpose of showing that the pressure on the support
is equal to the sum of the weights.' ... But it is precisely because in
every action of his life from earliest infancy he has been continually
making the trial, and seeing it made by every other living being about
him, that he never dreams of staking its result on one additional
attempt made with scientific accuracy. This would be as if a man should
resolve to decide by experiment whether his eyes were useful for the
purpose of seeing, by hermetically sealing himself up for half an hour
in a metal case."

On the "paradox of universal propositions obtained by experience," the
same writer says: "If there be necessary and universal truths
expressible in propositions of axiomatic simplicity and obviousness, and
having for their subject-matter the elements of all our experience and
all our knowledge, surely these are the truths which, if experience
suggest to us any truths at all, it ought to suggest most readily,
clearly, and unceasingly. If it were a truth, universal and necessary,
that a net is spread over the whole surface of every planetary globe, we
should not travel far on our own without getting entangled in its
meshes, and making the necessity of some means of extrication an axiom
of locomotion.... There is, therefore, nothing paradoxical, but the
reverse, in our being led by observation to a recognition of such
truths, as _general_ propositions, coextensive at least with all human
experience. That they pervade all the objects of experience, must ensure
their continual suggestion _by_ experience; that they are true, must
ensure that consistency of suggestion, that iteration of uncontradicted
assertion, which commands implicit assent, and removes all occasion of
exception; that they are simple, and admit of no misunderstanding, must
secure their admission by every mind."

"A truth, necessary and universal, relative to any object of our
knowledge, must verify itself in every instance where that object is
before our contemplation, and if at the same time it be simple and
intelligible, its verification must be obvious. _The sentiment of such a
truth cannot, therefore, but be present to our minds whenever that
object is contemplated, and must therefore make a part of the mental
picture or idea of that object which we may on any occasion summon
before our imagination.... All propositions, therefore, become not only
untrue but inconceivable_, if ... axioms be violated in their
enunciation."

Another eminent mathematician had previously sanctioned by his authority
the doctrine of the origin of geometrical axioms in experience.
"Geometry is thus founded likewise on observation; but of a kind so
familiar and obvious, that the primary notions which it furnishes might
seem intuitive."--_Sir John Leslie_, quoted by Sir William Hamilton,
_Discourses_, &c. p. 272.

[39] _Principles of Psychology._

[40] Mr. Spencer is mistaken in supposing me to claim any peculiar
"necessity" for this axiom as compared with others. I have corrected the
expressions which led him into that misapprehension of my meaning.

[41] Mr. Spencer makes a distinction between conceiving myself looking
into darkness, and conceiving _that I am_ then and there looking into
darkness. To me it seems that this change of the expression to the form
_I am_, just marks the transition from conception to belief, and that
the phrase "to conceive that _I am_," or "that anything _is_," is not
consistent with using the word conceive in its rigorous sense.

[42] I have myself accepted the contest, and fought it out on this
battleground, in the eleventh chapter of _An Examination of Sir William
Hamilton's Philosophy_.

[43] _Discussions_, &c., 2nd ed. p. 624.

[44] If it be said that the _existence_ of matter is among the things
proved by the principle of Excluded Middle, that principle must prove
also the existence of dragons and hippogriffs, because they must be
either scaly or not scaly, creeping or not creeping, and so forth.

[45] For further considerations respecting the axioms of Contradiction
and Excluded Middle, see the twenty-first chapter of _An Examination of
Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy_.

[46] Mr. De Morgan says "Plato," but to prevent confusion I have kept to
my own _exemplum_.




