CHAPTER IX. HOW SECULARISM AROSE

     "We must neither lead nor leave men to mistake falsehood for
     truth. Not to undeceive is to deceive."

     --Archbishop Whately.

BEING one of the social missionaries in the propaganda of Robert Owen,
I was, like H. Viewssiew, a writer of those days, a "student of
realities." It soon became clear to me, as to others, that men are much
influenced for good or evil, by their environments. The word was unused
then, "circumstances" was the term employed. Then as now there were
numerous persons everywhere to be met with who explained everything on
supernatural principles with all the confidence of infinite knowledge.
Not having this advantage, I profited as well as I could by such
observation as was in my power to make. I could see that material laws
counted for something in the world. This led me to the conclusion that
the duty of watching the ways of nature was incumbent on all who
would find true conditions of human betterment, or new reasons for
morality--both very much needed. To this end the name of Secularism was
given to certain principles which had for their object human improvement
by material means, regarding science as the providence of man and
justifying morality by considerations which pertain to this life alone.

The rise and development (if I may use so fine a term) of these views
may be traced in the following records.

1. "Materialism will be advanced as the only sound basis of rational
thought and practice." (Prospectus of the _Movement_, 1843, written by
me.)

2. Five prizes awarded to me, for lectures to the Manchester Order of
Odd-fellows. These Degree Addresses (1846) were written on the principle
that morality, apart from theology, could be based on human reason and
experience.

3. The _Reasoner_ restricts itself to the known, to the present, and
seeks to realise the life that is. (Preface to the _Reasoner_, 1846.)

4. A series of papers was commenced in the _Reasoner_ entitled "The
Moral Remains of the Bible," one object of which was to show that those
who no longer held the Bible as an infallible book, might still value
it wherein it was ethically excellent. (_Reasoner_, Vol. V., No. 106, p.
17, 1848.)

5. "To teach men to see that the sum of all knowledge and duty is
_Secular_ and that it pertains to this world alone." (_Reasoner_, Nov.
19, 1851. Article, "Truths to Teach," p. 1.)

This was the first time the word "Secular" was applied as a general test
of principles of conduct apart from spiritual considerations.

6. "Giving an account of ourselves in the whole extent of opinion, we
should use the word _Secularist_ as best indicating that province of
human duty which belongs to this life." (_Reasoner_, Dec. 3, 1851, p.
34.)

This was the first time the word "Secularist" appeared in literature as
descriptive of a new way of thinking.

7. "Mr. Holyoake, editor of the _Reasoner_, will lay before the meeting
[then proposed] the present position of Secularism in the provinces."
(_Reasoner_, Dec. 10, 1851, p. 62.)

This was the first time the word "Secularism" appeared in the press.

The meeting above mentioned was held December 29, 1851, at which
the statement made might be taken as an epitome of this book. (See
_Reasoner_, No. 294, Vol. 12, p. 129. 1852.)

8. A letter on the "Future of Secularism" appeared in the _Reasoner_,
(_Reasoner_, Feb. 4, 1852, p. 187.)

This was the first time Secularism was written upon as a movement. The
term was the heading of a letter by Charles Frederick Nicholls.

9. "One public purpose is to obtain the repeal of all acts of Parliament
which interfere with Secular practice." (Article, "Nature of Secular
Societies," (Reasoner), No. 325, p. 146, Aug. 18, 1852.)

This is exactly the attitude Secularism takes with regard to the Bible
and to Christianity. It rejects such parts of the Scriptures, or of
Christianism, or Acts of Parliament, as conflict with or obstruct
ethical truth. We do not seek the repeal of all Acts of Parliament, but
only of such as interfere with Secular progress.

10. "The friends of 'Secular Education' [the Manchester Association was
then so known] are not Secularists. They do not pretend to be so, they
do not even wish to be so regarded, they merely use the word Secular as
an adjective, as applied to a mode of instruction. We apply it to the
_nature_ of all knowledge." We use the noun Secularism. No one else has
done it. With others the term Secular is merely a descriptive; with us
the term is used as a subject. With others it is a branch of knowledge;
with us it is the primary business of life,--the name of the province of
speculation to which we confine ourselves.* When so used in these
pages the word "Secularism" or "Secularist" is employed to mark the
distinction.

     * See article "The Seculars--the Propriety of Their Name,"
     by G.J. Holyoake.   Reasoner, p. 177, Sep. 1, 1852.

A Bolton clergyman reported in the _Bolton Guardian_ that Mr. Holyoake
had announced as the first subject of his Lectures, "Why do the Clergy
Avoid Discussion and the Secularists Seek it?" (_Reasoner_, No. 328, p.
294, Vol. 12, 1852.)

These citations from my own writings are sufficient to show the origin
and nature of Secularism. Such views were widely accepted by liberal
thinkers of the day, as an improvement and extension of free thought
advocacy. Societies were formed, halls were given a Secular name, and
conferences were held to organise adherents of the new opinion. The
first was held in the Secular Institute, Manchester (Oct. 3, 1852).
Delegates were sent from Societies in Ashton-under-Lyne, Bolton,
Blackburn, Bradford, Burnley, Bury, Glasgow, Keighley, Leigh, London,
Manchester, Miles Platting, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Oldham, Over Darwen,
Owen's Journal, Paisley, Preston, Rochdale, Stafford, Sheffield,
Stockport, Todmorden.

Among the delegates were many well known, long known, and some still
known--James Charlton (now the famous manager of the Chicago and Alton
Railway), Abram Greenwood (now the cashier of the Cooperative Wholesale
Bank of Manchester), William Mallalieu of Todmorden (familiarly known as
the "Millionaire" of the original Rochdale Pioneers), Dr. Hiram Uttley
of Burnley, John Crank of Stockport, Thomas Hayes, then of Miles
Platting, now manager of the Crumpsall Biscuit Works of the Cooperative
Wholesale Society, Joseph Place of Nottingham, James Motherwell of
Paisley, Dr. Henry Travis (socialist writer on Owen's system), Samuel
Ingham of Manchester, J. R. Cooper of Manchester, and the present
writer.




