CHAPTER VII. THIRD STAGE OF FREE THOUGHT--SECULARISM

     "Nothing is destroyed until it has been replaced."

     --Madame de Stael.

SEEING this wise maxim in a paper by Auguste Comte, I asked my friend
Wm. de Fonvielle, who was in communication with Comte, to learn for me
the authorship of the phrase. Comte answered that it was the Emperor's
(Napoleon III.). It first appeared, as I afterwards found, in the
writings of Madame de Stael, and more fully expressed by her.

Self-regarding criticism having discovered the insufficiency of theology
for the guidance of man, next sought to ascertain what rules human
reason may supply for the independent conduct of life, which is the
object of Secularism.

At first, the term was taken to be a "mask" concealing sinister
features--a "new name for an old thing"--or as a substitute term for
scepticism or atheism. If impressions were always knowledge, men would
be wise without inquiry, and explanations would be unnecessary. The
term Secularism was chosen to express the extension of free thought to
ethics. Free thinkers commonly go no further than saying, "We search for
truth"*; Secularists say we have found it--at least, so much as replaces
the chief errors and uncertainties of theology.

Harriet Martineau, the most intrepid thinker among the women of her day,
wrote to Lloyd Garrison a letter (inserted in the _Liberator_, 1853)
approving "the term Secularism as including a large number of persons
who are not atheists and uniting them for action, which has Secularism
for its object. By the adoption of the new term a vast amount of
prejudice is got rid of." At length it was seen that the "new term"
designated a new conception.

Secularism is a code of duty pertaining to this life, founded on
considerations purely human, and intended mainly for those who find
theology indefinite or inadequate, unreliable or unbelievable.

Its essential principles are three:

1. The improvement of this life by _material_ means.

2. That science is the available** Providence of man.

3. That it is good to do good. Whether there be other good or not, the
good of the present life is good, and it is good to seek that good.

     * M. Aurelius Antoninus said, "I seek the truth by which no
     man was ever injured." It would be true had he said mankind.
     Men are continually injured by the truth, or how do martyrs
     come, or why do we honor them?

     **This phrase was a suggestion of my friend the Rev. Dr. H.
     T. Crosskey about 1854. I afterwards used the word
     "available" which does not deny, nor challenge, nor affirm
     the belief in a theological Providence by others, who,
     therefore, are not incited to assail the effectual
     proposition that material resources are an available
     Providence where a spiritual Providence is inactive.

Individual good attained by methods conducive to the good of others, is
the highest aim of man, whether regard be had to human welfare in this
life or personal fitness for another. Precedence is therefore given to
the duties of this life.

Being asked to send to the International Congress of Liberal Thinkers,
(1886), an account of the tenets of the English party known as
Secularists, I gave the following explanation to them.

"The Secular is that, the issues of which can be tested by the
experience of this life.

"The ground common to all self-determined thinkers is that of
independency of opinion, known as free thought, which though but an
impulse of intellectual courage in the search for truth, or an impulse
of aggression against hurtful or irritating error, or the caprice of
a restless mind, is to be encouraged. It is necessary to promote
independent thought--whatever its manner of manifestation--since
there can be no progress without it. A Secularist is intended to be
a reasoner, that is as Coleridge defined him, one who inquires what a
thing is, and not only what it is, but _why_ it is what it is.

"One of two great forces of opinion created in this age, is what is
known as atheism,* which deprives superstition of its standing-ground
and compels theism to reason for its existence. The other force is
materialism which shows the physical consequences of error, supplying,
as it were, beacon lights to morality.

     * Huxley's term agnosticism implies a different thing--
     unknowingness without denial.

"Though respecting the right of the atheist and theist to their theories
of the origin of nature, the Secularist regards them as belonging to the
debatable ground of speculation. Secularism neither asks nor gives any
opinion upon them, confining itself to the entirely independent field of
study--the order of the universe. Neither asserting nor denying theism
or a future life, having no sufficient reason to give if called upon;
the fact remains that material influences exist, vast and available for
good, as men have the will and wit to employ them. Whatever may be the
value of metaphysical or theological theories of morals, utility in
conduct is a daily test of common sense, and is capable of deciding
intelligently more questions of practical duty than any other rule.
Considerations which pertain to the general welfare, operate without the
machinery of theological creeds, and over masses of men in every land to
whom Christian incentives are alien, or disregarded."




