The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Human Side of Animals
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Human Side of Animals

Author: Royal Dixon


        
Release date: November 17, 2006 [eBook #19850]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/19850

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Janet Blenkinship and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








[Illustration: RECREATION IS AS COMMON AMONG ANIMALS AS IT IS AMONG
CHILDREN.]




  THE
  HUMAN SIDE
  OF ANIMALS

  BY
  ROYAL DIXON
  AUTHOR OF "THE HUMAN SIDE OF PLANTS," "THE HUMAN SIDE OF TREES,"




  "THE HUMAN SIDE OF BIRDS," ETC.

  _WITH TWO ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLORS AND
  THIRTY-TWO IN BLACK-AND-WHITE_




  NEW YORK
  FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
  PUBLISHERS


  _Copyright, 1918, by_
  FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

  _All rights reserved, including that of translation
  into foreign languages_

  MADE IN U. S. A.




  TO
  MARCELLUS E. FOSTER
  WHO BELIEVED




NOTE


The author wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to his
fellow-naturalist and friend, Mr. Franklyn Everett Fitch, for carefully
reading the entire manuscript and making many scholarly and valuable
criticisms and corrections.




  CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                                                  PAGE

  FOREWORD                                                 xiii

  I ANIMALS THAT PRACTISE CAMOUFLAGE                          1

  II ANIMAL MUSICIANS                                        18

  III ANIMALS AT PLAY                                        32

  IV ARMOUR-BEARING AND MAIL-CLAD ANIMALS                    46

  V MINERS AND EXCAVATORS                                    61

  VI ANIMAL MATHEMATICIANS                                   88

  VII THE LANGUAGE OF ANIMALS                                99

  VIII IN THEIR BOUDOIRS, HOSPITALS AND CHURCHES            120

  IX SELF-DEFENCE AND HOME-GOVERNMENT                       130

  X ARCHITECTS, ENGINEERS, AND HOUSE-BUILDERS               150

  XI FOOD CONSERVERS                                        170

  XII TOURISTS AND SIGHT-SEERS                              181

  XIII ANIMAL SCAVENGERS AND CRIMINALS                      199

  XIV AS THE ALLIES OF MAN                                  210

  XV THE FUTURE LIFE OF ANIMALS                             234




  ILLUSTRATIONS


  Recreation is as common among animals as it is among children
    (_in Colours_)                                         _Frontispiece_

  The Indians claim that the mother bison forced her calf to roll often
    in a puddle of red clay, so that it might be indistinguishable against
    its clay background                                                6

  The zebra is one of the cleverest of camouflagers. The black-and-white
    stripes of his body give the effect of sunlight passing
    through bushes                                                     7

  Monkeys are the most musical of all animals. When they congregate
    for "concerts," as some of the tribes do, the air is filled with weird
    strains of monkey-music                                           20

  Cats, unlike dogs, are very fond of music. And it has been proved that
    their music-sense can be developed to a remarkable degree         21

  A happy family of polar bears. The young cubs wrestle and tumble,
    as playfully as two puppies. This play has much to do with their
    physical and mental development                                   34

  Dryptosaurus. The prehistoric animals, too, undoubtedly had their
    play time, with games and "setting up" exercises                  35

  The mother opossum is never happier than when she has her little ones
    playing hide-and-seek over her back                               38

  This young fox came from his home in the woods daily to play with a
    young fox-terrier. He is now resting after a romp                 39

  Naosaurus and Dimetrodon, two extinct armour-bearers who should
    have been well able to protect themselves                         50

  An armour-bearer of prehistoric times whose shield was an effective
    protection against enemy horns                                    51

  To the polar bear the ice and snow of the Far North means warmth
    and protection. The mother bear digs herself into a snowbank,
    where she lives quite comfortably throughout the winter           84

  The sharp claws of the ground squirrel are efficacious tools in digging
    his cosy underground burrow                                       85

  The coyote can readily distinguish whether a herd of sheep is guarded
    by one or more dogs, and will plan his attack accordingly         94

  The zebu, the sacred bull of India, in spite of its domestication,
    has an agile body and a quick, alert mind                         95

  Roosevelt's Colobus. These horse-tailed monkeys chatter together in
    a language exclusively their own, yet they seem to have no difficulty
    in making themselves understood by other monkey-tribes           112

  A tamed deer of Texas, whose constant companion and playmate was
    a rabbit dog. Between the two, there developed, necessarily, a
    common language                                                  113

  Water-loving animals, like the beavers, seemingly take great pride in
    their toilets. Their fur is always sleek and clean               122

  Great forest pigs of Central Africa. Like the common domesticated
    hogs, they will seek a clay bath to heal their wounds            123

  The Rocky Mountain goat has many means of defence, not the least of
    which is his agility in climbing to inaccessible places          134

  Wild boars are among the most ferocious of animals. By means of
    their great strength alone they are well able to defend
    themselves                                                       135

  Brontosaurus. The animals that seemed best equipped to defend themselves
    are the ones that, thousands of years ago, became extinct        144

  This prehistoric monster was equipped not only with a pair of strong
    horns but with a shield back of them as well                     145

  The beaver is the greatest of all animal architects. His skill is
    equalled only by his patience (in Colours)                       158

  The skunk mother tries to keep on hand a good supply of such delicacies
    as frogs and toads, so that her young may never go hungry        172

  The porcupine and the hedgehog have a unique method of collecting
    food for their young. After shaking down berries or grapes,
    they roll in them, then hurry home with the food attached to
    their quills                                                     173

  The black bear is not one of the great migrating animals. The thickness
    of his coat must therefore change with the seasons               188

  Rabbits seem to have a well-devised system in their road-building,
    running their paths in and out of underbrush in a truly ingenious
    manner                                                           189

  The mongoose, a scavenger of the worst type, feeding on rats and
    mice and snakes, and even poultry                                202

  Diplodocus. The prehistoric animals, also, undoubtedly had their
    scavengers and criminals                                         203

  The Esquimo-dog is man's greatest friend in the Far North          218

  Chipmunks are among the most easily tamed of man's wild friends,
    and they even seem fond of human companionship                   219

  Men cruelly take the lives of these denizens of the wildwood, rejoicing
    in their slaughter, but the animal soul they cannot kill         244

  Two pals. There is between man and dog a kinship of spirit that cannot
    be denied                                                        245




FOREWORD

  _"And in the lion or the frog--
  In all the life of moor or fen--
  In ass and peacock, stork and dog,
  He read similitudes of men."_

More and more science is being taught in a new way. More and more men
are beginning to discard the lumber of the brain's workshop to get at
real facts, real conclusions. Laboratories, experiments, tables,
classifications are all very vital and all very necessary but sometimes
their net result is only to befog and confuse. Occasionally it becomes
important for us to cast aside all dogmatic restraints and approach the
wonders of life from a new angle and with the untrammelled spirit of a
little child.

In this book I have attempted to bring together many old and new
observations which tend to show the human-like qualities of animals. The
treatment is neither formal nor scholastic, in fact I do not always
remain within the logical confines of the title. My sole purpose is to
make the reader self-active, observative, free from hide-bound
prejudice, and reborn as a participant in the wonderful experiences of
life which fill the universe. I hope to lead him into a new wonderland
of truth, beauty and love, a land where his heart as well as his eyes
will be opened.

In attempting to understand the animals I have used a method a great
deal like that of the village boy, who when questioned as to how he
located the stray horse for which a reward of twenty dollars had been
offered, replied, "I just thought what I would do if I were a horse and
where I would go--and there I went and found him." In some such way I
have tried to think why animals do certain things, I have studied them
in many places and under all conditions, and those acts of theirs which,
if performed by children, would come under the head of wisdom and
intelligence, I have classified as such.

Life is one throughout. The love that fills a mother's heart when she
sees her first-born babe, is also felt by the mother bear, only in a
different way, when she sees her baby cubs playing before her humble
cave dwelling. The sorrow that is felt by the human heart when a beloved
one dies is experienced in only a little less degree by an African ape
when his mate is shot dead by a Christian missionary. The grandmother
sheep that watches her numerous little lamb grandchildren on the
hillside, while their mothers are away grazing, is just as mindful of
their care as any human grandparent could be. One drop of water is like
the ocean; and love is love.

The trouble with science is that too often it leaves out love. If you
agree that we cannot treat men like machines, why should we put animals
in that class? Why should we fall into the colossal ignorance and
conceit of cataloging every human-like action of animals under the word
"instinct"? Man delights in thinking of himself as only a little lower
than the angels. Then why should he not consider the animals as only a
little lower than himself? The poet has truly said that "the beast is
the mirror of man as man is the mirror of God." Man had to battle with
animals for untold ages before he domesticated and made servants of
them. He is just beginning to learn that they were not created solely to
furnish material for sermons, nor to serve mankind, but that they also
have an existence, a life of their own.

Man has long preached this doctrine that he is not an animal, but a
kinsman of the gods. For this reason, he has claimed dominion over
animal creation and a right to assert that dominion without restraint.
This anthropocentric conceit is the same thing that causes one nation to
think it should rule the world, that the sun and moon were made only for
the laudable purpose of giving light unto a chosen few, and that young
lambs playing on a grassy hillside, near a cool spring, are just so much
mutton allowed to wander over man's domain until its flavour is
improved.

It is time to remove the barriers, once believed impassable, which man's
egotism has used as a screen to separate him from his lower brothers.
Our physical bodies are very similar to theirs except that ours are
almost always much inferior. Merely because we have a superior intellect
which enables us to rule and enslave the animals, shall we deny them all
intellect and all feeling? In the words of that remarkable naturalist,
William J. Long, "To call a thing intelligence in one creature and
reflex action in another, or to speak of the same thing as love or
kindness in one and blind impulse in the other, is to be blinder
ourselves than the impulse which is supposed to govern animals. Until,
therefore, we have some new chemistry that will ignore atoms and the
atomic law, and some new psychology that ignores animal intelligence
altogether, or regards it as under a radically different law from our
own, we must apply what we know of ourselves and our own motives to the
smaller and weaker lives that are in some distant way akin to our own."

It is possible to explain away all the marvellous things the animals do,
but after you have finished, there will still remain something over and
above, which quite defies all mechanistic interpretation. An old war
horse, for instance, lives over and over his battles in his dreams. He
neighs and paws, just as he did in real battle; and cavalrymen tell us
that they can sometimes understand from their horses when they are
dreaming just what command they are trying to obey. This is only one of
the myriads of animal phenomena which man does not understand. If you
doubt it, try to explain the striking phenomena of luminescence,
hybridization, of eels surviving desiccation for fourteen years,
post-matrimonial cannibalism, Nature's vast chain of unities, the
suicide of lemmings, why water animals cannot get wet, transparency of
animals, why the horned toad shoots a stream of blood from his eye when
angry. If you are able to explain these things to humanity, you will be
classed second only to Solomon. Yet the average scientist explains them
away, with the ignorance and loquaciousness of a fisher hag.

By a thorough application of psychological principles, it is possible
to show that man himself is merely a machine to be explained in terms of
neurones and nervous impulses, heredity and environment and reactions to
outside stimuli. But who is there who does not believe that there is
more to a man than that?

Animals have demonstrated long ago that they not only have as many
talents as human beings, but that under the influence of the same
environment, they form the same kinds of combinations to defend
themselves against enemies; to shelter themselves against heat and cold;
to build homes; to lay up a supply of food for the hard seasons. In
fact, all through the ages man has been imitating the animals in
burrowing through the earth, penetrating the waters, and now, at last,
flying through the air.

When a skunk bites through the brains of frogs, paralysing but not
killing them, in order that he may store them away in his nursery-pantry
so that his babes may have fresh food; when a mole decapitates
earth-worms for the same reason and stores them near the cold surface of
the ground so that the heads will not regrow, as they would under normal
conditions, only a deeply prejudiced man can claim that no elements of
intelligence have been employed.

There are also numerous signs, sounds and motions by which animals
communicate with each other, though to man these symbols of language may
not always be understandable. Dogs give barks indicating surprise,
pleasure and all other emotions. Cows will bellow for days when mourning
for their dead. The mother bear will bury her dead cub and silently
guard its grave for weeks to prevent its being desecrated. The mother
sheep will bleat most pitifully when her lamb strays away. Foxes utter
expressive cries which their children know full well. The chamois, when
frightened, whistle; they might be termed the policemen of the animal
world. The sentinel will continue a long, drawn-out whistle, as long as
he can without taking a breath. He then stops for a brief moment, looks
in all directions, and begins blowing again. If the danger comes too
near, he scampers away.

In their ability to take care of their wounded bodies, in their reading
of the weather and in all forms of woodcraft, animals undoubtedly
possess superhuman powers. Even squirrels can prophesy an unusually long
and severe winter and thus make adequate preparations. Some animals act
as both barometers and thermometers. It is claimed that while frogs
remain yellow, only fair weather may be expected, but if their colour
changes to brown, ill weather is coming.

There is no limit to the marvellous things animals do. Elephants, for
example, carry leafy palms in their trunks to shade themselves from the
hot sun. The ape or baboon who puts a stone in the open oyster to
prevent it from closing, or lifts stones to crack nuts, or beats his
fellows with sticks, or throws heavy cocoanuts from trees upon his
enemies, or builds a fire in the forest, shows more than a glimmer of
intelligence. In the sly fox that puts out fish heads to bait hawks, or
suddenly plunges in the water and immerses himself to escape hunters, or
holds a branch of a bush over his head and actually runs with it to hide
himself; in the wolverine who catches deer by dropping moss, and
suddenly springing upon them and clawing their eyes out; in the bear,
who, as told in the account of Cook's third voyage, "rolls down pieces
of rock to crush stags; in the rat when he leads his blind brother with
a stick" is actual reasoning. Indeed, there is nothing which man makes
with all his ingenious use of tools and instruments, of which some
suggestion may not be seen in animal creation.

Great thinkers of all ages are not wanting who believe that animals have
a portion of that same reason which is the pride of man. Montaigne
admitted that they had both thought and reason, and Pope believed that
even a cat may consider a man made for his service. Humboldt, Helvitius,
Darwin and Smellie claimed that animals act as a definite result of
actual reasoning. Lord Brougham pertinently observes, "I know not why so
much unwillingness should be shown by some excellent philosophers to
allow intelligent faculties and a share of reason to the lower animals,
as if our own superiority was not quite sufficiently established to
leave all jealousy out of view by the immeasurably higher place which we
occupy in the scale of being."

From the facts enumerated in this book I find that animals are possessed
of love, hate, joy, grief, courage, revenge, pain, pleasure, want and
satisfaction--that all things that go to make up man's life are also
found in them. In the attempt to establish this thesis I have been led
mentally and physically into some of Nature's most fascinating highways
and hedges, where I have had many occasions to wonder and adore. I will
be happy if I have at least added something to the depth of love and
appreciation with which most men look upon the animal world.

                                                    ROYAL DIXON.

  New York, April, 1918.




THE HUMAN SIDE OF ANIMALS




I

ANIMALS THAT PRACTISE CAMOUFLAGE

  _"She was a gordian shape of dazzling line,
  Vermilion-spotted, golden, green and blue;
  Striped like a zebra, freckled like a pard,
  Eyed like a peacock, and all crimson barr'd,
  And full of silver moons, that, as she breathed,
  Dissolved, or brighter shone, or interwreathed
  Their lustres with the glorious tapestries...."_

  --KEATS (_on Lamia, the snake_).


The art of concealment or camouflage is one of the newest and most
highly developed techniques of modern warfare. But the animals have been
masters of it for ages. The lives of most of them are passed in constant
conflict. Those which have enemies from which they cannot escape by
rapidity of motion must be able to hide or disguise themselves. Those
which hunt for a living must be able to approach their prey without
unnecessary noise or attention to themselves. It is very remarkable how
Nature helps the wild creatures to disguise themselves by colouring them
with various shades and tints best calculated to enable them to escape
enemies or to entrap prey.

The animals of each locality are usually coloured according to their
habitat, but good reasons make some exceptions advisable. Many of the
most striking examples of this protective resemblance among animals are
the result of their very intimate association with the surrounding flora
and natural scenery. There is no part of a tree, including flowers,
fruits, bark and roots, that is not in some way copied and imitated by
these clever creatures. Often this imitation is astonishing in its
faithfulness of detail. Bunches of cocoanuts are portrayed by sleeping
monkeys, while even the leaves are copied by certain tree-toads, and
many flowers are represented by monkeys and lizards. The winding roots
of huge trees are copied by snakes that twist themselves together at the
foot of the tree.

In the art of camouflage--an art which affects the form, colour, and
attitude of animals--Nature has worked along two different roads. One is
easy and direct, the other circuitous and difficult. The easy way is
that of protective resemblance pure and simple, where the animal's
colour, form, or attitude becomes like that of its habitat. In which
case the animal becomes one with its environment and thus is enabled to
go about unnoticed by its enemies or by its prey. The other way is that
of bluff, and it includes all inoffensive animals which are capable of
assuming attitudes and colours that terrify and frighten. The colours in
some cases are really of warning pattern, yet they cannot be considered
mimetic unless they are thought to resemble the patterns of some extinct
model of which we know nothing; and since they are not found in
present-day animals with unpleasant qualities, they are not, strictly
speaking, warning colours.

Desert animals are in most cases desert-coloured. The lion, for example,
is almost invisible when crouched among the rocks and streams of the
African wastes. Antelopes are tinted like the landscape over which they
roam, while the camel seems actually to blend with the desert sands. The
kangaroos of Australia at a little distance seem to disappear into the
soil of their respective localities, while the cat of the Pampas
accurately reflects his surroundings in his fur.

The tiger is made so invisible by his wonderful colour that, when he
crouches in the bright sunlight amid the tall brown grass, it is almost
impossible to see him. But the zebra and the giraffe are the kings of
all camouflagers! So deceptive are the large blotch-spots of the giraffe
and his weird head and horns, like scrubby limbs, that his concealment
is perfect. Even the cleverest natives often mistake a herd of giraffes
for a clump of trees. The camouflage of zebras is equally deceptive.
Drummond says that he once found himself in a forest, looking at what he
thought to be a lone zebra, when to his astonishment he suddenly
realised that he was facing an entire herd which were invisible until
they became frightened and moved. Evidently the zebra is well aware that
the black-and-white stripes of his coat take away the sense of solid
body, and that the two colours blend into a light gray, and thus at
close range the effect is that of rays of sunlight passing through
bushes.

The arctic animals, with few exceptions, are remarkable for imitating
their surroundings; their colour of white blends perfectly with the snow
around them. The polar bear is the only white bear, and his home is
always among the snow and ice. The arctic fox, alpine hare, and ermine
change to white in winter only, because during the other seasons white
would be too conspicuous. The American arctic hare is always white
because he always lives among the white expanses of the Far North. Both
foxes and stoats are carnivorous and feed upon ptarmigan and hares, and
they must be protectively coloured that they may catch their prey. On
the other hand, Nature aids the prey by providing them with colours that
enable them to escape the attention of their enemies.

The young of many of the arctic animals are covered with fluffy white
hair, so that while they are too young to swim they may lie with safety
upon the ground and escape the attention of polar bears; but in the
antarctic regions, where there are few enemies to fear, the young seals,
for instance, are exactly the colour of their parents.

The most remarkable exception of mimetic colouring among the animals of
the polar regions is the sable. Throughout the long Siberian winter he
retains his coat of rich brown fur. His habits, however, are such that
he does not need the protection of colour, for he is so active that he
can easily catch wild birds, and he can also subsist upon wild berries.
The woodchuck of North America retains his coat of dark-brown fur
throughout the long, cold winters. The matter of his obtaining food,
however, is easy, for he lives in burrows, near streams where he can
catch fish and small animals that live in or near the water.

A number of the old-school naturalists believed that when an animal's
colouring assumed the snowy-white coat of its arctic surroundings, this
was due to the natural tendency on the part of its hair and fur to
assume the colourings and tints of their habitat. This, however, is
absolutely false; and no better proof of it can be offered than the case
of the arctic musk-ox, who is far more polar in his haunts than even the
polar bear, and is therefore exposed to the whitening influence of the
wintry regions more than the bear. Yet he never turns white, but is
always brown. The only enemy of this northern-dweller is the arctic
wolf, and against this enemy he is protected by powerful hoofs, thick
hair, and immense horns. He does not need to conceal himself, and
therefore does not simulate the colour of his surroundings.

[Illustration: _American Museum of Natural History, New York_

THE INDIANS CLAIM THAT THE MOTHER BISON FORCED HER CALF TO ROLL OFTEN IN
A PUDDLE OF RED CLAY, SO THAT IT MIGHT BE INDISTINGUISHABLE AGAINST ITS
RED CLAY BACKGROUND.]

[Illustration: _American Museum of Natural History, New York_

THE ZEBRA IS ONE OF THE CLEVEREST OF CAMOUFLAGERS. THE BLACK-AND-WHITE
STRIPES OF HIS BODY GIVE THE EFFECT OF SUNLIGHT PASSING THROUGH BUSHES.]

Mimetic resemblances are worked out with great difficulty, except in
such cases as the nocturnal animals, which simply become one with their
surroundings. Mice, rats, moles, and bats wear overcoats that are very
inconspicuous, and when suddenly approached they appear almost
invisible. Some of the North American Indians claimed that buffaloes
made their calves wallow in the red clay to prevent them from being seen
when they were lying down in the red soil.

The kinds of protection from these mimetic resemblances are many and
varied: the lion, because of his sandy-colouring, is able to conceal
himself by merely crouching down upon the desert sands; the striped
tiger hides among the tufts of grass and bamboos of the tropics, the
stripes of his body so blending with the vertical stems as to prevent
even the natives from seeing him in this position. The kudu, one of the
handsomest of the antelopes, is a remarkable animal in several ways. His
camouflage is so perfect that it gives him magnificent courage. With his
spiral horns, white face, and striped coat tinted in pale blue, he is
almost invisible when hiding in a thicket. The perfect harmony of his
horns with the twisted vines and branches, and the white colourings with
blue tints in the reflected sunlight conceal him entirely.

The snow-leopard, which inhabits Central Asia, is stony-grey, with large
annular spots to match the rocks among which he lives. This colouration
conceals him from the sheep, upon which he preys; while the spotted and
blotchy pattern of the so-called clouded tiger, and the
peculiarly-barred skin of the ocelot, imitate the rugged bark of trees,
upon which these animals live.

One of the most unusual and skilled mimics is the Indian sloth, whose
colour pattern and unique eclipsing effects seem almost incredible to
those unfamiliar with the real facts. His home is in the trees, and he
has a deep, orange-coloured spot on his back, which would make him very
conspicuous if seen out of his home surroundings. But he is very clever,
and clings to the moss-draped trees, where the effect of the
orange-coloured spot is exactly like the scar on the tree, while his
hair resembles the withered moss so strikingly that even naturalists are
deceived.

Henry Drummond must have known the animal world rather well when he
remarked that "Carlisle in his blackest visions of 'shams and humbugs'
among humanity never saw anything so finished in hypocrisy as the
naturalist now finds in every tropical forest. There are to be seen
creatures, not singly, but in tens of thousands, whose every appearance,
down to the minutest spot and wrinkle, is an affront to truth, whose
every attitude is a pose for a purpose, and whose whole life is a
sustained lie. Before these masterpieces of deception the most ingenious
of human impositions are vulgar and transparent. Fraud is not only the
great rule of life in a tropical forest, but the one condition of it."

Many of the larger cats live in trees, and most of them have spotted or
oscillated skins, which aid them in hiding among foliage plants. The
puma who wears a brown coat is an exception, but it must be remembered
that he does not need the kind of coat his fellow friends wear. He
clings so closely to the body of a tree while waiting for his prey as to
be almost invisible.

This phenomenon is true throughout the animal world. Everywhere does
Nature aid in escape and capture. Only those skilled in the ways of the
wild fully realise how conspicuous amidst foliage, for instance, would
be a uniform colouration. A parti-coloured pattern is extremely
deceptive and thus protective, and for this reason one seldom sees in
Nature a background of one colour; and since the large majority of
animals need concealment, it is necessary for them to be clothed in
patterns that vary.

These variations are especially noticeable in young animals, and furnish
them with a mantle that is practically invisible to predatory enemies
during the time they are left unprotected by their parents. These
protective mantles often differ strikingly in pattern and colouration
from those of their parents, and indicate that the young animals
present the colouration and pattern of their remote forbears. It might
even be said that "the skins of the fathers are thrust upon the
children, even unto the third and fourth generation!" In fact, it is
quite probable that they give through this varying colouration the
"life-history" of their family.

In all hoofed animals--antelope, deer, horses--the protective
colouration is also adapted to habitat and environment. Most deer belong
to the forest, carefully avoiding the open deserts and staying near
water. They live chiefly in the jungle or scrub, and are usually spotted
with red and white in such a way as to be almost invisible to a casual
observer; some, however, that live in the very shady places are
uniformly dark so as to harmonise with their surroundings. The wild
horses and asses of Central Asia are dun-coloured--corresponding exactly
to their sandy habitat.

The Shakesperian conception of the human world as a stage may be
paralleled in the animal world. Animals, like human beings, have all a
definite role to play in the drama of life. Each is given certain
equipment in form, colour, voice, demeanour, ambitions, desires, and
natural habitat. Some are given much, others but little. Many have
succeeded well in the art of camouflage while endeavouring to make a
success in life. This success has brought the desired opportunity of
mating, rearing young, bequeathing to them their special gifts and
living in ease and comfort.

One of the most successful and striking cases of protective colouration
in young animals is found in wild swine. Here there is longitudinal
striping which marks them from head to tail in broad white bands, over a
background of reddish dark brown. The tapirs have a most unique form of
marking. It is similar in the young of the South American and Malayan
species. Their bodies are exquisitely marked in snow-white bars. At
their extremities these bars are broken up into small dots which tend to
overlap each other. During the daytime these young animals seek the
shade of the bushes and as the spots of sunlight fall upon the ground
they appear so nearly one with their environment as to pass unnoticed by
their enemies. The adults, however, vary greatly one from another in
colouration. The American species is self-coloured, while the Malayan
has the most unique pattern known to the animal world. The
fore-quarters, the head, and the hind-legs are black, while the rest of
the body from the shoulders backwards is of a dirt-white colour.

It has been observed by all students of Nature that bold and gaudy
animals usually have means of defending themselves that make them very
disagreeable to their enemies. They either have poisonous fangs, sharp
spines, ferocious claws, or disagreeable odours. There are still others
that escape destruction because of the bad company with which they are
associated by their enemies.

The reptiles offer us many good examples of mimicry. Most arboreal
lizards wear the colour of the leaves upon which they feed; the same is
true of the whip-snakes and the tiny green tree-frogs. A striking
example of successful camouflage is found in the case of a North
American frog whose home is on lichen-covered rocks and walls, which he
so closely imitates in colour and pattern as to pass unnoticed so long
as he remains quiet. I have seen an immense frog, whose home was in a
damp cave, with large green and black spots over his body precisely like
the spots on the sides of his home.

     _Author Note:_ The word "mimicry" as used here implies a particular
     kind of resemblance only, a resemblance in external appearance,
     never internal, a resemblance that deceives. It does not imply
     voluntary imitation. Both the words "mimicry" and "imitation" are
     used to imply outward likeness. The object of the outward likeness
     or resemblance is to cause a harmless or unprotected animal to be
     mistaken for the dangerous one which he oftentimes imitates; or to
     aid the unprotected animal in escaping unnoticed among the
     surroundings he may simulate.

A splendid example of pure bluff is shown in the case of the harmless
Australian lizard, known scientifically under the name of
_chlamydosaurus kingii_. When he is undisturbed he seems perfectly
inoffensive, but when he becomes angry, he becomes a veritable
fiend-like reptile. In this condition he stands up on his hind legs,
opens his gaping mouth, showing the most terrible teeth, which, by the
way, have never been known to bite anything. Besides this forbidding
display he further adds to his terrible appearance by raising the most
extraordinary frill which is exquisitely decorated in grey, yellow,
scarlet, and blue. This he uses like an umbrella, and if in this way he
does not succeed in frightening away his enemy, he rushes at him, and
lashes him with his saw-like tail. Even dogs are terrified at such
camouflage and leave the successful bluffer alone.

In all parts of the tropics are tree-snakes that lie concealed among the
boughs and shrubs. Most of them are green, and some have richly coloured
bands around their bodies which look not unlike gaily coloured flowers,
and which, no doubt, attract flower-seeking insects and birds. Among
these may be mentioned the deadly-poisonous snakes of the genus _elaps_
of South America. They are so brilliantly provided with bright red and
black bands trimmed with yellow rings that it is not uncommon for a
plant collector to attempt to pick them up for rare orchids!

Wherever these snakes are found, are also found a number of perfectly
harmless snakes, absolutely unlike the dangerous ones in habit and life,
yet coloured precisely the same. The _elaps fulvius_, for example, a
deadly venomous snake of Guatemala, has a body trimmed in simple black
bands on a coral-red ground, and in the same country and always with him
is found a quite harmless snake, which is coloured and banded in the
same identical manner. The terrible and much-feared _elaps lemnicatus_
has the peculiar black bands divided into divisions of three by narrow
yellow rings, thus exactly mimicking a harmless snake, the _pliocerus
elapoides_, both of which live in Mexico. Presumably, the deadly variety
assumes the colouring of the harmless kind in order to deceive intended
victims as to his ferocity.

Surely this is sufficient evidence that colouration and pattern-design
is a useful camouflage device of the great struggle for existence. And
it is safe to assert that any animal that has enemies and still does not
resort to protective colouration or mimicry in some form is entirely
able to protect itself either by its size, strength, ferocity, or by
resorting to safety in numbers. Elephants and rhinoceroses, for example,
are too powerful to be molested when grown, except in the rarest cases,
and are furthermore thoroughly capable of protecting their young.
Hippopotamuses are protected by their immense heads, and are capable of
defending their young from crocodiles even when in the water.

The bison and buffalo, which were once so powerful on the plains of
North America, were protected by their gregarious habits, which
terrorised their enemies--the wolves. Their nurseries were a feature of
their wisdom. These were circular pens where the tall grass was tramped
down by expectant mothers for the protection of their young. This
natural nursery was protected from the inside by sentinels who went
round and round the pen constantly guarding the young not only from the
attack of wolves but also from venturing forth alone too early into the
open unprotected plains. In a similar way the snow-pens of the moose of
the Far North serve to protect them from the hungry hordes of wolves of
which they live in constant danger. This indicates that the annihilation
of the bison and buffalo was due, not to lack of wisdom, but to man's
inhumanity; for, taking advantage of their nurseries, the men crouched
near and concealing themselves in the grass killed not only the mothers
for food but even the young in their savage sport.

The large majority of monkeys are protectively coloured with some shade
of brown or grey, with specially marked faces. Entire packs of
Ceylonese species will, at the slightest alarm, become invisible by
crouching on a palm-tree. One of the most strikingly coloured African
monkeys is jet black with a white bushy tail, and a face surrounded by a
white ring, or mantle of long silky hair. He thus simulates so
strikingly the hanging white lichens upon the trees that he is rarely
seen by his enemies.

A book might be written upon the various ways that animals, when closely
associated with other animals or human beings, imitate them. Darwin says
that "two species of wolves, which had been reared by dogs, learned to
bark, as does sometimes the jackall," and it is well known that certain
dogs, when reared by cats, imitate their habits, even to the licking of
their feet and the washing of their faces. If a mongrel dog associates
with a trained dog for any period of time it is remarkable the progress
he will make. For this same reason young dogs are carried on hunting
trips with trained dogs that they may learn by imitation the art of
hunting.

In the whole realm of Nature there is nothing more wonderful than this
matter of protective colouration. Animals do not monopolise the art. It
extends through the whole world of living creatures. The fact that
individual animals have no voluntary control over their own colour is
eloquent testimony as to the existence of mysterious life forces and
racial evolutions which are still far beyond the grasp of man's
understanding. To see a tiny chameleon adapt his colouring to his
environment, be it red, green, or yellow, in the twinkling of an eye, is
to have seen an argument for God Himself.




