CHAPTER V.

PRUDENTIAL CHECKS.


If the validity of the Malthusian position be admitted, there is no
logical escape from the conclusion that the knowledge of innocent
means by which families may be limited should be conveyed to the
people. Yet, with characteristic inconsistency, the public advocacy
of Malthusianism in the abstract is regarded with approval, whilst
the practical application of the principle is met with the parrot-cry
of "obscenity," and menaced with penal infliction. In the Windeyer
judgment it will be noted that the proceedings against Mr. Collins
were based not upon those portions of Mrs. Besant's pamphlet in which
the subject was philosophically discussed, but upon the passages
in which the preventive checks were described. An eminent English
statesman, Mr. John Morley, has insisted in a public speech upon the
"vital importance" of the population question, and, he added, "I
wish that we did not shirk it so much." A popular English clergyman,
the Rev. H. R. Haweis, has declared in a popular weekly newspaper that
the most important remedy for poverty is "to control the family growth,
according to the family means of support." But when the social reformer
passes from vague precept to direct instruction, he is confronted by
an anomalous law which threatens him as a foe to public morality.

The tragical element in this otherwise ridiculous inconsistency lies
in the fact that the knowledge of prudential checks is denied to
the very class which most urgently needs such information. It is the
poor alone who suffer acutely from the effects of over-population:
it is they who feel the actual sting of want when the small wage
is distributed over a large family-area. For the well-to-do there
is no mystery concerning prudential checks. The family doctor will
whisper discreetly into the ear of the wealthy matron whose quiver
is sufficiently filled. Expensive medical works containing full
instructions are at the command of those who can afford to buy
them. Why should the poor be kept in ignorance upon a matter of
supreme importance to them?

Upon the subject of prudential checks the medical profession as a
body has afforded little or no assistance. Here, as in many other
matters, "doctors differ"; and no steps have as yet been taken to
ascertain, by scientific investigation, the best method of preventing
conception. The checks now to be described are of two kinds--first,
those in which success depends upon self-control; and, second, those
in which mechanical appliances are used.




I.

The practice of withdrawal immediately before the act of coition
is completed obtains very extensively in France. This, the most
ancient of known methods, is referred to in the Bible (Genesis
xxxviii. 8-9). The efficacy of the check depends, of course, entirely
upon the self-control of the husband, and failure is therefore
always possible. It may be mentioned that this plan has sometimes
been objected to on the ground of supposed injury to health; but no
evidence has been adduced in support of the objection. On the other
hand, Dr. C. R. Drysdale has ascertained by personal enquiry that 100
members of the medical profession in Paris "had only 174 children in
all their married lives, or not two as an average.... The question
of the effect produced upon the health of the parents by the use of
the physical check of Genesis xxxviii. was discussed at the meeting
of the International Medical Congress at Amsterdam in 1879; and two
medical men of great distinction--MM. Lutaud and Leblanc--asserted
distinctly that these practices of family physical prudence in France
were in no way productive of ill-health to either conjoint. And,
as they were universally made use of by the medical men of Paris in
limiting their own families, it was very unlikely that such damage
to health as had been spoken of would not have been noted and clearly
described long ago if it existed in nature."

Abstinence from intercourse during a certain period is said to be an
effectual method of avoiding conception. This, however, rests upon the
assumption that a female is more likely to conceive immediately before
or after "menstruation" (the monthly flow). If connection do not take
place within five days before, or eight days after, menstruation,
the probability of pregnancy is supposed to be diminished.




II.

Of the various appliances which have been devised for the prevention of
conception, the simplest and most effectual is the "sheath" (commonly
known as the "French Letter"). This an envelope of skin or very thin
rubber, and is used by the husband. It completely covers the male
organ, and, being closed at the extremity, prevents the semen from
being discharged into the vagina. It is obvious that, if the sheath
remain intact, it is impossible for conception to take place. The
only danger to be guarded against is the breaking or perforation of
the sheath, which should in all cases be carefully examined before
use. The material may be tested by stretching it gently over the inside
of the thumb, when the smallest fracture can be detected. If sheaths
of good quality (not necessarily expensive) be used, and reasonable
care taken to avoid accidental breakage, this check is CERTAIN.

The Enema Syringe is an instrument frequently employed for preventive
purposes. A solution (composed of a teaspoonful of alum dissolved in
a pint of cold or tepid water) is injected by the female immediately
after connection. The vertical and reverse syringe is more likely to
act efficiently than the ordinary enema.

A very simple and inexpensive method is the use of a small piece of
fine sponge, soaked in warm water, and placed in such a position as
to cover the mouth of the womb. The chances of failure are diminished
by saturating the sponge with a solution of quinine.

Pessaries of various kinds are sometimes used to prevent
conception. The simple pessary (of which there are several
modifications) is a small dome-shaped appliance, made of thin rubber,
and constructed to fit closely round the neck of the womb. If carefully
adjusted and retained in position, the pessary may be relied upon.

Of late years a new form of pessary has been introduced and is stated
to have been used with marked success. It consists of a small cone
of cacao-butter, charged with quinine. The pessary is inserted a few
minutes before connection takes place; the quinine, being liberated
by the dissolution of the fatty substance, destroys the vitality of
the seminal fluid.








THE MALTHUSIAN LEAGUE.

(Founded in 1877.)


President:

C. R. DRYSDALE, M.D., M.R.C.P. Lond., F.R.C.S. Eng.


Vice-Presidents:

Señor Aldecoa, Director of Government Charities, Madrid.

Mr. G. Anderson, C.E.

M. Yves Guyot, Deputé, Rue de Seine, Paris.

Mr. Gerritsen, Amsterdam, Holland.

Mr. S. Van Houten, Deputé, The Hague.

Mr. P. Murugesa Mudaliar, Madras.

Mr. T. Parris.

Dr. Stille, Hanover.

Dr. Giovanni Tari, Naples.

Dr. Alice Vickeby.


Hon. Secretary:

Mr. W. H. Reynolds, New Cross, London, S.E.




RULES.


I.--Name.

That this Society be called "The Malthusian League."


II.--Objects.

That the objects of this Society be:

1. To agitate for the abolition of all penalties on the public
discussion of the Population Question, and to obtain such a statutory
definition as shall render it impossible, in the future, to bring
such discussions within the scope of the common law as a misdemeanor.

2. To spread among the people, by all practicable means, a knowledge
of the law of population, of its consequences, and of its bearing
upon human conduct and morals.


III.--Principles.

1. "That population has a constant tendency to increase beyond the
means of subsistence."

2. That the checks which counteract this tendency are resolvable into
positive or life-destroying, and prudential or birth-restricting.

3. That the positive or life-destroying checks comprehend the
premature death of children and adults by disease, starvation, war
and infanticide.

4. That the prudential or birth-restricting check consists in the
limitation of offspring by abstention from marriage, or by prudence
after marriage.

5. That prolonged abstention from marriage--as advocated by Malthus--is
productive of many diseases and of much sexual vice; early marriage,
on the contrary, tends to ensure sexual purity, domestic comfort,
social happiness, and individual health; but it is a grave social
offence for men and women to bring into the world more children than
they can adequately house, feed, clothe and educate.

6. That over-population is the most fruitful source of pauperism,
ignorance, crime and disease.

7. That the full and open discussion of the Population Question is
a matter of vital moment to society, and such discussion should be
absolutely unfettered by fear of legal penalties.


IV.--Executive.

1. That the officers of the League consist of a president,
vice-presidents, council, treasurer, secretaries, solicitor and
auditors.

2. That the government of the League be vested in a council, consisting
of a president, vice-presidents, and secretary (by virtue of their
respective offices), of twenty members who shall be elected annually
at a general meeting, and of a duly-appointed representative from
each branch of the League which may hereafter be formed.

3. That the council have power to appoint a treasurer and secretaries
from amongst its own members; to elect a president, vice-presidents,
and solicitor, subject to the approval of the next general meeting;
to fill up vacancies in its own ranks, and to make the necessary
bye-laws for carrying out these laws and for the general management
of the League.

4. That all candidates for election as officers shall be nominated
one month before the annual general meeting, and that such nomination
shall be publicly announced, the form and manner to be determined by
the council.


V.--Membership.

That the conditions of membership be an annual subscription of one
shilling, which shall be taken to imply adhesion to the rules of
the League; or an annual subscription of two shillings, which shall
entitle the subscriber to receive the Malthusian. To constitute life
membership, a single payment of one guinea.


VI.--General Meetings.

1. That a general meeting be held once a year, at such place and time
as the council shall determine, at which meeting the presentation of
the report and balance sheet and the election of officers shall take
precedence of all other business.

2. That, on the receipt of a requisition signed by not less than
twenty-five members, a special general meeting be, within one month,
called by the council. No other business but that set forth on the
notice calling the meeting shall be taken into consideration.

3. That the voting at all meetings be taken by show of hands, except
when a poll is demanded, when the voting shall be taken by ballot.


VII.--Expulsion.

That the council have power to expel any member, but the member so
expelled shall have a right of appeal to the annual general meeting,
or to a special general meeting called for that purpose.


VIII.--Alteration of Rules.

That no alteration be made in these rules, except at an annual general
meeting, by the vote of two-thirds of those present, two months'
notice of the proposed alteration having been given to the council.








OVER-POPULATION; a Lecture delivered for the Sunday Lecture Society,
under the title "The Law of Population: its Meaning and Menace." By
John M. Robertson. Post free, 2 1/2d.

PLAIN HOME-TALK, by Edward B. Foote, M.D. (U.S.A.) embracing Medical
Common Sense. 909 pages, with 200 illustrations.


    Contents: The cause, Prevention, and Cure of Disease--The Food
    we Eat--The Liquids we Drink--The Atmosphere we Live in--The
    Clothes we Wear--Bad Habits of Children and Youth--Bad Habits of
    Manhood and of Womanhood--Sexual Starvation--How to have Healthy
    Babies--Private Words to Men--Impotency--History of Marriage, etc.


    The book is carefully and thoughtfully written in plain language,
    easily understood, and with the object of making its readers
    better parents and better citizens through the knowledge obtained
    of themselves and their duty to others. No parent should be
    without this book. Useful for every-day reference.     Post free,
    six shillings.


DR. FOOTE'S HANDBOOK OF HEALTH, comprising information of the utmost
importance to all who wish to enjoy life. 128 pages, post free, 1/1.

THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF T. R. MALTHUS. By C. R. Drysdale, M.D. 120
pages, with portrait of Malthus. Should be read by every student of
social problems. Post free, 8d.

THE POPULATION QUESTION. By Dr. C. R. Drysdale. A careful and complete
statement of the Neo-Malthusian position. 100 pp., stout wrapper;
post free 8d.

THE OVER-GROWTH OF POPULATION, AND ITS REMEDY. An Address to men only,
delivered at Lambeth Baths on Tuesday, January 15th, 1889, by William
Lant Carpenter, B.A., B.Sc. Post free, 2d.

EARLY MARRIAGE AND LATE PARENTAGE. The only Solution of the Social
Problem. By Oxoniensis. Post free, 2 1/2d.

THE CAUSE OF POVERTY. A paper read at the National Liberal Club,
by Dr. C. R. Drysdale. Post free 2d.

POVERTY: Its Cause and Cure. By M. G. H. Post free, 2d.








NOTES


[1] This has already been admirably done in two pamphlets by
Dr. C. R. Drysdale, President of the Malthusian League: (1) The Life
and Writings of Malthus; (2) The Population Question.

[2] Preface to Special Report of Trial.

[3] Lucifer, July, 1891.

[4] See Appendix.








