CHAPTER III

THE FORMAL SELF-SUBSISTENCY OF INDIVIDUAL PARTICULARITIES

If we take a glance back on the territory we have passed through, we
see in the first instance that the object of our investigation was
the life of the soul[256] in its most absolute capacity, in other
words, consciousness in its mediation with God, the universal process
of the self-reconciling spirit. The abstraction of this point of view
consisted in this that the soul by an effort of abnegation withdrew
itself from all that was secular, purely natural and human--even
when the same had ethical features, and for this reason possessed a
claim upon us--into its own distinctive domain in order to satisfy
its yearning for the pure heaven of spirit. _Secondly_, we found
ourselves able, it is true, to bring into view the human consciousness
without this factor of abstract negation which was included in that
mediation, in other words, positively in its independence and as
related to others[257], but the content of this secular infinitude as
such was none the less only the personal self-subsistency of honour,
the intensiveness[258] of love and the vassalage of fidelity, a
content which, no doubt, may appear before us in many relations, in a
many-folded variety and many gradations of feeling and passion, subject
to the most extensive changes of external condition, yet for all that
only propounds just this personal independence and inwardness within
such examples. The _third_ aspect, then, which we have now left us to
examine is the mode and manner in which that further material of human
existence, both on the side of its inward and its external life, that
is to say, Nature and its apprehension and significance for soul-life,
is able to enter into the romantic type of art. We have here to deal
with the world of particular objects, determinate existence generally,
regarded in its unfettered independence, and which, in so far as it
does not appear transparent to religion and spiritual synthesis,
bringing it into unity with the Absolute, asserts itself on its own
foothold and declares its self-subsistence in its own kingdom.

In this third province of the romantic type of art consequently the
purely religious material and chivalry with those lofty views and aims
that we found it brings to birth from its spiritual womb[259], but
which were not directly concordant with anything visible in the reality
of the existing world, have vanished. The new object of satisfaction
is a thirst for this actual presence itself, a delight in the facts of
existence, a contentment of the soul with the dwelling that confronts
it, with the finitude of our humanity, and what is finite, particular,
and the true counterfeit of such generally. Man is intent to recreate
for his own world the world as he actually finds it, although such
may imply a sacrifice of the Beauty and ideality of the content and
manifestation will reflect it as it stands before him endowed with
life in his art, will have that present life before his eyes as the
work of his own mind. The religion of Christianity as we have already
seen has not sprung up from the soil of the imagination as was the
case with the divinities of the East and Greece, whether we consider
them relatively to form or content. It is the imagination which
fashions the vital significance out of its own resources in order to
promote the unity between the reality of soul life with the perfected
embodiment of the same. In classical art this complete coalescence is
actually attained. In the Christian religion, on the other hand, the
secular aspect in its exclusive character is from the first accepted
for just that which it really is as an essential factor of the Ideal;
and the soul of man finds satisfaction in the ordinary and contingent
presence of the external world without the necessary interposition of
beauty. But man is nevertheless in the first instance reconciled to
God only by implication, and as a possible result. All men are called
to the blessed condition, but few are chosen; and the soul for which
both the kingdom of heaven and that of this world still remain as a
"beyond" is constrained to renounce both that which is spiritual in the
external world and its own presence therein. The point of departure is
from a distance infinitely remote from that world; and to make this
reality, which in the first instance is simply surrendered, a positive
constituent of that which is man's own, in other words to bring about
this rediscovery of himself and his volition in his own present life,
from which all takes its rise, this it is which supplies us first with
a terminating point in the elaboration of romantic art, and is the
final outlook to which the spiritual penetration of man is carried and
on which it is concentrated.

In so far as the form of this new content is concerned we have already
observed that romantic art from its first initiation was infected
with the contradiction that the essentially infinite mode of the
self-conscious life is, in its independence, incapable of being united
with the external material, and is bound to remain in such separation.
This independent opposition of both aspects and the withdrawal of the
inwardness of spirit into its own domain is that which constitutes the
content of romance. These two aspects are continually separated anew
by self-rehabilitation[260], until at length they fall entirely apart,
and thereby demonstrate that we must search for some _other field_ than
_Art_ to secure their absolute union. And by this falling apart we find
that these aspects in their relation to art are _formal_; in other
words they fail to appear as a totality in that complete type of unity
which was secured to them by the Classic Ideal. Classical art is placed
in a region of stable figures, that is in the midst of a mythology
and its irresoluble types perfected by art. The resolution of the
classical form is consequently brought about--as we found in discussing
its transition to the romantic form--leaving out of our present
consideration the generally more restricted territory of the comic and
satyric modes--by an over-elaboration in the direction of all that
pleases the senses or an imitation which loses itself in the deadly
frost of a pedantic learning, till it at length entirely degenerates
into a negligent and inferior technique. The objects of art remain,
however, the same throughout the process, and merely play truant to
the earlier intelligent mode of production with a presentation that is
increasingly more spiritless and a purely traditional and mechanical
technique. The progress and conclusion of romantic art on the contrary
is the resolution of the material of art within its own boundaries[261]
altogether, a material which falls apart into its elements, an
increase of freedom in the several parts, along with which process and
in contrast to the previous case, the individual craftsmanship and
artistic mode of presentment is enhanced; and in proportion as the
substantive content tends to break up to that extent attains a fuller
perfection.

We may now attempt a more specific subdivision of this the final
chapter of this part of our subject in the following terms.

In the first place we have before us _the self-subsistency of
character_, which is, however, a particular one, that is, a definite
individual self-absorbed in its world, its specific qualities and aims.

In opposition to this formal particularity of character we have the
external conformation of situations, events, and actions. For the
reason, moreover, that the inward spirituality of romance stands
generally in an indifferent relation to that which is external the
actual phenomenon[262] appears in the present case independently free,
that is as neither permeated by the spiritual content of human aims and
actions nor clothed in modes adequate to retain them. By reason of its
unrelated and loose mode of manifestation it therefore enforces the
contingency of natural processes[263], circumstances, the sequence of
events, and manner of its realization as _the unexpected._[264]

In the _third_ place, and finally, the severation of the two factors
asserts itself, the complete identity of which supplies us with
the real notion of art. This is consequently the dismemberment and
dissolution of art itself. On the one hand we find that art passes to
a representation of wholly commonplace reality, to the reflection of
objects precisely as they appear in their contingent isolation and its
equally singular characteristics. Its interest is now wholly absorbed
in reproducing this objective existence by means of the technical
ability of the artist. On the other hand we have, in what is a mode
of conception and representation entirely dependent on the accidental
idiosyncracy of the artist himself, that is in humour, a complete
reversal of the pictorial style above mentioned. For in _humour_ we
meet with the perversion and overthrow of all that is objectively solid
in reality; it works through the wit and play of wholly personal points
of view, and if carried to an extreme amounts to the triumph of the
creative power of the artist's soul over every content and every form.


1. THE SELF-SUBSISTENCY OR INDEPENDENCE OF INDIVIDUAL CHARACTER

The fundamental determinant of our present subject-matter is once again
that infinitude implied in the very nature of the human consciousness
which was our point of departure in the romantic type of art. The new
accretions we have now, however, to add to our conception of this mode
of self-subsistent infinity consist partly in the _particularity_
of content, which constitutes the world of the individual mind, as
to a further aspect of it in the immediate coalescence of the ego
with this its particularity, its wishes and objects, and thirdly,
in the living individuality, in which the substantive character is
self-determined. We are not, therefore, entitled to understand under
the expression "character" as now employed that which the Italians
represented in their masks. The Italian masks are also no doubt
definite characters, but this definition is only presented by them
in its abstraction and generality, without a personal individuality.
The characters, on the other hand, of the type under discussion are
each of them a character unique in itself, an independent whole, an
individual person[265]. If we have, therefore, occasion here to refer
to the formalism and abstraction of character, such an expression is
entirely relative to the fact that the fundamental content, the world
of such a character appears, on the one hand, as restricted and to that
extent abstract, and, on the other, as qualified by accidental causes.
What the individual is is not carried or sustained by virtue of what
is substantive or essentially self-accredited[266] in its content,
but through the naked personality asserted by the character, which
consequently reposes formally on its own individual self-subsistency
rather than on its content and its independently secured pathos.

Within the limits of this formalism we may now observe _two_ main lines
of distinction.

On the one hand we have the stability of character in the energy of its
_executive_ power, which restricts its line of action to specific aims,
and entrusts the concentrated force of individuality thus restricted to
the realization of such objects. On the other hand we have character
under the aspect of a totality that is _personal_, which, however,
persists not wholly articulated throughout the content of that inward
life and in the unsounded[267] depths of the soul, and is unable to
unravel itself wholly, or express itself with absolute clarity.

(_a_) What we have therefore before us, in the first instance, is the
particular character which wills to be that its immediate presence
proposes, Just as animals differ from each other and discover
themselves as independent creatures in this difference, so, too, here
we have different characters whose range and idiosyncracy remains
subject to the element of contingency[268], and is not to be accurately
determined by the mere notion.

(_α_) An individuality of this kind built up entirely on itself
consequently has no ready thought-out opinions and objects, which
it has associated with any universal principle of pathos: all that
it-possesses, does, and accomplishes it creates right away with no
further reflection out of its own specific nature; which is just
what it happens to be, and has no wish to be rooted in anything more
exalted, to be resolved in that and to find its justification in
something substantive. Rather it reposes unyielding and unmalleable
on itself, and in this stability either goes on its way or goes to
ground. A self-subsistency of character of this kind is only able to
appear, where the secular or natural man[269], in other words, humanity
in its particularity has secured its fullest claim. Pre-eminently the
characters of Shakespeare are of this type. It is just this iron[270]
steadfastness and exclusiveness which constitutes the aspect of them
which most excites our wonder. We have no word here of religion for
religion's sake, or action as the embodiment of human reconciliation,
in the unqualified religious sense, or of morality pure and simple.
On the contrary we are presented with individuals, conceived as
dependent solely on themselves, possessed with aims that are their
own exclusively, exclusively deducible from their individuality, and
which they carry through as best satisfies them with the unmitigated
consequences of passion, and with no incidental reflection on the
principles involved. In particular the tragedies, such as "Macbeth,"
"Othello," "Richard III" and others contain one character of this type
for their main interest surrounded by others less pre-eminent for such
elemental energy. Macbeth is forced by his character, for example, into
the fetters of his ambitious passion. At first he hesitates, then he
stretches his hand to seize the crown; he commits a murder in order
to secure it, and in order to maintain it storms on through the tale
of horror. This regardless tenacity, this identity of the man with
himself, and the object which his own personality brings to birth is
the source to him of an abiding interest. Nothing makes him budge,
neither the respect for the sacredness of kingship, nor the madness of
his wife, nor the rout of his vassals, nor destruction as it rushes
upon him, neither divine nor human claims--he withdraws from them
all into himself and persists. Lady Macbeth is a character of the
same mould, and it is merely the chatter of our latter-day tasteless
criticism which can find in her the least flavour of affection. At
her very first entrance, on reading Macbeth's letter reporting his
meeting with the witches and their prophecy in the words[271]: "Hail to
thee, thane of Cawdor! Hail to thee king that shall be!" she exclaims,
"Glamis thou art and Cawdor; and shall be what thou art promised. Yet
do I fear thy nature; it is too full o' the milk of human kindness, to
catch the nearest way." She shows no affectionate trait, no joy over
the happiness of her husband, no moral emotion, no sympathy, no pity
of a noble soul; she simply fears lest the character of her husband
will stand in the path of his ambition. She regards him simply as a
means. With her there is no recoil, no uncertainty, no consideration,
no retreating, as we find is at first the case with Macbeth, no
repentance, but the pure abstraction and rigour of character, which
perpetrates that which falls in with it, until it finally breaks.
This collapse which comes in a tempest on Macbeth from the outside as
he executes his object, becomes madness of the mind in Lady Macbeth.
Of the same type is Richard III, Othello, the old Margaret and many
another also. We have its opposite in the wretched coherence[272] of
modern characters, such as those of Kotzebue, which are outwardly noble
in the highest degree, great and excellent, yet in their soul-force
are all rags and tatters. Later writers have done no better in other
relations, despite their supreme contempt for Kotzebue. Heinrich von
Kleish is an example with his Kätchen and Prince von Homburg[273],
characters in which, in contrast to the alert condition of real causal
effect, magnetism, somnambulism, and sleep-walking are depicted as
that which is of highest and most effective moment. This Prince von
Homburg is a most pitiable exhibition of a general; he is distracted
when he makes his military dispositions, writes out his orders in a
way none can decipher them, is engaged in the night previous to the
battle with morbid forebodings, and acts on the day of battle like a
fool. And despite such duality, raggedness, and lack of harmony in
their characters these writers imagine that they tread in the footsteps
of Shakespeare. Wide indeed is the distance which separates them, for
the characters of Shakespeare are essentially consequent in what they
do; they remain staunch to their master passion; in what they are and
in what confronts them, nothing makes them veer round but what is in
strict accord with their rigidly determinate character.

(_β_) The more particular, then, the character is, which relies purely
on itself, and consequently readily approaches evil, to that extent
it is forced in the concrete world of reality to maintain itself, not
merely against the obstacles which lie in its path and prevent the
realization of life's aims, but so much more by this very realization
such is driven headlong to its downfall. In other words, on account
of the fact that it achieves its object, the fate that has its origin
in the specific nature of its character itself, deals it a blow in a
mode of destruction it has itself prepared. The development of this
fatality is, however, not merely a development from the _action_ of the
particular personality, but quite as much a growth of the soul[274],
a development of the _character_ itself in its headlong movement,
its running wild, its shattering in pieces or exhaustion. Among the
Greeks, for whom pathos, the substantive content of action, rather
than the personal character, is the important feature, a destiny
affects the character that is thus sharply defined to a less degree for
this reason, that it is not further evolved within the sphere of its
activities, but remains at their conclusion what it was at the start.
In the compass of our present subject-matter, however, by the carrying
through of the action itself, the inner life of the personality is
evolved quite as much as the progress of the action; the advance is
not simply on the outside. The action of Macbeth appears at the same
time a descent of the soul into savagery, accompanied by a result
which, when all irresolution is thrown to the winds, and the dice is
cast, leaves nothing further able to restrain it. His wife is from the
very first decided: development is shown here merely as the anxiety
of the soul, which is carried to the point of physical and spiritual
ruin, the madness, in short, which strikes her down. And this is the
kind of process which we can follow in the majority of Shakespeare's
characters, whether important or unimportant. The characters of ancient
drama assert themselves, no doubt, also on fixed lines, and we find
them even face to face with opposed forces, relief from which is no
longer possible except through the advent of a _deus ex machina._ Yet
this stability, as in the case of Philoctetes, is united to a content,
and, on the whole, penetrated with a pathos which may be vindicated on
ethical grounds.

(_γ_) In the sphere of presentation we are now considering, owing to
the contingent nature of all that the characters which belong to it
seize upon as their aim and the independence of their individuality,
no _objective reconciliation_ is possible. The environment of all that
they are, and what opposes their progress, is in part without defined
lines, but also in part we see that there is neither a "Whence" nor a
"Whither" unriddled for themselves. Here we have once more presented
to us that Fate which is the most abstract form of Necessity. The only
reconciliation of the individual issues from the infinite mode of his
soul-life, his own steadfastness, in which he stands supreme over his
passion and his destiny. "Thus it came to pass,"[275] whatever falls
in his way, whether it be due to a controlling destiny, necessity or
accident, there is his "Wherefore"; he accepts it at once without
further reflection. It is fact, and man adjusts himself thereto, and
tries to make himself as stone toward its authority.

(_b_) In absolute contrast to the above, however, there is a further
or _second_ mode in which the formal aspect of character may find its
seat within the _innermost_ of soul-life, and in which the individual
may remain fixed without being able to extend its range or execute its
effects.

(_α_) Such are those spiritual natures of intrinsic substance, who,
while self-absorbed in a complex whole, are only able in the simplicity
of their compactness[276] to perfect that profound activity within the
shrine of the soul without further development or explication in the
world around them. The formalism which we have hitherto been examining
was relative to the defined character of the content, the entire
self-concentration[277] of the individual upon one object, which it
makes to appear in all its unrelieved severity, a concentration which
expressed itself, was carried out, and in which, just as circumstances
fell out, either collapsed or held on to the end. This further mode
of formalism is emphasized in a converse way by its undisclosed and
formless character, and by its defect of expression and expository
power. A soul of this type is like some precious jewel, which is only
visible at certain points, a manifestation which is that of a lightning
flash.

(_β_) And the reason that such state of self-seclusion should still be
of worth and interest to us is due to the fact that it presupposes a
secret wealth of the soul, which, however, only permits its infinite
depth and fulness, and precisely, by means of this silence, to show
itself in a few and so to speak half-muted ways of expression. Such
simple natures, unconscious of what they possess, and without speech,
may exercise an extraordinary fascination. But that this may be so
their silence must be like the unruffled stillness of the sea upon
its surface, over its unsounded depths, not the silence of all that
is shallow, hollow, and stupid. It is quite possible sometimes for
the dullest fellow to succeed by means of an external demeanour that
manages very little to expose itself, and merely presents now and
again something that is but half intelligible, to awake in others
the opinion that it is the veil of a profound wisdom and spiritual
depth, so that people wonder what in the world lies hidden in such a
heart and soul, where we find in the end there is just nothing. The
infinite content and profundity of _silent_ souls of the genuine type
is made clear to us--and to declare it makes the greatest demand on
the intuitive powers and executive ability of the artist--by means of
isolated, unrelated, naïve, and involuntary expressions of soul-life,
which quite unintentionally make it plain to all who can grasp their
significance that such a soul has seized upon the substantial import
of all that confronts it with the richest quality of spiritual
insight, that its reflective capacity, however, is not carried further
by positive expansion into the general environment of particular
interests, motives, and finite aims, but rather preserves its original
purity that the fact it refuses to have its powers dissipated by the
commonplace excitements of the heart and the serious quests and modes
of sympathy which are thus inevitable, may remain unknown to the world.

(_γ_) A time must, however, arrive for a soul of this type in which
it becomes uniquely affected at one definite point of attachment in
that inward worlds it concentrates the whole of its undivided powers
in one supreme form of emotion that dominates its life-current; it
adheres to this with a force that refuses to be diverted, and secures
happiness therein, or goes to ground from lack of support. To retain
a hold on life a man requires a constantly expanding breadth of
ethical sustenance, which alone supplies an objective stability. To
this type of character belong some of the most fascinating figures in
romantic art, whose full perfection of beauty we shall find among the
creations of Shakespeare. As an illustration we may take the Juliet
in his "Romeo and Juliet." It is possible at this moment to see a
reproduction of this play in this city[278]. It is well worth going
to. The picture we have given us there of this character is a moving,
lifelike, passionate, talented, highly finished and noble one. But for
all that it is possible to entertain a somewhat different conception
of the part. In other words, we may figure for ourselves a maiden in
the first instance simple as a child, of only fourteen or fifteen years
of age, who, it is quite clear, has as yet no self-knowledge or world
wisdom, no emotional activity, no strong inclination or wishes of the
heart, but has rather glanced into the motley show of the world as into
some _laterna magica_ without learning anything from it, or reflecting
upon what is seen there. All in a twinkling we behold the development
of the entire strength of this soul, of its artfulness[279], its
circumspection, its force; it is prepared to sacrifice everything and
to submit itself to the severest ordeals, so that in its entirety it
now suddenly appears to be the first breaking forth of the full rose
in all its petals and folds, an infinite outburst of the innermost
purity which gushes from the spring source of the soul, in which it
had held itself back previously as yet undiscerned, unmoulded and
undeveloped; which moreover, as the now existing creation of _one_
awakened interest, betrays itself unpremeditated in the fulness and
strength of its beauty from the previous seclusion of spirit. It is
a brand which one spark has kindled, a bud which at the first bare
touch of love breaks unawares before us in full bloom. And yet the
faster it unfolds the more rapidly it also sinks, and its petals
fall from it. An impetuous progress is still more conspicuous in the
case of Miranda. Brought up in seclusion we have her portrayed for
us by Shakespeare at the critical moment when she first makes the
acquaintance of manhood[280]. He depicts her in a few scenes, but in
those we get a picture that is complete and unforgettable. We may
also include Schiller's Thecla under the same type, despite the fact
that it is rather the creation of a reflective kind of poetry[281].
Though placed in the midst of a life of such amplitude and richness she
remains unaffected by it; she remains within it without vanity, without
reflection, purely absorbed by the one interest which alone dominates
her soul. And as a general rule it is chiefly the beautiful and noble
natures of women, in which the world and their own heart-life blossoms
for the first time in love, so that it is as though their spiritual
birth here takes its rise.

Under the same type of spiritual intensity, which is unable fully to
unfold itself, we may for the most part classify those folksongs, more
particularly our German ones, which, in the copious compactness of the
soul-life therein reflected, and however much such is displayed to
us as carried away by any one absorbing interest, are yet unable to
express the same except in broken flashes, and thereby fully reveal
just this very depth. It is a mode of artistic presentment, which in
its reserve is apt to fall back on the effects of symbolism. What it
offers us is not so much the open, transparent display of the entire
inward life as it is purely a _sign_ and indication of that life.
But we do not get, however, from it a symbol, the significance of
which, as was the case previously, remains a general abstraction, but
an expression the inward content of which is nothing more nor less
than this personal, living, and actual soul. In times like our own,
dominated by a critical reflectiveness, which lies so far removed from
a self-absorbed _naïveté_ of this kind, such presentations are of the
greatest difficulty, and if successful, are a sure proof of an original
creative genius. We have already seen that Goethe, more particularly in
his lyrics, has shown himself a master in this respect, namely, that he
can depict and unfold to us in a symbolical way, in other words with a
few simple, apparently external and insignificant traits, the entire
truth and infinite wealth of a soul. His poem, "The King of Thule," one
of his most lovely bits of poetical work, is of this class. The king
here makes us aware of his love by just one thing only, namely, the
drinking cup which the old man preserved as a gift of his beloved. The
old carouser stands up there on the point of death in his lofty palace
hall; his knights, his kingdom, his possessions are around him; and
he bequeaths them all to his heir, but the goblet he flings into the
waves; no one shall have that.

/$
     Er sah ihn stürzen, trinken,
     Und sinken tief in's Meer,
     Die Augen thäten ihm sinken,
     Trank nie ein Tropfen mehr[282].
$/

A soul, however profound and still of this kind, which retains its
energy of spirit pent up like the spark in the flint, unopened to
form, which does not elaborate its existence and reflection beyond its
own boundaries, has also failed to free itself by such expansion. It
remains exposed to the remorseless contradiction that, if the false
note of unhappiness ring through its life, it possesses no remedial
aptitude, no bridge as a way of passage between the heart and reality;
it is equally unable to ward off external conditions from itself, and
by so doing to preserve an independent ground of vantage in its own
self-reliance. When the collision comes therefore it is helpless; it
acts hastily and without circumspection, or bows passively to the
movement of events. So, for example, we have in Hamlet a beautiful
and noble soul; one not so much spiritually weak, but one that
wanders astray without a strong grasp of life's realities, moving in
an atmosphere of dejection, a sombre and half articulate melancholy.
Gifted with a finely intuitive sense he feels that all is not well with
him, that things are not as they should be though he has no external
sign, no single ground for suspicion; nevertheless he surmises the
atrocious deed that has been perpetrated. The ghost of his father
gives yet closer embodiment to his feelings. He is at once ready in
spirit to revenge, his sense of duty is always before him reflecting
the innermost craving of his heart, but he is not carried away with
the flood, as Macbeth; he cannot either kill, rage, or strike with the
directness of a Laertes; he persists in the inactivity of a beautiful,
introspective soul, which can neither realize its aims nor make itself
at home in the conditions of actual life. He dallies, seeks for more
positive certainty buoyed up by the fair integrity of his soul; he
can, however, come to no firm decision, much as he has sought it,
and permits himself to follow the course of external events. In this
atmosphere of unreality he goes yet further astray in matters that lie
directly in his path; he kills the old Polonius instead of the king;
he acts in a hurry where he should have been more circumspect, yet
persists in his self absorption, where decided action is essential;
until at length, without any action on his part, the fated _dénouement_
of the entire drama, including that of his own persistently
self-retiring personality, has unravelled itself on the broad highway
of Life's external incidents and accidents.

We are particularly presented with this attitude in modern times
among men of the lower levels of life, who are without an education
which extends to aims of universal significance, or are devoid of the
variety of objective interests. Consequently when some _particular_
aim of their life fails they are unable to secure any further stay of
their spiritual forces and a centre of control for their activities.
This lack of education tends to make reserved natures, in proportion
as it is undeveloped, adhere with the more rigidness and obstinacy to
that which, through its appeal to their entire individuality, makes
a claim upon them however limited in its range it may be. We find
pre-eminently such a monotonous attitude incidental to this class
of self-absorbed and speechless men among German characters, who
for this reason appear in their seclusion inclined to stubbornness,
ready to bristle up, crabbed, inaccessible, and in their dealings and
expressions wholly unreliable and contradictory. As a master in the
delineation and exposition of such obtuse characters of the poorer
classes we will mention but one example, Hippel, the author of "Life's
Careers in the Line of Ascent,"[283] one of our few German works
stamped with original humour. He keeps himself wholly removed from
Jean Paul's sentimentality and want of taste in plot construction,
and possesses moreover an astonishing individuality, freshness, and
vitality. He understands, in quite an exceptional way, and one that
seizes on our interest at once, how to depict the thickset type of
people who are unable to breathe freely and who consequently, when
they do give themselves the rein, do so with a violence that is
simply fearful. They put an end of their own accord to the infinite
contradiction of their spiritual life and the unhappy circumstances
in which they are involved in an appalling manner; and bring about by
such means that which is otherwise the result of an external fate, as
we find, for instance, in "Romeo and Juliet," where external accidents
mar all the wise and able offices of the holy father's intervention and
cause the death of the lovers.

(_c_) We find, then, that characters of this formal quality generally
either expose merely the infinite volitional force of the individual's
personality, which asserts itself frankly just as it is and storms
ahead in the bare impulse of the will; or, to take the further
aspect, present to us an essential self-contained[284], if not wholly
articulate soul, which, affected as it becomes by one specific aspect
of its spiritual experience, concentrates the entire breadth and
depth of its personality on this point, yet, owing to the fact of its
possessing no development externally, is unable to find its proper
place or to act with practical sense when it comes into collision
with that world. We have yet a _third_ point[285] to mention, which
consists in this, that when characters of this type, wholly one-sided
and restricted as they are in respect to their aims if at the same time
fully developed in mental power, awake in us not merely a _formal_,
but also a _substantial_ interest, we cannot fail to receive the
impression that this limitation of their personal life is itself only
a condition that is inevitable; in other words it is a result which
grows out of the particular way in which their character is defined
along with the profounder content of their personal life. Shakespeare
in fact enables us to see this depth and wealth in such characters.
He presents them to us as men of imaginative power and genius by
showing how their reflective faculty commands them and lifts them
above that which their condition and definite purpose would make them,
so that they are all the while as it were forced by the misfortune
of circumstances and the obstacles of their position into doing that
which they accomplish. At the same time we do not mean this to the
extent of asserting, for example, that the bad witches were to blame
for all that Macbeth dared after consulting them. These witches are
rather to be looked at as the reflex of his own obstinate will. All
that the characters of Shakespeare execute, that is the particular
purpose they propose, originates and finds the taproot of its force in
their own personality. But along with this they maintain in one and
the same individuality a loftiness, which brushes aside that which
they actually are, so far as their aims, interests, and actions are
concerned, and which amplifies them and exalts them above themselves.
In like manner Shakespeare's more vulgar characters, such as Stephano,
Trinculo, Pistol, and that hero among them all, Falstaff, though
saturated with their own debasement, assert themselves as fellows of
intelligence, whose genial quality is able to take in everything,
to possess a large and open atmosphere of its own, and in short
makes them all that great men are. In the tragedies of the French on
the contrary even the greatest and most worthy characters only too
frequently, if viewed critically, assert themselves as so many evil
offshoots of the brute creation, whose only intelligence consists in
this that it can furnish dialectical arguments in its vindication.
In Shakespeare we find neither vindication nor damnation, but merely
a review of the general condition of destiny, which inevitably places
such characters uncomplaining and unrepentant where they are, and from
the starting-point of which they see everything, themselves included;
and yet as independent spectators of themselves decline and fall.

In all these respects the realm which is peopled by such individual
characters is an infinitely rich one, a kingdom, however, which very
easily collapses in hollowness and dulness, so that only quite a few
masters have received the gifts of poetical and intuitional power
sufficient to enable them to reveal its truth.


2. THE SPIRIT OF ADVENTURE

Now that we have examined the aspect of the inward soul-life, which
may, at this stage of our inquiry, be presented by art, we must direct
our attention to that which lies without it, to the particularity
of circumstances and situations which affect character, also to the
collisions in which its development proceeds, and finally review the
entire collective form, which this inward life assumes within the
boundaries of concrete reality.

It is, as we have more than once pointed out, a fundamental determinant
of romantic art, that the spiritual sense, in other words, the soul
in its aspect of self-reflection, should constitute a whole, and
relates itself for this reason to the external world, not, in its own
reality, inter-penetrated by this world, but as though related to
something purely external and separated from it, which goes on its way
independently disjoined from Spirit, is thus evolved, and thus disposes
of itself as a finite and continuously fluid, changing, and complicate
object of contingent causality[286]. To the self-absorbed soul it is
as wholly a matter of indifference what particular circumstances it
confronts, as it is an affair of chance what those circumstances are
which appear before it. For in its action it is less a matter of
importance that it should carry out a work whose essential basis is
rooted in itself and owes its subsistency to its own character than
that it should generally make itself effective in action.

(_a_) We have, in short, before us here a process which we may from
one point of view describe as the rejection of the Divine from
Nature. Spirit has here withdrawn itself from the externality of
phenomena, which, for the reason that the inward life no longer sees
itself reflected in this sphere[287], is now independently clothed
on its part under a relation of indifference exterior to the subject
of consciousness. Relatively to its truth Spirit is, no doubt, in
its own medium mediated and reconciled with the Absolute: but in so
far as we now take up our position on the ground of self-subsistent
individuality, which proceeds from itself as it discovers itself in
its immediacy, this divesting of the Divine[288] affects character in
its active capacity. It moves forward, that is to say, with its own
contingent aims into a world equally subject to chance, with which
it fails to unite itself in an essentially harmonious whole. This
relative character of purpose in an environment which is relative,
whose determination and development does not subsist in the individual
mind, but is defined externally and contingently and is responsible for
collisions equally adventitious, which appear as offshoots that are
unexpectedly interwoven with it, creates that to which we give the name
of "the adventurous," which supplies the _fundamental type_ of romance
for the mode of its events and actions.

It is necessary that the action and dramatic event in so far as they
apply strictly to the Ideal and classic art, should be referable
to an essentially true or, in other words, independently explicit
and necessary end, in whose conformation that which is also the
determinating factor for the external form, for the particular type and
mode of execution, is an object of real existence. In the case of the
acts and events of romantic art this is not the case. For, although
essentially universal and substantive ends are also presented in their
manner of realization by this type, the definition of the action which
is referable to such ends, and the principle of co-ordination and
articulation which appears in its progress on its spiritual side[289]
is not the direct result of those ends themselves; this aspect of
realization is inevitably left independent and subject to the operation
of contingency.

(_α_) The romantic world had one and only _one absolute_ work to
accomplish, namely, the extension of Christendom, and the bringing into
manifest performance the spirit of the community[290]. Situated in the
midst of a hostile world consisting in part of the unbelieving ancient
_régime_, and in part of a human life which was barbarous and coarse,
the character of its actual accomplishment, in so far as it passed
from mere theory to deeds, was, in the main, the passive endurance of
pain and torture, the sacrifice of its own temporal existence for the
eternal salvation of the soul. A further product of its energies, which
is equally a portion of the same essential content, is, in the Middle
Ages, that carried out by Christian Chivalry, the driving forth of the
Moors, Arabs, and Mohammedans generally from Christian countries, and,
above all, along with it, the conquest of the Holy Sepulchre in the
Crusades. This, however, was not an object which affected man simply as
human[291], but one which a mere collection of isolated individuals had
to accomplish under conditions in which the individuals which composed
it streamed together at their own free will and pleasure as such. From
such a point of view we may call the Crusades the collective adventure
of the Christian Middle Ages; an adventure, which was essentially
subject to lapses[292], and fantastical, of a spiritual tendency, and
yet devoid of a truly spiritual aim, and in its relation to action and
character delusive. For in its relation to the processes of religion,
the supreme object of the Crusades is in the highest degree empty and
external. Christianity purported to secure its salvation solely in
Spirit, in Christ, who is raised to the right hand of God; it finds
its living reality and stay in Spirit, not in the grave of Spirit, or
in the sensuous, immediately present localities of its former temporal
abiding-place. The impulse and religious yearning of the Middle
Ages, however, was centred on the spot, the external locality of the
Passion and the Holy Sepulchre. In just the same direct contradiction
with the religious object we find that wholly worldly one which was
bound up with conquest; a possession, which in its relation to the
secular world, carried a totally different character to that of a truly
religious purpose. Men would fain win for themselves what was spiritual
and health to their souls, and they set before them as an aim a purely
material locality, from which Spirit had vanished; they strained after
a gain that was temporal, and united this which was of the world to the
pure substance of religion. It is this distraction which gives us the
discordant and fantastic note in such enterprises in which we find that
which is of the world confound the life of soul, or the latter prove
the confounding of the former instead of a harmony which is the result
of both. And for the same reason much that is contradictory appears in
the execution unresolved. Piety is carried to the point of rawness and
barbarous cruelty. And this rawness permits every kind of selfishness
and passion to break forth, or casts itself conversely once more upon
the eternal depths which either move or bruise the human spirit, and
which are, in truth, the heart and substance of the matter. In the
medley of elements so discrepant, there is also an absence of all unity
in the object proposed by the exploits and events themselves, or in
the consequential power of authority. The host of men is diverted and
split up in single adventures, victories, defeats, and a variety of
accidents; and the outcome of it all fails to correspond to the means
and enormous preparations which were involved. Nay, the object itself
is stultified in the execution. For the Crusades would once again bring
truth to the sentence: "Thou couldst not leave him in peace in the
grave, thou didst not suffer thy holy one to see corruption." But it
is precisely this longing to find Christ and spiritual content in such
places and spaces, even the grave itself, the place of death, which
is itself, whatever essential worth even a Chateaubriand may make out
of it, a corruption of Spirit, out of which Christianity must rise in
resurrection in order to return once more to the fresh and abundant
life of the concrete world.

An object of much the same kind, mystical from one point of view,
equally fantastical from another, and adventurous in its undertaking,
is the search of the Holy Grail.

(_β_) A more exalted emprise is that which every man has to go through
in his own domain, his life, in the course of which he determines
his eternal destiny. It is this object which Dante has, consistently
with the catholic standpoint, seized upon in his "Divine Comedy" as
he conducts us in turn through hell, purgatory, and paradise. In this
poem, too, despite the strenuous co-ordination of the whole, we have
abundant evidence of conceptions which are fantastic[293], aspects that
are suffused with the spirit of adventure, in so far, at any rate, as
this work in its blessing and cursing is not carried through merely in
the explicit form of universal statement, but as referable to an almost
innumerable company of distinct personalities, not to mention the fact
that the _poet_ takes upon himself the _fiat_ of his church, seizes
the keys of heaven in his hand, adjudicates both bliss and damnation,
and so constitutes himself the judge of the v world, who places the
best known individuals both of the ancient and Christian eras, whether
poets, citizens, cardinals, or popes, respectively in hell, purgatory,
or paradise.

(_γ_) The remaining material, on the basis of the _worldly_ life, which
leads up to action and event, consists in the infinitely manifold
and venturesome experiments of imaginative idea, all that element of
chance in what arises either without or within the soul from love,
honour, and fidelity. At one time we may see men thus affected box
the compass for their own reputation's sake, at another leap to help
persecuted innocence, carry out amazing exploits in defence of the
honour of their lady, or vindicate some right that is invaded with the
strength of their own arm, and the able use of their own weapons; and
this albeit the innocence which is delivered prove only a company of
knaves. In the majority of such cases there is absolutely no condition,
no situation, no conflict before us in virtue of which we can assert
that action follows as a _necessary_ result. The soul simply wills it
and _intentionally_ looks out for adventure. The exploits of love,
for instance, in such cases have for the most part, if we look at
their more specific content, no other real principle of determination
beyond the effort to give proof of the steadfastness, fidelity, and
constancy of love, to testify that all the surrounding world, together
with the entire complexus of its relations, is merely of value as so
much material in which love may be brought to light. For this reason
the specific act of such manifestation, since the only thing that
matters is the proof, is not determined by its own course, but is left
dependent on a freak of chance, the mood of the lady, the caprice of
external accidents. The same principle holds where the objects are
honour or bravery. They are proper to an individual who holds himself
far aloof from all further content of a more substantive character, who
is perfectly able to enter into any and every content as it may chance
to occur, to find himself the object of insult therein, or to look for
an opportunity in which he may display his courage and shrewdness.
As we have here absolutely no criterion as to what should or what
should not form part of this content, in the same way also we have no
principle in accordance with which we can fix what in each case is
really an attack upon honour or the true subject-matter of bravery. It
is just the same with the treatment of _right_, which is likewise an
object of chivalry. In other words, right and law are here not as yet
asserted as a condition and object which is of essentially independent
stability, or as a system which is continuously made more perfect in
accordance with law and its necessary content, but as themselves purely
the product of individual caprice, so that their interposition, no
less than the judgment passed upon that which in every particular case
is held to be right or wrong, is throughout relegated to the entirely
haphazard criteria of individual judgment.

(_b_) What we have before us generally, more particularly on the
secular field, in chivalry and the formalism of character above
indicated, is not merely, to a more or less degree, the contingency of
the circumstantial conditions of human action, but also that of the
soul in its attitude of volition. For individuals of this one-sided
characterization are capable of accepting as the substance of their
life that which is wholly contingent, conduct that is only sustained
by virtue of the energy of their character, and is carried out, or
fails in its contact with the inevitable collisions which the condition
of the world opposes to it. The same thing is true of the chivalry
which receives in honour, love, and fidelity a more lofty ground of
justification, and one entitled to rank with a truly ethical basis. On
the one hand, it is still emphatically a matter of chance on account of
the particular aspect of the circumstances on which it reacts; we find
that here the object is to carry out aims peculiar to some particular
person, instead of some work of general significance, and the modes
of its attachment with the rest of life fail to possess independent
stability. On the other hand, precisely at the point where we consider
such action as part of the personal life of individuals, we are aware
of the presence of caprice and illusion in respect to all that it
either projects, originates, or undertakes. The net result of such a
spirit of enterprise consequently, through all that it performs or
enters upon, no less than in its ultimate effects, is no other than a
world of events and fatalities which is self-dissolvent, a world of
comedy for this very reason.

This self-dissolution of Chivalry we find set before us and
artistically reproduced, pre-eminently and with unsurpassed adequacy,
by Ariosto and Cervantes, and, so far as it affects the fate of
such highly individual characters as those above described in their
isolation, by Shakespeare.

(_α_) In Ariosto, more particularly, an attempt is made to delight the
reader with the infinitely varied developments of personal destiny and
aims, the fabulous complexity of fantastic relations and ludicrous
situations over which the adventurous fancy of the poet plays to
the point of absolute frivolity. The heroes of these dramas are
seriously engaged in what is often unadulterated folly and the wildest
eccentricity. And, to note especial points, love is frequently degraded
from the Divine love of a Dante, or the romantic tenderness of a
Petrarca, to sensual tales and ludicrous collisions; or heroism appears
to be screwed up to a pitch that is so incredible it ceases to amaze,
and merely excites a smile over the fabulousness of such exploits. By
virtue, however, of this indifference in respect to the particular
manner in which dramatic situations are brought about, astonishing
complications and conflicts are introduced, broken off and once more
interwoven, chopped about, and finally resolved in a surprising way;
yet, despite his ludicrous treatment of chivalry, Ariosto is as able
to secure and display to us the true nobility and greatness which we
may find in chivalry, or the exhibition of courage, love, honour, and
bravery, as he can on occasion excellently depict other passions,
cunning, subtlety, presence of mind, and much else.

(_β_) Just as Ariosto inclines more to the _fabulous_ element in this
spirit of adventure, Cervantes develops that aspect of it which is
appropriate to _romantic_ fiction. We find in his Don Quixote a noble
nature in whose adventures chivalry goes mad, the substance of such
adventures being placed as the centre of a stable and well-defined
state of things whose external character is copied with exactness
from nature. This produces the humorous contradiction of a rationally
constituted world on the one hand, and an isolated soul on the other,
which seeks to create the same order and stability entirely through
his own exertions and the knight-errantry which could only destroy
it. Despite, however, this ludicrous confusion we have still in Don
Quixote that which we have already eulogized in Shakespeare. Cervantes
has created in his hero an original figure of noble nature endowed
with varied spiritual qualities, and one which at the same time
throughout retains our full interest. In all the madness of his mind
and his enterprise he is a completely consistent[294] soul, or rather
his madness lies in this, that he is and remains securely rooted in
himself and his enterprise. Without this unreflecting equanimity
respectively to the content and result of his actions he would fail
to be a truly romantic figure; and this self-assuredness, if we look
at the substantive character of his opinions, is throughout great and
indicative of his genius, adorned as it is with the finest traits of
character. And, further, the entire work is a satire upon the chivalry
of romance, ironical from beginning to end in the truest sense. In
Ariosto this genius of adventure is merely the butt of frivolous jest.
From another point of view, however, the exploits of Don Quixote are
merely the central thread around which a succession of genuinely
romantic tales are intertwined in the most charming way, in order
to unfold the true worth of that which the romance in other respects
scatters to the winds with the genius of comedy.

(_γ_) In somewhat the same way as we thus have seen chivalry, even
in respect to its most momentous interests, overturned in comedy,
Shakespeare, too, either places the characters and scenes of comedy in
juxtaposition to his downright and stable individualities, and tragic
situations and conflicts, or exalts the essential figures of his drama
through a profound humour above themselves and their uncouth, limited,
and false purposes. Falstaff, the fool in "Lear," the musician scene in
"Romeo and Juliet," will sufficiently illustrate the first alternative,
and Richard III the second.

(_c_) The dissolution of romance, in the sense we have hitherto
regarded it, introduces us finally and in the third place to the
spirit of the _novel_[295], in our modern sense of the term, which
historically the knight-errantry and pastoral romances precede. This
spirit of modern fiction is, in fact, that of chivalry, once more
taken seriously and receiving a true content. The contingent character
of external existence has changed to a stable, secure order of civic
society and state-life, so that now police administration, tribunals
of justice, the army and political government generally take the place
of those chimerical objects which the knight of chivalry proposed to
himself. For this reason the knightly character of the heroes who
play their parts in our modern novels is altered. Confronted by the
existing order and the ordinary prose of life they appear before us as
individuals with personal aims of love, honour, ambition, and ideals of
world reform, ideals in the path of which that order presents obstacles
on every side. The result is that personal desires and demands unroll
themselves[296] before this opposition to unfathomable heights. Every
man finds himself face to face with an enchanted world that is by no
means all that he asks for, which he must contend with for the reason
that it contends with himself, and in its tenacious stability refuses
to give way before his passions, but interposes as an obstacle the
will of some one else whoever it may be, his father's, his aunt's, or
social conditions generally. For the most part such a knighthood will
consist of young people, who feel it incumbent upon them to hew their
way through a world which makes for its own realization rather than
that of their ideals, and who hold it a misfortune that there should
be family ties, civic society, state laws, professions, and all the
rest of such things at all, because conditions of such solidity and so
inevitably restricted are so cruelly opposed to their ideal dreams and
the infinite claims of their souls. The main object now is to drive a
breach through this wall of facts, to change, to improve, or at least
carve for themselves in despite of it some little heaven on earth such
as they seek for, their ideal maiden, discover her, win her from the
clutches of her wicked relations or her evil circumstances, carry her
off and lay the balm of love on her wounds. Conflicts of this kind,
however, in our modern world are the apprentice years, the education of
individuality in the actual world; they have no further significance,
but the significance has, nevertheless, a real value. The object
and consummation of such apprenticeship consists in this, that the
individual drops his horns and finds his own place, together with his
wishes and opinions in social conditions as they are and the rational
order which belongs to them, that he enters, in short, upon the varied
field of life, and secures that position within it which is appropriate
to his powers. However soundly he may have rated the world and have
been shoved on one side, the day comes at last with the most of us
when the maiden is discovered and some kind of place in the world, he
marries, and is as much a Philistine as the rest of his neighbours. His
wife takes charge of his domestic arrangements; children do not fail to
put in an appearance; the adorable wife who was so unique, an angel,
acts very much as other wives do; the profession supplies its toils
and vexations, the married tie its domestic sorrows, and, in short, we
have the entire process of marital caterwauling once more illustrated.
In this history we may see the same old type of the adventurous spirit
with this distinction, that here that spirit discovers its real
significance, and all that is wholly fantastic in it receives its
necessary correction.


3. THE DISSOLUTION OF THE ROMANTIC TYPE OF ART

The last point which we have to establish still more closely is
that relatively to which the romantic spirit, for the reason that
it already is _intrinsically_ the principle of the dissolution of
the classic Ideal, manifests, in fact, this _dissolution_ clearly as
such a process. In this connection it is of the first importance to
consider the ultimately complete contingent and external character
of the material, which the activity of the artist seizes on and
informs. In the plastic material of the plastic arts the spiritual
conception is so related to the external medium that this external
show is the embodiment which uniquely belongs to that spiritual
significance itself, and possesses no real independence apart from
it. In romantic art, on the contrary, in which we find the inwardness
of Spirit withdraws within its own domain, the entire content of the
_external_ world secures the freedom of unfettered independence and the
assured subsistency of its own peculiar character and particularity.
Conversely, as we have seen, if the personal life of soul forms the
essential feature in the artistic product, it is a question of similar
indifference with what specific content of external reality and the
spiritual world the soul is vitally connected. The romantic Idea can
therefore assert itself through _every_ sort of condition; can embrace
every conceivable position, circumstance, relation, aberration,
confusion, conflict, and means of satisfaction; it is simply its own
personal and self-subsistent mode of conformation, the expression and
receptive form of the soul rather than any objective independently
valid form which is the object of search and is made good. In the
representation of romantic art therefore everything has its due place,
all the departments and phenomena of life, the greatest and the least,
the highest and most insignificant, what is moral with that which
is immoral and evil. And we may further note in particular that the
more secular the art becomes, the more it amasses the finite wealth
of the world, the more it takes to it with, delight, bestows upon
it a validity that is without reserve and exists for the artist in
such a world under the sole condition that it is reproduced in its
naked reality, so much the more is art at home with itself. Thus we
may observe in Shakespeare, on account of the fact that with him the
action as a rule runs its course in the most realistic association
with objective life, and is isolated and broken up in a mass of purely
accidental relations, and conditions of every kind, the least important
and most incidental no less than the most sovereign flights and most
weighty interests of poetry are each and all substantiated. So in
"Hamlet" we have the sentry on watch no less than the royal court;
in "Romeo and Juliet" the domestic _ménage_; in other pieces, not to
mention clowns, swashbucklers, and all the vulgarities of ordinary
life, we have pot-houses, carriers, chamber-pots and fleas, much as
in the representations by romantic art of the birth of Christ and the
adoration of the kings we do not fail to find oxen and asses, mangers
and straw[297]. And this is the kind of thing throughout, that the
scriptural text may receive its fulfilment, too, in art, "they that are
of low estate shall be exalted." It is from out this contingent sphere
of its subject-matter, which in a measure asserts itself as merely the
environment of a content intrinsically more important and in part also
in absolute independence, that the _downfall_ of romantic art issues,
to which we have already above adverted. In other words we have, on the
one hand, objective reality placed before us in what is from the point
of view of the Ideal its _prosaic objectivity_, that is, the content of
everyday life, which is not grasped in the substantive form in which
it adumbrates what is both moral and divine, but rather in that which
is for ever changing and which as temporal passes away. And, in the
further aspect of it, it is also the _subjective condition_, which,
with its emotion and insight, with the principle and authority of its
wit or humour, is able to exalt itself in mastery over the entire world
of the real, a mastery which leaves nothing in the ordinary connections
and significance where the commonsense consciousness finds it, and
is not fully satisfied until it has proved that everything which is
a part of that world is, by virtue of the form and relative position
which it receives from the view of it, mood and supreme gifts of the
artist[298], itself intrinsically capable of being broken up, and, as
such, is for the artistic vision and feeling dissolved. We have now, in
this connection, first, to add a few words on the principle contained
in those very varied works of art whose level of representation
approximates closely to the ordinary appearance of objective or
external reality, what in common parlance is called the imitation of
Nature.

_Secondly_, we shall have to discuss humour as a personal quality
in the artist. It plays a very considerable part in modern art, and
is that which in the case of many poets distinctively supplies the
fundamental character of their work.

_Thirdly_, it remains for us to offer a few suggestions, in conclusion,
on the point of view from which it is still possible for the art of
to-day to find a field for its activities.


(_a_) _The Artistic Imitation of what is Immediately presented by
Nature_

The realm of subjects which may be included in this sphere v of
artistic activity may be extended indefinitely for the reason that Art
takes for its content here not that which is by its own inherent law
necessary[299], the range of which is essentially self-contained, but
the contingent phenomena of reality in their unlimited modifications
of form and relation, Nature and her kaleidoscopic play of separate
pictures, the everyday action and affairs of man in his dependence
on natural conditions and their means of his satisfaction, in his
accidental habits also, attitudes, activities of family life, his
business as a citizen, and, generally, the incalculable variety of
all that shifts and changes in the world around us. And for this
reason this art is not merely, in the broad sense that applies more
or less to the romantic spirit in all its manifestations, a type
of portraiture: rather it tends to lose itself completely in the
mode of its portrayal, whether it be in sculpture, painting, or in
the descriptions of poetry. The tendency is to return to the exact
imitation of Nature, in other words, to the intentional approach to
the contingent aspects of what is immediately before the vision and
independently thus presented, prosaic existence in all its ugliness no
less than its beauty. The question, therefore, at once suggests itself
whether productions of this character have any right to be called art
at all. No doubt, if we simply fix before our attention the notion of
artistic work which fully corresponds to the Ideal, work which from one
point of view it is of the first importance that their content shall
not be thus intrinsically accidental or evanescent, and from another
point of view that their mode of presentation must be adequate in all
respects to such a content, then such artistic productions as we are
now considering will unquestionably appear to fall short. On the other
hand, there is another fundamental aspect of art which assumes here
an exceptional importance. This is the conception and execution of a
work of art which are personal to the artist, the aspect, that is, of
an individual talent, which is able to remain true to the inherently
substantive life of Nature no less than the embodiments of spiritual
experience though carried to the very limits of contingent condition
with which they may be involved, and which is further competent through
the vividness of its truth to import a significance into that which
is by itself insignificant, no less than by the amazing ability of
the technical execution itself. We have consequently to consider here
the degree in which the soul, that is, the genius and vitality of the
artist, is able to enter into the very being of such objects--whether
we consider their dominant idea[300], or the purely external form
of their appearance--and thus makes them visible in his art to our
eyes. And if we look at it from this point of view it will be found
impossible to deny that such creations have a genuine claim to the name
of art-products.

If we approach such more closely we shall find that among the
particular arts poetry and painting are the ones which are most
occupied with their subject-matter. For, on the one hand, we see here
that it is that which is itself essentially particular which supplies
their content, and on the other hand it is the accidental though in
this type of art the genuine peculiarities of the objective appearance
which is sought for as the mode of the reproduction. Neither the arts
of architecture, sculpture, or music are adapted to the fulfilment of
such a task.

(_α_) In poetry it is ordinary domestic life--the main source, that is,
of the probity, commonsense spirit, and the morality of everyday[301]
life--which is presented by art in the usual developments of civic
life, in scenes and characters selected from the middle and lower
classes. Among the French Diderot stands out conspicuous for the way
in which he has thus insisted on natural effects and the imitation
of the bluntness of fact. Among Germans it was Goethe and Schiller
who, with more lofty aim, struck out a path somewhat similar in their
youth, but rather, within this naturalness of life itself and its
particular detail, sought after a profounder content and conflicts
of essential significance. And in contrast to them we have Kotzebue
and Iffland, both of whom, in their several ways, the first with a
superficial rapidity of conception and execution, the second with a
more conscientious accuracy of detail and a homely kind of morality,
gave us the counterfeit of the daily life of their time in the prosaic
picture of its more limited aspects, with but a limited sense, either
of them, for genuine poetry. And generally, we may say, that it is
German art more than any other, and particularly that of our own times,
which has fastened with delight on this kind of treatment till it has
reached a sort of. virtuosity in it. In fact for a long period back Art
was more or less something of a stranger and a guest in our country,
not the child of our own loins.

Further, we may observe that in this attraction to the reality that
lies actually before us it is essential that the material assimilated
by such an art be cognate with such reality and at home in it[302];
it must be the national life of the poet and his immediate public.
It is on this very point of the kind of appropriation suited to an
art such as our own, which carried the purpose both in its content
and its methods of representation of making us feel at home in it,
even to the extent of sacrificing both beauty and ideality, that the
impulse originated which led to such a type of artistic production.
Other nations have been inclined to reject such material with scorn,
or only in more recent times have taken a more vital interest in such
opportunities as the ordinary course of human life offers.

(_β_) If we desire, however, to see what is most worthy of our
admiration in such productions, we must turn our attention to the later
genre-painting of the Dutch. We have already in the first part of this
work, when examining the intrinsic character of the Ideal, indicated,
so far as the general spirit of it is concerned, what we take to be
the substantial basis of such work[303]. That contentment in life
under its presentment of direct experience down to the most ordinary
and most insignificant detail is mainly due to the fact that this
people was obliged to work out for itself only after severe struggles
and hard labour that which Nature supplies with far less reserve to
other peoples. Further, circumscribed as it is by local conditions,
it has become great in this very concern for and appreciation of the
least things. From another point of view it is a people of fishermen,
sailors, citizens, and peasants, and for this reason is forced from
the start to rate highly all that may be useful and necessary both in
matters of greatest and least importance which it knows how to secure
with the most assiduous industry. As a further essential feature of its
development the religion of this Dutch folk was Protestantism, and it
is an exclusive characteristic of this form of religion that it seeks
to find a home in the prose of life and suffers the same to remain
just as it is by itself, and independently of religious associations,
and to retain its forms of growth in unrestricted freedom. It would
be quite impossible for any other nation, situated in other external
conditions, to create works of art of such pre-eminent quality from
the kind of material which we have placed before us in the Dutch
school of painting. And, moreover, despite the peculiar nature of this
artistic interest, the Dutch have not by any means discovered their
whole life-in what was necessitous or barren in the conditions of their
existence and what tended to oppress their vitality: on the contrary,
they have reformed their church itself, have overcome a religious
despotism precisely as they overcame the world-power and majesty of
Spain, and have finally through their exertions, their industry, their
bravery and thrift secured for themselves, in the consciousness of
their self-attained liberty, prosperity, comfort, rectitude, courage,
joviality, nay, even a superabundant sense of the joys of ordinary
existence. Herein lies the vindication of the typical subject-matter of
their art. The material of such an art will not, however, satisfy that
profounder significance which is due to a content that is essentially
true. If, however, neither our emotional nor our critical faculties
are wholly content with it the more we consider it closely the more
we shall feel reconciled to such defects. It is an essential part of
the art of painting and the man who paints that they should please and
carry us away with that sense of pleasure. And, to put it bluntly, if
we would really know what painting is, in looking at any particular
canvas we must be, at least, able to say of the master in question:
"Ah, this man can paint." The main point, therefore, does not turn on
the question how far the artist in his work is able to give us an exact
transcription of the object he presents before us. We have already the
completest vision of grapes, flowers, stags, sand-hills, sea, sun,
sky, the finery and decoration of ordinary life, horses, warriors,
peasants, smokers, teeth-extraction, and every kind of domestic scene.
We have only to go to Nature for such things and others like them. What
ought to captivate us is not the content in its bare reality. Rather
it is the appearance, which in comparison with the object is wholly
without interest[304]. This appearance is, moreover, by itself fixed
independently of the beautiful[305], and art consists in the mastery
of its reproduction of all the mysteries of the ever self-deepening
appearance of external phenomena[306]. And, above all, the function of
art consists in this that, armed with an exceptionally fine sense for
such things, it lies in ambush for the momentary and wholly transient
traits which it finds upon the surrounding world observed in its
individual aspects of life, aspects which, however, completely coincide
with the universal laws that dominate the appearance, and can retain
true and secure the most fading apparition. A tree, a landscape, is
something of independent and permanent stability. But to seize upon the
flash of a metal, the gleam of light through the grape, a vanishing
glance of the moon or the sun, a smile, the expressions of spiritual
life which are no sooner seen than they vanish, or ludicrous movements,
situations, and attitudes, to master such evanescent material as this
is the difficult task of this type of work. If classic art in its
Ideal has essentially confined its embodiment to that which is purely
substantive so here we have opened to our vision the changes of Nature
in their fleeting forms of expression, a stream of water, a waterfall,
waves of foam on the sea, still life with the accidental flashes of
glass, plate, and things of like nature, the outward appearance of man
in the most exceptional situations, a wife, for instance, threading her
needle by candle-light, a halt of robbers suddenly surprised, the most
instantaneous fraction of some human posture, the smile or sneer of a
peasant, all the things, in fact, in which men like Ostade, Teniers,
or Steen are masters. It is the triumph of art over the Past, in which
the substantive is likewise filched of its power over that which is
accidental and transitory.

And just as the appearance simply as such reflects the real content
of objects, so we may say that Art, in giving a permanent form to
the evanescent show of things, goes a step further. In other words,
quite apart from the objective realization, the means adopted in the
reproduction are themselves independently an end, in the sense that
the individual ability of the artist, and his use of the means his
art supplies, may itself rank as one of the objects aimed at by the
art product. In quite the early days of the school the artists of the
Netherlands studied profoundly the qualities of colour in its relation
to material substances[307]. Van Eyck, Hemling, and Schoreel[308] were
all of them capable of imitating in the most realistic way the sheen
of gold and silver, the varied light effects of jewels, silk, velvet,
and fur-stuffs. A mastery of this kind which, by the magic of colour
and the mysteries of its enchantment, is able to bring about artistic
results so entirely surprising requires no further vindication; it
justifies itself. As Spirit in thought and in its grasp of the world
by means of ideas and thoughts reproduces itself, so what is most
important here is the individual recreation of the external world,
independently of the bare object itself, in the sensuous medium, of
colours under effects of light and shade. It is in fact a kind of
objective music, a system of colour tones. In music the single tone is
of no value and only produces the musical effect in its relation to
some other, in its opposition, concord, modulation, and unison. It is
precisely the same thing with the music of colour. If we consider the
appearance of painted colour closely such as the gleam of gold or the
flash from the steel of battle we shall only see a number of white or
yellow dashes, points, coloured surfaces. The single colour alone does
not possess this gleam which we gather from the picture. It is only
by its association with other tints that we get the effect of glitter
and flash. Take for example the Atlas of Terburg; every individual
strip of colour here alone is simply a dull gray, more or less whitish,
bluish, or inclining to yellow: only when we take in the entire effect
from a distance, which gives us the relative contrast of each part to
the rest, dawns upon us the beautiful soft sheen which is true of the
genuine Atlas. And it is just the same with our velvet effect, play
of light, exhalation of cloud and so on through all pictorial effect
whatsoever. It is not so much the reflex of the artist's mood[309],
which, as is no doubt frequently the case with landscape, transfers
itself to the objects delineated, as it is the entire ability of the
artist, which seeks to make itself felt in this objective way as the
use of the means at his disposal in such a vital interaction that they
themselves straightway of their own cunning bring to birth a world of
objects.

(_γ_) And consequently the interest in the objects delineated tends to
revert to the fact that it is the unique powers of the artist himself
which are thus consciously displayed, and for which the embodiment of
a work of art, independently complete and self-composed, is not of so
much importance as a production in which the creative artist unveils
to us simply his genius. In so far as this _personal_ aspect is no
longer concerned with the external means of presentation but affects
the _content_ itself of the work, the art becomes thereby the art of
caprice and humour.


(_b_) _The Humour of Personality_[310]

In humour it is the personality of the artist, which so reproduces
itself both in its particular idiosyncrasies and profounder content,
that the main thing of importance is the spiritual value of this
personality.

(_α_) Inasmuch as humour does not so much propose to itself the task
of unfolding and informing an objective content according to its own
essential character, and, by artistic means, of articulating and
rounding it off in such a self-evolved process, as it consists in the
artist's own self-manifestation in the material, he will be mainly
concerned to let everything which tends to become an object and to
secure the rigid lines of reality, or which appears in the external
world, fall away and dissolve under the powerful solvent of his own
fancies, flashes of thought and arresting modes of conception. By this
means every appearance of self-subsistency in such a content, the
embodiment of which is secured in its coalescence through means of a
given fact, is entirely destroyed, and the product is now simply a play
with certain objects, a derangement or a turning upside down of a given
material, the enterprise of a rover throughout such, the interwoven
woof of the artist's own expression; views and moods, through which
he gives free scope to himself quite as much as to his immediate
subject-matter.

(_β_) The illusion which readily springs from such a type of art
consists in this, that though it is a very easy matter to make either
oneself or the object given the butt of drollery and wit, and for this
reason the form of humorous composition is that frequently adopted,
yet quite as often as not we find that the humour is dull enough when
our artist gives free rein to any chance conceits or jest which may
occur, which in their loose and patchy connections range to excess
beyond all reasonable limits, and with intentional eccentricity bind
up frequently together the most alien matter. Some nations have
proved themselves indulgent to such artistic experiments, others are
more severe. Among the French such attempts at humorous composition
have not as a rule been successful; we Germans have done better, and
we are more tolerant to the defects of such a style. Jean Paul, for
instance, is a much admired humourist among us; and yet it would be
difficult to point to any writer who is more eccentric in the way he
brings to the common fund what is most remote from his subject, and
patches together an incredibly motley assemblage of subjects, whose
sole bond of relationship is one of the artist's own fancy. The story,
the matter and progress of events are the features of least interest
in his romances. The main attraction throughout is the sportive
procession of his humour which uses everything in its course as a means
to establish his own triumph as a humourist. In this subordination
to itself and concatenation of every conceivable stuff that can be
raked out of the four quarters of the world, or the realm of the real,
the material of humour approximates once more to that of symbolism,
wherein significance and conformity likewise are disjoined, with this
difference, however, that in the former it is purely the personality
of the poet which commands the material no less than the significance,
co-ordinating them according to his own caprice[311]. Such a series
of freaks and fancies soon tires us, more particularly when we are
expected to live as best we can in the not unfrequently barely
decipherable combinations which have passed somehow or another in the
clouds of the poet's brain. With Jean Paul, as with scarce another, one
metaphor, sally of wit, drollery, or simile proves the death of its
neighbour. Nothing grows; there is an explosion, that is all. A plot,
however, which purports to have a _dénouement_ must first be unfolded
and prepared for such solution. From another point of view, when the
artist in question is essentially devoid of the solid core and support
of a mind and heart overflowing with the real actualities of existence,
his humour very readily lapses into what is sentimental and morbid.
And in this respect Jean Paul is no less an example.

(_γ_) In a humour of the best kind, which keeps itself aloof from
such excrescences, we must therefore have a genuinely spiritual
depth and wealth, able to exalt that which issues as the emanation
of a personality to the rank of real expression, and capable of
making that which is truly substantive arise from that which the
chance suggestions, the mere caprices of the artist, dictate. The
self-abandonment of the poet in the course of his exposition must
be, as it is with humourists such as Sterne or Hippel, a wholly
unembarrassed, easy-going, scarce perceptible kind of saunter[312],
which, insignificant though it appear, manages precisely by that means
to strike at the root of the main idea; and, for the reason that what
thus bubbles up in haphazard fashion are matters of detail, it is
essential that the conception, which binds the whole ideally together,
should have the deeper foundation, and that such detail should simply
flash forth the focal spark of genius.

We have now arrived at the point where romantic art itself for the
present terminates. It is the standpoint of our most modern outlook,
whose distinctive characteristic we shall find to be mainly this, that
the individual personality[313] of the artist stands supreme above both
the material he informs and his creation. He is no longer dominated by
the conditions of an essentially restricted sphere, in which he must
accept as given both the content and form of his work; it now lies in
his power to choose either as he wills, and to retain both on similar
terms.

(_c_) _The End of the Romantic Type of Art_

Art, in so far as it has hitherto been the subject of our inquiry, had
for its fundamental basis the unity of significance and form, and, as a
further type of it, the unity of the personality of the artist with the
work he embodies and creates[313]. More closely defined we may say that
it was the specific type of this union, which supplied the content and
its appropriate artistic presentment with the substantive and directive
principle running through all the images therein.

We found at the commencement of our inquiry with reference to the
origins of art that in the Eastern world Spirit was not as yet
independently free. It still sought that which it conceived to be the
Absolute in the domain of Nature, and apprehended the natural as itself
essentially Divine. At a further stage the outlook of classical art
set before itself the vision of the Greek Pantheon as unconstrained
and inspired beings, but still in all essential features formed as our
humanity, as individuals charged with a positive physical process[314].
Finally it was romantic art which first permitted Spirit to penetrate
the depths of its own world, in contrast to which flesh, the external
reality and frame of this world generally, albeit the fact that the
spiritual and absolute could alone manifest itself in this world, in
the first instance was divested of all claim to reality[315], but for
all that afterwards asserted such a positive claim with increasing
strength and urgency.

(_α_) These distinctive views of the world process constitute religion,
the substantive Spirit or genius of peoples and eras; they not merely
influence art, but are threads of life which permeate every other
domain or province of the living present to which they belong. As
every man, in every sphere of activity, whether it be on the field of
politics, religion, art, or science, is a child of his own age, and
receives the task to elaborate the essential content and consequently
the inevitable plastic form of that age, so, too, the aim that
determines the content of art is no other than that of finding in its
own medium and resources some adequate expression for the spirit of a
nation. So long as the artist is in immediate identity and unshaken
faith inextricably one with the determinate content of such a view of
the world and the religion where it culminates, to that extent this
content and the mode of its presentation will call forth his most
_serious_ powers; in other words this content remains for him the
infinite substance and truth of his own consciousness, a content,
with which he lives, down to the inmost recesses of his spiritual
nature, in original unity; and, moreover, the embodied presence in
which he reveals the same is for him as such an artist[316] the final,
necessary, and highest type of such a form, namely that of bringing
before the aesthetic sense the absolute being[317] and the ideal
significance[318] of the subject-matter of his art. It is through
that aspect of his material which is no other than his own immanent
substance[319] that he finds that which binds him to the specific
mode of his exposition. For the material, and with it the form that
appertains to it, carries the artist directly into himself[320], as
being the real essence of his determinate being, which he does not
imagine but rather actually is, and consequently has only to make this
essential part of him an objective fact to himself, to conceive and
elaborate such in a vital form from his own resources. Only under such
conditions is the enthusiasm of the artist fully awakened for either
the content or manifestation of his art; only thus his creations become
no mere product of caprice, but spring up within him, out of him,
out of this living field of his substance, this spiritual capital,
whose content never ceases to be active, until, through the efforts
of the master, it has attained a defined form adequate to its own
ideal notion. When, however, we of to-day would seek to make a Greek
god or, as our own Protestants try to do, a Virgin Mary the object of
a piece of sculpture or a picture, it is impossible for us to treat
such a material with entire seriousness. It is the faith of our inmost
heart which fails us here, albeit even in ages of absolute belief the
artist was by no means necessarily what is commonly understood as a
pious mart, any more than at any time artists generally come in an
exceptional sense under that category. The demand is rather simply
this that in the view of the artist his content should be no other
than the substantive significance, the most spiritual truth of its
own conscious life, and that it should unfold the necessary laws of
its mode of presentation. For an artist is, in his creative activity,
a child of Nature; his ability is in one aspect a talent he receives
from _her._ His method of working is not the pure activity of rational
apprehension, which places itself in direct opposition to its material,
and unites with it in the medium of free thoughts and pure thinking.
Rather, as one not yet released from the natural aspect, it[321]
coalesces immediately with the object, in full faith, and is identical
with it heart and soul. The artistic personality reposes frankly in the
object, the work of art proceeds in like manner absolutely from the
unimpaired spiritual depth and power of genius; the product is _ferme_,
unwavering, and its entire intensive effect preserved. And this it is
which supplies the fundamental condition of the final demand that Art
be presented us in its flawless totality.

(_β_) The situation, however, has entirely changed in view of the
position we have been forced to indicate as that occupied by Art in
this its final stage of evolution. We have, however, no reason to
regard this simply as a misfortune which the chance of events has
made inevitable, one, that is to say, by which art has been overtaken
through the pressure of the times, the prosaic outlook and the dearth
of genuine interests. Rather it is the realization and progress of art
itself, which, by envisaging for present life the material in which
it actually dwells, itself materially assists on this very path, in
each step of its advance, to make itself free of the content that
is presented. In the very fact that we have an object set before
our ocular or spiritual vision, whether it be by Art or the medium
of Thought, with a completeness which practically exhausts it, so
that we have emptied it, and nothing further remains for our eyes to
discover or our souls to explore, in that alone the vital interest
disappears. Our interest only continues where our faculties are kept
fresh and alive. Spirit only concerns itself actively with objects so
long as there is still a mystery unsolved, a something unrevealed.
And this is so so long as the material remains identical with our
own substance. A time comes, however, when Art has displayed, in all
their many aspects, these fundamental views of the world, which are
involved in its own notion, no less than every province of the content
that is bound up with such world-views: when that time arrives such
art is necessarily cast loose of that which has been its previous
specific content for any particular people or age; in such a case the
renewed craving for material to work upon only fully awakes when it
is accepted as inevitable that we must first bid farewell to all that
its activity has previously substantiated: just as in Greece, for
example, Aristophanes opposed a resolute face to his age, and Lucian to
the entire historical Past of his country; or in Italy and Spain, in
the decline of the Middle Ages, both Ariosto and Cervantes opened the
attack on Chivalry.

In opposition to the age, then, in which the artist, by virtue of
the concrete content of his nationality and times, stands within
a definite outlook upon the world and its modes of embodiment, we
become aware of a point of view diametrically antagonistic, which, so
far as its complete enunciation is concerned, has only in the most
modern times received its due significance. It is only in our own days
that we find the artist no less than the man of science among pretty
nearly all civilized nations, has mastered the cultivation of his
reflective faculty, the art of criticism, and among us Germans the
absolute freedom of thought, and has made this critical apparatus,
both relatively to the material and the form of its production, having
already run through all the necessary phases or types of romantic art,
a kind of _tabula rasa._[322] The specific mode of association for any
particular context, and a manner of presentment exclusively pertinent
to that and no other material, are things which the artist of to-day
looks upon as obsolete. Art has become a free instrument which is
qualified to exercise itself relatively to every content, no matter
what kind it may be, agreeably to the principles or criteria of the
artist's own peculiar craftsmanship. The artist stands superior to all
specific modes and conformations, however much hallowed in the usage,
and moves forward free and independent, untrammelled by either form or
presentment such as previously have brought before man's vision and
mind the one holy and eternal substance. No content, no form is any
longer identical directly with the inmost soul of the artist[323],
his nature, his unaware[324] and substantive essence; every material
he may treat with indifference, if he only keep true to the formal
principle that he make his work consonant with beauty and a really
artistic execution. There is, in short, no material nowadays which we
can place on its own independent merits as superior to this law of
relativity; and even if there is one thus sublimely placed beyond it
there is at least no absolute necessity that it should be the object
of _artistic_ presentation. For these reasons the artist is situated
relatively to the content of his work much as the dramatist who places
before us and develops other and alien characters. It is quite true
that even our poet of to-day interposes the atmosphere of his genius
within his delineations, and the warp that he weaves is in fact that
of his own substance; but this only applies to what is universal there
or wholly accidental. The closer traits of individualization are not
his own, but rather he makes use of in this respect his stores of
images, modes of metaphor, earlier types of art, which by themselves he
does not care for, and whose significance is exclusively dependent on
the fact that they turn out to be the most suitable for this or that
matter in hand. In most of the arts, and particularly in the plastic
types, the subject-matter is, apart from this, supplied from outside
to the artist. He works to order, and when occupied with whatever
tales, scenes, and portraits thus come in his way, whether sacred or
profane, has merely to look to it that he can make something out of
them. For, however much he leaves the impress of his genius on a given
content, it remains throughout for all that a material which is not
itself directly the substance of his own conscious life. Nor is it of
any real assistance to him, that he further appropriates, so to speak,
with his soul and substance views of the world that belong to the Past,
in other words, tries to root himself in one of such, and, let us say,
turns Roman Catholic, as not a few have done in recent times for Art's
sake, in order to give their soul some secure foundation, and enable
the definite lines of their artistic product to become themselves
something which shall appear to have an independently valid growth. It
is not a prime condition of the artistic state that the artist should
come completely to terms with his own soul, or should be obliged to
look after his own salvation. What is important is that his soul in
its greatness and freedom should from the first, before it thinks of
creating, both know and possess that whereof it is, should stand fast
by it and reliant within it; and, above all, is it indispensable that
the spirit and mind of the great artist of to-day should have a liberal
education, one in which every kind of superstition and belief which
remains limited to circumscribed forms of outlook and presentment,
should receive their proper subordination as merely aspects or phasal
moments of a larger process; aspects which the free human spirit has
already mastered when it once for all sees that they can furnish
it with no conditions of exposition and creative effort which are,
independently for their own sake, sacrosanct; and only ascribes to them
value in virtue of the loftier content, which itself, as creator and
worker, he reposes in them, making them thus what they ought to be[325].

It is somewhat in this way nowadays that any and every form and
material may prove of service to and under the control of the artist
whose executive talents and genius have been liberated in their
independence from the former limitation to a specific mode of artistic
work.

(_γ_) If we ask, then, in conclusion what are the content and the
modes which may be considered _peculiar_ to the present sphere of our
inquiry, the result will be approximately as follows.

The universal types of art were pre-eminently related to the absolute
truth to which Art attains, and they discovered the source of their
differentiation in the specific grasp they respectively supplied of
that which passed for the Absolute in the human consciousness, and
which itself carried the principle of its manner of embodiment. In
this respect we have already seen in symbolism Nature's significances
pass before us as content, and her facts and human personification as
the mode of presentation; similarly in the classical type, we have
passed in review spiritual individuality, but as bodily presence which
carried no memory with it[326], and over which the abstract necessity
of Fate stood paramount. In the romantic the intellectual being of the
personal consciousness was asserted inherent in its own substance, and
for the inmost content of which the external form remained entirely
contingent. In this concluding type as in the earlier ones the object
of art was the Divine in its explicitly unfolded nature. This Divine
had however to make itself an object, to define itself, and in the
process to pass from its own immediate substance to the secular content
of the personal consciousness. In the first instance the infinite
essence of personality was reposed in honour, love, and fidelity;
after that in the particular individuality, the specific character
which happened to coalesce with the particular mode of human life in
question. This coalescence, together with the specific limitation of
content appropriate to such, was finally put an end to by humour,
which proved itself capable of dissolving or making pliable to its
purpose any or every line of stable definition, and by so doing made
it possible for art to transcend its own limitations. In this passing
away of Art beyond itself, however, Art is quite as truly the return
of man upon himself, a descent into his own soul-depths, by which
process art strips off from itself every secure barrier set up by a
determinate range of content and conception, and unfolds within our
common humanity[327] its new holy of holies, in other words the depths
and heights of the human soul simply, the universal shared of all men
in joy and suffering, in endeavour, action, and destiny. From this
point onwards it is from himself that the artist receives his content,
is in truth the Spirit of man assigning to himself his own boundaries,
contemplating, experiencing and giving utterance to the infinitude of
his emotions and situations, a spirit to which nothing is any more
alien which can possibly emanate as life from the human soul. A
content of this nature is one which cannot persist under the defined
modes of art independent and apart from the activity of the artist.
Rather the definition of content and its elaboration is transferred by
it to the caprice of his invention. But, despite of this, it excludes
no vital interest, because Art is no longer under constraint to
represent that, and only that, which is completely at home in one of
its specific grades. Everything is now possible as its subject-matter,
in which man, on whatever plane of life he may be, possesses either the
need or the capacity of making his abode.

Confronted with a material of such a wide range and multiplicity, it is
above all of first importance that in respect to the mode of artistic
treatment the Spirit that is now active in our present life should
throughout declare itself as such. Our modern artist may no doubt join
the company of ancients and elders. It is a fine thing to be one of
the Homerides, though we stand last of the line; pictures, too, that
reflect for us once again the atmosphere of romantic art in the Middle
Ages will have a worth of their own. But this universal sufficiency,
depth, and unique suitability of a given material such as we above
described is another thing altogether, and equally so its mode of
presentation. Neither Homer, Sophocles, Dante, Ariosto, nor Shakespeare
can reappear in our times. What has been sung so greatly, what has been
expressed with such freedom, has been sung and expressed once for all.
Only the Present blows fresh; all else is faded and more faded. In the
matter of history we must fain make it something of a reproach to the
French, and we may add to it a criticism on the score of beauty, that
they have presented on their stage Greek and Roman heroes, Chinese, and
Peruvians as so many French princes and princesses, and moreover have
given them the motives and views peculiar to the age of Louis XIV or
Louis XV. Yet, after all, had these very motives and opinions only been
intrinsically deeper and more beautiful than they are we should have
had little fault to find in the fact that the Past is here translated
into Art's present life. On the contrary all material whatsoever, it
matters not from what age or nation it hails, only retains its truth
for art as part of this vital and actual Present, in which it floods
the human heart with the reflected image of its own life, and brings
truth home to man's senses and mind. It is just this revelation and
renewed activity of that humanity which is immortal in all its varied
significance and infinite reconstruction, which, in this its receptacle
of human situations and emotions, forms the possible no less than the
absolute content of the art of our time.

If we now take a glance back, having established in a general way the
content which distinguishes the subject-matter of this portion of
our inquiry, at that which we finally considered to be the modes of
romantic art's dissolution, we may recall the fact that we then defined
them under a term applicable to all, as the falling to pieces of Art,
a process which, in one of its aspects, was due to an imitation of the
objects of Nature in all the detail of their contingent appearance,
and in another was referable to humour, that unfettered activity of
the individual soul in all its capricious mastery. In conclusion,
we may still draw attention to a further way of fixing on our minds
that _terminus_ of romantic art without prejudice to our previous
remarks upon it. In other words, just as in our advance from symbolism
to classical art, we considered the transitional forms of image,
simile, and epigram, we have also here in romantic art a form somewhat
similar worthy of attention. In those previous modes of conception the
important thing was the falling asunder of the spiritual significance
and the external form, a severation which in part was cancelled by
the activity of the artist's own mind, and in the exceptional case
of the epigram could possibly be converted into complete identity.
Romantic art was from the beginning the profounder disunion of that
inmost soul-life which finds its satisfaction in its own wealth, which,
moreover, for the reason that generally the objective world does not
completely satisfy the demand of Spirit essentially as such, persisted
in its discordance with or indifference to it. This opposition in the
evolution of romantic art finally led us perforce to the point where
we found that the interest was exclusively centered on the contingent
aspects of externality, or the equally capricious activity of the soul.
When, however, this exclusive attention to either side, whether it be
the externality or purely personal presentment, agreeably to the main
principle of romantic art, is carried so far that it becomes a real
penetration of the soul within the object, and the aspect of humour in
its relation to the object and its embodiment within the sphere of its
own individual reaction[328] assumes a real importance, in that case
we are face to face with what is a coalescence[329] with the object,
and is nothing less than an _objective_ humour. Such a coalescence,
however, can only be of limited range, and find expression merely, say,
within a lyric, or at most in but a portion of a larger composition.
For if its boundaries widened, and it was carried throughout the
object-matter in question, it would necessarily become identical
with the action and event, become, in short, a completely objective
representation. What we have to consider here is rather a sensitive
self-abandonment of the artist's soul in his object, which no doubt is
unfolded in some kind of process, but nevertheless remains a movement
of the imagination and heart indicative rather of _individual_ genius;
a caprice in some sort, and yet not entirely capricious or intentional,
but rather a sympathetic expansion of the artist's genius, which
devotes itself solely to its subject-matter, and makes it exclusively
its interest and content.

We may usefully compare with such a spirit the last blooms of the
ancient Greek epigram, in which this type appears in its first and
simplest features. The mode we have here in our mind is in the first
instance apparent when the reference to the object is not a mere
statement of fact, is not merely an inscription or transcript which
states what the object is, but is associated with a deeper emotion,
a sleight of witticism, an ingenious fancy, or a real flash of
imaginative power, any or all of which through their poetical grasp
give life to and expand the minutest detail. Poems of this description,
it matters little what their subject-matter may be, whether a tree, a
mill-stream, spring, dead things or alive, are of infinite variety and
may be found in the literature of all nations. They are, however, a
subordinate grade of poetry, and very readily come off halting. For at
least in a country of cultivated speech and reflection there are few
objects and conditions, indeed, which will not offer some further link
of association to every man. And just as the average man thinks himself
qualified to write a letter he will rate his capacity to express such
ideas. One is very easily tired of a universal spirit of sing-song such
as this, even though a stray novelty of touch may be here and there
thrown in. The importance of such a class of composition, therefore,
depends almost entirely on the question how far the artist's soul,
with its full intensity of life, and with a spiritual and intellectual
wealth that is both profound and extensive, has without reserve entered
vitally into such conditions, situations, and so forth; has made a home
there, and from the object in question created something unseen before,
something beautiful, something essentially worth our attention.

To this end the Persians and Arabians pre-eminently in the oriental
splendour of their images, in the unfettered enjoyment of their
imagination, which enters into the being of its subject-matter in the
purest spirit of contemplation, offer, even for present times and our
own intensity of spiritual penetration, a glorious exemplar. Both the
Spaniards and Italians, too, have done excellent things in the same
direction. It is true that Klopstock says of Petrarch:

/$
                   --Laura besang Petrarca in Liedern,
     Zwar dem Bewunderer schön, aber dem Liebenden nicht[330].
$/

but Klopstock's own love-odes are themselves full of moral reflections,
troubled yearning and passion that is for ever writhing after
immortality of happiness. What we admire most in Petrarch is the
free atmosphere of essentially noble emotion, which, however much it
expresses the longing for the beloved, can none the less repose on its
own heart. For this kind of longing, indeed sensual desire itself, is
far from being absent in the range of the art we now are considering,
when the subject is restricted to wine and love, the tavern and the
glass; the excessive voluptuousness of the images of Persian writers
themselves are in fact an illustration of this; but in this case the
imagination, in the interest it possesses for the intelligence, removes
the object entirely from the sphere of desire which has a practical
aim. It possesses an interest merely in the realm of its own exuberant
activity, finding its delight freely in its own countless freaks and
fancies, and making joys and griefs alike the subject of its sport
Among our modern poets the two who preeminently combine a similar
buoyancy of genius with a more intimate and spiritually searching depth
of imagination are Goethe in his "Westöstlicher Divan" and Rückert.
The essential contrast between Goethe's poetry in the "Divan" and his
more early efforts is quite remarkable. In his "Welcome and Farewell,"
for instance, the language and description are no doubt fine in
their way, true feeling is there. In other respects the situation is
commonplace, the climax is poor, and of imagination in the full and
free sense there is no further trace. The poem in the "Divan" entitled
"Recovery"[331] is composed in a totally different spirit. Love is here
wholly absorbed in the imagination, and the movement, happiness, and
bliss of the latter are throughout predominant. And, to speak generally
of artistic productions of this class, we may affirm that we find
in them no personal craving, no indications of enamourment, no mere
desire, but a pure delight in the objects delineated, an inexhaustible
self-absorption of imagination, an innocent play, a free surrender to
the coquettish humours even of rhyme and ingenious versification; and
withal an intense jubilation of the soul in its own free movement, a
spirit, which, by means of this very exhilaration induced by artistic
form[332] lifts the soul high above all its painful perplexity into the
ordered limits of the real.

And here we must close our consideration of the particular types
according to which the Ideal of art throughout its process is
self-differentiated. We have made these several modes the subject of
a more extensive inquiry, with a view to unfolding the content of the
same, a content from which the proper modes of artistic presentment
are themselves also deducible. For in Art, too, as in all other human
production, it is the content which is finally decisive. In fact Art,
if we consider the true notion of it, has one and only one supreme
function. It has to set forth in adequate form, within the grasp of our
actual senses, what is itself essential content; and the Philosophy of
Art should consequently regard it as its main business to comprehend
in Thought what this abundance of content and its beautiful mode of
manifestation verily is.

[Footnote 256: _Subjektivität._]

[Footnote 257: _Für andere_, that is for other spiritual beings than
the absolute Spirit as such.]

[Footnote 258: _Die Innigkeit._]

[Footnote 259: _Aus dem Innern exzeugten._]

[Footnote 260: _Sich in sich hineinbildend._ That is by continually
supplying new modes to the subjective spiritual content--until we
arrive at the almost purely spiritual mode of music.]

[Footnote 261: _Die innere Auflösung._]

[Footnote 262: The phenomenal world of Nature.]

[Footnote 263: _Die Verwickelungen._]

[Footnote 264: _Die Abentheuerlichkeit._ Hegel means that it is like
the result of an adventure--unforeseen rather than "fantastic."]

[Footnote 265: _Ein individuelles Subjekt._]

[Footnote 266: That which supplies its own justification.]

[Footnote 267: Lit., unenclosed, that is open indefinitely and so
undefined, unsounded.]

[Footnote 268: That is, it is open to extraneous causes that cannot be
predicted from the mere essential notion of them.]

[Footnote 269: I presume this is the meaning of the expression _das
Aussergöttliche_ and _das partikulär Menschliche._]

[Footnote 270: _Pralle_--stiff, metallic in its steeply rigidity.]

[Footnote 271: Act I, sc. 5.]

[Footnote 272: _Miserabilität._ One of Hegel's own coinage.]

[Footnote 273: An unknown work to me.]

[Footnote 274: _Ein inneres Werden._]

[Footnote 275: One is reminded of the Mohammedan fatalism. It is Allah.]

[Footnote 276: _In einfacher Gedrungenheit._ Hegel means that it is
tightly self-sealed, that and nothing more.]

[Footnote 277: _Hineingelegtseyn._ The reference of the whole being to
one object.]

[Footnote 278: This was the representation which took place in Berlin
in 1820, with Mademoiselle Erelinger as Juliet.]

[Footnote 279: _List_, usually in depreciatory sense, here otherwise.]

[Footnote 280: With the exception, of course, of her presumed father
Prospero.]

[Footnote 281: That is, a poetry based rather on the reflective faculty
than the creative imagination.]

[Footnote 282:

/$
     "He saw it plunge, drink boldly,
     Then sink in sea-depths lost;
     And what his eyes saw loosed him,
     No drop the king drank more."
$/
]

[Footnote 283: _Lebensläufe in aufsteigender Linie._]

[Footnote 284: _In sich totales, unbeschränktes Gemüth._ The
expressions would appear to contradict one another, but the emphasis is
on the unity of a whole which is itself not fully defined.]

[Footnote 285: It is not so much a third type as a way of looking at
the previous ones.]

[Footnote 286: It is contingent, of course, to the individual. Hegel
does not mean that it is without causality.]

[Footnote 287: The sphere of objective fact.]

[Footnote 288: From Nature, that is.]

[Footnote 289: _Ihres inneren Verlaufs._ I suppose Hegel means
action under the aspect in which it forms a part of the individual
development--regarded in its relation to will and consciousness.]

[Footnote 290: That is, the Christian community.]

[Footnote 291: _Den Menschen als Menschheit_, that is in his generally
secular aspect.]

[Footnote 292: I presume this is the sense of _gebrochen_ here. But
lower down it would mean apparently _discordant._]

[Footnote 293: By "fantastic" Hegel seems to me to mean that which is
based on a fancy or imagination that is wholly personal to the artist,
and so adventitious in its results.]

[Footnote 294: _Sicheres Gemüth_--"consistent" both in its literal and
metaphorical senses--one that holds together and is thus self-assured.]

[Footnote 295: _Das Romanhafte._ I cannot think of an English
expression which exactly corresponds.]

[Footnote 296: _Sich schrauben_, like the winding smoke from a
bottle--the corkscrew---ironical of course.]

[Footnote 297: One of the finest illustrations of such a universality
of interest may be found in Ruskin's description of Tintoret's
"Adoration of the Magi."]

[Footnote 298: _Genialität_ and _genial_ mean a good deal more than our
English words geniality and genial--they refer directly to genius.]

[Footnote 299: _Das in sich Nothwendige._ The reference is mainly to
the stricter principles of classical art.]

[Footnote 300: _Nach ihrer ganzen Inneren._]

[Footnote 301: Lit., "Which possesses for its substantial content
(_Substanz_) the integrity (_Rechtschaffenheit_), world-wisdom [here I
think no more is meant than "good sense"] and the morale of daily life
(_des Tages_)."]

[Footnote 302: Lit., "That the material, so far as art appropriates it,
be immanent and at home in that reality." _Immanent_ must I think refer
back to _die vorliegende Werklichkeit._]

[Footnote 303: Vol. I, pp. 229, 230.]

[Footnote 304: That is it has no interest _quâ_ a natural object.]

[Footnote 305: _Scheinen_ must mean here natural rather than artistic
appearance. Natural appearance is not _necessarily_ beautiful.]

[Footnote 306: _Des sick in sich vertiefenden Scheinens._ It is
self-deepening in proportion to the _feiner Sinn_ below mentioned.]

[Footnote 307: I think this is the meaning of the expression _das
Physikalische der Farbe_--not so much the material constituents of
colour as the effect of colour on physical substances. But either
interpretation makes sense.]

[Footnote 308: An artist unknown to me.]

[Footnote 309: _Gemüth_. I think Hegel uses the word here in the
narrower sense rather than "soul" generally.]

[Footnote 310: _Der subjektive Humor._]

[Footnote 311: Lit., "And arranges them side by side in an alien
order." That is, under a principle of co-ordination which does not lie
in the subject-matter.]

[Footnote 312: _Unscheinbares Fortschlendern._]

[Footnote 313: _Die Subjektivität des Kunstlers._ The expression
as used here and below implies, of course, not so much the formal
personality or character as the individual spirit and its resources.]

[Footnote 314: I presume this is the meaning of _von einem affirmativen
Momente._]

[Footnote 315: Lit., "Was at first posited as naught."]

[Footnote 316: That is, as an artist for whom it is _wahrhafter Ernst._]

[Footnote 317: _Das Absolute_ here is, I think, referable to the
subject-matter of art rather than to be taken as "the Absolute" simply.]

[Footnote 318: _Die Seele._ Perhaps "vital principle" would be better.]

[Footnote 319: That is, Spirit or mind.]

[Footnote 320: There is an uncorrected misprint here, _der_ should be
_den_ and _tragen_ would be an improvement on _trägt._]

[Footnote 321: I am not certain whether the subject is here the artist
himself, or his mode of working. The context would suggest the latter,
the better sense the former.]

[Footnote 322: Reflection has destroyed the _necessity_ of any
particular form.]

[Footnote 323: That is the life of Spirit. _Das Heilige und Ewige._]

[Footnote 324: _Bewusstlosen._ His spiritual nature in its unexplored
universality is, I presume, the sense.]

[Footnote 325: _Als ihnen gemäss._ As adequate to their completely
explicit nature.]

[Footnote 326: _Aber als leibliche unerinnerte Gegenwart._ I am not
sure that I know precisely the sense here, unless it amounts to
this that the Greek gods were without an historical memory. Their
immortality swallowed up in its repose the sense of beings in time, and
assumed to be in human bodily shape.]

[Footnote 327: _Zu ihrem neuen Heiligen den Humanus macht_, an uncommon
phrase.]

[Footnote 328: _Innerhalt seines subjektiven Reflexes._ That is, the
synthetic activity of humour's reflection.]

[Footnote 329: _Verinnigung_, a stronger word than _Vereinigung._]

[Footnote 330: "Petrarch sang songs of his Laura. To him who wonders at
beautiful songs they are beautiful, to the lover they are not so."]

[Footnote 331: "_Wiederfinden_."]

[Footnote 332: I am not quite sure that _die Heiterkeit des Gestaltens_
does not mean "the buoyancy of the created form."]


END OF VOL. II





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philosophy of Fine Art, volume 2
(of 4), by G. W. F. Hegel

