CHAPTER III


THE CONSCIOUS SYMBOLISM OF THE COMPARATIVE TYPE OF ART


The result we have now arrived at in the above consideration of the
Sublime, and in contradistinction to the strictly unpremeditated
type of symbolization, consists partly in the _separation_ of its
own independent Inwardness, consciously apprehended in its quality
of significance, from the concrete appearance that is thereby
distinguished from it, partly also in the direct or indirect
affirmation of the _incompatibility_ of the two above mentioned
aspects to one another, by which it appears that the significance as
the universal passes beyond the particular fact and its singularity.
But in the imagination of pantheism, no less than in the type of the
Sublime, the real content, that is the One universal substance of all
concrete existence, was unable to be presented to imaginative vision
or sense-perception without some relation to created existence, albeit
created under a mode inadequate to express the essence of that Unity.
This relation, however, was attached to the substance itself, which,
in the negativity of its accidents, supplied the proof of its Wisdom,
Goodness, Power, and Justice[76]. For this reason the relation between
significance and content is also in the case of the Sublime, at least
in a general way, of a kind that is both _essential_ and _necessary_,
and the two sides thus linked with each other are not yet, in the
strict sense of the term, external to each other. It is, however,
inevitable, for the reason that it is implicitly present in symbolism,
that this externality should come to be directly posited and appear
in the forms we have now to consider in this concluding chapter on the
art of symbolism. We may summarily describe them as _conscious_[77]
symbolism, or, in a still more direct way, the _comparative_ type of
art.

In other words, what we understand by conscious symbolism is this,
that the significance is not merely independently cognized, but is
_expressly_ set forth as distinct from the external mode, in which it
is represented. The significance then appears, as in the case of the
Sublime, to receive an independent expression which is not essentially
in the actual embodiment given to it under the mode employed[78].
The relation, however, of both to one another no longer continues
to be, as in the type last examined, a mode of relation which is
fundamentally due to the significance itself, but is a more or less
haphazard association, which may generally be expressed as the product
of the _subjectivity_ of the poet, the absorption of his spirit in an
external object, the result of his wit or invention; a mode, in short,
which enables the poet at one time rather to make a beginning directly
from a sensible phenomenon, and to imagine for it from his own mind
a spiritual significance cognate with it, and at another to select
in preference as his point of departure the real or only relatively
personal idea, with a view to embodying the same, or even to do nothing
more than relate one image with another, which presents characteristic
features of resemblance.

This kind of linking together must consequently be distinguished from
that still naïve and _unconscious_ symbolism in virtue of the fact that
now the individual recognizes the inward essence of the significances
he adopts for the content of his creation no less than, the positive
nature of the external objects, which he employs as means of comparison
for the more direct presentment of the same, placing both in this
juxtaposition with clear intention owing to the similarity he has
discovered between them. The distinction, on the other hand, between
the present type and that of the Sublime is rather to be traced to the
fact that though under one aspect it may be true that the separation
and juxtaposition of the significances with their concrete shaping in
the work of art is itself set forth in express relief to a less or
higher degree, yet, on the other hand, for the reason that it is no
longer the Absolute itself that is accepted as content, but any defined
and restricted significance whatever, the typical relation of the
Sublime falls away, and in its place a relation is set up within the
act of severance thus intentionally made between the real significance
and its embodiment, a relation which in effect produces the very result
in the sphere of premeditated comparison that we found unconscious
symbolism in its own way proposed as an object.

In one word, so far as _content_ is here concerned, the Absolute
itself, _the Lord of creation_, can no longer be conceived as the
significance which Art seeks after. That this is so is rendered
inevitable by the already obvious fact that on account of the
severation of more concrete existence from the notion, and further,
if only under the mode of comparison, the juxtaposition of both sides
thus separated, the category of_finitude_ is there and then accepted
by the artistic consciousness, in so far as it conceives this form
as the real and ultimate one; and for this reason, moreover, the
imagined significances, being selected wholly from the sphere of the
finite, have no further association whatever with the Absolute as the
fundamental significance of all created things. Sacred poetry stands
out in entire contrast to this, for in this God is the exclusive
significance of all things; as set over against Him, they have
no stability at all, but vanish or are nothing. If, however, the
significance is able to discover its image and parallel of resemblance
in that which is itself essentially _restricted_ and finite, it follows
that it must itself to that extent be limited in its range, as, in
fact, it is in the type of symbolic conception which now occupies our
attention, where that which is found is nothing more than an image,
necessarily external to the content, selected purely at random by the
poet for the sake of the _similarity_ it presents to the content, and
as such regarded as relatively adequate thereto. For this reason there
is but one trait left us in the comparative type of art, which is also
shared by that of the Sublime, and it is this that every image, instead
of embodying the fact and significance directly under a mode adequate
to their full reality, is only taken to present an image and similitude
of either.

For these reasons this kind of symbolization is, if we conceive it
apart as an independent whole, a generic class of subordinate rank.
The form which it supplies is merely the descriptive selection of a
portion of sensuous existence immediately perceived, or of a prosaic
idea of the mind[79], in other words, the significance is expressly to
be distinguished from it. And, further, in a measure such an employment
of comparison in works of art, which are shaped out of homogeneous
material, and in their specific form constitute an indivisible whole,
can only assert itself as relatively valid, that is, as mere ornament
and accessory, such as we find it, in fact, in the genuine products of
classic and romantic art.

It is a further consequence that if we regard the entire sphere of
this type as the union of the two stages which preceded it on the
ground that it not merely comprehends within itself the _separation_
of significance from external reality, which is the fundamental
_causa rationis_ of the Sublime, but also includes the _reference_ of
a concrete phenomenon to a universal import cognate with it, as we
have seen was asserted in the real type of symbolism, such a union
is notwithstanding in no way a higher type of art; it is, in truth,
despite its very clearness, a superficial way of apprehending things,
limited in its content and formally more or less prosaic, which falls
away into the consciousness of commonsense as fully remote from the
secretly fermenting depth of genuine symbolism as it is from the height
of the Sublime.

So far as the _classification_ of our present subject-matter is
concerned we may observe, first, that in this act of comparative
differentiation, which presupposes the significance independently,
and affirms either a sensuous or imaginary form in a relation of
opposition to it, there is the aspect held constantly throughout
that the significance is here accepted as of most importance, and
the form is solely the embodiment of the same and external to it;
but along with this the further difference makes its appearance,
namely, that it is sometimes the one aspect of this opposition which
is first pre-eminently emphasized, and made the significant point of
departure, while at other times it is the other. And owing to this
fact we have either the embodiment presented us as an independently
external, immediate fact or phenomenon of Nature, which is then
related by comparison to a significance of a more general bearing, or
the significance is independently come by in another way, and only
afterwards a mode of embodying it is selected from some external
source, it matters not what.

Relatively to the above distinctions we may classify our material under
the two first fundamental and a third and other supplementary divisions
as follows:

A. In the _first_ it is the _concrete phenomenon_, whether the
selection be made from Nature or human events, incidents, and actions,
which constitutes both the point of departure in the process of
artistic conception, and the substance of essential weight in the
reproduction. It is no doubt exhibited solely on account of the more
general significance, which it contains and signifies, and is only so
far unfolded, that it may contribute to the object of embodying this
significance in a specific occurrence or condition cognate with it. The
comparison, however, of the general significance and the particular
case is not as yet _expressly_ set forth as _subjective_ activity, and
the entire reproduction will not merely be the embellishment of a work
which actually possesses a substantive position without it, but is set
forth as itself claiming to give the character of an independent whole.
The types of this class are the fable, the parable, the apologue, the
proverb, and the metamorphosis.

B. In the _second_ phase the _significance_ on the contrary is that
which is first presented to consciousness, and the concrete embodiment
is that which is merely incidental or accessory to it, possessing no
independent subsistency of its own, but appearing as wholly subordinate
to the significance, so that we are now also made more immediately
aware of the element of personal caprice in the selection of this
rather than any other image. This mode of production is unable in the
great majority of cases to reach the point of a fully perfected work
of art, and is consequently forced to leave the forms it supplies as
appurtenant to other artistic images. The important types of this
class are the riddle, the allegory, the metaphor, the image, and the
simile.

C. _Thirdly_, and in conclusion, if rather by way of supplement, we
have yet further to include within our list the didactic poem, and
purely descriptive poetry, inasmuch as in these types of poetry we
find, on the one hand, that the presentment of the general character
of the objects in the clearness under which they are made intelligible
to commonsense[80], no less than on the other that the exhibition of
their concrete appearance receives a substantially independent form,
and by doing so effects with elaborate completeness the severation of
that which only in its union and really reciprocal fusion is capable of
giving us a genuine work of art.

This separation of the two phases essential to the process of
art-production carries with it the result that the various forms which
find their place in the entire subject-matter under discussion have
merely a claim to fall in as part of an inquiry into the modes of art
in virtue of the fact that poetry, and only poetry, is in a position
to express such a relation of self-contained independence as between
significance and form. As opposed to this it is the very problem of the
plastic arts to manifest such significant content in and through their
external form and viewed thus externally.

A. MODES OF COMPARISON, WHICH HAVE THEIR ORIGIN UPON THE SIDE OF
EXTERNALITY

The attempt to arrange the several kinds of poetic production which
are apportioned to this first stage of the comparative type of art
carries with it no little difficulty, and is a fruitful source
of embarrassment. They are, that is to say, hybrid species of a
subordinate rank, which in no way whatever mark out any necessary
aspect of art They stand in the domain of Aesthetic presenting features
analogous to certain animal types, and other exceptional phenomena
in natural science. In both spheres the difficulty consists in this
that in either case it is the notion of the science itself, which
is the ground of its classification and specific differences. As
differentia of the notion these are also at the same time distinctions
really adequate to the notional process, and intelligible as such;
with these latter such transitional modes are unable fully to conform
for the reason that they are merely defective types, which proceed
from a previous phase that is fundamental without being able to reach
the next one. This is no fault of the notion, nay, supposing that we
preferred to make such ancillary types the basis of our classification,
instead of pointing out their relation to the specific phases of the
_notional_ process of our subject-matter, we should have presented us
precisely that aspect of them which was inadequate to this process
as the irreproachable mode of their development. A true principle of
classification, on the contrary, is compelled to proceed from the true
notion, and such _hybrid_ types as those now discussed can only be
suitably placed where the genuine and independently stable ones show a
tendency to dissolve and pass over into others.

Apart from such considerations, however, the artistic types referred to
belong to the _forecourt_ of artistic symbolism, inasmuch as they are
generally incomplete, and to that extent _merely_ a search after art in
its truth. Such a movement no doubt presents the essential ingredients
of a genuine mode of configuration, but it lays hold of them in their
aspect of finitude, separation, and purely relative propinquity;
it fails consequently to rank on the same level. When we discuss,
therefore, the fable, apologue, and the rest we must treat these forms
not as though they belonged to _poetry_ in the specific sense, as it
differs among other things from music no less than the plastic arts,
but only with the view of pointing out the relation in which they stand
to the _generic_ types of art. It is only thus their specific character
can be elucidated. To such an object the notion of the genuine types of
the art of poetry, whether epic, lyric, or dramatic, will not assist us.

We propose now to differentiate these forms in the following order;
we shall begin with the _fable_, proceed after that to discuss the
_parable_, _apologue_, and _proverb_, and conclude our inquiry with the
_metamorphosis._



1. THE FABLE

Hitherto we have throughout merely dwelt upon the formal aspect of the
relation of an expressed significance to its embodiment; we have now
furthermore to elucidate the content, which declares its suitability
for such a mode.

In our previous consideration of the various aspects of the _Sublime_
we saw that at the point where we have now arrived, it is no longer a
matter of any importance to envisualize the Absolute and One in its
indivisible Power by means of the nothingness and impotency of the
created thing to rise up to that infinite transcendency. We are now
on the plane of the finite consciousness, and have only to concern
ourselves with a finite content. If we direct our attention conversely
to the genuine symbolical type, to which the comparative is under
a certain aspect equally related, we find that here that _inward_
aspect, which stands in opposition to the form up to this point
always immediately presented, the natural shape, that is to say, is
the spiritual, a truth that even in Egyptian symbolism received ample
illustration. To the extent, however, that everything natural is left
standing, and preconceived in its position of isolated _solidarity_,
the spiritual is also something both _finite_ and _defined_, that is
to say man and his finite aims and the natural maintains a certain,
albeit theoretical[81], relationship to these objects, a significant
suggestion and revelation of the same to the use and weal of mankind.
The phenomena of Nature, storms, flight of birds, the constitution
of the intestines of animals and so forth, in the significance they
possess for human interests, are now accepted in a totally different
sense to that they figured in the conceptions of Parsees, Hindoos, or
Egyptians, for whom the Divine is still linked to the Natural under
the mode that man, as an integral part of Nature, moves to and fro in
a world full of gods, and his personal action consists in the display
through his activities of this very identity of Life, whereby this
doing of his, in so far as it is compatible with the natural existence
of the Divine, appears itself as a revelation and bringing forth of
the Divine in mankind. When, however, man is withdrawn into himself,
and intuitively seeks for his freedom within the closed doors of his
own substance[82], he becomes intrinsically the object of his own
personality; he acts, transacts his affairs, and works as he himself
wills; he possesses a personal life of his own, and feels the essential
character of his aims as part of himself, to which the natural is only
related as something outside him. Consequently Nature becomes insulated
around him, serves him under such an aspect that in his attitude to the
Divine he no longer secures an envisagement of the Absolute in her, but
simply regards her as a means, through which the gods enable him to
discover such a knowledge of themselves as may contribute most to his
advantage, unveiling their will to the human spirit through the medium
of Nature and suffering the purpose thereof to declare itself through
mankind. An identity of the Absolute and Nature is here presupposed, an
identity in which _human aims_ are pre-eminently emphasized. A type of
symbolism such as this, however, is not within the province of art, but
that of religion. That is to say, the _vates_ or prophet subordinates
every significant relation of natural events, pre-eminently to the
service of practical ends, whether it be in the interest of the
particular designs of individuals, or in that of the common action of
an entire people. Poetry, on the contrary, is bound to recognize and
express even the practical situations and relations in a more universal
form adapted to contemplation.

What we have, however, to deal with now is a natural phenomenon, an
occurrence, which, in its passage, exhibits a particular relation,
which maybe accepted as symbol for a general significance in the
circle of human deeds and dealings, in other words for an ethical
maxim, a saw, for a significance, therefore, whose content unfolds
a reflection over the nature of the course which either is taken or
ought to be taken in human matters, that is, facts which are related to
volition. Here it is no longer the Divine will, which is self-revealed
in its essential nature to mankind through natural events, and their
religious import. We have nothing more than a quite ordinary course of
everyday occurrences, from the isolated reproduction of which we are
able to abstract in a way commonly intelligible an ethical _dictum_,
a warning, ensample, or rule of prudence, by whatever name we choose
to call it, which is set before us in a form that appeals to our
imagination for the sake of the reflection it carries with it. And this
is just the way in which we ought to regard the fables of Aesop.

(_a_) In other words, the fables of Aesop in their original form are
just such a mode of conceiving a natural relation or event between
single natural objects generally, mainly between animals, whose
intercourse with one another is based on the same practical necessities
of life that are the motive force in that of humanity. This relation or
occurrence, as viewed in its more general characters, is consequently
of a kind that may happen in the sphere of human life, and as such
carries with it a significance for man.

As thus explained the genuine fable of Aesop is therefore the
reproduction of a condition of animate or inanimate life, of some
occurrence in the animal world for example, which is not by any
means composed at haphazard, but is put together in conformity with
natural fact and genuine observation, and so reproduced in the form of
narrative that, in its relation to human existence, and particularly
the practical aspect of the same, a general maxim may be deduced from
it. The requirement of _primary_ importance that it implies, therefore,
is that the particular case in question, which is to supply the
so-called moral, must not be purely _imaginary_, that is to say, first
and foremost the substance of the composition must not present facts
which run _counter_ to the mode of their appearance in real life. The
narrative may be further and yet more clearly characterized in this
that it does not record the particular case itself in its universality,
but rather the mode under which this, taken in its concrete singularity
and as a real fact, is in such external reality the type for all action
based upon analogous circumstances.

This original form of the fable leaves upon it, and this is the
_third_ point to which we direct attention, the impress of most
_naïveté_, because in it the didactic aim and the deduction of general
significances of utilitarian colour do not appear to be that which was
the original intention of the narrator, but rather something which
turned up afterwards. For this reason the most attractive among
the so-called fables of Aesop will be those which correspond most
emphatically with this naïve tone and narrate actions, if such an
expression may here be used, or at least relations and events, which
in part are founded upon animal instinct, partly are the expression of
some other natural relation and partly are generally put together for
their own sake rather than exclusively composed as the fancy of the
moment happened to dictate. For this reason it is further sufficiently
obvious that the motto _fabula docet_, which has attached itself to
these fables as we now have them presented us, either takes the true
spirit out of them, or frequently is something like a fist in our
eyes[83], so that quite as often as not we are inclined to deduce the
intended maxim's opposite, or one or two as good if not better.

In further elucidation of this conception of these Greek fables we
propose now to offer a few illustrations. The oak and the reed stand
in the teeth of the storm-wind. The slender reed merely bows before
it, the stubborn oak snaps. This is a frequent enough occurrence in
a great storm. In its ethical suggestion what we have here is some
man of high position and inflexible temper as opposed to one of more
modest station who, through his natural pliancy, is able in misfortune
to keep himself secure on such ordinary levels, while the great man
goes to ground through his pride and obstinacy. An analogous case is
the fable of the swallows which we find in the Phaedrus. The swallows
and other birds with them see a rustic sowing the flax seed, from the
growth of which the bird-snare is to be made. The provident swallows
fly away, the other birds think nothing of the morrow; they abide
at home and are caught. A real phenomenon of Nature is also at the
bottom of this fable. It is a notorious fact that in autumn swallows
are off to southerly climes, and consequently are absent when birds
are snared. The same thing may be said of the fable about the bat,
which is despised by day and night, because it belongs to neither the
one nor the other. A more general human significance is attributed to
real prosaic incidents of this class, much as pious people are only
too ready nowadays to interpret everything that occurs in a sense
that is edifying or useful. It is, however, not essential to such a
purpose that in every case the true fact of Nature should appear at
once as obvious. In the fable, for instance, of the fox and the raven
we are unable at first blush to recognize the natural fact, although
it is not wholly absent. It is, in truth, a genuine characteristic
both of ravens and crows that they set about cawing when they happen
to catch sight of strange objects, whatever they may be, whether man
or beast, in sudden motion. Natural relations of a similar kind lie
at the root of the fable of the thorn-bush, which plucks the wool off
the passer-by, or wounds the fox that seeks refuge there, or that
of the countryman who warms a snake in his bosom. Others set forth
occurrences which may naturally form part of animal experience; take,
for instance, the first example of the fables of Aesop where the eagle
devours the cubs of the fox and carries off a hot coal attached to the
sacrificial flesh which sets his nest on fire. And, in conclusion, we
find that others contain traits of old myths, such as the fable of
the dung-beetle, eagle, and Jupiter, where the circumstance borrowed
from natural history--we will pass it by for what it is worth--appears
to be referable to the different seasons of the year when the eagle
and dung-beetle respectively lay their eggs; at the same time we may
observe a clear intimation here of the traditional importance of the
scarab, which, however, even in our present example, is already treated
with an inclination toward comedy, an inclination still more pronounced
in Aristophanes. As an excuse for not entering more fully here into the
question how many of these fables can actually be traced to Aesop we
mention the already well-established fact that only of quite a small
minority--the last-cited one of dung-beetle and the eagle is among
them--can it be shown that they date from Aesop's time, or that in
general terms there is any flavour of antiquity about them to support
the view that Aesop is in fact their author.

Of Aesop himself we are informed that he was a deformed and humpbacked
slave; and for his place of residence we are transported into Phrygia,
the very land, that is, which marks the passage from the immediately
symbolical and the existence still fettered on Nature, to a land in
which man begins to take real hold of the spiritual and himself as
the source of the same. In our present connection, no doubt, he does
not behold the animal and natural world in the way the Hindoos and
Egyptians beheld it, that is, as something of itself, superior and
Divine. He regards it with prosaic vision as something whose relations
are only of service in the presentment of a picture of human act and
avoidance. His conceits are further merely the reflections of wit,
without real energy of soul or depth of insight and a fundamental grasp
of reality, without poetry and philosophy, in fact. His opinions and
maxims are, in consequence, fairly rich in sensuous image and traits of
cleverness, but we never get beyond the digging away into mere trifles,
which, instead of creating free shapes from the unfettered life of
spirit, is contented to discover some additional aspect that is new
in material already close at hand, such as the specific instincts and
habits of animals or other daily occurrences of little moment; and this
is so because that which he would teach he is still afraid to express
freely, and is only able to make it intelligible in a kind of riddle
which is at the same time always being solved. Prose has its origin
in the slave, and in the same way prose clings to the entire type of
conception with which we are now concerned.

Despite this fact, however, the experience of almost all nations and
times has in one form or another run through these old tales; and
however much any particular people whose literature is generally well
versed in fable may pride itself as possessing more than one fabulist
of distinction, we shall find that their poetry is for the most part
merely a reflection of these primary sallies of invention, merely
translated into the vernacular of the age. All that has since been
added to the general heritage of such conceits falls far behind the
original legacy in real merit.

(_b_) There are, however, among these fables of Greek descent a
number which betray the greatest poverty of invention and execution,
being mere pegs on which to hang the instructive moral, so that the
contents, whether they refer to gods or animals, have merely a formal
significance. Yet even these are far enough removed from the modern
tendency of doing violence to the animal world as we find it in
Nature. An example of this tendency is that fable of Pfeffel about
a marmot which collected provisions in autumn, an act of foresight
which another marmot neglected, and so was brought to the condition
of beggary and starvation. Or there is that other of the fox, the
bloodhound, and the lynx, of whom it is narrated that they presented
themselves before Jupiter, together with the talents which exclusively
belonged to them of cunning, keen scent, and clear sight, and requested
that these gifts should be equally divided between them; the fable goes
on that they obtained such consent under these rather surprising terms:
"The fox gets a blow on the forehead, the bloodhound is good for no
more hunting, the Argus Lynx receives a cataract." That a marmot should
cease to make provision for its wants, or that the three animals above
mentioned should ever incidentally meet with, or be naturally capable
of receiving, a proportionate division of their respective gifts is
contrary to all reason and consequently meaningless. A better fable
than those above cited is that of the ant and the grasshopper, or that
other of the deer with the beautiful horns and the slender legs.

Conformably to the tenor of fables of this kind we have grown, as
a rule, accustomed to accept the moral of the fable as that which
is of first importance, and to regard the narrative as _merely_ an
external form, and consequently an event entirely _composed_ with a
view to expound that moral. Embodiments of this sort, however, more
particularly when the occurrence described is wholly at variance with
the natural character of specific animals, are in the highest degree
insipid, attempts at invention which mean less than nothing. The real
ingenuity of a fable consists exclusively in this that it is able to
impart to that which already exists in determinate form a further and
more universal significance than that which is immediately presented.

The question has further been raised, in reference to the general
assumption that the essence of a fable consists in setting before us
the actions and speech of animals rather than those of mankind, as to
what it is precisely which attracts us in this allusion. We cannot
suppose, however, that there is after all much that is attractive in
such a furbishing up of our humanity in animal form, even though it
should exceed or at least differ from that of a comedy of apes and
dogs, where, apart from the sight of the general cleverness of the
dressing up, the entire interest consists rather in the deliberate
contrast between animal nature as it really is and appears, and that
represented as taking part in human affairs. On grounds of this sort
Breitinger finds the attraction to consist entirely in the element
of the _marvellous._ In the original type of the fable, however, the
appearance of animals endowed with speech is _not_ put before us as
anything uncommon or surprising. And for this very reason Lessing is
of the opinion that the introduction of animals is really of great use
in helping us to understand and _assisting_ the poet to _abridge_ his
exposition; in other words we are well acquainted with the qualities
of animals, the cuteness of the fox, the magnanimity of the lion, the
voracity and violence of the wolf, and are consequently able to set
before our minds a concrete image in place of such abstract qualities.
An advantage of this kind, however, in no essential degree mitigates
the triviality of the relation when it has become one purely of form,
and generally it is even a disadvantage to place animals thus before
us instead of men, for the reason that the animal form remains a mask,
which, so far as intelligibility is concerned, _veils_ fully as much as
it _declares_ the significance.

The most important fable of this kind should be in that case the
old history of Reinecke, the fox, which is notwithstanding strictly
speaking no fable at all.

(_c_) In other words we may in conclusion add a _third_ type of the
fable, in which we find that there is already a tendency to pass beyond
the real boundaries of the type. The ingenuity of a fable consists, as
already pointed out, in the discovery of particular cases among the
variety of natural phenomena, which we are able to use as evidential
support of general reflections upon human action and behaviour, without
essentially displacing the animal and natural world from its own native
mode of existence. For the rest this general application or adaptation
of the particular case to the so-called moral is an exercise of
personal caprice, or shall we say native wit, and is therefore to all
intents and purposes an affair of pleasantry. It is this aspect which
receives the main emphasis in the type of fable now before us. The
fable is in fact accepted as a witty jest. Goethe has written many a
delightful and ingenious poem in this vein. The following lines occur
in one of them, which is entitled "The Barking Dog":

/$
     Down every road afield we ride
       On business bent or pleasure;
     And ever in our wake full-cry
       A hound's bark beats the measure.
     Loosed from our horse's stable he
       _Will_ always gallop beside us:
     And this is what his clamour proves!
       We ride, are with the riders.
$/

It is equally necessary here, as in the case of Aesop's fables, that
objects which are borrowed from Nature should receive their native
aspect, and only bring before us in their action and habits human
circumstances, passions, and traits, which have a close affinity to
those of the animal world. The story of Reinecke is one of this kind,
and is really more a fairy-tale than a fable in the strict sense.
We find in the content of this the reflection of an age of disorder
and lawlessness, of evil generally, weakness, baseness, violence,
and shamelessness, of unbelief in religion, that merely retains the
appearance of a mastery, or indeed an established position in the
world-drama; and the result is that craft, cunning, and selfishness
have it all their own way. It is, in fact, the condition of the
Middle Ages, more especially as developed in Germany. The powerful
vassals pay, it is true, some appearance of respect to the king; but
practically every man does as he pleases--robs, murders, oppresses
the weak, betrays the king, finds a way somehow to the favours of the
queen, so that if the community just holds together that is about
all. Such is the human content, which by this fable is preserved,
not in a mere abstract proposition but in an entire _complexus_ of
conditions and characters, and by reason of its baseness fits in with
the animal nature exactly, under the forms of which it is unfolded.
For this reason we find nothing embarrassing in the fact that it is
without any reserves transferred to the animal realm; and for the same
reason the particular form it takes does not so much appear as an
exceptional case cognate with it; rather we are inclined to feel the
singularity of it make way for a certain breadth of universality, a
vision emphasizing the general truth: "Such is the way things happen
in the world." The comical side consists in the forms under which the
whole is put together, drollery and jest being freely mingled with the
bitter earnestness of the situation; the general effect of which is
that we not only have human meanness admirably depicted through that
of animals, but we are further made a present of the most entertaining
traits, and most characteristic anecdotes wholly peculiar to animal
life, so that, despite all tartness to the palate, our final view
is that of a comedy whose main intention is neither bad nor purely
capricious, but one that has genuine earnestness to support it.


2. PARABLE, PROVERB, APOLOGUE

(_a_) _The Parable_

_Parable_ has this general affinity with _fable_, that it accepts
events from the circle of common life, but also makes them the
depositors of a higher and more universal significance, expressly with
a view that the same shall become intelligible and objective by means
of that daily occurrence in its ordinary guise. A difference, however,
at once asserts itself between the parable and fable, and it is this,
that the former selects such occurrences in _human_ action and habits,
as we have them every day before our eyes, rather than in Nature and
the animal world; it then expands the particular case selected, which
appears trite enough at first as such a particular, to the range of
wider interest, by suggesting through it a higher kind of significance.

For this reason the range and the importance of the significances in
wealth of _content_ can materially be increased and deepened[84],
while, if we take the point of view of form, it is clear that the
subjective process of intentional comparison and setting out of a
generally instructive reflection already marks the acceptance and
appearance of a more advanced type.

As a parable, still united to a wholly practical end, we may view
the means of persuasion used by Cyrus to induce the Persians to
rebel (Herod., I, cap. 126). His letter to the Persians advised them
to betake themselves to a certain spot provided with sickles. When
there he set them all on the first day to clear with hard labour a
certain field overgrown with thistles. On the following day, however,
after they had rested and bathed, he conducted them to a meadow
and supplied them with ample cheer in the shape of food and wine.
Finally, at the close of the feast, he asked of them which of the two
days had proved the most enjoyable. All voted naturally for to-day
rather than yesterday; the former had brought them only good things,
while the latter had been a day of weariness and toil. On this Cyrus
exclaimed: "Follow me, and many will be the good days such as the
present has brought you. Refuse to follow me, and countless labours
are in store quite a match for those of yesterday." Of a type akin
to the above, though of profoundest interest and the widest range
considered relatively to their significance, are the parables we meet
with in the Gospels. Take, for example, that of the sower, a narrative
which as such possesses the most unimportant subject-matter, and
whose significance centres throughout in the comparison it supplies
to the preaching of the kingdom of heaven. The significance in these
parables is wholly a religious gospel, to which the human occurrences,
wherein such is imaginatively presented, stand in a relation similar
to that between the animal and human world in the fables of Aesop,
where the former elicits the meaning of the latter. Of a like breadth
of content is the famous story of Boccaccio, which Lessing converted
in his "Natham" into the parable of the three rings. The substance of
the narrative is also in this case taken by itself nothing remarkable;
the extraordinarily wide, reach of its content arises wholly from the
way the differences between and the relative validity of the three
religions, namely, the Jewish, the Mohammedan, and the Christian, are
suggested by it. The same thing may be said of the latest novelties in
this type of art, the parables of Goethe for example. Take that of the
"cat-pasty." In this a famous _chef_, in order to prove himself hunter
no less than cook, went out hunting, but shot a tom-cat instead of
a hare, which he then served up to the company sauced with his most
consummate art. This is no doubt a reference to the Light theory of
Newton. We have here under the guise of the hare-pie which the cook
tried in vain to elaborate out of a cat a reflection of that abortive
type of physical science which the mathematician will assume to be
something better than it is. These parables of Goethe frequently have
a strong touch of drollery about them, an aspect which they share with
his fables by the help of which he was wont to shed himself of life's
disappointments.

(_b_) _The Proverb_

The _proverb_ forms as it were the middle point of this sphere. In the
form of their execution, that is to say, proverbs lean at one time in
the direction of the fable, at another to that of the apologue. They
give us a particular case selected for the most part from the daily
walk of mankind, which, however, is to be interpreted universally. Take
the example, "One hand washes the other," or those others, "Every one
wheels before his own door," "Who digs a grave for another, falls into
it himself," "Bake a pudding for me and I will staunch your thirst,"
and others like them. To wise saws of this type belong the many
apophthegems that Goethe has contributed to modern literature, often
of exquisite grace and profound to a degree. These are not modes of
comparison of the type that the general significance and the concrete
phenomenon are opposed to one another in separation, but the former is
immediately expressed with the latter.

(_c_) _The Apologue_

The _apologue_ may be regarded as a parable, which not only serves
in the way of _comparison_ to render visible a general significance,
but rather in this its very form reproduces and expresses the general
moral, the same being actually included in the particular case,
which is, however, related as only a single example. Conformably to
this definition we may call Goethe's "Der Gott und die Bajadere" an
apologue. Here we find the Christian tale of the repentant Magdalene
reclothed in accordance with Hindoo ideas. The Bajadere[85] exemplifies
the same humility, a like strength of love and faith; God puts her to
the proof, an ordeal she completely sustains, and her exaltation and
reconciliation follows. In the apologue also narrative is so extended
that the outcome of it furnishes the moral itself, bare of any parallel
to support it, as may be illustrated from "The Treasure-Finder":

/$
     Work by day and guests at night,
     Weeks of moil, feasts of delight,
     Such the Future's spell for thee.
$/


3. THE METAMORPHOSIS[86]

The _third_ mode we have to discuss in its contrast to the fable,
parable, proverb, and apologue, is the _metamorphosis._ This is no
doubt of a kind which is both symbolical and mythological; it sets
forth, however, expressly furthermore the natural in its opposition
to the spiritual. That is to say, it confers on an object immediately
present to sense such as a rock, animal, flower, or spring the
peculiar significance of being a _delapsus_ and a _punishment_ of
spiritual existences. Such are the examples of Philomela, the Pieredes,
Narcissus, and Arethusa, all of whom, through some false step, passion,
transgression or the like, became subject to irreparable guilt or pain,
and for this reason were deprived of the freedom of spiritual life,
and united to the substance of physical nature. From one point of view
Nature is not regarded merely under its external and prosaic aspect,
simply, that is, as mountain, river-source, tree and so forth, but it
further receives a content which is bound up with some action or event
of spiritual life. The rock is not simply stone, but Niobe herself, who
weeps for her children. From the other point of view this human action
implies guilt of some kind, and this metamorphosis into the physical
phenomenon is accepted as a degradation of Spirit.

It is therefore necessary to distinguish these metamorphoses of human
individuals or gods very sharply from the genuine type of _unconscious
symbolism._ To return to Egypt, for example, the Divine is here in
part immediately envisaged in the mysterious and secluded intension
of animal life, partly, too, the real symbol is here a natural form
which is immediately associated with a wider significance cognate to
it, despite the fact that this form is unable to supply the determinate
existence fully commensurate with it; and this is so for the reason
that neither in respect to its form or its content has unconscious
symbolism arrived at the free outlook of Spirit. Metamorphosis, on
the contrary, emphasizes the essential distinction between Nature and
Spirit, and by doing so marks the _passage_ from that which is both
symbolical and mythological to that which is in the _strict sense_
mythological, under, that is to say, a conception of the latter, which,
albeit that it proceeds in its myths from a concrete fact of Nature
such as sun, sea, rivers, trees, earth, and the like, nevertheless,
further and expressly sets this purely natural aspect on one side and
apart, divesting such natural phenomena of their inner content and
individualizing the same as a spiritual Power in the adequate artistic
form of gods clothed in the lineaments of humanity, whether we regard
them as external shape or spiritual activity. In this sense Homer and
Hesiod have given to the Greeks their mythology, a mythology which
by no means merely consists in the revelation of the significance of
such gods, by no means is merely an exposition of moral, physical,
theological, or speculative doctrine, but one that is a mythology in
the strict sense, that is the origin of a spiritual religion under the
genuine guise of our humanity.

In the Metamorphoses of Ovid the most heterogeneous material is brought
together quite apart from the entirely modern spirit in which myth is
treated. Beside the mere aspect of metamorphosis, which could here in
general terms only be conceived as a kind of mythical representation,
we have the specific character[87] of this type raised in an
exceptional way in these narrations, in which embodiments of this sort,
which are commonly accepted as symbolical, or are already received in
their entirely mythical character, appear to have been converted into
metamorphoses, and that which is elsewhere united is so presented as to
assert an opposition between its significance and form, and the passage
of the one into the other. In this way, for instance, the Phrygian
or Egyptian symbol, the wolf, is so separated from its intrinsic
significance, that the same is converted into a previous existence if
not actually into the kingship of the Sun, and the existence of the
wolf is conceived as resulting from an act of that human existence. In
the same way in the song of the Pierides the Egyptian gods, the ram,
the cat, and so forth are imaged as such animal forms, in which the
mythical gods of Greece, Jupiter, Venus, and the rest have concealed
themselves from sheer fright. The Pierides themselves, however, by
way of punishment, in that they dared to rival the Muses with their
singing, are changed into woodpeckers.

Looked at from another side it is equally necessary, with a view to
securing the more accurate definition, which the content wherein the
significance consists essentially carries, that we distinguish the
metamorphosis from the fable. That is to say in the fable the binding
together of the moral with the natural fact is an association that is
_harmless_; for in this the thing of Nature, regarded under the mode
in which it differs in its natural aspect from Spirit, does not affect
the significance, although there are certainly single examples of the
fables of Aesop, which, with but slight alteration, would be instances
of metamorphosis. As such may be cited the forty-second fable of the
bat, the thorn-bush, and the diver, whose instincts are explained as
due to the ill-luck of former experiences.

And here we must end our passage through this the first circle of the
comparative type of art. It started from that which was immediately
present to sense, that is, the concrete phenomenon. We proceed now from
the point we have arrived at to examine a further kind of significance
which the type unfolds.



B. COMPARISONS, WHICH IN THEIR IMAGINATIVE PRESENTMENT HAVE THEIR
ORIGIN IN THE SIGNIFICANCE.

Forasmuch as the severation of significance from embodiment is the
hypostasized form for consciousness, within which the relation of both
originates independently, it is both possible and inevitable that in
the articulation of the self-subsistency of one side no less than
the other a start should be made not only from external existence,
but conversely and as emphatically from that which is _immediately
present_ to the conscious subject, in other words general conceptions,
reflections, emotions, and principles of thought. For this inward
aspect is equally with the images of external objects a subject-matter
present to consciousness and in its independence of that which is
external proceeds on its way from its own resources. In the case,
then, where we find the significance is the point of departure, the
expression, that is, the reality, appears as the _modus formulandi_,
which is abstracted from the concrete world in order to give a visible
and sensuously defined shape to the significance regarded as abstract
content.

Owing, however, to the reciprocally indifferent relation under which
both sides confront each other, this association which binds the two
sides together is, as we have already seen, no essentially explicit and
necessary union; consequently the relation, such as it is, that is no
actual reflection of objective fact, is rather a _product_ of _active
mind_, which no longer even disguises this its fundamental character,
but rather deliberately exposes it in the form of its representation.
The very embodiment possesses this binding together of form and
content, soul and body, under the guise of concrete _animation_[88],
as essentially and explicitly the substantial union of both sides
in the soul as in the body, in the content as in the form. In the
case before us, however, what is presupposed by consciousness is the
dislocation of the two sides, and consequently their association is the
vivification of the significance simply for consciousness by means of
a shape external to it, and an indication of a real existence, equally
subjective in its character through the relation of the same to the
general conceptions, emotions, and thoughts common to humanity. For
this reason what is mainly emphasized in these forms of comparative art
is the subjective art of _the poet_ in his creative capacity, and in
complete works of art we have mainly in our attitude to this particular
aspect of them to separate that which strictly is appurtenant to their
subject-matter and its necessary embodiment from that which is attached
to them by the poet as mere ornament and embellishment. Such accessory
detail, which we cannot fail to distinguish, that is, consisting
mainly of images, similes, allegories, and metaphor, is precisely
that part of his work in virtue of which he earns his title to fame
with most people, a tendency which is all the more common because it
indirectly bears witness to the insight and subtlety which enables such
critics to discover our poet and draw attention to that aspect of his
invention which is so entirely his own. But for all that, as we have
already observed, in genuine works of art such forms as those we are
discussing can only be regarded as accessory, although we doubtless do
find in previous works on _Poetics_ such incidental features treated as
precisely those which go to make the poet.

Furthermore however, though unquestionably in the first instance
the two sides which have to be associated stand in a relation of
indifference to one another, yet in order to justify the subjective
relation and comparison, the embodiments must also in the character of
its content itself include the same relations and qualities under a
cognate mode to that which the significance intrinsically possesses;
the grasp of this similarity is, in fact, the one sure ground upon
which the setting forth of the significance in union with this specific
form rather than any other, and the envisagement of such import by
its means is based. Lastly, inasmuch as we begin here, not from the
concrete phenomenon, by the abstraction of a general characteristic
from that, but conversely from this universal itself, which the
intention is to have reflected in an image, the significance secures
the position which makes it stand out actually as the real object, and
as such is predominant over the sensuous picture which is the _modus_
of its envisagement.

The series in which we propose now to examine the particular types we
have mentioned as belonging to this phase of comparative art may be
indicated as follows:

_First_ in order, as most cognate to the previous stage, the _riddle_
will enlist our attention.

_Secondly_, we have to examine the _allegory_, in which as the main
feature we shall find the abstract significance assert a mastery over
the external form.

_Thirdly_, we have the class of the comparison in its strict sense;
_metaphor, image_, and _simile._


1. THE RIDDLE

The true symbol is essentially enigmatical in so far as the
externality, by means of which a general significance is made apparent,
still differs from the import it is intended to express: in other words
it thereby raises the doubt as to what is the exact signification
applicable to the form. The riddle, however, appertains to conscious
symbolism, and an obvious distinction between it and the genuine
symbol is to be found in the fact that in the former case the meaning
is clearly and fully _recognized_ by the propounder of it, and the
form which veils that which is to be interpreted by it is therefore
_intentionally_ selected for this very purpose. The genuine symbol is
both before and after the act of selection an unsolved problem, the
riddle, on the contrary, is essentially a problem that is solved. It is
therefore with very good reason that Sancho Panza exclaims: "I should
much prefer to hear the solution first and the riddle afterwards."

(_a_) _First_, then, in the invention of the riddle, the point from
which the process starts, is the apprehended meaning, the signification
of it.

(_b_) The _second_ step consists in the intentional selection of
traits of character and other qualities from the common experience of
the external world, which--such is always the aspect of Nature and
external objects of every kind--are placed relatively to one another
in piecemeal fashion, and in thus setting them forth in disparate
contiguity, which makes their singularity the more striking. And
inasmuch as they are so placed they are without the enfolding unity
of mind, and their array and association intentionally distract has so
far no intrinsic significance whatever. And yet for all that, and this
is the other aspect of the riddle, they do expressly point to a unity
in relation to which even traits to all appearance most heterogeneous
contain, notwithstanding, both a real sense and significance.

(_c_) This unity, which may be styled the subject of these distract
predicates, is just the simple preconception, the word that solves
our riddle, to discover or divine which from the apparently confused
medley of the mode under which it is propounded is the riddle's
problem. Thus interpreted we may call the riddle the facetiousness of
symbolism, aware that it is such which puts to the proof acuteness
of insight and aptness at putting things together, and finally, by
stimulating the zest of solution, breaks into and destroys the very
mode of presentation it has itself set up. In the main we shall find
this, form, therefore, most employed in human speech, though we
may find exceptional examples of it also in the plastic arts[89],
architecture, horticulture, and painting. With regard to its historical
appearance the East is first and foremost responsible, and we may date
its advent in that intermediate and transitional period out of the
more obtuse type of symbolism into one of more intelligent knowledge
and comprehension. Entire peoples and historical epochs have taken
delight in the solution of such problems. It also plays an important
part in the Middle Ages among the Arabs and the Scandinavians, and as a
particular example it is much in evidence in the minstrel tourneys on
the Wartburg. In modern times it is mainly under the more modest guise
of recreation and purely social pleasantry that we cross it.

In the riddle we have opened a practically limitless field for
witty and striking conceits, which in their reference to any given
circumstance, occurrence, or object take the form of a play upon words
or an epigrammatical sentence. On the one hand we have presented
an object trite to a degree, on the other some conceit of the mind
which emphasizes unexpectedly with conspicuous force some aspect
or relation, which we failed to perceive in that object on first
confronting it, and which now attaches to it the light of a new
significance.


2. THE ALLEGORY

The counterpart to the riddle in this sphere of comparative art, where
the point of departure is from the generality of the significance,
is the _allegory._ From a certain point of view this form, no less
than the former, endeavours to make more visible to us the definite
qualities of a general conception through qualities in materially
concrete objects which are cognate therewith; but in contrast to that
form this is not done in the interest of a partial concealment and
a mysterious problem; rather it is now quite the other way with the
express object of absolute revealment; to an extent, in fact, that all
which is external, and is as such utilized by it, must become through
and through transpicuous with the significance which has to make its
appearance therein.

(_a_) It is therefore in the first place concerned to personify
abstract conditions of a general character or similar qualities
both from the human and the natural world, such as religion, love,
justice, strife, fame, war, peace, the seasons, death, and the like,
and conceive them under the mode of _personality._ This subjective
aspect, however, is neither in respect to its content nor its external
form in itself either a real subject or individual, but persists as
the abstraction of a general conception, whose content is merely
the _barren_ form of subjectivity which may be called as truly a
grammatical subject[90]. In other words an allegorical being, despite
every attempt to clothe it in the lineaments of humanity, entirely
falls short of concrete individuality, whether it be a Greek god, a
saint, or any other genuine example. It is, in fact, so forced to
pare away[91] from the substance of subjectivity, in order to make it
conform with the abstract character of its significance, that all
the true definition of individuality disappears. It is therefore only
a just criticism of allegory to say that it is frosty and cold, and,
having regard to the abstract quality of its significances, even in the
point of invention, that it is rather the result of the matter-of-fact
understanding than that of the complete vision and emotional depth
of genuine imagination. Poets, such as Virgil, for example, are
particularly ready to give us examples of allegorical individualization
simply because they are unable to create gods of the Homeric type of
personality.

(_b_) _Secondly_, however, the significant character of allegorical
material is at once _defined_ in its abstraction, and only by means of
such definition is it intelligible; the expression of such particular
aspects, for the reason that it is not immediately unfolded in that
which is in the first instance a purely _generalized_ conception of
personality, is consequently forced to appear alongside of the subject,
simply as the predicates which elucidate the same. This separation of
subject from predicate, generality from particularity, is the second
feature of the frostlike appearance of the allegory. The envisagement
of the determinate and specific qualities is borrowed from the modes of
expression, activity, and resultant effects which make their appearance
in virtue of the significance, when that secures its realized form
in concrete existence, or from the various means which subserve it
in its true realization. For example, war is delineated through
weapons, cannons, drums, and standards, etc.; the yearly seasons, by
an enumeration of the flowers and fruits, which pre-eminently spring
up under the favouring influence of the particular seasons. Objects
of this kind may further receive purely symbolical relations, as, for
instance, Justice may be brought home to our minds by means of the
scales and fillet, Death by that of the hour-glass and scythe. For the
reason, however, that the significance in allegory is the dominant
factor, and the more specialized presentment is subordinate to it
under an equally abstract form, for it is, after all, itself merely
an abstraction, the embodiment of such definable characteristics only
secures the validity of an _attribute_ pure and simple.

(_c_) In this way the allegory is under both these aspects without
vital warmth. Its general personification is empty, the definite mode
of its externalization is only a sign, which taken independently has
no longer any meaning, and the _centrum_, which is thus constrained to
gather up the variety of the attributes into a focus does not possess
the potency of a truly subjective unity which is itself self-embodied
in its real and determinate existence inter-related throughout, but is
rather a purely abstract form, for which the substantial filling-up
with particular traits, which, as we have seen, never succeed in rising
above the rank of the formal attribute, remains as something external.
Consequently we may say that in so far as the allegory sets up any
claim to real self-consistency, in which it personifies its abstraction
and their delineation, it is not to be taken seriously. In other
words, that which is both implicitly and explicitly self-substantive
is unable really to conform with an allegorical being. The _Dikê_
of the ancients, for instance, is not on all fours with allegorical
individualization. She is universal Necessity personified, eternal
Justice, the universally potent subject, the absolute substantivity of
the relations which co-ordinate Nature and spiritual Life, that is, she
is the absolute Self-subsistent itself, in the train of whom all other
individuals are bound, whether gods or men. Herr Frederick von Schlegel
has, it is true--we have already referred to the fact--ventured the
opinion that every work of art must of necessity be an allegory. Such
an expression of opinion is only true if limited to the sense that
every work of art must contain a general idea and a significance which
is itself essentially true. What we have above, on the contrary,
included under the term allegory is a mode of presentation which only
conforms to the notion of art incompletely, being itself no less
in content than in form subordinate to it. Every human event and
development, every relation in which life is concerned, possesses no
doubt intrinsically an aspect of universality, which may be emphasized
as such, but abstractions of this kind are already to be found in the
general contents of consciousness, and merely to assert them in their
prosaic aspect of generality and external delineation, which is the
point where the allegory halts, is still to fall short of the true
sphere of art.

Winckelmann has also written an immature work on allegory, in which he
has ranged together a large number of examples, but failed for the
most part to distinguish those which exemplify the symbol and allegory
respectively.

Among the particular arts within which we find examples of the
allegory, poetry is really acting contrary to its laws when it takes
refuge in such a mode of presentment; sculpture on the contrary is in
most directions barely complete without it, more especially modern
sculputure, which freely admits of that which is native to portraiture,
and so must avail itself of allegorical figures in order to delineate
more closely the relative aspects under which the individual
presentment is posed. On Blucher's monument, for example, which has
been raised to him here in Berlin, we find both the genius of Fame and
Victory, although, having regard to the general treatment of the war of
liberation, this allegorical aspect is once more set aside by means of
a series of particular scenes such as the departure of the army, its
march, and victorious return. Generally speaking, however, where the
subject of sculpture is portraiture the sculptor will avail himself
gladly of allegorical representation as offering to the simplicity
of his central figure the contrast of environment and variety. The
ancients on the other hand, on their sarcophagi for example, more
frequently made use of general mythological representations of such
figures as Sleep, Death, and the like.

Allegory generally is far less common in the antique than it is in
the romantic art of the Middle Ages, although it must be added that
such romance as it possesses is not really referable to allegory. The
frequent appearance of allegorical conception at this particular epoch
of human history is to be thus explained. From a certain point of
view we find that the content of the Middle Ages is preoccupied with
particular types of individuality and the personal aims, generally
focussed in love and honour, and resulting in vows, wanderings, and
adventures, which are common to them. Individuals of this type and the
events of such lives invariably offer the imagination a wide scope
for the inventive faculties, and the composition of accidental and
capriciously imagined collisions and their resolution. On the other
hand, in direct contrast to this motley show of worldly adventure we
have the universal, taking it here as the stability of the ordinary
relations and conditions of life, a universal which is not, as was
the case in the ancient world, individualized in the figures of
self-subsistent gods; consequently we find it freely and naturally
emphasized in independent isolation as such universality alongside
of these particular types of personality and their specific modes
of appearance and activity. If the artist therefore happens to have
before his mind the general conditions of life we have adverted to,
and assuming that he is desirous of giving artistic embodiment to them
in some form other than the accidental mode common to his age, that
he wishes, in short, to emphasize their universality, he has no other
alternative than to accept the allegorical type of presentment. This is
precisely what we find in the sphere of religion.

The Virgin Mary, Christ, the actions and dramatic events of apostolic
history, the saints with their penances and martyrdoms, are, it is
true, even here individualities in the full sense; but Christendom
is also to an equal extent concerned with the general conceptions of
abstract spiritual qualities, such as will not comply with the concrete
definition of actual persons inasmuch as the relation of _universality_
is precisely the mode under which they are presented, of which examples
are Love, Faith, and Hope. And generally the truths and dogmas of
Christendom are independently cognized by the religious consciousness,
and a main interest even of their poetry consists in this that these
doctrines are emphasized in their _universal_ aspect, that Truth is
known and believed in as _universal_ truth. In that case, however, it
is necessary that the concrete presentation should remain a subordinate
factor, itself external to the content, and allegory is just the form
which satisfies this want in the easiest and most sufficient way.
Conformably to this the divine comedy of Dante is full of allegorical
matter. Theology, for example, in this poem is run together in fusion
with the image of his beloved lady Beatrice. This personification,
however, wavers in the lines of its delineation; and this uncertainty
of outline is that which constitutes the beauty of it, and places it
halfway between genuine allegory and a vision of his youthful love.
In the ninth year of his life he looked on her for the first time:
she appeared to him no daughter of mortal men, but of God. His fiery
Italian nature conceived a passion for her, which the years failed to
extinguish. And conscious that it was she who awoke in him the genius
of poetry he finally sets himself the task, after he had lost in her
that which was most loved in the fairest flower of its promise, of
composing that wonderful monument of the most intimate and personal
religion of his heart in the poetic masterpiece of his life.


3. METAPHOR, IMAGE, SIMILE

The _third_ sphere of content attached to the riddle and the allegory
consists in the _imaged thing_ generally. The riddle veiled the still
independently cognized significance and the mode of its shaping in
cognate, albeit heterogeneous and distantly placed traits of definition
was still of most importance. Allegory on the contrary emphasized
the perspicuity of the significance so strongly as the predominant
aim, that the personification and its attributes appear deposed to
the rank of mere signs. The imaged thing now connects this clarity of
allegorical expression with that impulse of the riddle to envisage the
significance which stands out clearly before the mind in the form of an
externality cognate with it; the result, however, is not that it gives
rise to problems which have first of all to be solved, but rather that
the imaged shape appears, by means of which the preconceived conception
is revealed with absolute transparency, notifying itself as that which
it really is.

(_a_) _The Metaphor_

The _first_ point we have to draw attention to in the _metaphor_ is
this, that it may be accepted at once as essentially a simile, in so
far as it expresses clear and self-subsistent significance in a similar
phenomenon of reality comparable with it. In the comparison as such,
however, both sides of the comparison, that is the real meaning and
the image, are definitely kept apart from each other, while on the
contrary in the metaphor this separation, albeit it is essentially
present, is _not_ as yet clearly _posited._ For this reason Aristotle
long ago distinguished comparison and metaphor by his statement that
a "how" is added to the former which is absent from the latter. In
other words the metaphorical expression specifies but _one_ aspect,
the image. In the context, however, to which the image is attached,
the real significance which is intended lies so near that it is at
the same time immediately asserted without any direct separation of
it from the image. When it is said, for example: "the Spring-time
of these cheeks," or "a sea of tears," we are inevitably forced to
accept such an expression as an image rather than an actual fact,
an image whose significance the context at the same time expressly
designates. In the symbol and allegory the relation of actual meaning
to external form is not asserted either so immediately or necessarily.
From the fact that an Egyptian staircase consists of nine stages,
and a hundred other circumstances of similar pregnancy, it is only
the adept, the connoisseur, and the professor who will derive a
symbolical significance, and doubtless will scent out and discover
much that is both mystical and symbolical into the bargain, which is
so much ingenuity of research thrown away for the reason that what is
discovered is not there. This may have happened often enough to my
honoured friend Creutzer, no less than our latter-day Platonists and
the commentators of Dante.

(_a_) In range and variety of form it is impossible to exhaust the
resources of metaphor; its definition, however, is simple. It is a
wholly abbreviated comparison, in which we find, as a fact, image and
significance are not as yet set in opposition to one another, but only
the image is introduced by it; at the same time, however, the meaning
which is thus attached to the image is not its real meaning; this is as
it were effaced, and by virtue of the content in which it is set we are
enabled to recognize the significance which is really intended in the
image itself, albeit that meaning is not expressly asserted.

For the reason, however, that the meaning that is thus rendered
intelligible under the image only comes to light by virtue of the
context, the significance which is expressed in metaphor cannot claim
the importance of an independent artistic presentation; their mode of
appearance is purely incidental, so that metaphors, in a still more
emphatic degree, can only be employed as the external embellishment of
an essentially independent work of art.

(_β_) The metaphor is mainly used in the expressions of speech, which
we may usefully consider in this relation under the following aspects.

(_αα_) In the first place every language includes within its own
compass a host of metaphors. They arise from the fact that a word,
which in the first instance merely designates something entirely
sensuous, is carried over into a spiritual sphere. "_Grasp"_,
"_comprehend"_[92], and generally a number of words connected with
the processes of thought, have in regard to their original meaning a
content that is wholly sensuous, which is consequently abandoned and
exchanged for the meaning applicable to mind; the first meaning is
sensuous, the second spiritual.

(_ββ_) By degrees, however, the metaphorical aspect disappears in the
general use of such a word, which as the current coin of language is
converted from an expression which is not strictly accurate to one that
is so, the effect of this process being that image and import, owing
to the habitual frequency with which the latter is only conceived in
the former, cease to differ from one another, and the image merely
immediately presents the abstract significance itself instead of a
concrete mode of vision[93].

When we take, for example, the word "grasp" in the sense applicable to
mental life it entirely escapes us that there is any sensuous relation
implied between the hand and external objects[94]. In living languages
this distinction between genuine metaphor and words which already
through usage have fallen to the level of a mere means of expression
is readily established; the reverse is the case with dead languages,
for the reason that here mere etymology is unable finally to bring our
minds to a decision, inasmuch and in so far as the question does not
depend on the original source of that word, and its general development
in speech, but first and foremost on the fact whether a word which
has all the appearance of being used in a picturesque and metaphorical
sense had or had not already lost by habitual usage under a meaning
applying exclusively to spirit, and in the speech when alive, its first
sensuous significance and been absorbed wholly in that higher sense.

(_γγ_) When this takes place the invention of new metaphors, which
are the exclusive product of the poetical imagination becomes for the
first time a vital necessity. That in which this invention is mainly
concerned consists _first_ in transferring the phenomena, activities,
and conditions of a higher level of fact in a way that illustrates
the content of less important material, and in bringing to light
significances of such inferior matter in the form and image which
stands above them. The organic, for example, is by itself essentially
of higher importance than the inorganic, and to carry forward that
which has no life within, the range of vital phenomenal enhances its
expression. We may illustrate this with the saying of Ferdusi: "The
keenness of my sword _devours_ the brain of the lion, and _drinks_ the
dark blood of the courageous." In a yet more enhanced degree we find
the same result when that which is of Nature and sensuous is imaged,
and thereby raised and ennobled in the form of _spiritual_ phenomena.
So we have such common turns of speech as "_smiling_ fields," and
"_angry_ flood," or in the language of Calderon: "The waves _sigh_
beneath the burden of ships." In these examples that which exclusively
applies to humanity is diverted to the expression of Nature. The Latin
poets use such metaphorical language often enough, as we may find
in our Virgil, take the example: _Quum graviter tunsis gemit area
frugibus_ (Georg., III, 132).

Conversely and in the _second_ place that which pertains to mind is
brought in the same way more close to our powers of vision through the
image of natural objects. Such fanciful presentations, however, can
very readily degenerate into mere trifling and far-fetched conceits,
when that which is essentially without life receives notwithstanding
every appearance of individuality, and really spiritual activities are
assigned to it with perfect seriousness. The Italians more especially
have given themselves over to illusive trickery of this kind, and even
Shakespeare is not wholly free from them, as in that passage from
"Richard II" (Act V, sc. I), where he makes the King say to the Queen
on parting:

/$
      For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
      The heavy accent of thy moving tongue
      And in compassion weep the fire out;
      And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black
      For the deposing of a rightful king.
$/

(_γ_) Finally, if we look at the aim and interest of that which is
metaphorical, the first thing which strikes us is that a word in the
strict sense is an independently intelligible expression, the metaphor
otherwise. The question consequently presents itself, what is the
reason of this twofold means of expression, or, to put it another way,
why is it that we have the metaphorical which essentially implies
this division? The common explanation is that metaphors are used to
give vivacity to poetical composition, and this animating effect is
the ground in virtue of which Heyne, in particular, insists on their
value. The vivacity consists in the support they offer to imaginative
vision in the direction of clear definition, divesting the word, which
is always something generalized, of its purely indefinite character,
and bringing it home to sense by means of an image. No doubt a greater
degree of vivacity is to be found in metaphors than in the strict
expressions of ordinary speech; genuine vitality, however, is not to
be sought for in metaphors, whether in isolation or combination, whose
figurative plasticity, it is true, may frequently include a relation,
which by good chance attaches at the same time to the expression an
increased perspicuity and a higher definition, but quite as often, if
every detail of the process of thought is thus figuratively emphasized
in isolation, makes the whole unwieldy, overloading it thus with its
emphasis on singular aspects.

The genius of metaphorical diction is consequently, as we shall have to
elucidate more closely in our consideration of simile, to be regarded
as responding to a need and potency of mind and the emotional life,
which will not rest satisfied with that which is entirely simple,
ordinary, and homely, but make an effort beyond this and over into
something more recondite under the attraction which distinction offers
and the impulse to co-ordinate contrasted effects. This binding
together has itself again various causes, which may be notified as
follows.

(_αα_) _First_, we have it for the sake of _reinforcing_ an effect. The
emotional life, under the pressure and movement of its passions, gives
visible utterance to these forces by means of the piling up of sensuous
image. More than this, it strives to express its own whirl and tumble,
or persistence in the ideas which crowd upon it by means of a similar
letting itself go into phenomena cognate with such a condition, and its
own free movement among images of the greatest variety. In Calderon's
supplication to the Cross Julia utters the following words when she
looks upon the dead body of her only just deceased brother, and her
lover, Eusebio, the man who has killed Lisardo, stands before her:

/$
     O that I might close for ever
     Eyes before this blood here guiltless,
     Blood which cries for vengeance with its
     Flooding stream of purple flowers!
     Would that I could deem thee pardoned
     In the rush of tears that blind thee:
     Wounds and eyes are mouths which swallow
     Lies which seek admittance never, etc.
$/

With a still more vehement burst of passion Eusebio starts back from
the sight of her, when Julia finally is for surrendering herself to
him, as he exclaims:

/$
     Flaming sparks thine eyeballs scatter;
     Every sigh is breath that scorches;
     Every word is a volcano,
     Every hair a scribbled lightning,
     Every word is Death, and every
     Soft caress is Hell's own anguish;
     Such the horror stirs within me
     As I see--O awful symbol,
     Crucifix thy bosom carries.
$/

The human soul on the swell of its emotion keeps adding image on image
to that immediately confronting it, and with all this impetuous seeking
to and fro for new means of expression barely lays to rest its own
tumult.

(_ββ_) A _second_ rationale of the metaphorical consists in this that
the human soul, after adding to its own depth by this the motion of
its own life into the varied survey of objects cognate with it, is
stirred at the same time to cast itself free of the externality of
such objects, to the extent that it seeks to rediscover itself in what
is external; it transmutes that external in its own free activity,
and by clothing both itself and its passions in the forms of beauty,
proclaims furthermore its power to present in visible semblance its own
exaltation above the bare fact.

(_γγ_) A _third_ ground of figurative expression, and one of at
least equal force, may be found in the purely ribald exuberance of
the phantasy, which is unable to set before us an object in its own
outlines for what they are worth, or a significance in its unadorned
simplicity, but on all occasions hankers after some concrete embodiment
cognate with it, or is overmastered by the ingenuity of a personal
caprice, which, in order to escape the commonplace, abandons itself to
the charms of the piquant novelty, a caprice that is never satisfied
until it has discovered for us points of affinity in material the most
remote apparently from that before us, and has thereby related the same
to the most distant objects.

And we may here observe that it is not so much the _prosaic_ and
_poetic_ style generally as the style of the _classic_ world in
contrast with that of later periods which presents such a marked
difference in the pre-eminent importance they attach to genuine or
metaphorical expression respectively. It is not merely the Greek
philosophers, such as Plato and Aristotle, or the great historians and
orators, such as Thucydides and Demosthenes, but also the great poets,
Homer and Sophocles, who, albeit we find examples of the simile in all
them, remain on the whole, and without exception, constant in the use
of their direct form of expression[95]. Their plastic severity and
sterling substance will not permit them such a multifarious product,
as is bound up with the use of metaphor, nor will it suffer them, even
for the sake of gathering the so-called flowers of expression, to waver
fitfully in devious ways from their ideal mintage of the completely
simple and co-ordinate result as of one metal cast in one mould. The
metaphor, in fact, is always an interruption to the logical course of
conception and invariably to that extent a distraction, because it
starts images and brings them together, which are not immediately
connected with the subject and its significance, and for this reason
tend to a like extent to divert the attention from the same to matter
cognate with themselves, but strange to both. The prose of ancient
writers in the extraordinary clarity and flexibility of its utterance
and their poetry in the repose of its completely unfolded content[96],
are equally removed from the frequent use of metaphor by modern writers.

On the other hand it is particularly in the East, and above all the
later literature of Mohammedan poetry, which makes use of the indirect
or figurative modes of expression, and, indeed, finds them essential.
The same thing may be said, if less emphatically, of modern European
literature. The diction of Shakespeare, for instance, is full of
metaphor. The Spaniards, too, are very fond of this flowery region,
and, indeed, have wandered off into it to the point of the most
tasteless exaggeration and superfluity. Jean Paul falls under the
same charge. Goethe by virtue of the equal strength and clarity of
his vision to a less extent. Schiller, however, is even in his prose
exceedingly rich both in image and metaphor; in his case this is rather
due to his effort to bring really profound ideas within the range of
the imaginative vision without being forced to expound all they imply
for the mind in the technical language of philosophy. We behold and
find there the essential unity of the speculative reason reflected on
the mirror of Life as it stands before us.

(_b_) _The Image_

We may place the _image_ midway between the metaphor and the simile.
It has, in fact, so close an affinity with the metaphor that we may
regard it as merely a metaphor _fully amplified_[97], an aspect which
at the same time marks its very close resemblance to the simile; there
is, however, this distinction, that in the case of the image as such
the significance is not set forth in its independent opposition to
the concrete external object expressly compared with it. That which
we term the image arises when two phenomena or conditions, which by
themselves stand substantially apart, are placed in concurrence so that
one condition supplies the significance which is made intelligible
by means of the other. The first, that is to say, the fundamental
_modus_ of the definition constitutes here the relation of _independent
consistency_[98], and is the line of _division_ of the spheres in
their separation, from which both the significance and its image are
deduced; and that which is common to them, the qualities and relations
and so forth, are not, as in the symbol, the indefinite universal and
substantive itself, but the self-defined concrete existence on the one
side no less than on the other[99].

(_a_) Under a relation such as this the image may possess as its
significance a whole series of conditions, activities, contrasts, and
modes of existence, and manifest the same through a series of a similar
nature from an independent if cognate source, without emphasizing in
so many words the significance as such within the limits of the image.
The poem of Goethe, entitled "The Song of Mahomet," is of this kind.
It is merely the title here which shows us that in the image of a
rocky water-spring which, in the freshness of youth, leaps over the
cliff's edge into the abyss, and which then spreads away with the rush
of tributary springs down the plain, ever and anon taking up fraternal
rivers, which gives further a name to localities, and sees whole
towns subject to its glory, until it finally bears in the tumultuous
folds of its rapturous heart all these splendours, the brothers, its
possessions, its children, to the great source that awaits them--it
is, we repeat, merely the title which explains to us that in this
comprehensive and radiant image of a mighty river we have the first
bold appearance of Mahomet, then the rapid spread of his teaching,
and, finally, the deliberately planned attempt to bring all nations
to the _one_ faith set forth with such singular directness. We may
view in a similar way many of the Xenien of Goethe and Schiller, those
sentences edged in part with scorn, but as often the mere vehicle of
good spirits, which were flung at the public and its weak authors in
particular. Take the pair of distiches which follow, as an example:

/$
     Stille kneteten wir Salpeter, Kohlen und Sewefel,
     Bohrten Röhren, gefall' nun auch das Feuer work euch!

     Einige steigen als leuchtende kugeln und andere zünden,
     Manche auch werfen wir nur spielend das Aug' zu erfreun[100].
$/

Ay, we have in truth seen not a few rockets of this order changed
to dull ash, to the exceeding entertainment of the better half of
public opinion, only too delighted when the rabble of commonplace and
miserable quality, which had for a long time spreadeagled it far and
wide and laid down the law, received a genuine smack in the mouth and a
bucket of cold water over its precious body into the bargain.

(_β_) In these last examples there is, however, already a _second_
aspect brought to view, which in our consideration of the image
should be emphasized. In other words the content is in these cases
an _individual_ which acts, brings before us objects, experiences
specific states, etc., and then is reflected in the _image_ not as
such a subject, but merely with a reference to his particular actions,
workings, and experiences. The individual himself as subject is, on
the contrary, introduced without an image, and it is only his actions
and relations strictly viewed which contain the form of indirect
expression. Here, too, as in the case of the image generally, it is
not the _entire_ significance which is separated from its mode of
embodiment, but the subject is alone set forth independently, while
the definite content of that subject receives at the same time the
form of an image; and the result is that the subject is imagined in
such a way as though it was itself the means which supplied the imaged
form of their existence to the objects and actions in question. The
metaphorical relation is, in fact, ascribed to the individual subject
expressly named. This confusion, or at least interfusion of the direct
and indirect modes of expression has frequently been the subject of
adverse criticism, but we do not find very solid ground to support
it[101].

(_γ_) Orientals are to an extraordinary degree distinguished by the
bold use they make of this type of imagery. They will unite together
and intertwine in one image entirely _independent_ forms of existence.
Take for example this sentence of Hafiz: "The life-course of the
world is a bloodstained dagger, and the drops which fall therefrom
are crowns." Or that other: "The sword of the sun drips in the red of
morning with the blood of Night, over which it has won the victory."
Or again this: "No one has yet drawn aside the veil from the cheeks of
thought as Hafis since the day when the tips of the locks of the Word's
bride were curled." The meaning of this image may be apparently thus
expanded. Thought is the bride of the word; so Klopstock calls the word
the twin-brother of Thought, and since this bride has been adorned by
man with delicately turned words, no one is likely to be more competent
than Hafis to suffer the thought thus adorned to appear in the clarity
of its unveiled beauty.

(_c_) _The Simile_

From this last type of imagery we may proceed without a break to
the consideration of _simile._ For in the image we already find the
initial appearance of the independent and imageless expression of
this significance, the subject of the image being here designated.
The two types are, however, distinguished by this that in the simile
everything which exclusively manifests the image in a figurative form
is furthermore able to receive an independently subsistent mode of
expression as significance, which thereby appears alongside of its
image and is placed in comparison with the same. The metaphor and image
declare the significances without making that declaration explicit,
so that it is only the context, in which either metaphor or image
occur, which shows without disguise what their meaning veritably is
intended to be. In the simile, on the contrary, both aspects, image and
significance, albeit no doubt we find at one time it is the image, and
at another the significance which is most clearly and fully emphasized,
are kept completely apart and set forth each in its isolation, and only
then, and in such severation are related to one another in virtue of
the similarity of their content.

Viewed in this relation it is possible to characterize the simile as
to some extent merely a vain _repetition_, in so far, that is, as one
and the same content is reproduced in a twofold, or it may be threefold
or fourfold form. In part, too, we may even see in it a frequently
wearisome _superfluity_, for the reason that the significance is
already there as an independent factor, and requires no further mode
of figuration to render it intelligible. The question consequently
presses upon us here with even more insistence than in the case of the
image and metaphor, what essential interest and object there may be in
the employment of isolated examples or a whole number of similes. For
their use is not to be justified on the commonly received ground of
mere vivacity, and the contention that they increase the lucidity of
expression will assist us just as little. On the contrary similes make
a poem only too frequently insipid and overweighted, and an image or
metaphor by itself can possess a clarity fully as pronounced without
there being any previous necessity to attach the significance to either
as something still outside.

We must consequently conceive the object of the simile to consist in
this, that the subjective[102] imagination of the poet, however much
it has brought home to the artist's consciousness the content, which
it seeks to express, with distinctive emphasis according to its more
abstract generality and expresses it in this universal aspect, yet it
finds itself equally under a constraint to seek out a concrete form
for it, and to envisualize for itself in the phenomena of sense that
which already is clearly before the mind as its significance. Looked
at in this way we shall find that the simile is, no less than the
image and the metaphor, indicative of the bravery which invariably
distinguishes imaginative power when it faces its object, it matters
not what, it may be a single object of sense-perception, a definite
condition, or a general significance--the enterprise, that is, to bind
together with its own activity that which lies remote from it in its
external environment, and by so doing to carry away by force objects of
the greatest variety, and unite them to the interest which its unified
content possesses, and generally to annex to the matter in hand a whole
world of diversified phenomena. And this power of the imagination
continually to find out the new plastic shape, and cement together
heterogeneous material by means of the relations and associations of
sense is, in general terms, also the rational basis of the simile.

(_α_) In the _first_ place, then, this impulse to compare can find
satisfaction simply by virtue of the demand which it satisfies, without
bringing to light, that is to say, anything else in the brilliancy of
its images than the bravery of the imagination itself. And this is but
the same thing as that revelry[103] of imaginative power, which, more
particularly in the East, with all the easy-going tranquillity of the
South regales itself in the wealth and splendour of its images nor
seeks any other object, while it seduces the hearer to give himself up
to the same spirit. At the same time we are frequently astounded by
the amazing force, with which the poet surrenders himself to ideas of
the most startling contrasts, and displays a cunning of combination
which far exceeds all the effort of mere wittiness as an indication of
genius. Calderon, too, supplies us with many comparisons of this type,
more particularly in his pictures of important and splendid pageants
and festive processions, in his descriptions of chargers and cavaliers,
or in his reference to ships, which on one occasion he calls "birds
without pinions, and fish without fins."

(_β_) A _second_ and more intimate aspect of these comparisons is that
in virtue of which we find them to be a _tarrying by_ one and the same
object, which becomes thereby the substantial centre of a series of
other ideas remote from it, by pointing to or illuminating which the
interest of the content compared receives a tangible increase.

This protraction of the interest round one centre may be explained in
several ways.

(_αα_) As the _first_ we may draw attention to the _absorption_ of
the soul in the content, which is the source of its _animation_, and
which attaches itself so intimately to it, that it is unable to detach
itself from the permanent interest thus excited. We may at the same
time observe that a fundamental difference once more asserts itself in
this respect between the poetry of the East and the West resembling
that we have already adverted to our discussion of Pantheism. In
other words the Oriental is in his absorption less dominated by the
personal relation, and consequently without the languish and yearning
of self-interest: his longing, such as it is, remains a more impersonal
delight in the object under comparison, and consequently more of a
contemplation. He looks about him with a free mind, sees in everything
which surrounds him, everything which stirs either his mental faculties
or his heart, an existing image of that which actively concerns his
sense-life and his spiritual forces, and with which he abounds. This
type of the imagination which is free from all mere self-obsession,
delivered, I mean, from all morbid introspection discovers its
satisfaction in the figurative conception of the object itself, and
most of all when that object, by virtue of the comparison instituted,
is extolled, exalted, and declared in line with that which is most
glorious and beautiful. The West is in its general contrast more remote
from this impersonal spirit, and in its grief and pain more inclined to
languish and yearn itself away.

This dallying, as we may call it, is then pre-eminently an interest
of the _emotional_ life, more particularly of love, which delights
to take refuge in the objects of its suffering and its raptures; and
as often as it finds itself unable to break loose from such feelings
finds naught that is wearisome in the task of repainting the object
ever anew. The lover is above all things the prodigal in wishes, hopes,
and ever changing conceits. Among such conceits we have to reckon
the simile, to which love and the emotions generally have recourse,
all the more readily for the reason that they take up and absorb
the entire soul, and are themselves the independently motive source
of comparison. Whatever is their immediate content, is, that is to
say, a beautiful object arrested in its singularity, whether it be
the mouth, the eye, or the hair of the beloved. In such a state the
human soul is active, restless, and the states of joy and pain are
neither without life nor in repose, but full of activity and motion,
are up and down, which at least is continuous in this that it is for
ever bringing all material of whatever kind into relation with the
one emotional centre of the world of the heart. In other words the
interest of comparison has its root in the feeling itself, which is
insistently conscious of the fact, for example, that there are other
objects in Nature which are beautiful, or have given rise to pain and
so on. Consequently love draws these objects with the aid of the simile
into the sphere of its own content, and makes the same wider and more
universal thereby. If the object of the simile is, however, entirely
_isolated_ in its _material_ form, and brought into juxtaposition with
objects of a similar nature, we shall find, and particularly so where
similes of this sort are piled one on the top of another, that such
a composition is due to emotion of a still rather superficial order,
and to reflection equally wanting in depth; the result will be that
the variety which merely plays round an external material will readily
appear to us insipid and of no vital interest, because we have here
no spiritual relation interpenetrating it. We may illustrate such an
effect from the fourth chapter of the Song of Solomon where we find
the words: "Behold thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou
hast doves' eyes within thy locks; thy hair is as a flock of goats,
that appear from mount Gilead. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep
that are even shorn, which came up from the washing, whereof everyone
bear twins, and none is barren among them. Thy lips are like a thread
of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy temples are like a piece of
pomegranate within thy locks. Thy neck is like a tower of David builded
for an armoury, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of
mighty men. Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins,
which feed among the lilies[104]. Until the day break and the shadows
flee away." This _naïveté_ is to be met with in many of the comparisons
of Ossian. Take for example the words: "Thou art as snow on the
heather; thine hair is as mist on the kromla, when he curls himself up
on the rock, and glistens toward the gleam in the West; thine arms are
as two arrows in the halls of the mighty Fingal."

Of the same kind, only here in wholly a rhetorical way, are the
following words Ovid places in the mouth of Polyphemus (Met. XIII,
vv. 789-807): "Thou art more white, O Galatea, than the leaf of the
snow-white meadowland; more blooming than the fields, more slender than
the elm; more brilliant than glass, more arch than the tender little
roebuck; smoother than the shell ever-polished by the sea; more dear
than Winter's sun, or the shade in Summer; nobler than the fruit-tree,
more comely than the lofty plane." And so on through all the nineteen
hexameters, a description not wanting in rhetorical beauty, but as
the presentation of an emotion, which rouses little interest, itself
equally lacking in interest.

We may find many examples of this style of comparison in Calderon,
although a halt, by the way, of this kind is more suitable to lyrical
emotion simply, and fetters the march of drama far too insistently,
if it is not actually motived by the subject-matter. Don Juan, for
instance, during the progress of the action, describes at length in
this way the beauty of a veiled lady whom he had followed. This is what
he says to a third person:

/$
     Natheless in despite and often
     Through the gross and barriered darkness
     Of that intranslucent veil,
     Flashed a hand of sheen most splendid,
     Mistress pure of rose and lily,
     Princess, to whose matchless glory
     E'en the snow's gleam paid obeisance,
     Slave all murk of Aethiop moulding.
$/

The matter is wholly different, however, when any one capable of
_profound_ emotion, expresses his life through images and similes,
in which the most secret folds of spiritual feeling are unveiled,
the soul here either identifying itself with some scene of external
Nature, or making such a scene the counterfeit of a spiritual content.
We may cite Ossian once again in illustration of this better use of
image and comparison, although the range of objects which serve him
in such similitude is jejune, mainly restricted to clouds, mists,
storms, trees, streams, thistles, grasses, and other facts equally
obvious. Here is one of them: "The Present[105] brings joy to us, O
Fingal; it is as the sun on Kromla, when the hunter has mourned its
absence a whole year long and now it breaks forth from the clouds." In
another passage of the same writer we find these words: "Did not Ossian
hearken but now to a voice? Is it then the voice of the days that are
no longer? Ofttimes, oft as the evening suns, comes the memory of times
that are gone into my soul." And for another instance take this bit of
narration: "Pleasant are the words of song, saith Kuchullin, and dear
to the heart are the tales of times far away. They are as the quiet
dew of the morning on the hill of the roe-deer, when the sun trembles
faintly on his flank, and the pool lies motionless and blue in the
dale." In the case of Ossian this halting by the same emotions, and
their similitudes expresses the attitude of an old age which out of
weariness and exhaustion turns to sorrowful and painful memories. And
generally a recourse to comparisons is evidence of an inclination to
melancholy and effeminate emotion. The desire and interest of such a
soul lies far away and foregone; and for this reason we find as a rule
that, instead of bracing itself up manfully, it yields to its longing
to lose itself in something else. Many of the figurative expressions
of Ossian consequently are quite as much a response to this wholly
personal mood as they are a reflection of ideas mostly of a mournful
colour, and of the restricted circle beyond which he is unable to pass.

But, conversely, it is quite possible that _passion_, in so far as
it is able to concentrate its forces on one content, despite its own
unrest, with the object of finding a counterfeit of the soul in the
natural world around it, may fluctuate to and fro in a variety of
images and similitudes, which are all purely conceits of the fancy
over one and the same object. A fine example of this we have in that
monologue of Juliet from "Romeo and Juliet," in which she apostrophizes
the night as follows:

/$
     Come, night; come Romeo; come, thou day in night;
     For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
     Whiter than new snow on a raven's back:
     Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,
     Give me my Romeo; and when he shall die,
     Take him and cut him out in little stars,
     And he will make the face of heaven so fine
     That all the world will be in love with night
     And pay no worship to the garish sun.
$/

(_ββ_) The similes of epic poetry as they come before us over and
over again in Homer stand out in a marked contrast to the above type
of almost purely lyrical simile in which sentiment is absorbed in the
heart of its content. In the former case the aim of the poet, when
he may by any chance wish to dally with the comparative mode around
some specific object, is, on the one hand, interested in raising us
over the active curiosity, expectancy, hope, and fear, by which we are
moved relatively to the several situations and exploits of his heroes
during the actual progress of events over, that is to say, the general
concurrencies of cause, action, and consequence, and in fixing our
attention upon the images which he places before us in their plastic
repose, purely for our contemplation, serene as the works of sculpture.
This repose, this absolution from the merely practical interest that
we may enter into that which he places visibly before our eyes comes
upon us with all the more force in so far as everything with which
he compares the object is taken from a field entirely remote from
it. Moreover, this halting round the simile possesses the further
significance that by virtue of this kind of twofold painting of the
same object its importance is emphasized, and is thus not permitted
to be whirled away in the mere shifting stream of the song and the
events it celebrates. Take, for example, what Homer says of Achilles,
when that hero, fired with anger, confronts Aeneas ("Iliad," XX, vv.
164-175):

/$
     As when the harmful king of beasts (sore threatened to be slain
     By all the country up in arms) at first makes coy disdain
     Prepare resistance, but at last when anyone hath led
     Bold charge upon him with his dart, he then turns yawning head,
     Fell anger lathers in his jaws, his great heart swells, his stern
     Lasheth his strength up, sides and thighs waddle with stripes to learn
     Their own power, his eyes glow, he roars, he leaps to kill,
     Secure of killing: so his power then rous'd up to his will
     Matchless Achilles, coming on to meet Anchises' son[106].
$/

Much in the same spirit he speaks of Pallas, when she averted the arrow
which Pandaros had let fly against Menelaus ("Iliad," IV, vv. 130-131):

"She did not forget him, and warded off the arrow e'en as a mother
flicks away some fly from her son, as he lies in sweet slumber."

And again further on when the arrow, notwithstanding, wounds Menelaus
(vv. 141-146):

/$
     Yet forth the blood flow'd, which did much his royal person grace,
     And show'd upon his ivory skin, as doth a purple dye
     Laid, by a dame of Caïra, or lovely Maeony,
     On ivory, wrought in ornaments to deck the cheeks of horse;
     Which in her marriage room must lie; whose beauties have such force,
     That they are wish'd of many knights, but are such precious things,
     That they are kept for horse that draw the chariots of kings;
     Which horse, so deck'd, the charioteer esteems a grace to him;
     Like these, in grace, the blood upon thy solid thighs did swim,
     O  Menelaus, etc[107].
$/

(_γ_) A _third_ motive cause of similes, quite distinct from that
of purely imaginative riot as also the self-absorbed sentiment or,
under its other aspect, the dallying round important objects with
the figurative power of the fancy, we have now to emphasize with
particular reference to dramatic poetry. The content of the drama is
made up of the conflict of passions, activities, pathos, actions, and
the accomplishment of the thing willed by the soul, a content which
does not, as in the case of the epic, take the form of a narrative of
past events, but the dramatic poet places the individuals themselves
before our eyes and makes them unfold their emotions personally in
an objective form, and their actions as taking place in the present:
his mediate position between ourselves and the objects represented
therefore ceases. Looked at from this point of view it would appear as
though in order to make this presence in Nature clear to us a primary
requirement of drama would be that the expression of passions and
the vehemence of their grief, consternation, and delight should be
painted as naturally as it was possible to paint it, and consequently
the simile would be here out of place. To let individuals, on the
very plane of their action, in the full storm of emotion, and in the
continuous strain of the busy world, speak much in the language of
metaphor or image is obviously, from the commonsense point of view,
an unnatural proceeding and injurious to the directness aimed at.
We are by the simile diverted from the immediate situation, and the
characters, whose actions and emotions are involved in it, to something
external and strange to it, which in short does not strictly belong to
it, as part of its own present; consequently the general course of the
dialogue must unavoidably appear to lag under the interruption thus
imposed. And for this reason it came about also in Germany when at
last our young bloods were all for freeing themselves from the fetters
of French rhetorical taste, that the Spaniards, Italians, and French
were regarded as artists who did nothing more than place their own
personal flights of fancy or witticism, their own conventional attitude
to society and elegance of speech in the mouth of their dramatic
characters in situations, too, when the very tempest of emotion cried
out for Nature's most direct expression to the exclusion of all other.
We find as a result of such an insistence on the principle of realism
that in many dramas, which hail from this time, the outcry of emotion,
with all the exclamatory signs and hyphens which may render its nudity
more visible, takes the place of a noble and dignified diction, rich
in image and simile. In much the same sense even English critics
have often charged Shakespeare with a superabundant and too varied
recourse to the simile, some of which he not unfrequently will attach
to characters in the full strain of personal bereavement, where the
stress of emotion least of all admits of the tranquillity necessary to
reflection, the attitude of mind which is indispensable to this type of
comparison. We may no doubt admit that now and again we meet with in
Shakespeare an exaggerated tendency to pile up image upon image, and
that his diction is thereby overweighted. At the same time we shall
see, if we examine the matter in all its bearings, that even in drama
the simile is entitled to a position essential to this form of poetry
and vital to its action.

In other words if the emotion makes a pause in similes for the reason
that it is absorbed in its object and is unable to free itself
therefrom, there is also on the plane of _active life_ a distinct
purpose subserved by it, namely, to indicate that the individual is
not thus so exclusively preoccupied with the particular situation or
state of the emotions then uppermost, but possesses a fine and noble
nature superior to such conditions and able to assert its independence.
In passion soul-life is restricted and fettered to its own seclusion,
narrowed down to the point of concentrated heat, either thereby a
mute, an ejaculation of monosyllables, or the rage that vents itself
at random. Greatness of soul and intellectual power alike refuse to
submit to such limitations: they are wings which carry the soul in
a fine tranquillity over and above the storm of pathos that moves
it. It is this deliverance of the soul, which the simile primarily
expresses by the very mode under which it is asserted. In other words
it is only a really profound composure and strength which is able to
make itself the object of its pain and suffering, to compare itself
with something else, and by doing so to view itself impartially[108]
in a strange material; or it may be in a mood of the most terrible
scorn to set forth in the external thing the confronting image of its
own annihilation, and still persist in the repose of its own obdurate
forces. In epical poetry, as we before observed, it was the poet's
undoubted function to transmit to his audience, by means of those halts
by the way which his picturesque similitudes offered, that sense of
tranquillity which is essential to fine art. In dramatic art, on the
contrary, the _dramatis personae_ appear as themselves the _poets_
and _artists._ Here it is the characters who objectify their own
soul-life in that which they are powerful enough to imagine and inform,
thereby further manifesting to us the nobility of their receptive
faculties and the inherent force of their emotional resources[109].
For this absorption into something else that is external is now[110]
the deliverance of the world within from a purely practical interest,
or at least is that which lifts the immediacy of emotion to the level
of forms the soul may contemplate in freedom; and for this reason
every comparison instituted simply for the comparison's sake in the
way we have already observed it under the first aspect of the simile
discussed, is vindicated now in a much profounder sense than was then
possible; it can now only appear as a victory over the exclusive
obsession of passion and the release from its masterdom. In following
up the course of this liberating process we will now emphasize several
important distinctions to illustrate which we shall borrow exclusively
from Shakespeare.

(_αα_) Now in the first place we would observe that when we have a soul
set before us about to meet with a grave misfortune, by which it will
be shaken to its depths, and the pain of this inevitable cataclysm
is at length actually entered upon, it would be nothing less than an
indication of a nature essentially commonplace if it were there and
then to break out into the cry of horror, pain, and desperation, and so
make a clean breast of it. A strong and noble spirit on the contrary
holds its lamentation as such in reserve, keeps a hand of iron upon its
pain, and by this means preserves a free power to embody in far-distant
material imaginatively presented the profound sense of its anguish,
and to express its own tragic state under the image of that which is
remote. Thus man rises superior to his suffering; he is not utterly
with all that is in him bondman to it; rather he is as wholly distinct
from it as he is one with it; and consequently he can still pause
before that which is outside and beyond him, which he relates to his
emotion as an independent force cognate with his own. This will explain
to us those words of the old Northumberland in Shakespeare's "Henry
IV," when he inquires of the messenger who comes to inform him of the
death of Percy, what news he brings him of his son and his brother,
and, on receiving no reply, gives utterance to the composure of the
most poignant grief as follows:

/$
     Thou tremblest; and the whiteness of thy cheek
     Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand.
     Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
     So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,
     Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night,
     And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;
     But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
     And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it[111].
$/

This attitude of the soul, which spins about itself as it were
the garments of its pain, and yet retains the power throughout to
image itself under new modes of comparison, receives a particularly
striking illustration in the character of Richard II, where we find
him repentant over the youthful frivolity of his days of prosperity.
In fact there is no trait in this royal grief that is more touching
or suggestive of a child's simplicity than the fact that he always
expresses himself under the objective form of most pertinent images,
and in the play of this type of self-expression preserves his suffering
all the more profoundly. When, for example, Henry demands of him the
crown, he replies:

/$
     Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;
     Here cousin;
     On this side my hand, and on that side yours.
     Now is this golden crown like a deep well
     That owes two buckets, filling one another,
     The emptier ever dancing in the air,
     The other down, unseen and full of water.
     That bucket down and full of tears am I,
     Drinking my griefs while you mount up on high[112].
$/


(_ββ_) The other aspect to which we would now draw attention is this,
namely, that a character which is already made one with its interests,
its sorrow, and its destiny, endeavours by means of the simile to
release itself from this immediate union, and makes this deliverance
obvious to us by the very fact that it shows itself still able to
deduce such similitudes. In "Henry VIII,"[113] for instance, the Queen
Katherine, on being forsaken by her royal consort, expresses the depth
of her desolation in the words:

/$
     I am the most unhappy woman living!
     Alas, poor wenches, where are now your fortunes?
     Shipwreck'd upon a kingdom, where no pity,
     No friends, no hope; no kindred weep for me;
     Almost no grave allow'd me: like the lily,
     That once was mistress of the field and flourish'd,
     I'll hang my head and perish.
$/

In a still more admirable manner in "Julius Caesar"[114] Brutus
exclaims to Cassius, to whose want of spirit he has vainly striven to
give the spur:

/$
     O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb
     That carries anger as the flint bears fire;
     Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
     And straight is cool again.
$/

That Brutus in such a situation can find room for a simile is already
an excellent proof that he himself has thrust his scorn into the
background, and has begun to assert himself as master of it.

For the most part Shakespeare, by endowing his criminal characters
with greatness of soul in crime no less than in misfortune, exalts
them before he leaves them above their own evil passions: he will not
let them rest in the purely abstract assertion of crimes they are for
ever going to do, but never really commit, as is the French style, but
actually infuses them with the imaginative power, by means of which
they stand out before us as distinctly as any other personification
that is new to us. Macbeth, for instance, when his last hour has
struck[115], exclaims in the well-known words:

/$
                   Out, out, brief candle!
     Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
     That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
     And then is heard no more: it is a tale
     Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury
     Signifying nothing.
$/

The same thing may be said of those last words of Cardinal Wolsey in
"Henry VIII,"[116] uttered at the close of his career when struck down
from the summit of his greatness:

/$
     Farewell! a long farewell to all my greatness!
     This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
     The tender leaves of hopes: to-morrow blossoms,
     And bears his blushing honours thick upon him;
     The third day comes a frost, a killing frost;
     And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
     His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,
     And then he falls, as I do.
$/

(_γγ_) In this impersonal relation of objective fact and its expression
of the comparative mode, the repose and substantial self-command of
character returns to itself; it is the means whereby the pain of a
great downfall is softened. So Cleopatra exclaims[117] to Charmian,
after she has already put the mortal aspic to her breast:

/$
                             Peace, peace!
     Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,
     That sucks the nurse asleep?
     As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle--
$/

The bite of the serpent relaxes her members so gently that Death is
himself deceived and holds himself to be Sleep. And this image may well
pass as itself a counterfeit of the mild and allaying influence of such
similitudes.


C. THE DISAPPEARANCE OF THE SYMBOLIC TYPE OF ART

_Didactic_, _descriptive poetry and the ancient epigram._

The conception we have in general terms formed of the symbolic type
of art is such that within it significance and expression are unable
to unite sufficiently to appear in complete and reciprocal fusion.
In unconscious symbolism the _incompatibility_ of these two aspects
remained a fact throughout, if not actually _declared_ as such; in the
Sublime on the contrary this inadequacy was _explicitly_ asserted:
the absolute significance, God, no less than His external reality,
the world, are expressly represented in this excluding relation to
one another. On the other hand, however, in all these types that
further aspect of symbolism, namely, the _affinity_ which obtains
between the significance and the external form, in which it is visibly
manifested, still retained its importance. In the original type of
symbolism this was exclusively the case, a type which did not as yet
set forth the significance in contrast to its concrete existence.
But in the Sublime, too, it remained an _essential_ relation, a type
which, in order to express the Supreme Being, if here under a wholly
inadequate mode, required as its means the phenomena of Nature, and the
events and exploits of God's chosen people. And finally it reappears
in the comparative type of art a personal relation and one that is
consequently amenable to _caprice._ This element of caprice, however,
albeit it is an entirely present fact and particularly so in the case
of the metaphor, image, and simile, is notwithstanding still hidden
away behind the _affinity_ between the significance and the image
utilized to express it, in so far as it selects the comparison simply
out of a regard for their mutual resemblance, a fundamental aspect of
which is not so much the _external_ form as just this _relation_ set up
between them by the activity of the soul and consisting in subjective
emotions, points of view and ideas and their cognate modes of
configuration[118]. When, however, it is not the notion of the material
itself, but simply a capricious use of the judgment, which brings
together the content and its artistic form, both can only be conceived
as posited in an entirely external relation to one another; their
association is now a juxtaposition without essential relation, simply
a dressing up, that is to say, of the one side by the other. For this
reason we have here to treat these last-mentioned and subordinate types
of art by way of supplement. They arise from the absolute collapse of
the essential phases in all true art-production; they bring before us,
in short, by their independence of the principle of relativity the
suicide of the symbolic type.

If we view this stage generally as a whole we find on the one hand
already as wholly independent the elaborate but formless significance,
for the artistic shaping of which all that we can now supply is an
external ornament selected at caprice to set it off. On the other side
we have the external mode pure and simple. That is to say, instead of
being mediated in its identity with that on which it is imposed by the
fact that this is its own essentially cognate significance it can now
only be accepted and described in the aspect of its self-subsistence
over against this _centrum_ of significance, and consequently only
as mere externality. From the above contrasted aspects we may
differentiate in abstract terms _didactic_ from _descriptive_ poetry,
a distinction which so far at least as the didactic is concerned is
only to be made good under the poetic type for the reason that this
alone is able to bring before us the significance in its abstract
universality.

Inasmuch, however, as the notion of art does not consist in the
dissociation, but the identification of significance and form we find
even at this stage not only a complete separation, but also in line
with that, a relation asserted between the sides thus opposed. This
relation, however, now that the partition line of symbolism has already
been _crossed_, is no longer of a symbolic nature, and is therefore
an attempt to abolish the fundamental characteristics of that type,
namely, the incompatibility, and at the same time the self-subsistence
of form and content, a position that all the previous types were unable
to transcend. Owing, however, to the separation of the two sides,
which thus make for unity, being already presupposed by this type
this attempt can only be looked upon as a mere aspiration[119], to
completely satisfy which in all that it involves is reserved for a more
perfect type of art, namely, the classical.

We will now briefly glance at these supplementary forms, in order to
make our passage from them to the real type above mentioned more fully
intelligible.


1. THE DIDACTIC POEM

When a significance, which as such co-ordinates a homogeneous
_complexus_ of relations, is apprehended exclusively as significance,
yet does not receive the form strictly adequate to this content, but
is merely invested with the external ornamentation of art, then we
have before us the didactic poem. The didactic poem does not figure
among the genuine types of art. For in it we find on the one hand a
content already completely elaborated under a mode that is thereby
necessarily prosaic, while on the other we have the artistic form,
which is merely tacked to it in an external way, for this very reason
that it had already been accepted by the mind in a form stamped with
_prose_ throughout, and is merely exhibited to our common sense or
reflective faculties as instruction under this prosaic aspect, that is
to say, with an exclusive reference to the significance embodied in
its abstract and general terms. Consequently art, in this its external
relation to a content so essentially foreign to its real informing
process, can only recognize in the didactic poem its external aspects,
such as metre, exalted language, episodic matter, images, similes,
ebullitions of sentiment, points of acceleration and transition in
the march of ideas, aspects in short which do not give us the heart
of the content as such, but rather surround it as an incidental
accretion, with the object of alleviating and making more enjoyable the
serious and dry tone of the didactic material by means of their more
inspiriting atmosphere. That which is intrinsically, in the fundamental
conception of it, relegated to prose, cannot receive the poet's
mintage, though it may be the peg on which he may hang his mantle[120].
Just as we find, for example, that the art of gardening is in great
measure a purely external rearrangement of what is already presented us
by Nature, but not necessarily of that which is itself a truly lovely
locality; or as the art of building ameliorates by its ornament and
external decoration a locality which has been expressly devoted to
prosaic purposes and affairs.

In this way Greek Philosophy made a start under the mode of the
didactic poem. We may even adduce Hesiod as an example, albeit a
prosaic treatment of this kind in its strict sense is only fully
assured when the understanding is undisputed master of the subject
with its train of reflections, consequences, and classifications, and
instructs us from this standpoint alone in as pleasing and elegant a
way as it can. Lucretius, too, in his relations to the philosophy of
Epicurus, and Vergil, with the information he supplies on agriculture,
are in part examples of the same type. Despite all their artistic
adroitness they are unable to give their versification the genuine
spontaneity of the artistic form. In Germany the didactic poem is
new out of fashion; in France Delille, in addition to his previous
efforts entitled "Les jardins, ou l'art d'embellir les paysages," and
his "Homme des champs," has presented his compatriots with a further
example of the didactic poem, in which he has treated physical science
as compendiously through its forms of magnetism, electricity and the
rest.


2. DESCRIPTIVE POETRY

The _second_ type which we have to examine stands out in direct
contrast to the previous one. The point of departure here is not from a
significance already present before the mind in an independent form of
its own, but from external objects simply such as natural localities,
buildings, seasons of the year or periods of time, and the modes under
which they are presented to sense. But as we found in the didactic
poem the content persisted in formless _generality_ so far as its
essential character was concerned, so here, if in a converse manner,
the _external material_ is _independently_ set forth in the singularity
which pertains to it simply as phenomenon without being drawn within
the circle of the significances apparent to mind; and it is this
particularity which is depicted and described in its external aspect
precisely as it appears to the matter-of-fact consciousness. Such a
sensuous content has no relation to true art whatever, except under the
_one_ feature, namely, that of its external existence; and this can
only claim art's recognition in so far as it represents the natural
basis of _spiritual_ life and individuality, its actions and events,
the facts, that is to say, which constitute an environing world; as
merely external form separated by itself from all that pertains to such
life it has no such claim.


3. RELATION OF BOTH ASPECTS

On grounds deducible from the above, neither the instructive nor the
descriptive type is secured in the exclusive one-sidedness which would
obliterate every vestige of art, and we find in the one case that the
external reality is brought into appreciable relation with that which
is seized by mind as significance, just as conversely in the other the
abstract universal is related to its concrete mode of appearance.

(_a_) We have already explained how this is so in the case of the
didactic poem. Without depicting external conditions and particular
phenomena, without the episodical narration of mythological and other
illustrations we shall rarely find a genuine example of it. By means,
however, of a parallel series of this character in which the universal
for mind is thus laid alongside of the particular object of sense we
have merely a quite collateral relation set up instead of a union
carried out in every detail, a parallelogism, moreover, which does not
affect the entire content and its all-embracing artistic form, but
merely isolated aspects and traits.

(_b_) Such a modicum of true relation is particularly conspicuous in
the case of descriptive poetry, in so far as its delineations are
accompanied with such emotions as the sight of natural landscape, the
course of the days and seasons, a wooded hill, a lake, a babbling
brook, a church, a picturesquely situated village and the poor man's
peaceful cottage are likely to arouse. We find consequently in
descriptive poetry much as we do in the didactic poem episodes which,
although merely accessory, animate us, in particular through the
reflection of affecting emotions, such as a tender melancholy or little
touches of occasional experience taken from the more homely levels of
life. Such an association of spiritual feeling with the external facts
of Nature can still only too easily in this type of poetry remain
wholly external in its presentation. For the natural or local condition
is here assumed to be something which quite independently confronts
us. Man no doubt draws near to it; under its influence he entertains
this or that feeling, but there is nothing which essentially unites
moonlight, forests, valleys, landscape, and so on, with the emotions
of the soul they excite. I am not here either the interpreter or the
animating focus of Nature, but feel, as each happens to confront me,
a wholly indefinite kind of harmonious reciprocity establish itself
between the objects I face and the emotional life which they stimulate.
Most of all are we Germans devoted to this type of picturesque
description, and along with it to every variety of exquisite feeling
and heart effervescence such natural scenery can possibly evoke. It is
a public high-road over which all may march in line. Even some of the
odes of Klopstock are tuned to its key.

(_c_) But _thirdly_, if we inquire whether there is not a profounder
relation between these opposed aspects of the internal feeling and
external object, we shall find our nearest approach to an answer in the
ancient _epigram._

(_α_) The very name of the epigram already expresses the original gist
of it. It is an _inscription._

Unquestionably we find, also here on the one hand an object, and on
the other we have a definite statement propounded as to this object;
but in the most ancient epigrams, among which Hesiod has preserved a
few examples, we do not have the picture of an object accompanied by
any reaction of feeling, rather we find, the matter of fact put before
us in two distinct ways. In the one the external existence, and with
it the meaning thereof and explanation, is concentrated in its form
as epigram on the keenest and most forcible of its characteristics.
This original characterization of the epigram, however, even among the
Greeks, later examples have already lost; and we find an increasing
tendency both to secure and apply the passing conceits of fancy,
whether ingenious, witty, or merely entertaining, to particular
incidents, works of art, people and so on, ideas in short which do not
so much set forth the object itself, as illustrate the condition of
personal feeling in reference to the same.

(_β_) The main point to observe here is this that, just in proportion
as the object itself fails as such to become the predominant factor
in this type of presentment to that extent it becomes less complete.
In this connection we may also in passing mention a few more modern
examples of an analogous nature. The novels of Tieck, for instance,
not unfrequently have to deal with specific works of art or artists,
or a definite gallery of pictures, composition of music and so forth,
and they have then some nice little romance attached. These particular
pictures, however, which the reader has never seen, these compositions,
which he has never heard, the poet obviously can neither bring before
our eyes nor ears. From this point of view the entire expression of his
art, in so far as it depends on objects of this nature, must remain
subject to this defect. In the same way in yet more important romances
writers have sought to embody as the real content of their work entire
arts, and their finest productions as Heinse, for instance, did with
that of music in his _Hildegard von Hohenthal._ But in every case
where we find that a work of art throughout is unable to reproduce
with essential adequacy its fundamental subject-matter, we can
only conclude that the primary cause of this defect arises from the
inadequacy of the type of art selected.

(_γ_) To remove the defects above adverted to two things are clearly
essential; the objective fact and the explanation of it which is
offered to mind must not be suffered to fall into absolute _severation_
as was the case in the type last considered, nor must the union when
effected, an equally important point, assume a character _identical_
with either the symbolical, sublime or purely comparative types. A yet
more genuine form of presentment must be sought for under a condition
in which we find that the fact in question supplies an elucidation
of its ideal content by means of its external mode of appearance,
and actually in this mode, a condition under which that which is of
spirit unfolds itself completely in the form of its reality, and the
corporeal and external presence is simply the adequate explication of
the spiritual and ideal. In order, however, to follow up this problem
to its complete _fulfilment_ we must bid farewell to the symbolic types
of art. For the essential character of symbolism consisted precisely in
this that the union of the animating principle of the significance with
its spatial embodiment always _stopped short_ of such completeness.

[Footnote 76: In other words everything created being posited as
unsubstantial apart from the One necessitated the conclusion that
all the Goodness, etc., there divulged was referable to that Supreme
Source.]

[Footnote 77: _Bewussten_, that is a symbolism conscious of its typical
character. I have above used the expression "premeditated," but
"conscious" is perhaps sufficient.]

[Footnote 78: I understand _auf solche Weise,_ "under such a mode as
expressed either by Symbolism or the Sublime."]

[Footnote 79: It is prosaic because it has no absolute root in reality.]

[Footnote 80: Lit., "As consciousness lays hold of the same in the
clear light of ordinary reason" (_seiner verständigen Klarheit._)]

[Footnote 81: _Theoretische_, that is personal, contemplative rather
than practical.]

[Footnote 82: Lit., "and his freedom secludes itself with a prophetic
instinct (_ahndend_) in itself."]

[Footnote 83: _Wie die Faust auf das Auge passt._ A proverbial
expression unknown to me. We should rather say "a beam in our eyes."]

[Footnote 84: As contrasted, that is, with the fable.]

[Footnote 85: An Indian dancing girl.]

[Footnote 86: Hegel uses the term in the plural, _Die Verwandlungen_,
possibly with reference to Ovid's Metamorphoses.]

[Footnote 87: _Standpunkt, i.e._, the form viewed relatively to the
general type.]

[Footnote 88: _Beseelung._]

[Footnote 89: Plastic must be taken here in the very loose and pregnant
sense of any art that deals with external material.]

[Footnote 90: _Ein grammatisches Subject._ Hegel presumably means that
it is merely subject under the mode of literary expression without
possessing the true determination of personality.]

[Footnote 91: _Aushöhlen muss._ We should rather say that the
allegorist is forced to attenuate (lit. hollow out) the substance of
subjectivity, etc. But I have left the more literal rendering.]

[Footnote 92: In the German _fassen_, _begreifen._]

[Footnote 93: _Einer konkreten Anschauung._ That is, a quality or
feature that belongs to the phenomena of the concrete world of
perception.]

[Footnote 94: Of course this is not so in the English equivalent, where
the primary sense is still material.]

[Footnote 95: Lit., "Of expressions in the strict sense of the term."]

[Footnote 96: _Ihr ruhiger vollständig ausgestaltender Sinn._ The
meaning that declares itself completely through the form in classic
repose.]

[Footnote 97: _Ausführliche_, explicit in all its detail.]

[Footnote 98: _Das Für-sich-seyn._]

[Footnote 99: I give the literal translation. I presume a more
intelligible one would be "but actual existence in its self-defined
concreteness." The passage is not easy to follow.]

[Footnote 100:

/$
     Silent we pounded up carbon, saltpeter, and sulphur,
     Set the train going. Good friend! How did our cracker find _you?_

     Some as illuminate balls soared prodigious while others exploded,
     Many we flashed in our fun simply the eye to delight.
$/
]

[Footnote 101: I find this analysis of the image more than usually
difficult to follow, I have therefore made my translation very literal.
I must confess that this distinction between the image and the metaphor
appears to me rather an example of hyper-subtlety on Hegel's part, or
as some might say, an effort to make what is virtually only a verbal
distinction correspond to a more real difference of idea.]

[Footnote 102: That is the emphatically personal.]

[Footnote 103: _Die Schwelgerei._]

[Footnote 104: In the German the sentence is continuous. Our version
clearly gives another reading to the Hebrew.]

[Footnote 105: May be a misprint for "thy presence," _deine_ instead of
_die._]

[Footnote 106: Chapman's translation.]

[Footnote 107: Chapman's translation, somewhat an extension of the
Greek it must be admitted.]

[Footnote 108: _Theoretisch_, _i.e._, in contemplative repose.]

[Footnote 109: Such I take to be the contrast implied in the words _den
Adel ihrer Gesinnung_ and _die Macht ihrers Gemüths. Gesinnung_ is the
sense-perception. _Gemüth_ includes the creative fertility.]

[Footnote 110: _Hier_, _i.e._, as contrasted with the first stage of
the discussion.]

[Footnote 111: "Henry IV, Part II," act i, scene I.]

[Footnote 112: "King Richard II," act iv, sc. 1.]

[Footnote 113: "King Henry VIII," act iii, sc. 1.]

[Footnote 114: "Julius Caesar," act iv, sc. 3.]

[Footnote 115: "Macbeth," act v, sc. 5.]

[Footnote 116: "Henry VIII," act iii, sc. 2.]

[Footnote 117: "Antony and Cleopatra," act V, sc. 2.]

[Footnote 118: The meaning is that the selection is not made merely
with reference to external resemblance, but is also based on relations
only existing in the soul of the artist and therefore to that extent
capricious, however much they appear to be essential.]

[Footnote 119: _Ein blosses Sollen,_ lit., a mere "should," a mere
movement in a given direction.]

[Footnote 120: This is implied in the contrast of the verbs _umstalten_
and _überkleiden._]




SUBSECTION II

THE CLASSICAL TYPE OF ART

INTRODUCTION

THE CLASSIC TYPE IN GENERAL

Thr central point[121] of art's evolution is the union, in a
self-integrated totality, carried to the point of its freest
expression, of content and form wholly adequate thereto. This
realization, coinciding as it does with the entire notional concept
of the beautiful, towards which the symbolic form of art strove in
vain, first becomes apparent in _classical art._ We have already, in
our previous consideration of the Idea of the beautiful and of art,
outlined the general character of classic art. The _Ideal_ supplies a
content and form to classical art, which in this adequate mode in which
it is embodied reveals that which true art is according to its notion.

To perfect this result, however, all the various phases of art, whose
evolution is the subject-matter of our previous investigations, are
contributive. For classical beauty has for its ideal substance[122]
free and _independent_ significance, that is to say, not the
significance of any particular thing, but a significance which
_declares itself,_ and thereby points to its substance. This is the
_spiritual_ substance, which in general terms is that which makes of
itself an object. In this objectification _of itself_ it possesses the
form of externality, which, as identical with its ideal character, is
consequently also on its own part the significance of itself, and is
made conscious of itself by this self-knowledge. It is true that in
our consideration of the symbolical our point of departure was that of
the unity of the significance and its mode of envisagement in the art
product; but this unity was _purely immediate_, and for this reason
inadequate.

For the real content either remained essentially the natural according
to its _substance_ and abstract _universality_, and consequently the
_isolated_ thing in the objective world of Nature[123], although it
was regarded as the real determination of that universality, was not
able to present the same in a mode adequate to it, or that which is
purely ideal, and only to be apprehended by spirit, in so far as it
was received in the artistic content, carried with it in that which
was foreign to its essential nature, namely the immediate individual
and sensuous thing, the mode of its appearance that was in fact
incongruent with it. And generally here significance and form only
stood in the relation of mere affinity and suggestion; and however
much in certain respects they could be brought together homogeneously,
they as clearly fell apart again in other directions. This original
unity was therefore torn asunder; this simple and abstract inwardness
or ideality was imaged for the Hindoo conception of the world on the
one side in the manifold reality of Nature, and on the other in finite
human existence; and the imagination, in the unrest of its impetuous
motion, was carried from the one to the other by turns, without being
either able to deliver the ideal in its essentially pure and absolute
self-subsistency, or to thoroughly infuse it with the phenomenal matter
as it was presented and informed, and so reproduce it throughout that
material in undisturbed union. The disorder and grotesque appearance,
which arose in the commingling of elements opposed to one another,
no doubt again vanished, but only to make way for an enigmatical
condition equally unsatisfying, which, instead of solving the problem,
was only able to prevent the problem's solution. For here, too, still
was lacking the freedom and self-subsistency of content, which only
thereby is rendered explicit in that the Inward is presented to
consciousness as in itself a whole, and by this means as that which
overlaps the externality which in the first instance is other than
itself and foreign to itself. This essential self-subsistency, cognized
as free and absolute significance, is self-consciousness, which has for
its content the Absolute, and for its form the subjectivity of Spirit.
In contradistinction to this self-determining, thinking, willing power
everything else is self-subsistent in merely a relative and momentary
sense. The material phenomena of Nature such as the sun, the heavens,
stars, plants, animals, stones, streams and sea have only an abstract
relation to themselves, and are in the eternal process of Nature bound
up with other facts of natural existence, so that they can only pass
as self-subsistent for the finite perception. The real significance of
the Absolute is not presented in them. Nature is indeed under a mode
expressed[124], but only under the mode of what is outside itself; its
inwardness is not as such for itself, but poured forth into the varied
show of its appearances, and consequently devoid of self subsistency.
Only in Spirit as the concrete, free and, infinite self-relation,
is the true and absolute significance actually disclosed, and
self-subsistent under the mode of its determinate existence.

On the way to this emancipation of the Idea from the immediately
sensuous medium and to its self-establishment we are confronted by
the _Sublime_ and the consecration of the imagination. The absolute
significance is, that is to say, in the first instance the thinking,
absolute and senseless[125] One, which is self-related as the Absolute,
and in this relation affirms that which it creates; Nature and finitude
generally, as the negative, thing, that which is essentially in itself
devoid of stability. It is the explicit and essential Universal,
conceived as the objective power over collective existence, whether
it be that this One be brought now to consciousness and represented
in its expressly negative attitude to the created, thing, or in its
positively pantheistic inherence in the same. The twofold defect of
this point of view, so far as it is connected with art, consists first
in this that this One and Universal which constitutes the fundamental
significance has not yet in itself arrived at the closer determination
and distinction, and by this means just as little at the point of
real individuality and personality in which it could be apprehended
as Spirit, and could be set before the sensuous perception in a form
which would be applicable to its spiritual content, according to its
own notion, and duly conformable therewith. The concrete idea of Spirit
on the contrary requires, that it both defines and distinguishes itself
in itself, and by the very act of making itself an object discovers
through this reduplication an external phenomenon, which although
material and present, nevertheless is throughout permeated by Spirit,
and consequently taken by itself expresses nothing at all, simply
permitting Spirit to declare itself as its inner core, the expression
and reality of which it is. _Secondly_, from the point of view of the
objective world the defect is bound up with this abstraction of an
Absolute to which the principle of self-determination is lacking that
now also the real phenomenon, being that which is essentially without
substance, is unable to set forth under any true mode the Absolute in
concrete shape. In contrast to those songs of praise and glory, those
celebrations of the abstract and universal majesty of God, we have
now in the passage we are making to a higher form of art to recall
to our minds that phase of negativity, change, pain, and progress
through life and death, which we discovered among other matter in the
conceptions of the East. We have here set before us the principle of
_self-distinction_ in its essential character under a mode which is
unable to unite with its conception the unity and self-subsistency of
that subjective principle. Both aspects, however, both the essential
and self-substantive unity, and the differentiation of that unity by
virtue of a self-defined content, are equally necessary to unfold a
true and free self-subsistency in its concrete and mediate totality.

In this connection we may incidentally, together with this reference
to the Sublime, mention that further conception which at the same
time entered on its process of explication in the East. It is that
apprehension, in opposition to the substantiality of the one God,
of internal freedom, self-subsistency and innate independence of the
individual, so far as the elaboration of this impulse was permitted
to Eastern nations. The main source of this attitude we must seek for
among the Arabs, who in their deserts, upon the infinite sea of these
expanses, with the clear heavens over their heads, in a nature such as
this have emphasized their own courage and the bravery of their hand,
as also the means of their self-preservation, whether it be camel,
horse, lance, or sword. Here we find the more stubborn independence
of personal character asserting itself in its contrast to the Hindoo
softness and lack of individuality, as also to the more recent
pantheism of Mohammedan poetry, and opposing also to the objective
world its circumscribed, securely defined and immediate reality. With
this incipient stage of the independence of the individual we must also
associate free friendship, hospitality, and august nobility, but at
the same time an insatiable lust of revenge and the inextinguishable
memory of a hate, which is insistent and will have satisfaction with
an unsparing passion and an absolutely remorseless cruelty. None
the less all that happens on this soil is wholly within the circle
of humanity. We have here deeds of revenge, conditions of love,
traits of self-sacrificing nobility from which the fantastic and the
wonderful have vanished; everything is carried forward in the secure
and determinate shape which the causative connection of the facts
necessitate. A similar conception of real objects which are referred
to their determinate basis of actuality[126], and are made visible
in their free power, not merely in that which conserves an exterior
purpose[127], we discovered in an earlier stage of our investigations
among the Hebrews. The more assured independence of character, the
savagery of revenge and hate lie, too, at the root of the original
Jewish nationality. But the difference is at once pronounced, that in
this case even the most powerful images of Nature are depicted less
for their own sake than for that of the glory of God, as related to
which they at once again lose their self-subsistency; and furthermore
even hate and persecution are not merely a personal matter affecting
persons, but are embraced in the service of God as national vengeance
against whole peoples. As, for example, the later Psalms and yet more
the prophets frequently only are able to desire and plead for the
misfortune and overthrow of other nations, and not unfrequently find
the main strength of their utterance in curses and imprecations.

No doubt the elements of true beauty and art are presented to each of
these points of view above noticed; but they are in the first instance
brought together in haphazard and confused fashion, and are set in a
false relation to each other, instead of being referred to a genuine
principle of identity. For this reason the purely ideal and abstract
unity of the Divine is unable to bring forth any entirely adequate
art-product in the form that is characterized by real individuality;
and at the same time Nature and human individuality either are
manifestly not, whether we consider their inward principle, or their
external mode of appearance, permeated by the Absolute, or at least
not positively pervaded by it. This _externality_ of significance,
which is thus made the essential content, and the determinate mode of
appearance under which it is generally reproduced is finally and in the
_third_ place exemplified in the _comparative activity_ of art[128].
In this type both sides have become wholly independent, and the unity
that binds them together is merely the invisible subjectivity which
compares. For this very reason that which is defective in such an
external presentment returned in ever more emphatic degree and betrayed
itself as that which was for the genuine art representation merely
negative or, rather, entirely subversive. And when this dissolution is
really effected the significance can no longer remain the inherently
_abstract_ ideal, but the inherently determinate and self-defined
ideal principle, which in this its concrete totality possesses quite
as essentially the other aspect thereof, that is, the form of an
inherently exclusive and determinate appearance; and consequently in
its external existence, as that which is its very own, merely expresses
and signifies itself.

1. This essentially free totality which remains constant to itself
throughout each successive self-determination in something other than
itself, this ideal principle, which in its objectivity is self-related
is the essentially true, free, and self-subsistent, which in its
determinate existence unfolds nothing other than itself. In the realm
of art, however, this form is not present in its form of infinitude,
is not, that is, the _thinking_ of itself, as the essential, absolute,
which is made an object for itself in the form of ideal universality,
and makes itself, wholly explicit, but is still in immediate natural
and sensuous existence. In so far, however, as significance is
self-substantive, it must in art borrow its form from its own resources
and inherently possess the principle of its externality. It must
consequently, it is true, repair to Nature, but as predominant over
that which is external, which, in so far as it is itself an aspect of
the totality of this ideal realm, no longer exists as purely natural
objectivity, but being without its own self-subsistence, simply serves
as the expression of Spirit. In this interpenetration consequently the
natural form and externality, which is modified by Spirit contains out
and out on its part, as immediately given, its significance in itself,
and no longer points to this as to something separate and different
from the corporeal appearance. And this is that identification of
the spiritual and natural which is appropriate to the notion of
Spirit, which, that is, does not merely proceed no further than the
neutralization of the two opposed aspects, but raises that which is
spiritual into the higher totality, in which it is able to preserve
itself in its own Other, to bring the natural within its own ideal
range and to express itself in and relatively to the natural. It is on
this type of unity that the notion of classical art is based.

(_a_) This identity of significance and bodily form may be approached
yet more closely under the view of it that no separation of these
opposed aspects[129] takes place within their consummated union;
and consequently the ideal principle does not, as _purely inward
spirituality_, return upon itself from out of the corporeal and
concrete reality, under a process which would give us once more the
distinction of these aspects in opposition. And inasmuch as the
objective and external, in which Spirit is made visible as an object
of sense, according to the very notion of it, is at once throughout
_defined_ and _separate_, mind which is free, and which it is the
function of art to elaborate in the form of reality truly commensurate
with it, can only be that spiritual individuality which is not merely
_defined_ but essentially _self-consistent_ in its natural form.
For this reason it is the _human_ which constitutes the centre and
content of true beauty and art; but as content of art--we have already
developed the subject in discussing the notion of the Ideal--it is
brought under the essential determination of concrete individuality and
the external appearance adequate thereto, which in its objectivization
has been thus purified from the imperfection of the finite condition.

(_b_) Under such a consideration of the matter it is at once obvious
that the classical mode of representation, if we take it for what
it _essentially_ is, can no longer be of the _symbolic_ type in the
strict sense of the term, however much now and again we may find along
with it the play of that which belongs to symbolism. Greek mythology,
for example, which, in so far as art asserts its mastery over it,
belongs to the classical Ideal, is, if we grasp it in its fundamental
character, not of a beauty which is symbolical, but unfolded under
the genuine character of the Art-ideal, albeit there may be certain
remnants of symbolism which adhere to it, as we shall shortly see.

If we now proceed to ask ourselves what, then, is the nature of the
determinate form, which can thus enter into this unity with Spirit
without offering merely the suggestion of its content, we shall find it
determined for us in the conception that in classical art both content
and form must be adequate, must, that is, in the aspect of form meet
the demands of totality and essential self-subsistency. For it is a
prime condition of the free self-subsistence[130] of the whole, which
constitutes the fundamental determination of classical art, that either
of these aspects, the ideal form no less than its external embodiment,
should be essentially a totality which goes to make the notion of the
whole. Only by this means is either side _essentially_ identical with
the other, and consequently their difference reduced to the purely
formal differences of one and the same, through which also the totality
appears now as free, the adequacy of both of its aspects being now
fully displayed, inasmuch as it declares itself in either of them and
is one and the same in both.

The lack of this free reduplication of itself within the same unity
carried with it in the symbolic type precisely this absence of freedom
in the content and with it also in the form. Spirit was here not
clear to itself, and for this reason declared its external reality
not as that which belonged to itself, set forth in its explicit
significance through and in it. Conversely the form had no doubt to
be significant, but its significance only lay partly and on one side
in it. The external existence gave here primarily to what passed for
its ideal aspect, though still under a mode that was external, merely
_itself_ instead of a significance which declared an ideal content;
and in attempting to show that there was something further which it
suggested its power was necessarily put under a constraint. In this
distortion it neither remained true to itself, nor was it the Other,
that is significance, but declared nothing save that which was a
problematical connection and confusion between incompatible things, or
tended to be the purely co-adjutant attire and external adornment of
what was simply the glorification of the one absolute significance of
all things whatever, until it was finally obliged to surrender itself
to the purely subjective caprice of comparison with a significance
which was far removed from it and indifferent to it. If this relation
of unfreedom is to find a release the form must already inherently
possess its significance, or, to speak more definitely, must possess
the significance of mind or Spirit itself. This form is essentially
the _human_ form because the externality of this form is alone capable
of revealing the spiritual in sensuous guise. Human expression in
countenance, eye, pose, and carriage is, it is true, material and
therein not that which the spirit is; but within this corporeal frame
itself the human exterior is not merely alive and a part of Nature as
the animal is, but it is the bodily presence which reflects Spirit
to itself. Through the human eye we look into the soul of a man just
as through the entire presentment of him his spiritual character is
expressed. When consequently the body belongs to Spirit, as _its_
determinate presence, Spirit is also that ideal principle which is
appropriate to the body, and is no form of ideality which is foreign
to the external form in the sense that materiality still inherently
possesses a significance other than that to which it testifies or
suggests. It is quite true that the human form still carries within
it much of the universal animal type, but the fundamental distinction
between the human and the animal body consists simply in this, that
the human is obviously, by virtue of its entire conformation, declared
as the dwelling, nay, we may add the only possible dwelling-place of
Spirit. And for this reason also it is only in the body that Spirit
is immediately present to others. This is, however, not the place
to discuss the necessity[131] of this association and the peculiar
reciprocity of soul and body. We must here assume this necessity. We
have, of course, many indications on the human figure of death and
ugliness, that is, of other influences and defects which are traceable
to their source. When we find this to be the case it is the function
of art to expunge the divergence between the purely natural and the
spiritual, to exalt the external bodily appearance to a form of beauty,
that is, a form throughout dominated and suffused with the animation of
Spirit.

We have seen, then, that in this type of representation symbolism is
no longer presented by the external relation, and everything that
partook of effort, strain, distortion, and perversion is eliminated.
For when Spirit has grasped itself as Spirit it is at once explicit
and clear; and on the same ground is also its association with the
form adequate to it from the side of externality, something which is
essentially ready to the hand and a free gift, which does not require,
as a means for its declaration, a bond of connection introduced by the
imagination, and contrasting with that which is immediately presented.
Just as little is the classical form of art exhibited as a purely
material and superficial personification. It is Spirit in its entirety,
in so far as it is intended to make it the content of the art-product,
which passes into that bodily shape, and is able to identify itself
completely with it. From this point of view we may considerer
the conception that art has followed the human figure by means of
imitation. According to the common view, however, this acceptance of
the human figure as the model of imitation appears as a matter of
accident, whereas we should rather maintain the art which has arrived
at its maturity is obliged to reveal its substance by a necessary
law in the form of man as he appears to sense perception, because
Spirit alone obtains in it the existence fitting to it in the sensuous
material of Nature.

All that we have here observed relatively to the human body and
its expression applies also to human emotions, impulses, actions,
experiences, and occupations. The externalization of these is also, in
classical art, not merely characterized as a part of Nature's life,
but as that of Spirit; and this ideal aspect is brought into full and
adequate identity with that which is external appearance.

(_c_) Inasmuch, then, as classical art comprehends free spirituality
as determinate individuality, and immediately envisages the same in
its bodily presentment, it frequently falls under the reproach of
anthropomorphism. Even among the Greeks, to take an example, Xenophanes
ridiculed the presentation of Gods by means of the sensuous image in
his famous remark, that if lions had been sculptors they would have
given their gods the external shape of lions. Of a similar tendency
is that piece of French wit: God made men according to His image,
but man has returned Him the compliment by creating God in the image
of man. If we consider the matter relatively to the form of art that
follows, the romantic, we may in this respect observe that the content
of the classical form of beauty is no doubt defective precisely as
the religion of art is so; but so little does the defect consist in
anthropomorphism as such, that we may rather maintain, on the contrary,
that though classical art is certainly sufficiently anthropomorphic for
art, for the higher form of religion it is not enough so. Christianity
has carried anthropomorphism to far greater lengths; for, according
to Christian doctrine, God is not merely individuality in a human
form, but a real and singular individual entirely God, and entirely
a real man who has entered into all conditions of existence, and is
no mere Ideal of beauty and art created by man. If our conception of
the Absolute is limited to an abstract Being essentially without any
characterization then, no doubt, every kind of representation vanishes,
but if God is Spirit he must appear as man, as individual subject,
not as ideal human being, but as actual participator in the entire
externality of temporal conditions[132] which pertain to immediate
and natural existence. In other words, from the Christian point of
view, the infinite movement is carried to the extremest verge of
opposition, and only returns to the absolute unity as the resolution of
this separation. The man-becoming of God is incident to this phase or
significant moment of separation; as real and individual subjectivity
it is involved in the difference between unity and substance in its
bare extension, and in this common sphere of temporal and spatial
condition creates the consciousness in and pain of division in order
through the ultimate resolution of such contradiction by the same
means to arrive at eternal reconciliation. And this essential point
of passage in the process, according to the Christian conception, is
inherent in the nature of God Himself. As a matter of fact, God is here
apprehended as absolute and free Spirit, in which Nature and immediate
singularity is indeed proferred us as a phasal moment of a process,
but, at the same time, as one which is necessarily transcended[133]. In
classical art, on the contrary, the material medium is neither killed
nor suffers death, but for this reason also we cannot wholly find in it
the resurrection of Spirit. Classical art and its religion of beauty
does not consequently wholly satisfy the depths of Spirit. However
essentially concrete it may be, it still remains abstract for humanity
because, instead of movement and reconciliation obtained by the
contradiction we have adverted to of that infinite subjective process,
it merely possesses as its life that undisturbed harmony of the free
individuality determined in its adequate existence, this repose in its
reality, this happiness, this content and greatness in itself, this
eternal blitheness and bliss which even in unhappiness and pain does
not lose its secure reliance on itself. Classical art has not worked
its way to the full contradiction which is fundamentally involved in
the notion of the Absolute and overcome that contradiction. For this
reason it does not recognize the aspect which is in close relation
to this contradiction, that is the essential obduracy of the subject
as opposed to that which is ethical and of absolute significance,
namely, sin and evil, no less than the waste of individual life in its
own subjective aims, the dissolution and incontinence of that world
which we may summarily describe as that of the entire sphere of its
divisions, which is productive on the side both of sense and spirit of
distortion, ugliness, and the repulsive. Classical art fails to cross
the pure territory of the genuine Ideal.

2. In so far as the _historical_ realization of classical art is
concerned, it is hardly necessary to observe that we must seek for
that among the Greeks. Classical beauty, with its infinite range of
content, material and form, is the gift bestowed on the Greek people;
and this folk is entitled to our respect on the ground that it has
produced art in its highest form of vitality. The Greeks, if we regard
the form of their realized life immediately presented us, lived in
that happy middle sphere of self-conscious and subjective freedom and
substantive ethical life. They did not persist, on the one hand, in the
unfree Oriental unity, which is necessarily bound up with a religious
and political despotism for the reason that the individuality of the
subject is overwhelmed in a universal substance, or, in some particular
aspect of the same, because it has essentially as personality no
right, and consequently no ground to stand on; neither, on the other,
did they pass beyond to that subjective penetration, in which the
particular subject separates itself from the whole and the universal,
in order to make itself more explicit in its ideality; and only through
a higher return to the ideal totality of a purely spiritual world,
succeeds in its final purification of the substantive and essential.
On the contrary, in the ethical life of Greece, the individual was
self-substantive and essentially free, without disengaging himself
from the general interests of the realized State immediately visible
to him and the positive immanence of spiritual freedom in the temporal
condition. The universal of morality and the abstract freedom of
personality, both in its ideal and external aspect, remains in
accordance with the principle of Greek life in undisturbed harmony,
and during the time in which, even in real existence, this principle
asserted itself in still unimpaired purity, the self-substantiality of
the citizen did not stand forth in relief in contrast to a morality
which was to be distinguished from it: the substance of political life
was so far merged in the individual, as he on his part sought his own
liberty absolutely in the universal ends of the entire civic life.
The feeling for beauty, the significance and spirit of this joyous
harmony interpenetrates all productions, in which the freedom of Greece
is self-conscious, and in which she has made visible to herself her
being. Consequently her view of the world is just the midway ground
on which beauty commences its true life and breaks open its serene
dominion; the intermediate realm, that is, of free vitality, which is
not merely a fact at once immediate and natural, but one which is the
creation of a spiritual point of view revealed by art, the realm, that
is, of a culture of reflection, and at the same time of an absence of
reflection, which neither isolates the individual nor on the other
hand is competent to bring back again its negativity, pain, and
unhappiness to a positive unity and reconciliation--a realm, however,
which, just as in the case of Life itself, is at the same time only
a point of passage, however true it be that it scales at this point
the summit of beauty, and in the form of its plastic individuality is
so spiritually concrete and rich, that all tones have their interplay
within it, and also, too, that which is for its own standpoint what
lies behind it, albeit it is no longer present as an absolute and
unqualified principle, is nevertheless felt as that which accompanies
it--a kind of background to it. In this sense the Greek nation has
also, in the representation of its gods, made its spirit visible to the
perceptions and the imaginative consciousness, and bestowed on them,
by means of art a determinate existence, which is entirely conformable
with their true content. By virtue of this homogeneous form, which
is alike consistent with the fundamental notion of Greek art and
Greek mythology, art became in Greece the highest expression for the
Absolute, and Greek religion is the religion of art itself, whereas
romantic art, which appeared later, although it is undoubtedly art,
suggests a more exalted form of consciousness than art is in a position
to supply.

3. In establishing the position, as we have just done, on the one
hand, that essentially free individuality is the content of classical
art, and, on the other, that a like freedom is the equally requisite
determinant of the form, we have already assumed that the entire
blending of both together, however much it may be presented in the
immediate form, is nevertheless no original unity such as Nature's,
but is necessarily an _artificial_ association made possible by the
subjective spirit. Classical art, in so far as its content and its
form is spontaneity[134], originates in the freedom of the Spirit
that is clear to itself. And for this reason also we may say that in
the _third_ place the artist occupies a position different from that
of his predecessors. That is to say his production declares itself
as the spontaneous _product_ of a man in the full possession of his
senses[135], who as truly _knows_ what he wills as he is _able_ to
accomplish such a purpose; who is consequently obscure to himself
neither in respect to the significance and substantive content of that
which he has resolved to make visible in the form of art, nor finds
himself hindered by any defects of technique from executing the result
aimed after.

(_a_) If we look more closely at this change in the position of the
artist we shall in the first place find this freedom announced to
us relatively to the _content_ in this way, that he does not feel
compelled to seek for it with the restless process of symbolical
fermentation. Symbolic art remains the captive of its travail to
bring to birth and make clear its form to its own vision, and this
embodiment is itself only the original form[136], that is, on the
one side Being in the immediate guise of Nature, and on the other
the ideal abstraction of the universal, unity, conversion, change,
becoming, origination, and passing away. In this original form of
the artistic process, however, art does not come to its rightful
possessions. Consequently, these representations of symbolic art, which
should be expositions of content, remain still themselves riddles and
problems, and merely testify to the struggle after clarity and the
effort of Spirit, which on and on seeks to discover without obtaining
the rest and repose of discovery. In contrast to this troublous
search the content must for the classic artist be presented him as
something _already there_ in the sense that as a thing essentially
positive, as belief, popular opinion, or as an actual event either
of myth or tradition, it is determined for his imagination in all
its essential character. Relatively to this objectively determined
material the artist is placed in the freer relation that he does not
himself undertake the process of production and fermentation, and
pass no further than the impulse after the real significances of
his art, but rather that for him a completely explicit and unfolded
content lies before him which he accepts and freely reproduces from
himself. The Greek artists received their material from the popular
religion in which already that which had been brought over to Greece
from the Orient had begun to receive a form of its own. Pheidias
borrowed his Zeus from Homer, and other tragedians also did not create
the fundamental groundwork of that they represented. In the same way
the artists of Christianity, Dante and Raphael, have only reclothed
what was already to hand in the doctrines of their faith and their
religious conceptions. This is also, it is true, from a certain point
of view in like manner the case in the art of the Sublime, but with
this difference, that here the relation to the content, as the _one_
substance, does not permit subjectivity to come by its just claims, and
allows to it no self-substantive finality. The comparative form of art,
on the other hand, no doubt starts with the selection of significances
as images which it makes use of, but this initiative of selection
remains at the disposition of _subjective_ caprice, and on its part
dispenses with all substantive individuality, which constitutes the
notion of classical art, and for this reason must rest with the
personality which creates it.

(_b_) The more, however, an explicitly unfolded content is present
for the artist in popular beliefs, myth, and other actual facts, the
more his energy is concentrated upon the object of endowing such a
content with the _external embodiment_ of art fitting to it. While
in this respect symbolic art dissipates its resources in a thousand
forms, and with unbridled imaginative power lays about it for material
that it fails either to measure or define in order to adapt forms that
are never really conformable to the significance it is seeking after,
the classical artist in this respect is possessed of an aim that is
at once resolute and definite. That is to say, the free form is with
the content itself defined through that content, and is essentially
pertinent to such content, so that the artist only appears to execute
what is already accordant with the fundamental conception of what is
presented him. While, therefore, the symbolic artist strives in his
imagination, to suit the form to significance or _vice versa_, the
classic artist _adapts_ significance to plastic shape by means of the
process of freeing the external phenomena which are already presented
from that part of them which is merely an incidental product. In this
activity, however, although all that is purely his caprice is excluded,
his productive power not merely follows or is not merely limited to a
bare type, but is at the same time _creative_ throughout the whole.
Art which, to start with, is forced to seek out and discover its true
form neglects for that reason the very aspect of form; but where, on
the contrary, the building up of form is made the essential interest
and the main task there we find the content also receives its plastic
shape by imperceptible degrees through the process of the reproduction,
precisely as we have hitherto found in a general way that form and
content proceed hand in hand during the process, wherein they are
completed. In this respect the classic artist elaborates the result
also where it is a religious world that is presented him; he throughout
develops in the free and buoyant medium of his art the material and
mythological ideas which he receives.

(_c_) The same applies to the technique of art. In the case of the
classic artist the ingredients must be already to hand; the sensuous
material through which the artist labours must already be disengaged
from all brittleness and extreme stubbornness, and yield directly to
the aims of the artist, in order that the content, conformably to
the notion of the classic type, may make its free and unfettered way
through this external medium. To classical art, consequently, belongs
from the first a high level of technical ability, which has subjected
the sensuous material to an apt subservience. Such a technical
perfection, if it is really to carry out all that is required of Spirit
and its conceptions, is presupposed by the complete elaboration of all
that pertains to craftsmanship in art, that is, in especial degree
of that which makes itself visible within the plastic forms of the
religion to which we now refer. The religious view of things, such
as the Egyptian, for example, discovers, that is, definite external
forms, idols, colossal constructions whose type remains fixed, and,
further, in the usual similarity of forms and shapes, supplies a
considerable field for elaboration in the treatment of it by the
steadily progressive executive powers. This adaptability to the talents
of the craftsman must already have been presented in that which is of
an inferior and distorted type before the genius of classical beauty
can associate these powers of mechanical facility with the forms
of technical perfection. Then, at last, when that which is purely
mechanical work is confronted with no further insuperable difficulty,
is art enabled to proceed in the elaboration of a form, the practice in
working out which is at the same time an elaboration which is in the
closest relationship to the progressive advance of both content and
form.

So far as the _division_ of classical art is concerned it is usual
in the more general sense of the term to call every complete work
of art classic, whatever the particular character it may otherwise
carry, whether symbolic or romantic. We have no doubt thus accepted
it in the particular sense of art perfection, but with this important
qualification, that this perfection must be based on the thorough
interpenetration of ideal and free individuality and external
definition. We consequently differentiate the classic form expressly
from the symbolic and romantic, whose beauty in content and form is
entirely of another kind. And along with the classic, regarded in its
usual and more indefinite significance, we have as little to do here at
this early stage with the particular arts in which the classical ideal
is represented, as, for example, sculpture, the Epic, definite forms
of lyrical poetry and specific types of tragedy and comedy. These
particular types of art, although classic art is imprinted upon them,
will be first discussed in the third portion of the division of our
subject in the explication of the several arts and their grades[137].
What we approach more immediately now is the classic in the sense we
have secured for the term, and as bases of our subdivision we can only
therefore seek out the grades of evolution, which proceed from this
notion of the classical ideal itself. The essential phases of this
development are as follows.

The _first_ point to which we would direct our attention is this, that
the classical type of art is not to be apprehended as was the case with
the symbolic type as immediately primary, as art's _commencement_, but,
on the contrary, as its _result._ We have evolved it, consequently,
in the first instance from the course of the symbolic modes of
representation, which it presupposes. The essential feature on which
this process turned was the concentration of content in the elucidation
of an essentially self-conscious individuality, which can neither
employ for its expression the mere natural form, whether it be that of
the elements or animals, nor the defective and confused personification
of the human figure with it, but receives its expression in the
animation of the human body permeated throughout with the breath of
Spirit. Inasmuch, then, as the essence of freedom consists in this,
to be that which it is through its own resources, that which in the
first place appeared purely as the presupposition and condition of its
origin outside the sphere of classical art must take its place within
the circle peculiar to the same in order to make really visible the
true content and the genuine form by means of the subjection of what
is unconformable to and the negation of the Ideal. This process of
conformation through negation, this process by means of which, whether
we view it relatively to content or form, the genuine type of classical
beauty begets itself from its own substance is consequently our point
of departure, and we shall treat of that in our _first_ chapter.

In the _second_ chapter, on the other hand, we have reached by means of
this process the true Ideal of the classical type of art. We find here
as the central fact the fair and novel world of the gods of Greece,
which it will be incumbent on us to develop exhaustively from within,
both in its aspects of spiritual individualization, and those which are
related to the bodily form with which such individuality is immediately
associated.

In the _third_ place, however, the notion of classical art implies
conversely, along with this becoming of the beauty which springs from
itself, also the dissolution of that creation, which will carry us into
a further sphere, namely, that of the romantic type of art. The gods
and human individuals of classic beauty just as they rise so, too, pass
away once more from the art-consciousness, which in part turns round
in opposition to the aspect of Nature that still persists, in which
Greek art, in fact, had elaborated itself in the full perfection of
beauty, in part transcends an undeific[138], defective, and vulgar mode
of reality in order to reveal that which is false and purely negative
therein. In this dissolution, whose artistic activity we shall take as
the material of our third chapter, the specific phases in the process,
which created the truly classical type in that harmony presented by
the perfect fusion of immediate beauty, fall apart. The ideal essence
is made explicit on the one side in its independence of the external
mode of its existence on the other. Subjectivity withdraws into itself,
for the reason that it fails now to find an adequate realization in
the forms hitherto employed, and is constrained to enlarge itself with
the fuller content of a new spiritual world of absolute freedom and
infinity, looking about for novel means of expressing this profounder
grasp of its substance.

[Footnote 121: The central point, that is, in the entire evolution of
the types of art, classical art being intermediate between symbolic and
romantic art and in a certain sense marking a point of culmination.]

[Footnote 122: _Zu ihrem Inneren_, _i. e._, that which unites it as a
whole rather than is the purely external form. The Inward of man is the
notion of man, not the mere fact that he has a head and arms, etc.]

[Footnote 123: The "Nature-existence," as Hegel calls it.]

[Footnote 124: _Die Natur ist freilich heraus._ Nature is there
explicitly before us, but not all that is implied in Nature is made
explicit in the material world.]

[Footnote 125: _Sinnlichkeitslos_, "senseless" as devoid of or
abstracted from all sense.]

[Footnote 126: _Auf ihr festes Maas zurückgeführt._ To their own proper
standard or measure that strictly applies to them.]

[Footnote 127: I think this must be the meaning of _nützlich_ here. But
the passage is not an easy one.]

[Footnote 128: That is, the comparative type of art discussed at the
conclusion of the preceding section.]

[Footnote 129: That is, the Inward or ideal principle and the natural
externality.]

[Footnote 130: _Selbstständigkeit._ Self-consistency or independence
are perhaps better words here.]

[Footnote 131: That is, I suppose, the causal necessity as part of
natural evolution.]

[Footnote 132: _Bis zur zeitlichen gänzlichen Äußerlichkeit._]

[Footnote 133: These words contain no doubt the epitome of Hegel's
"Philosophy of Religion" and are involved in its difficulties.
The reference to the historical facts of Christianity under ideal
conceptions is obvious. I have translated the words _das Moment des
Natürlichen_ ... _zwar vorhanden seyn_ as a phasal moment of "a
process," but I am well aware that no mere amplification of this sort
can in itself make the words clear.]

[Footnote 134: _Das Freie._]

[Footnote 135: _Des besonnenen Menschen_, _i.e._, the man of clear
intelligence, sound sense, as we say.]

[Footnote 136: The words _dieser Gehalt ist selber nur der Erste_ would
seem to refer back to the expressions _Keine Erste und somit natürliche
Einheit._ But the sense is not very clear.]

[Footnote 137: _Deren Gattungen,_ their specific types.]

[Footnote 138: _Entgöttert_--a mode from which the Divine is removed.]




