CHAPTER II

CHIVALRY

The principle of the essentially infinite subjective consciousness
possesses for the content of faith and art in the first instance, as
we have already discovered, the Absolute itself, in other words the
Spirit of God as it is mediated and reconciled with the conscious
spirit of man and thereby is first itself independently free. This
romantic mysticism in its self-limitation to the sense of blessedness
in the Absolute Presence remains a mode of spiritual inwardness which
is abstract, because it confronts the things of the world in opposition
and rejects the same. Faith is, in an abstraction of this kind,
alienated from life, from the concrete reality of human existence,
removed from the positive relations of mankind to one another, who only
know and love each other in faith, and for the sake of their belief
as completely bound together in yet a third association, namely, the
spirit of the Christ community. This association is alone the clear
spring in which the image of that blessedness is reflected, without
it being necessary for man to look his brother first in the face, to
enter into any direct relation with another, or to experience the
unity of love, of trust, of confidence, of mutual aims and actions
in contact with the living concrete presence. That which constitutes
the hope and yearning of the inner life man here, in this sense of
exclusive religious intimacy, can only discover as actual life in the
kingdom of God, in the society of the Church. He has not as yet[241]
withdrawn this single identity in a third factor from his conscious
life in order that he may possess all that he is really himself in
his entire spiritual concreteness no less before his eyes directly
in the knowledge and volition of that other whole. The collective
religious content, it is true, assumes the mode of real existence, but
it is still an existence which is located in the ideal world of an
imagination which consumes the expanding boundaries of actual life. It
is still far away from attempting to satisfy its own life also in that
abundance which it receives from the world and its realization in the
world as the higher demand in the medium of life itself.

It follows that the soul which found its initial consummation in the
simple feeling of Divine blessedness must step forth from this heavenly
kingdom peculiar to the _religious_ sphere, must undertake the effort
of self-introspection and assimilate a content which is, as vitally
present, adequate to the demands of the individual consciousness in
its fullest extension. And in this process that which was before a
_religious_ coalescence of soul is changed to one of _secular_ type.
Christ indeed said; "Ye must leave father and mother, and follow Me."
And in the like spirit: "Brother shall hate brother; men shall crucify
you and persecute you." But as soon as the kingdom of God has secured
a foothold in the world, and is actively employed in transfusing with
its spirit and illumining the aims and interests of that world; when
father, mother, and brother are already numbered in the community,
then the things of the world on their side commence to assert their
just claim to recognition and furtherance. If this claim is not merely
fought for but vindicated then also the negative attitude of the
religious spirit, which was at first exclusively hostile to all that
was merely human, vanishes; the spirit of man enlarges, it explores
the full scope of its actual presence, and unfolds its heart in the
entire world of reality[242]. The fundamental principle suffers no
alteration; the substantive and infinite self-consciousness merely
directs its attention to another province of its own kingdom. We may
perhaps define this transition in the statement that the individual
singularity is now as such singularity independent of its mediation
with God and self-subsistently free. For precisely in that mediation,
whereby it divested itself of its purely finite limitation and natural
life, it has passed over the path of mere negation, and reappears
after having thus secured an essentially _affirmative_ position,
in the condition of a consciousness that is free and as such makes
the demand that it shall, in virtue of its own infinitude, though
the infinitude is here only in the first instance one of pure form,
secure complete recognition both for itself and others. In this the
religious mode of the individual consciousness is reposed the entire
spiritual wealth of the infinite soul, which it has hitherto filled
up with God. If we, however, made the inquiry, of what material the
heart of man is suffused in this its inward repletion, such a content
merely concerns the infinite relation of the subjective consciousness
in its active self-relation; it is simply replete with its own
formal medium, that is, as essentially infinite singularity without
further and more concrete expansion and significance as a content of
interests, aims, and actions which is itself essentially objective
and substantive[243]. If we further examine the matter, however, more
closely we shall see there are in the main _three_ emotions, which
in their independence rise up in the individual soul to the level of
this infinite mode, namely personal _honour, love_, and _fidelity._
They are not so much moral qualities and virtues as simply modes which
inform the intimate presence of the individual soul when fulfilled
with its own self-relation as such is recognized by romance. For the
personal self-subsistency for which _honour_ contends does not assert
itself as intrepitude on behalf of a communal weal, and the repute
of thoroughness in relation to it and integrity of private life.
On the contrary it contends simply for the recognition and formal
inviolability of the individual person. The same principle applies to
_love_, which forms the central subject-matter of this sphere. It is
merely the adventitious passion of one individual for another; and
however much it may expand under the wand of imagination or may be
deepened by excess of emotion, it is for all that neither the ethical
relation of marriage or family. _Fidelity_ possesses no doubt more
the appearance of a moral character, inasmuch as it does not merely
will its own but holds fast to something higher, something shared
with itself, surrenders itself to another's will, whether it be the
wish or behest of a master, and thereby renounces the personal desire
and independence of its own particular volition. But the feeling of
loyalty does not concern the objective interest of the social weal
in its independent form, that is, in the concrete freedom of the
developed state life, but associates itself merely with the _person_
of a master, who, in his own fashion, acts with independence, or
concentrates himself in more general relations and is active on their
behalf[244]. These three modes of feeling taken together and as they
reciprocally affect one another constitute with the exception of the
religious relation, which also has its part to play here, the principal
content of _chivalry_, and furnish the necessary steps of advance
from the principle of purely religious enthusiasm to the entrance of
the individual soul into the concrete social life of the world, in
the kingdom of which romantic art now secures a platform on which it
can from its own resources work out its independence, and at the same
time embody a freer type of beauty. It stands here, so to speak, in
the free room midway between the absolute content of the independently
stable religious conceptions and the varied particularity and
restricted boundaries of the finite world. Among the various arts it is
pre-eminently poetry which has shown itself most qualified to master
such a material, its modes of expression being directed to the life of
the soul as wholly occupied with its own domain and as realized in its
aims and events.

Inasmuch as we now have before us a material which man takes possession
of in his own spiritual life, or rather, from the world of his pure
humanity, we might at first suppose that romantic art occupied the
same ground as that of classic art. This, therefore, is an excellent
opportunity for placing them together both in comparison and
contrast. We have already defined classical art the Ideal of humanity
certified as true in its objective self-subsistence. Its imaginative
vitality requires as its core a content which is substantive in type
and excludes an ethical pathos. The Homeric poems, the tragedies of
Sophocles and Aeschylus, are in the main concerned with interests
of an absolutely factual content, an austere treatment of the
passions reflected therein, a solid style of speech and execution in
conformity with the nature of the ideas expressed, and above this
domain of heroes and other figures which alone are in their individual
self-concentration at home in such an atmosphere of pathos we have
the realm of the gods at a still more advanced stage of objective
presentment. Even in the case where art, in more introspective fashion,
is occupied with the infinite experiments of sculpture, bas-reliefs and
similar forms, or the later elegies, epigrams, and other diversions
of lyrical poetry, we still have the same type before us, that is to
say, the type which portrays the object more or less as it finds it,
and obedient to the claim that it already has secured its constructive
presentment. We have, in short, represented figures of the imagination
already established and defined in their characterization such as
Venus, Bacchus, or the Muses. It is just the same with the later
epigrams, where we get the description of a material already to hand
or, as in the case of Meleager, a posy of well-known flowers, bound
together with the cords of exquisite feeling and taste. It is, in
short, an exhilarating mode of activity carried on in a wealthily
furnished house overflowing in its stores with every kind of bounty,
image and provision for every conceivable object. The poet and the
artist is simply the magician, who wafts them into use, collects and
groups them.

It is wholly different in romantic poetry. In so far as it is of the
world worldly, and is not directly associated with the story of our
Lord, the virtues and objects of its heroism are not those of the
Greek heroes, whose type of morality Christendom in its early days
simply regarded as a brilliant enormity. Greek morality presupposes
the presence of humanity in its complete configuration, in which
the volition then and there as it ought to act conformably to its
essential notion of independence has received a definite content and
the actual conditions of freedom imperatively valid such as belong to
that content. Such are the relations of parents and children, married
persons, or of citizens of city or State in the realized liberty of
such. Now inasmuch as this objective content of human affairs belongs
to the _evolution_ of man's spirit on the basis of Nature cognized
and insured as actual fact, it is unable any longer to satisfy that
self-absorbed introspection of the religious life, which seeks to
destroy the natural aspect of human life, and must deviate considerably
from the virtue of humility which opposes it, and the surrender of
human freedom and its staunch self-dependence. The virtues of Christian
piety simply prove the death of such a world-attitude if held in their
extreme of abstraction, and only make the individual free, when he
absolutely denies the human part of him. The individual freedom of our
present sphere is no doubt no longer conditioned by mere endurance
and self-sacrifice but essentially positive in the world arena; that
infinite self-relation of the individual has, however, as we have
already discovered, the inward realm of the soul as its content and
only that, the subjective soul, that is, whose movement is in its own
peculiar medium, as the secular ground of its own domain. In this
connection poetry does not draw from any objective material already
presented it, no mythology, for instance, no imaginative pictures
and embodiments, which already lie ready waiting for its expression.
It stands there wholly free, without any extraneous matter, purely
creative and productive. It is free as a bird that sings straight
from its breast. It follows, then, if this subjective activity
proceeds also from a noble will and a profound soul, we shall merely
have in its workings and relations and existence the evidence of
caprice and contingency, for the reason that freedom and its aims
proceed, relatively to a content which is throughout immaterial, from
internal self-reflection. And, consequently, we do not find so much in
individuals a particular pathos in the Greek conception of the term
and a vital self-subsistency of character associated with it by the
closest bonds, as that which is simply a grade of heroic conception in
its connection with love, honour, bravery, and fidelity; a grade into
which it is mainly the nobility or depravity of soul which imports the
distinguishing features. The characteristic trait, however, which the
heroes of the Middle Ages possess in common with those of antiquity
is that of _bravery._ Yet even this receives a totally different
complexion. It is not so much a natural courage, which reposes on the
character that is sane and sound, and flows forth from the growth of
an unimpaired robustness of body and will, assisting the execution of
objective interests. Rather it is the outcome of the secret wealth of
the soul, its honour and chivalry, and is in the main a creation of
the phantasy, which undertakes adventures that have their origin in
individual caprice and the chance intricacies of external circumstance
or the impulses of mystical piety, and we may add generally the
personal attitude of the individual.

This romantic type of art finds a home, then, in two hemispheres, in
the Western world as this penetration into the more intimate shrine of
Spirit, in the Eastern this its first expansion of the self-absorbed
consciousness as it frees itself from the finite environment. In the
West poetry reposes on a soul which is withdrawn upon its resources,
which has become the centre of its activity, yet possesses this flavour
of secularly merely as one part of its complexion, as one aspect, over
which is superposed a yet loftier world of belief. In the East it is
the Arab above all, who as a solitary,[245] who in the first instance
has nothing before his eyes but his dried-up desert and his heavens,
stands forth in the full strength of life as the proclaimer of the
splendour and primary extension of the world of Nature, and thereby
still preserves at the same time the freedom of his soul. And generally
we may say that in the Orient it is the Mohammedan religion, which
has cleared the ground, made an end of all idolatry in the service
of finite things or the imagination, and given the soul at the same
time the personal freedom, which wholly floods the same, so that the
secularity does not here only constitute another province, but runs
beyond it into the universal licence, where heart and mind, without
ascribing any objective reality to God, find their reconciliation in
the jubilant lust of living just like beggars by throwing the glory
of their fancy on the objects around them: enjoy their loves and are
happy, blessed, and contented.


1. HONOUR

The motive of honour was unknown to ancient classic art. In the "Iliad"
it is quite true that the wrath of Achilles constitutes both the
content and the motive principle, so that the entire series of events
is dependent upon it; but what we moderns understand by the term honour
is not grasped here at all. Achilles believes himself to be insulted
to all intents and purposes only in the fact that the share in the
booty which he considers justly to belong to him and the reward of
his personal merits, his _γέρας_, has been taken away by Agamemnon.
The insult here has a direct reference to something actual, a bounty,
in which no doubt a privilege, a recognition of fame and bravery was
reposed, and Achilles is enraged because Agamemnon meets him unworthily
and lets the Greeks know that they are not to pay any attention to
him. An insult of this kind is not driven home to the real centre
of personality in its abstract purity; in fact Achilles expresses
himself satisfied with the restitution of the abducted slave and the
addition of other goods and bounties, and Agamemnon finally makes this
reparation although from our point of view they have both insulted one
another in the grossest fashion. Maledictions of this kind, however,
have only made them angry; and, after all, the particular insult, which
has reference to a matter of fact, is done away with in the same matter
of fact fashion.

(_a_) The honour of romance is, on the contrary, of another kind.
Insult has no reference here to the factual values of real things,
property, status, obligation, etc., but to personality simply, and
its idea of its own importance, the work which the individual claims
as his right. This worth is in the cases we are now discussing of
an infinite significance equal to that of personality itself. In
honour, therefore, man possesses the earliest positive consciousness
of his infinite spiritual medium, independent of the content. What
the individual has, what in him something peculiar creates, after
the loss of which it may yet subsist precisely as it did before--in
this elusive something the absolute validity of the entire subjective
life is reposed and apprehended in it both for itself and others.
The determining measure of honour therefore does not depend on what
the individual really is, but on what is contained in this personal
self-regard. This regard, however, raises all particularity to the
level of the universal conception that the personal core in its full
significance resides in this particularity which it claims as its own.
Honour is merely an outward show it is sometimes said. No doubt this is
so: but from our present point of view we must, if we look at it more
narrowly, accept it as the appearance and reappearance of the personal
medium self-reflected, which as the semblance of an entity essentially
infinite is itself infinite. And through this infinitude it is just
this show or semblance of honour which is the real existence of the
individual, its highest actuality; and every particular quality, into
which honour is reflected and appropriates as its own is by virtue of
this show exalted itself to an infinite worth. This type of honour
constitutes a fundamental determinant in the romantic world, and
presupposes that man has not merely passed beyond the limits of purely
religious conception and inward life, but actually entered the arena
of the great world and makes itself vital in the material of the same
simply by virtue of the pure medium of its personal self-subsistence
and absolute intension[246].

The _content_ of honour may be of the most varied kind. For everything
that I am, do, or is done to me by others affects my honour. We may
consequently reckon within its boundaries the out and out substantive
itself, loyalty towards princes, fatherland, a man's profession,
fulfilment of obligations, marital fidelity, integrity in business
affairs and conscientiousness in scientific research. For the point
of view of honour, however, all these essentially valid and veritable
relations are neither sanctioned nor recognized in and through
themselves, but only so far as the individual reposes in them his
personal relation and makes them thereby matters affecting his honour.
A man of honour consequently always thinks first of all about himself,
and the question for him is not if anything is on principle right
or not, but whether it is the right thing for him to do, whether it
becomes him then as a man of honour to make himself master in it and to
stand by it. And consequently he may also perpetrate the worst actions
and still be a man of honour. He creates at the same time objects at
will, imagines himself of a specific character, and appropriates to
himself, both as he sees himself and is seen by others, that which
in the natural order of things has nothing to do with him at all.
Even then it is not the natural fact, but the personal view of it
which places difficulties and devolutions in the path, because it has
become an affair of honour to maintain that character. So, to take
an example, Donna Diana conceives it to be derogatory to her honour
to confess in any way the love she feels, because she has pledged
herself not to listen to love. In general we may say, then, that the
content of love is at the mercy of accident, because its validity
depends purely on the personal attitude, and is not directed by that
which is the essential mode of the inner life itself. For this reason
we may observe that in romantic representations on the one hand that
which is on principle justifiable is expressed as the _law_ of honour,
the individual associating with the consciousness of right at the
same time the infinite self-conscious unit of his personality. What
is then expressed by the statement that honour makes such and such a
demand, or forbids it, is this that the entire personal attitude of
consciousness implants itself within the content of such a demand or
prohibition so that no trespass in any transaction can fail to attract
its attention without a repair and restoration being effected; and
we may add the individual is unable to attend to any other content.
Conversely, however, honour may resolve itself into something wholly
formal and contentless, in so far as it contains nothing but the shell
of the Ego, which is formally infinite, or only accepts an entirely
bad content as obligatory upon it. In this case, more particularly
in dramatic representations, honour remains but a wholly frosty and
unvitalized object: its aims express no longer an essential content
but simply an abstract form of consciousness. But it is only an
essentially substantive content which possesses the contingency of law,
and is capable of explication in its multifold environment, and can be
apprehended in its imperative sequence of consequences. This defect
in profound content especially rises to the surface when casuistry of
reflection includes within the embrace of honour matter which is purely
accidental and insignificant which the individual comes in contact
with. There is never a lack of material, because this casuistical
tendency analyses with great subtlety in its modes of distinction,
and many aspects may be elicited and made the subject of honour which
in themselves are quite unimportant Above all the Spaniards have
elaborated this casuistry of reflection over matters of honour in their
dramatic poetry, and made their particular heroes of honour deduce all
their consequences in their speeches. In this way the fidelity of the
married woman may form a subject of investigation into the minutest
details, and the mere suspicion of another, nay, the possibility of
such even when the husband is aware that the suspicion is false may
be an affair of honour. If this leads to collisions we can derive no
real satisfaction from the process, because we have nothing of material
moment to arrest us, and consequently instead of the resolution of an
antagonism which is causally inevitable we can only extract from it a
painfully contracted feeling. Also in French plays we frequently find
that it is an honour which is barren, that is entirely abstract, which
is made the essential fulcrum of interest Still more extreme is this
essentially frostlike and lifeless type of it apparent in the drama
"Alarcos" of Herr Friedrich von Schlegel. The hero here murders his
noble and loving wife. And we ask why. Simply for honour's sake; and
this honour consists in this that he may marry the king's daughter, for
whom he entertains no affection, and thus become the king's son-in-law.
Such a pattern is of course contemptible and an ignoble conception
which merely prides itself as something lofty and of infinite intension.

(_b_) Inasmuch, then, as honour is not only a semblance in me myself,
but must also exist in the mind and recognition of _another_, which
again on its part makes a claim to a similar honourable recognition,
honour is the extreme embodiment of _vulnerability._ For it is purely
a matter of personal caprice how far I choose to extend the claim
and to what material I care to relate it. The smallest offence may
be in this respect of significance; and inasmuch as man is placed
relatively to concrete reality in the most manifold relations with a
thousand things, and is able to extend practically without limit the
sphere of that which he conceives to affect him, and to which he
is placed in the relation of honour it follows that when we come to
deal with the independence of mankind and the obstinate isolation of
their units, aspects for which the principle of honour is in the main
responsible, there is no end to the strife and contention to which
they give rise. Moreover, in the case of insult also no less than in
that of honour generally, the important matter is not the content, in
which I necessarily feel myself insulted; for that which is negated
has reference to the personality which has appropriated such a content
as its own, and now conceives itself as this ideal centrum of infinity
attacked.

(_c_) For such reasons every insult to honour is regarded as
essentially of an infinite significance. It can consequently only
be repaired by means which possess that character. No doubt we may
have many degrees of insult, and as many modes of satisfaction; what
however at the stage we are now considering any man may take as an
insult, how far he will feel himself as insulted and claim satisfaction
therefore, such considerations depend once more wholly on the personal
caprice of the particular person, which is justified in pursuing its
object to the utmost point of scrupulosity and outraged feeling. In
this process of satisfaction, which is here claimed, it is essential
that the man who delivers the insult no less than he who receives it
should be recognized as a man of honour. For the latter requires the
free recognition of his honour from the former; but in order to have
honour in his eyes and through his action that man must appear to
the recipient of insult as a man of honour, in other words he must
substantiate by virtue of his personality the infinite character of the
insult which he has laid upon the outraged man and despite his personal
enmity that is thereby directed against him.

It is, then, a fundamental determinant in the general principle of
honour that no one through his actions can give to any one a right over
himself; and consequently all that he has done and may have initiated
will be regarded both previous to its commencement and after its
conclusion as unalterably affiliated to infinity, and will be accepted
and treated under such a qualitative relation.

Moreover, since honour, in its conflicts and its satisfaction in this
respect, depends on personal independence, which is conscious of
itself as subject to no limitation, but acts directly from its own
resources, we find a fact recur to our attention, which we previously
observed fundamentally characterized the heroic figures of the Ideal,
namely the self-subsistence of individuality. In honour, however, we
have not merely the secure self-dependence and action from personal
resources, but this self-subsistence is in this case united with _the
idea of itself_; and it is just this preconception which constitutes
the real content of honour in the sense that it perceives what is its
own in that which is presented exterior to it, and envisages itself
therein to the full extent of its personal life. Honour is consequently
a self-subsistence, which is a _self reflection_, and possesses in such
a reflection its exclusive essence, and moreover leaves it wholly to
accident whether its content be that which is essentially moral and
necessary, or contingent and insignificant.


2. LOVE

The second emotional source which plays a predominant part in the
productions of romantic art is _love._

(_a_) We have found in honour that the individual conscious life,
as it prefigures itself in its absolute _independence_, forms the
fundamental determinant; in a similar way the highest attitude of
love is the _surrender_ of the personal life to some object of the
opposed sex, a sacrifice of its independent consciousness and its
personal isolation, which for the first time in the consciousness of
another, is aware emotionally that it has thoroughly brought home to
itself its own self-knowledge. In this respect we may contrast love
and honour. Conversely, however, we are entitled to regard love as the
_realization_ of that which was already inherent in honour, in so far
as honour claims recognition[247] that it should be received in another
as the infinite significance of personality. This recognition is only
true and complete when it is not merely my personality in the abstract,
or in a concrete and consequently restricted case, is respected by
another, but when I, in the' entire significance of my personal
resources, with everything this either emphasizes or includes, as this
particular person in all my past, present, and future relations, both
penetrate the conscious life of another, and, in fact, constitute the
object of his real volition and knowledge, his effort and his property.
In this respect it is this same inward infinitude of the individual
which makes love of such importance to romantic art, an importance
which is materially enhanced by the exalted character of the wealth
which the notion of love itself carries.

More closely, then, love does not subsist, as may frequently happen
in the case of honour, upon the subject-matter of the mind and the
casuistry of reflection, but originates in the emotions, and for the
reason that here the distinctions of sex play an important part,
possesses at the same time for its basis natural conditions as already
related to spirit life. This basis is, however, only present in the
sense that the individual comes into relation with such conditions by
way of his soul-life, that essentially infinite aspect of himself.

This state of a man's losing his own consciousness in another, this
appearance of disinterestedness and unselfishness, by virtue of which
a man first really finds himself and comes to himself--this oblivion
of his own, so that the lover no longer exists, or is careful for
himself, but discovers the roots of that life in another, and yet
only comes into the full enjoyment of himself in that other is what
gives us the infinite relation of love; and we must look for beauty
mainly in so far as this feeling does not persist as mere impulse
and emotion, but through the imagination makes its world conform to
such a condition, exalts everything which otherwise belongs by virtue
of its interest, circumstances, and objects to real existence and
life, into an adornment of this feeling, bears away all else into the
charmed circle, and only attaches a value to it in this relation.
More particularly it is in female characters that love appears in
most beautiful guise because this sacrifice, this surrender, is with
them as the culmination of everything else. It is these qualities, in
fact, which concentrate and extend life in its spiritual breadth and
reality to the wealth of this emotion, which alone discover within
it a stay for existence, and if any misfortune sweeps across the
path, vanish like a light which is extinguished by the first rude
breath[248]. In this personal and intimate sense of feeling love is
not presented in classical art, and only appears as a feature of quite
secondary importance for the representation, or is only conspicuous
under its aspect of physical enjoyment. In Homer, either we find it is
not emphasized at all, or love appears in its most respected type as
wedded love in the sphere of the domestic state, exemplified in the
figure of Penelope, or as solicitude of wife and mother, exemplified
in the case of Andromache, or in other ethical relations of a similar
character. The tie, on the other hand, which unites Paris to Helen is
recognized as immoral, and the cause of the horror and fatal course of
the Trojan war. The love, too, of Achilles for Briseis has little depth
of sentiment or spiritual flavour, for Briseis is a slave entirely at
his disposition. In the odes of Sappho it is true that the language
of love receives the dramatic emphasis of lyrical enthusiasm; yet it
is rather the insinuating and devouring flame of the blood which is
here expressed than the profound emotion of the singer's heart and
soul. From another aspect we find in the short and charming odes of
Anacreon a wider and more jovial sense of enjoyment, which sports with
delight on the immediate sense of enjoyment as over something to be
simply accepted as it falls without troubling itself with infinite
heartaches, without this overmastering of the entire life or the pious
submission of a burdened, yearning, and yielding soul; in this type
the point of infinite importance whether it is precisely this or that
girl which you possess is as absolutely disregarded as the monkish
notion that you should shun maidenhood altogether. The lofty tragedy
of the ancients does not recognize the passion of love in its romantic
significance. Pre-eminently in the case of both Aeschylus and Sophocles
we find that it makes no pretension to contribute to the main interest
of the drama. For although Antigone is the accepted lover of Haemon,
and Haemon claims her before his father, nay, goes to the length of
committing suicide because he is unable to deliver her, yet it is the
external aspects of the case rather than the power of his own personal
passion, which, we may also note, is not that of a modern lover, which
he emphasizes before Creon. As a more essential type of pathos love
is treated by Euripides in the "Phaedra." But here, too, it rather
makes itself felt as a criminal aberration of the blood, as a passion
of the senses, initiated by Aphrodite, who is desirous of slaying
Hippolytus, because he refuses to sacrifice to her. In the same way we
have, no doubt, in the Medicean Aphrodite a plastic figure of love,
whose exquisite pose and lovely elaboration of bodily form is quite
consummate; but any profound expression of soul-life such as romantic
art demands is wholly absent. On the other hand, the immortality of
Petrarca, although he himself treated his sonnets in the light of
recreation, and it was rather through his Latin poems and other works
that he appealed to posterity, is due to this very love of the fancy
which, under an Italian sky, joined sisterly hands with religion in
the medium of a somewhat artificial outpouring of the heart. Dante's
exaltation, too, originated in his love for Beatrice, which was
transfigured in his soul to the white fervour of religious ecstasy,
while the courage and boldness of his genius created energetically
a religious outlook on the world, in which he dared, an attempt
impossible without such gifts, to constitute himself the judge of
mankind, and to apportion to individuals hell, purgatory, or paradise.
In contrast to an exaltation of this kind love is placed before us by
Boccaccio in those romances of his, in which he brings before our eyes
the morals and life of his country, partly in all its impetuosity of
passion, partly, too, in the spirit of frivolity without any ethical
aim whatever. In the songs of the German Minnesingers we find a type
of love, sensitive, tender, without much generosity of imagination,
sportive, melancholy, and monotonous. Among the Spaniards it is copious
in imaginative expression, chivalrous, somewhat casuistical in its
discovery and defence of rights and duties, so far as they relate to
private affairs of honour; and in this respect also possesses all the
richest splendour of enthusiasm. In contrast to this among Frenchmen
of more modern times love is more an affair of gallantry with a
distinct bias toward vanity, an artificial state of feeling converted
to the uses of poetry with a kind of sophistry of the senses often
marked with the finest wit, at one time expressing a kind of sensuous
enjoyment which is devoid of passion, at another a passion that brings
with it no enjoyment, a sublimated condition of feeling and sensibility
which feeds upon the maxims of reflection. But I must here break off
these general indications which our subject does not permit me now to
carry further.

(_b_) More closely looked at the secular interest may be treated
under two general divisions. We have on the one side secularity as
actually organized, such as family life, the tie of citizenship and
politics, law, justice, morality, and the rest; and in opposition to
this[249] independent and assured existence love springs up in noble
and impetuous spirits; this world-religion of hearts, which at one
time we find joining hands with religion in every respect, while at
another it supersedes it, forgets it, and by constituting itself the
single essential, or rather the unique and supreme condition of life,
is not only prepared to renounce all else, and to fly for refuge to a
desert with the beloved, but proceeds in this extremity of its passion,
which we can only exclude from the domain of beauty, to sacrifice all
the worth of humanity in a manner at once servile, degrading, and
despicable. An example of this we have in "Kätchen von Heilbronn." On
account of this cataclysm of life's essential interests the objects
of love cannot be realized without _collisions_ in the theatre of the
world. For despite of love the general conditions of life make their
demand and assert their claims and the despotism of love's passion is
unable to maintain itself against them with impunity.

(_α_) The first and most frequently exemplified type of collision we
may draw attention to is that between _honour_ and _love._ In other
words, honour possesses just as love possesses in its own right this
infinitude of claim, and may accept a content, which may confront love
as a positive obstacle in its path. The obligations of honour may
require the sacrifice of love. From a certain point of view it would
be, for example, dishonourable for a man of high rank to wed one of the
lower classes. The distinction between class and class is a necessary
fact of natural condition as ordinarily presented[250]. And so long
as our secular life has not been emancipated through the infinite
notion of true freedom, whatever may be the class or profession from
which that life in the particular individual and his free choice takes
its rise, to that extent it will always be Nature, that is, the birth
condition, which to a greater or less degree will, on the one hand,
determine the social position; and, on the other, these distinctions
of status, as they thus originate, and quite independently of general
grounds of honour, in so far as social position is made an affair of
honour, will maintain themselves as of absolute and infinite stability.

(_β_) Quite apart, however, from questions of honour we must add as
a further example of collision that the eternal and _substantive_
powers themselves, the interests of the State, love of country, family
obligations, and the rest, come into conflict with love and preclude
its realization. Particularly in modern representations, in which the
objective conditions of life have been already elaborated in all their
available stringency, this is a favourite type of collision. Love is in
such cases, as itself an important right of the personal soul, either
set forth in opposition to other rights and duties, or despite of its
own recognition of such it enters upon a conflict with them reliant
upon itself and with the power of its private passion. The "Maid of
Orleans"[251] is an example of a drama which rests upon a collision of
this kind.

(_γ_) And in the _third_ case we may find in a general way that
_external_ condition and its impediments oppose obstacles in the path
of love. Such are the ordinary course of events, the prose of ordinary
existence, misfortunes, passion, prejudice, follies, the selfishness
of others, occurrences of every conceivable complexity and kind. Much
will here present itself that is hateful, terrible, and mean, for
it is mainly the evil, ruthless, and savage aspects of other forms
of human passion which work contrary to the tender spiritual beauty
of love. More particularly in later times we frequently come across
external collisions of this sort in dramas, narratives, and romances,
works whose main interest centres in a sympathy for the sufferings,
expectations, and ruined prospects of unhappy lovers and affect or
satisfy us by means of their bad or happy endings, or merely provide
entertainment. This type of conflict, however, on the ground that it
merely depends upon accidental matters, is a subordinate one.

(_c_) No doubt love, from whatever of these points of view you choose
to regard it, possesses a lofty quality, in so far as it does not
merely remain an impulse of sex-attraction, but emphasizes the bounty
of a really rich, beautiful, and noble soul, and is a living, active,
courageous, and disinterested bond of union between one person and
another. But romantic love is also not without its _limitation._
That which disappears from its content is the essentially realized
_universality._[252] It is merely the _personal_ feeling of one
particular individual, which does not attest itself as fulfilled
with interest of eternal import and the actual content of organic
human life, as made up of family, political aims, one's own country,
obligations of profession, status, freedom, and religion, but merely
with the personal consideration which is intent upon receiving again
such private feeling as reflected back from some one else. Such
a content of what is itself still but a formal mode of spiritual
life does not correspond in full truth to the totality, which the
essentially complete personality[253] ought to be. In the family,
marriage, duty, and the State the personal feeling simply as such and
the unity which issues from it with some particular person and no other
is not the main point of interest. In the love of romance, however,
all centres in the fact that this man or woman loves that woman or man
and _no one else._ Yet it is precisely this fact that it is only this
or that person, which is solely based upon personal idiosyncracy, in
other words, the contingency of caprice. There is no lover who does
not think his beloved, no maiden who does not fancy her lover, as the
fairest and most supreme, to the exclusion of all others, although
they may appear very ordinary mortals in the eyes of other folk. But
in just this fact that all the world or, let us say, a large number,
act thus exclusively, and will not make an exception in favour of the
unique Aphrodite herself, but rather possess an Aphrodite of their
own, and very easily somewhat more than Aphrodite, we can only very
obviously conclude that there are many who pass for the same fairy
Princess, as no doubt every one knows well enough, that there are a
whole bevy of pretty or good and excellent girls in the world, all
of whom, or let us hope the majority, will secure their own lovers,
adorers, and husbands, to whom they doubtless appear as gifted in like
manner with all the beauty and virtue of Christendom. To bestow in
every case our preference on one, and only one, is obviously a wholly
private affair of the heart and of the separate individuality of each
person, and the incommensurable obstinacy in discovering as though by
a law of necessity one's life and supremest sense of such in just that
one individual is proof that it is a caprice no less infinite in its
significance than it is inevitable. We have without question in this
attitude the loftier freedom of the personal life and its absolute
power of choice recognized, the power to be, not merely as we find
in the "Phaedra" of Euripides, under the constraint of a pathos, a
divinity; but in regard to the absolutely individual volition, from
which such a liberty proceeds, such a choice appears at the same time
to be a mere idiosyncrasy, an inflexibility of that which is wholly
self-exclusive.

For this reason the collisions of love, more particularly when it is
set in hostile opposition to substantive interests, retain an aspect of
contingency and lack of authorization, because it is the personal life
as such which confronts in opposition with a demand not independently
justifiable that which for its own essential sake has a claim to
recognition. The personalities in the lofty tragedy of the ancients
such as Agamemnon, Clytemnestra, Orestes, Oedipus, Antigone, and
Creon have, it is true, among other things a personal object; but the
substantive thing, the pathos, which as the content of their action is
the compelling force behind them, is of absolute authority, and for
this very reason, is also itself essentially of universal interest.
The destiny which affects them on account of their action does not
therefore move us on the ground that it is a fate of misfortune,
but because it is a misfortune which affects or redounds to their
honour. In other words the pathos, which will not rest until it is
satisfied, possesses an essentially necessary content. When the guilt
of Clytemnestra, in this concrete case of it, receives no punishment,
when the insult which Antigone receives as sister[254] is not removed,
in both cases we have a substantial wrong. These sufferings of love,
however, these shattered hopes, this being in love generally, these
infinite pains experienced by lovers, this measureless happiness and
bliss which such imagine, are no such essential interest but rather
something that merely affects themselves. All men, it is true, should
be sensitive to love and may claim satisfaction in this respect. But
when a man fails to secure that object in some particular place, in
precisely this or that association, under just these circumstances
and in respect to one unique maiden we can admit no absolute wrong.
There is nothing essentially inevitable in the fact that a man should
capriciously select any particular young woman, and that we should
interest ourselves consequently for that which is in the highest degree
accidental, a caprice of his own conscious life, which carries with it
no impersonal expansion or universal significance. We have here the
source of that tendency to cool which we cannot help feeling in the
representation of the passion of romantic love however that passion may
be emphasized.


3. FIDELITY

The third type of soul-life which is of importance to the romantic
consciousness on the field of its activity in the world is _fidelity._
By fidelity in the sense we are now using it we do not mean either
the permanent adherence to the avowal of love once given, nor yet the
stability of friendship in the beautiful image of the same such as we
have left us by the ancients in that of Achilles and Patroclus, or with
yet more intimacy, that of Orestes and Pylades. Youth is pre-eminently
both the soil and the occasion from which friendship of this
latter type originates. Every man has to construct his path of life
independently, to work out and sustain a given mode of realization. The
time of youth, when individuals still live in an undefined atmosphere
of external relations which they share, is the one in which they
associate closely, and are bound together so nearly in _one_ mode of
thought, volition, and activity, that everything that any one of them
undertakes becomes at the same time the undertaking of another. When
men attain maturity this is no longer the case. The circumstantial
life of the grown man pursues its independent course and will not
admit of so close an affiliation with that of another that we can
affirm of it that one cannot accomplish it without the other. Men make
acquaintances and then separate; their interests and business are at
one time disjoined, at another they coalesce; friendship, intimacy of
mutual opinions, of principles, and the general trend of their life may
remain; but this is not the friendship of youth, in which no individual
unit either makes a decision or carries it into effect without
inevitably making it a matter in which another is concerned. It is an
essential principle at the very root of our life that in general every
man must look after himself, must, in other words, prove by himself his
capacity to confront the reality which affects him.

(_a_) Fidelity in friendship and love, then, subsists solely between
equals. The fidelity which we have now to consider is relative to a
superior, one more highly placed, a _master._ A fidelity of this type
is to be found even among the ancients in that of servants to the
family, the house of their lord. The most beautiful example of such a
relation is supplied us by the swine-herd of Odysseus, who sweats by
night and through tempest in order that he may look after his swine;
who is full of anxiety on his master's account, to whom he finally
gives loyal assistance against the suitors. Shakespeare offers us a
picture of fidelity no less moving, though it is here shown entirely
on the side of the feelings, in his "King Lear."[255] Lear asks Kent,
"Dost thou know me, fellow?" And Kent replies: "No, sir; but you have
that in your countenance which I would fain call master." This borders
as close as possible on that which we would make clear as romantic
fidelity. Fidelity at this stage is not the loyalty of slaves and
churls, however true and pathetic such unquestionably may be, which is
none the less devoid of the free independence of individuality and its
unrestricted aims and actions, and is consequently of subordinate rank.
What we, in short, have before us is the liege-service of chivalry, in
which each vassal preserves intact his own free self-dependence as an
essential element in the attitude of subordination to one of higher
rank, whether lord, king, or emperor. This type of fidelity, however,
is a principle of supreme importance in chivalry for the reason that it
forms the fundamental bond of union in a common society and its social
co-ordination at least in the original form of its appearance.

(_b_) The object which thus receives a fuller content and is made
apparent in this new type of association between individuals is not,
however, by any means patriotism regarding that as an objective and
universal interest, but a bond merely with one person, the lord, and
for this reason conditioned by private honour, personal advantage
and opinion. In its fullest brilliancy we find fidelity of this kind
in a surrounding world that is unregulated and uncouth, beyond the
control of right and law. Within a lawless reality of this kind the
most powerful and commanding spirits stand out as fixed points of
attraction, as leaders and nobles, and the rest rally round them of
their own free will. Such a condition is later on elaborated into a
legalized co-ordination of fealty, in which every vassal has his own
claim to rights and privilege. The fundamental principle, however, upon
which the entire system reposes is in its primary origins free choice,
no less in relation to the dependent vassal than to the conditions
under which he remains faithful to his vassalage. For this reason the
fidelity of chivalry is quite prepared to maintain property, right, and
personal independence and honour, and is on this account not simply
recognized as an _obligation_ which may be enforced to the entire
disregard of the private inclinations of the vassal however they may
arise. Quite the contrary. Every subordinate unit only continues there
and helps to establish the general social order so long as the same
falls in with his own wishes, inclinations, and opinions.

(_c_) On this account fidelity and obedience to the feudal lord can
very readily clash with private feelings, an exasperated sense of
honour, sensitiveness to insult, love, and many other chance incidents
of the personal or external life. It is consequently of a highly
precarious character. A knight, for example, is loyal to his lord,
but a friend of his happens to quarrel with him. He has now to choose
between the two objects of his fidelity, and, chief of all, he has to
consider himself, the claims of his personal honour and advantage.
The most beautiful example of such a conflict we have in the "Cid."
He remains as true to himself as he is to his king. If the king acts
wisely he assists him with his arm's strength; if his feudal lord acts
wrongly or the Cid feels touched on the point of honour this powerful
support is withdrawn. The paladins of Charles the Great exhibit
much the same attitude. It is a tie of chieftainship and obedience
not unlike that which we have already observed between Zeus and the
other gods. The superior lord commands, blusters, and scolds, but the
independent and powerful individualities resist him precisely when and
as they please. We find the most consistent and charming picture of the
conditional and easy terms under which this bond is maintained in the
"Reinecke Fuchs." Just as the magnates in this kingdom are most really
true to their own aims and independence, we find that the German barons
and knights in the Middle Ages were not at home when called upon to
act for the sake of the general weal and their emperor; and it really
looks as though our chief praise of the Middle Ages must consist in
this that no man is in such a period justified in his own eyes or a man
of honour, except in so far as he runs after his own inclinations, in
other words, does precisely that which he is not suffered to do in a
State which is organized on a rational basis.

In all these three stages of honour, love, and fidelity, we shall find
the soil on which the self-subsistency of personality, the soul, is
supported, an independence which, however, constantly unfolds in a
wider and more affluent content, remaining in the same self-reconciled.
Here stretches before us in romantic art the fairest strip of country
which we can find anywhere outside the enclosure of religion in its
strict sense, Its objects are concerned with that which is simply
human, a relation with which we can at least from one aspect of it,
namely, that of personal freedom, absolutely sympathize, and we do
not find here, as we do now and again in the religious field, both
a material and modes of representation which clash with our modern
notions. But at the same time we must add that our present subject
matter may very frequently be brought into direct relation to religion
so that religious interests are interwoven with those of the world
of chivalry; as, for example, was the case in the adventures of the
knights of the round table in their quest of the Holy Grail. In this
interfusion we find not only much that is mystical and fantastical,
but also much that is allegorical added to the poetry of chivalry. And
conversely this secular sphere of the interests of love, honour, and
fidelity may also be totally unconnected with the deepening of their
content with religious aims and opinions, and only bring to view the
earliest movement of soul-life in the secular aspect of its spiritual
intensity. That which, however, drops away from the present levels is
the repletion of this inner life with the concrete content of human
conditions, characters, passions, and realized existence generally. In
contrast to this variety the essentially infinite soul still remains
abstract and formal, and has therefore in front of it the task, to
accept as part of its own this further material with what it held
before, and to exhibit the same in the forms congenial to artistic
composition.

[Footnote 241: He has not in this exclusive sense of religiosity
identified himself with the spirit of the Christian community. _Der
Anderen_ refers to _Gemeinschaft._ Such appears to me the sense.]

[Footnote 242: _Zur Wirklichkeit entfaltetes Leben._]

[Footnote 243: Put more simply we may say in popular terminology that
it is filled up or amplified by virtue of the sense of individual
personality. This Hegel himself further elucidates below. Falstaff
undoubtedly possessed a strong personality, but in his famous soliloquy
on honour he deliberately emptied himself of any sense of it by
refusing to view himself under the self-relation, that is self-respect.]

[Footnote 244: I fail to appreciate this distinction, except in a very
qualified form. Even in the Middle Ages when the feudal relation was in
full force, the relation between the master and the servant was surely
one of the institutions of the State, though no doubt the rights of the
dependent were not always very readily enforced. Even in the case of
slavery in the Southern States of America the relation between master
and slave carried with it quite definite ethical obligations--there was
in general at least quite a distinct social if not actually political
status.]

[Footnote 245: I suppose Hegel means by _ein Punkt_ a centre or point
of life. The expression is rather unusual.]

[Footnote 246: _Absoluten Geltung_, that is its absolute validity in
its ideal character.]

[Footnote 247: The punctuation in text is defective.]

[Footnote 248: So runs the text. It comes from such a writer with a
shock. Why such qualities should vanish (_schwinden_) in the presence
of unhappiness it is not easy to see. It would rather appear that such
was the condition to evoke them. What is meant is, I suppose, that the
failure of _reciprocity_, especially in the love of women, often brings
complete collapse. We may illustrate it in several of Meredith's novels
such as "Diana" and "Sandra Belloni."]

[Footnote 249: The two sides would appear to be the secularity of the
social organism and "free" love.]

[Footnote 250: This I think is the meaning. Until the full notion of
liberty is apprehended the divisions of class will have the appearance
of natural necessity.]

[Footnote 251: Schiller's drama of that name.]

[Footnote 252: _Die an und für sich seyende Allgemeinheit._ The
universal notion as explicitly made actual in life.]

[Footnote 253: _Ein in sich konkretes Individuum._ The whole of this
analysis appears to me a rather abstract and professorial consideration
of romantic attachment, separating love from its reality of association
and relation in actual life. In so far as it is true it is purely
abstract truth, and must be regarded as such. In actual life it is no
more true that even in the average case misfortune blights the blossom
than it is true that the love of the individual concentrates itself
solely on the mere attachment between two persons. It is bound up with
the idea of family and continuation of the race, and so indirectly with
the State.]

[Footnote 254: As sister of her violated brother Polyneices.]

[Footnote 255: Act I, sc. 4.]




