CHAPTER III

THE DISSOLUTION OF THE CLASSICAL TYPE OF ART

The gods of classical art contain in themselves the germ of their
overthrow; consequently, when this fatal defect which they include is
brought to consciousness through the elaboration of art itself, they
bring about the dissolution of the classical Ideal at the same time.
We established as the principle of this, so far as we have here to
deal with it, that kind of spiritual individuality which secures in
every respect an adequate expression in bodily or external existence
immediate to our senses. This individuality was enclosed within a
complex of divine personalities, whose definition is not essentially
and withal from the first given up to the contingent condition in which
the everlasting gods receive the appearance of dissolution for man's
conscious life no less than for his artistic creation.

1. FATE OR DESTINY

It is true that sculpture in its complete plastic perfection accepts
the gods as substantive potencies, and endows them with a form in whose
beauty they in the first instance repose in security, for the reason
that the accidental character, of their external envisagement is to
the least extent emphasized. Their _multiplicity_ and _distinction_
does in fact, however, constitute this element of contingency, and
thought annuls this in the determinate conception of _one_ divinity,
through whose inevitable power they are mutually at war with and to
the detriment of each other. For however universal the power of every
particular god is conceived as specific individuality, such is of a
restricted range. Add to this the fact that the gods do not continue
in their eternal repose; they are self-determined relatively to
particular aims in actual movement through their being drawn hither
and thither by the pre-existing conditions and collisions of concrete
reality, in order at one time to afford assistance and at another
to obstruct or destroy. These isolated relations in which the gods
as active individuals participate contain within them an element of
contingency, which impairs the substantive nature of the divine,
however much the same may persist as the predominant substratum, and
involves the gods in the contradictions and conflicts of a limited
finitude. By reason of this finiteness immanent in the gods themselves
they fall into contradiction with the loftiness, worth, and beauty of
their existence, through which, too, they are eventually brought down
to the level of mere caprice and chance. The genuine Ideal evades the
complete appearance of this contradiction simply and in so far as--this
is preeminently the case in true sculpture and its particular creations
as we find them in temples--the divine personalities are represented as
explicitly alone in the repose of blessedness, yet retain, as we have
already above indicated, a certain aspect of lifelessness, somewhat
aloof from all emotion, and withal that quiet characteristic of
pathetic lament. It is just this mournfulness which exposes their fate
by demonstrating that something of higher import stands above them, and
the passage from the particularities of form to their comprehending
unity is a necessary one. If, however, we fix our attention on the type
and configuration of this loftier unity we shall find that it is, as
contrasted with the individuality and relative determination of the
gods, the essentially abstract and formless--the necessity, the fate,
which under this mode of abstraction the higher can only in general
terms be, and which constrains both gods and men, while remaining in
itself incomprehensible and inconceivable. Fate is not as yet absolute
and self-subsistent end, and thereby at the same time subjective,
personal, divine purpose, but merely the one and universal Power which
transcends the particularity of the different gods, and consequently is
unable to be presented itself as individual entity; because otherwise
it would simply appear as one among many individuals, and would stand
above them. For this reason it remains without form and individuality,
and is in this abstraction merely necessity and nothing more; with
which gods no less than men, when they differentiate themselves as
separate from one another, contend. And thus they give effect to their
individual power condemned though it be to limitations, and would fain
exalt themselves over the bounds and warrant of Fate, though they
are, in fact, its subjects, and are forced to hearken to all that
unalterably befalls them.


2. THE DISSOLUTION OF THE GODS THROUGH THEIR ANTHROPOMORPHISM

For the reason, then, that the principle of self-determinate
Necessity[197] does not appertain to the particular gods, does not
supply in other words the content of their self-determination, and
only floats over them as an undefined abstraction, the aspect of their
insularity as individuals has consequently free play and is unable to
escape from Destiny, is moreover at liberty to branch out into the
external fabric of the human condition, into the finite consistency of
anthropomorphism, possibilities which convert the gods into the reverse
of that condition which truly constitutes the notion of what they are
essentially and in virtue of their divine nature. The overthrow of
these gods of beauty is consequently quite inevitably brought about for
art through their own nature. The human consciousness is at last quite
unable to find repose in them, and is fain compelled to take leave of
them. And, moreover, if we look more closely we shall find that the
mode and type of Greek anthropomorphism supplies us with a general
example of how the gods vanish away from the faiths of religion no less
than those of poetry.

(_a_) Spiritual individuality here makes its appearance in the human
form, it is true, as Ideal; but for all that it is in the immediately
visible, that is, the bodily presence, not within humanity in all its
essential explication, under the mode in which it is conscious of
itself in its own self-conscious world as distinct from God, while in
the same breath it annuls the distinction, and is, by its own act, as
one with God, essentially infinite and absolute self-consciousness.

(_α_) For this reason the plastic Ideal is unable to present itself
as infinite self-conscious spirituality. These plastic shapes of
beauty are not merely stone and bronze, but also the infinite form of
subjective life vanishes from them in their content and expression.
We may become as enthusiastic as we please over their beauty and art,
but for all that our _enthusiasm_ is and remains something native
to our own souls; it is not really at home in the objects which it
thus contemplates, that is in the gods themselves. To complete the
true totality a real reciprocity is required on this side also of the
subjective, self-knowing unity and infinity; it is this, and only this,
that unfolds our conception of a living God of knowledge, and of men
who thus apprehend Him. If this totality is not also essentially and
with adequacy conformable to the content and nature of the Absolute,
then the Absolute will itself appear not as truly a subject of
spiritual being, and its presentment will confront us merely in its
objective form without the possession of self-conscious Spirit. It is
quite true, no doubt, that the individuality of the gods retains the
content of subjectivity, but merely under modes that are contingent,
and in a process of development,' which moves independently outside
that substantive repose and blessedness of the gods.

(_β_) On the other hand, the subjectivity which is opposed to the
gods of plastic art is also not the form of conscious life which is
essentially eternal and true. In other words, this latter is--as we
shall see for ourselves more clearly in our consideration of the third
type of art, the romantic--that which has before it the objectivity to
which it is conformable under the mode of an essentially infinite and
self-knowing God. Inasmuch, however, as the knowing subject, at the
stage we are now discussing, does not consciously conceive itself as
present in the perfections of these godlike figures, nor even in its
contemplation of such objects is aware of itself as circumstantially
objective, it is still wholly distinct and separate from its absolute
object, and is consequently a purely contingent and finite subjectivity.

(_γ_) We might possibly suppose that the passage into a higher sphere
of reality would have been emphasized by the imagination and art as a
further war among the gods, in a way analogous, in fact, to the first
transition from the symbolism of the gods of Nature to the spiritual
Ideals of classical art. This is by no means the case. On the contrary,
this translation is carried forward in a wholly different field, as a
conflict brought home to consciousness between absolute reality and
the present world. For this reason art, in its relation to the higher
content, which it has to seize under new modes, occupies an entirely
altered position. This new configuration does not assert its importance
as revelation by means of Art, but is made manifest independently
without it, and appears on the prosaic ground of controversial and
rational discussion, and from thence is within the soul and its
religious emotions, mainly by means of miracle, martyrdoms, and so
on, carried into the world of subjective knowledge, together with a
consciousness of the contradiction between all that is finite and
the Absolute, which unfolds itself in actual history as the process
of events toward a Present which is not merely imagined, but is the
_fact_ we have before us. The Divine, God Himself, becomes flesh, is
born, lives, suffers, dies, and rises from the dead. This is a content
which heart did not discover, but which, quite apart from it, was a
present fact, and which consequently it has not borrowed from its own
domain, but merely supplies a form to it. That old transition and war
of the gods, on the contrary, discovered its origins in the artistic
or imaginative view of the world simply, which created its wisdom and
plastic shapes from its inner life, and gave to astonished mankind his
new gods. For this reason the classic gods also have only received
their existence through the fiat of the imagination, and merely exist
as such in stone and bronze, or in the world open to the senses,
not, however, in flesh and blood, or in very and actual Spirit. The
anthropomorphism of the Greek gods is therefore without real human
existence, that of body no less than that of Spirit. It is Christianity
which first introduces us to this reality in flesh and blood as the
determinate existence, life, and activity of God Himself. Consequently
this bodily form, this flesh, however much also the purely natural and
sensuous is recognized as a negation therein, receives its due and
honour, and that which partakes of anthropomorphism here is sanctified.
Even as man originally was made in the image of God, God is an image
of man; whoso beholdeth the Son beholdeth the Father, and whoso loveth
the Son loveth the Father. In a word, God is acknowledged as present
in the actual world. This new content, then, is not brought home to
consciousness by means of the conceptions of art, but is presented from
an exterior source as an actual occurrence, as the history of the God
who became flesh. A transition such as this could not take its point of
departure from Art; the contrast between the old and the new would have
been too disparate. The God of revealed religion, in respect to content
and form, is very God in truth, in contrast with whom all rivals would
become mere creations of the imagination, whom it would be quite
impossible to compare with Him on equal terms. The old and new gods of
classical art, on the contrary, originate in both cases independently
from the ground of the imagination. They have only such reality from
the finite Spirit as enables them to be conceived and represented as
potencies of Nature and Spirit; the contradiction and conflict they
declare, is taken seriously. If, however, the transition from the Greek
gods to the God of Christendom were portrayed in the first instance by
Art, the representation of such a war of gods could not in this direct
form be enforced in all seriousness.

(_b_) Consequently this strife and transition becomes also, in more
recent times, primarily an accidental, isolated subject-matter of art,
which can claim to create no true epoch, and has been able in this form
to embody no fundamental phase in the line of the entire development
of art. We will recall here in this connection, if incidentally, a
few of the more famous examples of this nature. We frequently hear
in more recent times the lament over the submergence of Greek art,
and a yearning towards Greek gods and heroes is not infrequently the
theme of our poets[198]. This lamentation is expressed emphatically
as in direct opposition to Christendom; and though it is, no doubt,
generally granted that it contains the higher truth, the qualification
is added that, so far as art is concerned, the transition is only
to be regretted. This is the theme of Schiller's "Gods of Greece";
and it is worth our while, even in the present inquiry, to consider
this poem, not merely as poetry in the beauty of its exposition, its
musical rhythm, its vivid pictures, or in the charm of its regretful
mood, which was the motive force in its creation, but also in order to
examine the content. Schiller's pathos is always true, no less than
poignant, and the result of profound reflection.

It is perfectly true that the Christian religion contains, and may
justly claim to accentuate, a certain phase of art; but in the due
course of its development, at the time of the Aufklärung[199], it
has also reached a point where we find that thought, or rather the
Understanding[200], has driven into the background that element,
which art pre-eminently requires, the actual human envisagement and
revelation of God. For the human form and all that it expresses and
declares, human events, actions, feeling, is the form under which art
is forced to conceive and represent the content of Spirit. Inasmuch as
the Understanding has converted God into a mere fact of thought, no
longer crediting the appearance of His Spirit in concrete reality, and
thus has alienated the God of Thought from all actual existence, this
type of religious Illumination has necessarily accepted conceptions
and requirements which are intolerable to Art. When, however, the
Understanding is raised once more from the region of these abstractions
into that of Reason, the need at once asserts itself for something
more concrete, and withal for that kind of concreteness which Art
itself unfolds. The period of the illuminating Understanding has, no
doubt, possessed an art of its own, but only of very prosaic type,
as we may even find it in Schiller, whose point of departure was
precisely that of such a period of criticism; later on, however,
owing to his realization how little reason, imagination, and passion
were satisfied by the critical Understanding, he experienced a deep
longing for art, in the fullest sense of the term, and primarily for
the classical art of the Greeks and their gods, and general views of
the world. It is from this kind of yearning, a reaction, in short,
from the mere abstractions of the mind, that the poem referred to
originated. According to the original draft of the poem, Schiller's
attitude to Christianity is entirely polemical; afterwards he modified
it considerably, no doubt realizing that its _animus_ was only directed
against the critical aspect of the Illumination, which at a later time
itself began to lose its importance. In the first instance he praises
the Greek point of view as fortunate in that the whole of Nature was a
thing of Life to it, and full of divinities. After that he reviews the
Present and its prosaic conception of natural law, and the position man
here takes relatively to God:

/$
                  Diese traur'ge Stille
     Kündigt sie mir meinen Schöpfer an?
     Finster wie er selbst ist seine Hülle,
     Mein _Entsagen_, was ihn feiern kann[201].
$/

No doubt resignation is an essential characteristic in the evolution
of the Christian life; but it is only in the monkish conception of it
that it requires he should cut off from himself his soul, his emotions,
the so-called impulses of his Nature, and should not incorporate his
life in the moral, rational, actual world, the family and the State;
and it does so precisely as the Illumination and its Deism, which
presupposes that God is unknowable, imposes on mankind the extremest
form of resignation, namely, that of abandoning all effort either to
know or conceive Him. In any true exposition of Christian doctrine,
resignation is, on the contrary, merely a phasal moment of mediation, a
point of transition, in which that which is purely natural, sensuous,
and in general terms finite, strips off this its incompatible nature in
order to permit Spirit to attain the loftier freedom and reconciliation
of its own possessions, a freedom and blessedness which was unknown
to the Greeks. In Christianity as thus understood we are not entitled
to speak of the celebration of the one God, of the bare seclusion of
Himself, and the cutting ourselves adrift from an ungodly world, for it
is precisely in this spiritual freedom and reconciliation of Spirit
that God is immanent, and from this point of view the famous lines of
Schiller:

/$
     Da die Göttes menschlicher noch waren,
     Waren Menschen göttlicher[202].
$/

is absolutely false. We must for this very reason emphasize the later
alteration made in the concluding lines which refer thus to the Greek
gods:

/$
     Aus der Zeitfluh weggerissen schweben
     Sie gerettet auf des Pindus Höhn;
     Was unsterblich im Gesang soll leben,
     Muss im Leben untergehn[203].
$/

These words support entirely the assertion we have made above that
the Greek gods could only be localized in the mental conception and
imagination; they were neither able to affirm such a position in the
reality of life, nor satisfy in the long run finite spirit.

Of another sort is the opposition of Parny to Christianity--a poet
named the French Tibullus on account of his successful elegies--which
is conspicuous in a prolix poem of ten cantos, a kind of epic poem
entitled "La Guerre des Dieux," as an attempt made to bring ridicule
upon Christian conceptions in the interests of jest and comedy carried
out in a tone of unrestrained frivolity, yet withal marked by good
humour and considerable talent. The sallies of wit here are not,
however, carried beyond the point of levity; we have few traces of
the wanton disregard of things that are sacred and of the highest
excellence such as marks the period of Frederick von Schlegel's
"Lucinde." The Virgin Mary no doubt is treated very badly in this poem.
The monks, Dominicans and Franciscans, yield to the seductions of wine
and Bacchanals, and the nuns do much the same with Fauns, and the
result is sufficiently shocking. Finally, however, the gods of the old
world are vanquished and withdraw from Olympus to Parnassus.

As a concluding illustration Goethe in his "Bride of Corinth" has
more profoundly depicted in a vivacious picture the banishment of
love, not so much as the result of any true principle of Christianity
as the misconceived interpretation of resignation and sacrifice. The
poet here contrasts that false asceticism which seeks to condemn the
determination of a woman to be wife and rates that enforced celibacy
as something more holy than marriage with the natural feelings of
mankind. Just as we find in Schiller the opposition between the Greek
imagination and the critical abstractions of our modern Enlightenment,
so we may detect here the Hellenistic ethical and sensuous
justifications in the matter of love and marriage, placed in direct
contrast to ideas which can only claim to belong to the Christian
religion when regarded from a wholly one-sided and therefore incorrect
point of view. With the greatest art a really horrible tone dominates
the entire work; and the principal reason is this, that it remains
quite uncertain whether the action has reference to a real maiden, or
a dead one, a living reality or a ghost; and in the metre of the verse
itself in an equally masterly way the threads of light foolery and
seriousness are so interwoven as to make the uncanniness still more
effective.

(_c_) Before, however, we attempt to gauge in its profundity the new
type of art, whose opposition to the old does not come into the course
of Art's development, so far, at least, as we here have undertaken to
follow it along its fundamental lines, we must in the first instance
make clear for ourselves that other transition in its earliest form,
which attaches to antique art itself. The principle of this transition
consists in this, that the Spirit whose individuality hitherto has been
contemplated as in harmony with the true subsistency of Nature and
human life, and which, in respect to its own life, volition, and acts,
was consciously at home in that accord, begins now to withdraw itself
into the infinite subjectivity of its essence, but instead of the true
infinity is only able to secure a purely formal and indeed still finite
return upon itself.

If we look more closely at the concrete conditions which correspond to
the principle indicated, we shall see, we have already done so, that
the Greek gods possess as their content the substantive _materiae_ of
real human life and action. Over and above the vision of the gods we
have now the highest mode of determination, the universal interest and
the end in determinate life, that is to say, presented at the same
time as an existing fact. Just as it was essential to the spiritual
configuration of Greek art to appear both as external and real, so,
too, the spiritual growth of mankind in its absolute significance
has elaborated itself in a reality that both externally appears and
is real, with whose substance and universality the individual has
put forward a claim to be in accordant fusion. This highest end was
in Greece the life of the State, the collective body of citizens and
their morality and living patriotism. Outside this supreme interest
there was no other more lofty or true. The life of the State, however,
as an external phenomenon of the world, fades into the Past, as do
the conditions of the entire reality of the outside world. It is not
difficult to demonstrate that a State under the type of such a freedom,
so immediately identical with all its citizens, which as such already
possess in their grasp the highest activity in all public transactions,
is inevitably small and weak, and in part must prove suicidal to
itself, in part fall into ruins in the natural course of the history
of nations. In other words, by reason of this immediate coalescence of
individual life with the universality of State-life, on the one hand
we find that the peculiar idiosyncrasies of spiritual experience and
its particular aspects as private life do not receive their full dues,
nor do they receive sufficient opportunity for a development innocuous
to society at large. Rather, as distinct from the concrete substance,
into which it has not been accepted, such a nature remains simply the
limited and natural egoism, which goes on its own way independently,
pursues its interests however much they are alien to the true interest
of the whole, and, consequently, is an instrument to the ruin of
the State, against which, in the last resort, it strains to oppose
its individual forces. On the other hand within the circle of this
freedom itself the need of a higher personal liberty is roused, which
not merely in the State, as the substantive totality, nor merely in
the accepted code of morals and law, but in the very soul of the man
himself asserts its claim to exist, in so far as he is ready to give
life to goodness and rectitude out of the wealth of his own nature and
in the light of his own personal knowledge, and to recognize the same
at its real worth. The individual subject demands of consciousness that
it should be, in virtue of its claim as self-identity, a substantive
whole. Consequently there arises in this freedom a new breach between
the end of the State and that of the man's own personal welfare as
essentially free himself. Such a conflict as this had already begun in
the time of Socrates, while on the other side the vanity, self-seeking
and unbridled character of democracy and demagogy corrupted the true
State to such a degree that men like Plato and Xenophon experienced a
loathing for the internal condition of their mother-city, where the
direction of all public transactions lay in the hands of those who were
either frivolous, or those who sought nothing but personal aims.

The spirit of this transition, therefore, depends in the first
instance on the general line of severation between Spirit in its
unfolded self-subsistency and external existence. The spiritual in
this separation from its reality, in which it no longer finds itself
reflected, is then the abstract mode of Spirit; it is not, however, the
one Oriental god, but on the contrary the actual self-knowing conscious
subject, which brings to the fore and retains within the clasp of
its ideal subjectivity all that is universal in thought, truth,
goodness, and morality, and possesses therein not so much the knowledge
of a pre-existing reality as simply the content of its thoughts
and convictions. This relation, in so far as it persists in this
opposition, and sets up the two aspects of the same as purely opposites
to one another, would be of an entirely prosaic character. We do not,
however, at this stage as yet arrive at this point of bare prose. In
other words it is true that on the one hand we have a consciousness
present, which as self-secure, wills the Good, the fulfilment of its
desires, conceives the reality of its notion in the virtue of its
emotional life, much as we find it thus imaged in the ancient gods,
morals, and laws. At the same time, however, this consciousness is
split up in opposition to its existence as part of existing Life, in
other words the actual political life of the time, the dissolution
of the old modes of conception, the former type of patriotism and
political wisdom, and adheres thereby unquestionably to that opposition
between the inward life of soul and the real environment outside it.
And the reason of this hesitancy is this that the bare conceptions
of genuine ethical truth which it derives from its own inner world
are unable to fully satisfy it; it consequently faces that which is
exterior to this, to which it relates itself in a negative and hostile
spirit with the object of changing it. This consciousness is, as
already stated, on the one hand no doubt an inward and present content,
which, self-determined and at the same time deliberately articulate,
is concerned with a world that confronts it, to which this content is
opposed, and which receives the task to depict this same reality in
the semblance of the very traits of the corruption peculiar to that
world, and which form such a contrast with its own ideas of goodness
and truth. From another point of view this very contrast is cancelled
by art itself. In other words, another type of art arises, in which the
conflict of this opposition is not emphasized through the medium of
mere thoughts, remaining thus in its disunion; but this reality in the
very folly of its corruption is itself submitted to a mode of artistic
presentation, which exposes it as self-destructive, and exposes it in
such a way that it is precisely in and through this self-destructive
process of what is of no weight that truth is enabled to assert itself
upon this mirror as the secure and endurable power, and thereby all the
force of a direct opposition to what is essentially true is removed
from that side represented by folly and unreasonableness. This art is
comedy, of the type Aristophanes dramatized for his fellow-citizens,
connecting it closely with all that was essential in the world around
him, and doing so with equanimity[204], in a mood of pure and hearty
joviality.


3. SATIRE

We may, however, observe that this resolution of art, despite its
adequacy, tends to disappear to this extent, that the contradictory
antithesis persists in the form of its _opposition_, and, consequently,
instead of the poetic reconciliation a prosaic relation is imported,
by means of which the classical type of art appears to be annulled, and
the gods of plastic shape no less than the entire world of human beauty
vanish with it. We have, then, now to look about us for a form of art,
which is able to reclothe itself from the ruins of this overthrow in
a loftier configuration and to extract the real significance which it
implies. We discovered as the terminating point of symbolic art in
the same way that the separation of pure form from its significance
was emphasized in a variety of modes such as simile, fable, parable,
riddle, and the like. Inasmuch as the severation above adverted to is
causally responsible for the dissolution of that art-type, in a similar
way the question arises what is the nature of the distinction between
our present example of transition as contrasted with the previous one.
The distinction is as follows:

(_a_) In the truly symbolic and comparative type of art the form and
significance are from the very first, despite the affinity of their
relationship, alien to one another; they are placed, however, in no
mere negative, but rather in amicable relationship; for it is precisely
the qualities and traits which are identical to or resemble each other
on the two sides which assert themselves as the causal basis of their
conjunction and comparison. Their persistent separation and hostility
is consequently within the bounds of this union neither, relatively to
the separated aspects, of a _hostile_ character, nor is a blending of
the same, within essentially narrow limits, thereby removed from them.
The Ideal of classical art, on the contrary, proceeds from the perfect
interfusion of significance and form, the ideal individuality of spirit
and its external conformation; and when the composite aspects which
have been brought together in such a consummated unity are disrupted,
this disruption takes place simply because they are unable any longer
to cohere one with the other, and are absolutely compelled to start
forth from their peaceful state of harmony in disunion and hostility.

(_b_) Together with this way of looking at the relation in contrast
to that of symbolic art we may add that the _content_ of both sides
is altered, as they now stand in opposition. To put it thus we may
say that, in the symbolic type of art, it is abstractions more or
less, general thoughts, or at least definite phrases in the form of
generalities peculiar to reflective thought, which, by means of the
symbolic type of art, receive a sensuous embodiment replete with
suggestion. In the form, however, which makes itself predominant in
this transition to romantic art the content, it is true, is made up
of a similar abstraction of general thoughts, opinions, and maxims of
reflective reason, but in this case it is not these abstractions in
themselves, but rather their presence in the _individual's_ mind and
his self-subsistent identity which furnish the content for one side of
the opposition. For the primary requirement of this mediating stage
consists in this, that the spiritual which has attained the Ideal,
shall stand forth in its entire independence. Already in classical
art we found that spiritual individuality was of chief importance,
albeit on the side of its realization it remained reconciled with a
determinate existence as immediately presented. What is of importance
now is to declare a mode of subjectivity which strives to acquire the
mastery over the form that is no longer adequate to it, in a word, over
external reality. In this way the world of Spirit becomes liberated as
independent. It recovers itself from bondage to the sensuous material
and manifests itself thereby through this return upon its own resources
as the subject of a self-consciousness which only finds contentment
in the secret wealth of its own domain. This subject, however, which
repels externality from itself, is not in respect to its ideal aspect
yet the truly concrete totality which encloses as content the Absolute
under the mode of self-conscious spiritual life; rather it is, as still
fettered by its opposition to reality, a purely abstract, finite,
and unsatisfied form of subjectivity. In opposition to this we have
confronting it an equally finite mode of reality, which on its part is
also independent, but just for that very reason--forasmuch, that is,
as the truth of Spirit has withdrawn from it into its own ideality and
henceforward neither will nor can identity itself with it, appears as
a reality void of all gods and an existence fallen into rottenness. In
this manner and at this point art brings forward a Spirit that thinks,
that is, to repeat our former analysis, the individual consciousness
of our humanity, which, supporting itself on its own possession of the
abstract knowledge and volition of goodness and virtue, confronts
with hostility therewith the corruption of its present environment.
That aspect of this opposition which remains unresolved, and in which
the ideal and external modes of its antithesis persist in their
disruption, constitutes the element of prose in the mutual relation of
the two sides. A noble mind or a virtuous soul to whom the realization
of self-conscious life is denied in a world of vice and folly, turns
away from the existence which thus confronts him with passionate
indignation, or more subtle wit and more frosty bitterness, and either
is wroth with or scorns a world which gives the lie direct to his
abstract notions of virtue and truth.

The type of art which accepts this sudden outburst of opposition
between a subjectivity still finite in its mode and a degenerate world
outside it as its matter is the _Satire_, the ordinary theories as to
which have little to commend them, for the simple reason that they
break down precisely where we look for their assistance. Satire has
nothing to do with epic poetry, and it has just as little affinity
with lyric. In the Satire it is not the life of the emotional nature
which is expressed; rather the general conception of goodness and what
is essentially needful, which it no doubt blends with the particular
aspect of soul-life[205], appears as the virtuousness of this or that
individual; but this does not suffer itself to be enjoyed in the open
and unhampered beauty of imaginative conception or let that enjoyment
issue freely. Rather with discontent it retains the existing discord
between the writer's own state of mind and its abstract principles
and the empirical reality which mocks them. To this extent satire
is neither a genuine creation of the poet nor a real work of art.
For these reasons the point of view of the satirical poem can never
be reached satisfactorily through those other types of poetry just
mentioned; it must be apprehended in a more general way as the example
of this very transitional form we referred to from the classic Ideal.

(_c_) Inasmuch, then, as it is, relatively to its ideal content, the
prosaic resolution of the Ideal, which asserts itself mainly in
satire, we do not find that Greece, which is pre-eminently the native
land of Beauty, is the place where we must look for it. Satirical
poems of the nature above described are the characteristic possession
of Rome. The spirit of the Roman world is the sovereignty of the
abstract Ideal, the law that is dead, the shipwreck of beauty and of
the joyousness of civic life, the suppression of the family in the
sense that it is the immediate and most natural form of morality, and
generally the sacrifice of individuality, which surrenders itself
wholly to the State, and in obedience to the abstract law is satisfied
with the frost-like sense of political worth and critical satisfaction
which it supplies. The principle of this civic virtue, the cold-blooded
harshness of which subjects to its pleasure all alien peoples, while
the formal rectitude of the personal life is elaborated to the furthest
point of consistency on equally rigid lines, is wholly inconsonant
with genuine art. We find, therefore, even in Rome no art that is at
once conspicuous in its beauty, freedom, and greatness. It is from
the Greeks that the Romans borrowed all that they mastered whether
in sculpture or painting, epic, lyric, or dramatic poetry. It is a
remarkable fact that all that we can point to as the native product of
Latin art is comic farces, whereas the more cultivated types of comedy,
not excluding those of Plautus and Terence, are borrowed from Greece,
and are rather an affair of imitation than independent production.
Even Ennius first exhausted the sources of Greek poetry before he
made mythology prosaic. That type of art is alone native to the Latin
genius, which was essentially itself prosaic, the didactic poem, for
example, more particularly when it contains an ethical content, and
endows its general reflections with the purely exterior adornment of
metre, images, similes, and a rhetorically beautiful diction. But above
all other forms thus excepted we place the satire. Here we find it is
the mood of virtuous exasperation over the surrounding world which
strives to air itself in what is, in some measure, hollow declamations.
We can only call this essentially prosaic type of art poetical in so
far as it brings before the vision the corrupted nature of real life
in such a way that this corruption practically falls to pieces as the
result of its own folly. Just as Horace, who as a lyric poet entirely
identified himself by study with the artistic type and manner of
Greece, in his epistles and satires--where we have his originality
more emphasized--traces for us a living picture of the morals of his
age, by depicting follies which are self-destructive by virtue of the
stupidity, that carries them into effect. Nevertheless, even this
example only presents us with a kind of merriment that for all its keen
and educated sense can barely be classed as poetry, the object in the
main being to make ridicule out of that which is bad. Among others, on
the contrary, we find that the abstract conception of rectitude and
virtue is deliberately contrasted with vice; and in this case it is
exasperation, anger, hate, and scorn, which in some measure expatiate
in formal eloquence over virtue and wisdom, and in part give full rein
to the indignation of a soul of more nobility against the dissolution
and servility of the times, or hold up before the vices of the day the
mirror of the old morality, the former liberty, the virtues of a state
of the world which has passed away, without any genuine hope and belief
in their recovery; or rather one which has nothing to oppose to the
tottering gait, the dilemmas, the need and danger of an ignominious
present, save a stoical equanimity and the unshakable conscience of a
virtuous soul. Roman history and philosophy not unfrequently receive
something of the same tone from a mood of this kind. Sallust must
needs express himself strongly against the corruptions of morals,
being himself very considerably affected by them. Livy, despite his
rhetorical elegance, seeks for comfort and satisfaction in his picture
of the good old days. Above all we have Tacitus, who, with a severe
melancholy as grand in its scope as it was profound, without the
baldness of declamation, indignantly exposes in the clearest relief
the evils of his time. Among the satirists Persius is remarkable for
his acerbity, with a bitter edge more keen than that of Juvenal. Later
on we find bringing up the rear the Greek Syrian Lucian giving free
vent to his witticisms and pleasantry against all things, whether
heroes, philosophers, or gods; and with exceptional prominence passing
in review the ancient gods of Greece on the score of their humanity
and individuality. However, only too often he goes no further in his
tittle-tattle than the mere external aspect of these godlike figures
and their actions, and is for that reason wearisome to modern readers.
For, on the one hand, so far as our convictions are concerned, we have
already disposed of all that he would destroy, and on the other we are
aware that, despite all his jests and mockery, these characteristic
traits of Greek divinities, when contemplated under the aspect of
beauty, still retain their eternal significance.

Nowadays satirical poems are not likely to prove a success. Cotta and
Goethe have proposed competitions in this form of composition, but no
poems of note are forthcoming. Certain fixed principles are bound up
with it, with which the present age is not in harmony; a wisdom which
is devoid of content, a virtue which adheres with inflexible obstinacy
to its own resources and nothing beyond, may very possibly contrast
itself with the actual world, but is quite unable to bring about the
truly poetical resolution of what is false and repugnant, and effect
the genuine reconciliation in the truth.

In one word, Art is unable to persist in this breach between the
abstract conceptions of the inward life and the objective world
around, without proving itself false to its own principle. The
subjective realm of the soul must be conceived as that which is itself
an essentially infinite and independent existence, which, albeit it
is unable to suffer the finite reality to subsist as Truth itself,
nevertheless does not merely assert itself negatively toward the same
in a bare contradiction, but proceeds all the while on the path of
reconciliation, and for the first time, in its opposition to the ideal
individualities of the classical art-form, declares this very activity,
being in fact the presentment of the absolute mode of self-conscious
life.

[Footnote 197: Lit. "the essentially-and-for-itself-necessary."]

[Footnote 198: Hölderlin, and of course Goethe no less than Schiller,
would be included. With our moderns such as Swinburne the admission is
less obvious than the qualification.]

[Footnote 199: _Die Aufklärung._ That is, the end of the eighteenth
century; usually translated as illumination or enlightenment.]

[Footnote 200: _Verstand_, the faculty of science and common sense.]

[Footnote 201:

/$
     What! doth this same stillness tell me sadly
     All I know of Him who voiced creation?
     Dark as e'en the veil that hides Him from me
     Is my heart's salute of resignation.
$/
]

[Footnote 202:

/$
     Since the gods were then more human
     Men were more in image godlike.
$/
]

[Footnote 203:

/$
     Wrested from the flood of Time's abysses
       Saved they float above high Pindus now;
     All that was immortal life within them
       Lives in song, all other life must go.
$/
]

[Footnote 204: _Zornlos_ lit., without anger.]

[Footnote 205: I think this is the meaning of the words _mit
subjectiver Besonderheit_, but the interpretation "with other material
peculiar to the writer" is not impossible.]




SUBSECTION III

THE ROMANTIC TYPE OF ART

INTRODUCTION

OF THE ROMANTIC GENERALLY

The type of romantic art receives its definition, as we have hitherto
throughout the present inquiry seen was always the case, from the ideal
notion of the content, which it is the function of art to declare.
We must consequently in the first place attempt to elucidate the
distinctive principle of the new content, a content which now, in its
significance as the absolute content of truth, opens up to our minds a
new vision of the world no less than a novel configuration of art.

In the _first_ stage of our inquiry, the entrance chamber of art,
the impulse of imagination consisted in the struggle from Nature to
spiritual expression. In this strain Spirit never reached beyond
what was still only an effort to find, an effort which, in so far as
it was not yet able to supply a genuine content for art, could only
maintain its position as an external embodiment of the significant
aspects of Nature, or those abstractions of the ideal inwardness
of substance which were destitute of a subjective character in the
strict sense, and in which this type of art found its real centre. The
_reverse_ of this point of view we discovered in classical art. Here
it is spirituality--albeit it is only by virtue of the abrogation of
the significances of Nature that it is enabled to struggle forth in
its independent self-identity--which is the basis and principle of
the content, with the natural phenomenon in the bodily or sensuous
material for its external form. This embodiment, however, did not,
as was the case in the first stage, remain superficial, indefinite,
and unsuffused by its content; but the perfection of art attained
its culminating point by precisely this means, namely, that Spirit
completely transpierced its exterior appearance, idealized the shell
of Nature in this union of beauty, and drew round itself a reality
adequate to its own nature as mind under the mode of substantive
individuality. By this means classical art was a presentation of the
Ideal which completely satisfied its notion, the consummation of the
realm of beauty. More beautiful art than this can neither exist now nor
hereafter.

But for all that we may have an art that is more lofty in its aim than
this lovely revelation of Spirit in its immediate sensuous form, if
at the same time one that is created by the mind as adequate to its
own nature. For this coalition, which perfects itself in the medium of
what is external, and thereby makes sensible reality its adequate and
determinate existence, necessarily runs counter to the true notion of
Spirit, and drives it forth from its reconciliation in the bodily shape
upon its own essential substance to seek further reconciliation in that
alone. The simple and unriven totality of the Ideal is dissolved, and
breaks up into one of twofold aspect, namely, that of the essentially
subjective life and its exterior semblance, in order to enable mind,
by means of this severation, to win the profounder reconciliation
in its own most proper element. In one word, Spirit, which has for
its principle the mode of entire self-sufficiency, the union of its
notion with its reality--is only able to discover an existence that
wholly corresponds to such a principle in its own spiritual world of
emotion, soul, that is to say, in the inward life where it feels at
home. The human spirit becomes aware that it must possess its Other,
its _existence_, as Spirit, which it appropriates as its own and what
it verily is, and by doing so at length enjoys its own infinity and
freedom.

1. This elevation of Spirit to its _own substance_, through which it
attains its objectivity--which it would otherwise be obliged to seek
for in the external environment of its existence within its own self
and in this union with itself both feels and knows itself--is what
constitutes the fundamental principle of romantic art. With this truth
we may join as a corollary thereto that for this concluding stage the
beauty of the classic Ideal, or in other words beauty in its most
uniquely consonant form and its most conformable content, is no longer
regarded as ultimate. For in arriving at the point of romantic art,
Spirit[206] becomes aware that its truth is not fully attained by a
self-absorption in the material of sense. On the contrary, it only
comes fully to the knowledge of that truth by withdrawing itself out
of that medium into the inward being of its own substance, whereby it
deliberately affirms the inadequacy of external reality as a mode of
its existence. It is owing to this that when this new content is set
the essential task of making itself an object of beauty, the beauty, in
the meaning of the terms under which we have met with it before, only
persists as a subordinate mode, and the new conception of it becomes
the _spiritual_ beauty of what is its own ideality made fully explicit,
in other words, the subjectivity of Spirit essentially infinite in its
mode.

In order, however, that mind may attain the infinity which belongs
to it it must transcend at the same time purely formal and _finite_
personality and rise into the measure of the _Absolute._ That is to
say, Spirit must declare itself as fulfilled with that which is out
and out substantive, and in doing so proclaim itself as a self-knowing
and self-willing subject. Conversely, therefore, what is substantive
and true is no longer to be apprehended as a mere "beyond" relatively
to our humanity, and the anthropomorphism of the Greek view of things
can be struck out; and in the place of this we have humanity as very
and real subjectivity affirmed as the principle, and by virtue of this
change, as we have already seen, anthropomorphism for the first time
reflects a truth of complete and final validity.

2. We have now in a general way to develop the range of subject-matter,
no less than its form, from the earliest phases in the evolution of
this principle, whose configuration, as it thus changes, is conditioned
by the new content of romantic art.

The true principle of the romantic content is absolute inwardness[207],
and the form which corresponds to it, the subjectivity of mind, meaning
by this the comprehension of its self-subsistence and freedom. This
intrinsically infinite principle and explicitly enunciated universal
is the absolute negation of all particularity[208]; it is simple
unity at home with itself, which consumes all that is separable, all
processes of Nature and its succession of birth, passing away, and
reappearance, all the limitations of spiritual existence, and dissolves
all particular gods in its pure and infinite self-identity. In this
Pantheon all gods are dethroned; the flame of the subjective essence
has destroyed them; instead of the plastic polytheism art recognizes
now _one_ God only, _one_ Spirit, _one_ absolute self-subsistence,
which as the absolute knowledge and volition of itself remains in
free union with it, and no longer falls to pieces in the particular
characters and functions we have reviewed above, whose single unit of
cohesion was the force of an obscure Necessity. Absolute subjectivity,
however, in its purity would escape from art altogether, and only be
present in the apprehension of Thought, unless it could enter into
external existence in order that it might be a subjectivity which was
_actual_ if also conformable to its notion, and further could recollect
itself in its own province from out of this reality. And, what is
more, this moment of reality is pertinent to the Absolute, because
the Absolute, as infinite negativity, contains this self-relation--as
simple unity of knowledge at home with itself, and therewith as
_immediacy_--for the final consummation of its activity. On account
also of this its immediate existence, which is rooted in the Absolute
itself, the Absolute declares itself not as the one jealous God, who
merely annuls the aspect of Nature and finite human existence, without
revealing itself verily therein under the mode of actual divine
subjectivity; rather the very Absolute unfolds itself, and takes to
itself an aspect, relatively to which it is also within the grasp and
presentation of art.

The determinate existence of God, however, is not the natural and
sensuous in its simplicity, but the sensuous as brought home to that
which is not sensuous, in other words to the subjectivity of mind
which, instead of losing the certainty of its own presence as the
Absolute, in its external envisagement, for the first time, and by no
other means than this its reality, is made aware of its actual presence
as such. God in His Truth is consequently no mere Ideal begotten of the
imagination, but He declares Himself in the heart of finite condition
and the external mode of contingent existence, and is, moreover, made
known to Himself therein as divine subjective life, which maintains
itself there as essentially infinite and creating this infinity for
itself. Inasmuch, then, as the actual subject[209] is the manifestation
of God, Art for the first time secures the superior right to apply
the human figure and its mode of externality generally as a means to
express the Absolute, although the new function of art can only consist
in making the external form not a means whereby the ideality of man's
inward condition is absorbed in exterior bodily shape, but rather
conversely to make the consciousness of the Divine mind visible in the
subject of consciousness. The distinguishable phases, which combine to
make up the totality of this apprehension of the world-condition as,
that is to say, the concrete totality of truth, are consequently made
manifest to mankind from this point onwards under such a mode that
it is neither the Natural in its simplicity, such as sun, heavens,
stars, and so forth, nor the Greek conclave of the gods of beauty, nor
the heroes and practical exploits in the field of the family cultus
and political life--it is neither one nor any of these which supplies
us with either content or form. Rather it is the actual and isolated
individual subject who receives in the inward[210] substance of his
living experience this infinite worth, for it is in him alone that the
eternal characters of absolute Truth--which is made actual only as
Spirit--expand out of their fulness within, and are concentrated to the
point of determinate existence.

If we contrast this definition of romantic art with that which
was proposed to the classical--that is to say, as Greek sculpture
completed the latter under the mode most conformable to it--it is
obvious that the plastic figure of the god does not express the
motion and activity of Spirit, in so far as the same has retired from
its actual bodily shape, and has penetrated to the inner shrine of
independent self-identity. That which is mutable and contingent in
the empirical aspect of individuality is no doubt removed from those
lofty, godlike figures: what, however, fails them is the actualization
of the subjective condition in its self-subsistent being as shown in
self-knowledge and self-volition. This defect makes itself felt on the
exterior side in the notable fact that the direct expression of soul in
its simplicity, the light of the eye, is absent from the sculptured
figure. The most exalted works of beautiful sculpture are sightless.
The inward life does not look forth from them as self-conscious
inwardness such as this concentration of Spirit to the point of light
made visible in the human eye offers us. This light of the soul falls
outside of them, and is the possession of the beholder alone: he is
unable to look through these figures as soul direct to soul, and eye
to eye. The God of romantic art, however, is made known with sight,
that is, self-knowing, subjective on the side of soul, and that soul or
divine intimacy disclosing itself to soul. For the infinite negativity,
the withdrawal of the spiritual into itself, cancels its discharge
in the bodily frame. This subjectivity is the light of Spirit, which
reveals itself in its own domain, in the place which was previously
obscure, whereas the natural light can only give light on the face of
an object, is in fact this _terrain_ and object, upon which it appears,
and which it is aware of as itself[211]. Inasmuch as, however, this
absolute intimacy of the soul expresses itself at the same time as
the mode of human envisagement in its actual existing shape, and our
humanity is bound up with the entire natural world, we shall find
that there is no less a wide field of variety in the contents of the
subjective world of mind than there is in that external appearance, to
which Spirit is related as to its own dwelling-place.

The reality of absolute subjectivity, as above described, in the mode
of its visible manifestation, possesses the following modes of content
and appearance.

(_a_) Our first point of departure we must deduce from the Absolute
itself, which as very and actual mind endows itself with determinate
existence, is self-knowing in its thought and activity. Here we find
the human form so represented that it is known immediately as the
wholly self-possessed Divine. Man does not appear as man in his solely
human character, in the constraint of his passions, finite aims,
and achievements, or as merely conscious of God, but rather as the
self-knowing one and only universal God Himself, in whose life and
sufferings, birth, death, and resurrection He reveals openly also to
finite consciousness, what Spirit, what the Eternal and Infinite in
their veritable truth are[212]. Romantic art presents this content
in the history of Christ, his mother, and his disciples, with all
the rest of those in whom the Holy Spirit and the perfected Divine
is manifested. For in so far as God, who is above all the essential
Universal, exists in the manifestation of human existence, this
reality is not, in the Divine figure of Christ, limited to isolate and
immediate existence, but unfolds itself throughout the entire range
of that humanity, in which the Spirit of God is made present, and in
this actuality continues in unity with itself. The diffusion of this
self-contemplation, this essential self-possession of mind[213], is
peace, in other words the reconciled state of Spirit with its own
dominion in the mode of its objective presence--a divine world, a
kingdom of God, in which the Divine, which has for its substantive
notion from the first reconciliation with itself, consummates this
result in such a condition, and thereby secures its freedom.

(_b_) However much, we must fain add, this identification asserts
itself as grounded in the essence of the Absolute itself, as spiritual
freedom and infinity it is no reconciliation which immediately is
visible from the first in either the real worlds of Nature or Spirit;
on the contrary, it is only accomplished as the elevation of Spirit
from the finitude of its immediate existence to its truth. As a
corollary of this it follows that Spirit, in order to secure its
totality and freedom, must effect an act of self-severation, and set
up on the one side itself as the finitude of Nature and Spirit to
its opposed self on the other as that which is essentially infinite.
Conversely with this act of disruption the necessity is conjoined
that from out of this retirement from its unity--within the bounds of
which the finite and purely natural, the immediacy of existence, the
"natural" heart in the sense of the negative, evil and bad, one and
all are defined--a way is at last found by virtue of the subjugation
of all that has no substantive worth within the kingdom of truth and
consolation. In this wise the reconcilement of Spirit can only be
conceived as an activity, a movement of the same, can only be presented
as a process, in whose course arise both strain and conflict, and
the appearance and reappearance, as an essential feature of it, of
pain, death, the mournful sense of non-reality, the agony of the
soul and its bodily tenement. For just as God in the first instance
disparts finite reality from Himself, so, too, finite man, who starts
on his journey outside the divine kingdom, receives the task to exalt
himself to God, to let loose from him the finite, to do away with the
nothing-worth, and by means of this decease of his immediate reality
to become that which God in His manifestation as man accomplished as
very truth in the actual world. The infinite pain of this sacrifice of
the most personal subjectivity, sufferings, and death, which for the
most part were excluded from the representation of classical art, or
rather only are presented there as natural suffering, receive their
adequate treatment necessarily for the first time in romantic art.
It is, for example, impossible to affirm that among the Greeks death
was ever conceived in its full and essential significance. Neither
that which was purely natural, nor the immediacy of Spirit in its
union with the bodily presence, was held by the Greeks as something
in itself essentially negative. Death was consequently to them purely
an abstract passing over, unaccompanied by horror or fearsomeness, a
cessation without further immeasurable consequences for the deceased.
If, however, conscious life in its spiritual self-possession is of
infinite worth then the negation, which death enfolds, is a negation
of this exaltation and worth, and it is consequently fearful, a death
of the soul, which is in the position of finding itself thereby
as itself now this negative in explicit appearance, excluded for
evermore from happiness, absolutely unhappy, delivered over to eternal
damnation[214]. Greek individuality, on the contrary, does not,
regarded as spiritual self-consciousness, attach this worth to itself;
it is able, consequently, to surround death with more cheerful images.
Man only fears the loss of that which is of great worth to him[215].
Life possesses, however, only this infinite worth for mind if the
subject thereof, as spiritual and self-conscious, is reality in its
absolute unity, and is compelled with an apprehension, in this way
justified, to image itself as doomed to negation by death. From another
point of view, however, death also fails to secure from classical
art the _positive_ significance which it receives from romantic art.
The Greeks never treated with real seriousness what we understand
by immortality. It was only in later times that the doctrine of
immortality received at the hands of Socrates a profounder significance
for the introspective reflection of human intelligence. When, for
example, Odysseus[216] praises the happiness of Achilles in the lower
world as one excelling that of all others who were before or came after
him on the ground that he, once revered as a god, is now greatest chief
among the dead, Achilles in the well-known words rates this fortune
at a very low rank indeed, and makes answer that Odysseus had better
utter no word of comfort to him on the score of death; nay, he would
rather be a mere serf of the soil, and poor enough serve a poor man
for wage, than rule as lord over all the ghosts of the dead who have
vanished to Hades. In romantic art, on the contrary, death is merely
a decease of the natural soul and finite consciousness, a decease,
which only proclaims itself as negative as against that which is itself
essentially negative and abolishes what has no real substance, and is
consequently the deliverance of Spirit from its finitude and division,
mediating at the same time the spiritual reconciliation of the
individual subject with the Absolute[217]. Among the Greeks life in its
union with the existence of Nature and the external world was the only
life about which you could affirm anything, and death was consequently
pure negation, the dissolution of immediate reality. In the romantic
view of the world, however, death receives the significance due to
its negativity, in other words the negation of the negative[218],
and returns back to us thereby equally as the affirmative, as the
resurrection of Spirit from the bare husk of Nature and the finiteness
which it has outgrown. The pain and death of the extinguished light of
individual being awakes again in its return upon itself in fruition,
blessedness, and in short that reconciled existence which Spirit is
unable to attain to save through the dying of its negative state, in
which it is shut off from its most veritable truth and life. This
fundamental principle does not therefore merely affect the fact of
death as it approaches man in his relation to the world of Nature, but
it is bound up with a process, which Spirit has to sustain in itself,
quite independently of this external aspect of negation, if life and
truth are to join hands.

(_c_) The _third_ presentment of this absolute world of Spirit is
co-ordinated by man, in so far as he neither makes manifest the
Absolute and Divine in its immediate and essential mode as such
_Divine_, nor declares positively the process in which he is exalted
to the Supreme Being, and reconciled with Him, but rather continues
within the ordinary sphere of his human life. Here it is the purely
_finite_ aspect of that existence which constitutes the content,
whether we regard it in the light of its spiritual purposes, its
worldly interests, passions, collisions, suffering, and enjoyments,
or from that point of view which is wholly external, that of Nature,
its kingdom, and all its detailed phenomena. In order to apprehend
this content with adequacy, however, we must take up two distinct
positions relatively to it. In other words, it is true that Spirit,
for the reason that it has secured the principle of self-affirmation,
expatiates in this province, as one on which it has a just claim, and
one which, as native to it, provides satisfaction, an element from
which it merely extracts this positive character[219], and is permitted
thereby itself to be reflected in its positive satisfaction and
intimacy; yet, on the other hand, we have the fact that this content
is brought down to the level of pure contingency, a contingency which
is unable to claim any independent validity, for the reason that mind
cannot discover therein it veritable existence, and consequently only
preserves its substantial unity by independently on its own account
breaking up again this finite aspect of Spirit and Nature as a thing of
finitude and negation.

3. In conclusion, then, so far as the relation of this content in its
entirety to its mode of presentation is concerned, it would appear,
in the first place, agreeably to what we have above stated, that the
content of romantic art, relatively to the Divine, at any rate, is very
_limited._

(_a_) For, first, as we have already indicated, Nature is divested of
the Divine principle; in other words, the sea and mountains, valleys,
Time, and Night, briefly all the general processes of Nature, have
here lost the worth which they carry when related to the presentation
and content of the Absolute. The images of Nature receive no further
expansion in a symbolic significance. The thesis that their shapes and
activities might possibly sustain traits of Divine import is taken away
from them. For all the mighty questions in regard to the origin of the
world, in regard to the Whence, Wherefore, and Whither, of created
Nature and humanity, and all the symbolical and plastic experiments
in the resolution and exposition of these problems disappear at once
in the revelation of God in Spirit; and we may add that also in the
spiritual sphere the world of variety and colour, with the characters,
actions, and events, as they were envisaged by classical art, are now
concentrated in _one_ single _light-focus_ of the Absolute and its
eternal history of redemption. The whole content meets, therefore, at
this single point of the Inmost of Spirit[220]--that is, of feeling,
imagination, soul--all that strains after a union with truth, that
seeks and wrestles to bring to birth the Divine in consciousness, and
to maintain it; and, furthermore, is constrained to execute the world's
aims and undertakings, not so much for the _world's_ sake as to further
the unique and essential undertaking of its heart by means of the
spiritual conflict of man's inward nature and his reconciliation with
God, presenting personality and its conservation no less than all that
paves the way to them for this object, and this alone. The heroism,
which makes its appearance as the result of such aspirations, is not
the kind of heroism which prescribes laws by its own fiat, establishes
new systems, creates and informs circumstances, but rather a heroism
of submission, which accepts everything as predetermined and ordered
above it, and whose energies are now wholly restricted to the task of
regulating temporal events in line with such direction, and making
that which is in keeping with the higher order and of independent
stability a valid factor in the world as if is and in the Time-process.
For the reason, however, that this absolute content appears as
concentrated to a focus in the inward _life of the soul_, and the
entire process is imported into the life of mankind, the range of this
content is thereby also infinitely extended. It _expands_, in fact,
to a manifold variety practically without limit. For although every
objective history supplies what is substantive in that self-concrete
soul-life, yet for all that the subject of the same reviews it in all
its aspects, presents isolated features taken from it, or unfolds it
as it appears in continually novel human traits by way of addition,
and may very well into the bargain both import the entire expanse of
Nature, as environment and _locale_ of Spirit, and divert them to the
one single object referred to. By this means the history of soul-life
is infinitely rich, and can adapt its form to ever shifting conditions
and situations in every possible way. And, further, if the individual
at last steps forth from this absolute sphere and actively engages in
worldly affairs, the range of interests, objects, and emotions will
be difficult to count on the score in proportion as the spiritual
self-possession is profound, agreeably to the principle in its fullest
application; man is consequently distracted by an infinitely multiplied
profusion of interior and exterior collisions, revolutions, and
gradations of passion, and the most manifold degrees of satisfaction.
The Absolute in its unqualified and essential universality, in so far,
that is, as it is unfolded in the conscious life of the human soul,
constitutes the spiritual content of romantic art; and for this reason
his collective humanity, no less than its entire evolution, becomes its
inexhaustible material.

(_b_) Romantic art does not, however, _as art_ educe this content
in the way we found was the case for the most part in symbolic art,
and, above all, in the classical type and its ideal gods. Romantic
art, as we have seen already, is not, in its _specific_ capacity, the
instructive _revelation_, which, merely in the form of art, makes
the content of truth visible to the senses. The content is already
present in the conceptive mind, and the emotions independently and
outside the sphere of art. _Religion_, as the consciousness of truth
in its universality, is here an essential _premiss_ of art to a degree
totally different from what it was in the previous cases; and, even
if we look at the position in its wholly exterior aspect for the
consciousness that is actual in the reality of the material world, it
lies before us as the prosaic fact of the very present. That is to say,
inasmuch as the content of revelation to mind is the eternal absolute
nature of _mind_[221] itself, which breaks itself loose from Nature
in its bareness and _subordinates_ the same, its manifestation in the
immediacy of present life is such that the external material, in so far
as it consists and is existent, only continues as a contingent world,
out of which the Absolute recollects itself in the secret wealth of
Spirit, and only by such means attains independence and truth. The
external show receives thus the imprimatur of an indifferent medium,
in which Spirit can repose no ultimate trust, and in which it can find
no dwelling-place. The more it conceives the conformation of external
reality as unworthy of its fulness the less it becomes able to seek
consolation therein, or to discover its task of self-reconcilement
consummated by a union therewith.

(_c_) The manner in which, therefore, romantic art gives to itself
a real embodiment agreeably to the spirit of the principle above
indicated, and on the side of its external appearance, is not one
which essentially overleaps the ordinary presentment of reality: it
is by no means averse to accept as cover for itself real existence in
its finite defects and definition. That beauty therefore disappears
from it, which tended to raise the outside envisagement above the
soilure of Time, and the traces that unite it with a Past, in order
to declare the beauty of existence in its blossom in the room of what
had otherwise been a dismantled image. Romantic art has no longer for
its aim the freedom and life of existence in its infinite tranquillity
and absorption of the soul in the bodily presence; no more a life
such as _this_ arrests it. It turns its back on this pinnacle of
beauty. It interweaves the threads of its soul experience with the
contingent material of Nature's workshop, and gives unfettered play
to the emphatic features of ugliness itself. We have, in short, two
worlds included in the Romantic, a spiritual realm essentially complete
in itself, the soul-kingdom, which finds reconciliation in its own
sphere, and therewith the otherwise straightforward repetition of
birth, death, and resurrection now for the first time perfected in
the true circular orbit, doubled back in the return upon itself, the
genuine Phoenix life of Spirit. On the other hand, there is the realm
of external Nature simply as such, which, released as it is from its
secure association and union with Spirit, becomes now a completely
empirical reality, concerning the form of which the soul cares little
or nothing. In classical art Spirit controlled the empirical phenomenon
and transpierced it through and through, because it was the very thing
which it had to accept as its completed reality. But now the ideal
kingdom is indifferent to the mode of configuration in the world of
immediate sense, because this immediacy is beneath the sphere of the
blessedness of essential soul-life. The external phenomenon is no
longer able to express this inward life; and if any call is made upon
it for this purpose, it merely is utilized to make plain that the
external show is an existence which does not satisfy, and is forced
to point back by suggestion to the spiritual content, the soul and
its emotions, as the truly essential medium. Precisely for the same
reason romantic art suffers externality on its own part to go on
its way freely; and in this respect permits all and every material,
flowers, trees, and so on, down to the most ordinary domestic utensils,
to appear in its productions just as they are, and as the chance of
natural circumstance may arrange them. Such a content as this, however,
carries at the same time with it the result, that as purely exterior
matter, its worth is of no validity and insignificant; it only receives
its genuine worth when the soul has made itself a home in it, and it is
taken to express not merely the ideal, but _spiritual inwardness_[222]
itself, which, instead of blending itself with the exterior thing,
appears simply to have attained its own reconciliation with itself. The
ideality thus brought home to a point is that mode of expression which
is without externality, invisibly declaring itself, and only itself,
in other words, a tone of music simply, which is neither an object nor
possesses form, a wavelet over waters[223], a ringing sound over a
world, which, in sounds such as this, and the varied phenomena which
are united with it, can only receive and reflect one reverberation of
this self-absorption of the soul.

To sum up, then, in a word, this relation of content and form in the
romantic type, where it remains true to its distinctive character, we
may affirm that the fundamental note of the same, for this very reason
that its principle constitutes an ever expanding universality and the
restlessly active depths of heart and mind, is that of _music_, and
when combined with the definite content of imagination, lyrical. This
_lyrical_ aspect is likewise the primary characteristic of romantic
art, a tone which gives the key-note also to the epic poem and drama,
and which is wafted as a breath of soul even around the works of the
plastic arts, since here, too, spirit and soul are desirous of speaking
by means of the plastic shape to soul and mind.

As regards the _division_ of our subject, which we must now in
conclusion determine for the examination of this our third extensive
domain of artistic production on the lines of its development, we
shall find that the basic notion of the romantic relatively to
its substantive and progressive articulation is comprised most
conveniently in three branches of division we may define as follows.

The _first_ sphere is the province of _religion_ strictly, in which
the redemption history, the life, death, and resurrection of Christ
constitute the central interest. The principle which is emphasized as
all-important here is that self-involution which mind accomplishes by
negating its immediacy and finitude, overcoming the same, and by means
of this liberation secures its own self-possessed infinity and absolute
self-subsistence in its own kingdom.

This self-subsistence passes, then, in the _second_ place from the
Divine dwelling of essential Spirit, surrenders its pure exaltation
of finite man to God, in order to enter the _temporal world._ Here it
is, in the first instance, the subject of consciousness simply, which
has become self-affirmative, and which possesses as the substantive
material of its content, no less than as the interest of its existence,
the virtues of this positive subjectivity, such as honour, love,
fidelity, and bravery, the aims and obligations, in short, of romantic
chivalry.

The content and form of the _third_ chapter may be generally
indicated as the _formal consistency of character._ In other words,
if the subjective life has been so far concentrated, that spiritual
independence is its essential characteristic, it follows also that the
_particular_ content, with which such independence is associated as
with what is strictly its own, will also partake of such a character;
this self-subsistence, however, inasmuch as it does not, as was the
case in the sphere appertinent to essential and explicit religious
truth, repose in the substantive core of its life, is only able
to reach a formal type. Conversely the configuration of external
conditions, situations, and events is now also independently free, and
is involved consequently in every sort of capricious adventure. For
this reason we find, to put it in general terms, as the termination of
the romantic, the contingency of the exterior condition and internal
life, and a falling asunder of the two aspects, by reason of which Art
commits an act of suicide, and betrays the fact that conscious life
must now secure forms of loftier significance, than Art alone is able
to offer, in which to grasp and retain truth.

[Footnote 206: Throughout, of course, the German word translated in
these paragraphs as mind or spirit is _Geist._]

[Footnote 207: Absolute ideality may perhaps interpret the text more
intelligibly.]

[Footnote 208: It is so because as self-identity it distinguishes
itself from everything to which it is related.]

[Footnote 209: _Das wirkliche Subjekt_, Hegel means, of course,
individual man.]

[Footnote 210: "Most intimate" would perhaps express the meaning more
clearly.]

[Footnote 211: Hegel here gives expression to what is perhaps not
wholly defensible logic, though it may be truly poetic mysticism.]

[Footnote 212: I would refer any reader who is inclined to gasp at
this interpretation of Christian revelation to some useful remarks of
Professor Bosanquet in his Preface to his translation, p. XXVIII.]

[Footnote 213: _Die Ausbreitung dieses Selbstanschauens,
In-sich-und-Bei-sich-seyns_ _des Geistes ist der Frieden._ One of
Hegel's terrors for the translator, though the sense is obvious enough.]

[Footnote 214: The analysis no doubt has its interest. But among
other difficulties it is not easy to see how the argument, based
as it is on rational grounds, makes for anything but annihilation.
Death is a negation--it, according to the argument, puts an end to
the "process"--what remains then is apparently the evanescence of the
finite spirit. This reference to "happiness" assumes that conscious
individual life continues, which is a mere _pelitio principii._ If it
continues the former dual aspect would seem to be implied in it. The
analysis of the actual significance of death for Christendom and Greek
paganism retains, of course, its validity.]

[Footnote 215: But surely in a sense personal life, if only limited
to Earth's existence, may be, I do not say necessarily is, all the
more valuable. This is an important aspect of the matter which is not
here adequately answered, and it suggests a real grievance against
the extravagant follies of a certain type of Christendom. The present
feeling of the wisest minds of our own time will be inclined to
regard a good deal of Hegel's remarks here as insufficient or lacking
directness. One recalls those significant lines of a great writer but
recently taken from us:

/$
     Sensation is a gracious gift
       But were it cramped in station,
     The prayer to have it cast adrift
       Would spout from all sensation.
$/

Hegel's point of view seems neither to be that of mysticism nor mere
absorption.]

[Footnote 216: "Odyssey," XI, vv. 481-91. But this illustration is at
least evidence of the high value a Greek attached to life on Earth.]

[Footnote 217: True enough as an analysis of the Christian
consciousness; but the difficulty above pointed out remains so far as
the writer refers to a future life, which he sometimes appears to do,
sometimes not. Conditions are assumed for human personality of which we
can form no conception.]

[Footnote 218: He means it is the negation of that which is itself
a negation, finite existence. The conclusion is of course, as above
suggested, replete with difficulty.]

[Footnote 219: That is, I presume, the positive character of natural
conditions; but it may mean its own "affirmative" relation.]

[Footnote 220: _Auf die Innerlichkeit des Geistes._]

[Footnote 221: Reason or Spirit are perhaps preferable.]

[Footnote 222: The German words are _das Innerliche_ and _die
Innigkeit._]

[Footnote 223: This is obviously not wholly independent of form.]




