CHAPTER I

THE COMING INTO BEING OF THE CLASSIC IDEAL

In the notion of free Spirit is contained immediately that aspect of
the process of intelligence we may describe as self-introspection,
return upon the self, of being explicit as an object existing for the
self and in a determinate place, although this penetration into the
realm of subjectivity, as we have already observed, does not either
necessarily proceed to the length of making the subject essentially
self-substantive in its negative aspect as against all that is
concrete in Spirit and presented us as the stability of Nature, nor
to that absolute reconciliation which constitutes, the freedom of the
infinite subjectivity in truth. With the freedom of Spirit, however, in
whatever form it may appear, is generally associated the elimination
of that which is purely natural, regarded as that which is the Other
in contrast to Spirit. Spirit must in the first instance essentially
withdraw itself from Nature, uplift itself over, her boundaries and
overcome them, ere it can prevail with unfettered movement within those
bounds as within an element that is opposed to it, and can build itself
up in a positive mode of existence truly indicative of its own freedom.
If we further ask for a closer definition of the object through the
transcendence of which Spirit attains to its self-substantive form
in classical art we shall find this object is not Nature merely as
such, but rather a Nature that is already throughout suffused with
the significations of Spirit, in other words the symbolic type of
art, which made use of the immediately natural form as a means of
expressing the Absolute, its artistic consciousness either seeing in
animals and so forth the presence of gods, or striving vainly under
false modes toward the true unity of the spiritual and the natural. It
is through the removal and reformation of this defective association
that the Ideal for the first time presents itself as the Ideal, and
is forced to develop consequently this process of transcendence within
its own sphere as a phase of its own necessary evolution. Such a
consideration at once enables us to dispose of the question whether the
Greeks received this religion from extraneous sources or no. We have
already seen that subordinate conceptions are necessarily presupposed
in the very notion of classical art. These, in so far as they in truth
appear and are presented as factors of human history, are, as opposed
to the higher form, which strives to pass beyond them, the actual
starting-point of the new self-evolving art. And this is so, though
in the particular case of Greek mythology there is not throughout
historical evidence for these preliminary data. The relation, however,
of the Greek spirit to these presupposed data is essentially a relation
of construction and in the first instance of transformation. If this
were not so the conceptions and forms of the same had remained as they
were. It is true that Herodotus says, in a passage already cited, of
Homer and Hesiod, that they had created their gods for the Greeks,
but he also speaks expressly of particular gods, how this or that
one was Egyptian or some other form: the poetic activity does not
therefore exclude the reception of material from other sources, but
merely suggests an essential transformation. For the Greeks possessed
mythological conceptions before the time in which Herodotus places
those original poets.

If we inquire further into the more obvious aspects of this necessary
transformation of that which is undoubtedly involved with, but at first
still alien from, the Ideal, we find it set before us in naïve form as
content of mythology itself. The main fact of Greek theology is this,
that it creates itself and constitutes itself from that which has gone
before, which takes its place in the origins and process of its own
generic history. Incidental to this origination, in so far as the gods
are taken to be spiritual individualities in determinate bodily shape,
we find, on the one hand, that Spirit, instead of giving visibility
to its essence in that which is purely vital and animal, regards life
rather as an attribute which is insufficient[139], as its unhappiness
and death, and, on the other, that it is in the living thing that it
triumphs over the elements of Nature and its confused reproduction.
Conversely, however, it is equally necessary for the Ideal of the
classic gods, not merely to stand over against Nature and its elemental
powers as individual spirit in its finite and abstract seclusion, but
to possess itself the elements of the universal natural life notionally
as a phasal moment in the vital constitution of Spirit. As the essence
of the gods is essentially _universal_, and in this very universality
they are defined as individuals, it follows also that the aspect of
their bodily presence must essentially include at the same time the
natural as the essential and wide-reaching power of Nature, and as
vital activity intertwined with spirituality itself.

In this respect we may differentiate the process of embodiment followed
by the classical art-form under the following points of view.

The _first_ concerns the degradation of that which is purely animal,
and the removal of the same from the sphere of free and pure Beauty.

The _second_ more important aspect is related to the elemental itself,
in the first instance conceived as gods put before us as powers of
Nature, through whose conquest alone the genuine race of gods can
attain to undisputed mastery, that is in the war between the ancient
and new gods. But this negative tendency becomes, then, in the _third_
place, after Spirit has secured its free right, to the same extent
once again an affirmative force, and elemental Nature constitutes an
aspect of godhead permeated with individualized spirituality in order
to re-establish even the animal organism, though here only of an
attributive and external sign. Following the above points of view we
will now, if still at no great length, endeavour to emphasize the more
definite traits, which here come under consideration.


1. THE DEGRADATION OF ANIMALISM[140]

Among the Indians and Egyptians, among Asiatics generally we find
animalism, or at any rate specific kinds of animals regarded as
sacred and worshipped, because in them the Divine itself is taken
to be visible to sense. The animal form is consequently also a main
feature of their artistic representations, albeit they are in addition
merely used as symbolic and in association with human forms, in the
stage previous to that where we find the human, and only the human,
apprehended by consciousness as that which is alone true. It is only
in virtue of the self-consciousness of the spiritual that the respect
for the obscure and gloomy ideality of animal life disappears. This
has already taken place among the ancient Hebrews who regard, as we
have already observed, the whole of Nature neither as symbol nor as the
presence of God, and attach to external objects merely the powers and
vitality which in fact dwell within them. At the same time there still
remains even among them, if in accidental fashion, at least a vestige
of reverence for the living thing as such. We may illustrate this with
the fact that Moses forbids the use of animal blood as food for the
reason that life is centred in the blood. Man, however, is really under
a necessity to eat that which is his natural food. The next step which
we must draw attention to in this passage to classical art consists in
lowering the high worth and position of what is animal, and making this
degradation itself the content of religious conceptions and artistic
productions. And illustrative of this we find abundant examples from
which I shall merely offer the following selections.

(_a_) We find that among the Greeks certain animals appear conspicuous
among others, as the snake, for example, is presented us in the
sacrifices of Homer as an exceptionally beloved genius[141], and before
all others it is this species which is offered to one god, while
others are appropriated to some other. We find, further that the hare,
which runs across the way, birds observed in their flight to right
hand or left, and entrails are investigated as fruitful in prophetic
significance. All this, it is true, indicates a real reverence for the
animal type, since the gods communicate through them and speak to men
by means of omens. If we look at the heart of the matter, however,
we shall find these to be merely isolated revelations, suggestive of
superstition no doubt, but merely momentary hints of the Divine. On
the other hand, it is an important fact that animals are sacrificed
and the sacrificial flesh eaten. Among the Indians sacred animals are
on the contrary preserved alive as such, and taken care of, and among
the Egyptians they are even preserved after their death. For the Greek
it is the sacrifice which is sacred. In the sacrifice man demonstrates
that he is willing to give up a consecrated thing to his gods, and to
deprive himself wholly of the use of the same. And in this connection
we may observe a characteristic trait in the Greek rite, among which
people the sacrifice was observed as at the same time a hospitable
feast[142], only a part of the same being dedicate to the gods, that
is, the portion which it was assumed they alone could enjoy, while
the Greek himself retained and feasted upon the flesh. Out of this
circumstance originated a mythical tale in Greece. The ancient Greeks,
it is said, sacrificed with the greatest solemnity to the gods, and
suffered the entirety of the sacrificial animal to be consumed in the
flames. Not even the poorer suppliants dared contest this great waste.
So Prometheus endeavoured to obtain by request from Zeus, that they
were merely under an obligation to sacrifice a portion, and could
devote the remainder to their own uses. He slew two oxen, burnt the
liver of both, converted, however, all the bones into one, the flesh
into the remaining hide of the animals, and presented Zeus the choice.
Zeus, deceived by appearances, selected the bones because they were a
larger portion and left the flesh in this way for human consumption.
For this reason, when the flesh of sacrificial animals was consumed,
the remaining portions, which were devoted to the gods, were burnt up
in the same fire. Zeus, however, took away fire from men because by so
doing he made it impossible for them to celebrate their feast. Little
help the ruse gave him. Prometheus robbed him of the fire and in the
excess of his joy flew back faster than he sped thither; for which
cause, so the tale goes, the bringer of good news invariably brings
"speed" with him. In this way the Greeks have directed attention to
this progress in human culture and preserved and reclothed the same in
myth for the mind.

(_b_) We may connect with the above as a similar example of a yet
further degradation of animalism the traditions of famous _huntings_,
such as we find ascribed to heroes, and handed down as sacred to
grateful memory. In these the slaying of animals which appear as
injurious foes, such as the strangling of the Numean lion by Heracles,
the slaying of the Lernean hydra, the hunting of the Caledonian boar
are set forth as something famous, by means of which the heroes
contended for godlike rank, whereas the Hindoos punished with death
as a crime the slaughter of certain animals. Unquestionably there is
a further interplay of symbolism in deeds of this kind or they lie at
the base of them. In the case of Hercules there is the fact of the
sun and its course, so that such heroic actions supply an essential
aspect of symbolical interpretation. These myths are, however, at the
same time accepted in their express significance as beneficial hunts
and were consciously recognized as such by the Greeks. We must here
again in a similar relation recall certain fables of Aesop, especially
those already referred to of the dung beetle. The dung beetle, that
primitive Egyptian symbol, in whose balls of dung the Egyptians or the
interpreters of their religious conceptions saw the world balls, comes
in Aesop again before Jupiter, and with the important change that the
eagle does not respect his protector the hare. Aristophanes, on the
other hand, has wholly made fun of him.

(_c_) _Thirdly_, the degradation of the animal is directly indicated
in many of the tales of metamorphosis as Ovid has delineated them
for us in detail with grace and talent and fine traits of feeling
and intuition, but also composed in a rambling way without their
great and commanding ideal significance, treating them merely as the
sport of mythos and external fact and failing to recognize a deeper
significance. Such a deeper significance is, however, there, and we
will consequently, now we mention the subject, make further allusion to
it. For the most part the particular narratives are if we look at this
material, quaint and primitive, not so much on account of the depraved
condition of the culture, but rather, as in the Nibelungenlied,
on account of the condition of a still raw nature. As far as the
thirteenth book, according to their content, they are older than
the Homeric tales; add to this they are a medley of cosmogony and
heterogeneous elements of Phoenician, Phrygian, Egyptian symbolism,
treated no doubt in a human way, but in such wise that the uncouth
stock still remains, whereas the metamorphoses which enumerate tales of
a later period subsequent to the Trojan war, although their material is
also borrowed from fabulous times, clash awkwardly with the names of
Ajax and Aeneas.

(_α_) Generally speaking, we may regard the metamorphoses as a contrast
to the conception and worship implied in animalism. Looked at from
the ethical side of Spirit they include essentially the negative
attitude toward Nature, making the animal and other inorganic forms a
phase of human degradation. Consequently, if among the Egyptians the
gods of Nature's elements are exalted and made vital in animals, here
conversely, as we have already intimated, the natural form appears
before us as an easier or difficult lapse and a monstrous crime, as the
existence of an ungod-like, unfortunate thing, and as the embodiment of
pain, in which the human is no longer able to remain self-contained.
For this reason they have not the significance of the migration of
souls in the Egyptian sense of that expression; this is a migration
which does not imply guilt, but rather is on the contrary, if we take
the case of the passage of the human soul into the animal, regarded as
an exaltation.

As a whole, however, this is no severely exclusive circle of myths,
however different the objects of Nature may be, into which that which
is spiritual is banished. A few examples will sufficiently elucidate
the point.

Among the Egyptians the wolf plays a part of great importance, as,
for example, in the case where Osiris appears as beneficent protector
of his son Horus in the latter's conflict with Typhon, and in a whole
series of Egyptian coins is represented as the assister of Horus. And
speaking generally the association of the wolf and the sun-god is a
primitive one. In the "Metamorphoses" of Ovid, on the other hand,
the conversion of Lycaon into the form of a wolf is presented us as
a punishment for his impiety. After the subjugation of the giants,
we are told[143], and after the annihilation of their bodily shapes
the Earth, warmed by the blood of its sons which had been scattered
in all directions, revitalized the warm blood, and, in order that no
vestige of the former wild stock should remain, brought into being a
race of men. Yet for all that was this after-birth contemptuous of the
gods, eager for savage deeds and murder. Then Jupiter called the gods
into conclave with a view to destroy this mortal race. He informed
them how Lycaon had cunningly formed stratagems against himself, the
wielder of the lightning and their sovereign lord. When, such is
the story, the worthlessness of the times was apparent to him, he
descended from Olympus, and came to Arcadia. "I furnished signs," the
narration continues, "that a god had drawn nigh and the people began to
supplicate." First, to make merry over these pious prayers was Lycaon,
who forthwith cried out: "I will make experiment whether this indeed
be a god or mortality, and the truth shall not remain in doubt." "He
made preparation," continued Jupiter, "to slay me when oppressed with
slumber; he was possessed with the passion for discovering the truth.
And not contented with this, he made an incision with his sword in the
throat of a goat of Molassian pedigree and boiled as to one part the
only partially dead members; and as to the rest baked them on the fire,
and placed both portions before me to eat. Wherefore I, with avenging
flame, have laid his homestead in ashes. Affrighted he fled forth from
thence, and when he reached the silent field he broke forth: in howls
and strove in vain to utter speech. With rage in his jaws and in the
eagerness of his animal lust for murder he turned against the cattle,
and rejoices even now in their blood; his garments have become the
hairy hide, and his arms have turned into thighs. He is a wolf, and
preserves the signs of the primitive shape."

The tale of Procne, who was changed into a swallow, sets before us the
gravity of the committed abomination with a like emphasis. When, so the
tale runs[144], Procne begs of her husband, Tereus--she happened at the
time to stand in his favour--that he will, forthwith let her go to see
her sister or suffer her sister to visit her, Tereus hastens to launch
his vessel on the sea and quickly reaches the harbour of Piraeus with
his seamanship. He, however, barely catches sight of Philomela before
he is violently enamoured of her. At his departure Pandion, the father,
binds him on oath to protect her with the love of a father, and to send
back as soon as possible the alleviation of his old age. The voyage,
however, is hardly over when the barbarous man deprives her--pale,
trembling, already fearful of the worst, and beseeching with tears to
know where her sister is--of liberty, and as twin-consort forces her
to be his concubine along with her sister. Overcome with anger and
thrusting all sense of shame on one side, Philomela threatens of her
own accord to betray the deed. Tereus on this draws his sword, seizes
and binds her and cuts off her tongue, informs, however, his wife by
way of evasion of the death of her sister. Thereupon the sorrowing
Procne tears off the fine linen from her shoulders and puts on mourning
apparel; she raises an empty tomb and in a mode somewhat out of place,
as it happens, laments the lamentable fate of her sister. How then does
Philomela meet this? A prisoner, robbed of all speech, of her voice,
she bethinks her of craft. With threads of purple she works the news
of the crime upon a white texture, and sends the raiment secretly to
Procne. The wife reads the heartrending news of her sister; she neither
speaks nor weeps; she lives wholly in the image of revenge. It was the
time of the festival of Bacchus. Driven forth by the furies of her
passionate grief she forces her way to her sister; she tears her from
her chamber and carries her off with her away. Then in her own house,
while she still is in doubt what terrible act of vengeance she shall
exact on Tereus, Itys appears before his mother. She stares upon him
with eyes of wildness. How like he is to his father! No further word
she utters, but consummates at once the doleful deed. They slay the
boy and serve him on his father's table, who partakes eagerly of his
own flesh and blood. He then calls for his son, and Procne exclaims
that he carries within him that which he calls for; and, as he still
looks about him and seeks after him and again asks and calls for him,
Philomela sets before his face the bloody head. Then he breaks away
from table with an awful cry of anguish, and weeps and calls himself
his son's sepulchre, and forthwith makes after the daughters of Pandion
with the naked steel. But now supplied with wings they float away from
thence, the one into the forest, the other into the roof; and Tereus
also, despite all the energy of his sorrow and desire of revenge, is
changed into the bird which rears on its crest the comb of feathers,
and carries a beak of immoderate projection. The name of the bird is
the hoopoe.

On the other hand, we have changes which proceed from a guilt of less
significance. As examples, there is Cygnus who became a swan, and
Daphne, the first love of Apollo[145], who was changed into the laurel,
Clyde into the heliotrope, Narcissus, who despised in his vanity
maidens, and sees himself in the watery mirror, and Biblis[146], who
was enamoured of her brother, and is, when he scorns her, changed into
the spring which even now bears her name and flows beneath the shading
oak.

However, we must not lose ourselves in further digression through
particular examples, and I will merely, by way of passage, and the
one further reference to the change of the Pierides, who, according
to Ovid[147], were the daughters of Pieros and challenged the Muses
to a match of rivalry. For ourselves the distinction of importance
is the nature of the songs which the combatants sang respectively.
The Pierides celebrate the battles of the gods[148] and honour the
giants unduly while they depreciate the deeds of the great gods.
Rising up from the depths of Earth, Typhoeus filled heaven with fear;
in a body the gods take flight from thence until, wearied out, they
rest on Egyptian soil. But here, too, so sang the Pierides, Typhoeus
arrives, and the high gods are fain to hide themselves in illusive
shapes. Jupiter was leader of the army, and for this reason, so ran
their refrain, the Lybian Ammon to this day is figured with crooked
horns; and in like manner the scion of Semele is changed into a ram,
the sister of Phoebus into a cat, Juno into a snow-white cow, Venus is
concealed in a fish, Mercury in the feathers of Ibis.

Here we find therefore the gods suffer reproach in their change
to animal form. Although their translation is not presented as a
punishment for a wrong or a crime, it is their cowardice which is held
forth to us as the reason of this self-imposed metamorphosis. Calliope,
on the other hand, exalts in song the good deeds and history of Ceres.
Ceres was the first, so ran the strain, to scour through the fields
with the crook-backed ploughshare; first was she to give fruits and
fruitful means of nourishment to the ploughed fields. First was she to
lay down laws for our guidance; we are collectively but a gift of her
wisdom. "Ah," she exclaims, "my task is to celebrate her, and yet how
shall I tune my strain worthy of such a goddess! Assuredly the goddess
is worthy of the singer's best." When she has finished, the Pierides
adjudge themselves victors in the contest: but even as they endeavour
to speak, and with loud cries, so Ovid informs us (v. 670), are
flourishing about with their hands, they perceive their nails passing
away into feathers, their arms become covered with down, while each is
aware that the mouth of the other is closing up into the stiff bill
of a bird: and while they are all for deploring their lot, they are
carried up on the waves of their wings, they float away, the screamers
of the woods, and as waifs of the air. And even unto this day, adds
our poet, they still retain their own glibness of tongue and excited
chatter, and infinite desire to gossip. In this way we find again also
here that metamorphosis is presented us as punishment, and, what is
more, is presented, as is so frequently the case with such stories, as
punishment due to religious impiety.

(_β_) If we consider further examples of still well recognized
metamorphoses of men and gods into animals, we shall find that,
although they do not directly imply any transgression as the cause
of such a change, as, for example, in the case where Circe possessed
the power to change men into animals, yet, for all that, the animal
condition is at least indicative of a misfortune and a humiliation,
such as brings no honour even to the person who makes such a change
subservient to private ends. Circe was quite a subordinate, obscure
type of goddess, and her power appears as mere witchery, and Mercury
assists Odysseus, when the latter contrives to free his comrades from
the spell. Of much the same kind are the many shapes which Zeus takes
upon himself, as, for example, when he is changed into a bull in his
quest of Europa, or when he approaches Leda in the form of a swan, or
fructifies the Danae in a shower of gold. In all these cases the object
is one of deception, directed by purposes of an inferior, that is to
say, not spiritual, but purely natural quality, purposes which the
ever constant jealousy of Juno render unavoidable. The conception of a
universal procreative life of Nature, which in many of the more ancient
mythologies constituted the leading motive, is imaginatively reproduced
in separate poetical tales about the easily enamoured disposition of
the father of gods and men, exploits, however, which he does not carry
through in his own or, for the most part, in human shape, but expressly
either in the shape of animals, or some other embodiment of Nature.

(_γ_) And, lastly, we may add to our list those hybrid forms, combining
both humanity and animalism, which are also not excluded from Greek
art, though the animality is here accepted as something that degrades,
is unspiritual. Among the Egyptians, for example, the he-goat, Mendes,
was revered[149], and, according to the opinion of Jablouski[150], in
the sense of the procreative power of Nature, generally speaking, as
that of the sun, and to such an outrageous excess that, according to
Pindar, even women sacrificed themselves to these creatures. Among the
Greeks, Pan, on the contrary, personifies the mysterious sense of the
divine presence, and later in the shape of fauns, satyrs, and Pan-like
figures, the goat shape only appeared in a subordinate way, such as
in the feet, and in the most beautiful representations was perhaps
limited to the pointed ears and little horns. The rest of the figure
is shaped in human guise, and the animal suggestion thrust back upon
the barest detail. Yet, for all that, fauns were not recognized among
the Greeks as gods of any important rank or spiritual forces; their
fundamental characteristic remained that of a sensuous, uncontrolled
joviality. It is true that they are also artistically represented with
an expression of profounder significance, as, for instance, that fine
example of one in Munich, which holds the youthful Bacchus in his arms,
and gazes down on him with a smile which is brimming over with love and
tenderness. He is not to be taken as the father of Bacchus, but merely
the foster-parent, and we find given him here the beautiful feeling of
joy in the innocence of the child, such as that which, in the maternal
devotion of Mary for the Christ babe, is exalted in romantic art to so
lofty a level of contemplation. Among the Greeks, however, this most
charming love still belongs to the subordinate sphere of fauns in order
to indicate that its origin is traceable from animal, that is natural,
life, and consequently is entitled to rank with such a sphere[151].

Mediate shapes of a similar kind are the centaurs, in which we may
also observe that the Nature-aspect of sensuality and desire is also
supremely prominent to the suppression of the spiritual side. Cheiron,
no doubt, is of a more noble type, a clever physician, and the tutor of
Achilles; but this instructive _rôle_, as the teacher of a child, is
not appropriate to godhead strictly, but is to be related with human
ability and cleverness.

In this manner the relation of the animal shape receives a modification
in classical art from whatever point of view we regard it. Its
prevailing employment is to indicate that which is evil, bad, inferior,
merely natural and unspiritual, whereas, outside Greece it was the
expression of the positive and absolute.


2. THE CONTEST BETWEEN THE ANCIENT AND MODERN DIVINITIES

The second grade of more elevated rank we may contrast with the
degradation of the animal condition consists in this, that the genuine
gods of classical art, inasmuch as they possess for their content a
free self-consciousness, which we may define as the power of spiritual
individuality reposing on its own resources, are also able to be
represented as subjects of knowledge and volition, that is as spiritual
potences. For this reason the _humanity_, in the bodily form of which
they are presented us, is not, as one may say, a mere form, which is
girt about this content by virtue of the imagination under a mode of
purely external validity, but is rooted in the significance, content,
and ideal substance itself. The divine, however, generally speaking, is
essentially to be apprehended us unity of the natural and spiritual;
both sides are involved in the conception of the Absolute; and it is
merely the different mode, under which this harmony is conceived, which
constitutes from our present point of view the respective grades of
the various forms of art and historic religions. According to our own
Christian way of looking at it, God is the creator and lord of Nature
and the spiritual world, and therewith, no doubt, exempted from the
immediate and determinate existence of Nature, for the reason that,
before all else, he is very God as the taking back into Himself of his
own fulness, that is as absolute and self-dependent Spirit; it is only
the finite and human spirit which stands in opposition to Nature as
a limit and a bound, a limitation which such only thereby overcomes
in his determinate existence, and exalts himself intrinsically to
the grade of infinity in so far as he grasps Nature contemplatively
in thought, and in the actual world[152] consummates the harmony
between spiritual idea, reason, the Good and Nature. This infinite
actualization is, however, God, in so far as the lordship over Nature
is strictly due to Him, and He Himself is conceived as explicit in this
infinite activity, and the knowledge and volition of such realization.

In the religions of strictly symbolic art, on the contrary, as we
have traced already, the union of the Inward and Ideal with Nature
was an immediate association, which consequently made use of Nature
both as regards its substance and form as its fundamental mode of
determination. In this sense the sun, the Nile, the sea, the Earth,
the natural processes of birth, death, procreation, and reproduction,
in short, all the varied changes of the universal life of Nature were
revered as divine existence and life. These Nature-forces, however,
were even in symbolic art personified, and consequently set up in
contrast to the spiritual. If, however, and nothing less than this
is the requirement of classical art, the gods are to be spiritual
individualities in harmony with Nature, mere personification is a
conception insufficient for this result. For personification, in
the case that its content is a purely universal force and activity
of Nature, persists as a mere form, unable to penetrate to the
constituting substance, and can neither give existence to the spiritual
content in the same, nor its individuality. We find therefore
necessarily in classical art a change of front[153], to the effect
that, in conformity with the degradation of the animal aspect we have
just been considering, the universal power of Nature also in one aspect
of it suffers humiliation, and the spiritual is proportionally exalted
in contrast to it. And by this means we find that it is the principle
of _subjectivity_, rather than mere personification, which becomes
the main mode of definition. From another point of view, however,
the gods of classical art do not cease to be potences of Nature,
because God here has not yet come to be represented as essentially
absolute and free spirituality. In the relation of a merely created
and ministrant creature to a lord and creator separated from it,
Nature stands, however, albeit deified, either as we have it in the
art of the Sublime--conceived as an essentially abstract, that is
purely ideal masterdom of one supreme substance, or--as in the case of
Christianity--exalted as concrete Spirit to absolute freedom within the
pure element of spiritual existence and personal actuality. Neither of
these examples falls in with the point of view of classical art. God
here is not as _yet_ lord of Nature, for the reason that he does not
as yet possess absolute spirituality either if regarded relatively to
what is contained in Him, or to the mode under which He is apprehended.
He is no longer lord of Nature, because the sublime relation of the
deified natural thing and human individuality has ceased, and taken
upon itself the limitations of beauty, in which their just due must
be rendered for art's representation without any tittle of loss to
both aspects, the universal and the individual, the spiritual and the
natural. Consequently in the god of classical art the nature-potency is
preserved, but is conceived as such not in the sense of the universal
and all-embracing Nature, but as the definable, and consequently
limited activity of the sun, sea, and so on, generally speaking, as
a particular natural potency, which is made visible as spiritual
individuality, and possesses this spiritual individuality as its
essential being.

For the reason, then, as we have already made clear, that the classical
Ideal is not immediately present, but first makes its appearance
through the process in which that which is negative to the formative
content of spirit is resolved, this transformation and building up
into new forms of that which is raw, unbeautiful, wild, grotesque,
purely natural, or fantastic, which originated in earlier religious
conceptions and views of art, will be a leading interest in Greek
mythology, and consequently will necessarily reproduce a readily
defined sphere[154] of particular significances.

In proceeding further to examine this fundamental aspect of our present
subject I must at once give utterance to the preliminary caution that
the historic investigation of the varied and multifold conceptions of
Greek mythology lies outside our present task. All we are concerned to
inquire into here are the essential phasal steps of this process of
reconstruction, in so far as the same notify themselves as phases of
universal import in the new artistic configuration and its content.
As for that infinite mass of particular myths, narrations, histories,
things referable to a local origin and symbolism, which collectively
still assert their predominance in the world of later gods, and
incidentally appear in artistic production, but for all that do not
belong to the vital point of interest to which our own effort is
directed--we must necessarily leave all this broad field of material
on one side, and can merely refer to an example or two by way of
illustration. Speaking generally we may compare this road, on which
we now move forwards, to the course of the history of sculpture. For
inasmuch as sculpture places before the observation of sense the gods
in their real form it constitutes the peculiar _centrum_ of classical
art, albeit also the better to make it wholly understood poetry
expresses itself upon gods and mankind, or passes in review the worlds
of gods and men in their activity and movement in direct contrast to
that objectivity self-contained in repose. Just as, then, in sculpture
the moment of all importance in the beginning is the transformation of
the formless, the stone or block of wood that has fallen from heaven
(διoπετὴς)--as the the great goddess of Pessinus in Asia Minor actually
was, which the Romans directed by means of a solemn embassy to be
transferred to Rome--into the human form and so makes the statue, so
too we have here to make a beginning from the formless, uncouth powers
of Nature, and while doing so merely to indicate the stages, in their
passage through which they are exalted into spiritual individuality and
are finally concentrated in shapes of fixity.

We may in this connection distinguish three separable aspects as of
most importance.

The _first_, which arrests our attention, are the _oracles_ in which
the knowledge and volition of gods, still under a formless mode, gives
witness to their presence through natural existences.

The _second_ point of view to be noted is concerned with the universal
forms of Nature, no less than the abstractions of Right and so forth,
which lie at the root of the genuine spiritual and individual deities,
which are, so to speak, their birth-cradles and furnish us with the
necessary conditions of their origin and activity: they are the old
gods in contradistinction to the new.

_Thirdly_, and finally, we are made aware of the essentially necessary
progress to the Ideal in the fact that the primarily superficial
personifications of the activities of Nature and the most abstract
spiritual conditions are contested and thrust from their prominence
as something essentially subordinate and negative and, by virtue of
this debasement the self-sufficient spiritual individuality and its
human form and action, is suffered to attain an unchallenged masterdom.
This revolution, which constitutes the real central position in the
historical origins of the classic gods, is in Greek mythology placed
before our imagination in the conflict--a mode of presentation as naïve
as it is astonishingly direct--between the old and new gods, in the
headlong fall of the Titans, and in the victory which the divine race
of Zeus secures.

(_a_) To take, then, first in order the _oracles_, it will not be
necessary for us now to dilate on them to any considerable extent. The
essential point which concerns us here is merely due to this fact,
that in classical art the phenomena of Nature are no longer revered
as such--in the way that the Parsees, for example, pray to naphthetic
regions or fire, or as among the Egyptians, gods remain inscrutable,
mysterious, and mute riddles--but that the gods, being themselves
subjects of knowledge and volition, do verily give to man by means
of natural phenomena indications of their wisdom. In this sense the
ancient Hellenes made inquiry at the oracle of Dodona[155], whether
they should accept the names of gods, which have come to them from
barbarians, and the oracle replied: "Use them."

(_α_) The signs by means of which the gods thus made their revelations
are for the most part of the simplest description. At Dodona such
were the rustle and whisper of the sacred oak, the murmur of the
spring, the tones of the brazen vessel, which the wind made thus to
reverberate. In like manner at Delos it was the laurel which rustled
and at Delphi, too, the sound of the wind on the brazen tripod was full
of significance[156]. Over and above, however, such immediately natural
sounds man is also the voice-piece of the oracle in so far as he is
rendered deaf to and whirled away from the alert commonsense of his
ordinary mind to a natural condition of enthusiasm; as, for example,
the Pythia at Delphi was wont, stupefied by exhalations, to deliver
the oracular words, or in the cave of Trophonius the inquirer of the
oracle met with faces, from the interpretation of which an answer was
delivered him.

(_β_) There is, however, another aspect which we should set alongside
of the purely external sign. For in the oracles God is, it is true,
accepted as He who _knows_, and the oracle of most famed repute is
dedicate to Apollo, the god of wisdom. The form, however, in which he
reveals his will, remains the wholly indefinite voice of Nature, either
a natural sound, that is, or the unconnected tones of words. In this
obscurity of form the spiritual content is itself equally obscure and
requires _interpretation_ and explanation.

(_γ_) This explanation, albeit it brings under a mode of spiritual life
the deliverance of the god which in the first instance is presented
purely in the form of Nature's own voice, remains despite this fact
obscure and equivocal. For the god is in his knowledge and volition
concrete universality. And of the same type also must the advice or
command unavoidably be which the oracle declares. The universal,
however, is not one-sided and abstract, but as concrete universal
contains the one side no less than the other. Inasmuch, then, as
man stands over against the knowing god as one unknowing he accepts
the oracular word itself in ignorance. In other words, the concrete
universality of the same is not open to his intelligence, and he can
merely select from the equivocal word of the god, assuming that he
decides to act upon it, _one_ aspect thereof, for the reason that
every action under particular circumstances is unavoidably _definite_,
only, that is to say, giving a decisive impulse in _one_ direction
and shutting off another. His action is barely accomplished, and the
deed--which consequently has become his own and for which he must
now be answerable--really carried through when he finds a collision
confronting him. All in a moment he is aware that the other side, which
lay already folded in the oracular sentence, is turned against himself
and the fatality of his deed, his knowledge and will notwithstanding,
has him in the toils; a fatality which he may not know, but of which
we must suppose the gods are aware. Conversely again the gods are
determinate potencies and their expressed will, when it carries this
character of essential determinacy, as, for example, the bidding of
Apollo, which drives Orestes forward to his revenge, brings about a
collision of forces in the selfsame way. For the reason, then, that in
one aspect of it the form, which the spiritual knowledge of the god
assumes in the oracle, is the wholly undefined external expression
or the abstract ideality of the word, and the form itself through
the equivocal sense it contains includes the possibility of discord,
we find that in classical art it is not sculpture, but poetry, and
pre-eminently dramatic poetry, in which oracles contribute their share
of the content and are of importance. In _classical_ art, however, they
do essentially maintain a place, because in it human individuality has
not forced its way to the full height of spiritual attainment, where
the subject draws the determination of his actions without infringement
from his own resources. What we in our modern sense of the term call
conscience, has not as here secured its rightful place. The Greek acts
often, it is true, at the beck of his passion, bad no less than good;
the genuine pathos, however, which is here held to quicken him, and
does in fact so quicken him, proceeds from the gods, whose content
and might is the universal of such a pathos; and the heroes are either
immediately instinct with the same, or they interrogate oracles for
advice, when the gods do not present themselves openly to their vision,
by way of quickening the deed to be done.

(_b_) Moreover, as in the oracle the _content_ is to be found in
the gods that _know_ and _willy_ while the form of the external
phenomenon is the external which is abstract and a part of _Nature_,
from the other point of view that which is _natural_, if we look at
it relatively to its universal forces and the activities which belong
to these, becomes the _content_, from out of which the independent
individuality has first to force its way up, and receives as its
original form merely the formal and superficial personification. The
thrusting back of these purely natural forces, the opposition and
contention through which they are overcome is just the significant
centre, for which we are indebted primarily to classical art, and which
we must consequently submit to a closer examination.

(_α_) The first thing we would remark in this connection is
attributable to the circumstance that we are not here concerned--as in
that view of the world which belongs to the Sublime, or in part even
that appropriate to Hindoo doctrines--with God already essentially
devoid of any relation to sense, when regarded as the starting point of
all creation, but rather with that in which Nature's gods, and we may
add in the first instance the more universal forces of Nature such as
Chaos, Tartarus, Erebus, the entire savage and subterranean substance,
and, furthermore, Uranos, Gaia, the Titan Eros, Kronos, and the rest,
supply the beginning[157]. It is from out of these, then, that the
better defined powers, such as Helios, Oceanos, and others like them
first have their being; while they, in their turn, become the natural
cradle for the later spiritual and individualized divinities. We find,
therefore, again here another theogony and cosmogony which is the work
of the imagination, whose earliest gods, however, still remain for the
observer under one aspect of an undefined character, or vaguely extend
beyond all reasonable limit; and, if viewed from another standpoint,
still carry with them much that is essentially symbolical.

(_β_) The more detailed distinctions among these Titan potencies may be
thus indicated:

(_αα_) First, we have those powers of the Earth and the stars, without
spiritual and ethical content, consequently dissolute, a raw, savage
race, gigantic and formless, as though they were scions of Hindoo or
Egyptian imagination. They are to be classed with other individualities
of Nature such as Brontes, Steropes, and again with the hundred-handed
Kottos, Briareus, and Gyges, the giants and the rest standing in the
first instance beneath the lordship of Uranos, then of Kronos, that
chief of the Titans, who obviously is a kind of personified _Time_,
devouring all his children, just as Time eventually annihilates
everything that it has brought to birth. This myth is not without a
symbolical significance. For the life of Nature is, in fact, subjugate
to Time, and brings only the Past into existence, just as in the same
way the prehistoric times of some people, which is only one nation,
one stock, yet constitutes no genuine State, and pursues no definite
objects essentially made clear to itself, becomes the sport of the
power of a Time, which is destitute of history. We touch solid ground
for the first time when we come to law, morality, and the State,
something permanent which remains though races pass away, as it is said
that the Muses give permanence and a defence to everything, which, as
the life of Nature and present action, had only vanished swept away
with Time.

(_ββ_) But, further, it is not only that the forces of Nature belong
to this sphere of the old gods, but also the forces noted as earliest
over the elements. In particular the first active agency upon metal
through the force of what is still raw, and elementary Nature, that
is air, water, fire, is of importance. We may mention in illustration
the Corybantes, the Telchines, demons of both beneficent and evil
influence, the Pataeci, pygmies, dwarfs, cunning in the woodman's
craft, small, with big paunches.[158]

More prominent notice should be taken of Prometheus, as illustrating
in the chief place a fundamental point of new departure. Prometheus
is a Titan of exceptional type and deserves exceptional attention.
Together with his brother Epimetheus he appears in the first instance
as favourable to the young gods; then he stands out as the benefactor
of men, who in other respects have no defined relation with the new
gods or the Titans. He brings fire to man, and thereby supplies them
with the means of satisfying their needs and working the technical
arts, which are no longer, however, regarded as natural products, and
consequently it would appear do not stand in any closer association
with Titan workmanship. For this interference Zeus punishes Prometheus
until Hercules finally releases him from suffering. At the first
glance there would appear to be nothing strictly Titanesque in these
main features of the story; nay, it would not be difficult to point
out an inconsequence in the fact that Prometheus, just as Ceres, is
a benefactor of mankind, and is none the less numbered among the old
Titanic potencies. If we look at the matter more closely, however,
this inconsequence will at once disappear. In this connection several
passages from Plato's works will help us sufficiently to clear the
difficulty. There is the myth in which the guest-friend recites to
the younger Socrates that in the time of Kronos men originated from
the Earth, while the god, on his part, devoted his attention to the
whole[159]. After this step a movement of opposite tendency sprang up,
and the Earth was left to itself[160], so that now the beasts became
savage, and mankind, whose means of nourishment and all their other
needs had hitherto passed immediately into their hands, were left alone
without advice or assistance. Well, according to this myth, it was in
such a condition[161] that fire was brought to mankind by Prometheus,
all other accessories of craftsmanship being communicated by Hephaestos
and his companion in craftsmanship, Athene.

Here we have notified expressly a distinction between fire and the
thing which artistic ability produces by working on the raw material;
and only the gift of fire is ascribed to Prometheus. Plato narrates
the myth of Prometheus at greater length in the "Protagoras." There we
read[162]: "There was once a time when gods indeed existed, but mortal
beings had not appeared. When the foreordained time of their birth
also had come, the gods created them in the inward parts of the Earth,
composing their substance of Earth and fire and that which is the union
of both these elements. When the gods were desirous of bringing them
into the light, they handed them over to Prometheus and Epimetheus
to apportion and arrange the energies of each singly as was right.
Epimetheus, however, requested of Prometheus that the apportionment
might be left to him. After I have done this, quoth he, you may mark
and express an opinion. Epimetheus, however, by a blunder apportioned
everything worth having to the animal world, so that there was nothing
left over for mankind; and when Prometheus made his inspection he found
that though all other living things were wisely provided with all their
needs mankind remained naked, unprotected, without covering or weapons.
But already the appointed day had appeared in which it was necessary
that man should pass from the bowels of the Earth into the light. In
the embarrassment in which he was placed to procure some assistance
for mankind Prometheus stole the wisdom that is shared by Hephaestos
and Athene by taking fire--for without fire it would be impossible to
possess it or make it of use--and made a present of this to men. Man
now, it is true, possessed the wisdom necessary for the support of his
life, but he was still _without political wisdom_, for this was still
lodged with Zeus. Entry, however, to the stronghold of Zeus was no
longer permitted Prometheus, and apart from this the awful watchers
of Zeus barred the way. He passed, however, secretly into the chamber
which Hephaestos and Athene shared in the practice of their art, and
having secured the forging-art of Hephaestos he pilfered that other art
(the art of weaving) which was possessed by Athene and presented this
to mankind. Out of these possessions the means of satisfying the needs
of Life is provided for man (ἐυπoρία τoῦ βίoυ)." Prometheus receives,
however, as already narrated, punishment for the thefts he commits
owing to the blunders of Epimetheus.

Plato further tells us in a passage which immediately follows the
above that mankind was still destitute of the art of war for their
protection against the animal world, which was merely a part of the
art of politics, and consequently were collected into cities, and would
have so outraged each other and finally broken up such asylums for the
reason that they were without all political organization, that Zeus
found it necessary to send down to them under the escort of Hermes
Shame and Right.

In these passages the distinction between the immediate objects of
life, which are related to physical comfort, that is, the provision
for the satisfaction of the most primary necessaries and political
organization, such as sets before itself as its object what is
spiritual, custom, law, right of property, freedom, and communal
existence is expressly emphasized. This principle of ethical life and
right[163], Prometheus did not give to men, he merely taught them the
cunning by means of which they might overcome natural objects and make
them serviceable to their needs. Fire and the craftsmanship which makes
use of fire have nothing ethical about them in themselves; and it is
just the same with the art of weaving; in the first instance they are
devoted to the exclusive service of private individuals, without coming
into any relation with that which is shared in human existence or with
Life in its public character. For the reason, then, that Prometheus was
unable to furnish mankind with anything more spiritual or ethical, he
also does not belong to the race of new gods, but to the Titans[164].
Hephaestos, it is true, also possessed fire and the particular crafts
to which it is essential as an instrument for his field of activity,
and is none the less accredited as a new god: but Zeus cast him from
Olympus, and he continued to limp ever after. Just as little is it,
therefore, an inconsequence when we find Ceres placed among the younger
gods, who proved herself a benefactor of mankind just as Prometheus
did. For that which Ceres taught was agriculture, with which at the
same time property, and yet more, marriage, social custom, and law
stand in close association.

(_γγ_) A third class of the ancient gods contains, it is true, neither
personified potencies of Nature, as such, nor the might which next
follows as lord over the particular elements of Nature in the service
of the more subordinate human necessities, but is already contestant
with that which is essentially in itself ideal, universal, and
spiritual. What, however, is none the less lacking in the powers we
have here to reckon with is spiritual individuality and its appropriate
form and manifestation, so that they also more or less relatively to
their operations keep a position which is more nearly akin to the
necessity and essential being of Nature. In illustration of this type
we may recall the conception of Nemesis, Dike, the Erinnyes, Eumenides,
and Moirai. No doubt we find associated with these figures the
determinate notions of right and justice; but this inevitable right,
instead of being conceived and clothed in the essentially spiritual and
substantive medium of social morality[165], remains either persistent
in the universal abstract notion, or is related to the obscure right of
that which is natural within the circle of spiritual connections, the
love of kindred, for example, and its paramount claim, which does not
appertain to Spirit in the open freedom of itself self-recognized; and
consequently also does not appear as lawful right, but in opposition to
this as the irreconcilable right of revenge.

To bring the view of the above nearer I will merely draw attention to
one or two ideas bound up with it. Nemesis, for example, is the might
to humiliate the exalted, and to cast down the man all too fortunate
from his lofty seat, and consequently to restore equilibrium. The
claim or right of equilibrium is the purely abstract and external
right, which, it is true, certifies itself as operative in the range of
spiritual circumstances, and conditions, without, however, making the
ethical organization of the same the content of justice. Another aspect
of importance attaches to this circumstance, that the right of the
family-condition is apportioned by the ancient gods, in so far as these
repose on a condition of Nature, and thereby are in antagonism with the
public right and law of the community. We may adduce the Eumenides
of Aeschylus as the clearest illustration of this point. The direful
maidens pursue Orestes on account of the murder of his mother, a murder
which Apollo, the younger god, had directed, in order that Agamemnon,
the slaughtered spouse and king, should not remain unavenged. The
entire drama consequently is concentrated in a conflict between these
divine Powers, which confront each other in person. On the one side
we have the goddesses of revenge, the Eumenides; but they are called
here the beneficent, and our ordinary conception of the Furies, into
which we convert them, is set before us as rude and uncouth. For they
possess an essential right thus to persecute, and are therefore not
merely hateful, wild, and ferocious in the torments which they impose.
The right, however, which they enforce as against Orestes is only the
family-right in so far as this is rooted in the blood relation. The
profoundest association of son and mother is the substantive fact
which they represent. Apollo opposes to this natural ethical relation,
rooted as it is already both on the physical side and in feeling, the
right of the spouse and the chieftain who has been violated in respect
to the highest right he can claim. This distinction is in the first
instance brought to our notice in an external way since both parties
are champions for morality within one and the same sphere, namely
the family. The sterling[166] imagination of Aeschylus has, however,
here--and we cannot sufficiently value it on this score--discovered for
us a contradiction, which is not by any means a superficial one, but
of fundamental significance. That is to say, the relation of children
to parents reposes on the unity of the natural nexus; the association
of man and wife on the contrary must be accepted as marriage, which
does not merely proceed from purely natural love, that is from
the blood or natural affinity, but originates out of a conscious
inclination, and for this reason belongs to the free ethical sphere of
the self-conscious will. However much, therefore, marriage is bound
up with love and feeling it is none the less to be distinguished from
the purely natural emotion of love, because it also freely recognizes
definite obligations quite independent of the same, which persist when
that feeling of love may have ceased. The notion, in short, and the
knowledge of the substantiality of marital life is something later
and more profound than the purely natural connection between mother
and son, and constitutes the beginning of the State as the realization
of the free and rational will. In like manner we shall find resident
in the relation of prince to citizen the association of a similar
political right, law, and the self-conscious freedom and spirituality
of similar social aims. This is the reason why the Eumenides, the
ancient goddesses, pursue Orestes with punishment, whereas Apollo--the
clear, knowing and self-consciously knowing ethical sense--defends the
right of the spouse and the chief, justly opposing the Eumenides: "If
the crime of Clytemnestra were not scented out I should be in verity
without honour and despised as nought by the consummator Here and the
Councils of Zeus[167]."

Of still greater interest, albeit wholly involved in human feeling
and action, is the contradiction which we have set before us in
the "Antigone," one of the most sublime, and in every respect most
consummate work of art human effort ever produced. Not a detail in
this tragedy but is of consequence. The public law of the State and
the instinctive family-love and duty towards a brother are here set
in conflict. Antigone, the woman, is pathetically possessed by the
interest of family; Kreon, the man, by the welfare of the community.
Polynices, in war with his own father-city, had fallen before the
gates of Thebes, and Kreon, the lord thereof, had by means of a public
proclamation threatened everyone with death who should give this enemy
of the city the right of burial. Antigone, however, refused to accept
this command, which merely concerned the public weal, and, constrained
by her pious devotion for her brother, carried out as sister the sacred
duty of interment. In doing this she relied on the law of the gods.
The gods, however, whom she thus revered, are the _Dei inferi_ of
Hades[168], the instinctive Powers of feeling, Love and kinship, not
the daylight gods of free and self-conscious, social, and political
life.

(_γ_) The _third_ point, which we would advert to in connection with
the theogony of the outlook of artists in the classic period, has
reference to the difference between individuals of the older gods
relatively to their powers and the duration of their authority.

(_αα_) In the first place, the origin of these gods is a succession.
From Chaos, according to Hesiod, proceeds Gaia, Uranos, and others,
after that Kronos and his race, finally Zeus and his subjects. This
succession appears in one aspect of it as a rise from the more abstract
and formless to the more concrete and already fairly defined powers
of Nature; in another as the beginnings of the superiority of the
spiritual over the natural. Thus in his "Eumenides" Aeschylus makes the
Pythia in the temple of Delphi begin with the words: "First of all I
revere in my prayer her who first gave us oracles, Gaia, and after her
Themis, who as second after her mother had her prophetic seat in this
place." Pausanias, on the other hand, who also names the Earth first as
giver of oracles, says that Daphne was ordained by her afterwards in
the prophetic office. In another series again Pindar places Night in
the first place, after her he makes Themis follow, then comes Phoebe,
and finally he closes the succession with Phoebus. It would be of
interest to analyse more closely these particular differences; such an
inquiry, however, lies outside our present purpose.

(_ββ_) This succession further, in addition to its aspect of being
an extension into essentially profounder conceptions of godhead,
possessing, that is, a fuller content, also appears as the degradation
of the earlier and more abstract type within the range of the older
race of gods itself. The primary and most ancient powers are robbed of
their masterdom, just as we find Kronos dethroned Uranos, and the later
representatives are set up in their place.

(_γγ_) In this way the negative relation of the reformation[169],
which we settled at once to be the essence of this first stage of the
classic type of art, becomes the proper centre of the same. And it is
so for the reason that personification is here the universal form, in
which the gods are presented to the imagination, and the progressive
movement comes into opposition with human and spiritual individuality.
And although this appears in the first instance still in a form
indeterminate and formless, we necessarily find that the imagination
presents this negative attitude of the younger gods against the more
ancient under the image of conflict and war. The essential advance is,
however, from Nature to Spirit, implying by the latter the true content
and the real form appropriate to classical art. This progress and the
conflicts by means of which we perceive that it is carried forward,
belong no longer exclusively to the sphere of the old gods, but centre
in the war through which the new gods lay the foundation of their
enduring mastery over the ancient.

(_c_) The opposition between Nature and Spirit is in the nature of the
case inevitable. For the notion of Spirit, as in very truth totality,
is, as we have already seen, _essentially_ simply this, to split itself
in twain, that is into its intrinsic constituents as objectivity and as
subject, in order that by means of this opposition it may emerge from
Nature and confront the same forthwith free and jubilant as vanquisher
and superior might. This fundamental phase, rooted in the very essence
of Spirit, is consequently a material aspect in the conception which
it supplies to itself of that nature. Regarded historically, that is
on the plane of ordinary reality, this passage asserts itself as the
reconstruction through progressive steps of the natural man into the
condition where right, property, laws, constitution and political life
are paramount. Regarded under a mode which relates this process to gods
and _sub specie eternitatis_ it becomes the conception of the victory
over the natural Powers by means of the spiritual and individual
Divinities.

(_α_) This contest exposes an absolute catastrophe, and is the
essential deed of the gods, by virtue of which the fundamental
distinction between the old and new gods is first made visible.
Consequently we ought not to point to the war, which exposes this
distinction as a mythical story in the same way we should point to any
other myth; rather we should regard it as the mythos, which in fact
punctuates a great moment of transition, and expresses the creation of
the later theogony.

(_β_) The result of this violent strife among the gods is the ruin of
the Titans, the unique victory of the new gods, who forthwith receive
in their assured dominion a plenitude of gifts in every direction from
the imagination. The Titans, on the other hand, are banished, and
compelled to huddle in the hollows of the Earth, or, like Oceanos,
dally on the dark skirts of the clear, joyful world, or still endure
many grievous punishments. Prometheus, for example, is fettered on
the Scythian mountains, where an eagle insatiable devours the liver
that ever renews itself. In like manner an infinite and inexhaustible
thirst torments Tantalus in the lower world, and Sisyphus is for ever
constrained to roll up hill in vain the rock that for ever rolls back
again. These punishments are, in truth, the false type of infinity,
the yearning of the indefinite aspiration or the unsatisfied craving
of natural desires, which in their eternal repetition fail to discover
rest or final satisfaction. For the truly godlike intuition of the
Greeks regarded the mere extension into space and the region of the
indefinite, not, as some modern votaries of such longings do, as the
highest attainment of mankind, but as a damnation which it relegates to
Tartarus.

(_γ_) If we ask ourselves in a general way, what from this point must
for classical art fall into the background, failing, that is, to have
any right to figure as its final form and adequate content, we shall
find at the earliest point of departure the elements of Nature. With
them disappear from the world of the new gods all that is gloomy[170],
fantastical, void of clarity, every wild confusion between Nature
and Spirit, between significances essentially substantive and the
accidental incidents of externality. In a world such as this the
creations of an unrestricted imagination, which has not yet for its
principle the measure of spiritual proportion, have no place, and
are compelled and justly so to vanish before the clear light of day.
We may furbish up the monstrous Cabeiri[171], the Corybantes, these
representatives of procreative force as much as we choose, yet for
all that such presentations in every trait of them--to say nothing
of the ancient Baubo, whom Goethe sets careering over the Blocksberg
on an old sow--belong to a greater or less degree to the twilight of
consciousness. Only that which is spiritual imperatively demands the
light; and that which does not reveal itself and in itself expound its
own interpretation is the unspiritual, which fades again once more into
Night and obscurity. That which is of Spirit on the contrary reveals
itself, and purifies itself, by itself defining its external form, from
the caprice of the imagination, the flood of obstructing shapes, and
the otherwise perturbed accessories of symbolical sense.

For the same reasons we now find that human activity, in so far as it
is limited merely to Nature's wants and their satisfaction, falls into
the background. That old right, Themis, Dike and the rest, as one not
determinate through laws which originate in self-conscious Spirit,
loses its unimpaired validity, and in the same way, if conversely, that
which is purely local, albeit there is still room left for its play,
passes by incorporation into the universal figures of the gods; in
which we may still trace the lingering vestiges that remain of it. For
as in the Trojan war the Greeks fought and conquered as _one_ people,
so, too, the Homeric gods, who already have their conflict with the
Titans behind them in the past, are one essentially secure and defined
god-world, a world which is yet further with ever-increasing fulness
made definite and unassailable by later poetry and the plastic arts.
This invincible consistency[172] is in its relation to the content of
the Greek world of gods Spirit and only Spirit; but not Spirit in its
abstract ideality, but as identified with its external and adequate
existence, just as with Plato soul and body, as in union brought into
one nature and in this consolidation from one piece, is at once the
Divine and Eternal.


3. THE POSITIVE CONSERVATION OF THE CONDITIONS SET UP THROUGH NEGATION

Despite, then, the victory of the new gods that which came before them
still remains in the classical type of art partly preserved and revered
in the original form in which we have already recognized it, partly
under a transmuted mode. It is only the limited Jewish national god
which is unable to tolerate other gods in its company for the reason
that it purports as _the_ one god to include everything, although
in regard to the definition of its form it fails to pass beyond its
exclusiveness wherein the god is merely the God of His own people. Such
a god manifests his universality in fact only through his creation
of Nature and as Lord of the heavens and the earth. For the rest he
remains the god of Abraham, who led his people Israel out of Egypt,
gave them laws on Sinai, and divided the land of Canaan among the Jews.
And through this narrow identification of him with the Jewish nation
he is in a quite peculiar way the god of this folk; and consequently,
speaking generally, neither stands in positive consonance with
Nature, nor appears truly as absolute Spirit referable back from his
determinate character and objectivity to his universality. Consequently
this austere, national god is so jealous, and ordains in his jealousy
that men shall see elsewhere merely false idols. The Greeks, on the
contrary, discovered their gods among other nations and accepted
what was foreign among themselves. For the god of classical art has
spiritual and bodily individuality and is for this reason not the one
and only one, but merely a _particular_ godhead, which, as everything
else that shares particularity, has a circle of particularity which
surrounds it or in opposition to it as its Other, from which it is the
result, and which is qualified to preserve its validity and worth.
The process here is analogous to that of the particular divisions of
Nature. Although the world of vegetation is the truth of the geological
image of Nature, the animal again the higher truth of the vegetable,
yet the mountains and the flooded land persist as the solid basis of
trees, shrubs, and flowers, which in their turn do not lose their
existence alongside the world of animals.

(_a_) The earliest form under which among the Greeks we come upon
this ancient residue, are the _Mysteries._ The Greek Mysteries were
nothing secret in the sense that the Greek nation was not in a general
way aware of their content. On the contrary, the majority of the
Athenians and a large number of foreigners were among the initiated
in the Eleusinian mysteries; but they were not permitted to speak of
that in which they had been instructed through initiation. In our
own times people have been at great pains to discover more nearly
the type of conceptions which prevailed in these mysteries, and to
investigate the kind of religious services which were used in their
celebration. It appears, however, that on the whole there was no
extensive wisdom or profound knowledge concealed in the Mysteries. They
merely preserved the old traditions, the basis, that is, of what was
latterly reconstructed by the genuine type of art, and consequently,
so far from containing the true, higher, and more valuable content,
rather unfolded that which was of less significance and of inferior
rank. Whatever it was, this holiness was not clearly expressed in the
mysteries, but merely handed down in its symbolical features. And in
fact this character of secrecy and reticence is bound up with the old
telluric, sidereal, and Titanic deposit; Spirit alone is the revealed
and the self-revealer. Consonant, too, with this it is the symbolical
mode of expression which constitutes the other aspect of secrecy
in the mysteries, because in symbolism the interpretation remains
obscure, and contains a something other than the external image, which
it purports to display, in fact offers to the view. In this sense,
for example, the mysteries of Demeter and Bacchus were, it is true,
spiritually interpreted, and contained a profounder sense. The form of
the same remained quite externally isolate from this content, so that
it was impossible clearly to disengage it from it. Consequently the
Mysteries had very little influence over art; for though we are told
of Aeschylus, that he willfully betrayed something which attached to
the Demeter mysteries, this merely amounts to an assertion on his part
that Artemis had been the daughter of Ceres, which is not very profound
wisdom after all.

(_b_) But, _secondly_, we find that the reverence and preservation
of the old _régime_ is yet more clearly indicated in actual artistic
representation. We have already referred to Prometheus as the
chastised Titan who appears in the stage immediately prior to that
of genuine art. We meet with him however again as delivered. For as
the Earth and as the Sun, so also the fire, which Prometheus brought
down to men, that is, the eating of flesh, which he taught them, is
an essential feature of human life, a necessary condition for the
satisfaction of their needs; and consequently Prometheus is honoured
with an enduring recognition[173]. In the Oedipus Colonos of Sophocles
we have the words:

/$
     χῶρoς μὲν ἱερὸς πᾶς ὅδ ἔστ· ἔχει δέ νιν
     σεμνὸς Πoσειδῶν· ἐν δ' ὁ πoρφόρoς θeὸς
     Tιτὰν Πρoμηθὲυς[174]
$/

and the scholiast adds that Prometheus was revered in the Academy along
with Athene, as Hephaestos was, and a temple was shown in a grove of
the goddess, and an ancient pedestal near the entrance, where there
was not only an image of Hephaestos, but also one of Prometheus.
Prometheus, however, according to the statement of Lysimachides, was
represented as primary and more ancient, and he held in his hand a
sceptre; Hephaestos as the younger and in the second place, and the
altar on the pedestal was shared by both. Prometheus, then, according
to the tale, was not obliged to endure his chastisement for ever,
but was released from his fetters by Hercules. In this story of his
liberation we come across certain remarkable traits. In other words,
Prometheus is delivered from his agony because he informs Zeus of
the danger which threatens his empire at the hands of the thirteenth
descendant. This descendant is Hercules, to whom, we may add in
illustration, Poseidon exclaims in the "Birds" of Aristophanes[175],
"he will do himself an injury, if he strike a bargain with reference
to the transference of the divine headship, for all that Zeus leaves
behind him on his decease will most assuredly take place." And, in
fact, Hercules is the only man who passed over into Olympus, became a
god after being a man, and stands higher than Prometheus, who remained
a Titan. Moreover, the overturning of the old race of tyrants is
intimately connected with the name of Hercules and the Heraklidae. The
Heraklidae break up the power of the old dynasties and royal houses,
in which we may remark the selfish desire of personal aggrandizement
and lawlessness no less than disregard for their subjects admitted no
judicial restraint, and consequently was responsible for the grossest
cruelties. Hercules, though himself in the service of a superior lord,
overcame the savagery of this despotism.

In a similar way we may, to linger once more for a moment by the
illustrations we adduced on a former page, recall again to our readers
the "Eumenides" of Aeschylus. The conflict between Apollo and the
Eumenides is to be settled by the intervention of the Areopagus. In
other words, a human tribunal, as a whole, at whose head stands Athene,
stands forth as the concrete spirit of the folk, and is as such to
terminate the collision. The judges, however, give an equal number of
votes for condemnation and acquittal, having an equal reverence both
for the Eumenides and Apollo; the white pebble of Athene, however,
decides the conflict in favour of Apollo. The Eumenides break out in
indignation against this decision of Athene; she, however, allays
their wrath by promising them worship and altars in the famous grove
of Colonos. What the Eumenides have to give in return to her people
is a protection against the evils[176] which result from the elements
of _Nature_, the earth, the heavens, the sea, and the winds; they
have further to ward off unfruitfulness in the fields, the failure of
living seed, and misbirths in all else that is procreated. Pallas, on
her part, takes beneath her protection the strife of wars and sacred
contests. Ina similar way Sophocles[177], in his "Antigone," not only
makes Antigone suffer and die, but to a like extent we find that Kreon
is punished by the loss of his wife and the death of Haemon, both of
whom perish through the death of Antigone.

(_c_) _Thirdly_, the ancient gods do not merely preserve their place
in juxtaposition to the new, but, what is of more importance, the
natural basis itself is maintained by the new gods, and receives,
continuing to made its echo sound in them, if in conformity with the
spiritual individuality of classical art, a reverential acceptance.

(_α_) And for this reason people are not unfrequently led into the
error of conceiving the Greek gods, in respect to their human character
and form, as mere _allegories_ of such natural elements. This is not
so. In this sense we frequently hear it stated that Helios is the
god of the sun, Diana the goddess of the moon, or Neptune the god of
the sea. Such a separation, however, between the natural element, as
content, and the humanly shaped personification, as form, no less than
the external association of both, regarded merely as the masterdom of
the god over the natural fact, as we are accustomed to it in the Old
Testament, is quite inapplicable to Greek conceptions. We never find
among the Greeks such an expression as ὁ θεὸς τoῦ ἡλίoυ, τῆς θαλάσσης,
and so forth, though it is quite certain they would have used with
others such an expression for the relation in question, had it been
compatible with their point of view. Helios is the sun as god.

(_β_) We must, however, at once insist on the further fact that the
Greeks never regarded mere Nature as itself divine. On the contrary,
they retained the definite conception that what was purely natural
was not divine. This is partly contained, if unexpressed, in what
their gods actually are, in part also it is expressly stated so by
themselves. Plutarch, for example, in his essay upon Isis and Osiris,
refers incidentally to the modes of interpretation current of myths
and divinities. Osiris and Isis belong to the Egyptian theogony, and
had yet more of the natural element for their content than the Greek
gods, who correspond to them; they merely express the longing and
conflict to escape out of the circle of Nature to that of Spirit. In
later times they were very highly honoured in Rome, and the mysteries
allied with them were of great importance. Yet for all that it is
Plutarch's view that it would be an interpretation beneath the level
of the subject to think of explaining them as sun, earth, or water.
Only that which in the sun, Earth, and so forth, is without measure or
co-ordination, defective or superfluous, can strictly be referred to
the natural elements, and all that is good and conformable to order is
as exclusively a work of Isis, and the rational principle, the λόγoς,
a work of Osiris. It is not, therefore, the natural as such which is
adduced as the substantive content of these gods, but the spiritual
principle, the universal, λόγoς, reason, conformity to law.

By virtue of this insight into the spiritual nature of the gods, the
more definite elements of Nature, then, had also among the Greeks
been differentiated from the later gods. We have, it is true, grown
accustomed to associate Helios and Selene, to take two examples, with
Apollo and Diana: in Homer, however, they are presented as distinct.
The same remark applies to Oceanos and others.

(_γ_) But in the _third_ place an echo still lingers in the new gods
of the natural powers, whose operative energies themselves belong to
the spiritual individuality of the gods. We have already indicated,
at an earlier stage, the basis of this positive connection of the
spiritual and natural in the ideal of classical art, and may limit our
observations here to a few illustrations.

(_αα_) In Poseidon resides, as in Pontus and Oceanus, the might of
the world-encircling sea, but his power and activity extends further.
He built Ilium and was a shield of Athens. Generally he is revered
as the founder of cities, in so far as the sea is the element of
sea-faring, of commerce, and a bond between mankind. Apollo, in like
manner, is the light of knowledge, of oracular speech, and preserves,
moreover, a distant relation with Helios, as the natural light of the
sun. Critics differ, no doubt--take Voss and Creuzer for examples--as
to whether Apollo is referable to the sun. One may, however, in fact,
assert that he both is and is not the sun, since he is not limited to
its natural content, but is raised thereby to the significance of a
spiritual import. It is impossible to escape the inevitable connection
in which knowledge and light, the light of Nature and that of Spirit,
if we regard their fundamental characteristics, stand relatively to
one another. Light regarded as a element of Nature is that which
manifests. Without our seeing Light itself it makes visible to us the
illuminated objects around. By means of Light everything grows on
the plane of contemplation for something else. Spirit, that is the
free light of consciousness, knowledge, and cognition, possesses just
the same character of manifestation. The distinction, apart from the
differences of the respective spheres, in which these two modes of
manifestation reveal themselves, consists simply in this, that Spirit
reveals itself, and in that which it brings us, or which it assimilates
as content[178], remains constant to itself. Light, however, does not
make itself apprehensible to itself, but, on the contrary, makes that
which is other and external to itself apprehensible; and though, no
doubt, we may say this is done from its own resources, yet it cannot,
as the Spirit can, once more retire into itself. For this reason it
does not win the higher unity which finds itself constant by itself in
another. Just as, then, light and knowledge are closely associated, we
find in Apollo, as spiritual god, still a recollection of the light of
the sun. For this reason Homer, for example, ascribes the plague in
the camp of the Greeks to Apollo, which, in such a locality is in the
summer solstice ascribable to the operation of the sun. We may add that
his deadly arrows have unquestionably a symbolical reference to the
solar rays. In the external representation it is external signs which
more closely determine under what specific interpretation the god shall
be mainly accepted.

More particularly when we follow up the origins of the later gods
we are able to recognize the natural element, which the gods of the
classic ideal retain in themselves. This is a point which Creuzer in
particular has made clear. For example, in the conception of Jupiter
there are many features which indicate a solar source. The twelve
labours of Hercules, the expedition, for example, in which he carries
off the apples of the Hesperides, have relation both to the sun and
the twelve months. At the root of the conception of Diana we have the
distinct suggestion of the mother of Nature, just as the Ephesian
Diana, for example, which floats between the old world and the new,
has for her fundamental content Nature generally, procreation and
nutrition; which latter feature is clearly indicated in a part of her
external form, namely the breasts. If we consider the Greek Artemis, on
the other hand, the huntress, who slays wild animals, we find that in
her humanly beautiful and maiden form and self-continency, this aspect
falls entirely into the background, although the half moon and the
arrows still distinctly recall to us Selene. To take Aphrodite in the
same way, the more we follow her back to her original source in Asia
the more she approaches a force of Nature. Once arrived in Greece, the
spiritual and more individual aspect of her grace, charm, and love,
passion is more emphasized, albeit here, too, the natural basis is by
no means entirely absent. In the same way the productivity of Nature
is, no doubt, the original cradle which gives us Ceres. Starting from
that we proceed to the spiritual content, whose relations are developed
from agriculture, property, etc. The source in Nature of the Muses
is the murmur of the spring-water; and Zeus himself may be accepted
under one aspect as the universal Power of Nature, and is revered as
the Thunderer, as with Homer already thunder is the sign of misfortune
or assistance, is, in short, an omen, and as such is relative to that
which is human and spiritual. Juno, too, implies a natural association
with the firmament of cloud and the heavenly sphere in which the gods
move to and fro. So we are told, for example, that Zeus laid Hercules
on the breast of Juno, and from the milk which spouted thereout flashed
into being the Milky Way.

(_ββ_) Just as, then, in the later gods, from one point of view the
universal elements of Nature are dethroned, while from another they are
maintained, we have the same process repeated in that which is, more
strictly speaking, animal, which we merely regarded in a former passage
on the side of its degradation. We are now able to point out a more
positive aspect under which such may be considered. Since, however,
in the classic gods the symbolic mode of configuration is abolished,
and they secure as their content the spirit that is self-luminous,
the symbolical _significance_ of animals must tend to pass away
precisely in proportion as the animal form has taken to itself the
right to mingle with the human under a mode naturally alien to it.
It will therefore appear merely as a significant attribute, and is
established in juxtaposition to the human form of the gods. Thus we
find the eagle as attendant on Jupiter, the peacock on Juno, the doves
as accompanying Aphrodite, the hound, Anubis, as watch-dog of the
lower world, and so forth. If, therefore, there is still a symbolical
aspect which attaches to the ideals of the spiritual gods, yet, if
contrasted with the original significance, it will appear of little
importance; and the natural significance, if strictly regarded, which
previously constituted the essential content, will merely persist as
a residue, and mere particular mode of externality, which, on account
of its accidental character, more often than not has a grotesque
appearance, for the reason that the former significance is no longer
there. Inasmuch as the ideal content of these gods is that which
partakes of Spirit and humanity, the externality pertinent to them
approximates to a _human_ contingency and weakness. In this connection
we may once more recall to memory the numerous love affairs of Zeus.
According to their original symbolic significance, they are related, as
we already have seen, to the universal activity of generation, that is,
the vitality of Nature. As the love affairs of Zeus, however, which,
in so far as his marriage with Here is to be regarded as the permanent
and substantive sexual relation, appear in the light of an infidelity
towards his spouse, they have the complexion of accidental adventures,
and exchange their symbolical sense for unconnected tales which possess
the character of purely capricious invention.

With this degradation of the powers which are purely natural and of the
animal aspect no less than of the abstract universality of spiritual
relations, and with the re-acceptance of the same within the spiritual
individuality, permeated and Suffused as it is with Nature, we leave
behind us the origins of classical art which are stamped with necessity
and are presupposed by its essence, inasmuch as it is on this path
that the Ideal evolves itself by its own agency with that which it is
according to its notion. This reality of the spiritual gods adequate to
its notion carries us on to the genuine Ideals of the classical type of
art, which, in contrast to the old _régime_ which has been vanquished,
represent immortality[179], for mortality generally resides in the
incompatibility of the notion to its determinate existence.

[Footnote 139: _Als eine Unwürdigkeit_. As something unworthy of the
full notion of its gods.]

[Footnote 140: That is, the relegation of it to a position of
inferiority.]

[Footnote 141: This is the German word. By genius I presume Hegel means
"the familiar spirit" of a particular animal. Apparently this rather
than "kind." "Iliad," II, 308; XII, 208.]

[Footnote 142: "Odyss." XIV, 414; XXIV, 215.]

[Footnote 143: "Metam." I, vv. 150-243.]

[Footnote 144: "Metam." VI, vv. 440-676.]

[Footnote 145: "Metam." I, vv. 451-567.]

[Footnote 146: _Ibid._, IX, vv. 454-64.]

[Footnote 147: _Ibid.,_ V, v. 302.]

[Footnote 148: _Ibid._, vv. 319-31.]

[Footnote 149: "Herod." II, 46.]

[Footnote 150: Creuzer, "Symb." I, 477.]

[Footnote 151: That is, the sphere of fauns as a part of Nature.]

[Footnote 152: _Praktisch._ The contrast is between the philosophic
contemplation and the world regarded as the sphere of human activity.]

[Footnote 153: By _Umkehr_ Hegel probably means a "return" in the
direction of the art of the Sublime.]

[Footnote 154: _Einen bestimmten Kreis._ The meaning seems to be that
the circle of examples is here a clearly defined and limited one as
contrasted with the vagueness of Oriental Pantheism.]

[Footnote 155: "Herod." II, 52.]

[Footnote 156: _War ein entscheidendes Moment._ That is, was part of
the oracular reply.]

[Footnote 157: Both wording and punctuation of this sentence are at
fault, but I give the sense no doubt intended.]

[Footnote 158: I am not sure what is referred to here by _Telchinen_
and _Pätaken._]

[Footnote 159: _Das Ganze_, means here, I think, the whole of Creation.]

[Footnote 160: That is, took no further active interest in human life.]

[Footnote 161: Politicus ex rec. Bekk. II, 2, p. 283; Steph. 274.]

[Footnote 162: "Protag." I, 1, pp. 170-4; Steph. 320-3.]

[Footnote 163: I have just above translated _Sitte_ with the word
"custom," that is, ethical custom. But the contrast here is, I
think, between morality generally (_sittlich_) and juridical right
(_Rechtliche_).]

[Footnote 164: The argument of Hegel is ingenious. It must be admitted,
however, that in several accounts of Prometheus, notably that of
Aeschylus, Zeus is represented as hostile to human progress. And it
is rather a strain on the facts to trace, in the case of Ceres, so
much that is of an ethical colour to agriculture, and limit the use of
fire simply to the crafts of Hephaestos, ignoring, that is to say, its
domestic use altogether.]

[Footnote 165: _Der Sittlichkeit._]

[Footnote 166: _Gehaltvolle._ That is, intrinsically sound and
substantial.]

[Footnote 167: "Eum." vv. 206-9.]

[Footnote 168: Soph., "Ant." v. 451: ἡ ξὐνoικoς τῶν κάτω θεῶν Δἰκη.]

[Footnote 169: _Umgestaltung._ Remodelling, reorganization. Reformation
in literal sense.]

[Footnote 170: _Trübe._ "Troubled" perhaps is better.]

[Footnote 171: The Cabeiri were mystic Powers. Aeschylus wrote a drama
under this title. The ancients differ greatly as to their origin and
nature, Herodotus assumes an Egyptian origin.]

[Footnote 172: _Feste_ is as a substantive a stronghold, and this may
be Hegel's meaning, but I think he uses it here for _Festigkeit_,
consistency, compact security.]

[Footnote 173: The sentence is not very clear. The sense is that
Prometheus is honoured as the Earth and Sun are honoured by his
assistance of human needs.]

[Footnote 174: Vv. 54-6. "This entire spot is sacred; awful Poseidon
holds it, and therein is the fire bringing god, the Titan Prometheus."]

[Footnote 175: Vv. 1645-8.]

[Footnote 176: Vv. 901 _et seq._]

[Footnote 177: Hegel means that in the suffering of Kleon Sophocles
treats the natural law of Antigone and the higher law of the king on
the same terms.]

[Footnote 178: Lit., "what is made for it," _e.g._, the detail of
objective experience.]

[Footnote 179: _Unvergänglichkeit._ Hegel no doubt refers to the
epithet always applied by Homer and other, Greek poets to the gods of
Olympus, immortal.]




