CHAPTER II

THE IDEAL OF THE CLASSICAL TYPE OF ART

We have already seen what the essence of the Ideal is in our general
consideration of the beauty of art. Here we are to take it merely in
the special sense appropriate to the _classic_ Ideal, whose notion has
already presented itself in its general features in its association
with the notion of the _classical_ art-type. For the Ideal, of which
we have now to speak, consists simply in this, that classical art in
very truth attains to and sets before us that which exposes its most
intimate notion. As content it grasps on this particular plane the
spiritual, in so far as this Spirit attracts Nature and her powers to
its own appropriate realm, and sets itself before us in exposition not
as mere inwardness and dominion over Nature, but furthermore accepts
as its proper form, human shape, deed, and action, through which
the spiritual shines forth clearly in perfect freedom, and the form
penetrates with its life into the sensuous material not merely as into
a mode of externality symbolically significant, but as actually into a
determinate existence, which is the adequate existence of Spirit.

We may divide up, then, the present chapter into the following sections:

We have in the _first_ place to consider the _general_ character of
the classic Ideal, which possesses what is pertinent to humanity
in its form no less than its content, and elaborates both sides in
the completest consistency one with the other. _Secondly_, however,
forasmuch as here the human is absorbed wholly into the bodily shape
and external appearance, it becomes the _definite_ external shape,
which in its conformity is merely a defined content. Since, therefore,
we have the Ideal before us at the same time as _particularity_, there
arises a definite number of _particular_ gods and powers in the shape
of human existence. _Thirdly_, this particularity does not persist in
the abstraction of _one_ type of definition, whose essential character
would constitute the entire content and the one-sided principle for its
representation; but rather it is quite as much essentially a totality
and the _individual_ unity and congruity which is applicable to such.
Without this repletion such particularity would remain cold and empty;
the vitality of Life would fail it, a contingency which is impossible
to the Ideal in any relation whatever.

We have now to consider more narrowly the Ideal of classical art
according to these three aspects of universality, particularity, and
individual singularity.


1. THE IDEAL OF CLASSICAL ART GENERALLY

The questions which arise relatively to the origins of the Greek gods,
in so far as the real centre for ideal reproduction results from
them, we have already touched upon, and seen that they belong to the
elaborated tradition of art. The modification that is incidental to
that treatment can only proceed by means of the twofold degradation,
on the one hand, of the universal powers of Nature and their
personification, and, on the other, of the animal constituents and
its form, in order that thereby it may win the spiritual as its true
determinate substance, and also the human mode of appearance as its
true form.

(_a_) We have described how the classical Ideal first really becomes
actual through such a remodelling of that which came before the
earliest aspect of it. Along with this we have above all to draw
attention to just this fact, that it is generated from mind (Spirit),
and consequently has originated in the most intimate and personal
resources of the poets and artists, who brought it into the presence
of conscious life with the aid of a thoughtful consideration as
clear as it was unfettered and with the distinct object of artistic
production. In opposition to this creation we have, however, apparently
the fact that Greek mythology reposes on earlier traditions, and
contains distinct references to foreign, that is Oriental, matter.
Herodotus, for example, although specifically asserting in the passage
already cited that Homer and Hesiod created for the Greeks their
gods, nevertheless in other passages associates closely these very
Greek gods with other divinities such as those of Egypt. For in the
second book[180] he expressly narrates that Melampus gave the name of
Dionysos to the Greeks, further introduced the Phallus and the entire
sacrificial festival, adding, however, this discrepant detail, that
Melampus had learnt the religious service from the Tyrian Kadmus and
the Phoenicians, who came with Kadmus to Boeotia. These contradictory
statements have roused interest in our own times, more particularly
as associated with Creuzer's researches, who endeavours to discover
in Homer, for example, ancient mysteries and the sources which flowed
in together towards Greece, whether they be Asiatic, Pelasgian,
Dodonian, Thracian, Samothracian, Phrygian, Indian, Buddhistic,
Phoenician, Egyptian, or Orphic, to say nothing of the infinitely
varied peculiarities of specific localities and other details. No doubt
it appears at first sight wholly inconsistent with these many sources
of tradition that those poets should have supplied either the names or
the substantial form of the gods. It is possible, however, to harmonize
entirely both factors, tradition, and individual creation. The
tradition comes first; it is the point of departure, which hands down
the mere ingredients; but for all that it does not contribute the real
content and the genuine form of the gods. This substantive presence is
the product of the genius of those poets, who discovered by a process
of free elaboration the true substantive form of these very gods and
are consequently in fact become the creators of that mythology which
awakes our admiration of Greek art. Yet for this reason the Homeric
gods, in one aspect of them, are not to be taken as the result merely
of the poetic phantasy, or nothing more than capricious invention. They
have their roots in the genius and beliefs of the Greek folk and the
religious basis of that nation. They are the absolute potencies and
powers, the highest stretch of the Greek conception, the central point
of the beautiful regarded universally, presented, so to speak, by the
Muses themselves to the poet.

In this free handling, then, the artist takes up an entirely different
position from that he occupies in the East. The Hindoo poets and
sages have also to begin with material ready to work upon, such as the
elements of Nature, the heavens, animals, streams, and so forth, or
the pure abstraction of the formless and contentless Brahman. Their
enthusiasm, however, is a confusion of the ideal character[181] of
the subjectivity which accepts the difficult task of elaborating such
an external material to it, an enthusiasm which, in the unmeasured
expansion of its imagination, which excludes every secure and
absolute[182] direction, is unable to mould its creations conformably
to genuine freedom of expression and beauty, and remains the slave
of that material in uncontrolled and roving productive activity. It
resembles, in fact, a master-builder who has no firm foundation beneath
him. Ancient ruins of half dismantled walls, mounds, and projecting
rocks fetter him, quite apart from the particular aims according to
which he desires to construct his building; and he can only create
a wild, inharmonious, and fantastical fabric. In other words, that
which he produces is not the result of his imagination freely acting
under its own plastic genius. Conversely the Hebrew poets present
us with revelations which, it is said, they deliver as the Lord's
voice, so that here again the creative source is an enthusiasm not
fully self-conscious; it is separated, that is, and distinct from
individuality and the productive genius of the artist, as in the wisdom
of the Sublime generally it is the abstract and eternal, essentially
in its relation to something other than it and external, which is
consciously or imaginatively conceived.

In classical art artists and poets are, it is true, also prophets and
teachers, who declare and reveal to mankind the nature of the Absolute
and Divine. But we must emphasize here the following distinctions:

(_α_) In the _first_ place the content of their gods is neither that
appearance of Nature which is external to humanity nor the mere
abstraction of one Godhead, whereby merely a superficial formulation
or an inwardness that is without content is preserved. Their content
is, on the contrary, deduced from human life and existence, and for
this reason is that which is peculiar to the human breast; a content,
in short, with which man himself can freely coalesce as at home with
himself, while that which he thus produces is the fairest product of
his own activity.

(_β_) _Secondly_, these artists are at the same time _poets_, that is,
men of creative talent who work the aforesaid material and its content
into a free and substantially independent form. As thus regarded Greek
artists are in all essential respects creative poets. They have brought
together all the varied original ingredients into the melting-pot,
but they have produced thereby no mere broth, such as might come from
a witches' cauldron; rather they did away with all that is troubled,
purely natural, unclean, foreign, and without rational measure in the
pure flame of this more profound spirit; they made all glow together
and permitted the form to appear at last purified, albeit it still
retained a distant accord with the ruder material from which it was
fashioned. What mainly concerned them in this work consisted partly
in the winnowing away of all that was in their inherited material
destitute of form and beauty, distorted and symbolical, and partly in
the prominence they gave to what was really spiritual, which they set
themselves to render under modes of individuality, and in the interest
of which they had to discover gradually the external appearance most
appropriate. Here for the first time we find that it is the human form
and human actions and events, not merely made use of under the mode
of personification, which, as we have already seen, necessarily stand
forth as the uniquely adequate reality. No doubt the artist discovers
these forms, too, in the real world; but he has at the same time to
eradicate all that is accidental and incongruent in them, before they
are entitled to appear as commensurable with that humanity, which, as
essentially apprehended, shall offer to us the image of the eternal
powers and gods. And this is what we call the free and spiritual, and
not merely capricious production of the artist.

(_γ_) And, _thirdly_, for the reason that the gods are not merely
stable existences in their own world, but also are active within the
concrete reality of Nature and human, events, the poet is further
concerned to recognize the presence and activity of the gods in this
relation to human, fact, to interpret, that is, the particularity of
natural event and human actions and destiny wherein the divine powers
are apparently interfused, and to share thus the duties of the priest
and the seer. We, from the point of view of our everyday prosaic
reflection, explain the phenomena of Nature according to universal laws
and forces, and interpret the actions of mankind as the product of
their subjective intentions and self-proposed aims. The Greek poets,
however, have their eyes everywhere directed toward the Divine, and
create, by giving to human activities the loftier colour and habit
of divine actions, and by means of such interpretation, the various
aspects under which the power of the gods is made visible. For a number
of such interpretations results in a number of actions, in which we
are made aware of the character of this or that god. We have but to
open, for example, the Homeric poems, and we shall scarcely meet with
a single event of importance which is not more closely elucidated as
proceeding from the volition or actual assistance of the gods. These
expositions are, in fact, the insight, the independently created
belief, the intuitive conceptions of the poet, just as Homer often,
too, gives expression to them in his own name, and in part also places
such in the mouth of his characters, whether priest or hero. Quite at
the opening of the "Iliad," for example, he has himself explained the
pestilence in the Greek camp as the result of the indignation of Apollo
over Agamemnon, who refused to release to Chryses his daughters[183];
and, in a passage that follows, he makes Calchas transmit this very
interpretation to the Greeks[184].

In a similar way Homer informs us in the concluding canto of the
"Odyssey"--on the occasion when Hermes conducted the shades of the
inanimate suitors to the meadows of Asphodel, and they find there
Achilles and the other deceased heroes, who fought before Troy, and
finally, too, Agamemnon joins them--how the last-mentioned describes
the death of Achilles[185]:

"The whole day long had the Greeks fought; and when at last Zeus
separated the combatants, they carried the noble body to the ships,
and washed it, weeping often the while, and embalmed it. Then there
arose a divine uproar on the sea, and the affrighted Achaeans would
have been flung headlong into their hollow ships, had not an aged and
much knowing man, Nestor to wit, restrained them, whose advice had
also proved the wisest on former occasion." Nestor then interprets for
them the phenomenon in the following terms: "The _mother_[186] comes
forth from the sea with the immortal sea-goddesses, in order to meet
her deceased son. And the great-hearted Achaeans at this word let
their fear depart from them." That is to say, they knew then of what
kind it was--of human origin--the mother in her grief comes toward
him; what they shall see and hear is that which finds its response
in themselves. Achilles is her son, she is herself full of grief.
And in this vein Agamemnon, turning towards Achilles, continues his
narrative with a description of the universal sorrow: "And around thee
stood the daughters of the ancient of the sea, lamenting, and they
robed themselves in ambrosial garments; and the Muses also, the nine
in conclave, wailed by turns in beautiful song; and there was I ween
no man of the Argives to be seen without tears, so greatly did the
clear-toned song move all."

It is, however, another divine apparition in the "Odyssey" which has
always in this connection most particularly fascinated me in my study
of it. Odysseus in his sea-wanderings, insulted among the Phaeacians
during the sports over which Euryalos presides, because he refused to
take part in the rival throwing of the discus, makes answer indignantly
with dark looks and hard words. He then stands up, seizes a disk,
larger and heavier than the rest, and hurls it far and away over the
mark. One of the Phaeacians marks down the throw and calls out: "Even
a blind man could see the stone; it does not lie within the medley of
the rest, but far beyond. Thou hast nothing to fear in this contest;
there is no Phaeacian who will reach or surpass such a throw as thine
is. So he spake; but the much-enduring divine Odysseus rejoiced to see
a well-disposed friend in the lists." And this word, this friendly nod
of the Phaeacian Homer interprets as the friendly apparition of Athene.

(_b_) Of what kind, then, we may further ask, are the _products_ of
this classical mode of artistic activity, of what type are the new gods
of Greek art?

(_α_) It is their concentrated individuality which presents to us the
most general and at the same time most complete idea of their intrinsic
character, in so far, that is, as this individuality is brought
together out of the variety of accidental traits, isolated actions, and
events into the one focus of their simple and self-exclusive unity.

(_αα_) What appeals to us in these gods is first of all the spiritual
and _substantive_ individuality, which, withdrawn into itself as it
is out of the motley show of the particular medium of necessity, and,
the many-purposed unrest of the finite condition, reposes on its own
inviolable universality, as on an eternal and intelligible foundation.
It is only thus that the gods appear as the imperishable powers, whose
untroubled rule is made visible to us not in the particular event in
its evolution with somewhat else and external to it, but freely in its
own unchangeableness and intrinsic worth.

(_ββ_) Conversely, however, they are not by any means the bare
abstraction of spiritual generalities, and thereby so-called general
Ideals, but in so far as they are individuals they appear as one Ideal,
an essentially of itself determinate existence, and consequently
one that is defined, in other words one that as Spirit possesses
_characterization._ Without character we can have no individuality.
From this point of view we find, as we have already indicated
previously, that there is at the root of these spiritual gods a
definite natural force, with which a definite ethical consistency[187]
is blended, such as imposes on every particular god distinct bounds to
the sphere of his activity. The manifold aspects and traits which are
forthcoming by reason of this characterization as particular persons,
being in this way concentrated in the point of a true self-identity,
constitute the characters of the gods.

(_γγ_) In the true Ideal, however, this definition ought just as little
to terminate in the blunt restriction of pure _one sidedness_, but
must at the same time appear as withdrawn into the universality of the
godhead. In just such a way, then, every god, by carrying in his own
person this defined character as divine and as bound up with that as
universal individuality, is in part of a definite type, and in part
is all in all, and floats, as it were, precisely midway between mere
universality and equally abstract singularity. And this is what gives
to the genuine Ideal of classical art its infinite security and repose,
its untroubled blessedness and unimpaired freedom.

(_β_) Add to this that as beauty of classical art the essentially
self-articulate divine character is not only spiritual, but fully as
much plastic form which appears externally in its bodily presence to
the eye no less than to the mind.

(_αα_) This beauty, inasmuch as it possesses not merely the natural or
animal aspect in its spiritual personification, but includes as its
content that which is spiritual in its adequate mode of existence,
can only take up what is _symbolical_ in its incidental aspect and
under those relations in which it appears as purely natural. Its real
external expression is the form that is peculiar to mind and only mind,
in so far as its ideal character reveals itself as existent truth, and
pours itself wholly through that form.

(_ββ_) From another point of view classical beauty is debarred
from giving expression to the _Sublime._ For it is only the
abstract universal, which attaches to itself no inclusion such as
is self-defined, but merely a negative determinacy relatively to
particularity in general, and along with this is resolute in its
antagonism to every form of embodiment which presents us with the
aspect of the Sublime. Classical beauty, on the contrary, carries
spiritual individuality into the very heart of what is at the same time
its natural existence, and elucidates the ideal content wholly in the
material of its external appearance.

(_γγ_) For this very reason, however, it is essential that the
external form quite as much as the spiritual, which creates for
itself therein its home and dwelling, should be liberated from all
dependence on Nature and derangement, all finitude, all that is of
fleeting character, all that is exclusively concerned with the sensuous
presence, and should purify and exalt that definition of it which
discloses affinity with the determinate character of the god into free
commerce with the universal forms of the human figure. The stainless
externality alone, from which every hint of weakness and relativity has
been removed, and every flick of capricious particularity wiped off, is
able to represent the Spirit's ideality, which should sink itself in it
and secure an embodiment from it.

(_γ_) For the reason, however, that the gods are forced once more
from the defined limits of character into the universal wave, the
self-subsistency of Spirit as repose on itself, and as the security of
itself in its external form has to discover a real reflection also in
its manifestation.

(_αα_) Consequently we observe in the concrete individuality of the
gods--when we have before us the genuine classic Ideal, on equal
terms with all else--this nobility and loftiness of Spirit, in which,
despite the entire absorption within the bodily and sensuous presence,
we are made conscious of the absolute removal of all the indigence
of what is wholly finite. Pure self-absorption[188] and the abstract
liberation from every kind of determinacy is the highway to the Ideal
of the Sublime. The classical Ideal, on the contrary, is made visible
in an existence which entirely is its own, that is, the specific
manifestation of Spirit itself; yet for all that we shall find that
here, too, the Sublimity of the same is blended with the beauty, and
that the one aspect passes over immediately into the other. And this
it is which constitutes the expression of loftiness in these figures
of the gods, making inevitable the Sublime of classical beauty. An
immortal seriousness[189] makes its throne on the forehead of these
gods, and is poured forth over their entire presentment.

(_ββ_) In their beauty these gods appear, therefore, as exalted
over their individual bodily shape; we have consequently a kind
contradiction or contention between their lofty blessedness, which is,
in fact, their spiritual self-exclusiveness and their beauty, which
pertains to their external bodily presence. Spirit appears wholly
lost in its external form, and yet for all that appears quite as much
absorbed in itself from out that form. It is precisely as though we had
the moving to and fro of an immortal god among mortal men.

In this relation the Greek gods make on us an impression which, despite
all difference, resembles that which the bust of Goethe by Rauch made
upon me when I first saw it. Many will have doubtless seen it, the high
brow, the powerful, commanding nose, the free eye, the round chin,
the affable, finely-cut lips, the pose of the head, so suggestive of
genius, with its glance a bit on one side and uplifted: add to this
the entire fulness and breadth of an emotional and genial humanity,
and further, those carefully articulated muscles of the forehead, of
the entire countenance, of all that gives evidence of passion and
emotion; and in all this house of Life, the repose, stillness, and
loftiness of advanced age; and we may add withal the fading ebb of the
lips, which retreat back into the teethless mouth, the slackness of
the neck and cheeks, whereby the bridge of the nose appears yet more
dominant, and the reach of the forehead yet more towering. The force
of this firmly set figure, which to an extraordinary degree brings
before us the notion of immutability, appears all the more so in the
loose environment which surrounds it[190], just as the sublime head and
form of the Oriental in his wide turban, but flapping over-garment and
trailing slippers. It is the secure, powerful, timeless spirit, which,
in the mask of encircling mortality, is just ready to let this husk
fall away, and yet suffers it to linger around it freely and without
restraint.

In much the same way the gods appear to us in their aspect of lofty
freedom and spiritual repose to be exalted over their bodily presence,
so that they seem to feel their form, their limbs, despite all the
beauty that is there, as at the same time a superfluous appanage. And
yet withal the entire presentment is suffused with vitality, identical
with their spiritual being, inseparable, without the disunion of what
is essentially subsistent, and those parts which are more loosely put
together, the spirit in short neither escaping nor coming forth from
the body, but both firmly moulded together into a whole, out of which,
and in no other way, the self-absorption of Spirit looks forth in
silence in its amazing and secure self-possession.

(_γγ_) For the reason, then, that the contention we have indicated is
present, without appearing, however, as a difference or separation of
the ideal spirituality from its external form, the negative which is
therein contained, is for this very reason immanent in this inseparable
totality and is thereby expressed. This is within the sphere of this
spiritual loftiness the breath and atmosphere of melancholy, which
men of genius have felt in the godlike figures of antique art even
where the beauty of the external presentment is consummate. The
repose of divine blessedness[191] is unable to split itself up into
the passions of joy, pleasure, and satisfaction, and the _peace_ of
immortality stands aloof from the smile of self-satisfaction and genial
contentedness. Contentment is the emotion of the agreement of our
singular subjectivity with the condition of that environment which is
defined for or given to us or brought about through our own agency.
Napoleon, for example, never expressed more thorough contentment than
when he happened to obtain some success at the cost of making all
the world discontented. For contentment is only the approval of my
own being, action, and engagements, and the extreme of it is readily
recognizable in that state of feeling of the Philistine to which every
man of practical ability necessarily extends it. This feeling and its
expression is, however, no expression appropriate to the prefigured
immortal gods. Free and perfected beauty is not satisfied with joining
the concordant temper of a particular finite existence; rather its
individuality, in its aspect as Spirit no less than in that of form,
albeit it is self-defined with characterization, only finds itself
fully in union with its true nature when it is at the same time free
universality and spirituality in repose upon itself. This universality
is just that which people are wont to point to as the frigidity of
the Greek gods. They are only cold, however, to our modern intimacy
with the temporal. Independently regarded they possess warmth and
life; that peaceful blessedness, which is reflected in their external
presentment, is essentially an abstraction from particularity, a
mode of being indifferent to the Past, a surrender of that which is
external, a giving up which, albeit neither full of trouble nor pain,
is for all that a giving up of what is earthly and evanescent, just as
their cheerfulness of spirit looks far away and over death, the grave,
loss and temporality, and for the very reason that it is profound
inherently contains this negative we are discussing. And the more this
earnestness and spiritual freedom is prominent in the vision of these
godlike figures the more we feel the contrast between this loftiness
and the determinate corporality in which they are enclosed. The
blessed gods mourn quite as much over their blessedness as their bodily
environment. In the letters of their form we read the destiny which
lies before them, and whose development, as actual manifestation of
that contradiction between this very loftiness and that particularity,
spirituality, and sensuous existence classical art itself sets face to
face with its final overthrow.

(_c_) If we ask ourselves, then, _thirdly_, what is the nature of
the external representation, which is adequate to this notion of the
classic Ideal we have just indicated, we shall find in this connection,
too, that the essential points of view have already in our general
consideration of the Ideal been furnished us with considerable detail.
We have consequently here only further to remark, that in the genuine
classic Ideal the spiritual individuality of the gods is not conceived
in their relation to something else, or brought about by virtue of
their particularity in conflict, and battle, but rather is made visible
in their eternal self-tranquillity, in this painfulness of the godlike
peace itself. The determinate character is not, therefore, made active
in the way that it stimulated the gods to the sense of particular
emotions and passions, or compelled them to adopt specific aims of
conduct. On the contrary, it is precisely out of that collision and
development, nay, out of that very relation to the finite and all that
is essentially discordant that they are brought back to that condition
of pure self-absorption. This repose in its most austere severity, not
inflexible, cold, or dead, but sensitive and immutable, is the highest
and most adequate form of representation for the classic gods. When
they make their appearance consequently in specific situations, it is
not necessary that there should be conditions or actions which give
rise to conflicts, but rather such which, as themselves harmless, so,
too, leave the gods in a like condition. It is, therefore, sculpture
which among the arts is above all adapted to portray the classic Ideal
in its simple self-possession, in which what is rather the universal
divinity receives more obvious emphasis than the particular character.
Chiefly it is the more ancient and more austere type of sculpture which
maintains its firm hold of this aspect of the Ideal, and only in the
later forms we find a movement towards increased dramatic vividness
of situations and characterization. Poetry, on the contrary, ranges
the gods in vigorous action, that is, in an attitude of negation to
a definite mode of life, and brings them thereby into conflict and
strife. The repose of plastic art, where it remains in the sphere which
is uniquely its own, can only express the aforesaid negative phase of
spirit face to face with particular facts in that serious strain of
melancholy, which we have already attempted to define more nearly.


2. THE SPHERE OF THE PARTICULAR GODS

As individuality in visible form, represented under the mode of
immediate existence, and withal both definite and particular, godhead
necessarily is divided into a number of figures. In other words,
Polytheism is unquestionably essential as the principle of classical
art, and it would be the undertaking of a fool to think of embodying
the one God of the Sublime and of Pantheism or the absolute religion,
which comprehends God purely as Spirit and essential personality, in
the plastic type of beauty, or to entertain the idea that the classical
forms could have arisen among the Jews, Mohammedans, or Christians,
as adapted to the content of their religious beliefs, from their own
original views of the world, as they did in the case of the Greeks.

(_a_) In this multiplicity the divine universe[192] at this stage
is broken up into a sphere of particular gods, of which each
individual stands by himself alone in contrast to all the others.
These individualities are not, however, of the kind that they can be
taken merely as allegorical presentations of universal qualities, as
if Apollo, for example, were the god of wisdom, Zeus of dominion.
Zeus is also quite as much wisdom, and in the "Eumenides" Apollo, as
we have seen, protects Orestes, the son and the royal son to boot,
whom he himself has stimulated to an act of vengeance. The sphere
of the Greek gods is a multiplicity of individuals, of which every
particular god, albeit also in the specific character of a particular
person, is at the same time a self-exclusive totality, which itself
possesses essentially also the quality of another god. For every such
presentment, viewed as divine, is always, too, a whole. It is only by
this means that the divine personalities of Greek religion include an
abundance of traits; and although their blessedness consists in their
universal and spiritual self-repose no less than in their abstraction
from the direct movement which Time is for ever defeating in the sphere
of the disintegrating manifold of natural fact and condition, yet for
all that they possess the power in a like degree to assert themselves
as energetic and active in many of its aspects. They are neither the
abstract particular nor the abstract universal, but the universal which
is the source of particularity.

(_b_) On account of this type of individuality, however, Greek
polytheism is unable to make up an essentially systematic and
self-integrated totality. At the first glance, it is true, it appears
imperative to require of the Olympus of the gods, that the numerous
gods that are there assembled, should, as thus collected together,
and if their separable unities have real truth in them, and their
content is to be classic in the true sense, also express essentially
the totality of the Idea, should exhaust the entire sphere of the
necessary forces of Nature and Spirit, and give to themselves therefore
constructive completeness, in other words, manifest themselves as
subject to a principle of necessity. This demand, however, would be
liable from the first to the qualification that those forces present
in the emotions and, generally speaking, assertive in the sphere
of spiritual life in the absolute significance[193] which becomes
operative first in the later and higher religion, must remain excluded
from the sphere of the classic gods, so that the range of content, the
particular aspects of which succeed in making an appearance in Greek
mythology, would be already thereby curtailed. Moreover, apart from
this, we have also on the one hand, necessarily introduced by virtue of
the essentially varied character of this individuality, the accidental
incidents of a definition, which avoids the rigorous articulation
of the differences inherent in the notion, and does not suffer
these divinities to maintain the abstraction of merely _one_ mode
of determination. And, on the other hand, the universality, in the
elemental medium of which the divine personalities secure their blessed
state, abolishes any hard and fast particularity, and the loftiness of
the eternal powers exalts itself jubilant over the cold seriousness of
finite fact, wherein, if this inconsequence did not prevail, the divine
presences would be evolved through the medium of their limitations.

However much, therefore, even the principal forces of the world, as the
totality of Nature and Spirit, are reproduced in Greek mythology, this
aggregation, quite as much in the interests of the universal Divine as
in those of the individuality of particular gods, cannot assert itself
as a _systematic_ whole. If this were not so, instead of _individual_
characters the gods would approximate rather to allegorical beings,
and instead of being _divine_ personalities would be characters wholly
limited to finite and abstract modes.

(_c_) When we consequently consider the circle of the Greek
divinities--that is all within the range of the so-called presiding
divinities--more nearly according to their fundamental character,
inquiring how that character appears firmly delineated by sculpture
in its most general and at the same time sensuously concrete
presentment, we find no doubt the essential distinctions and their
totality explicitly set before us, but also in their detail also
ever again obliterated, and the severity of the execution tempered
to a result which is inconsistent with either their beauty or their
individuality. So for example Zeus bears in his hands the dominion
over gods and men, without, however, thereby essentially endangering
the free independence of the other gods. He is the supreme god; his
power, however, does not absorb that of the others. We find in the
conception of him no doubt an association with the heavens, with
lightning and thunder, and the generative vitality of Nature; but he
is yet more truly the might of the State, of the order of fact which
is conformable to law, the binding nexus in contracts, oaths, and
hospitality, and generally the substantial bond that gives subsistence
to the human condition, whether in its practical or ethical aspect,
the potency, in short, both of knowledge and spirit. The dominion of
his brothers is directed toward the sea or the lower world. Apollo is
known as the god of knowledge, as the mouthpiece and fair presentment
of spiritual interests, as the teacher of the Muses. "Know thyself"
is the inscription over his temple at Delphi, a behest which is not
so much concerned with the failings and defects, as the essential
import of spirit, that is with art and the truth of consciousness.
Subtlety and eloquence, mediation in fact generally as we also find
it in subordinate spheres, which, albeit immoral elements are therein
commingled, nevertheless are appurtenant to the complete range of
spiritual life--such is the most important province of the activity
of Hermes, who also leads the shades of the dead to the underworld.
The might of war is what mainly distinguishes Ares. Hephaestos is
conspicuously capable in the technical crafts. The enthusiasm which
still carries with it a natural element, the strong emotions which
wine, sport, and dramatic performances naturally produce are the native
province of Dionysos. The spheres allotted to the feminine divinities
very much correspond to the above series. In Here the ethical bond of
marriage is the most dominant trait. Ceres is the instructress and
developer of agriculture, and as such has presented mankind with both
those adjuncts to its cultivation, that is to say, first, the care for
the nurture of natural products, which satisfy man's immediate wants,
and, secondly, the spiritual accessories of property, marriage, right,
the beginnings of civilization and moral order. In the same way Athene
is the representative of moderation, good sense[194], legality, the
power of wisdom, technical capacity in the arts and courageousness, and
comprises within her intelligent and warlike maidenhood the concrete
spirit of the folk, the free and substantive spirit which uniquely
belongs to the Athenian state, and places the same before us in
positive shape as sovereign and godlike power to be revered. Artemis on
the contrary, wholly distinct from the Ephesian Diana, possesses the
more inflexible independence of maiden modesty for her most essential
characteristic. She loves the chase, and is generally not so much the
quietly pensive, as the severe and eager-striving maiden. Aphrodite,
together with the charming Cupid, who in his descent from the ancient
Titan Eros became a boy, is the interpreter of all that the attractions
and sexual passion effect in our humanity. This, then, is the kind
of content of the spiritually informed individual gods. In so far
as we are concerned with their external representation we can only
repeat that sculpture is the most important art in this respect, and
it is carried to the point of this detail of their particularity. If,
however, it is permitted to express that individuality in its more
specific determination, it at once passes beyond its primary severe
loftiness, although even in that case it unites the variety and wealth
of such individuality under _one_ mode of definition, namely that
which we distinguish as character, and establishes this character in
its more simple clarity for the envisagement of the senses, in other
words for the completest and most final determination of the external
presentment of these divinities. For the imagination always remains
relatively to the external and real existence less distinct, when it
elaborates, as it also does, as poetry the same content in a number
of tales, occurrences, and events which concern the gods. For this
reason sculpture is on the one hand more ideal, while on the other
it individualizes the character of the gods in perfectly clear human
outlines, and perfects the anthropomorphism of the classic Ideal. As
this presentation of the Ideal in its mode of externality, entirely
adequate as it unquestionably is to the essentially ideal content it
declares, these figures of Greek sculpture are the Ideals in their
absolutely explicit realization; they are the self-subsistent, eternal
forms, the centre of the plastic beauty of classical art, whose type
persists as the foundation, even there too, where these figures step
forth on the planes of definite activity, and appear as affected by the
revolutions of particular events.


3. THE PARTICULAR INDIVIDUALITY OF THE GODS

Individuality and its representation is, however, unable to acquiesce
in that which is still an ever relative and abstract articulation
of character. A star is exhaustively summarized in the simple laws
that control it. A few definite traits may sufficiently characterize
the external formation of the world of rocks; but already in the
vegetable world we are aware of an infinite variety of manifold
structure, transition, interfusion, and anomaly. Animal organizations
are distinguished by a still greater range of difference, and
constantly shifting interaction with the external environment to which
they are related. And finally, as we rise to the spiritual realm
and its manifestation, we are conscious of a yet more infinitely
embracing multiplicity, both of its internal and external existence.
Inasmuch, then, as the classic Ideal does not rest content with purely
self-possessed individuality, but is further concerned to place the
same in motion, to bring the same into relation with something else,
and to exhibit it as active in such relation--for these reasons the
character of the gods does not rest stationary in the possession
of what itself is an essentially still substantive determination,
but secures further particular traits of wider extension. The
self-exclusive movement in the direction of external existence, and
the change which is inseparable from it supplies the more intimate
traits that constitute the singularity of any particular god, as is
meet and fit and withal necessary to complete a living personality. The
accidental nature of these particular traits is, however, associated
at the same time with such a type of _singularity_, traits, that is,
we are no longer able to refer back to the universal aspect of the
substantive significance. For this reason this particular aspect of
the separate divinities approximates to something positive, which can
consequently also merely stand about it and continue to resound as an
external accessory.

(_a_) We are therefore at once confronted with the question: "From
what source is the _material_ secured for this mode of the appearance
of singularity, and in what manner is this forward process of
particularization maintained?" For the ordinary individual man, for
his character out of which he brings his actions to a conclusion, for
the events in which he is involved, for the destiny which awaits him,
this closest and more positive material is supplied by his external
conditions, such as the date of his birth, the situation he inherits,
parents, education, environment, temporal relations, the entire
province, that is, of the conditions of his life as they affect his
spiritual nature or bodily existence. The present world contains this
material, and the records of life furnished by different individuals
are from this point of view characterized by every conceivable
difference. It is another matter altogether, however, with the free
shapes of godlike individuality, which possess no determinate
existence in the concrete world of Nature, but have their birth in
the cradle of the imagination. For this very reason it is an obvious
assumption that poets and artists, who, speaking in general terms,
have created the Ideal out of their free spiritual bounty, have merely
borrowed the material for these accidental particular traits from the
caprice of their own innate powers of imagination. This assumption is,
however, false. For we assigned in general terms to classical art, the
position that its construction in the first instance is, by means of
the reaction active in its opposition to the assumptions necessarily
requisite to its own peculiar province, carried forward to that which
as genuine Ideal it is. It is from these presuppositions as their
source that the specific traits of particularity are to be looked
for, which supply to the gods their closer individual vitality. The
fundamental features of these assumptions have already been submitted,
and we have only here to remind our readers shortly of what has been
already advanced.

(_α_) It is the symbolical natural religions which constitute in the
first instance the abundant source which supplies Greek mythology
with the primary substratum that we find then modified within it. But
inasmuch as the traits that are borrowed from such a source have to be
distributed among gods that are represented as individuals possessing
the life of Spirit, they inevitably lose the essential feature of
their character, in which they passed as symbolical; they have now no
longer to retain a significance, which would differ from that which the
individual himself presents and makes visible. The previous symbolical
content becomes now, therefore, converted into the content of a divine
subject itself, and for the reason that it implies no substantive
relation of the god, but is merely an incidental feature, material of
this sort falls together into an external tale, some deed or event,
which is ascribed to the gods in this or that particular situation.
Consequently we find under this head all the symbolical traditions of
the earlier sacred poems, which receive, under the modified shape of
actions proper to a truly self-conscious individuality, the form of
human events and histories, which purport to be accomplished in concert
with the gods, and are not merely the inventions of poets as the mood
dictates. When Homer tells us, for instance, that the gods went off on
a journey to feast for twelve days among the blameless Ethiopians, such
would be a poor enough example of inventiveness regarded as the poet's
invention alone. It is much the same with the tale of the birth of
Zeus. Kronos, we are told, had devoured all his sons; for this reason
Rhea, his spouse, when she was big with her youngest child Zeus, went
off to Crete, where she brought forth her son, presenting to Kronos a
stone to devour instead of her child, whom she swaddled in fur. Later
on Kronos brought up again all his children, his daughters, and along
with them Poseidon. This story, regarded as mere invention, would be
foolish enough. The remnants of symbolical significance still peer,
however, through it, albeit on account of their having lost their
original character, they come down to us in the guise of external
history. The history of Ceres and Proserpina is on similar lines.
Here we have the ancient symbolic significance of the disappearance
and budding forth of the seed of corn. The myth presents this to us
under the image as though Proserpina played one day in a valley with
flowers, and plucked the fragrant narcissus, which from one root opened
in a hundred blossoms. Then the Earth thunders; Pluto ascends from the
depths, lifts the lamenting maiden into his golden car, and bears her
off to the underworld. Thereon Ceres wandered over the Earth for a
long time vainly stricken with a mother's sorrow. Finally Proserpina
returned to the upper world; Zeus, however, had only suffered her to do
this subject to the command that she must never partake of the food of
the gods. Unfortunately she had on one occasion tasted a pomegranate,
and was therefore only able to remain in the upper world during spring
and summer. In this tale, too, we find that the symbolical content has
not been retained, but has been converted into a human event, which
suffers only the more general sense to penetrate through many external
traits. In the same way the supplementary names of the gods point
frequently to symbolical ground-strata of a similar character, from
which, however, the symbolical form has vanished, and which only serve
now to give individuality a more complete characterization.

(_β_) Local conditions supply a further source for the positive
particularities of individual divinities, no less by presenting us with
the origin of the conceptions of godhead, than by pointing to the modes
under which their services were originally obtained and secured, and
the particular places which were in a special sense devoted to their
worship.

(_αα_) Although, however, the demonstration of the Ideal and its
universal beauty is exalted over the particular locality and its
unique claims for recognition, and, moreover, has drawn together the
specific external aspects in the more general range of the artistic
imagination into one comprehensive picture which is throughout adequate
to the substantive significance, yet for all that, when the art of
sculpture associates the gods, regarded as individuals, with isolated
relations and conditions, these particular traits and local colours
come frequently also to the fore, in order to reproduce something
of that individuality, although it is only thus more defined in
its external aspect. An illustration of this is the way Pausanias
adduces a mass of ideas, images, pictures, and myths, which he met
with in temples, public places, temple treasuries, in any place where
anything of importance was to be found or otherwise was in the range
of his experience. In the same way and on the same lines the ancient
traditions and local suggestions which have been borrowed from foreign
sources run along with the home ones in Greek myth; and to all of
them more or less a relation has been attached which unites them to
the history, creation, and foundations of States, more particularly
by means of colonization. Forasmuch, however, as this many-sided
and specific material in the universality of the gods has lost its
original significance, we necessarily come across stories, which
in their motley and intricate character fail to convey any meaning
whatever. As an example we may instance the case where Aeschylus in
his "Prometheus" presents to us the wanderings of Io in all their
severity and external garb without admitting the least suggestion of an
ethical or traditional story, or a natural significance. We find just
the same difficulty when we approach the stories of Perseus, Dionysos,
and others. The most varied and confused kind of material is also run
into the tales about Hercules, which forthwith, in such tales, assume
an entirely human aspect under the guise of chance events, exploits,
passions, misfortunes, and other untoward occurrences.

(_ββ_) In addition to all this the eternal powers of classical art
are the universal constituents of the actual embodiment of the
existence and actions of Greek _humanity_, from whose national origins
consequently in their earliest form, that is, out of the heroic times
and other traditions, still a very considerable residue of detail
remains appendant to the gods even in later days. In this way, too,
many characteristic features in the intricate tales of their gods
unquestionably must be referred to historic personages, heroes, older
folk-races, natural facts and circumstances attributable to wars,
battles, and other matters of a public character. And just as the
family and the distinction of clans is the point of departure of the
State, the Greeks possessed also their family gods, penates, clan-gods,
and furthermore the guardian divinities of particular cities and
states. In this excessive leaning towards the point of view of history
the thesis, however, is apt to be maintained that the origin of the
Greek gods generally is deducible from such historical facts, heroes,
and earlier kings. This is a plausible but none the less superficial
view. Heyne quite in recent times has also given currency to it. In
a way analogous to this a Frenchman, by name Nicholas Fréret, has,
for example, accepted the quarrels of different priestly guilds as
the general principle underlying the war of the gods. That such a
historical phase in the life of a people may contribute something,
that definite clans may have given some effect to their peculiar
notions of deity, that likewise different local aspects may have
afforded further matter in the process of divine individualization--all
this may be admitted, no doubt. The real origin of the gods is for
all that not to be traced to such external material of history, but
resides in the spiritual potencies of Life, under the guise of which
they were conceived. We are consequently only entitled to accept the
more extensive play of all that is positive, local, and historical,
in so far as it makes more definite the formal presentation of each
particular individuality.

(_γγ_) Inasmuch as, further, the god passes into the sphere of the
human imagination, and, still more important, is represented in real
bodily shape, into close relations with which again man is placed by
his _cultus_ in the activities of divine worship, a fresh material is
here, too, presented by such relations for the extension of all that
is positive and accidental. What animals have to be sacrificed to any
god, what vestments the priesthood or the worshipper must appear in,
what particular sequence must be adopted in any ceremonial--by all such
matters the most varied and particular incidents are accumulated. For
every activity of this kind implies an indefinite number of aspects and
modes of arrangement, which may accidentally fall out in this way or
that, but which, as appurtenant to a sacred rite, should be something
settled, and not fixed by caprice, and which necessarily tend to
pass into the sphere of symbolism. The colour of the vestments is an
example of this; in the ritual of Bacchus we have the colour of wine,
in like manner the doe-skin in which those initiated in the mysteries
were enwrapped. The same thing applies to the drapery and attributes
of the gods, the bow of Pythian Apollo, the whip, the staff, and
numberless other accessories. Such things become, however, gradually
a custom and nothing more; no one in the practice of the same thinks
any longer of their birth history; and all that we now by dint of
our research point out as their significance, has in the performance
of them grown to something quite external, which mankind associates
himself with on account of the immediate interest, that is, from mere
sense of fun, delight in the present, devotion, or simply because it
is just a custom and is so fixed for his active senses, and is done
in like manner by others. As an example from our own life, when we
see our German youth light the Johannis fire in summer time, or play
antics elsewhere, and throw it at the windows, such is for us a purely
formal custom, in which the original significance fades as much into
the background as at the festal dances of Greek youths and maidens
the revolutions of the dance do in their imitative (like the twists
and turns of some labyrinth) significance of the spiral motions of
the planets. Youth does not dance in order to entertain ideas of such
things, but the interest limits itself naturally to the dancing and the
tasteful and graceful festivity of its beautiful motion. The entire
significance, which was created by the original stimulus, and of which
the reproduction was for the imagination and sensuous perception of
symbolical character, is throughout an imaginative conception, whose
singular traits we suffer to pass from us like a fairy story, or as in
historical narrative as external detail relative to Time and Space,
and of which we can only say: "It is so," or, "Such is the tale," and
so forth. The interest of art can consequently only consist in this,
namely, that it borrow one aspect from the material which has passed
into the condition of positive externality, and make the best of
this one for an example, which sets the gods before us as concrete,
living individuals, merely retaining a distant echo of any profounder
significance.

This positive aspect is precisely that which endows the Greek gods
with the charm of living humanity when the imagination elaborates it
anew. It is by this latter process that what is otherwise merely of
substantive import, or that of power, is thereby carried into the
individual present, which, speaking in general terms, is concentrated
to a point out of that which is truly explicit or independently actual,
and which is external and accidental, and thereby the indefinite,
which otherwise is always present in the conception of the gods, is
limited in its range and filled out in its content. We are unable to
attach any additional value to specific tales and particular traits
of characterization, for this material, which, in its earlier stage
is, when we look at its primary source, the symbolically significant,
has now only remaining the task to perfect the spiritual individuality
of the gods in their positive sensuous definition in contrast to the
human and to attach to it by virtue of a material which, in respect
to its content and envisagement, is undivine, the aspect of caprice
and chance, characteristics inseparable from concrete individuality.
Sculpture, in so far as it presents to our senses the pure ideals of
the gods, and is concerned to set before us character and expression
solely under the mode of living bodies, can least of all with
clearness make visible the final result of individualization. It does
nevertheless give real effect to it within the limits of its own
province, as we may see, for example, in the different treatment of
headdress, the mode in which the folds or locks of hair are arranged
in each particular case; and this is done not merely with a view to
symbolical interpretation but in order to individualize. In this way
Hercules has short locks, Zeus an abundant growth which rises above the
forehead, Diana quite a different folding of the hair to that of Venus.
Pallas, too, is distinguished by the Gorgo on the helmet, and the like
result is obtained by means of weapons, girdle, fillets, bracelets, and
all the variety of other external adornment.

(_γ_) We find as a _third_ and final source of the closer definition
of divine personality the relation which this occupies to the
concrete actual world and its numerous natural phenomena, human
deeds and events. For however much we have seen that this spiritual
individuality is in part respectively to their universal essence, and
partly in respect to their particular singularity, the visible result
of earlier natural foundations which have symbolical significance,
yet it also persists, if regarded as a spiritually self-subsistent
personality, in a relation of continuous, vitality with Nature and
human existence. It is under this point of view, as we have already
intimated at length, that we have before us the imaginative flow
of the poet, an ever fertile source of particular tales, traits of
character and exploits, such as are related us about the gods. The
artistic aspect of this stage of the process consists in this, that
the divine personalities are made to blend in a vital way with human
affairs, and that the isolated nature of events are without exception
conceived in association with the universality of the divine, just
as we ourselves, for example, are wont to say, if in another sense,
of course, that this or that eventuality comes from God. Even in the
reality of everyday life, in the natural process of his existence, in
his daily wants, fears, and hopes, the Greek took refuge in his gods.
At first it was external accidents, which the priesthood accepted as
omens, and interpreted relatively to his objects and circumstances. If
distress and misfortune appeared, the priest had to explain the cause
of the affliction, to recognize the anger and disposition of the gods,
and to suggest the means by which the misfortune might be faced. The
poets proceed yet further in their interpretations for this reason,
namely, that they ascribe everything, which is related to a pathos
universal and essential, that is, the moving force in human resolve
and action, to the gods themselves and their activity; so that the
activity of mankind appears likewise as the act of the gods, who fulfil
their own counsels by means of their instrument, man. The material in
these poetical expositions is taken from the circumstances of ordinary
life, in respect to which the poet lays it down, whether this or that
god has expressed his purpose in the event which he is expounding
and asserted himself actively therein. For this reason poetry to
an exceptional extent enlarges the range of many specific stories,
which have the gods for their principal subject-matter. We may in
this connection recall to our memories several examples which we have
already used as illustrations when considering another aspect of our
subject, namely, the relation of the universal powers to the practical
pursuits of human personality. Homer places Achilles before us as the
bravest among the Greeks before Troy. This pre-eminence of his hero he
expresses by means of the statement that Achilles is invulnerable in
every portion of his body with the single exception of his heel, which
his mother was compelled to take hold of when she dipped him in the
Styx. This tale has its origin in the imagination of the poet who thus
interprets the external fact. If we accept this bluntly as though an
actual fact purported to be expressed therein which the ancients would
have believed in the same sense that we believe in any fact on the
evidence of our senses such a conclusion is a very crude one indeed.
It in short amounts to this, that Homer no less than all the Greeks
and Alexander with them who admired Achilles and praised his fortunes,
which were the main theme of the song of Homer, were simpletons.
Such a glorification must inevitably carry such a consequence if
the reflection is to hold good that the bravery of Achilles was no
difficult matter since he was aware of his invulnerability. But the
bravery is, in truth, thereby in no way abridged, because he is equally
aware of his early death, and notwithstanding never evades danger,
however it may arise. The like relation is put before us in a very
different way in the "Niebelungenlied." In that the horned Siegfried
is likewise invulnerable, but he has also in addition to this his cap
which makes him invisible. When he assists King Gunther thus invisible
in the fight of the latter with Brunhilde it becomes simply an affair
of barbaric sorcery which does not enhance very much our opinion either
of the bravery of Siegfried or King Gunther. No doubt in Homer the gods
frequently lend assistance to particular heroes; but the gods merely
appear on such occasions as the universal concept of that which man
as an individual himself is and carries out, and to carry out which
he must actively employ the entire strength of his heroic endowment.
If it had been otherwise the gods would have only found it necessary
to decimate _en masse_ the Trojan host in battle in order to complete
at once the triumph of the Greeks. Homer gives us a picture just the
reverse of this when he describes the main fight as essentially a
contest between individuals, and it is only when the press and medley
in general, when the entire mass of combatants, the collective heart
of the host clashes in fury, that Ares at length storms over the field
and gods war against gods. And this is not only generally fine and
splendid as an enhancement of the effect, but we may find in it the
profounder significance that Homer recognizes the particular heroes in
what is singular and exceptional and the universal potencies and forces
in the collective effect and the general aspect. In another connection
Homer permits Apollo to appear on the scene, when the moment arrives
which is fatal to Patroclus who is bearing the invincible armour of
Achilles[195]. Three times had Patroclus plunged into the crowded host
of the Trojans, mighty as Ares, and three times he had already slain
nine men. When he stormed there for the fourth time then it was that
the god, enveloped in obscure night, made toward him among the medley
and smote him on the back and the shoulders, tore away from him his
helmet, so that it rolled on the ground, and rang out sharply as it
struck the hoofs of the chargers; and the plumes of it were besmirched
with blood and dust, which none ever wot of before. Apollo also breaks
the brazen spear in his hands, the shield drops from his shoulders, and
his armour is loosened on him by the god. This interference of Apollo
we may accept as the poetic explanation of the circumstance, that it
is exhaustion no less than natural death which seizes upon and subdues
Patroclus in the turmoil and heat of battle at the fourth encounter.
Then it was that Euphorbus was able to thrust his spear into his
back between the shoulders. Yet one more time Patroclus endeavoured
to withdraw from the battle; but Hector had already hastened to meet
him, and thrust his spear deep into his side. Then Hector rejoiced and
mocked the sinking hero. But Patroclus, speaking in low tones, replied
that it was Zeus and Apollo who had mastered him, and withal with no
trouble, because they had taken his weapons from off his shoulders.
"Twenty men such as thou art," he exclaims, "I could have laid low with
my spear, but I am slain by fateful necessity and the hand of Apollo.
Thou, Euphorbus, hast but slain me the second time, and thou, Hector,
but the third." Here, too, we may remark that the appearance of the
gods simply points to the fact that Patroclus, albeit protected by
the armour of Achilles, becomes faint, confounded, and despite of it
slain. And this is not by any means a superstitious freak or empty play
of the imagination, or rather a statement which amounts to this[196],
that Hector's fame will be detracted from by this interposition of
Apollo, and that even Apollo does not play in the entire affair a
part which entirely redounds to his honour, since we necessarily take
into account the might of the god--speculations of this kind merely
betray a superstition of the prosaic mind as destitute of taste as it
is devoid of reason. For in every case where Homer explains specific
events by means of such appearances of the gods the gods use that
which is already immanent in the conscious life of men, the power,
that is, of their own passion and observation, or the potentialities
of the general condition in which the man is placed, the force and the
foundation of that which befalls and happens to anyone as a consequence
of such conditions If it is true that at times traits that are wholly
external and absolutely positive assert themselves in the appearance
of the gods these in their turn have a comic aspect; as in the case
when the lame Hephaestos goes round as cup-bearer. And generally we may
say that Homer never treats the reality of such appearances from first
to last seriously. At one time we see the gods in action, at another
they occupy a station of complete tranquillity. The Greeks were
fully conscious that it was the poets who were responsible for such
apparitions; and if they believed in them their belief was connected
directly with that spiritual aspect which is equally the possession
of mankind, forasmuch as it is the universal, the very active and
motive principle in the events thus presented. From whatever point of
view, therefore, we consider the matter it is clear that it is totally
unnecessary to import superstition either in our own views or in those
of the Greeks before we can enjoy such poetical representations of
their gods.

(_b_) Such, then, is the general character of the classical Ideal,
whose broader development we shall have to consider more succinctly
when we examine the particular arts. Here we have only to add the
observation that to whatever extent either gods or men are carried
in their positive opposition to the particular and external, yet in
classical art the affirmative ethical substratum must assert itself
as maintained. The subjectivity remains throughout in union with the
substantive content of its powers. Just as in Greek art the natural
element is preserved in harmony with the spiritual and is likewise
subordinated to the ideal content, though it be as adequate existence,
the inward heart of our humanity ever presents itself also in a
thorough identity with the genuine objectivity of Spirit, in other
words, with the essential content of what is moral and true. Regarded
from this point of view, the classic Ideal is unaware of the separation
of ideality from external presentment and of the rending of the
subjective and consequently abstract individual caprice in its various
objects and passions, and it is no less so, on the other hand, of the
abstract universal as thereby created. The foundations of character
must, consequently, always be the substantive, and what is bad, sinful
and evil in the self-housed dwelling of subjectivity is excluded
from classical representations. And above all else the harshness,
wickedness, meanness, and hideousness which finds a place in romantic
art, will be wholly alien to it. It is true, we find many instances
of transgression, matricide, patricide and other crimes against the
love of family and piety treated as the subject-matter of Greek art;
but they are not here regarded simply as atrocities, or, as a little
while since it was the fashion among ourselves, as brought about by
the inscrutability of a so-called fatality which imports the appearance
of a necessary result. Rather, if such transgressions are committed
by mankind and in part ordered and defended by the gods themselves,
such actions are on every occasion presented to us from some point of
view at least in a light which declares a certain justification truly
arising out of the subject-matter itself.

(_c_) Despite this substantive foundation we have seen the general
elaboration of the gods of classical art manifest itself out of the
repose of the Ideal within the variety of the individual and external
embodiment, in all the detail of events, occurrences, and actions,
which become ever and ever more human. By this means classical art
finally, if we consider its content, carries yet further the process
of _articulating_ the accidental individualization, when we consider
it as a mode of making the same _pleasurable_ and attractive. In other
words that which pleases is the elaboration of the particular aspect of
the external phenomenon at every point of the same; by this means the
work of art no longer arrests the spectator merely in its connection
with his own concrete soul-life, but also contains many affiliating
links with the finite aspect of his subjectivity. For it is precisely
in the finiteness of the art-creation that the closer association
subsists with that aspect of the individual which is itself finite, and
which rediscovers itself once more with satisfaction in every respect
as mobile and stable existence in the art-product. The seriousness of
the gods becomes a grace, which does not agitate with violence or lift
a man over his ordinary existence, but suffers him to persist there
tranquil, and simply claims to bring him content. Just as we generally
find that the imagination when it masters religious conceptions, and
endows them with a form appropriate to its notions of beauty, has a
tendency to make the earnest character of devotion disappear, and in
this respect destroys religion strictly as religion; so, too, this very
process moves forward at the stage we are discussing for the most part
by the addition of that which is agreeable and pleases. For it is not
by any means the substantial aspect, the significance of the gods, or
their universal character, which is evolved by virtue of what delights.
Rather it is the finite side, their sensuous existence and subjective
inward life, which purports to awake interest and provide satisfaction.
The more, therefore, the charm of the existence reproduced is the
dominant factor in its beauty to that extent the gracefulness is
disentwined from the embrace of the universal and removed from the
content, through which alone the profounder penetration could rest
satisfied.

The transition to another province of the forms of art is closely
united with this externality and articulate definition. For under the
mode of externality reposes the manifold of the finite condition; a
manifold which, so soon as it secures a free field, asserts itself
finally in opposition to the spiritual Idea, its universality and
truth, and begins to rouse up the dissatisfaction of thought in a
reality which is no longer adequate to express it.

[Footnote 180: Chapter XLIX.]

[Footnote 181: I presume this is the sense of that difficult word _des
Inneren_ here.]

[Footnote 182: By "absolute" I presume Hegel means here absolute in
the sense of predominant, masterful--activity such as the Greek artist
possessed.]

[Footnote 183: "Iliad," I, vv. 9-12.]

[Footnote 184: _Ibid._ vv. 94-100.]

[Footnote 185: "Odyssey," XXIV, vv. 41-63.]

[Footnote 186: That is, Thetis.]

[Footnote 187: _Bestimmte sittliche Substanz._]

[Footnote 188: _Das reine Insichseyn._]

[Footnote 189: _Ein ewiger Ernst._]

[Footnote 190: I presume this refers to some drapery or curtains round
the bust as exhibited.]

[Footnote 191: This is the meaning of _Heiterkeit_ here rather than
"cheerfulness," though _Seligkeit_ is the usual word.]

[Footnote 192: _Göttliche Universum._ A rather curious expression for,
I presume, the ideal totality of the Divine Being.]

[Footnote 193: _Der geistigen absoluten Innerlichkeit._ Lit., "the
spiritual and absolute mode of the inward life." He refers, of course,
to Christianity, with its life of the pure in heart and the pure
reason.]

[Footnote 194: _Besonnenheit._]

[Footnote 195: "Iliad," XVI, vv. 783-849.]

[Footnote 196: I very much doubt whether the words _Sondern das Gerede
allein_ can have this meaning, but the obvious meaning, "but only the
gossip," hardly makes sense. I think the sentence requires revision.]




