CHAPTER I

THE RELIGIOUS DOMAIN OF ROMANTIC ART

Inasmuch as romantic art, in the representation of the consciousness
of absolute subjectivity, understanding this as the comprehension of
all truth, the coalescence of mind with its essence--receives its
substantive content in the satisfaction of soul-life, in other words
the reconciliation of God with the world and therein with Himself, it
follows that at this stage the Ideal for the first time is completely
at home. For it was blessedness and self-subsistency, contentment,
repose, and freedom which we declared as most fundamentally defining
the Ideal. Of course, we cannot therefore on this account deduce
the Ideal simply from the notion and reality of romantic art; but
relatively to the classic Ideal the form it receives is entirely
altered. This relation, already in general terms indicated, we must now
before everything else establish in its fully concrete significance,
in order to elucidate the fundamental type of the romantic mode of
presentation. In the classical Ideal the Divine is in one aspect of
it restricted to pure individuality; in another aspect the soul and
spiritual blessedness of particular gods find their exclusive discharge
through the physical medium; and as a third characteristic, for the
reason that the inseparable unity of each individual both essentially
and in its exterior form supplies the principle of the same, the
negativity of the dismemberment implied in human life, that is the
pain of both body and soul, sacrifice, and resignation are unable to
appear as essentially pertinent to these godlike figures. The Divine
of classical art falls, it is true, into an aggregation of gods,
but there is no organic and essential self-division, no universally
proclaimed essence such as we find in the particular presentment of
man whether in form and spirit, whether empirically or subjectively
considered; and just as little has it confronting it, as being itself
the Absolute in invisible form, a world of evil, sin, and ignorance,
together with the task of resolving such contradictions in harmony, and
only by thus growing on level terms with the very truth and divine out
of this reconciliation. In the notion of the absolute subjectivity,
on the contrary, this opposition between substantive universality and
personality is inherent, an opposition, whose consummated mediation
the subjective ideality perfects with its substance, exalting thereby
the substantive presence to the articulate and absolute subject of
self-knowledge and volition. But there is, _secondly_, appertinent
to the reality of the subjective condition conceived as mind the
profounder contradiction of a finite world, through whose abrogation
as finite, and by whose resultant reconciliation with the Absolute
the Infinite by virtue of its own absolute activity makes its proper
being self-subsistent, and so for the first time exists as absolute
Spirit. The appearance of this actuality on the _terrain_, and in the
configuration of the human spirit receives consequently, in respect to
its _beauty_, a totally different mode of relation to that presented
by classical art. Greek beauty unfolds the inward aspect of spiritual
individuality solely as it is envisaged by means of its bodily shape,
actions, and events, wholly expressed in what is exterior, and living
wholly therein. For romantic art, on the contrary, it is absolutely
necessary that the soul, albeit envisaged in the exterior medium,
should at the same time demonstrate its capacity of self-withdrawal
from the tenement of the body and self-substantive life. The bodily
frame can therefore now only express the inwardness of mind, in so far
as it makes it plain that it is not in this material existence, but
in itself, that the soul discovers its congruent reality. On account
of this beauty is now no longer an idealization in respect to the
objective form, but rather the ideal and essential configuration of the
soul itself; it is in short a beauty of spiritual ideality, that is
the specific mode of such, as every content is informed and elaborated
within the temple of the subjective world, and without retaining the
external medium in this its permeation with Spirit. For the reason,
then, that by this means the interest disappears, which consists in
clarifying real existence to the point of our classical unity, and
is concentrated in the contrary direction of wafting a new breath of
beauty through the unseen content of the spiritual itself, art ceases
to retain the old solicitude for what is exterior at all. It accepts
the same directly as it may chance to find it, leaving it to take
whatever form may happen to please it. The reconciliation with the
Absolute is in the Romantic an act of the inward life, which no doubt
is embodied externally, but which does not retain that exterior in
its material realization as its essential content and object. We may
observe that in close association with this indifference towards the
idealizing union of soul and body, and in its relation to the external
treatment of the more predominant individuality of a sitter, we find
the art of _portraiture_, which does not entirely erase particular
traits and lines, as they are found in Nature, and her inevitable
deficiencies--defects inseparable from finite effects--in order to
replace them with something more adequate. Generally speaking even
here there is a certain limit to the licence given to Nature in this
respect; but to the general aspect of form in the first instance it is
quite indifferent; and no attempt is made to exclude wholly from it the
accidental impurities of finite and sensuous existence.

We may adjoin a further quite sufficient reason for the imperative
character of this radical definition of romantic art from another point
of view. The classic Ideal, where we find it at the culminating point
of its very truth, is self-exclusive, self-subsistent, retiring and not
susceptible[224] in its nature, an orbed individual totality, which
repels all else from itself. Its conformation is uniquely its own; its
life is bound up in that and that exclusively, and it will harbour
no affinity with what is purely empirical and contingent. Whoever,
therefore, approaches an ideal such as this as spectator, is unable
to appropriate its existence as an embodiment strictly akin to that
of his own presence. The figures of the eternal gods, albeit human,
do not belong to our mortality, for these gods have not themselves
experienced the infirmities of finite existence, but are directly
exalted above them. Their affinity with what is empirical and relative
is interrupted. The infinite subjectivity, what we call the Absolute
of romantic art, is on the contrary not absorbed in its presentment;
it is rather carried into its _own_ domain, and for this very reason
retains such external aspect as it possesses not so much _for itself_
as for the contemplation of others, as, in short, an exterior presence
which is freely offered for this purpose. This externality must further
appear in the form of common fact, the human as our senses perceive
it, since it is through that that God Himself descends to the level
of finite and temporal existence, in order to mediate and reconcile
the absolute antithesis, which is inherent in the notion of the
Absolute. For this reason our empirical humanity also contains in its
bodily presence an aspect, which unfolds to man a bond of affinity and
kinship, by virtue whereof he is able to contemplate even his direct
natural presence with assurance; and he can do so because the Divine
incarnation does not, with the severity of the classical type, thrust
on one side the particular and contingent, but presents to his vision
that which he himself possesses, or that which he recognizes and loves
in others around him. It is just this homeliness incidental to what we
ordinarily meet with which attracts and enables romantic art to entrust
itself to the external aspect of reality. Inasmuch, then, as the
externality which is turned adrift is called upon, through this very
abandonment, to suggest the beauty of soul, the lofty pretension of its
spirituality and the sacred colour of the emotional life, so, too, at
the same time, it is a condition of its doing so that it be absorbed
itself within the ideal realm of mind and its absolute content, and
that it appropriate the same.

To sum up finally what is implied in this act of surrender we may
assert that it consists in the general conception, that in romantic art
the infinite subjectivity does not abide in solitary self-sufficiency,
as the Greek god did, living in the full perfection and blessedness
of his self-exclusion; rather it moves out of itself in relation to
somewhat else, which, however, is its own substance, in which it
discovers itself again and continues all the time in union with itself.
This condition of self-unity in some other that is yet its own is the
real form of beauty appropriate to romantic art, the Ideal of the same,
which receives for its mode and envisagement what is, in its essence,
subjective ideality or inwardness, soul-life and its attendant
emotions. The romantic Ideal expresses, therefore, the relation to
another spiritual correlative, which is so closely associated with
the ideal possessions of the first one, that it is only by virtue of
this further one that the soul lives in the complete wealth of its own
kingdom. This essential life of the soul in another is, when expressed
in terms of emotion, the inwardness of love.

We may consequently affirm _lave_ to be the general content of the
romantic, so far as the sphere of religion is concerned. Love, however,
only receives its truly ideal configuration when it expresses the
_positive_ reconcilement of Spirit in its immediacy. Before, however,
we shall be in a position to examine this stage of the fairest and
most ideal spiritual satisfaction, we must first pass in review _the
process of negation_, which the absolute Subject enters in overcoming
the finiteness and immediacy of its human envisagement, a process which
is divulged in the life, death, and suffering of God for the world and
humanity, and its possible reconcilement with God. And, secondly, we
have on the other side, humanity, which is called upon conversely on
its own account to pass through the very same process in order to make
actual the reconciliation which is implicitly contained in its nature.
Midway within the steps of this process, in which the _negative_ aspect
of the sensuous and spiritual passage 011 to death and the grave
constitutes the central act of achievement, we shall find that the
expression of _affirmative_ blessedness is conspicuous, which in this
sphere characterizes art's most beautiful creations. For the better
division of this first chapter we may examine its subject-matter as it
falls into three distinct heads of inquiry.

_First_, we have the redemption-history of Christ; the phasal moments
of absolute Spirit presented in the person of God Himself, in so far as
He becomes man, and takes to Himself an actual existence in the world
of finitude and its concrete conditions, and in this to start with
isolated existence gives visible shape to the Absolute itself.

_Secondly_, we shall consider love in its positive presentment as the
feeling of reconciliation between the human and the Divine; in other
words the Holy Family, the maternal love of Mary, the love of Christ
and that of his disciples.

_Thirdly_, we have the community before us. Here it is the Spirit
of God as present by virtue of the conversion of soul and the
mortification of the natural and finite sense, in short, the return of
man to God, a return in which penances and pains mediate in the first
instance this union of God and man.

1. THE REDEMPTION-HISTORY OF CHRIST

The reconciliation of God with His own substance, history in its
absolute significance, or, in one word, the process of realization, is
made visible to our senses and assured to our minds by the revelation
of God in the world. The content of this reconcilement as expressed
in the most direct way is the coalescence in unity of the absolute
essence of reality with the individual subject of human consciousness.
An individual man is God and God is an individual man. In this truth
is implied the fact that the human spirit _intrinsically_, that is,
relatively to its notion and essence, is Spirit in truth; and every
particular individual in virtue of the humanity he connotes possesses
the infinite vocation no less than the infinite significance of being
an object of God and in union with God. But along with this and of
a like importance the obligation is imposed on man to realize this
notion, which, in the first instance, he merely possesses under the
implication of his nature. In other words, he has to place before
himself and attain to this union with God as the seal of his existence.
Only when he has thus consummated his proper destiny does he become
essentially free and infinite Spirit. This he can only do in so far as
that unity is itself the origination, the eternal ground-root of the
human and Divine nature. The goal is here the explicit beginning of the
process, namely, the presupposition for the religious consciousness
exhibited in romantic art, that God is Himself man and flesh, that He
has become this particular human individual, in whom the reconciliation
consequently no longer remains as only implicit, so that it is merely
to be inferred from its _notional_ existence, but asserts itself in
_objective_ existence also before the perception of human sense as this
particular and actually existing man. The importance of this aspect of
_particularity_ consists in this that it enables all other individuals
to find in the same the picture of his own reconcilement with God;
it is now no longer a mere possibility, but a fact which has on this
very account appeared as really accomplished in this one person.
Inasmuch, however, as this unity, conceived as the ideal reconciliation
of opposed factors of one process, is no immediately unified mode of
being, it is inevitable, in the _second_ place, that the process of
Spirit as exemplified in this _one_ individual--the process, that
is, by means of which consciousness is for the first time Spirit in
Truth--should receive the form of its existence in the history of this
very person. This history of Spirit attaining its consummation in one
personal life consists simply in all that we have already adverted to;
that is to say, the particular man casts on one side his singularity
both in its bodily and spiritual presence, in other words he suffers
and dies, but furthermore through the agony of death rises again out of
death and ascends as glorified God, very and real Spirit, who now, it
is true, has entered actual existence as this particular person, yet is
with equal truth only very God as Spirit in His community.

(_a_) This history furnishes the fundamental material for the romantic
art of the religious consciousness, in its attitude to which, however,
art, taken simply as Art, is to some extent a superfluity. For the
main thing here is spiritual conviction, the feeling and conception
of this eternal truth, and _the faith_ which is essential evidence to
itself of the truth, and becomes in consequence a vital possession of
the ideality of that conception. In other words, faith in its developed
condition consists in the immediate conviction that it has confronting
soul, in the organic movement of this history, the _truth_ itself. If,
however, the consciousness of truth is the main point of importance it
follows that the _beauty_ of the artistic reflection and presentation
is of incidental value to which we may be comparatively indifferent,
for the truth is present to mind quite independently of art.

(_b_) From another point of view, however, the religious content
comprises at the same time within its compass a certain aspect of
this process, by virtue of which it not merely admits of artistic
treatment, but, in a specific relation, admits of it as _necessary._ In
the religious conception of romantic art, as we have more than once
explained it, it is an inseparable concomitant of the content that
it carries anthropomorphism to the verge of an extreme; and this is
so because it is precisely this content which possesses for its main
_centrum_ the complete coalescence of the Absolute and Divine with the
human consciousness as a visible part of sensuous reality, in other
words, as envisaged in the external bodily frame of man, and further,
is compelled to represent the Divine in the form of individuality such
as is associated with the deficiencies of Nature and the mode of finite
phenomena. In this respect Art supplies to the consciousness which
seeks to envisage the Divine manifestation, the definite presence of
an individual and real human figure, a concrete image, moreover, of
the exterior traits of events, in which the birth, life, sufferings,
death, resurrection and ascension of Christ are more widely circulated
to the glory of God; so that it is exclusively by Art that the real
and visible presence of the Divine is for ever renewed over again in a
permanent form.

(_c_) In so far as, in this Divine manifestation, an emphasis is laid
on this, namely, that God is essentially a particular individual to
the exclusion of others, and does not merely present to us the union
of Divine and human consciousness in its universal significance, but
rather as that of this _particular_ man, to that extent, the very
nature of the content makes it inevitable that all the features of
contingency and particularity incidental to finite existence assert
themselves, from which the beauty which characterized the consummation
of the classic Ideal had purified itself. That which the free notion
of beauty had removed from itself as unfitting, in other words, the
non-ideal, is in the present case accepted as a necessary aspect,
which actually originates in the movement of the content itself and is
consequently made explicit.

(_α_) And it follows from this that when the person of Christ is
selected for the object of art, as so frequently occurs, artists, no
matter when or where, have taken the very worst course of all who
create in their presentment of Christ an Ideal in the meaning and mode
of the classical Ideal. Such heads or figures of Christ may no doubt
display earnestness, repose, and ethical worth: but the true Christ
presentment should rather possess on the one hand soul-intensity
and pre-eminently spirituality in its _widest_ comprehension, on the
other, intimate personality and _individual_ distinction. Both these
contrasted aspects are inconsistent with that blissful repose in the
sensuous environment of our humanity. To combine these two _termini_
of artistic reproduction, expression and form, as above defined, is a
matter of the greatest difficulty, and painters especially have almost
always got themselves into difficulties when they diverged from the
traditional type[225].

Earnestness and depth of consciousness should no doubt be prominent
in the expression of such heads, but the specific features and lines
both of countenance and figure ought as little to be of a simply
ideal beauty as they are entitled to fall short in the direction of
the commonplace and the ugly, or erroneously to aspire after the
bare pretensions of the Sublime. The truest success in respect to
the external figure will be found in a mean between the directness
of Nature's detail and the ideal of beauty. Rightly to hit on this
just mean is difficult. It is pre-eminently in this that the ability,
taste, and genius of an artist will assert itself. And in general we
may assert that in all artistic execution of this character--putting
on one side entirely the different nature of the content, which is
inseparable from religious faith--there is more scope offered for the
exercise of the artist's private judgment than is the case when dealing
with the classic Ideal. In classical art the artist seeks to present
the spiritual and Divine immediately in the lines of the bodily shape
itself, in the organism of the human figure; the lines of the human
form, therefore, in this ideal divergence from what is ordinarily met
with in finite existence, are fundamentally necessary to the interest.
In the kind of art we are now discussing the configuration remains that
of ordinary experience; its specific lines are up to a certain point
unessential, detail, in short, that may indifferently be treated in
divers ways and with greater artistic licence. The supreme interest,
therefore, is concentrated, on the one hand, in the mode and manner
whereby our artist makes that which is spiritual and ideal within the
content under the mode of Spirit itself shine forth through this
envisagement of ordinary experience; and, on the other hand, in the
individual discretion exercised in the execution, the technical means
and shifts employed, by virtue of which he is able to impart to his
creations the breath of spiritual life and to bring home this finer
essence to our hearts and senses.

(_β_) With regard to the further aspect of the content we have already
pointed out that it is referable to the history of the Absolute under
the mode that the same is deducible from the notion of Spirit itself;
a history which makes objective in the real world bodily and spiritual
singularity as infused with its own essential and universal nature.
For the reconciliation of our individual consciousness with God
does not immediately appear as an original harmony, but rather as a
harmony which only is modulated from infinite pain, from resignation,
sacrifice, and the mortification of the finite, sensuous, and
particular. We see here the finite and the infinite brought into unity;
and this reconciliation only asserts itself in its true profundity,
intimacy, and power by means of the grossness and severity of the
contradiction which yearns for resolution. We may therefore without
fear assert that the entire asperity and dissonance of the suffering,
torture, and agony, which such a contradiction brings in its train,
is inseparable from the very nature of spiritual life, whose final
consolation constitutes here the content.

This process of Spirit is, if accepted frankly for all it implies and
unfolds, the essence, the notion of Spirit absolutely. It consequently
determines for conscious life that _universal history_[226] which is
for ever repeated in every individual consciousness. For it is nothing
less or more than this consciousness as the universal mind or Spirit
is explicated in the multiplicity of individual life, reality and
existence. In the first instance, however, for the reason that the
essential significance of the spiritual process is concentrated in that
mode of reality which is purely individual, this universal history
comes before us itself merely in the form of _one_ person, to which it
is conjoined as its own, as the history, that is, of his birth, his
suffering, death, and return from death; at the same time there is the
further significance attached to this personal history, namely, that it
is the history of universal and absolute Spirit itself.

The supreme turning-point of this life of God is the putting aside of
individual existence as the life of a _particular_ man simply--the
story of the Passion, the suffering on the Cross, the Calvary of
Spirit, the agony of death. In so far as the content here comprises
the fact that the external and bodily form--immediate existence in
its personal mode--is, in the pain of its inherent contradiction,
propounded in this aspect of negation in order that Spirit may secure
its truth and its blessedness by the sacrifice of the sensuous and its
individual singularity, to that extent we reach the extreme line of
division between it as an artistic creation and the classic or plastic
Ideal. From one point of view no doubt the earthly body and the frailty
of human Nature is expressly exalted and honoured in the fact that
it is God Himself who is made manifest within it. On the other hand,
however, it is just this human and bodily side which is posited as
negative, and declares itself in its pain. In the classic Ideal the
undisturbed harmony in no way vanishes before the co-essential Spirit.
The main incidents of that Passion, the mocking of Christ, the crowning
with thorns, the carrying of the cross, the final death on the same in
the agony of a torturing and tedious death, are wholly incompatible
with the presentment of the Greek type of beauty. The lofty aspect in
such situations as these is the essential holiness implied in them, the
depth of the Spirit's inmost, the eternal significance of the agony in
its relation to the spiritual process, the endurance and Divine repose.

The personal environment of this sublime figure is in part composed
of friends and in part of enemies. The friends are throughout no
ideal creations, but relatively to the notion[227], particular
individualities typical of ordinary men, which the impulse of Spirit
attaches to Christ: the enemies, on the other hand, by virtue of the
fact that they place themselves in hostility to God, judge, mock,
put to torture, and crucify Him, are presented to us as spiritually
evil, and this conception of their wickedness of heart and enmity
to God brings in its train on its exterior side ugliness, grossness,
barbarity, the rage and distortion of Spirit. In all these respects,
in contrast with the classical beauty we have before us in such
representations the non-beautiful as an inevitable concomitant.

(_γ_) The process of death, however, in the Divine nature is only
to be regarded as a point of transition, by means of which the
self-reconcilement of Spirit is effected; and the aspects of the Divine
and human, the out and out universal and the phenomenal individuality,
to mediate the division of which is the main object in view, are
positively suffered to coalesce. This positive affirmation, which is
the underlying root and origination of the process, is consequently
also forced to exhibit itself in a like positive way. As emphatic
situations in the Christ-history the resurrection and ascension supply
conspicuously the very means to put that affirmation in the clearest
light. In more isolated fashion we have over and above this for the
same purpose those occasions in which Christ appears to His own as
teacher. Here, however, plastic art is confronted with an exceptional
situation of difficulty. For in a measure it is Spirit in its purity,
which is to be presented in this very impalpable ideality, and in a
measure, too, it is nothing less than absolute Spirit, which in the
full pregnancy of its infinitude and universality is affirmatively
propounded in union with an individual consciousness and exalted above
immediate existence; and yet notwithstanding such preconceptions it has
undertaken the task to envisage for sense in the bodily configuration
of this person the entire expression of the infinite and innermost
spiritual profundity which it refers to him[228].


2. RELIGIOUS LOVE

Mind in its ultimate and most complete explication as reason is, as
such, not the immediate object of art. Its highest and most essentially
realized reconciliation can only find such satisfied consummation in
the intellectual medium as such, that is to say, the ideal medium which
is withdrawn from the reach of artistic expression; for absolute Truth
stands on a higher level than the show of beauty, which is unable
to break away from the sensuous and phenomenal. If, then, Spirit is
to receive an existence as _Spirit_ in its positive reconciliation
through the medium of art, an existence which is apprehended not merely
as ideal, in other words, as pure thought, but can be _felt_ and
_envisaged_, it follows that the only mode left to us, which supplies
this two-fold condition of spirituality on the one hand and of its
capability of being conceived and presented by art on the other, is
that of the inner realm of Spirit itself, what we understand by the
soul and its emotional experience. And the condition of that kingdom
which alone fully answers to the notion of free Spirit brought into
peace and joy with itself is _Love._

(_a_) In other words, if we look at the content, we shall see that its
articulation is in its important features similar to the fundamental
notion of absolute Spirit, the return of a reconciled presence from
its Other to itself. This Other in the sense of the Other, in which
Spirit continues by itself, can only be itself something spiritual,
or rather a spiritual personality. The true essence of love consists
in the surrender of the self-consciousness, in the forgetting oneself
in another self, yet for all that to have and possess oneself for the
first time in this very act of surrender and oblivion. This mediation
of Spirit with itself and surcharge of its own to the unit of totality
is the Absolute, not, however, of course, under the mode in which the
Absolute coalesces with itself as merely singular and thereby finite
individuality in another finite subject; rather the content of the
spiritual individuality which is here self-mediated in another is the
Absolute itself. It is, in short, Spirit which is only the knowledge
and volition of its own substance as the Absolute by being in another,
and which receives therewith the fruition of such knowledge.

(_b_) More closely regarded this content as love has the form of
self-concentrated emotion, which, instead of making its content more
explicit, that is to say, presenting it to consciousness in its
definite terms and universality, rather converges the infinite breadth
of the same directly to one focus in the clear profundity of the soul,
without further unfolding in other directions for the imagination the
wealth which it essentially includes. By this means a content of equal
significance, which would be inconformable to artistic presentation,
is fresh from the mint of its pure and ideal universality, is none the
less capable of being the subject-matter of art in this individual
existence of subjective emotion; for while under a mode such as this it
is not on the one hand compelled to accept an articulation of perfect
clarity by reason of its still undisclosed depth, which is the obvious
characteristic of soul-life, yet on the other hand it receives under
this mode a medium that it is possible for art to make use of. For
soul-life, heart, feeling, however self-contained and spiritual they
may remain, have none the less a bond of affiliation with the sensuous
and material, so that they are able also on the outside show of things
through the bodily members themselves, through a look, the facial
expression, or in a still more spiritual way through the voice tones
or a word to disclose the inmost life and existence of Spirit. But
this exterior medium is in such a case only acceptable in so far as it
strictly expresses this most intimate life of soul in ways that reflect
the inward nature of the soul itself.

(_c_) We defined the notion of the Ideal to be the reconciliation of
the inward life with its reality; we may now in like manner point
to the emotion of love as _the Ideal_ of romantic art in the sphere
of the religious consciousness. It is _spiritual_ beauty in its
pure emanation. The classic Ideal also exhibited the mediation and
reconcilement of Spirit with its Other. But here the opposing factor
of Spirit was the exterior medium suffused with that Spirit, it was
its bodily organism. In love, on the contrary, the opposing presence
of that which is spiritual is not the phenomenon of Nature, but a
spiritual consciousness itself, another subject of such; and the
realization of Spirit is consequently effected by Spirit itself in its
own kingdom, in that medium which is uniquely its own. It follows from
this that love in this its positive self-fruition and essentially
tranquillized and blessed realization is ideal, but before everything
else _spiritual_ beauty, which can only be expressed for the sake of
the ideal virtue it possesses and further only in and as a part of
the inmost shrine of the soul. For that Spirit, which is present in
_spirit_ to itself and is immediately aware of its own, which withal
possesses what is spiritual for the substance and bottom of its very
existence, abides in intimacy with itself, and, best definition of all,
is the inward being of Love.

(_α_) God is Love; and consequently it is this most profound essence
which, in this form native to artistic presentation, is thus
apprehended and presented in the person of Christ. Christ is, however,
_Divine love_ in the sense that from one aspect of it declares God
Himself as its object, that is, God in the mode of His invisible
essence, and from another it as truly reveals humanity under the seal
of its redemption; and for this reason it is not so much in Him[229]
that the passage of one individual into another particular individual
is made manifest in His love, as the fact that we have here the _idea_
of Love itself in its universality, in other words, the Absolute,
the spirit of Truth in the medium and mode of emotion. With the
universality of its object the expression of Love is also universalized
in pursuance of which the purely individual concentration of heart and
soul is not made the important point, just as among the Greeks in the
ancient Titan Eros and Venus Urania we find, though, of course, in an
entirely different connection, that it is the universal idea rather
than the individual side of personal form and feeling which is the
factor emphasized. Only when Christ is, in the presentation of romantic
art, rather conceived as at the same time the isolate self-absorbed
personality himself, is the expression of love clothed in the form of
individual inwardness, and even then it is, of course, always exalted
and uplifted by the universality of the content.

(_β_) The kind of love, however, which in this sphere of art is most
within its reach and is generally the most successful object of the
romantic and religious imagination, is the love of Mary, the mother's
love. It stands closest to Nature's reality, is very human, and yet
entirely spiritual, without either the interest or the egotism of
sensual desire, not sensuous and yet present inward bliss in its
absolute condition of fruition. It is a love that has no longing
in it, not friendship, for friendship, albeit also so rich in soul
quality, requires a substantive content, an essential material as the
associating object. A mother's love, on the contrary, possesses without
any mutuality[230] of aim or interests an immediate basis in the
natural maternal bond. But in this particular case the mother's love
is just as little restricted to the purely natural affiliation. Mary
possesses in the child which she has carried under her heart and borne
with travail the perfected knowledge and feeling of her very self, and
this selfsame child, the blood of her blood, is also in equal degree
exalted above her, and yet for all that she is conscious that this
higher belongs to herself, and is precisely that she gains in her act
of self-oblivion and possession. The natural intimacy of the mother's
love is absolutely spiritualized, it receives for its very embodiment
the Divine; but this spiritual coherence remains lowly and unaware,
permeated in a wonderful manner with the unity of Nature and the
emotion of womanhood. It is the _blessed_ mother's love, and pertains
only to the _one_ mother, who first was recipient of its joy[231]. It
is quite true that even this love is not without its pain, but the pain
is merely the grief of loss, the lament over the suffering, dying, and
dead son, and, as we shall find it at a later stage[232], has nothing
to do with the injustice and torture suffered from a force without, or
with the infinite conflict with sin, still less with agonies and pangs
that arise in the soul. The inwardness of soul such as we have analysed
is the beauty of Spirit, the Ideal, the human identification of man
with God, with Spirit, with Truth; oblivion in its pure selflessness,
the surrender of the ego, which, however, in this surrender, is from
beginning to end at unity with that in which it is absorbed, and it is
in this coalescence that the feeling of blessedness is consummated.

Under such a fair aspect we have maternal love embodied in romantic
art, and it is at the same time a picture of Spirit itself, because
Spirit is only apprehensible by art in the form of feeling; and the
feeling of that union of the individual with God in its most original,
most real, and most vivid form is only present in the mother's love of
the Madonna. It must inevitably form the subject-matter of art, if in
the representation of this, the sphere of the religious imagination,
the Ideal, the affirmative reconciliation in its joy is not to
fall short of its aim. There has consequently been a time when the
maternal love of the Blessed Virgin has been placed as the highest
and holiest of Earth's possessions, and as such has been revered and
presented to mankind. When, however, Spirit is brought before the human
consciousness in its own native element, separated, that is, from all
underlying emotion, the free mediation of Spirit that is built up on
such a foundation can alone be regarded as the free road to Truth;
and consequently we find that in Protestantism, as contrasted to this
worship of Mary whether in art or belief, it is the Holy Spirit, and
the inmost mediation of Spirit which has become the loftier truth.

(_γ_) _Thirdly_, and in conclusion, the positive reconciliation of
spiritual life is embodied in the feelings of Christ's own disciples,
the women and friends who follow him. Such are for the most part
characters who have personally taken on themselves the severity of the
idea of Christianity, hand iii hand with their Divine friend, by virtue
of the friendship, teaching, and sermons of Christ, without passing
through the external and inward pangs of spiritual conversion, who have
carried it forward, made themselves masters both of it and themselves,
and in the depth of their hearts remain strong in the same. From such,
no doubt, the immediate unity and intimacy of that mother's love in a
measure vanishes; but they still possess as the bond which unites them
the presence of Christ, the common service to a great life which they
share, and the direct impulse of Spirit[233].


3. THE SPIRIT OF THE COMMUNITY

In making our passage over to a concluding stage of the subject under
discussion we can hardly do better than associate it with that which we
have already touched upon in connection with the history of Christ.
The immediate existence of Christ, as this particular man, who is God,
is assumed to be wiped out, in other words, the truth itself asserts
itself that in the manifestation of God as man, the true reality of
God thus envisaged is not immediate sensuous existence but Spirit.
The reality of the Absolute regarded as infinite subjectivity[234] is
simply Spirit itself; God is in knowledge, in the element of the inner
life, and only there. This absolute existence of God, as absolutely
ideal to the same extent as it is subjective[235] _universality_, does
not therefore admit of the limitations of this particular individual,
who has in the story of his life made manifest the reconciliation
between the Divine and human self-consciousness, but on the contrary
is enlarged to the full measure of the human consciousness which is
reconciled to God, that is, in general terms to our _humanity_, which
exists as an aggregate of many individuals. In his independence,
however, taken, that is, as a specific personality, man is not under
any immediate mode the Divine, but on the contrary finite and human,
which only in so far as it really propounds itself as a negation, which
it essentially is, and thereby annuls itself in this negative aspect,
can attain to the reconcilement with God. It is only by virtue of this
deliverance from the frailty of finitude that our humanity declares
itself as the vehicle of the existence of the absolute Spirit, as the
spirit of the community, in which the union of the human and Divine
Spirit within the bounds of human reality itself, in the sense of its
realized mediation, carries into fulfilment what essentially, if we
look at it in the light of the notion of Spirit, it is from the first
in that very union.

The principal modes which are of importance in respect to this new
content of romantic art may be distinguished as follows:

The individual, who in his separation from God lives in a condition
of sinfulness and conflict with the immediacy and frailty of finite
existence, possesses the eternal destiny to come into reconciliation
with himself and God. Inasmuch, however, as we find that in the
redemption-history of Christ the negative relation of immediate
singularity is affirmed and declared an essential feature in the
spiritual process, so, too, every particular individual is only through
a conversion from the natural state and his finite personality uplifted
to the free condition and into the peace of God.

This abrogation of finitude asserts itself in a threefold manner as
follows:

_First_, as the repetition in _actual life_ of the history of the
Passion, a repetition of real bodily suffering--martyrdom.

_Secondly_, the above conversion is removed to the _inmost_ life of
soul, as spiritual mediation by means of repentance, penance, and
conversion.

_Thirdly_, and finally the manifestation of the Divine is so conceived
in the world of Nature's reality that the ordinary course of Nature
and the natural mode of occurrences as they otherwise take place is
arrested, in order to display the might and presence of the Divine.
Wonder or miracle is consequently the form of presentation.


(_a_) _The Martyrs_

The earliest mode under which the spirit of the community makes itself
actively present in the human consciousness is effected when man forms
a mirror in himself of the Divine process and so makes himself a new
form of existence for the eternal Life[236] of God. Here we find once
more that the expression of that immediate and positive reconciliation
disappears, inasmuch as man can only attain to this by abrogating his
finite existence. Everything, therefore, that was of central importance
in the first stage returns to us again here only in an aggravated
degree, because the incompatibility and unworthiness of our humanity
is here presupposed, and to remedy this defect is assumed to be man's
supreme and unique duty.

(_α_) The specific content of this phase is consequently the endurance
of torments, and along with such the individual's willing renunciation,
sacrifice, and self-imposed renunciation with the express aim of
arousing sufferings, tortures, and anguish of every kind in order that
Spirit may reveal itself therein, and feel itself in union with the
fruition and blessedness of its heaven[237]. The negative aspect of
pain is an object in itself for the true martyr, and the greatness of
the revelation is such that it can treat with indifference the awful
aspect of that which man has thus suffered, and the dreadful nature of
that to which he submits himself. The first thing, then, which will
be brought beneath the ruthless mace of negation in order that the
individual who still experiences this drought of the soul may wean
himself from the world and become sanctified, will be his _natural_
existence, his life, the satisfaction of the most essential necessaries
of his bodily existence. The main subject-matter therefore of the
type we are now dealing with will be torments of the body, sufferings
which have been perpetrated on the believer either by his enemies and
persecutors out of hatred and persecution, or have been deliberately
accepted by himself on principle by way of expiation. In both cases
the individual accepts them in the full fanaticism of his readiness
to endure, not, that is to say, as an injustice to himself, but as a
blessing through which alone he is enabled to break down the walls of
what he feels to be his sinful flesh, heart, and soul, and so obtain
reconcilement with his God.

In so far, however, as this conversion of the soul can only manifest
itself in such situations, in atrocities and awful treatment of the
bodily frame the beauty of the presentation of such subjects may be
very readily impaired; and, in fact, we may say that the treatment
of all subjects of this kind is a perilous undertaking for art. For,
on the one hand, it is obvious that individuals here, impressed as
they are wholly with the hall-mark of finite existence, and its
inevitable blemishes and defects, will have to be represented in an
entirely different atmosphere from that we claimed for the history of
Christ's Passion; and, from a further point of view, we unfortunately
meet with unheard of agonies and horrors in such cases, distortion,
and dislocation of limbs, bodily torments, scaffolds, decapitation,
burning or roasting in oil, flaying alive, and every other sort of
frightful, repugnant, and loathsome abuse of the body, such as lie
much too remote from beauty for any sane art to think of selecting
them for its subject-matter. The artistic dexterity of the artist may,
in such cases, no doubt, so far as execution is concerned, be of the
highest class; but, at best, such manual dexterity will merely possess
a personal interest, we may indeed find before us the technique of an
admirable painter; but it will be equally obvious that all his efforts
have been unable to produce out of such material a harmonious work of
art.

(_β_) For these reasons it will be necessary that the artistic
presentation of this negative process should emphasize another aspect
of it, which stands out thereby above this agony of the body and soul,
and establishes in relief the positive presence of reconciliation.
This is just that essential reconcilement of Spirit which is finally
won as the result sought for of the pain suffered. Under an aspect
such as this the martyrs may be depicted as the guardians of the
Divine in conflict with the grossness of material force and barbarism
of unbelief. For the sake of their heavenly treasure they endure pain
and death, and this courage, steadfastness, endurance, and consolation
must consequently, with equal truth, appear upon them. And yet for all
that this intimate possession of their faith and love in its spiritual
beauty is no sanity of soul which brings to them a sense of the sanity
of their body; rather it is a sense of inward life, which has worked
its way through their pain itself, or at least is made manifest in
their suffering, and which, even in the moment of their ecstasy,
retains the experience of pain as an essential condition of their
beatitude. The art of painting has, in particular, made this attitude
of saintly humiliation the object of its efforts. What this art mainly
should strive after here is to delineate the bliss of such torments in
the pure and simple lines of the countenance and its expression, as
contrasted with the offensive laceration of the flesh; and to present
such an ecstasy as may reflect the surrender and victory over pain,
the fruition, in short, of the Divine Presence in the temple of the
soul. If, on the contrary, the art of sculpture seeks to give a visible
form to such a content, it will inevitably find itself less qualified
to depict this ecstasy of soul-life at this strain of its intensity
with such a concentrated power, and will consequently be compelled to
emphasize that aspect of pain and laceration in so far as it declares
itself in its full force on the bodily frame.

(_γ_) _Thirdly_, it is to be observed that in the kind of examples
with which we are now dealing it is not merely the existence of Nature
and immediate finite conditions which is affected by this attitude
of self-abnegation and endurance, but the impulse of the soul is
transported by such feelings to an extreme point of this heavenly
rapture to such an extent, in fact, that what is merely human and of
the world, even when it is essentially beyond reproach on ethical or
rational grounds, is none the less thrust behind and scorned. In other
words, just in proportion as the Spirit, which here makes vivid to
itself the idea of its conversion, is in the first instance deficient
in an educated sense, to that extent it will with so much the more
uncontrollable and logical frenzy--the entire force of its piety being
concentrated on this one object--turn its back on everything which
as finite opposes this bare and abstract infinitude of its religious
fanaticism, that is to say, on every definite human emotion, all
the manifold ethical impulses, relations, and obligations of the
heart. For the moral life of the family, the bonds of friendship, of
blood, of love, of the State, and a man's calling, every one of them
belong to the things of the world; and all that is of the world, in
so far as it is not as yet suffused with the absolute conceptions of
faith and developed in unity and harmony with the same, appears to
this form of abstract spiritual intensity of the soul of faith so
far from being something acceptable to its emotional life and sense
of obligation, that it is, on the contrary, a thing of no worth at
all, and therefore both hostile and hurtful to its religious state.
The moral organism of the human world is consequently not as yet
respected, because its significant features and duties are not as
yet recognized as necessary, integrated members in the concatenation
of an essentially rational reality, in which nothing, it is true,
ought to assert itself in a one-sided and independent isolation, yet,
none the less, as an essential factor in the organic process, must
be maintained as such and not be sacrificed. In this respect the
religious reconciliation remains itself _one-sided_, and declares
itself in the truly simple heart as an intensity of belief which
is deficient in comprehensiveness, that is, as the piety of the
self-secluded soul, which has not yet attained in its growth to the
fully expanded self-reliance of maturity, and to conviction based on
genuine insight and circumspection. When the force of a soul deficient
in these qualities maintains its opposition to the world which is
thus treated in a purely negative way, and forcefully breaks loose
from all human ties, even though they may originally be the very
closest, we can only characterize such conduct as the rawness of Spirit
and a barbaric result of the power of abstraction, which is simply
repulsive. So we may say that though from the point of view of the
religious consciousness, as we find it to-day, it is indeed possible
to honour, and to honour highly, this opening germ of religiosity in
such representations, if, however, such a pious tendency proceeds to
such lengths that we find it advancing to lay siege to what is both
essentially rational and moral, then, so far from sympathizing with
such a fanaticism of sanctity, we can only protest that a kind of
abnegation such as this, which casts off from itself, shatters and
treads upon that which is independently justifiable, and even sacred,
appears to us both immoral in itself and subversive of the very type
of religion it represents. There are many legends, tales, and poems
which deal with this extreme form of the pious craze. We have, for
example, the tale of a man who, though full of tenderness for his wife
and family, and, moreover, beloved by all his friends, leaves his home
and makes a pilgrimage. When at last he returns home in the guise of
a beggar he refuses to disclose his identity. Alms are given him,
and out of compassion a permanent lodging provided under the stairs.
In this plight he lives for twenty years; he sees the grief of his
family on his account, and only declares who he is on his death-bed.
This kind of thing, which we are asked to revere as sanctity, is, of
course, merely the egotism of a fanatic which revolts us. This long
endurance of renunciation may remind us of the distrait nature of
those penances, which the Hindoos voluntarily impose on themselves
on religious grounds. But the endurance of the Hindoo has a very
different significance. In that case a man deliberately places himself
in a condition of vacuum and unconsciousness; in the case which we
are now considering the _pain_, and the deliberate consciousness and
feeling of the same is the real object, which it is assumed will be
attained with just so much more purity as the suffering is associated
with the consciousness of the value of and devotion to the severities
which are accepted, and is, moreover, united with a vision for ever
concentrated on the renunciation thus made. The richer the heart which
takes on itself the burden of such ordeals, the nobler the content
of its own possessions, and yet withal believes that it is bound to
condemn them as of no merit, just so much the more difficult grows the
task of reconciliation, and the more prone it is to bring about the
most terrible convulsions and the most raving distraction. Indeed, to
our vision, it is clear enough that a soul such as this, which is only
at home in a world which, however full of ideas, is not the world of
common experience, and which consequently only feels its grasp slipping
from the stable and paramount centres of activity and aims of this our
actual world, ay, and although it be with heart and soul held in and
associated with that world, yet regards all that is moral there simply
as something which contradicts its absolute destination--we can only
say that such a soul, both in its self-inflicted sufferings and its
renunciations, is from the rational point of view simply mad, so mad
that we can neither feel any profound compassion for it, nor propose
any means of liberation. What is lamentably lacking to a mode of life
of this kind is an object of real substance and valid significance;
what it proposes to secure is an aim wholly personal, an object sought
for by the individual for himself alone, for the salvation of his own
soul, for his own blessedness. Few are likely to concern themselves
very deeply whether an individual, at any rate one of this type, is or
ever will be happy[238].

(_b_) _The inward Penance and Conversion_

The kind of representation, in the same general class of cases which
we shall now contrast with the one above examined, turns aside from
the extremity of merely bodily suffering, as it is also from a further
point of view more indifferent to the purely negative impulse directed
against what is essentially just and right in the actual conditions of
the world; the material of such representations consequently, both in
respect to its content and its form, opens up a ground which is more
conformable with ideal art. And this ground is the conversion of the
_inner_ life of the soul, which only here seeks to express itself in
its _spiritual_ pain, and its change of heart. Here, therefore, we
find in the first place that we have no more of those ever repeated
horrors and barbarities of pain inflicted on man's poor body: and,
secondly, that which we have referred to as the barbarian religiosity
of the soul no longer holds fast to its antagonism as against the
purely ethical aspects of humanity in order to trample under iron foot
in the abstraction of its purely conceptive satisfaction[239], and
in the pain of an absolute renunciation that other kind of sensuous
enjoyment; for the most part its attention is now solely directed
against what is in fact sinful, criminal, and evil in human Nature.
We find here a lofty assurance that faith, this spiritual impulse
towards God, is capable of converting the past action, even though it
be a sin or a crime, into something alien to the man who perpetrated
it, washing it away in fact. This withdrawal out of evil, that wholly
negative condition, which is realized in the individual by the
subjective volition and spirit at once scorning and confounding itself
under its former state of evil--this return to the positive which
is now self-established as the only real in contrast to the former
state of sinfulness, is the truly infinite content of religious love,
the presence and actuality of absolute Spirit in the individual soul
itself. The feeling of the stability and endurability of the personal
existence, which through God, to which it addresses itself, triumphs
over evil, and in so far as it is thus mediated with Him is aware
of itself as one with Him, produces as its effect the fruition and
blessedness of contemplating God, it is true, in the first instance
as the absolute Other in His opposition to the sin inherent in finite
existence, but further of knowing this Infinite Presence as identical
with me as this particular person, of knowing, in short, that I carry
this self-consciousness of God, as the seat of my own personality,
that is to say, my own self-consciousness, as certainly as I carry
the sense of my own self-identity. Such a revolution takes place no
doubt entirely within the shrine of the soul, and belongs, therefore,
rather to religion than art: for the reason, however, that it is the
intimate movement of the soul, which pre-eminently makes itself master
of this act of conversion, and also is able to throw a gleam of light
through the external embodiment, a plastic art such as painting can
also claim to make visible the history of such conversions. If it
attempts, however, to depict the entire course of events which belong
to such a transition, much that is very far from being beautiful may
readily appear in the result, because in such a case both that which is
sinful and repulsive requires to be depicted, as, for example, in the
story of the prodigal son. Painting, therefore, achieves its greatest
success when it concentrates the act of conversion into _one_ picture
where that is the prevailing motive, and pays little or no attention
to the previous course of events. The ordinary presentations of Mary
Magdelene may be noted as an admirable example of this kind of work,
and particularly in the hands of the old Italian masters has been
treated in a way both excellent in itself and throughout consistently
with fine Art. She is depicted here both in the characterization of her
soul and her external presence as the _fair sinner_, in whom the sin no
less than the sanctity is intended to exercise a sort of fascination
on the spectator. But at the same time neither sin nor sanctity are
treated with any great intensity. She is forgiven much because she has
loved much, and her forgiveness is in a measure the portion both of her
love and her beauty. And what affects us most of all in this picture
is this, that she makes for herself a conscience as it were out of
her love, and robed in the beauty of her sensitive soul pours forth
her sorrow in a flood of tears. We are not led to feel that the fact
that she has loved so much is her error, but rather that her fair and
fascinating folly is this, namely, that she _believes_ herself to be a
sinner,[240] for her exquisitely sensitive beauty only leaves us the
impression that in her love she is both noble and profound.

(_c_) _Miracles and Legends_

The final aspect, which is closely associated with the two above
considered, and is frequently asserted as a concomitant of both, is
that of miracle. It plays in fact an important part throughout this
stage of our inquiry. In this connection we may define miracle as the
conversion-history of the immediate existence of Nature. Such reality
lies before us as a commonplace, contingent existence. This finite
substance is touched by the hand of God, which, in so far as it strikes
upon what is purely external and particular, breaks it up, transmutes
it into something entirely different, interrupting what in ordinary
parlance we call the natural course of things. To bring before us the
soul arrested by such inexplicable phenomena, in which it imagines it
recognizes the presence of the Divine, vanquished, in short, in its
ordinary view of finite events, this is the main subject-matter of
a host of legends. In fact, however, the Divine can only touch and
dominate Nature as Reason, that is, in the unalterable laws of Nature
herself, as implanted therein by God, and the Divine has no occasion
to exploit Himself in the supreme sense of this term in particular
circumstances and modes of causation which run contrary to these
laws of Nature, for it is only the eternal laws and determinations
of reason which apply in any real sense to Nature. From another
point of view legends frequently carry with them quite unnecessarily
an amount of matter which is abstruse, out of taste, senseless, and
ridiculous, inasmuch as the intention is that both intellect and heart
should be stimulated to believe in the presence and activity of God
by precisely those things which are essentially irrational, false,
and heathenish. The consequent emotion, piety, and conversion of the
soul may even then awake our interest, but in that case it is only
on the _one_ side, namely, that of the soul: so soon as that enters
into relation with somewhat else outside it, and the idea is that this
external correlative shall effect the conversion of the heart, then we
inevitably require that such should not be wholly a meaningless and
irrational sequence of events.

Such, then, would be the fundamental divisions of the substantive
content at this particular stage of our inquiry, regarding that content
as the self-subsistent Nature of God, or in its aspect as a spiritual
process, through which and in which He is Spirit. We have here the
absolute object, which art neither creates nor reveals out of itself,
but which it has received from religion which it approaches with the
conviction that it is _essentially_ true that it may express and
represent the same conformably to its modes. It is the content of the
believing, yearning soul, which is intrinsically the infinite totality
itself, so that for it the external medium remains to a more or less
degree outside it, or a matter of indifference, and is unable to be
brought completely into harmony with that inner life. And for this
reason it frequently presents a repellent material which art finds
itself unable wholly to subdue to its aims.

[Footnote 224: _Nicht aufnehmend._ Not ready to absorb extraneous
matter.]

[Footnote 225: This of course is an opinion which may be strongly
contested in its application to particular artists.]

[Footnote 226: Hegel means not so much the history in which the whole
totality of events is comprised as that aspect of human history which
declares its universal significance as infinite spirit.]

[Footnote 227: That is, of self-consciousness in all that it
implies--the personality of Christ, for example.]

[Footnote 228: Hegel does not further dwell upon this relativity. But
the next paragraph explains what is really in his mind. The important
question, however, how far such events are worthy of credence as
objective history, to say nothing of the inadequacy of their artistic
presentation, one cannot but feel is deliberately evaded. What Hegel
would say no doubt was that the bare historical aspect was only of
relative importance. The main question was their significance in the
spiritual process. It is in this direction that much of our noblest
modern thought finds a certain indissoluble unreality of statement.]

[Footnote 229: That is in Christ.]

[Footnote 230: _Gleichkeit._ Equality, reciprocity.]

[Footnote 231: We are reminded of our treasures in Christian art such
as the Virgin and Child in Tintoret's "Flight into Egypt," Rafael's
San, Sisto Madonna and the rest.]

[Footnote 232: In other words as regarded at a later date by the
Church.]

[Footnote 233: This statement hardly does justice to the profound
idealism of the epistles of St. Paul.]

[Footnote 234: Perhaps "the infinite form of subjectivity" is better.
He means "the infinite form of individual self-consciousness."]

[Footnote 235: That is, characterized by personality.]

[Footnote 236: _Geschichte._ Life as an evolved Process.]

[Footnote 237: Compare the poem of Meredith, "Theodolinda," in his
ballads of the Tragic Life. It is, in another aspect, that iron crown
which that thoughtful contemporary writer, Mr. H. W. Nevinson, refers
to in his Essays on Rebellion.]

[Footnote 238: The elimination even of sympathy with such fanaticism
where it is quite sincere, a rare case no doubt, seems severe. The
best illustration in modern literature I know of the principle "all
or nothing," is Ibsen's great drama "Brandt." Readers of Carlyle will
doubtless recall from "Past and Present" and elsewhere that prophet's
repeated denunciations of the craze for personal happiness.]

[Footnote 239: By _intellectuellen Befriedigung_ Hegel does not mean
"intellectual" in a good sense, but merely that the man imagines his
happiness in his mind rather than feels it through the senses. The
psychology of religious ecstasy, however, is a rather involved problem.]

[Footnote 240: This analysis is rather surprising. Did Hegel, the
robust Swabian, really think the above the finest type of art's
presentations of the Magdalene? Does it not lean very closely to that
soft sentimentalism which a Carlo Dolci gives us in its decadence? At
any rate the idea that the Magdalene was not really a sinner flatly
contradicts the original references to her in the gospels, and to
my mind at any rate seems from the artistic point of view also to
destroy half the rare beauty of her repentance. The principle of
such an interpretation is surely the entirely pagan one, whether
Greek or French, that a great passion is its own justification
quite irrespective of moral considerations. She is the historical
impersonation of the frailty of a love too dependent on the senses,
not of one in which either nobility of bearing or extreme selflessness
is conspicuous. Hegel's analysis may be true enough of certain
pictures--but do they really present us the ideal; most assuredly not.]




