CHAPTER XXIV—THE INN-KEEPER OF KIRKBY-LONSDALE


I had hitherto conceived and partly carried out an ideal that was dear to
my heart.  Rowley and I descended from our claret-coloured chaise, a
couple of correctly dressed, brisk, bright-eyed young fellows, like a
pair of aristocratic mice; attending singly to our own affairs,
communicating solely with each other, and that with the niceties and
civilities of drill.  We would pass through the little crowd before the
door with high-bred preoccupation, inoffensively haughty, after the best
English pattern; and disappear within, followed by the envy and
admiration of the bystanders, a model master and servant, point-device in
every part.  It was a heavy thought to me, as we drew up before the inn
at Kirkby-Lonsdale, that this scene was now to be enacted for the last
time.  Alas! and had I known it, it was to go of with so inferior a
grace!

I had been injudiciously liberal to the post-boys of the chaise and four.
My own post-boy, he of the patched breeches, now stood before me, his
eyes glittering with greed, his hand advanced.  It was plain he
anticipated something extraordinary by way of a _pourboire_; and
considering the marches and counter-marches by which I had extended the
stage, the military character of our affairs with Mr. Bellamy, and the
bad example I had set before him at the archdeacon’s, something
exceptional was certainly to be done.  But these are always nice
questions, to a foreigner above all: a shade too little will suggest
niggardliness, a shilling too much smells of hush-money.  Fresh from the
scene at the archdeacon’s, and flushed by the idea that I was now nearly
done with the responsibilities of the claret-coloured chaise, I put into
his hands five guineas; and the amount served only to waken his cupidity.

‘O, come, sir, you ain’t going to fob me of with this?  Why, I seen fire
at your side!’ he cried.

It would never do to give him more; I felt I should become the fable of
Kirkby-Lonsdale if I did; and I looked him in the face, sternly but still
smiling, and addressed him with a voice of uncompromising firmness.

‘If you do not like it, give it back,’ said I.

He pocketed the guineas with the quickness of a conjurer, and, like a
base-born cockney as he was, fell instantly to casting dirt.

‘’Ave your own way of it, Mr. Ramornie—leastways Mr. St. Eaves, or
whatever your blessed name may be.  Look ’ere’—turning for sympathy to
the stable-boys—‘this is a blessed business.  Blessed ’ard, I calls it.
’Ere I takes up a blessed son of a pop-gun what calls hisself anything
you care to mention, and turns out to be a blessed _mounseer_ at the end
of it!  ’Ere ’ave I been drivin’ of him up and down all day, a-carrying
off of gals, a-shootin’ of pistyils, and a-drinkin’ of sherry and hale;
and wot does he up and give me but a blank, blank, blanketing blank!’

The fellow’s language had become too powerful for reproduction, and I
passed it by.

Meanwhile I observed Rowley fretting visibly at the bit; another moment,
and he would have added a last touch of the ridiculous to our arrival by
coming to his hands with the postillion.

‘Rowley!’ cried I reprovingly.

Strictly it should have been Gammon; but in the hurry of the moment, my
fault (I can only hope) passed unperceived.  At the same time I caught
the eye of the postmaster.  He was long and lean, and brown and bilious;
he had the drooping nose of the humourist, and the quick attention of a
man of parts.  He read my embarrassment in a glance, stepped instantly
forward, sent the post-boy to the rightabout with half a word, and was
back next moment at my side.

‘Dinner in a private room, sir?  Very well.  John, No. 4!  What wine
would you care to mention?  Very well, sir.  Will you please to order
fresh horses?  Not, sir?  Very well.’

Each of these expressions was accompanied by something in the nature of a
bow, and all were prefaced by something in the nature of a smile, which I
could very well have done without.  The man’s politeness was from the
teeth outwards; behind and within, I was conscious of a perpetual
scrutiny: the scene at his doorstep, the random confidences of the
post-boy, had not been thrown away on this observer; and it was under a
strong fear of coming trouble that I was shown at last into my private
room.  I was in half a mind to have put off the whole business.  But the
truth is, now my name had got abroad, my fear of the mail that was
coming, and the handbills it should contain, had waxed inordinately, and
I felt I could never eat a meal in peace till I had severed my connection
with the claret-coloured chaise.

Accordingly, as soon as I had done with dinner, I sent my compliments to
the landlord and requested he should take a glass of wine with me.  He
came; we exchanged the necessary civilities, and presently I approached
my business.

‘By the bye,’ said I, ‘we had a brush down the road to-day.  I dare say
you may have heard of it?’

He nodded.

‘And I was so unlucky as to get a pistol ball in the panel of my chaise,’
I continued, ‘which makes it simply useless to me.  Do you know any one
likely to buy?’

‘I can well understand that,’ said the landlord, ‘I was looking at it
just now; it’s as good as ruined, is that chaise.  General rule, people
don’t like chaises with bullet-holes.’

‘Too much _Romance of the Forest_?’ I suggested, recalling my little
friend of the morning, and what I was sure had been her favourite
reading—Mrs. Radcliffe’s novels.

‘Just so,’ said he.  ‘They may be right, they may be wrong; I’m not the
judge.  But I suppose it’s natural, after all, for respectable people to
like things respectable about them; not bullet-holes, nor puddles of
blood, nor men with aliases.’

I took a glass of wine and held it up to the light to show that my hand
was steady.

‘Yes,’ said I, ‘I suppose so.’

‘You have papers, of course, showing you are the proper owner?’ he
inquired.

‘There is the bill, stamped and receipted,’ said I, tossing it across to
him.

He looked at it.

‘This all you have?’ he asked.

‘It is enough, at least,’ said I.  ‘It shows you where I bought and what
I paid for it.’

‘Well, I don’t know,’ he said.  ‘You want some paper of identification.’

‘To identify the chaise?’ I inquired.

‘Not at all: to identify _you_,’ said he.

‘My good sir, remember yourself!’ said I.  ‘The title-deeds of my estate
are in that despatch-box; but you do not seriously suppose that I should
allow you to examine them?’

‘Well, you see, this paper proves that some Mr. Ramornie paid seventy
guineas for a chaise,’ said the fellow.  ‘That’s all well and good; but
who’s to prove to me that you are Mr. Ramornie?’

‘Fellow!’ cried I.

‘O, fellow as much as you please!’ said he.  ‘Fellow, with all my heart!
That changes nothing.  I am fellow, of course—obtrusive fellow, impudent
fellow, if you like—but who are you?  I hear of you with two names; I
hear of you running away with young ladies, and getting cheered for a
Frenchman, which seems odd; and one thing I will go bail for, that you
were in a blue fright when the post-boy began to tell tales at my door.
In short, sir, you may be a very good gentleman; but I don’t know enough
about you, and I’ll trouble you for your papers, or to go before a
magistrate.  Take your choice; if I’m not fine enough, I hope the
magistrates are.’

‘My good man,’ I stammered, for though I had found my voice, I could
scarce be said to have recovered my wits, ‘this is most unusual, most
rude.  Is it the custom in Westmorland that gentlemen should be
insulted?’

‘That depends,’ said he.  ‘When it’s suspected that gentlemen are spies
it _is_ the custom; and a good custom, too.  No no,’ he broke out,
perceiving me to make a movement.  ‘Both hands upon the table, my
gentleman!  I want no pistol balls in my chaise panels.’

‘Surely, sir, you do me strange injustice!’ said I, now the master of
myself.  ‘You see me sitting here, a monument of tranquillity: pray may I
help myself to wine without umbraging you?’

I took this attitude in sheer despair.  I had no plan, no hope.  The best
I could imagine was to spin the business out some minutes longer, then
capitulate.  At least, I would not capituatle one moment too soon.

‘Am I to take that for _no_?’ he asked.

‘Referring to your former obliging proposal?’ said I.  ‘My good sir, you
are to take it, as you say, for “No.”  Certainly I will not show you my
deeds; certainly I will not rise from table and trundle out to see your
magistrates.  I have too much respect for my digestion, and too little
curiosity in justices of the peace.’

He leaned forward, looked me nearly in the face, and reached out one hand
to the bell-rope.  ‘See here, my fine fellow!’ said he.  ‘Do you see that
bell-rope?  Let me tell you, there’s a boy waiting below: one jingle, and
he goes to fetch the constable.’

‘Do you tell me so?’ said I.  ‘Well, there’s no accounting for tastes!  I
have a prejudice against the society of constables, but if it is your
fancy to have one in for the dessert—’  I shrugged my shoulders lightly.
‘Really, you know,’ I added, ‘this is vastly entertaining.  I assure you,
I am looking on, with all the interest of a man of the world, at the
development of your highly original character.’

He continued to study my face without speech, his hand still on the
button of the bell-rope, his eyes in mine; this was the decisive heat.
My face seemed to myself to dislimn under his gaze, my expression to
change, the smile (with which I had began) to degenerate into the grin of
the man upon the rack.  I was besides harassed with doubts.  An innocent
man, I argued, would have resented the fellow’s impudence an hour ago;
and by my continued endurance of the ordeal, I was simply signing and
sealing my confession; in short, I had reached the end of my powers.

‘Have you any objection to my putting my hands in my breeches pockets?’ I
inquired.  ‘Excuse me mentioning it, but you showed yourself so extremely
nervous a moment back.’  My voice was not all I could have wished, but it
sufficed.  I could hear it tremble, but the landlord apparently could
not.  He turned away and drew a long breath, and you may be sure I was
quick to follow his example.

‘You’re a cool hand at least, and that’s the sort I like,’ said he.  ‘Be
you what you please, I’ll deal square.  I’ll take the chaise for a
hundred pound down, and throw the dinner in.’

‘I beg your pardon,’ I cried, wholly mystified by this form of words.

‘You pay me a hundred down,’ he repeated, ‘and I’ll take the chaise.
It’s very little more than it cost,’ he added, with a grin, ‘and you know
you must get it off your hands somehow.’

I do not know when I have been better entertained than by this impudent
proposal.  It was broadly funny, and I suppose the least tempting offer
in the world.  For all that, it came very welcome, for it gave me the
occasion to laugh.  This I did with the most complete abandonment, till
the tears ran down my cheeks; and ever and again, as the fit abated, I
would get another view of the landlord’s face, and go off into another
paroxysm.

‘You droll creature, you will be the death of me yet!’ I cried, drying my
eyes.

My friend was now wholly disconcerted; he knew not where to look, nor yet
what to say; and began for the first time to conceive it possible he was
mistaken.

‘You seem rather to enjoy a laugh, sir,’ said he.

‘O, yes!  I am quite an original,’ I replied, and laughed again.

Presently, in a changed voice, he offered me twenty pounds for the
chaise; I ran him up to twenty-five, and closed with the offer: indeed, I
was glad to get anything; and if I haggled, it was not in the desire of
gain, but with the view at any price of securing a safe retreat.  For
although hostilities were suspended, he was yet far from satisfied; and I
could read his continued suspicions in the cloudy eye that still hovered
about my face.  At last they took shape in words.

‘This is all very well,’ says he: ‘you carry it off well; but for all
that, I must do my duty.’

I had my strong effect in reserve; it was to burn my ships with a
vengeance!  I rose.  ‘Leave the room,’ said I.  ‘This is insuperable.  Is
the man mad?’  And then, as if already half-ashamed of my passion: ‘I can
take a joke as well as any one,’ I added; ‘but this passes measure.  Send
my servant and the bill.’

When he had left me alone, I considered my own valour with amazement.  I
had insulted him; I had sent him away alone; now, if ever, he would take
what was the only sensible resource, and fetch the constable.  But there
was something instinctively treacherous about the man which shrank from
plain courses.  And, with all his cleverness, he missed the occasion of
fame.  Rowley and I were suffered to walk out of his door, with all our
baggage, on foot, with no destination named, except in the vague
statement that we were come ‘to view the lakes’; and my friend only
watched our departure with his chin in his hand, still moodily
irresolute.

I think this one of my great successes.  I was exposed, unmasked,
summoned to do a perfectly natural act, which must prove my doom and
which I had not the slightest pretext for refusing.  I kept my head,
stuck to my guns, and, against all likelihood, here I was once more at
liberty and in the king’s highway.  This was a strong lesson never to
despair; and, at the same time, how many hints to be cautious! and what a
perplexed and dubious business the whole question of my escape now
appeared!  That I should have risked perishing upon a trumpery question
of a _pourboire_, depicted in lively colours the perils that perpetually
surrounded us.  Though, to be sure, the initial mistake had been
committed before that; and if I had not suffered myself to be drawn a
little deep in confidences to the innocent Dolly, there need have been no
tumble at the inn of Kirkby-Lonsdale.  I took the lesson to heart, and
promised myself in the future to be more reserved.  It was none of my
business to attend to broken chaises or shipwrecked travellers.  I had my
hands full of my own affairs; and my best defence would be a little more
natural selfishness and a trifle less imbecile good-nature.




