CHAPTER XXVII—THE SABBATH DAY


It was indeed high time I should be gone from Swanston; but what I was to
do in the meanwhile was another question.  Rowley had received his orders
last night: he was to say that I had met a friend, and Mrs. McRankine was
not to expect me before morning.  A good enough tale in itself; but the
dreadful pickle I was in made it out of the question.  I could not go
home till I had found harbourage, a fire to dry my clothes at, and a bed
where I might lie till they were ready.

Fortune favoured me again.  I had scarce got to the top of the first hill
when I spied a light on my left, about a furlong away.  It might be a
case of sickness; what else it was likely to be—in so rustic a
neighbourhood, and at such an ungodly time of the morning—was beyond my
fancy.  A faint sound of singing became audible, and gradually swelled as
I drew near, until at last I could make out the words, which were
singularly appropriate both to the hour and to the condition of the
singers.  ‘The cock may craw, the day may daw,’ they sang; and sang it
with such laxity both in time and tune, and such sentimental complaisance
in the expression, as assured me they had got far into the third bottle
at least.

I found a plain rustic cottage by the wayside, of the sort called double,
with a signboard over the door; and, the lights within streaming forth
and somewhat mitigating the darkness of the morning, I was enabled to
decipher the inscription: ‘The Hunters’ Tryst, by Alexander Hendry.
Porter Ales, and British Spirits.  Beds.’

My first knock put a period to the music, and a voice challenged tipsily
from within.

‘Who goes there?’ it said; and I replied, ‘A lawful traveller.’

Immediately after, the door was unbarred by a company of the tallest lads
my eyes had ever rested on, all astonishingly drunk and very decently
dressed, and one (who was perhaps the drunkest of the lot) carrying a
tallow candle, from which he impartially bedewed the clothes of the whole
company.  As soon as I saw them I could not help smiling to myself to
remember the anxiety with which I had approached.  They received me and
my hastily-concocted story, that I had been walking from Peebles and had
lost my way, with incoherent benignity; jostled me among them into the
room where they had been sitting, a plain hedgerow alehouse parlour, with
a roaring fire in the chimney and a prodigious number of empty bottles on
the floor; and informed me that I was made, by this reception, a
temporary member of the _Six-Feet-High Club_, an athletic society of
young men in a good station, who made of the Hunters’ Tryst a frequent
resort.  They told me I had intruded on an ‘all-night sitting,’ following
upon an ‘all-day Saturday tramp’ of forty miles; and that the members
would all be up and ‘as right as ninepence’ for the noonday service at
some neighbouring church—Collingwood, if memory serves me right.  At this
I could have laughed, but the moment seemed ill-chosen.  For, though six
feet was their standard, they all exceeded that measurement considerably;
and I tasted again some of the sensations of childhood, as I looked up to
all these lads from a lower plane, and wondered what they would do next.
But the Six-Footers, if they were very drunk, proved no less kind.  The
landlord and servants of the Hunters’ Tryst were in bed and asleep long
ago.  Whether by natural gift or acquired habit they could suffer
pandemonium to reign all over the house, and yet lie ranked in the
kitchen like Egyptian mummies, only that the sound of their snoring rose
and fell ceaselessly like the drone of a bagpipe.  Here the Six-Footers
invaded them—in their citadel, so to speak; counted the bunks and the
sleepers; proposed to put me in bed to one of the lasses, proposed to
have one of the lasses out to make room for me, fell over chairs, and
made noise enough to waken the dead: the whole illuminated by the same
young torch-bearer, but now with two candles, and rapidly beginning to
look like a man in a snowstorm.  At last a bed was found for me, my
clothes were hung out to dry before the parlour fire, and I was
mercifully left to my repose.

I awoke about nine with the sun shining in my eyes.  The landlord came at
my summons, brought me my clothes dried and decently brushed, and gave me
the good news that the Six-Feet-High Club were all abed and sleeping off
their excesses.  Where they were bestowed was a puzzle to me until (as I
was strolling about the garden patch waiting for breakfast) I came on a
barn door, and, looking in, saw all the red face mixed in the straw like
plums in a cake.  Quoth the stalwart maid who brought me my porridge and
bade me ’eat them while they were hot,’ ‘Ay, they were a’ on the ran-dan
last nicht!  Hout! they’re fine lads, and they’ll be nane the waur of it.
Forby Farbes’s coat.  I dinna see wha’s to get the creish off that!’ she
added, with a sigh; in which, identifying Forbes as the torch-bearer, I
mentally joined.

It was a brave morning when I took the road; the sun shone, spring seemed
in the air, it smelt like April or May, and some over-venturous birds
sang in the coppices as I went by.  I had plenty to think of, plenty to
be grateful for, that gallant morning; and yet I had a twitter at my
heart.  To enter the city by daylight might be compared to marching on a
battery; every face that I confronted would threaten me like the muzzle
of a gun; and it came into my head suddenly with how much better a
countenance I should be able to do it if I could but improvise a
companion.  Hard by Merchiston I was so fortunate as to observe a bulky
gentleman in broadcloth and gaiters, stooping with his head almost
between his knees, before a stone wall.  Seizing occasion by the
forelock, I drew up as I came alongside and inquired what he had found to
interest him.

He turned upon me a countenance not much less broad than his back.

‘Why, sir,’ he replied, ‘I was even marvelling at my own indefeasible
stupeedity: that I should walk this way every week of my life, weather
permitting, and should never before have _notticed_ that stone,’ touching
it at the same time with a goodly oak staff.

I followed the indication.  The stone, which had been built sideways into
the wall, offered traces of heraldic sculpture.  At once there came a
wild idea into my mind: his appearance tallied with Flora’s description
of Mr. Robbie; a knowledge of heraldry would go far to clinch the proof;
and what could be more desirable than to scrape an informal acquaintance
with the man whom I must approach next day with my tale of the drovers,
and whom I yet wished to please?  I stooped in turn.

‘A chevron,’ I said; ‘on a chief three mullets?  Looks like Douglas, does
it not?’

‘Yes, sir, it does; you are right,’ said he: ‘it _does_ look like
Douglas; though, without the tinctures, and the whole thing being so
battered and broken up, who shall venture an opinion?  But allow me to be
more personal, sir.  In these degenerate days I am astonished you should
display so much proficiency.’

‘O, I was well grounded in my youth by an old gentleman, a friend of my
family, and I may say my guardian,’ said I; ‘but I have forgotten it
since.  God forbid I should delude you into thinking me a herald, sir!  I
am only an ungrammatical amateur.’

‘And a little modesty does no harm even in a herald,’ says my new
acquaintance graciously.

In short, we fell together on our onward way, and maintained very
amicable discourse along what remained of the country road, past the
suburbs, and on into the streets of the New Town, which was as deserted
and silent as a city of the dead.  The shops were closed, no vehicle ran,
cats sported in the midst of the sunny causeway; and our steps and voices
re-echoed from the quiet houses.  It was the high-water, full and
strange, of that weekly trance to which the city of Edinburgh is
subjected: the apotheosis of the _Sawbath_; and I confess the spectacle
wanted not grandeur, however much it may have lacked cheerfulness.  There
are few religious ceremonies more imposing.  As we thus walked and talked
in a public seclusion the bells broke out ringing through all the bounds
of the city, and the streets began immediately to be thronged with decent
church-goers.

‘Ah!’ said my companion, ‘there are the bells!  Now, sir, as you are a
stranger I must offer you the hospitality of my pew.  I do not know
whether you are at all used with our Scottish form; but in case you are
not I will find your places for you; and Dr. Henry Gray, of St. Mary’s
(under whom I sit), is as good a preacher as we have to show you.’

This put me in a quandary.  It was a degree of risk I was scarce prepared
for.  Dozens of people, who might pass me by in the street with no more
than a second look, would go on from the second to the third, and from
that to a final recognition, if I were set before them, immobilised in a
pew, during the whole time of service.  An unlucky turn of the head would
suffice to arrest their attention.  ‘Who is that?’ they would think:
‘surely I should know him!’ and, a church being the place in all the
world where one has least to think of, it was ten to one they would end
by remembering me before the benediction.  However, my mind was made up:
I thanked my obliging friend, and placed myself at his disposal.

Our way now led us into the north-east quarter of the town, among
pleasant new faubourgs, to a decent new church of a good size, where I
was soon seated by the side of my good Samaritan, and looked upon by a
whole congregation of menacing faces.  At first the possibility of danger
kept me awake; but by the time I had assured myself there was none to be
apprehended, and the service was not in the least likely to be enlivened
by the arrest of a French spy, I had to resign myself to the task of
listening to Dr. Henry Gray.

As we moved out, after this ordeal was over, my friend was at once
surrounded and claimed by his acquaintances of the congregation; and I
was rejoiced to hear him addressed by the expected name of Robbie.

So soon as we were clear of the crowd—‘Mr. Robbie?’ said I, bowing.

‘The very same, sir,’ said he.

‘If I mistake not, a lawyer?’

‘A writer to His Majesty’s Signet, at your service.’

‘It seems we were predestined to be acquaintances!’ I exclaimed.  ‘I have
here a card in my pocket intended for you.  It is from my family lawyer.
It was his last word, as I was leaving, to ask to be remembered kindly,
and to trust you would pass over so informal an introduction.’

And I offered him the card.

‘Ay, ay, my old friend Daniel!’ says he, looking on the card.  ‘And how
does my old friend Daniel?’

I gave a favourable view of Mr. Romaine’s health.

‘Well, this is certainly a whimsical incident,’ he continued.  ‘And since
we are thus met already—and so much to my advantage!—the simplest thing
will be to prosecute the acquaintance instantly.  Let me propose a snack
between sermons, a bottle of my particular green seal—and when nobody is
looking we can talk blazons, Mr. Ducie!’—which was the name I then used
and had already incidentally mentioned, in the vain hope of provoking a
return in kind.

‘I beg your pardon, sir: do I understand you to invite me to your house?’
said I.

‘That was the idea I was trying to convey,’ said he.  ‘We have the name
of hospitable people up here, and I would like you to try mine.’

‘Mr. Robbie, I shall hope to try it some day, but not yet,’ I replied.
‘I hope you will not misunderstand me.  My business, which brings me to
your city, is of a peculiar kind.  Till you shall have heard it, and,
indeed, till its issue is known, I should feel as if I had stolen your
invitation.’

‘Well, well,’ said he, a little sobered, ‘it must be as you wish, though
you would hardly speak otherwise if you had committed homicide!  Mine is
the loss.  I must eat alone; a very pernicious thing for a person of my
habit of body, content myself with a pint of skinking claret, and
meditate the discourse.  But about this business of yours: if it is so
particular as all that, it will doubtless admit of no delay.’

‘I must confess, sir, it presses,’ I acknowledged.

‘Then, let us say to-morrow at half-past eight in the morning,’ said he;
‘and I hope, when your mind is at rest (and it does you much honour to
take it as you do), that you will sit down with me to the postponed meal,
not forgetting the bottle.  You have my address?’ he added, and gave it
me—which was the only thing I wanted.

At last, at the level of York Place, we parted with mutual civilities,
and I was free to pursue my way, through the mobs of people returning
from church, to my lodgings in St. James’ Square.

Almost at the house door whom should I overtake but my landlady in a
dress of gorgeous severity, and dragging a prize in her wake: no less
than Rowley, with the cockade in his hat, and a smart pair of tops to his
boots!  When I said he was in the lady’s wake I spoke but in metaphor.
As a matter of fact he was squiring her, with the utmost dignity, on his
arm; and I followed them up the stairs, smiling to myself.

Both were quick to salute me as soon as I was perceived, and Mrs.
McRankine inquired where I had been.  I told her boastfully, giving her
the name of the church and the divine, and ignorantly supposing I should
have gained caste.  But she soon opened my eyes.  In the roots of the
Scottish character there are knots and contortions that not only no
stranger can understand, but no stranger can follow; he walks among
explosives; and his best course is to throw himself upon their
mercy—‘Just as I am, without one plea,’ a citation from one of the lady’s
favourite hymns.

The sound she made was unmistakable in meaning, though it was impossible
to be written down; and I at once executed the manoeuvre I have
recommended.

‘You must remember I am a perfect stranger in your city,’ said I.  ‘If I
have done wrong, it was in mere ignorance, my dear lady; and this
afternoon, if you will be so good as to take me, I shall accompany
_you_.’

But she was not to be pacified at the moment, and departed to her own
quarters murmuring.

‘Well, Rowley,’ said I; ‘and have you been to church?’

‘If you please, sir,’ he said.

‘Well, you have not been any less unlucky than I have,’ I returned.  ‘And
how did you get on with the Scottish form?’

‘Well, sir, it was pretty ’ard, the form was, and reether narrow,’ he
replied.  ‘I don’t know w’y it is, but it seems to me like as if things
were a good bit changed since William Wallace!  That was a main queer
church she took me to, Mr. Anne!  I don’t know as I could have sat it
out, if she ’adn’t ’a’ give me peppermints.  She ain’t a bad one at
bottom, the old girl; she do pounce a bit, and she do worry, but, law
bless you, Mr. Anne, it ain’t nothink really—she don’t _mean_ it.  W’y,
she was down on me like a ’undredweight of bricks this morning.  You see,
last night she ’ad me in to supper, and, I beg your pardon, sir, but I
took the freedom of playing her a chune or two.  She didn’t mind a bit;
so this morning I began to play to myself, and she flounced in, and flew
up, and carried on no end about Sunday!’

‘You see, Rowley,’ said I, ‘they’re all mad up here, and you have to
humour them.  See and don’t quarrel with Mrs. McRankine; and, above all,
don’t argue with her, or you’ll get the worst of it.  Whatever she says,
touch your forelock and say, “If you please!” or “I beg pardon, ma’am.”
And let me tell you one thing: I am sorry, but you have to go to church
with her again this afternoon.  That’s duty, my boy!’

As I had foreseen, the bells had scarce begun before Mrs. McRankine
presented herself to be our escort, upon which I sprang up with readiness
and offered her my arm.  Rowley followed behind.  I was beginning to grow
accustomed to the risks of my stay in Edinburgh, and it even amused me to
confront a new churchful.  I confess the amusement did not last until the
end; for if Dr. Gray were long, Mr. McCraw was not only longer, but more
incoherent, and the matter of his sermon (which was a direct attack,
apparently, on all the Churches of the world, my own among the number),
where it had not the tonic quality of personal insult, rather inclined me
to slumber.  But I braced myself for my life, kept up Rowley with the end
of a pin, and came through it awake, but no more.

Bethiah was quite conquered by this ‘mark of grace,’ though, I am afraid,
she was also moved by more worldly considerations.  The first is, the
lady had not the least objection to go to church on the arm of an
elegantly dressed young gentleman, and be followed by a spruce servant
with a cockade in his hat.  I could see it by the way she took possession
of us, found us the places in the Bible, whispered to me the name of the
minister, passed us lozenges, which I (for my part) handed on to Rowley,
and at each fresh attention stole a little glance about the church to
make sure she was observed.  Rowley was a pretty boy; you will pardon me
if I also remembered that I was a favourable-looking young man.  When we
grow elderly, how the room brightens, and begins to look as it ought to
look, on the entrance of youth, grace, health, and comeliness!  You do
not want them for yourself, perhaps not even for your son, but you look
on smiling; and when you recall their images—again, it is with a smile.
I defy you to see or think of them and not smile with an infinite and
intimate, but quite impersonal, pleasure.  Well, either I know nothing of
women, or that was the case with Bethiah McRankine.  She had been to
church with a cockade behind her, on the one hand; on the other, her
house was brightened by the presence of a pair of good-looking young
fellows of the other sex, who were always pleased and deferential in her
society and accepted her views as final.

These were sentiments to be encouraged; and, on the way home from
church—if church it could be called—I adopted a most insidious device to
magnify her interest.  I took her into the confidence, that is, of my
love affair, and I had no sooner mentioned a young lady with whom my
affections were engaged than she turned upon me a face of awful gravity.

‘Is she bonny?’ she inquired.

I gave her full assurances upon that.

‘To what denoamination does she beloang?’ came next, and was so
unexpected as almost to deprive me of breath.

‘Upon my word, ma’am, I have never inquired,’ cried I; ‘I only know that
she is a heartfelt Christian, and that is enough.’

‘Ay!’ she sighed, ‘if she has the root of the maitter!  There’s a remnant
practically in most of the denoaminations.  There’s some in the
McGlashanites, and some in the Glassites, and mony in the McMillanites,
and there’s a leeven even in the Estayblishment.’

‘I have known some very good Papists even, if you go to that,’ said I.

‘Mr. Ducie, think shame to yoursel’!’ she cried.

‘Why, my dear madam!  I only—’ I began.

‘You shouldnae jest in sairious maitters,’ she interrupted.

On the whole, she entered into what I chose to tell her of our idyll with
avidity, like a cat licking her whiskers over a dish of cream; and,
strange to say—and so expansive a passion is that of love!—that I derived
a perhaps equal satisfaction from confiding in that breast of iron.  It
made an immediate bond: from that hour we seemed to be welded into a
family-party; and I had little difficulty in persuading her to join us
and to preside over our tea-table.  Surely there was never so ill-matched
a trio as Rowley, Mrs. McRankine, and the Viscount Anne!  But I am of the
Apostle’s way, with a difference: all things to all women!  When I cannot
please a woman, hang me in my cravat!




