Project Gutenberg's The Sufistic Quatrains of Omar Khayyam, by Omar Khayyam

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Sufistic Quatrains of Omar Khayyam

Author: Omar Khayyam

Editor: Robert Arnot

Translator: Edward Fitzgerald
            Edward Henry Whinfield
            J. B. Nicolas

Release Date: January 6, 2012 [EBook #38511]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUFISTIC QUATRAINS--OMAR KHAYYAM ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Rory OConor and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









  UNIVERSAL CLASSICS
  LIBRARY


  ILLUSTRATED
  WITH PHOTOGRAVURES ON
  JAPAN VELLUM, ETCHINGS
  HAND PAINTED INDIA-PLATE
  REPRODUCTIONS, AND
  FULL PAGE PORTRAITS
  OF AUTHORS.


  M WALTER DUNNE, PUBLISHER
  NEW YORK & LONDON




  COPYRIGHT, 1903,

  BY

  M. WALTER DUNNE;

  PUBLISHER

[Illustration: _THE TOMB OF OMAR_
_From an old painting by an unknown artist_]




  THE SUFISTIC QUATRAINS OF

  OMAR KHAYYAM

  IN DEFINITIVE FORM
  INCLUDING THE TRANSLATIONS OF

  EDWARD FITZGERALD
  (101 quatrains)
  With Edward Heron-Allen's Analysis

  E.H. WHINFIELD
  (500 quatrains)

  J.B. NICOLAS
  (464 quatrains)

  WITH PREFACES BY EACH TRANSLATOR AND A
  GENERAL INTRODUCTION DEALING WITH
  OMAR'S PLACE IN SUFISM, BY

  ROBERT ARNOT, M.A.

  Author of "The Vine in Symbolism"

  M. WALTER DUNNE, PUBLISHER,
  NEW YORK & LONDON




  COPYRIGHT, 1903,

  BY

  M. WALTER DUNNE,

  PUBLISHER




ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                         FACING
                                                           PAGE

  THE TOMB OF OMAR                               _Frontispiece_
  From an old painting by an unknown artist.

  THE APPROACH TO NAISHAPUR                                 100
  From a painting by I.R. Herbert.

  SUFI MYSTICS GATHERED FOR MEDITATION                      210
  From an old painting by a Pushtu artist.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                             PAGE
  GENERAL INTRODUCTION                                         xi
  INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EDITION OF EDWARD FITZGERALD'S
    TRANSLATION OF THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM                1
  THE COMPLETE FITZGERALD FIRST EDITION                        13
    Kuza-Nama                                                  25
    Notes                                                      29
  AN ANALYSIS OF EDWARD FITZGERALD'S TRANSLATION (FIFTH
    EDITION), BY EDWARD HERON-ALLEN                            35
    Preface                                                    37
    Explanation of References                                  42
    Analysis of Edward Fitzgerald's Quatrains                  44
    Appendix                                                  107
  VARIATIONS BETWEEN THE SECOND, THIRD AND FOURTH EDITIONS
    OF FITZGERALD'S TRANSLATION                               115
    Stanzas Which Appear in the Second Edition Only           122
  COMPARATIVE TABLE OF STANZAS IN THE FOUR EDITIONS OF
    FITZGERALD                                                124
    Note                                                      127
  THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM TRANSLATED BY E.H.
    WHINFIELD, M.A.                                           129
    Introduction                                              131
    Note                                                      139
  E.H. WHINFIELD TRANSLATION                                  141
  THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM TRANSLATED INTO PROSE
    FROM THE FRENCH VERSION OF MONSIEUR J.B. NICOLAS          267
    Preface                                                   269
  TRANSLATION OF THE NICOLAS TEXT                             279




GENERAL INTRODUCTION


The earliest reference to Omar Khayyam dates from the middle of the
seventh century of the Hijra.[1] Mohammad Shahrazuri, author of a
little-used history of learned men, bearing the title of
«Nazhet-ul-Arwah,» devotes to Khayyam the following passage:

«'Omar Al-Khayyami was a Nishapuri by birth and extraction. He [may be
regarded as] the successor of Abu 'Ali (Avicenna) in the various
branches of philosophic learning; but he was a man of reserved character
and disliked entertaining (_sayyik al-'atan_). While he was in Ispahan
he perused a certain book seven times and then he knew it by heart. On
his return to Nishapur he dictated it [from memory] and on comparing it
with the original copy, it was found that the difference between them
was but slight. He was averse both to composition and to teaching. He is
the author of a handbook on natural science, and of two pamphlets, one
entitled ‹_Al-Wujud_› (or ‹Real Existence›) and the other ‹_Al-Kawn w'al
Taklif_.›[2] He was learned in the law, in classical Arabic, and in
history.

«One day Al-Khayyami went to see the Vezir, Abd-ur-Razzak, the Chief of
the Koran Readers. Abu-l-Hasan Al-Ghazzali was with this latter [at the
time], and the two were discussing the disagreement of the Koran Readers
in regard to a certain verse. [As Omar entered] the Vezir said, ‹Here we
have _the_ authority,› and proceeded to ask Al-Khayyami [for his
opinion] on the matter. ['Omar] enumerated the various readings of the
Readers, and explained the grounds (_'ilal_) for each one. He also
mentioned the exceptional readings and the arguments in favor of each,
and expressed his preference for one view in particular.

«Al-Ghazzali then said: ‹May God add such men as thee to the number of
the learned! Of a truth, I did not think any one of the Koran Readers
knew the readings by heart to this extent--much less one of the secular
philosophers.›

«As for the sciences, he had mastered both mathematics and philosophy.
One day ‹the Proof of Islam›, Al-Ghazzali, came to see him and asked him
how it came that one could distinguish one of the parts of the sphere
which revolve on the axis from the rest, although the sphere was similar
in all its parts. Al-Khayyami pronounced his views, beginning with a
certain category; but he refrained from entering deeply into the
discussion--and such was the wont of this respected Sheykh. [Their
conversation was interrupted by] the call to mid-day prayer, whereupon
Al-Ghazzali said, ‹Truth has come in, and lying has gone out.› 'Omar
arose and went to visit Sultan Sanjar. The latter was [at the time] a
mere child, and was suffering from an attack of smallpox. When he came
away the Vezir asked him, ‹How did you find the child, and what did you
prescribe for him?› 'Omar answered, ‹The child is in a most precarious
state.› An Ethiopian slave reported this saying to the Sultan, and when
the Sultan recovered he became inimical to 'Omar and did not like him.
Melik-Shah treated him as a boon companion; and Shams-ul-Mulk honored
him greatly, and made him sit beside him on his throne.

«It is related that ['Omar] was [one day] picking his teeth with a
toothpick of gold, and was studying the chapter on metaphysics from
[Avicenna's] ‹Book of Healing.› When he reached the section on ‹The One
and the Many› he placed the toothpick between the two leaves, arose,
performed his prayers and made his last injunctions. He neither ate nor
drank anything [that day]; and when he performed the last evening
prayer, he bowed himself to the ground and said as he bowed: ‹Oh, God!
verily I have known Thee to the extent of my power: forgive me,
therefore. Verily my knowledge of Thee is my recommendation to Thee.›
And [so saying], he died; may God have pity on him!»

We may look upon Omar as a deeply learned man, following his own
convictions, who, tortured with the question of existence, and finding
no solution to life in Musulman dogmas, worked out for himself a regular
conception of life based on Sufistic Mysticism; a man who, without
discarding belief, smiled ironically at the inconsistencies and
peculiarities of the Islam of his time, which left many minds
dissatisfied in the fourth and fifth centuries, needing as it did
vivification. It found this in the person of Ghazzali, who in this
movement assigned the proper place to the Mystic element. Omar was a
preacher of moral purity and of a contemplative life; one who loved his
God and struggled to master the eternal, the good, and the beautiful.

In this manner also is Omar portrayed in the various early biographical
notices: a defender of «Greek Science,» famous for his knowledge of the
Koran and the Law, and at the same time a «stinging serpent» to the
dogmatic; a wit and a mocker, a bitter and implacable enemy of all
hypocrisy; a man who, while curing others of the wounds of worldly
triviality, impurity, and sinful vanity, himself only with almost his
last breath closed the philosophic book on «Healing» and turned with a
touching prayer to the One God, the Infinite, whom he had been striving
to comprehend with all the strength of his mind and heart. Khayyam's
lively protests and his heated words in freedom's cause brought upon him
many bitter moments in his life and exposed him to numerous attacks at
the hands of the mullahs, especially those of the Shiite community.

Besides these, then as now (apart from hypocrites), persons were not
wanting who, failing to understand Omar, regarded him as an unbeliever,
atheist, and materialist. But in the course of centuries the people of
Persia and India, realizing, perhaps instinctively, the injustice of
former reproaches, have taken to publishing and reading Omar Khayyam in
collections side by side with Abu-Said, Abd-Allah Ansari, and
Attar--that is to say, with Sufi Mystics of the purest water, men whose
moral and religious reputations were spotless.

Rightly to understand Omar some knowledge of Sufism and its tenets is
necessary. Sufism is a mystical doctrine which had its birth on the
Arabian coast, and succeeded in implanting itself there to the point of
putting a decisive check upon the orthodox philosophy. The etymology of
the name is difficult to find. According to some, it comes from the word
_suf_ (wool, a woolen garment) because the first persons to adopt this
doctrine clothed themselves in wool.

We can give, as a proof, in support of this etymology, the fact that the
Persians call their dervishes Sufis, _pechmineh pôch_ (clothed in wool).
The name could also come from the Arabic _safou_ (purity) or the Greek
σοφία (wisdom). Again, some Arabic authors call by the name of Soufa an
Arabic tribe that separated themselves from the world in the
ante-Islamic period, consecrating themselves to the keeping of the
temple of Mecca. A man who professed the Mystic principles of _tasawouf_
(the spiritual life) they called a «Sufi.»

The origin of Musulman Mysticism is a question entailing some
controversy, for whoever knows the detailed ritual and the dogmatic
coldness of the Koran finds it impossible to reconcile Islamic dogma
with any idea of Mysticism whatsoever. In vain does one seek to find an
example of Mystical teaching in this aphorism attributed to Mahomet: «It
is when he prays that the faithful one is nearest God,» as Islamism
holds to a definite separation between the Divinity and the world,
between the Creator and the thing created. The religious customs that
Mahomet instituted and the moral action that he taught served only to
merit the good-will of the Divinity; at the utmost he only believed that
he would be permitted to see Him face to face.

Whence comes then this Mystical idea which, for so many centuries, has
occupied all the minds and absorbed all the intellectual force of the
Musulman world? Two different origins can be given for it: the idea of
emanation from and return to the divine essence whence it came--what we
call Neo-platonism. Added to this are Contemplation and Annihilation,
which come to it through Persia and the Vedantic school as
intermediaries, bringing with it Pantheism, which made its way late into
Sufism, and almost solely among the Persians. Also, it could be said
that originally Sufism owed its principles to the Alexandrian school.

The Arabs, who studied and translated the greater part of Aristotle,
knew Plato only by name; but they came under his influence and received
his doctrines, strongly impregnated with the Mysticism of the Kabbala,
through the Alexandrians and especially through Philon. To annihilate
reason, or at least to subordinate it to feeling; to attack liberty, in
order to subject the whole of life to love; and, furthermore, the blind
abandoning of self--such is the aim of Sufism, as it is of all Mystic
philosophy.

The doctrine of the Sufis has been set forth in a great number of
treatises, notably that of Sohrawdi. God alone exists; He is in
everything and everything is in Him. All beings emanate from Him,
without being really distinct from Him. The world exists for all
eternity; the material is only an illusion of the senses. Sufism is the
true philosophy of Islamism, «which is the best of religions,» but
religions have only a relative importance and serve but to guide us
toward the Reality.

God is the author of the acts of the human race; it is He who controls
the will of man, which is _not_ free in its action. Like all animals man
possesses an original mind, an animal or living mind, a mind
instinctive, but he has also a human mind, breathed into him by God, and
of the same character as the original and constructive element itself.
The concomitant mind comprehends the original element and the human
mind; it extends itself over the triple domain: animal, vegetable, and
mineral. The soul, which existed before the body, is confined in the
body as in a cage; death, then is, the object of the Sufi's desires,
since it returns him to the bosom of the Divinity. This metempsychosis
permits the soul which has not fulfilled its destiny here below to be
purified and worthy of a re-union with God. This spiritual union all can
strive for ardently, but all cannot attain, because it is a product of
the grace of God.

The Sufi, during his sojourn in the body, is uniquely occupied in
meditating upon his unity with God (_Wahdanija_), the reminiscence of
the names of God (_Zikr_), and the progressive advancement in the
_tarika_ or journey of life, up to his unification with God.

What is the Sufi journey, then? Human life has been likened to a voyage,
where the traveler is seeking after God. The aim of the voyage is to
attain to a knowledge of God, for human existence is a period of
banishment for the soul, which cannot return to God until it has passed
through many successive stages. The natural state of man is called
_nasout_ (humanity); the disciple should observe the law and conform to
all the rites of believers. The other stages are: the nature of the
angels (_malakout_), where one follows the way to purity, the possession
of power (_djabrout_), the degree to which knowledge corresponds
(_m'arifa_), and finally, extinction or absorption in the Deity, the
degree to which truth corresponds. The voyager agrees to renouncement,
which is of two kinds: external and internal. The first is the
renouncement of riches and worldly honors; the second is the
renouncement of profane desires. And he should especially guard against
idolatry, which for some is the adoration of worldly achievement, for
others a too assiduous practice of praying and fasting.

To arrive at this aim, the voyager has three necessary aids: attraction
(_indïïdhah_), the act of God which draws all men who have that tendency
or inclination to Him; devotion (_ibâda_), continuing the journey by two
roads--towards God and in God, the first limited, the second without
limit; finally, elevation (_ouroudi_). But the voyage cannot be
accomplished alone; it is necessary to have a guide or a monitor taken
from the second class (_ibâda_). The believer who, after having been
_tâlib_ (an educated man doubting the reality of God) and _mourid_
(desirous of following out his quest), becomes a _salik_ (traveler),
places himself under the authority of a Sufi guide who teaches him to
serve God until, through divine influence, he attains to the _ichk_
(love) stage. Divine love, removing all mundane desires from his heart,
causes him to arrive at _zouhd_ (isolation); he then leads a
contemplative life, passes through the _m'arifa_ degree, and awaits the
direct illumination of _wadja_ (ecstasy).

After having received a revelation of the true nature of God (the
_hakika_ stage) he arrives at the _wasl_ stage (union with God); he
cannot go further; death alone remains, by which he will arrive at the
final degree, absorption in the Divinity. The _Zikr_ are only various
forms of devotion invented by the Sufi guides to develop the spiritual
life. The conduct of the disciple in the presence of his master is
determined by rules which differ little from those imposed upon all
dervishes.

Some authors distinguish, in the Sufi voyage, seven stages,
corresponding to the degrees in the celestial sphere, in order to have
the soul received there after death. But, protest metaphysicians, the
soul cannot return to a determined place, since it does not come from a
determined place. Celestial intelligence, to which corresponds the
degree of intelligence reached by man, will absorb the soul after its
separation from the body.

The Sufis attribute a high antiquity to their doctrines. They do not
hesitate to refer them to as far back as Abraham; they pretend that one
of the founders of their sect was own son-in-law to the prophet Ali, son
of Abou-Tâlib. Finally, «there came a pious woman from Jerusalem, by the
name of Rabia, whose words recall the Christian Mysticism.»

The first person to take the name of Sufi was Abou-Hachim of Koufa. The
first convent or _Khanakah_ was founded in Khorasan by Abou-Said, the
Persian, although the prophet had prohibited monkish life in Islam.
Another convent was established at Ramia, in Syria, and Saladin founded
one in Egypt. Sufism then was divided into two schools: The Persian
Bestâmi (A.D. 875) inclined towards Pantheism; Djonaid, of Bagdad,
preached a system reconcilable with Musulman dogmatism. One of the most
celebrated doctors of this school was Halladj, burnt alive in A.D. 922.
They discoursed upon Sufism under the Kalifs Al-Motazz and Al-Mohtadi,
and preached it under Al-Motamid. The principal Sufi writers are:
Mohammed Salami an Nichabouri (A.D. 1021), El-Kochairi (A.D. 1072),
Ghazli (A.D. 1111), Sohrawdi (A.D. 1234), Ferid-ed-din Attar (A.D.
1230), Djami (A.D. 1492), and Ech-Cha'rani (A.D. 1565).

This Mysticism, so sweet and so full of sentiment, exhales itself in
poesy, and is as much stamped with tenderness and resignation as it is
overflowing with sensuality and drunkenness. The best and most
illustrious of the Persian poets are of this sect: Djelal-ed-din
er-Roumi, author of the «_Mesnewi_», Djami, author of «_Salaman
ou-Absa_», Ferid-ed-din Attar, author of «_Mantik-ut-tair_»; S'adi,
Hafiz de Chiraz, Bayazid-al-Bestami.

Just as Sufis leave the true faith for its semblance, so they also
exchange the external features of all things for the internal (the
corporeal for the spiritual) and give a spiritual significance to
outward forms. They behold objects of a precious nature in their natural
character, and for this reason, the greater part of their words have a
spiritual and visionary meaning.

For instance, when, like Omar, they mention wine, they mean a knowledge
of God, which, extensively considered, is the love of God. Wine, viewed
extensively, is also love: love and affection are here the same thing.
The wine-shop with them means the _murshid i kiamil_ (spiritual
director), for his heart is said to be the depository of the love of
God; the wine-cup is the _telkin_ (the pronunciation of the name of God
in a declaration of faith as: There is no God but Allah), or it
signifies the words which flow from the _murshid's_ mouth respecting
divine knowledge, and which, heard by the _salik_ (the Dervish, or one
who pursues the true path), intoxicates his soul, and divests his mind
(of passions) giving him pure, spiritual delight.

The sweetheart or Beloved means the preceptor, because, when any one
sees his beloved he admires her proportions, with a heart full of love.
The Dervish beholds the secret knowledge of God which fills the heart
of his spiritual preceptor (_murshid_), and through it receives a
similar inspiration, and acquires a full perception of all that he
possesses, just as the pupil learns from his master. As the lover
delights in the presence of his sweetheart, so the Dervish rejoices in
the company of his beloved preceptor. The sweetheart is the object of a
worldly affection; but the preceptor commands a spiritual attachment.

The curls or ringlets of the beloved are the grateful praises of the
preceptor, tending to bind the affections of the Dervish-pupil; the
moles on her face signify that when the pupil, at times, beholds the
total absence of all worldly wants on the part of the preceptor, he also
abandons all the desires of both worlds--he, perhaps, even goes so far
as to desire nothing else in life than his preceptor; the furrows on the
brow of the beloved one, which they compare to verses of the Koran, mean
the light of the heart of the _murshid_: they are compared to the verses
of the Koran, because the attributes of God, in accordance with the
injunction of the Prophet: «Be ye endued with divine qualities,» are
possessed by the sheikh (or _murshid_).

Perhaps I can do no better than to quote one of the foremost authorities
on Sufism[3] in regard to Omar's teachings.

«Seldom has a poet suffered from his friends and his foes as has Omar
Khayyam. ‹He has been regarded,› says a writer, ‹as a free-thinker, a
subverter of faith; an atheist and materialist; a pantheist and a
scoffer at Mysticism; an orthodox Musulman; a true philosopher, a keen
observer, a man of learning; a _bon vivant_, a profligate, a dissembler
and a hypocrite, and a blasphemer--nay, more, an incarnate negation of
positive religion and of all moral beliefs; a gentle nature, more given
to the contemplation of things divine than worldly enjoyments; an
epicurean sceptic; the Persian Abu-l-Ala, Voltaire, and Heine in one.›
The writer has in view the well-known criticisms of Von Hammer, Renan,
Ellis, Nicolas, Garcin de Tassy, Whinfield, Aug. Muller, etc. He might
have added Vedder's curious misunderstanding of the ‹Beloved,› making
him a damsel and a playtoy, and the thousand and one small ideas set
forth by Omarian Societies.

«All this criticism is curious because it is so completely out of
harmony with the facts of Omar's life. It is true that no complete,
authentic manuscript of Omar's is known, and equally true that no
comprehensive biography is known; but detailed information has come down
to us from his contemporaries. From these notes enough can be gathered
to show that Omar was a great man indeed, one who clearly and forcibly
shows the four sides of a perfect character.

«A perfect character is first and fundamentally powerful. It is based
upon the One, be it in idea or in action. Next, it is so simple and
direct that all extraneous thoughts and purposes are unknown to it.
These two sides condition one another. No power without simplicity and
no directness without power. The third side of a great character is love
or human feeling; a fullness that seeks to draw all men to the One, and
the fourth and last characteristic is harmony or a welding together into
One of all these four. The last characteristic is, of course, an
impossibility where the others do not exist; nor can the others attain
any vividness or fullness without love.

«A perfect character is rare. We see, however, glimpses of it here and
there. Omar Khayyam was a type of perfect character. He is full of the
One; he knows of nothing but the One; he burns to draw his fellow-men to
the One; he belongs nowhere but in the One, in whom he indeed can be
said to move, live, and have his being. In the One he attained
Wholeness, harmony. Omar's philosophy is that of the Sufis. In that,
too, he is consistent. The one is Truth; Truth is the reality of things,
Truth burns to draw men to Itself; Truth is the Law or ‹Universe.› His
method is Symbolism, viz.: he chooses the transparencies of Nature in
order to show his hearers how Truth or Wisdom and Love or Devotion
everywhere appear to be the reality behind ‹the magic Shadow-shapes
that come and go.› His most prominent symbols are Wine and Love; Roses,
Springtime, and Death.

«Omar's ethics are not those of Mohammedanism. He advocates Resignation,
to be sure, but not Mohammedan fatalism as popularly understood. His
morals spring from his conception of the fullness of the One, and as
such they are in harmony with the most universal notions of mankind. In
one word, Omar's theology, philosophy, method, and morals are Sufistic,
Sufism taken in the highest sense as the unifying notion for Wholeness,
Love, Truth, and Power. A study of Sufism will reveal the real
Omar--hitherto but little known, if known at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

«No one has attempted, so far as I know, to classify the various
Sufistic systems. It is not so difficult to do so when a key can be
found to them. The best key is that four-foldness which manifests itself
in all human character, endeavor, and work. Corresponding to the
four-foldness of character delineated above, I shall now take the terms
Life, Love, Light, and Law and say that Al-Ghazzali and Jelaladdin
represent the first and, as a proof, point to their constant emphasis of
will as being the dominant power of existence, and the prominence they
give to moral worth. The type of Love, in the form of poetry and
feeling, is represented by Hafiz and Jami. The third group is fully and
completely filled by Shabistani, the author of ‹Gulshan-i-Raz.› It is
Light, and its form is Philosophy, Truth, and Understanding. The last,
the fourth, sums up in a measure, the three preceding, and is also a
clearly defined group by itself. It is Law, Order, Unity, and Reality.
There is more independence in it than in any of the others, because it
is the nearest approach known in existence to Wholeness or Unity. It
contains the opposites of existence, both cosmic and human, viz.: the
protest of the Mystic and also his affirmation, and the new Hope he
represents.

«Omar Khayyam belongs to this fourth group. I do not say he alone fills
it. But he exhibits that Independence and Protest which is the first and
outward characteristic of it. He is also from time to time soaring into
the realms of the Truth or Unity, in a way not found in any other Sufi
poet or doctor.

«Under the garb of the Mystic's favorite method of Doubt and Protest,
the Sufi (Omar) pictures the process of the Awakening of the Soul. That
is the purpose of the ‹Magic Shadow-shapes that come and go› in the
Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam. His pictures are sufficiently transparent for
us to see The Reality Behind.

«While so much is claimed for Omar, it must not be forgotten that it has
not been said that he is the only perfect Sufi. It is not our intention
to say or to intimate that. Omar is great enough when we attribute to
him the office of an Awakener; not merely that of a John the Baptist,
but the office of one who is himself full of the Awakening he preaches.
Such an one is a unique character, and is truly an At-oner, one who
heals all wounds and binds up broken limbs.»


I have already stated, if not in actual words, at least by inference,
that Khayyam's philosophical and religious opinions were in certain
essential points based upon the teaching of the Vedantas. He must have
been familiar with the general scope of their philosophy, although
attaching himself, as we have seen, to the ranks of the Sufi Mystics.
Sufism and Babism are probably the most widely spread doctrines current
in modern Persia, and after all are but forms of Vedantic pantheism
despoiled of real significance by the effort to accommodate themselves
to the creed of Islam. We learn from El Kifti that Khayyam «exhorted to
the seeking of the One, the Ruler, by the purification of bodily
movements, for the cleansing of the human soul,» an unmistakable
exposition of Sufi practices, although based originally upon the customs
of the Vedantic sages.

He certainly did not practice asceticism and other quasi-religious
forms, which had been grafted upon the austere simplicity of the
original Vedantic creed, but he did inculcate the necessity of acquiring
«the knowledge of the unity of the soul with God»--the one thing
important--which can only be achieved by the renouncement of desire,
the purification of the soul from the lusts of the world, and the
practice of kindliness, goodness, universal sympathy with mankind, and
the patience which brings perfect work.

That Omar was a man of many moods is evident. His poetic faculties,
acted upon by an intelligence that was profound, and by a wit as cutting
as the _tulwar_ of a Persian soldier, swayed him hither and thither upon
the sea of daily doubts and fears which are part of man's existence.
Yet, in his way, he was a beacon light, not only in the history of Sufi
Mysticism, but in the annals of God-seeking. I can find no better
yoke-fellow for him than Luther, like whom he was indeed an Apostle of
Protest.

  Robert Arnot




  THE FIRST EDITION OF

  EDWARD FITZGERALD'S TRANSLATION

  OF THE

  QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM




OMAR KHAYYAM

THE

ASTRONOMER-POET OF PERSIA


Omar Khayyam was born at Naishapur in Khorassan in the latter half of
our eleventh, and died within the first quarter of our twelfth Century.
The slender story of his life is curiously twined about that of two
other very considerable figures in their time and country: one of whom
tells the story of all three. This was Nizam ul Mulk, Vizyr to Alp
Arslan the son, and Malik Shah the grandson, of Toghrul Beg the Tartar,
who had wrested Persia from the feeble successor of Mahmud the Great,
and founded that Seljukian Dynasty which finally roused Europe into the
Crusades. This Nizam ul Mulk, in his «_Wasiyat_»--or «Testament»--which
he wrote and left as a memorial for future statesmen--relates the
following, as quoted in the «Calcutta Review,» No. lix., from Mirkhond's
«History of the Assassins.»

«‹One of the greatest of the wise men of Khorassan was the Imam Mowaffak
of Naishapur, a man highly honoured and reverenced--may God rejoice his
soul; his illustrious years exceeded eighty-five, and it was the
universal belief that every boy who read the Koran or studied the
traditions in his presence, would assuredly attain to honour and
happiness. For this cause did my father send me from Tus to Naishapur
with Abd-us-samad, the doctor of law, that I might employ myself in
study and learning under the guidance of that illustrious teacher.
Towards me he ever turned an eye of favour and kindness, and as his
pupil I felt for him extreme affection and devotion, so that I passed
four years in his service. When I first came there, I found two other
pupils of mine own age newly arrived, Hakim Omar Khayyam, and the
ill-fated Ben Sabbah. Both were endowed with sharpness of wit and the
highest natural powers; and we three formed a close friendship together.
When the Imam rose from his lectures, they used to join me, and we
repeated to each other the lessons we had heard. Now Omar was a native
of Naishapur, while Hasan Ben Sabbah's father was one Ali, a man of
austere life and practice, but heretical in his creed and doctrine. One
day Hasan said to me and to Khayyam, «It is a universal belief that the
pupils of the Imam Mowaffak will attain to fortune. Now, even if we
_all_ do not attain thereto, without doubt one of us will, what then
shall be our mutual pledge and bond?» We answered, «Be it what you
please.»--«Well,» he said, «let us make a vow, that to whomsoever this
fortune falls, he shall share it equally with the rest, and reserve no
pre-eminence for himself.»--«Be it so,» we both replied, and on those
terms we mutually pledged our words. Years rolled on, and I went from
Khorassan to Transoxiana, and wandered to Ghazni and Cabul; and when I
returned, I was invested with office, and rose to be administrator of
affairs during the Sultanate of Sultan Alp Arslan.›

«He goes on to state, that years passed by, and both his old
school-friends found him out, and came and claimed a share in his good
fortune, according to the school-day vow. The Vizier was generous and
kept his word. Hasan demanded a place in the government, which the
Sultan granted at the Vizier's request; but, discontented with a gradual
rise, he plunged into the maze of intrigue of an Oriental court, and,
failing in a base attempt to supplant his benefactor, he was disgraced
and fell. After many mishaps and wanderings, Hasan became the head of
the Persian sect of the _Ismailians_--a party of fanatics who had long
murmured in obscurity, but rose to an evil eminence under the guidance
of his strong and evil will. In A.D. 1090, he seized the castle of
Alamut, in the province of Rudbar, which lies in the mountainous tract
south of the Caspian Sea; and it was from this mountain home he obtained
that evil celebrity among the Crusaders as the OLD MAN OF THE MOUNTAINS,
and spread terror through the Mohammedan world; and it is yet disputed
whether the word _Assassin_, which they have left in the language of
modern Europe as their dark memorial, is derived from the _hashish_, or
opiate of hemp-leaves (the Indian _bhang_), with which they maddened
themselves to the sullen pitch of Oriental desperation, or from the name
of the founder of the dynasty, whom we have seen in his quiet collegiate
days, at Naishapur. One of the countless victims of the Assassin's
dagger was Nizam ul Mulk himself, the old school-boy friend.[4]

«Omar Khayyam also came to the Vizier to claim his share; but not to ask
for title or office. ‹The greatest boon you can confer on me,› he said,
‹is to let me live in a corner under the shadow of your fortune, to
spread wide, the advantages of Science, and pray for your long life and
prosperity.› The Vizier tells us, that, when he found Omar was really
sincere in his refusal, he pressed him no further, but granted him a
yearly pension of 1200 _mithkals_ of gold, from the treasury of
Naishapur.»

«At Naishapur thus lived and died Omar Khayyam, ‹busied,› adds the
Vizier, ‹in winning knowledge of every kind, and especially in
Astronomy, wherein he attained to a very high pre-eminence. Under the
Sultanate of Malik Shah he came to Merv, and obtained great praise for
his proficiency in science, and the Sultan showered favours upon him.›

«When Malik Shah determined to reform the calendar, Omar was one of the
eight learned men employed to do it; the result was the _Jalali_ era (so
called from _Jalal-ud-din_ one of the king's names)--‹a computation of
time,› says Gibbon, ‹which surpasses the Julian, and approaches the
accuracy of the Gregorian style.› He is also the author of some
astronomical tables, entitled ‹_Ziji-Malik-skahi,›»_ and the French have
lately republished and translated an Arabic treatise of his on algebra.

«His Takhallus or poetical name (Khayyam) signifies a Tentmaker, and he
is said to have at one time exercised that trade, perhaps before Nizam
ul Mulk's generosity raised him to independence. Many Persian poets
similarly derive their names from their occupations; thus we have Attar,
‹a druggist,› Assar, ‹an oil presser,› etc.[5] Omar himself alludes to
his name in the following whimsical lines:--

    «‹Khayyam, who stitched the tents of science,
    Has fallen in grief's furnace and been suddenly burned;
    The shears of Fate have cut the tent ropes of his life,
    And the broker of Hope has sold him for nothing!›

«We have only one more anecdote to give of his life, and that relates to
the close; it is told in the anonymous preface which is sometimes
prefixed to his poems; it has been printed in the Persian in the
appendix to Hyde's ‹Veterum Persarum Religio,› p. 499; and D'Herbelot
alludes to it in his _Bibliothèque_, under _Khiam_:[6]--

«‹It is written in the chronicles of the ancients that this King of the
Wise, Omar Khayyam, died at Naishapur in the year of the Hegira 517
(A.D. 1123); in science he was unrivalled,--the very paragon of his age.
Khwajah Nizami of Samarcand, who was one of his pupils, relates the
following story: «I often used to hold conversations with my teacher
Omar Khayyam, in a garden; and one day he said to me, ‹My tomb shall be
in a spot where the north wind may scatter roses over it.› I wondered at
the words he spake, but I knew that his were no idle words.[7] Years
after, when I chanced to revisit Naishapur, I went to his final
resting-place, and lo! it was just outside a garden, and trees laden
with fruit stretched their boughs over the garden wall, and dropped
their flowers upon his tomb, so that the stone was hidden under them.»›»

Thus far--without fear of trespass--from the «Calcutta Review.» The
writer of it, on reading in India this story of Omar's grave, was
reminded, he says, of Cicero's account of finding Archimedes' tomb at
Syracuse, buried in grass and weeds. I think Thorwaldsen desired to have
roses grow over him; a wish religiously fulfilled for him to the present
day, I believe. However, to return to Omar.

Though the Sultan «shower'd favours upon him,» Omar's Epicurean audacity
of thought and speech caused him to be regarded askance in his own time
and country. He is said to have been especially hated and dreaded by the
Sufis, whose practice he ridiculed, and whose faith amounts to little
more than his own, when stript of the Mysticism and formal recognition
of Islamism under which Omar would not hide. Their poets, including
Hafiz, who are (with the exception of Firdausi) the most considerable in
Persia, borrowed largely, indeed, of Omar's material, but turning it to
a mystical use more convenient to themselves and the people they
addressed; a people quite as quick of doubt as of belief; as keen of
bodily sense as of intellectual; and delighting in a cloudy composition
of both, in which they could float luxuriously between heaven and earth,
and this world and the next, on the wings of a poetical expression, that
might serve indifferently for either Omar was too honest of heart as
well as of head for this. Having failed (however mistakenly) of finding
any Providence but destiny, and any world but this, he set about making
the most of it; preferring rather to soothe the soul through the senses
into acquiescence with things as he saw them, than to perplex it with
vain disquietude after what they _might_ be. It has been seen, however,
that his worldly ambition was not exorbitant; and he very likely takes a
humorous or perverse pleasure in exalting the gratification of sense
above that of the intellect, in which he must have taken great delight,
although it failed to answer the questions in which he, in common with
all men, was most vitally interested.

For whatever reason, however, Omar, as before said, has never been
popular in his own country, and therefore has been but scantily
transmitted abroad. The MSS. of his Poems, mutilated beyond the average
casualties of Oriental transcription, are so rare in the East as scarce
to have reached westward at all, in spite of all the acquisitions of
arms and science. There is no copy at the India House, none at the
Bibliothèque Nationale of Paris. We know but of one in England: No. 140
of the Ouseley MSS. at the Bodleian, written at Shiraz, A.D. 1460. This
contains but 158 Rubaiyat. One in the Asiatic Society's Library at
Calcutta (of which we have a copy) contains (and yet incomplete) 516,
though swelled to that by all kinds of repetition and corruption. So Von
Hammer speaks of _his_ copy as containing about 200, while Dr. Sprenger
catalogues the Lucknow MS. at double that number.[8] The scribes, too,
of the Oxford and Calcutta MSS. seem to do their work under a sort of
protest; each beginning with a tetrastich (whether genuine or not),
taken out of its alphabetical order; the Oxford with one of apology; the
Calcutta with one of expostulation, supposed (says a notice prefixed to
the MS.) to have arisen from a dream, in which Omar's mother asked about
his future fate. It may be rendered thus--

    «Oh Thou who burn'st in Heart for those who burn
    In Hell, whose fires thyself shall feed in turn;
      How long be crying, ‹Mercy on them, God!›
    Why, who art Thou to teach, and He to learn?»

The Bodleian quatrain pleads Pantheism by way of Justification.

    «If I myself upon a looser Creed
    Have loosely strung the Jewel of Good Deed,
    Let this one thing for my Atonement plead:
    That One for Two I never did mis-read.»

The reviewer,[9] to whom I owe the particulars of Omar's life, concludes
his review by comparing him with Lucretius, both as to natural temper
and genius, and as acted upon by the circumstances in which he lived.
Both indeed were men of subtle, strong, and cultivated intellect, fine
imagination, and hearts passionate for truth and justice; who justly
revolted from their country's false religion, and false, or foolish,
devotion to it, but who fell short of replacing what they subverted by
such better _hope_ as others, with no better revelation to guide them,
had yet made a law to themselves. Lucretius, indeed, with such material
as Epicurus furnished, satisfied himself with the theory of a vast
machine fortuitously constructed, and acting by a law that implied no
legislator; and so composing himself into a Stoical rather than
Epicurean severity of attitude, sat down to contemplate the mechanical
drama of the Universe which he was part actor in; himself and all about
him (as in his own sublime description of the Roman Theatre) discolored
with the lurid reflex of the curtain suspended between the spectator
and the sun. Omar, more desperate, or more careless of any so
complicated system as resulted in nothing but hopeless necessity, flung
his own genius and learning with a bitter or humorous jest into the
general ruin which their insufficient glimpses only served to reveal;
and, pretending sensual pleasure as the serious purpose of life, only
_diverted_ himself with speculative problems of Deity, Destiny, Matter
and Spirit, Good and Evil, and other such questions, easier to start
than to run down, and the pursuit of which becomes a very weary sport at
last!

With regard to the present translation. The original Rubaiyat (as,
missing an Arabic guttural, these _Tetrastichs_ are more musically
called) are independent stanzas, consisting each of four lines of equal,
though varied, prosody; sometimes _all_ rhyming, but oftener (as here
imitated) the third line a blank. Somewhat as in the Greek alcaic, where
the penultimate line seems to lift and suspend the wave that falls over
in the last. As usual with such kind of Oriental verse, the Rubaiyat
follow one another according to alphabetic rhyme--a strange succession
of grave and gay. Those here selected are strung into something of an
eclogue, with perhaps a less than equal proportion of the «Drink and
make-merry» which (genuine or not) recurs over-frequently in the
original. Either way the result is sad enough: saddest perhaps when most
ostentatiously merry: more apt to move sorrow than anger toward the old
Tentmaker, who, after vainly endeavouring to unshackle his steps from
destiny, and to catch some authentic glimpse of TO-MORROW, fell back
upon TO-DAY (which has outlasted so many TO-MORROWS!) as the only ground
he had got to stand upon, however momentarily slipping from under his
feet.


While the second Edition of this version of Omar was preparing, M.
Nicolas, French Consul at Resht, published a very careful and very good
edition of the text, from a lithograph copy at Teheran, comprising 464
Rubaiyat, with translation and notes of his own.

M. Nicolas, whose edition has reminded me of several things, and
instructed me in others, does not consider Omar to be the material
Epicurean that I have literally taken him for, but a Mystic, shadowing
the Deity under the figure of wine, wine-bearer, etc., as Hafiz is
supposed to do; in short, a Sufi Poet like Hafiz and the rest.

I cannot see reason to alter my opinion, formed as it was more than a
dozen years ago[10] when Omar was first shown me by one to whom I am
indebted for all I know of Oriental, and very much of other, literature.
He admired Omar's genius so much, that he would gladly have adopted any
such interpretation of his meaning as M. Nicolas' if he could.[11] That
he could not, appears by his paper in the «Calcutta Review» already so
largely quoted; in which he argues from the Poems themselves, as well as
from what records remain of the Poet's Life.

And if more were needed to disprove M. Nicolas' theory, there is the
Biographical Notice which he himself has drawn up in direct
contradiction to the interpretation of the Poems given in his notes.
Indeed I hardly knew poor Omar was so far gone till his apologist
informed me. For here we see that, whatever were the wine that Hafiz
drank and sang, the veritable juice of the grape it was which Omar used,
not only when carousing with his friends, but (says M. Nicolas) in order
to excite himself to that pitch of devotion which others reached by
cries and «hurlemens.» And yet, whenever wine, wine-bearer, etc., occur
in the text--which is often enough--M. Nicolas carefully annotates
«_Dieu_,» «_La Divinité_,» etc.: so carefully indeed that one is tempted
to think that he was indoctrinated by the Sufi with whom he read the
Poems. A Persian would naturally wish to vindicate a distinguished
countryman: and a Sufi to enrol him in his own sect, which already
comprises all the chief poets in Persia.

What historical authority has M. Nicolas to show that Omar gave himself
up «_avec passion à l'étude de la philosophie des Soufis_»? The
doctrines of Pantheism, Materialism, Necessity, etc., were not peculiar
to the Sufi; nor to Lucretius before them; nor to Epicurus before him;
probably the very original irreligion of thinking men from the first;
and very likely to be the spontaneous growth of a philosopher living in
an age of social and political barbarism, under shadow of one of the
Two-and-Seventy Religions supposed to divide the world. Von Hammer
(according to Sprenger's «Oriental Catalogue») speaks of Omar as «a
Free-thinker and _a great opponent of Sufism_»; perhaps because, while
holding much of their doctrine, he would not pretend to any inconsistent
severity of morals. Sir W. Ouseley has written a note to something of
the same effect on the fly-leaf of the Bodleian MS. And in two Rubaiyat
of M. Nicolas' own Edition Suf and Sufi are both disparagingly named.

No doubt many of these Quatrains seem unaccountable unless mystically
interpreted; but many more as unaccountable unless literally. Were the
Wine spiritual, for instance, how wash the Body with it when dead? Why
make cups of the dead clay to be filled with--«_La Divinité_»--by some
succeeding Mystic? M. Nicolas himself is puzzled by some «_bizarres_»
and «_trop Orientales_» allusions and images--«_d'une sensualité
quelquefois révoltante_» indeed--which «_les convenances_» do not permit
him to translate; but still which the reader cannot but refer to «_La
Divinité_».[12] No doubt also many of the Quatrains in the Teheran, as
in the Calcutta, Copies, are spurious; such _Rubaiyat_ being the common
form of epigram in Persia. But this, at best, tells as much one way as
another; nay, the Sufi, who may be considered the scholar and man of
letters in Persia, would be far more likely than the careless epicure to
interpolate what favours his own view of the poet. I observe that very
few of the more mystical Quatrains are in the Bodleian MS. which must be
one of the oldest, as dated at Shiraz, A.H. 865, A.D. 1460. And this, I
think, especially distinguishes Omar (I cannot help calling him by
his--no, not Christian--familar name) from all other Persian poets:
That, whereas with them the poet is lost in his song, the man in
allegory and abstraction, we seem to have the man--the _bonhomme_--Omar
himself, with all his humours and passions, as frankly before us as if
we were really at table with him, after the wine had gone round.

I must say that I, for one, never wholly believed in the mysticism of
Hafiz. It does not appear there was any danger in holding and singing
Sufi Pantheism, so long as the poet made his salaam to Mohammed at the
beginning and end of his song. Under such conditions Jelaluddin, Jami,
Attar, and others sang; using wine and beauty indeed as images to
illustrate, not as a mask to hide, the Divinity they were celebrating.
Perhaps some allegory less liable to mistake or abuse had been better
among so inflammable a people: much more so when, as some think with
Hafiz and Omar, the abstract is not only likened to, but identified
with, the sensual Image; hazardous, if not to the devotee himself, yet
to his weaker brethren; and worse for the profane in proportion as the
devotion of the initiated grew warmer. And all for what? To be
tantalized with images of sensual enjoyment which must be renounced if
one would approximate a God, who according to the doctrine, _is_ sensual
matter as well as spirit, and into whose universe one expects
unconsciously to merge after death, without hope of any posthumous
beatitude in another world to compensate for all one's self-denial in
this. Lucretius' blind Divinity certainly merited, and probably got, as
much self-sacrifice as this of the Sufi; and the burden of Omar's
song--if not «Let us eat»--is assuredly--«Let us drink, for to-morrow we
die!» And if Hafiz meant quite otherwise by a similar language, he
surely miscalculated when he devoted his life and genius to so equivocal
a psalmody as, from his day to this, has been said and sung by any
rather than spiritual worshippers.

However, as there is some traditional presumption, and certainly the
opinion of some learned men, in favour of Omar's being a Sufi--and even
something of a saint--those who please may so interpret his wine and
cup-bearer. On the other hand, as there is far more historical certainty
of his being a philosopher, of scientific insight and ability far beyond
that of the age and country he lived in; of such moderate worldly
ambition as becomes a philosopher, and such moderate wants as rarely
satisfy a debauchee. Other readers may be content to believe with me
that, while the wine Omar celebrates is simply the juice of the grape,
he bragged more than he drank of it, in very defiance perhaps of that
spiritual wine which left its votaries sunk in hypocrisy or disgust.

  EDWARD FITZGERALD.




THE FITZGERALD FIRST EDITION

    [_The first Edition of the translation of Omar Khayyam, which
    appeared in 1859, differs so much from those which followed, that it
    has been thought better to print it in full, instead of merely
    attempting to record the differences_.]


I.

    Awake! for Morning in the Bowl of Night
    Has flung the Stone that puts the Stars to Flight:
    And Lo! the Hunter of the East has caught
    The Sultan's Turret in a Noose of Light.


II.

    Dreaming when Dawn's Left Hand was in the Sky
    I heard a Voice within the Tavern cry,
    «Awake, my Little ones, and fill the Cup
    Before Life's Liquor in its Cup be dry.»


III.

    And, as the Cock crew, those who stood before
    The Tavern shouted--«Open then the Door!
    You know how little while we have to stay,
    And, once departed, may return no more.»


IV.

    Now the New Year reviving old Desires,
    The thoughtful Soul to Solitude retires,
    Where the WHITE HAND OF MOSES on the Bough
    Puts out, and Jesus from the Ground suspires.


V.

    Iram indeed is gone with all its Rose,
    And Jamshyd's Sev'n-ring'd Cup where no one knows;
      But still the Vine her ancient Ruby yields,
    And still a Garden by the Water blows.


VI.

    And David's Lips are lock't; but in divine
    High piping Pehlevi, with «Wine! Wine! Wine!
      _Red_ Wine!»--the Nightingale cries to the Rose
    That yellow Cheek of her's to incarnadine.


VII.

    Come, fill the Cup, and in the Fire of Spring
    The Winter Garment of Repentance fling:
      The Bird of Time has but a little way
    To fly--and Lo! the Bird is on the Wing.


VIII.

    And look--a thousand Blossoms with the Day
    Woke--and a thousand scatter'd into Clay:
      And this first Summer Month that brings the Rose
    Shall take Jamshyd and Kaikobad away.


IX.

    But come with old Khayyam, and leave the Lot
    Of Kaikobad and Kaikhosru forgot:
      Let Rustum lay about him as he will,
    Or Hatim Tai cry Supper--heed them not.


X.

    With me along some Strip of Herbage strown,
    That just divides the desert from the sown,
      Where name of Slave and Sultan scarce is known,
    And pity Sultan Mahmud on his Throne.


XI.

    Here with a Loaf of Bread beneath the Bough,
    A Flask of Wine, a Book of Verse--and Thou
      Beside me singing in the Wilderness--
    And Wilderness is Paradise enow.


XII.

    «How sweet is mortal Sovranty!»--think some:
    Others--«How blest the Paradise to come!»
      Ah, take the Cash in hand and waive the Rest;
    Oh, the brave Music of a _distant_ Drum!


XIII.

    Look to the Rose that blows about us--«Lo,
    Laughing,» she says, «into the World I blow:
      At once the silken Tassel of my Purse
    Tear, and its Treasure on the Garden throw.»


XIV.

    The Worldly Hope men set their Hearts upon
    Turns Ashes--or it prospers; and anon,
      Like Snow upon the Desert's dusty Face
    Lighting a little Hour or two--is gone.


XV.

    And those who husbanded the Golden Grain,
    And those who flung it to the Winds like Rain,
      Alike to no such aureate Earth are turn'd
    As, buried once, Men want dug up again.


XVI.

    Think, in this batter'd Caravanserai
    Whose Doorways are alternate Night and Day,
      How Sultan after Sultan with his Pomp
    Abode his Hour or two, and went his way.


XVII.

    They say the Lion and the Lizard keep
    The Courts where Jamshyd gloried and drank deep;
      And Bahram, that great Hunter--the Wild Ass
    Stamps o'er his Head, and he lies fast asleep.


XVIII.

    I sometimes think that never blows so red
    The Rose as where some buried Cæsar bled;
      That every Hyacinth the Garden wears
    Dropt in its Lap from some once lovely Head.


XIX.

    And this delightful Herb whose tender Green
    Fledges the River's Lip on which we lean--
      Ah, lean upon it lightly! for who knows
    From what once lovely Lip it springs unseen!


XX.

    Ah, my Belovéd, fill the Cup that clears
    TO-DAY of past Regrets and future Fears--
      _To-morrow_?--Why, To-morrow I may be
    Myself with Yesterday's Sev'n Thousand Years.


XXI.

    Lo! some we loved, the loveliest and best
    That Time and Fate of all their Vintage prest,
      Have drunk their Cup a Round or two before,
    And one by one crept silently to Rest.


XXII.

    And we, that now make merry in the Room
    They left, and Summer dresses in new Bloom,
      Ourselves must we beneath the Couch of Earth
    Descend, ourselves to make a Couch--for whom?


XXIII.

    Ah, make the most of what we yet may spend,
    Before we too into the Dust descend;
      Dust into Dust, and under Dust, to lie,
    Sans Wine, sans Song, sans Singer, and--sans End!


XXIV.

    Alike for those who for TO-DAY prepare,
    And those that after a TO-MORROW stare,
      A Muezzin from the Tower of Darkness cries
    «Fools! your Reward is neither Here nor There!»


XXV.

    Why, all the Saints and Sages who discuss'd
    Of the Two Worlds so learnedly, are thrust
      Like foolish Prophets forth; their Words to Scorn
    Are scatter'd and their Mouths are stopt with Dust.


XXVI.

    Oh, come with old Khayyam, and leave the Wise
    To talk; one thing is certain, that Life flies;
      One thing is certain, and the Rest is Lies;
    The Flower that once has blown for ever dies.


XXVII.

    Myself when young did eagerly frequent
    Doctor and Saint, and heard great Argument
      About it and about: but evermore
    Came out by the same Door as in I went.


XXVIII.

    With them the Seed of Wisdom did I sow,
    And with my own hand labour'd it to grow:
      And this was all the Harvest that I reap'd--
    «I came like Water, and like Wind I go.»


XXIX.

    Into this Universe, and _why_ not knowing,
    Nor _whence_, like Water willy-nilly flowing:
      And out of it, as Wind along the Waste,
    I know not _whither_, willy-nilly blowing.


XXX.

    What, without asking, hither hurried _whence?_
    And, without asking, _whither_ hurried hence!
      Another and another Cup to drown
    The Memory of this Impertinence!


XXXI.

    Up from Earth's Centre through the Seventh Gate
    I rose, and on the Throne of Saturn sate,
      And many Knots unravel'd by the Road;
    But not the Knot of Human Death and Fate.


XXXII.

    There was a Door to which I found no Key:
    There was a Veil past which I could not see
      Some little Talk awhile of ME and THEE
    There seem'd--and then no more of THEE and ME.


XXXIII.

    Then to the rolling Heav'n itself I cried,
    Asking, «What Lamp had Destiny to guide
      Her little Children stumbling in the Dark?»
    And--«A blind Understanding!» Heav'n replied.


XXXIV.

    Then to this earthen Bowl did I adjourn
    My Lip the secret Well of Life to learn:
      And Lip to Lip it murmur'd--«While you live
    Drink!--for once dead you never shall return.»


XXXV.

    I think the Vessel, that with fugitive
    Articulation answer'd, once did live,
      And merry-make; and the cold Lip I kiss'd
    How many Kisses might it take--and give!


XXXVI.

    For in the Market-place, one Dusk of Day,
    I watch'd the Potter thumping his wet Clay:
      And with its all obliterated Tongue
    It murmur'd--«Gently, Brother, gently, pray!»


XXXVII.

    Ah, fill the Cup:--what boots it to repeat
    How Time is slipping underneath our Feet:
      Unborn TO-MORROW, and dead YESTERDAY,
    Why fret about them if TO-DAY be sweet!


XXXVIII.

    One Moment in Annihilation's Waste,
    One Moment, of the Well of Life to taste--
      The Stars are setting and the Caravan
    Starts for the Dawn of Nothing--Oh, make haste!


XXXIX.

    How long, how long, in infinite Pursuit
    Of This and That endeavour and dispute?
      Better be merry with the fruitful Grape
    Than sadden after none, or bitter, Fruit.


XL.

    You know, my Friends, how long since in my House
    For a new Marriage I did make Carouse:
      Divorced old barren Reason from my Bed,
    And took the Daughter of the Vine to Spouse.


XLI.

    For «IS» and «IS-NOT» though _with_ Rule and Line
    And «UP-AND-DOWN» _without_, I could define,
      I yet in all I only cared to know,
    Was never deep in anything but--Wine.


XLII.

    And lately, by the Tavern Door agape,
    Came stealing through the Dusk an Angel Shape
      Bearing a Vessel on his Shoulder; and
    He bid me taste of it; and 'twas--the Grape!


XLIII.

    The Grape that can with Logic absolute
    The Two-and-Seventy jarring Sects confute:
      The subtle Alchemist that in a Trice
    Life's leaden Metal into Gold transmute.


XLIV.

    The mighty Mahmud, the victorious Lord,
    That all the misbelieving and black Horde
      Of Fears and Sorrows that infest the Soul
    Scatters and slays with his enchanted Sword.


XLV.

    But leave the Wise to wrangle, and with me
    The Quarrel of the Universe let be:
      And, in some corner of the Hubbub coucht,
    Make Game of that which makes as much of Thee.


XLVI.

    For in and out, above, about, below,
    'Tis nothing but a Magic Shadow-show,
      Play'd in a Box whose Candle is the Sun,
    Round which we Phantom Figures come and go.


XLVII.

    And if the Wine you drink, the Lip you press,
    End in the Nothing all Things end in--Yes--
      Then fancy while Thou art, Thou art but what
    Thou shalt be--Nothing--Thou shalt not be less.


XLVIII.

    While the Rose blows along the River Brink,
    With old Khayyam the Ruby Vintage drink:
      And when the Angel with his darker Draught
    Draws up to Thee--take that, and do not shrink.


XLIX.

    'Tis all a Chequer-board of Nights and Days
    Where Destiny with Men for Pieces plays:
      Hither and thither moves, and mates, and slays,
    And one by one back in the Closet lays.


L.

    The Ball no Question makes of Ayes and Noes,
    But Right or Left as strikes the Player goes;
      And He that toss'd Thee down into the Field,
    _He_ knows about it all--HE knows--HE knows!


LI.

    The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ,
    Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit
      Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,
    Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of it.


LII.

    And that inverted Bowl we call The Sky,
    Whereunder crawling coop't we live and die,
      Lift not thy hands to _It_ for help--for It
    Rolls impotently on as Thou or I.


LIII.

    With Earth's first Clay They did the Last Man's knead,
    And then of the Last Harvest sow'd the Seed
      Yea, the first Morning of Creation wrote
    What the Last Dawn of Reckoning shall read.


LIV.

    I tell Thee this--When, starting from the Goal,
    Over the shoulders of the flaming Foal
      Of Heav'n Parwin and Mushtara they flung,
    In my predestined Plot of Dust and Soul


LV.

    The Vine had struck a Fibre; which about
    If clings my Being--let the Sufi flout;
      Of my Base Metal may be filed a Key,
    That shall unlock the Door he howls without,


LVI.

    And this I know: whether the one True Light,
    Kindle to Love, or Wrath consume me quite,
      One glimpse of It within the Tavern caught
    Better than in the Temple lost outright.


LVII.

    Oh, Thou, who didst with Pitfall and with Gin
    Beset the Road I was to wander in,
      Thou wilt not with Predestination round
    Enmesh me, and impute my Fall to Sin?


LVIII.

    Oh, Thou, who Man of baser Earth didst make,
    And who with Eden didst devise the Snake;
      For all the Sin wherewith the Face of Man
    Is blacken'd, Man's Forgiveness give--and take

       *       *       *       *       *




KUZA-NAMA


LIX.

    Listen again. One evening at the Close
    Of Ramazan, ere the better Moon arose,
      In that old Potter's Shop I stood alone
    With the clay Population round in Rows.


LX.

    And, strange to tell, among that Earthen Lot
    Some could articulate, while others not:
      And suddenly one more impatient cried--
    «Who _is_ the Potter, pray, and who the Pot?»


LXI.

    Then said another--«Surely not in vain
    My substance from the common Earth was ta'en,
      That he who subtly wrought me into Shape
    Should stamp me back to common Earth again.»


LXII.

    Another said--«Why, ne'er a peevish Boy,
    Would break the Bowl from which he drank in Joy;
      Shall He that _made_ the Vessel in pure Love
    And Fancy, in an after Rage destroy!»


LXIII.

    None answer'd this; but after Silence spake
    A vessel of a more ungainly Make:
      «They sneer at me for leaning all awry;
    What! did the Hand then of the Potter shake?»


LXIV.

    Said one--«Folks of a surly Tapster tell,
    And daub his Visage with the smoke of Hell;
      They talk of some strict Testing of us--Pish!
    He's a Good Fellow, and 'twill all be well.»


LXV.

    Then said another with a long-drawn Sigh,
    «My Clay with long oblivion is gone dry:
      But, fill me with the old familiar Juice,
    Methinks I might recover by-and-bye!»


LXVI.

    So while the Vessels one by one were speaking,
    One spied the little Crescent all were seeking:
      And then they jogg'd each other, «Brother, Brother!
    Hark to the Porter's Shoulder-knot a creaking!»

       *       *       *       *       *

LXVII.

    Ah, with the Grape my fading Life provide,
    And wash my Body whence the Life has died,
      And in a Windingsheet of Vine-leaf wrapt,
    So bury me by some sweet Garden-side.


LXVIII.

    That ev'n my buried Ashes such a Snare
    Of Perfume shall fling up into the Air,
      As not a True Believer passing by
    But shall be overtaken unaware.


LXIX.

    Indeed the Idols I have loved so long
    Have done my Credit in Men's Eye much wrong:
      Have drown'd my Honour in a shallow Cup,
    And sold my Reputation for a Song.


LXX.

    Indeed, indeed, Repentance oft before
    I swore--but was I sober when I swore?
      And then and then came Spring, and Rose-in-hand
    My thread-bare Penitence apieces tore.


LXXI.

    And much as Wine has play'd the Infidel,
    And robb'd me of my Robe of Honour--well,
      I often wonder what the Vintners buy
    One half so precious as the Goods they sell.


LXXII.

    Alas, that Spring should vanish with the Rose!
    That Youth's sweet-scented Manuscript should close!
      The nightingale that in the Branches sang,
    Ah, whence, and whither flown again, who knows!


LXXIII.

    Ah, Love! could thou and I with Fate conspire
    To grasp this sorry Scheme of Things entire,
      Would not we shatter it to bits--and then
    Re-mould it nearer to the Heart's Desire!


LXXIV.

    Ah, Moon of my Delight who know'st no wane,
    The Moon of Heav'n is rising once again:
      How oft hereafter rising shall she look
    Through this same Garden after me--in vain!


LXXV.

    And when Thyself with shining Foot shall pass
    Among the Guests Star-scatter'd on the Grass,
      And in thy joyous Errand reach the Spot
    Where I made one--turn down an empty Glass!

  TAMAM SHUD.




NOTES.


(Stanza II.) The «_False Dawn_»; _Subhi kazib_, a transient Light on the
Horizon about an hour before the _Subhi sadik_, or True Dawn; a
well-known Phenomenon in the East.

(IV.) New Year. Beginning with the Vernal Equinox, it must be
remembered; and (howsoever the old Solar Year is practically superseded
by the clumsy _Lunar_ Year that dates from the Mohammedan Hegira) still
commemorated by a Festival that is said to have been appointed by the
very Jamshyd whom Omar so often talks of, and whose yearly Calendar he
helped to rectify.

«The sudden approach and rapid advance of the Spring,» says Mr.
Binning,[13] «are very striking. Before the Snow is well off the Ground,
the Trees burst into Blossom, and the Flowers start forth from the Soil.
At _Now Rooz_ [_their_ New Year's Day] the Snow was lying in patches on
the Hills and in the shaded Valleys, while the Fruit-trees in the
Gardens were budding beautifully, and green Plants and Flowers springing
up on the Plains on every side--

    ‹And on old Hyems' Chin and icy Crown
    An odorous Chaplet of sweet Summer buds
    Is, as in mockery, set›--

Among the Plants newly appeared I recognised some old Acquaintances I
had not seen for many a Year: among these, two varieties of the
Thistle--a coarse species of Daisy like the ‹Horse-gowan›--red and white
Clover--the Dock--the blue Corn-flower--and that vulgar Herb the
Dandelion rearing its yellow crest on the Banks of the Water-courses.»
The Nightingale was not yet heard, for the Rose was not yet blown; but
an almost identical Blackbird and Wood-pecker helped to make up
something of a North-country Spring.

«The White Hand of Moses.» Exodus iv. 6; where Moses draws forth his
Hand--not, according to the Persians, «_leprous as Snow,_» --but
_white_, as our May-blossom in Spring perhaps. According to them also
the Healing Power of Jesus resided in His Breath.

(V.) Iram, planted by King Shaddad, and now sunk somewhere in the Sands
of Arabia. Jamshyd's Seven-ring'd Cup was typical of the 7 Heavens, 7
Planets, 7 Seas, etc., and was a _Divining Cup_.

(VI.) _Pehlevi_, the old Heroic _Sanskrit_ of Persia. Hafiz also speaks
of the Nightingale's _Pehlevi_, which did not change with the People's.

I am not sure if the fourth line refers to the Red Rose looking sickly,
or to the Yellow Rose that ought to be Red; Red, White, and Yellow Roses
all common in Persia. I think that Southey in his «Common-Place Book,»
quotes from some Spanish author about the Rose being White till 10
o'clock; «_Rosa Perfecta_» at 2; and «_perfecta incarnada_» at 5.

(X.) Rustum, the «Hercules» of Persia, and Zal his Father, whose
exploits are among the most celebrated in the Shahnama. Hatim Tai, a
well-known type of Oriental generosity.

(XIII.) A Drum--beaten outside a Palace.

(XIV.) That is, the Rose's Golden Centre.

(XVIII.) Persepolis: call'd also _Takht.i-Jamshyd_--THE THRONE OF
JAMSHYD, «_King Splendid,_» of the mythical _Peshdadian_ Dynasty, and
supposed (according to the Shahnama) to have been founded and built by
him. Others refer it to the Work of the Genie King, Jan Ibn Jan--who
also built the Pyramids--before the time of Adam.

BAHRAM GUR--_Bahram of the Wild Ass_--a Sassanian Sovereign--had also
his Seven Castles (like the King of Bohemia!) each of a different
Colour; each with a Royal Mistress within; each of whom tells him a
Story, as told in one of the most famous Poems of Persia, written by
Amir Khusraw: all these Seven also figuring (according to Eastern
Mysticism) the Seven Heavens; and perhaps the Book itself that Eighth,
into which the mystical Seven transcend, and within which they revolve.
The Ruins of Three of those Towers are yet shown by the Peasantry; as
also the swamp in which Bahram sunk like the Master of Ravenswood while
pursuing his _Gur_.

    The Palace that to Heav'n his pillars threw,
    And Kings the forehead on his threshold drew--
      I saw the solitary Ringdove there,
    And «Coo, coo, coo,» she cried; and «Coo, coo, coo.»

This Quatrain Mr. Binning found, among several of Hafiz and others,
inscribed by some stray hand among the ruins of Persepolis. The
Ringdove's ancient _Pehlevi Coo, Coo, Coo_, signifies also in Persian,
«_Where? Where? Where?_» In Attar's «Bird-parliament» she is reproved by
the Leader of the Birds for sitting still, and for ever harping on that
one note of lamentation for her lost Yusuf.

Apropos of Omar's Red Roses in Stanza xix., I am reminded of an old
English superstition, that our Anemone Pulsatilla, or purple «Pasque
Flower» (which grows plentifully about the Fleam Dyke, near Cambridge),
grows only where Danish blood has been spilt.

(XXI.) A thousand years to each Planet.

(XXXI.) Saturn, Lord of the Seventh Heaven.

(XXXII.) ME-AND-THEE: some dividual Existence or Personality distinct
from the Whole.

(XXXVII.) One of the Persian Poets--Attar, I think--has a pretty story
about this. A thirsty Traveller dips his hand into a Spring of Water to
drink from. By and by comes another who draws up and drinks from an
earthen Bowl, and then departs, leaving his Bowl behind him. The first
Traveller takes it up for another draught; but is surprised to find that
the same Water which had tasted sweet from his own hand tastes bitter
from the earthen Bowl. But a Voice--from Heaven, I think--tells him the
clay from which the Bowl is made was once _Man_; and, into whatever
shape renewed, can never lose the bitter flavour of Mortality.

(XXXIX.) The custom of throwing a little Wine on the ground before
drinking still continues in Persia, and perhaps generally in the East.
Mons. Nicolas considers it «_un signe de libéralité, et en même temps un
avertissement que le buveur doit vider sa coupe jusqu' à la dernière
goutte_.» Is it not more likely an ancient Superstition; a Libation to
propitiate Earth, or make her an Accomplice in the illicit Revel? Or,
perhaps, to divert the Jealous Eye by some sacrifice of superfluity, as
with the Ancients of the West? With Omar we see something more is
signified; the precious Liquor is not lost, but sinks into the ground to
refresh the dust of some poor Wine-worshipper foregone.

Thus Hafiz, copying Omar in so many ways: «When thou drinkest Wine pour
a draught on the ground. Wherefore fear the Sin which brings to another
Gain?»

(XLIII.) According to one beautiful Oriental Legend, Azrael accomplishes
his mission by holding to the nostril an Apple from the Tree of Life.

This and the two following Stanzas would have been withdrawn, as
somewhat _de trop_, from the Text, but for advice which I least like to
disregard.

(LI.) Prom Mah to Mahi; from Fish to Moon.

(LVI.) A Jest, of course, at his Studies. A curious mathematical
Quatrain of Omar's has been pointed out to me; the more curious because
almost exactly parallel'd by some Verses of Bishop Donne's, that are
quoted in Izaak Walton's Lives! Here is Omar: «You and I are the image
of a pair of compasses; though we have two heads (sc. our _feet_) we
have one body; when we have fixed the centre for our circle, we bring
our heads (sc. feet) together at the end.» Dr. Donne:--

    If we be two, we two are so
      As stiff twin-compasses are two;
    Thy Soul, the fixt foot, makes no show
      To move, but does if the other do.

    And though thine in the centre sit,
      Yet when my other far does roam,
    Thine leans and hearkens after it,
      And grows erect as mine comes home.

    Such thou must be to me, who must
      Like the other foot obliquely run;
    Thy firmness makes my circle just,
      And me to end where I begun.

(LIX.) The Seventy-two Religions supposed to divide the World,
_including_ Islamism, as some think: but others not.

(LX.) Alluding to Sultan Mahmud's Conquest of India and its dark people.

(LXVIII.) _Fanusi khiyal_, a Magic-lantern still used in India; the
cylindrical Interior being painted with various Figures, and so lightly
poised and ventilated as to revolve round the lighted Candle within.

(LXX.) A very mysterious Line in the Original:--

    _O danad O danad O danad O----_

breaking off something like our Wood-pigeon's Note, which she is said to
take up just where she left off.

(LXXV.) Parwin and Mushtari--The Pleiads and Jupiter.

(LXXXVII.) This Relation of Pot and Potter to Man and his Maker figures
far and wide in the Literature of the World, from the time of the Hebrew
Prophets to the present; when it may finally take the name of «Pot
theism,» by which Mr. Carlyle ridiculed Sterling's «Pantheism.» _My_
Sheikh, whose knowledge flows in from all quarters, writes to me--

«Apropos of old Omar's Pots, did I ever tell you the sentence I found in
Bishop Pearson on the Creed? ‹Thus are we wholly at the disposal of His
will, and our present and future condition framed and ordered by His
free, but wise and just, decrees. _Hath not the potter power over the
clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto
dishonour?_ (Rom. ix. 21.) And can that earth-artificer have a freer
power over his _brother potsherd_ (both being made of the same metal),
than God hath over him, who, by the strange fecundity of His omnipotent
power, first made the clay out of nothing, and then him out of that?›»

And again--from a very different quarter--«I had to refer the other day
to Aristophanes, and came by chance on a curious Speaking-pot story in
the _Vespæ_, which I had quite forgotten.

  Φιλοκλέων.   Ἄκουε, μὴ φεῦγ'· ἐν Συβάρει γυνή ποτε  1. 1435
               κατέαξ' ἐχῖνον.

  Κατήγορος.                  Ταῦτ' ἐγὼ μαρτύρομαι.

  Φι.          Οὑχῖνος οὖν ἔχων τιν' ἐπεμαρτύρατο·
               Εἶθ' ἡ Συβαρῖτις εἶπεν, εἰ ναὶ τὰν κόραν
               τὴν μαρτυρίαν ταύτην ἐάσας, ἐν τάχει
               ἐπίδεσμον ἐπρία, νοῦν ἂν εἶχες πλείονα.

«The Pot calls a bystander to be a witness to his bad treatment. The
woman says, ‹If, by Proserpine, instead of all this «testifying» (comp.
Cuddie and his mother in «Old Mortality!») you would buy yourself a
rivet, it would show more sense in you!› The Scholiast explains
_echinus_ as ἀγγος τι ἐκ κεράμον.»

One more illustration for the oddity's sake from the «Autobiography of a
Cornish Rector,» by the late James Hamley Tregenna. 1871.

«There was one old Fellow in our Company--he was so like a Figure in the
‹Pilgrim's Progress› that Richard always called him the ‹ALLEGORY,› with
a long white beard--a rare Appendage in those days--and a Face the
colour of which seemed to have been baked in, like the Faces one used to
see on Earthenware Jugs. In our Country-dialect Earthenware is called
‹_Clome_›; so the Boys of the Village used to shout out after him--‹Go
back to the Potter, old Clome-face, and get baked over again.› For the
‹Allegory,› though shrewd enough in most things, had the reputation of
being _saift-baked_, _i.e._, of weak intellect.»

(XC.) At the Close of the Fasting Month, Ramazan (which makes the
Musulman unhealthy and unamiable), the first Glimpse of the New Moon
(who rules their division of the Year) is looked for with the utmost
Anxiety, and hailed with Acclamation. Then it is that the Porter's Knot
may be heard--toward the _Cellar_. Omar has elsewhere a pretty Quatrain
about the same Moon--

    «Be of Good Cheer--the sullen Month will die,
    And a young Moon requite us by and by:
      Look how the Old one, meagre, bent, and wan
    With Age and Fast, is fainting from the Sky!»




  AN ANALYSIS OF

  EDWARD FITZGERALD'S TRANSLATION

  OF THE

  QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM

  (_Fifth Edition_)

  By EDWARD HERON-ALLEN




PREFACE


The object with which this volume has been compiled has been to set at
rest, once and for ever, the vexed question of how far Edward
FitzGerald's incomparable poem may be regarded as a translation of the
Persian originals, how far as an adaptation, and how far as an original
work. In the Introduction to my recently published translation of the
Ouseley MS. in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, and more particularly in
the Essay which terminates the second edition of that work, I have dwelt
at considerable length upon the history of Edward FitzGerald's poem and
the influences of various Oriental works which are traceable in it. As
it is doubtful whether the present volume will reach the hands of, or at
any rate be critically considered by, any students of the poem who have
not already had access to my former work, I do not think that it would
be either expedient or useful to repeat in this place the information
which is collected there, but a short history of the major portion of
Edward FitzGerald's material is necessary, for the purpose of showing
why this question of translation, adaptation, or original composition
should have been a question open to lengthy argument, and why it has
been impossible to set it at rest until the present time, when forty
years have elapsed since first Edward FitzGerald's poem attracted the
attention of those great scholars and poets who rescued it, as recounted
in the threadbare anecdote, from the oblivion of the penny box.

The influence of the Ouseley MS. upon the poem forms the subject of the
volume to which I have referred, and, save in so far as it recurs in the
parallels which give excuse for the present work, may be dismissed, but
the doubts which have sprung up as to the extent to which Edward
FitzGerald took, as his editor, Mr. Aldis Wright, says, «great liberties
with the original,» have arisen in consequence of the vicissitudes which
have befallen the rest of the material from which the poet worked during
the construction of his first edition. We know that Prof. Cowell made a
copy of the Ouseley MS. for Edward FitzGerald just before he went to
India in August, 1856. In another letter he says «I got a copy made for
him from the one MS. in the Bengal Asiatic Society's Library at Calcutta
soon after I arrived in November, 1856. It reached FitzGerald June 14th,
1857, as I learn by a note in his writing. Some time after this I sent
him a copy of that rare Calcutta printed edition which I got from my
Munshi.» To possess oneself therefore of full information as to what
material Edward FitzGerald really worked from in making the original
edition of his poem, it was necessary to consult, line by line, and word
by word, the Calcutta MS. (noted as No. 1548 in the Bengal Asiatic
Society's Library) and the Calcutta _printed_ edition of 1836,--in
addition, of course, to the Ouseley MS. Prof. Cowell most generously
placed at my disposal his copy of the Calcutta MS., but, as he himself
has recorded, the copy was made by an inferior scribe in a hand which is
exceedingly difficult to read. I therefore communicated with Mr. A.T.
Pringle, Director of Indian Records in the Home Department at Calcutta,
himself a keen and critical student of Omar Khayyam, with a view to
getting either a photographic reproduction, or a clean copy of this MS.
made for me. Careful search and widely spread enquiry brought to light
the fact that the MS. was lost, stolen, or strayed, so that Prof.
Cowell's copy was the only record left of this portion of Edward
FitzGerald's material. This copy I sent out to India, and had copied by
a good writer, a copy being made at the same time to replace that which
had been stolen.

I next addressed myself to the discovery of «that rare Calcutta
_printed_ edition,» of whose existence, after searching in vain every
European State library and many others, and every library in India of
which I could learn, I began to have grave doubts, thinking that Prof.
Cowell had inadvertently confused it with an edition _lithographed_
simultaneously at Calcutta and Teheran in 1836. In the summer, however,
when I had given up all hope, one of Mr. Pringle's clerks picked up a
copy of the long sought book in the Bazar at Calcutta, printed from type
at Calcutta in 1836. A circumstance that greatly adds to the interest of
this discovery, whilst at the same time it very greatly lessened my
labours, lies in the fact that this edition is evidently printed from
the lost Calcutta MS. itself, both introduction and quatrains being
identical in readings and sequence. A few quatrains, including the
repetitions, forming part of the MS. and nearly all those written in the
margins of the MS. are omitted, but nearly all of these are added as an
appendix to the book, the printer explaining in a short note that they
were found in a _bayaz_ (or book of extracts), and were added in that
place instead of in their _diwan_ (or alphabetical) order on account of
their more than ordinarily antinomian tendency. A very interesting
question arises hereon, whether these latter were printed into the book
from the margins of the MS. after being purposely or accidentally
omitted, _or_ whether they were written on to the margin of the MS. from
this book at some date between 1836 and 1856. I think that the former is
the more likely explanation, but in the absence of the MS. this question
cannot be solved.

I find myself therefore in the interesting position of having the whole
of FitzGerald's material before me; and though (so perfectly did Edward
FitzGerald identify himself with his author's habit of mind) many other
MSS. contain quatrains that closely resemble his marvellous paraphrase,
there is nothing written by or attributed to Omar Khayyam which served
FitzGerald for inspiration in making his first edition, other than what
is to be found in the three, or rather two, texts above referred to. I
have spoken already (and at length, in the Terminal Essay to my former
volume) of the influences exerted by other Oriental poets upon his work,
and especially that of the Mantik ut-tair, or Parliament of Birds of
Ferid ud din Attar; where it was direct or exclusive I have set it down
in the parallels which follow. The result of my observations may be
summarised as follows:

Of Edward FitzGerald's quatrains, forty-nine are faithful and beautiful
paraphrases of single quatrains to be found in the Ouseley or Calcutta
MSS., or both.[14]

Forty-four are traceable to more than one quatrain, and therefore may be
termed «composite» quatrains.

Two are inspired by quatrains found by FitzGerald only in Nicolas' text.

Two are quatrains reflecting the whole spirit of the original poem.

Two are traceable exclusively to the influence of the Mantik ut-tair of
Ferid ud din Attar.

Two quatrains primarily inspired by Omar were influenced by the Odes of
Hafiz.

And three, which appeared only in the first and second editions and were
afterwards suppressed by Edward FitzGerald himself, are not--so far as a
careful search enables me to judge--attributable to any lines of the
original texts. Other authors may have inspired them, but their
identification is not useful in this case.

The «fillip,» so to speak, given to FitzGerald's interest in the
ruba'iyat, by the publication of Monsieur J.B. Nicolas' text and
translation of 464 «_Les Quatrains de Khèyam_» (Paris, 1867), must not
be lost sight of, and may be held responsible for many, if not most of
the variations and additions that differentiate the second, third, and
fourth editions from the first. This volume, as FitzGerald himself
records in his Introduction to the second and subsequent editions,
«reminded him of several things and instructed him in others.» Two of
FitzGerald's later quatrains at least (Nos. 46 and 98) come from that
text, and these I have never seen in any MS. text; and, in seeking the
parallels to the present volume, I have collated exactly 5,235 ruba'iyat
in the original Persian. I have appended to every Persian ruba'i in the
following pages, references to the texts in which I have found the same
ruba'i, in the identical form, or more or less varied, and it will be
observed that, for the most part, the ruba'iyat which inspired
FitzGerald are those which have so appealed to the Oriental mind as to
be represented in nearly all the MSS. and texts under examination. The
Ouseley MS. being the first text that occupied FitzGerald's attention,
where his inspirational lines occur both in that MS. and the Calcutta
MS., I have given the Ouseley MS. version, noting any important
variations to be found in the Calcutta MS. It will be observed that
FitzGerald's tendency, after the second edition, was to eliminate
quatrains which were merely suggested by the general tone and sentiment
of the original poem, and not the reflection or translation of
particular and identifiable ruba'iyat. The reader is especially
recommended, when studying these parallels, to turn to the corresponding
quatrain in the first edition, for FitzGerald often diverged further
from the originals in making his subsequent variations--notably, for
instance, in the first and forty-eighth quatrains.

With regard to my own translations of the originals in the following
pages, I may remark that the excessive baldness of the translation is
intentional, for I deemed it better to put before the lovers of
FitzGerald's poem the closest and most unpolished English rendering,
rather than to attempt to clothe the literal meaning of the originals in
graceful phraseology.

I desire to record in this place my most cordial thanks, for the
invaluable assistance they have given me in the preparation of this
volume, to Mr. A.T. Pringle, Professor E.B. Cowell, and Dr. E. Denison
Ross, and to Mr. Aldis Wright, Edward FitzGerald's literary executor,
and his publishers Messrs. Macmillan, for their very kind permission to
reproduce in this volume the poem which has brought it into existence.

  EDWARD HERON-ALLEN.




EXPLANATION OF THE REFERENCES IN THE FOLLOWING PARALLELS


The following are the alternative texts and translations referred to in
the following parallels:--

    O.--The Ouseley MS. No. 140 in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, dated
    A.H. 865 (A.D. 1460), containing 158 ruba'iyat. A facsimile and
    translation with notes, etc., were published by H.S. Nichols, Ltd.
    (London, 1898).

    C.--The Calcutta MS. No. 1548 in the Bengal Asiatic Society's
    Library at Calcutta, containing 510 ruba'iyat. The original has been
    lost or stolen, but a copy has been made from the copy made for
    Edward FitzGerald at the instance of Prof. Cowell.

    L.--The Lucknow lithograph. The edition referred to is that of A.H.
    1312 (A.D. 1894), containing 770 ruba'iyat.

    W.--The text and metrical translation published by E.H. Whinfield
    (London, Trübner, 1883), containing 500 ruba'iyat.

    N.--The text and prose translation published by J.B. Nicolas (Paris,
    Imprimerie Impériale, 1867), containing 464 ruba'iyat.

    S.P.--The text lithographed at St. Petersburg, A.H. 1308 (A.D.
    1888), containing 453 ruba'iyat. Almost identical with N.

    B.--A collection of poems lithographed at Bombay, A.H. 1297 (A.D.
    1880), containing 756 ruba'iyat of Omar. Almost identical with L.

    B. ii.--The MS. in the Public Library at Bankipur, dated A.H. 961-2
    (A.D. 1553-4), containing 604 ruba'iyat.

    P.--The MS. in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris. Supplément Persan,
    No. 823, ff. 92-113. Dated A.H. 934 (A.D. 1527), containing 349
    ruba'iyat.

    P. ii.--Seven ruba'iyat written upon blank pages of MS. of the Diwan
    of Emad. Dated A.H. 786 (A.D. 1384). Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.
    Supplément Persan, No. 745. The handwriting is of the end of the 9th
    or beginning of the 10th century of the Hijrah.

    P. iii.--Six ruba'iyat written in a handwriting of the 11th century
    of the Hijrah, on fol. 104 of a MS. collection of poems.
    Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris. Supplément Persan, No. 793.

    P. iv.--The MS. in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris. Supplément
    Persan, No. 826, ff. 391-394. Dated A.H. 937 (A.D. 1530), containing
    76 ruba'iyat.

    P. v.--The MS. in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris. Ancien Fonds.,
    No. 349, ff. 181-210. Dated A.H. 920 (A.D. 1514), containing 213
    ruba'iyat.

    T.--The MS. in the Library of the Nawab of Tonk. Apparently copied
    about A.D. 1840 principally from C., containing 369 ruba'iyat.

    E.C.--The quatrains translated by Prof. E.B. Cowell in his article
    in the «Calcutta Review,» No. 59, March, 1858, p. 149.

    De T.--The ten quatrains translated from the Ouseley MS. by Garcin
    de Tassy in his «_Note sur les Ruba'iyat d'Omar Khaïyām._» (Paris,
    Imprimerie Impériale, 1857.)

    V.--The metrical translation by John Payne, published by the Villon
    Society (London, 1898), containing 845 quatrains.




ANALYSIS OF EDWARD FITZGERALD'S QUATRAINS


I.

    Wake! For the Sun, who scatter'd into flight
    The Stars before him from the Field of Night,
      Drives Night along with them from Heav'n, and strikes
    The Sultan's Turret with a Shaft of Light.

This version of the opening quatrain is gradually evolved through the
four editions. The quatrain, which, in the first edition runs:

    Awake! for Morning in the Bowl of Night
    Has flung the Stone that puts the Stars to Flight:
      And lo! the Hunter of the East has caught
    The Sultan's Turret in a Noose of Light.

is inspired by C. 134.

    The Sun casts the noose of morning upon the roofs,
    Kai Khosru of the day, he throws a stone into the bowl:
    Drink wine! for the Herald of the Dawn, rising up,
    Hurls into the days the cry of «Drink ye!»

_Ref._:[15]L. 235, B. 232, C. 134, P. 320, T. 138.--W. 233, V. 242.

It is not surprising that Mr. Aldis Wright, in his editorial note at the
end of Messrs. Macmillan's definitive edition (London, 1890), states
that «the first stanza is entirely his own,» for, in this precise form
the ruba'i is only to be found in the Calcutta MS. and in a recently
discovered MS. copied largely from it and belonging to the Nawab of
Tonk. The matter rests upon the word «stone» in the second line. The
word means «to fling a stone into a cup or pot,» which is the signal for
«striking camp» among tribes of nomad Arabs. All the other texts I have
seen read wine for stone which has made the translators (Whinfield and
Payne) properly render the passage «pours _wine_ into the cup.»


II.

    Before the phantom of False morning died,
    Methought a Voice within the Tavern cried,
      «When all the Temple is prepared within,
    «Why nods the drowsy Worshipper outside?»

The inspiration for this quatrain is to be found in C. 5:

    There came one morning a cry from our tavern:
    «Ho! our crazy, tavern-haunting profligate[16]
    «Arise! that we may fill the measure with wine,
    «Ere they fill up our measure (of life).»

_Ref._: L. 1, B. 1, C. 5, B. ii. 1, T. 3.--W. 1, N. 1, V. 1.

In FitzGerald's quatrain there is traceable the influence of one of the
odes of Hafiz, translated by Prof. Cowell (in «Fraser's Magazine,»
September, 1854), which he greatly admired. The lines in question run:

    The morning dawns and the cloud has woven a canopy,
    The morning draught, my friends, the morning draught!
    It is strange that at such a season
    They shut up the wine tavern! Oh, hasten!
    Have they still shut up the door of the tavern?
    Open, oh thou Keeper of the Gates![17]

The influence of these lines is carried on into the next quatrain.


III.

    And, as the Cock crew, those who stood before
    The Tavern shouted--«Open then the Door!
      You know how little while we have to stay,
    And, once departed, may return no more.»

The inspiration for this quatrain is found in four ruba'iyat of the
Calcutta MS., viz.: 641, 207 (ll. 3 and 4), 273, 247.

    It is the hour for the morning draught, and the cock-crow, O Saki,
    Here are we, and the wine, and the street of the vintners, O Saki,
    What time is this for devotions? Be silent, O Saki,
    Let be the traditions,[18] and drink to the dregs, O Saki.

_Ref._: L. 685, B. 676, C. 461, S.P. 448, B. ii. 599.--W. 483, N. 454,
V. 737.

    Thou must drink wine, and gratify the pleasures of thy heart,
    It is clear that so long (and no longer) thou wilt remain
          in this world.

_Ref._: L. 281, B. 277, C. 207.--V. 285.

    O Essence of Delight! Arise, it is the dawn!
    Softly, softly drink wine, and play the harp
    For those who are asleep do not find much,
    And none of those who are gone will ever come back.

_Ref._: L. 431, B. 427, P. 289, C. 273, B. ii. 307, T. 173, P. v.
163.--N. 235, V. 469.

    It is the dawn! Arise, O strange boy!
    Fill up the crystal cup with ruby wine.
    For this moment (of existence) that is lent thee in this
          corner of mortality
    Thou may'st seek long, but thou shalt not find it again.

_Ref._: L. 402, B. 398, P. 224, S.P. 213, C. 247, B. ii. 282, P. iv.
21.--N. 214, V. 425.


IV.

    Now the New Year reviving old Desires,
    The thoughtful Soul to Solitude retires,
      Where the WHITE HAND OF MOSES on the Bough
    Puts out, and Jesus from the Ground suspires.

This quatrain is translated from two ruba'iyat in the Ouseley MS., 13
and 80.

    Now that there is a possibility of happiness for the world,
    Every living heart[19] has yearnings towards the desert,
    Upon every bough is the appearance of Moses' hand,
    In every breeze is the exhalation of Jesus' breath.[20]

_Ref._: P. 194, O. 13.--W. 116.

    Now is the time when by the spring breezes[21] the world is adorned,
    And in hope of rain it opens its eyes,[22]
    The hands of Moses appear like froth upon the bough,
    And the breath of Jesus comes forth from the earth.

_Ref._: O. 80, L. 272, B. 268, C. 204, S.P. 186, P. 157.--W. 201, N.
186, V. 276.


V.

    Iram indeed is gone with all his Rose,
    And Jamshyd's Sev'n-ring'd Cup where no one knows;
      But still a Ruby kindles in the Vine,
    And many a Garden by the Water blows.

This is a very composite quatrain, which cannot be claimed as a
translation of all, or the main part of any, of the C. or O. quatrains.
All the texts, as indeed all Persian poetry, are filled with references
of which we find an echo here. In the authorities at our disposal,
Jamshyd is referred to in C. 254. The Ruby in the Wine occurs in O. 39,
87, 149, and in C. 296, 304, 413, and 460. The Garden by the Water
occurs in O. 151 (C. 415), and in C. 44 and 417. I have never found any
reference to the Garden of Iram in quatrains attributed to Omar
Khayyam.[23]


VI.

    And David's lips are lockt; but in divine
    High-piping Pehlevi, with «Wine! Wine! Wine!
      Red Wine!»--the Nightingale cries to the Rose
    That sallow cheek of hers to 'incarnadine.

This quatrain (eliminating the reference to David[24]) is translated
from O. 67.

    It is a pleasant day, and the weather is neither hot nor cold;
    The rain has washed the dust from the faces of the roses;
    The nightingale in the Pehlevi tongue[25] to the yellow[26] rose
    Cries ever: «Thou must drink wine!»

_Ref._: O. 67, L. 291, B. 287, S.P. 153, P. 230.--W. 174, N. 153, V.
294.


VII.

    Come, fill the Cup, and in the fire of Spring
    Your Winter-garment of Repentance fling:
      The Bird of Time has but a little way
    To flutter--and the Bird is on the Wing.

This is another composite quatrain, and the similarity of its sentiment
to that of No. 94 (_post_) makes it somewhat difficult to allocate the
parallels to it. The first two lines come from two quatrains in C. 431
and 460 (ll. 1 and 2).

    Every day I resolve to repent in the evening,
    Repenting of the brimful goblet, and the cup;
    (But) now that the season of roses has come, I cannot grieve,
    Give penitence for repentance[27] in the season of roses, O Lord!

_Ref._: C. 431, L. 655, B. 647, B. ii. 510.--W. 425, V. 704.

    The flowers are blooming, bring wine, O Saki,
    Abandon the practices of the zealot, O Saki.

_Ref._: C. 460, L. 684, B. 675, B. ii. 540.--V. 736.

The image of the flight of time permeates the whole of the quatrains.
The precise image that FitzGerald uses in ll. 3 and 4 I find in the 24th
distich of the Mantik ut-tair of Ferid ud din Attar.

The bird of the sky flutters along its appointed path.


VIII.*[28]

    Whether at Naishapur or Babylon,
    Whether the Cup with sweet or bitter run,
      The Wine of Life keeps oozing drop by drop,
    The Leaves of Life keep falling one by one.

This quatrain is taken mainly from O. 47 (C. 123). It does not occur in
the first edition, and FitzGerald was evidently «reminded of it» by
Nicolas, in whose reading of the text, alone, the town of Naishapur is
mentioned instead of Balkh. Balkh and Babylon are constantly
interchanged in Persian _belles lettres_.

    Since life passes; what is Baghdad and what is Balkh?
    When the cup is full, what matter if it be sweet or bitter?[29]
    Drink wine, for often, after thee and me, this moon
    Will pass on from the last day of the month to the first,
          and from the first to the last.

_Ref._: O. 47, L. 299, B. 226, C. 123, S.P. 105, P. 51, T. 99.--W. 134,
N. 105, E.C. 2, V. 236.

If closer reference for line 3 be required, it may be found in N. 18,
ll. 3 and 4.

    Whether our Saki holds the neck of the bottle in his hand,
    Or the soul of wine oozes over the rim of the cup.

_Ref._: L. 35, B. 32, S.P. 18.--W. 21, N. 18, V. 33.

«The leaves of life» recur constantly either as leaves of a tree, or of
a book. FitzGerald's inspiration comes from C. 377, ll. 1 and 2. (_Vide_
also _sub._ No. 9.)

    At the moment when I flee from destiny,
    And fall like the leaf of the vine, from the branch.

_Ref._: C. 377, L. 574, B. 567, S.P. 265, B. ii. 353, T. 249.--W. 309,
N. 266, V. 614.


