CHAPTER X


The two women were alone beside the wide open window.  In the full,
wise light of the autumn sun, I saw how faded was the face of the
pregnant woman.

All of a sudden a frightened expression came into her eyes.  She reeled
against the wall, leaned there a second, and then fell over with a
stifled cry.

Anna caught her in her arms, and dragged her along until she reached
the bell and rang and rang.  Then she stood still, not daring to budge,
holding in her arms the heavy delicate woman, her own face close to the
face with the rolling eyes.  The cries, dull and stifled at first,
burst out now in loud shrieks.

The door opened.  People hurried in.  Outside the door the servants
were on the watch.  I caught sight of the landlady, who succeeded ill
in concealing her comic chagrin.

They laid the woman on the bed.  They removed ornaments, unfolded
towels, and gave hurried orders.

The crisis subsided and the woman stopped shrieking.  She was so happy
not to be suffering any more that she laughed.  A somewhat constrained
reflection of her laugh appeared on the faces bending over her.  They
undressed her carefully.  She let them handle her like a child.  They
fixed the bed.  Her legs looked very thin and her set face seemed
reduced to nothing.  All you saw was her distended body in the middle
of the bed.  Her hair was undone and spread around her face like a
pool.  Two feminine hands plaited it quickly.

Her laughter broke and stopped.

"It is beginning again."

A groan, which grew louder, a fresh burst of shrieks.  Anna, her only
friend, remained in the room.  She looked and listened, filled with
thoughts of motherhood.  She was thinking that she, too, held within
her such travail and such cries.

This lasted the whole day.  For hours, from morning until evening, I
heard the heart-rending wail rising and falling from that pitiful
double being.

At certain moments I fell back, overcome.  I could no longer look or
listen.  I renounced seeing so much truth.  Then once more, with an
effort, I stood up against the wall and looked into the Room again.

Anna kissed the woman on her forehead, in brave proximity to the
immense cry.

When the cry was articulate, it was: "No, no!  I do not want to!"

Serious, sickened faces, almost grown old in a few hours with fatigue,
passed and repassed.

I heard some one say:

"No need to help it along.  Nature must be allowed to take her course.
Whatever nature does she does well."

And in surprise my lips repeated this lie, while my eyes were fixed
upon the frail, innocent woman who was a prey to stupendous nature,
which crushed her, rolled her in her blood, and exacted all the
suffering from her that she could yield.

The midwife turned up her sleeves and put on her rubber gloves.  She
waved her enormous reddish-black, glistening hands like Indian clubs.

And all this turned into a nightmare in which I half believed.  My head
grew heavy and I was sickened by the smell of blood and carbolic acid
poured out by the bottleful.

At a moment when I, feeling too harrowed, was not looking, I heard a
cry different from hers, a cry that was scarcely more than the sound of
a moving object, a light grating.  It was the new being that had
unloosened itself, as yet a mere morsel of flesh taken from her flesh--
her heart which had just been torn away from her.

This shook me to the depths of my being.  I, who had witnessed
everything that human beings undergo, I, at this first signal of human
life, felt some paternal and fraternal chord--I do not know what--
vibrating within me.

She laughed.  "How quickly it went!" she said.

. . . . .

The day was coming to a close.  Complete silence in the room.  A plain
night lamp was burning, the flame scarcely flickering.  The clock, like
a poor soul, was ticking faintly.  There was hardly a thing near the
bed.  It was as in a real temple.

She lay stretched out in bed, in ideal quiet, her eyes turned toward
the window.  Bit by bit, she saw the evening descending upon the most
beautiful day in her life.

This ruined mass, this languid face shone with the glory of having
created, with a sort of ecstasy which redeemed her suffering, and one
saw the new world of thoughts that grew out of her experience.

She thought of the child growing up.  She smiled at the joys and
sorrows it would cause her.  She smiled also at the brother or sister
it would have some day.

And I thought of this at the same time that she did, and I saw her
martyrdom more clearly than she.

This massacre, this tragedy of flesh is so ordinary and commonplace
that every woman carries the memory and imprint of it, and yet nobody
really knows it.  The doctor, who comes into contact with so much of
the same sort of suffering, is not moved by it any more.  The woman,
who is too tender-hearted, never remembers it.  Others who look on at
travail have a sentimental interest, which wipes out the agony.  But I
who saw for the sake of seeing know, in all its horror, the agony of
childbirth.  I shall never forget the great laceration of life.

The night lamp was placed so that the bed was plunged in shadow.  I
could no longer see the mother.  I no longer knew her.  I believed in
her.




