CHAPTER III

WHETHER THE GENERAL WILL IS FALLIBLE


It follows from what has gone before that the general will is always
right and tends to the public advantage; but it does not follow that
the deliberations of the people are always equally correct. Our will
is always for our own good, but we do not always see what that is;
the people is never corrupted, but it is often deceived, and on such
occasions only does it seem to will what is bad.

There is often a great deal of difference between the will of all and
the general will; the latter considers only the common interest, while
the former takes private interest into account, and is no more than a
sum of particular wills: but take away from these same wills the pluses
and minuses that cancel one another,[1] and the general will remains as
the sum of the differences.

If, when the people, being furnished with adequate information, held
its deliberations, the citizens had no communication one with another,
the grand total of the small differences would always give the general
will, and the decision would always be good. But when factions arise,
and partial associations are formed at the expense of the great
association, the will of each of these associations becomes general
in relation to its members, while it remains particular in relation
to the State: it may then be said that there are no longer as many
votes as there are men, but only as many as there are associations.
The differences become less numerous and give a less general result.
Lastly, when one of these associations is so great as to prevail over
all the rest, the result is no longer a sum of small differences, but a
single difference; in this case there is no longer a general will, and
the opinion which prevails is purely particular.

It is therefore essential, if the general will is to be able to express
itself, that there should be no partial society within the State,
and that each citizen should think only his own thoughts:[2] which
was indeed the sublime and unique system established by the great
Lycurgus. But if there are partial societies, it is best to have as
many as possible and to prevent them from being unequal, as was done by
Solon, Numa and Servius. These precautions are the only ones that can
guarantee that the general will shall be always enlightened, and that
the people shall in no way deceive itself.


[1] "Every interest," says the Marquis d'Argenson, "has different
principles. The agreement of two particular interests is formed by
opposition to a third." He might have added that the agreement of all
interests is formed by opposition to that of each. If there were no
different interests, the common interest would be barely felt, as it
would encounter no obstacle; all would go on of its own accord, and
politics would cease to be an art.

[2] "In fact," says Macchiavelli, "there are some divisions that are
harmful to a Republic and some that are advantageous. Those which
stir up sects and parties are harmful; those attended by neither are
advantageous. Since, then, the founder of a Republic cannot help
enmities arising, he ought at least to prevent them from growing into
sects" (_History of Florence,_ Book vii). Rousseau quotes the Italian.




CHAPTER IV

THE LIMITS OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER


If the State is a moral person whose life is in the union of its
members, and if the most important of its cares is the care for its
own preservation, it must have a universal and compelling force, in
order to move and dispose each part as may be most advantageous to the
whole. As nature gives each man absolute power over all his members,
the social compact gives the body politic absolute power over all its
members also; and it is this power which, under the direction of the
general will, bears, as I have said, the name of Sovereignty.

But, besides the public person, we have to consider the private persons
composing it, whose life and liberty are naturally independent of it.
We are bound then to distinguish clearly between the respective rights
of the citizens and the Sovereign,[1] and between the duties the former
have to fulfil as subjects, and the natural rights they should enjoy as
men.

Each man alienates, I admit, by the social compact, only such part of
his powers, goods and liberty as it is important for the community to
control; but it must also be granted that the Sovereign is sole judge
of what is important.

Every service a citizen can render the State he ought to render as soon
as the Sovereign demands it; but the Sovereign, for its part, cannot
impose upon its subjects any fetters that are useless to the community,
nor can it even wish to do so; for no more by the law of reason than by
the law of nature can anything occur without a cause.

The undertakings which bind us to the social body are obligatory only
because they are mutual; and their nature is such that in fulfilling
them we cannot work for others without working for ourselves. Why is it
that the general will is always in the right, and that all continually
will the happiness of each one, unless it is because there is not a
man who does not think of "each" as meaning him, and consider himself
in voting for all? This proves that equality of rights and the idea
of justice which such equality creates originate in the preference
each man gives to himself, and accordingly in the very nature of man.
It proves that the general will, to be really such, must be general
in its object as well as its essence; that it must both come from all
and apply to all; and that it loses its natural rectitude when it is
directed to some particular and determinate object, because in such
a case we are judging of something foreign to us, and have no true
principle of equity to guide us.

Indeed, as soon as a question of particular fact or right arises on
a point not previously regulated by a general convention, the matter
becomes contentious. It is a case in which the individuals concerned
are one party, and the public the other, but in which I can see neither
the law that ought to be followed nor the judge who ought to give the
decision. In such a case, it would be absurd to propose to refer the
question to an express decision of the general will, which can be
only the conclusion reached by one of the parties and in consequence
will be, for the other party, merely an external and particular will,
inclined on this occasion to injustice and subject to error. Thus, just
as a particular will cannot stand for the general will, the general
will, in turn, changes its nature, when its object is particular, and,
as general, cannot pronounce on a man or a fact. When, for instance,
the people of Athens nominated or displaced its rulers, decreed
honours to one, and imposed penalties on another, and, by a multitude
of particular decrees, exercised all the functions of government
indiscriminately, it had in such cases no longer a general will in the
strict sense; it was acting no longer as Sovereign, but as magistrate.
This will seem contrary to current views; but I must be given time to
expound my own.

It should be seen from the foregoing that what makes the will general
is less the number of voters than the common interest uniting them;
for under this system, each necessarily submits to the conditions he
imposes on others; and this admirable agreement between interest and
justice gives to the common deliberations an equitable character which
at once vanishes when any particular question is discussed, in the
absence of a common interest to unite and identify the ruling of the
judge with that of the party.

From whatever side we approach our principle, we reach the same
conclusion, that the social compact sets up among the citizens an
equality of such a kind, that they all bind themselves to observe the
same conditions and should therefore all enjoy the same rights. Thus,
from the very nature of the compact, every "act of Sovereignty", _i.e._
every authentic act of the general will, binds or favours all the
citizens equally; so that the Sovereign recognises only the body of the
nation, and draws no distinctions between those of whom it is made up.
What, then, strictly speaking is an act of Sovereignty? It is not a
convention between a superior and an inferior, but a convention between
the body and each of its members. It is legitimate, because based on
the social contract, and, equitable, because common to all; useful,
because it can have no other object than the general good, and stable,
because guaranteed by the public force and the supreme power. So long
as the subjects have to submit only to conventions of this sort, they
obey no-one but their own will; and to ask how far the respective
rights of the Sovereign and the citizens extend, is to ask up to what
point the latter can enter into undertakings with themselves, each with
all, and all with each.

We can see from this that the sovereign power, absolute, sacred and
inviolable as it is, does not and cannot exceed the limits of general
conventions, and that every man may dispose at will of such goods and
liberty as these conventions leave him; so that the Sovereign never has
a right to lay more charges on one subject than on another, because, in
that case, the question becomes particular, and ceases to be within its
competency.

When these distinctions have once been admitted, it is seen to be so
untrue that there is, in the social contract, any real renunciation
on the part of the individuals, that the position in which they find
themselves as a result of the contract is really preferable to that in
which they were before. Instead of a renunciation, they have made an
advantageous exchange: instead of an uncertain and precarious way of
living they have got one that is better and more secure; instead of
natural independence they have got liberty, instead of the power to
harm others security for themselves, and instead of their strength,
which others might overcome, a right which social union makes
invincible. Their very life, which they have devoted to the State,
is by it constantly protected; and when they risk it in the State's
defence, what more are they doing than giving back what they have
received from it? What are they doing that they would not do more often
and with greater danger in the state of nature, in which they would
inevitably have to fight battles at the peril of their lives in defence
of that which is the means of their preservation? All have indeed to
fight when their country needs them; but then no one has ever to fight
for himself. Do we not gain something by running, on behalf of what
gives us our security, only some of the risks we should have to run for
ourselves, as soon as we lost it?


[1] Attentive readers, do not, I pray, be in a hurry to charge me with
contradicting myself. The terminology made it unavoidable, considering
the poverty of the language; but wait and see.




