BOOK II

_Which treats of legislation._

       I   That Sovereignty is inalienable
      II   That Sovereignty is indivisible
     III   Whether the general Will is fallible
      IV   The Limits of the Sovereign Power
       V   The Right of Life and Death
      VI   Law
     VII   The Legislator
    VIII   The People
      IX   The People (_continued_)
       X   The People (_continued_)
      XI   The various Systems of Legislation
     XII   The Division of the Laws


BOOK III

_Which treats of political laws, that is to say, of the form of
government._

       I   Government in General
      II   The constituent Principle in the various Forms of Government
     III   The Division of Governments
      IV   Democracy
       V   Aristocracy
      VI   Monarchy
     VII   Mixed Governments
    VIII   That all Forms of Government do not suit all Countries
      IX   The Marks of a good Government
       X   The Abuse of Government and its Tendency to Degenerate
      XI   The Death of the Body Politic
     XII   How the Sovereign Authority maintains itself
    XIII   How the Sovereign Authority maintains itself _(continued_)
     XIV   How the Sovereign Authority maintains itself _(continued_)
      XV   Deputies or Representatives
     XVI   That the Institution of Government is not a Contract
    XVII   The Institution of Government
   XVIII   How to check the Usurpations of Government

BOOK IV

_Which treats further of political laws and sets forth the
means of strengthening the Constitution of the State_.

       I   That the general Will is indestructible
      II   Voting
     III   Elections
      IV   The Roman Comitia
       V   The Tribunate
      VI   The Dictatorship
     VII   The Censorship
    VIII   Civil Religion
      IX   Conclusion


A DISCOURSE ON THE ARTS AND SCIENCES
A DISCOURSE ON THE ORIGIN OF INEQUALITY -- Appendix
A DISCOURSE ON POLITICAL ECONOMY




THE SOCIAL CONTRACT

OR

PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL

RIGHT

Fœderis æquas

Dicamus leges. (Vergil, _Æneid_ XI.)




FOREWORD

This little treatise is part of a longer work which I began years ago
without realising my limitations, and long since abandoned. Of the
various fragments that might have been extracted from what I wrote,
this is the most considerable, and, I think, the least unworthy of
being offered to the public. The rest no longer exists.




BOOK I


I mean to inquire if, in the civil order, there can be any sure and
legitimate rule of administration, men being taken as they are and laws
as they might be. In this inquiry I shall endeavour always to unite
what right sanctions with what is prescribed by interest, in order that
justice and utility may in no case be divided.

I enter upon my task without proving the importance of the subject. I
shall be asked if I am a prince or a legislator, to write on politics.
I answer that I am neither, and that is why I do so. If I were a prince
or a legislator, I should not waste time in saying what wants doing; I
should do it, or hold my peace.

As I was born a citizen of a free State, and a member of the Sovereign,
I feel that, however feeble the influence my voice can have on public
affairs, the right of voting on them makes it my duty to study them:
and I am happy, when I reflect upon governments, to find my inquiries
always furnish me with new reasons for loving that of my own country.




CHAPTER I

SUBJECT OF THE FIRST BOOK


Man is born free; and everywhere he is in chains. One thinks himself
the master of others, and still remains a greater slave than they. How
did this change come about? I do not know. What can make it legitimate?
That question I think I can answer.

If I took into account only force, and the effects derived from it, I
should say: "As long as a people is compelled to obey, and obeys, it
does well; as soon as it can shake off the yoke, and shakes it off,
it does still better; for, regaining its liberty by the same right
as took it away, either it is justified in resuming it, or there was
no justification for those who took it away." But the social order is
a sacred right which is the basis of all other rights. Nevertheless,
this right does not come from nature, and must therefore be founded on
conventions. Before coming to that, I have to prove what I have just
asserted.





