CHAPTER V

THE RIGHT OF LIFE AND DEATH


The question is often asked how individuals, having no right to dispose
of their own lives, can transfer to the Sovereign a right which they
do not possess. The difficulty of answering this question seems to me
to lie in its being wrongly stated. Every man has a right to risk his
own life in order to preserve it. Has it ever, been said that a man
who throws himself out of the window to escape from a fire is guilty
of suicide? Has such a crime ever been laid to the charge of him who
perishes in a storm because, when he went on board, he knew of the
danger?

The social treaty has for its end the preservation of the contracting
parties. He who wills the end wills the means also, and the means must
involve some risks, and even some losses. He who wishes to preserve
his life at others expense should also, when it is necessary, be
ready to give it up for their sake. Furthermore, the citizen is no
longer the judge of the dangers to which the law desires him to expose
himself; and when the prince says to him: "It is expedient for the
State that you should die," he ought to die, because it is only on that
condition that he has been living in security up to the present, and
because his life is no longer a mere bounty of nature, but a gift made
conditionally by the State.

The death-penalty inflicted upon criminals may be looked on in much the
same light: it is in order that we may not fall victims to an assassin
that we consent to die if we ourselves turn assassins. In this treaty,
so far from disposing of our own lives, we think only of securing
them, and it is not to be assumed that any of the parties then expects
to get hanged.

Again, every malefactor, by attacking social rights, becomes on forfeit
a rebel and a traitor to his country; by violating its laws he ceases
to be a member of it; he even makes war upon it. In such a case the
preservation of the State is inconsistent with his own, and one or the
other must perish; in putting the guilty to death, we slay not so much
the citizen as an enemy. The trial and the judgment are the proofs
that he has broken the social treaty, and is in consequence no longer
a member of the State. Since, then, he has recognised himself to be
such by living there, he must be removed by exile as a violator of the
compact, or by death as a public enemy; for such an enemy is not a
moral person, but merely a man; and in such a case the right of war is
to kill the vanquished.

But, it will be said, the condemnation of a criminal is a particular
act. I admit it: but such condemnation is not a function of the
Sovereign; it is a right the Sovereign can confer without being able
itself to exert it. All my ideas are consistent, but I cannot expound
them all at once.

We may add that frequent punishments are always a sign of weakness
or remissness on the part of the government. There is not a single
ill-doer who could not be turned to some good. The State has no right
to put to death, even for the sake of making an example, any one whom
it can leave alive without danger.

The right of pardoning or exempting the guilty from a penalty imposed
by the law and pronounced by the judge belongs only to the authority
which is superior to both judge and law, _i.e._ the Sovereign;
even its right in this matter is far from clear, and the cases for
exercising it are extremely rare. In a well-governed State, there
are few punishments, not because there are many pardons, but because
criminals are rare; it is when a State is in decay that the multitude
of crimes is a guarantee of impunity. Under the Roman Republic, neither
the Senate nor the Consuls ever attempted to pardon; even the people
never did so, though it sometimes revoked its own decision. Frequent
pardons mean that crime will soon need them no longer, and no-one can
help seeing whither that leads. But I feel my heart protesting and
restraining my pen; let us leave these questions to the just man who
has never offended, and would himself stand in no need of pardon.




CHAPTER VI

LAW


By the social compact we have given the body politic existence and
life: we have now by legislation to give it movement and will. For the
original act by which the body is formed and united still in no respect
determines what it ought to do for its preservation.

What is well and in conformity with order is so by the nature of
things and independently of human conventions. All justice comes from
God, who is its sole source; but if we knew how to receive so high an
inspiration, we should need neither government nor laws. Doubtless,
there is a universal justice emanating from reason alone; but this
justice, to be admitted among us, must be mutual. Humanly speaking, in
default of natural sanctions, the laws of justice are ineffective among
men: they merely make for the good of the wicked and the undoing of
the just, when the just man observes them towards everybody and nobody
observes them towards him. Conventions and laws are therefore needed to
join rights to duties and refer justice to its object. In the state of
nature, where everything is common, I owe nothing to him whom I nave
promised nothing; I recognise as belonging to others only what is of no
use to me. In the state of society all rights are fixed by law, and the
case becomes different.

But what, after all, is a law? As long as we remain satisfied with
attaching purely metaphysical ideas to the word, we shall go on arguing
without arriving at an understanding; and when we have defined a law of
nature, we shall be no nearer the definition of a law of the State.

I have already said that there can be no general will directed to a
particular object. Such an object must be either within or outside the
State. If outside, a will which is alien to it cannot be, in relation
to it, general; if within, it is part of the State, and in that case
there arises a relation between whole and part which makes them two
separate beings, of which the part is one, and the whole minus the part
the other. But the whole minus a part cannot be the whole; and while
this relation persists, there can be no whole, but only two unequal
parts; and it follows that the will of one is no longer in any respect
general in relation to the other.

But when the whole people decrees for the whole people, it is
considering only itself; and if a relation is then formed, it is
between two aspects of the entire object, without there being any
division of the whole. In that case the matter about which the decree
is made is, like the decreeing will general. This act is what I call a
law.

When I say that the object of laws is always general, I mean that
law considers subjects _en masse_ and actions in the abstract, and
never a particular person or action. Thus the law may indeed decree
that there shall be privileges, but cannot confer them on anybody by
name. It may set up several classes of citizens, and even lay down
the qualifications for membership of these classes, but it cannot
nominate such and such persons as belonging to them; it may establish a
monarchical government and hereditary succession, but it cannot choose
a king, or nominate a royal family. In a word, no function which has a
particular object belongs to the legislative power.

On this view, we at once see that it can no longer be asked whose
business it is to make laws, since they are acts of the general will:
nor whether the prince is above the law, since he is a member of the
State; nor whether the law can be unjust, since no one is unjust to
himself; nor how we can be both free and subject to the laws since they
are but registers of our wills.

We see further that, as the law unites universality of will with
universality of object, what a man, whoever he be, commands of his
own motion cannot be a law; and even what the Sovereign commands with
regard to a particular matter is no nearer being a law, but is a
decree, an act, not of sovereignty, but of magistracy.

I therefore give the name 'Republic' to every State that is governed by
laws, no matter what the form of its administration may be: for only
in such a case does the public interest govern, and the _res publica_
rank as a _reality_. Every legitimate government is republican;[1] what
government is I will explain later on.

Laws are, properly speaking, only the conditions of civil association.
The people, being subject to the laws, ought to be their author:
the conditions of the society ought to be regulated solely by those
who come together to form it. But how are they to regulate them? Is
it to be by common agreement, by a sudden inspiration? Has the body
politic an organ to declare its will? Who can give it the foresight to
formulate and announce its acts in advance? Or how is it to announce
them in the hour of need? How can a blind multitude, which often does
not know what it wills, because it rarely knows what is good for it,
carry out for itself so great and difficult an enterprise as a system
of legislation? Of itself the people wills always the good, but of
itself it by no means always sees it. The general will is always in
the right, but the judgment which guides it is not always enlightened.
It must be got to see objects as they are, and sometimes as they ought
to appear to it; it must be shown the good road it is in search of,
secured from the seductive influences of individual wills, taught to
see times and spaces as a series, and made to weigh the attractions
of present and sensible advantages against the danger of distant and
hidden evils. The individuals see the good they reject; the public
wills the good it does not see. All stand equally in need of guidance.
The former must be compelled to bring their wills into conformity with
their reason; the latter must be taught to know what it wills. If that
is done, public enlightenment leads to the union of understanding and
will in the social body: the parts are made to work exactly together,
and the whole is raised to its highest power. This makes a legislator
necessary.


[1] I understand by this word, not merely an aristocracy or a
democracy, but generally any government directed by the general will,
which is the law. To be legitimate, the government must be, not one
with the Sovereign, but its minister. In such a case even a monarchy is
a Republic. This will be made clearer in the following book.




