CHAPTER V

THE TRIBUNATE


When an exact proportion cannot be established between the constituent
parts of the State, or when causes that cannot be removed continually
alter the relation of one part to another, recourse is had to the
institution of a peculiar magistracy that enters into no corporate
unity with the rest. This restores to each term its right relation to
the others, and provides a link or middle term between either prince
and people, or prince and Sovereign, or, if necessary, both at once.

This body, which I shall call the _tribunate_, is the preserver of the
laws and of the legislative power. It serves sometimes to protect the
Sovereign against the government, as the tribunes of the people did
at Rome; sometimes to uphold the government against the people, as
the Council of Ten now does at Venice; and sometimes to maintain the
balance between the two, as the Ephors did at Sparta.

The tribunate is not a constituent part of the city, and should have
no share in either legislative or executive power; but this very fact
makes its own power the greater: for, while it can do nothing, it can
prevent anything from being done. It is more sacred and more revered,
as the defender of the laws, than the prince who executes them, or than
the Sovereign which ordains them. This was seen very clearly at Rome,
when the proud patricians, for all their scorn of the people, were
forced to bow before one of its officers, who had neither auspices nor
jurisdiction.

The tribunate, wisely tempered, is the strongest support a good
constitution can have; but if its strength is ever so little excessive,
it upsets the whole State. Weakness, on the other hand, is not natural
to it: provided it is something, it is never less than it should be.

It degenerates into tyranny when it usurps the executive power, which
it should confine itself to restraining, and when it tries to dispense
with the laws, which it should confine itself to protecting. The
immense power of the Ephors, harmless as long as Sparta preserved its
morality, hastened corruption when once it had begun. The blood of
Agis, slaughtered by these tyrants, was avenged by his successor; the
crime and the punishment of the Ephors alike hastened the destruction
of the republic, and after Cleomenes Sparta ceased to be of any
account. Rome perished in the same way: the excessive power of the
tribunes, which they had usurped by degrees, finally served, with the
help of laws made to secure liberty, as a safeguard for the emperors
who destroyed it. As for the Venetian Council of Ten, it is a tribunal
of blood, an object of horror to patricians and people alike; and, so
far from giving a lofty protection to the laws, it does nothing, now
they have become degraded, but strike in the darkness blows of which no
one dare take note.

The tribunate, like the government, grows weak as the number of its
members increases. When the tribunes of the Roman people, who first
numbered only two, and then five, wished to double that number, the
senate let them do so, in the confidence that it could use one to check
another, as indeed it afterwards freely did.

The best method of preventing usurpations by so formidable a body,
though no government has yet made use of it, would be not to make it
permanent, but to regulate the periods during which it should remain
in abeyance. These intervals, which should not be long enough to give
abuses time to grow strong, may be so fixed by law that they can easily
be shortened at need by extraordinary commissions.

This method seems to me to have no disadvantages, because, as I have
said, the tribunate, which forms no part of the constitution, can be
removed without the constitution being affected. It seems to be also
efficacious, because a newly restored magistrate starts not with the
power his predecessor exercised, but with that which the law allows him.




CHAPTER VI

THE DICTATORSHIP


The inflexibility of the laws, which prevents them from adapting
themselves to circumstances, may, in certain cases, render them
disastrous, and make them bring about, at a time of crisis, the ruin
of the State. The order and slowness of the forms they enjoin require
a space of time which circumstances sometimes withhold. A thousand
cases against which the legislator has made no provision may present
themselves, and it is a highly necessary part of foresight to be
conscious that everything cannot be foreseen.

It is wrong therefore to wish to make political institutions so strong
as to render it impossible to suspend their operation. Even Sparta
allowed its laws to lapse.

However, none but the greatest dangers can counter-balance that of
changing the public order, and the sacred power of the laws should
never be arrested save when the existence of the country is at stake.
In these rare and obvious cases, provision is made for the public
security by a particular act entrusting it to him who is most worthy.
This commitment may be carried out in either of two ways, according to
the nature of the danger.

If increasing the activity of the government is a sufficient remedy,
power is concentrated in the hands of one or two of its members: in
this case the change is not in the authority of the laws, but only in
the form of administering them. If, on the other hand, the peril is
of such a kind that the paraphernalia of the laws are an obstacle to
their preservation, the method is to nominate a supreme ruler, who
shall silence all the laws and suspend for a moment the sovereign
authority. In such a case, there is no doubt about the general will,
and it is clear that the people's first intention is that the State
shall not perish. Thus the suspension of the legislative authority is
in no sense its abolition; the magistrate who silences it cannot make
it speak; he dominates it, but cannot represent it. He can do anything,
except make laws.

The first method was used by the Roman senate when, in a consecrated
formula, it charged the consuls to provide for the safety of the
Republic. The second was employed when one of the two consuls nominated
a dictator:[1] a custom Rome borrowed from Alba.

During the first period of the Republic, recourse was very often had to
the dictatorship, because the State had not yet a firm enough basis to
be able to maintain itself by the strength of its constitution alone.
As the state of morality then made superfluous many of the precautions
which would have been necessary at other times, there was no fear that
a dictator would abuse his authority, or try to keep it beyond his term
of office. On the contrary, so much power appeared to be burdensome
to him who was clothed with it, and he made all speed to lay it down,
as if taking the place of the laws had been too troublesome and too
perilous a position to retain.

It is therefore the danger not of its abuse, but of its cheapening,
that makes me attack the indiscreet use of this supreme magistracy in
the earliest times. For as long as it was freely employed at elections,
dedications and purely formal functions, there was danger of its
becoming less formidable in time of need, and of men growing accustomed
to regarding as empty a title that was used only on occasions of empty
ceremonial.

Towards the end of the Republic, the Romans, having grown more
circumspect, were as unreasonably sparing in the use of the
dictatorship as they had formerly been lavish. It is easy to see
that their fears were without foundation, that the weakness of the
capital secured it against the magistrates who were in its midst; that
a dictator might, in certain cases, defend the public liberty, but
could never endanger it; and that the chains of Rome would be forged,
not in Rome itself, but in her armies. The weak resistance offered by
Marius to Sulla, and by Pompey to Cæsar, clearly showed what was to be
expected from authority at home against force from abroad.

This misconception led the Romans to make great mistakes; such, for
example, as the failure to nominate a dictator in the Catilinarian
conspiracy. For, as only the city itself, with at most some province
in Italy, was concerned, the unlimited authority the laws gave to the
dictator would have enabled him to make short work of the conspiracy,
which was, in fact, stifled only by a combination of lucky chances
human prudence had no right to expect.

Instead, the senate contented itself with entrusting its whole power
to the consuls, so that Cicero, in order to take effective action, was
compelled on a capital point to exceed his powers; and if, in the first
transports of joy, his conduct was approved, he was justly called,
later on, to account for the blood of citizens spilt in violation of
the laws. Such a reproach could never have been levelled at a dictator.
But the consul's eloquence carried the day; and he himself, Roman
though he was, loved his own glory better than his country, and sought,
not so much the most lawful and secure means of saving the State, as to
get for himself the whole honour of having done so.[2] He was therefore
justly honoured as the liberator of Rome, and also justly punished
as a law-breaker. However brilliant his recall may have been, it was
undoubtedly an act of pardon.

However this important trust be conferred, it is important that its
duration should be fixed at a very brief period, incapable of being
ever prolonged. In the crises which lead to its adoption, the State
is either soon lost, or soon saved; and, the present need passed,
the dictatorship becomes either tyrannical or idle. At Rome, where
dictators held office for six months only, most of them abdicated
before their time was up. If their term had been longer, they might
well have tried to prolong it still further, as the decemvirs did when
chosen for a year. The dictator had only time to provide against the
need that had caused him to be chosen; he had none to think of further
projects.


[1] The nomination was made secretly by night, as if there were
something shameful in setting a man above the laws.

[2] That is what he could not be sure of, if he proposed a dictator;
for he dared not nominate himself, and could not be certain that his
colleague would nominate him.




