CHAPTER VIII

THE PEOPLE


As, before putting up a large building, the architect surveys and
sounds the site to see if it will bear the weight, the wise legislator
does not begin by laying down laws good in themselves, but by
investigating the fitness of the people, for which they are destined,
to receive them. Plato refused to legislate for the Arcadians and the
Cyrenæans, because he knew that both peoples were rich and could not
put up with equality; and good laws and bad men were found together
in Crete, because Minos had inflicted discipline on a people already
burdened with vice.

A thousand nations have achieved earthly greatness, that could never
have endured good laws; even such as could have endured them could
have done so only for a very brief period of their long history. Most
peoples, like most men, are docile only in youth; as they grow old they
become incorrigible. When once customs have become established and
prejudices inveterate, it is dangerous and useless to attempt their
reformation; the people, like the foolish and cowardly patients who
rave at sight of the doctor, can no longer bear that any one should lay
hands on its faults to remedy them.

There are indeed times in the history of States when, just as some
kinds of illness turn men's heads and make them forget the past,
periods of violence and revolutions do to peoples what these crises do
to individuals: horror of the past takes the place of forgetfulness,
and the State, set on fire by civil wars, is born again, so to speak,
from its ashes, and takes on anew, fresh from the jaws of death, the
vigour of youth. Such were Sparta at the time of Lycurgus, Rome after
the Tarquins, and, in modern times, Holland and Switzerland after the
expulsion of the tyrants.

But such events are rare; they are exceptions, the cause of which
is always to be found in the particular constitution of the State
concerned. They cannot even happen twice to the same people, for it
can make itself free as long as it remains barbarous, but not when the
civic impulse has lost its vigour. Then disturbances may destroy it,
but revolutions cannot mend it: it needs a master, and not a liberator.
Free peoples, be mindful of maxim; "Liberty may be gained, but can
never be recovered."

Youth is not infancy. There is for nations, as for men, a period of
youth, or, shall we say, maturity, before which they should not be
made subject to laws; but the maturity of a people is not always
easily recognisable, and, if it is anticipated, the work is spoilt.
One people is amenable to discipline from the beginning; another, not
after ten centuries. Russia will never be really civilised, because
it was civilised too soon. Peter had a genius for imitation; but he
lacked true genius, which is creative and makes all from nothing. He
did some good things, but most of what he did was out of place. He
saw that his people was barbarous, but did not see that it was not
ripe for civilisation: he wanted to civilise it when it needed only
hardening. His first wish was to make Germans or Englishmen, when he
ought to have been making Russians; and he prevented his subjects from
ever becoming what they might have been by persuading them that they
were what they are not. In this fashion too a French teacher turns out
his pupil to be an infant prodigy, and for the rest of his life to be
nothing whatsoever. The empire of Russia will aspire to conquer Europe,
and will itself be conquered. The Tartars, its subjects or neighbours,
will become its masters and ours, by a revolution which I regard as
inevitable. Indeed, all the kings of Europe are working in concert to
hasten its coming.




CHAPTER IX

THE PEOPLE (_continued_)


As nature has set bounds to the stature of a well-made man, and,
outside those limits, makes nothing but giants or dwarfs, similarly,
for the constitution of a State to be at its best, it is possible to
fix limits that will make it neither too large for good government,
nor too small for self-maintenance. In every body politic there is
a _maximum_ strength which it cannot exceed and which it only loses
by increasing in size. Every extension of the social tie means its
relaxation; and, generally speaking, a small State is stronger in
proportion than a great one.

A thousand arguments could be advanced in favour of this principle.
First, long distances make administration more difficult, just as a
weight becomes heavier at the end of a longer lever. Administration
therefore becomes more and more burdensome as the distance grows
greater; for, in the first place, each city has its own, which is
paid for by the people: each district its own, still paid for by the
people: then comes each province, and then the great governments,
satrapies, and vice-royalties, always costing more the higher you go,
and always at the expense of the unfortunate people. Last of all comes
the supreme administration, which eclipses all the rest. All these
overcharges are a continual drain upon the subjects; so far from being
better governed by all these different orders, they are worse governed
than if there were only a single authority over them. In the meantime,
there scarce remain resources enough to meet emergencies; and, when
recourse must be had to these, the State is always on the eve of
destruction.

This is not all; not only has the government less vigour and
promptitude for securing the observance of the laws, preventing
nuisances, correcting abuses, and guarding against seditious
undertakings begun in distant places; the people has less affection for
its rulers, whom it never sees, for its country, which, to its eyes,
seems like the world, and for its fellow-citizens, most of whom are
unknown to it. The same laws cannot suit so many diverse provinces with
different customs, situated in the most various climates, and incapable
of enduring a uniform government. Different laws lead only to trouble
and confusion among peoples which, living under the same rulers and in
constant communication one with another, intermingle and intermarry,
and, coming under the sway of new customs, never know if they can call
their very patrimony their own. Talent is buried, virtue unknown and
vice unpunished, among such a multitude of men who do not know one
another, gathered together in one place at the seat of the central
administration. The leaders, overwhelmed with business, see nothing
for themselves; the State is governed by clerks. Finally, the measures
which have to be taken to, maintain the general authority, which all
these distant officials wish to escape or to impose upon, absorb all
the energy of the public, so that there is none left for the happiness
of the people. There is hardly enough to defend it when need arises,
and thus a body which is too big for its constitution gives way and
falls crushed under its own weight.

Again, the State must assure itself a safe foundation, if it is to
have stability, and to be able to resist the shocks it cannot help
experiencing, as well as the efforts it will be forced to make for
its maintenance; for all peoples have a kind of centrifugal force
that makes them continually act one against another, and tend to
aggrandise themselves at their neighbours' expense, like the vortices
of Descartes. Thus the weak run the risk of being soon swallowed up;
and it is almost impossible for any one to preserve itself except by
putting itself in a state of equilibrium with all, so that the pressure
is on all sides practically equal.

It may therefore be seen that there are reasons for expansion and
reasons for contraction; and it is no small part of the statesman's
skill to hit between them the mean that is most favourable to the
preservation of the State. It may be said that the reason for
expansion, being merely external and relative, ought to be subordinate
to the reasons for contraction, which are internal and absolute. A
strong and healthy constitution is the first thing to look for; and it
is better to count on the vigour which comes of good government than on
the resources a great territory furnishes.

It may be added that there have been known States so constituted that
the necessity of making conquests entered into their very constitution,
and that, in order to maintain themselves, they were forced to expand
ceaselessly. It may be that they congratulated themselves greatly on
this fortunate necessity, which none the less indicated to them, along
with the limits of their greatness, the inevitable moment of their fall.




