CHAPTER III

ELECTIONS


In the elections of the prince and the magistrates, which are, as I
have said, complex acts, there are two possible methods of procedure,
choice and lot. Both have been employed in various republics, and a
highly complicated mixture of the two still survives in the election of
the Doge at Venice.

"Election by lot," says Montesquieu, "is democratic in nature." I agree
that it is so; but in what sense? "The lot," he goes on, "is a way
of making choice that is unfair to nobody; it leaves each citizen a
reasonable hope of serving his country." These are not reasons.

If we bear in mind that the election of rulers is a function of
government, and not of Sovereignty, we shall see why the lot is the
method more natural to democracy, in which the administration is better
in proportion as the number of its acts is small.

In every real democracy, magistracy is not an advantage, but a
burdensome charge which cannot justly be imposed on one individual
rather than another. The law alone can lay the charge on him on whom
the lot falls. For, the conditions being then the same for all, and
the choice not depending on any human will, there is no particular
application to alter the universality of the law.

In an aristocracy, the prince chooses the prince, the government is
preserved by itself, and voting is rightly ordered.

The instance of the election of the Doge of Venice confirms, instead
of destroying, this distinction; the mixed form suits a mixed
government. For it is an error to take the government of Venice for a
real aristocracy. If the people has no share in the government, the
nobility is itself the people. A host of poor Barnabotes never gets
near any magistracy, and its nobility consists merely in the empty
title of Excellency, and in the right to sit in the Great Council. As
this Great Council is as numerous as our General Council at Geneva, its
illustrious members have no more privileges than our plain citizens.
It is indisputable that, apart from the extreme disparity between the
two republics, the _bourgeoisie_ of Geneva is exactly equivalent to the
_patriciate_ of Venice; our _natives_ and _inhabitants_ correspond to
the _townsmen_ and the _people_ of Venice; our _peasants_ correspond
to the _subjects_ on the mainland; and, however that republic be
regarded, if its size be left out of account, its government is no more
aristocratic than our own. The whole difference is that, having no
life-ruler, we do not, like Venice, need to use the lot.

Election by lot would have few disadvantages in a real democracy, in
which, as equality would everywhere exist in morals and talents as
well as in principles and fortunes, it would become almost a matter
of indifference who was chosen. But I have already said that a real
democracy is only an ideal.

When choice and lot are combined, positions that require special
talents, such as military posts, should be filled by the former; the
latter does for cases, such as judicial offices, in which good sense,
justice, and integrity are enough, because in a State that is well
constituted, these qualities are common to all the citizens.

Neither lot nor vote has any place in monarchical government. The
monarch being by right sole prince and only magistrate, the choice of
his lieutenants belongs to none but him. When the Abbé de Saint-Pierre
proposed that the Councils of the King of France should be multiplied,
and their members elected by ballot, he did not see that he was
proposing to change the form of government.

I should now speak of the methods of giving and counting opinions in
the assembly of the people; but perhaps an account of this aspect of
the Roman constitution will more forcibly illustrate all the rules I
could lay down. It is worth the while of a judicious reader to follow
in some detail the working of public and private affairs in a Council
consisting of two hundred thousand men.




CHAPTER IV

THE ROMAN COMITIA


We are without well-certified records of the first period of Rome's
existence; it even appears very probable that most of the stories told
about it are fables; indeed, generally speaking, the most instructive
part of the history of peoples, that which deals with their foundation,
is what we have least of. Experience teaches us every day what causes
lead to the revolutions of empires; but, as no new peoples are now
formed, we have almost nothing beyond conjecture to go upon in
explaining how they were created.

The customs we find established show at least that these customs had
an origin. The traditions that go back to those origins, that have
the greatest authorities behind them, and that are confirmed by the
strongest proofs, should pass for the most certain. These are the rules
I have tried to follow in inquiring how the freest and most powerful
people on earth exercised its supreme power.

After the foundation of Rome, the new-born republic, that is, the
army of its founder, composed of Albans, Sabines and foreigners, was
divided into three classes, which, from this division, took the name
of _tribes_. Each of these tribes was subdivided into ten _curiæ_, and
each _curia_ into _decuriæ_, headed by leaders called _curiones_ and
_decuriones_.

Besides this, out of each tribe was taken a body of one hundred
_Equites_ or Knights, called a _century_, which shows that these
divisions, being unnecessary in a town, were at first merely military.
But an instinct for greatness seems to have led the little township of
Rome to provide itself in advance with a political system suitable for
the capital of the world.

Out of this original division an awkward situation soon arose. The
tribes of the Albans (Ramnenses) and the Sabines (Tatienses) remained
always in the same condition, while that of the foreigners (Luceres)
continually grew as more and more foreigners came to live at Rome,
so that it soon surpassed the others in strength. Servius remedied
this dangerous fault by changing the principle of cleavage, and
substituting for the racial division, which he abolished, a new one
based on the quarter of the town inhabited by each tribe. Instead of
three tribes he created four, each occupying and named after one of the
hills of Rome. Thus, while redressing the inequality of the moment, he
also provided for the future; and in order that the division might be
one of persons as well as localities, he forbade the inhabitants of one
quarter to migrate to another, and so prevented the mingling of the
races.

He also doubled the three old centuries of Knights and added twelve
more, still keeping the old names, and by this simple and prudent
method, succeeded in making a distinction between the body of Knights
and the people, without a murmur from the latter.

To the four urban tribes Servius added fifteen others called rural
tribes, because they consisted of those who lived in the country,
divided into fifteen cantons. Subsequently, fifteen more were created,
and the Roman people finally found itself divided into thirty-five
tribes, as it remained down to the end of the Republic.

The distinction between urban and rural tribes had one effect which
is worth mention, both because it is without parallel elsewhere, and
because to it Rome owed the preservation of her morality and the
enlargement of her empire. We should have expected that the urban
tribes would soon monopolise power and honours, and lose no time in
bringing the rural tribes into disrepute; but what happened was exactly
the reverse. The taste of the early Romans for country life is well
known. This taste they owed to their wise founder, who made rural and
military labours go along with liberty, and, so to speak, relegated to
the town arts, crafts, intrigue, fortune and slavery.

Since therefore all Rome's most illustrious citizens lived in the
fields and tilled the earth, men grew used to seeking there alone the
mainstays of the republic. This condition, being that of the best
patricians, was honoured by all men; the simple and laborious life
of the villager was preferred to the slothful and idle life of the
_bourgeoisie_ of Rome; and he who, in the town, would have been but a
wretched proletarian, became, as a labourer in the fields, a respected
citizen. Not without reason, says Varro, did our great-souled ancestors
establish in the village the nursery of the sturdy and valiant men
who defended them in time of war and provided for their Sustenance in
time of peace. Pliny states positively that the country tribes were
honoured because of the men of whom they were composed; while cowards
men wished to dishonour were transferred, as a public disgrace, to the
town tribes. The Sabine Appius Claudius, when he had come to settle
in Rome, was loaded with honours and enrolled in a rural tribe, which
subsequently took his family name. Lastly, freedmen always entered the
urban, and never the rural, tribes: nor is there a single example,
throughout the Republic, of a freedman, though he had become a citizen,
reaching any magistracy.

This was an excellent rule; but it was carried so far that in the end
it led to a change and certainly to an abuse in the political system.

First the censors, after having for a long time claimed the right of
transferring citizens arbitrarily from one tribe to another, allowed
most persons to enrol themselves in whatever tribe they pleased. This
permission certainly did no good, and further robbed the censorship
of one of its greatest resources. Moreover, as the great and powerful
all got themselves enrolled in the country tribes, while the freedmen
who had become citizens remained with the populace in the town tribes,
both soon ceased to have any local or territorial meaning, and all were
so confused that the members of one could not be told from those of
another except by the registers; so that the idea of the word _tribe_
became personal instead of real, or rather came to be little more than
a chimera.

It happened in addition that the town tribes, being more on the spot,
were often the stronger in the comitia and sold the State to those who
stooped to buy the votes of the rabble composing them.

As the founder had set up ten _curiæ_ in each tribe, the whole Roman
people, which was then contained within the walls, consisted of thirty
_curia_, each with its temples, its gods, its officers, its priests and
its festivals, which were called _compitalia_ and corresponded to the
_paganalia,_ held in later times by the rural tribes.

When Servius made his new division, as the thirty _curiæ_ could not be
shared equally between his four tribes, and as he was unwilling to
interfere with them, they became a further division of the inhabitants
of Rome, quite independent of the tribes: but in the case of the rural
tribes and their members there was no question of _curiæ_ as the
tribes had then become a purely civil institution, and, a new system
of levying troops having been introduced, the military divisions of
Romulus were superfluous. Thus, although every citizen was enrolled in
a tribe, there were very many who were not members of a _curia_.

Servius made yet a third division, quite distinct from the two we have
mentioned, which became, in its effects, the most important of all.
He distributed the whole Roman people into six classes, distinguished
neither by place nor by person, but by wealth; the first classes
included the rich, the last the poor, and those between persons of
moderate means. These six classes were subdivided into one hundred and
ninety-three other bodies, called centuries, which were so divided that
the first class alone comprised more than half of them, while the last
comprised only one. Thus the class that had the smallest number of
members had the largest number of centuries, and the whole of the last
class only counted as a single subdivision, although it alone included
more than half the inhabitants of Rome.

In order that the people might have the less insight into the results
of this arrangement, Servius tried to give it a military tone: in
the second class he inserted two centuries of armourers, and in the
fourth two of makers of instruments of war: in each class, except the
last, he distinguished young and old, that is, those who were under an
obligation to bear arms and those whose age gave them legal exemption.
It was this distinction, rather than that of wealth, which required
frequent repetition of the census or counting. Lastly, he ordered that
the assembly should be held in the Campus Martius, and that all who
were of age to serve should come there armed.

The reason for his not making in the last class also the division of
young and old was that the populace, of whom it was composed, was not
given the right to bear arms for its country: a man had to possess a
hearth to acquire the right to defend it, and of all the troops of
beggars who to-day lend lustre to the armies of kings, there is perhaps
not one who would not have been driven with scorn out of a Roman
cohort, at a time when soldiers were the defenders of liberty.

In this last class, however, _proletarians_ were distinguished from
_capite censi._ The former, not quite reduced to nothing, at least gave
the State citizens, and sometimes, when the need was pressing, even
soldiers. Those who had nothing at all, and could be numbered only by
counting heads, were regarded as of absolutely no account, and Marius
was the first who stooped to enrol them.

Without deciding now whether this third arrangement was good or bad in
itself, I think I may assert that it could have been made practicable
only by the simple morals, the disinterestedness, the liking for
agriculture and the scorn for commerce and for love of gain which
characterised the early Romans. Where is the modern people among whom
consuming greed, unrest, intrigue, continual removals, and perpetual
changes of fortune, could let such a system last for twenty years
without turning the State upside down? We must indeed observe that
morality and the censorship, being stronger than this institution,
corrected its defects at Rome, and that the rich man found himself
degraded to the class of the poor for making too much display of his
riches.

From all this it is easy to understand why only five classes are
almost always mentioned, though there were really six. The sixth, as
it furnished neither soldiers to the army nor votes in the Campus
Martius,[1] and was almost without function in the State, was seldom
regarded as of any account.

These were the various ways in which the Roman people was divided. Let
us now see the effect on the assemblies. When lawfully summoned, these
were called _comitia_: they were usually held in the public square
at Rome or in the Campus Martius, and were distinguished as _Comitia
Curiata, Comitia Centuriata_, and _Comitia Tributa_, according to
the form under which they were convoked. The _Comitia Curiata_ were
founded by Romulus; the _Centuriata_ by Servius; and the _Tributa_
by the tribunes of the people. No law received its sanction and no
magistrate was elected, save in the comitia; and as every citizen
was enrolled in a _curia_, a century, or a tribe, it follows that no
citizen was excluded from the right of voting, and that the Roman
people was truly sovereign both _de jure_ and _de facto_.

For the comitia to be lawfully assembled, and for their acts to have
the force of law, three conditions were necessary. First, the body
or magistrate convoking them had to possess the necessary authority;
secondly, the assembly had to be held on a day allowed by law; and
thirdly, the auguries had to be favourable.

The reason for the first regulation needs no explanation; the second is
a matter of policy. Thus, the comitia might not be held on festivals
or market-days, when the country-folk, coming to Rome on business, had
not time to spend the day in the public square. By means of the third,
the senate held in check the proud and restive people, and meetly
restrained the ardour of seditious tribunes, who, however, found more
than one way of escaping this hindrance.

Laws and the election of rulers were not the only questions submitted
to the judgment of the comitia: as the Roman people had taken on itself
the most important functions of government, it may be said that the lot
of Europe was regulated in its assemblies. The variety of their objects
gave rise to the various forms these took, according to the matters on
which they had to pronounce.

In order to judge of these various forms, it is enough to compare
them. Romulus, when he set up _curiæ_, had in view the checking of
the senate by the people, and of the people by the senate, while
maintaining his ascendancy over both alike. He therefore gave the
people, by means of this assembly, all the authority of numbers to
balance that of power and riches, which he left to the patricians.
But, after the spirit of monarchy, he left all the same a greater
advantage to the patricians in the influence of their clients on the
majority of votes. This excellent institution of patron and client
was a masterpiece of statesmanship and humanity without which the
patriciate, being flagrantly in contradiction to the republican
spirit, could not have survived. Rome alone has the honour of having
given to the world this great example, which never led to any abuse,
and yet has never been followed.

As the assemblies by _curiæ_ persisted under the kings till the time
of Servius, and the reign of the later Tarquin was not regarded as
legitimate, royal laws were called generally _leges curiatæ_.

Under the Republic, the _curiæ_ still confined to the four urban
tribes, and including only the populace of Rome, suited neither the
senate, which led the patricians, nor the tribunes, who, though
plebeians, were at the head of the well-to-do citizens. They therefore
fell into disrepute, and their degradation was such, that thirty
lictors used to assemble and do what the _Comitia Curiata_ should have
done.

The division by centuries was so favourable to the aristocracy that it
is hard to see at first how the senate ever failed to carry the day in
the comitia bearing their name, by which the consuls, the censors and
the other curule magistrates were elected. Indeed, of the hundred and
ninety-three centuries into which the six classes of the whole Roman
people were divided, the first class contained ninety-eight; and, as
voting went solely by centuries, this class alone had a majority over
all the rest. When all these centuries were in agreement, the rest of
the votes were not even taken; the decision of the smallest number
passed for that of the multitude, and it may be said that, in the
_Comitia Centuriata_, decisions were regulated far more by depth of
purses than by the number of votes.

But this extreme authority was modified in two ways. First, the
tribunes as a rule, and always a great number of plebeians, belonged
to the class of the rich, and so counterbalanced the influence of the
patricians in the first class.

The second way was this. Instead of causing the centuries to vote
throughout in order, which would have meant beginning always with the
first, the Romans always chose one by lot which proceeded alone to
the election; after this all the centuries were summoned another day
according to their rank, and the same election was repeated, and as a
rule confirmed. Thus the authority of example was taken away from rank,
and given to the lot on a democratic principle.

From this custom resulted a further advantage. The citizens from the
country had time, between the two elections, to inform themselves of
the merits of the candidate who had been provisionally nominated,
and did not have to vote without knowledge of the case. But, under
the pretext of hastening matters, the abolition of this custom was
achieved, and both elections were held on the same day.

The _Comitia Tributa_ were properly the council of the Roman people.
They were convoked by the tribunes alone; at them the tribunes were
elected and passed their plebiscita. The senate not only had no
standing in them, but even no right to be present; and the senators,
being forced to obey laws on which they could not vote, were in this
respect less free than the meanest citizens. This injustice was
altogether ill-conceived, and was alone enough to invalidate the
decrees of a body to which all its members were not admitted. Had all
the patricians attended the comitia by virtue of the right they had as
citizens, they would not, as mere private individuals, have had any
considerable influence on a vote reckoned by counting heads, where the
meanest proletarian was as good as the _princeps senatus_.

It may be seen, therefore, that besides the order which was achieved
by these various ways of distributing so great a people and taking its
votes, the various methods were not reducible to forms indifferent in
themselves, but the results of each were relative to the objects which
caused it to be preferred.

Without going here into further details, we may gather from what has
been said above that the _Comitia Tributa_ were the most favourable to
popular government, and the _Comitia Centuriata_ to aristocracy. The
_Comitia Curiata,_ in which the populace of Rome formed the majority,
being fitted only to further tyranny and evil designs, naturally fell
into disrepute, and even seditious persons abstained from using a
method which too clearly revealed their projects. It is indisputable
that the whole majesty of the Roman people lay solely in the _Comitia
Centuriata_, which alone included all; for the _Comitia Curiata_
excluded the rural tribes, and the _Comitia Tributa_ the senate and the
patricians.

As for the method of taking the vote, it was among the ancient Romans
as simple as their morals, although not so simple as at Sparta. Each
man declared his vote aloud, and a clerk duly wrote it down; the
majority in each tribe determined the vote of the tribe, the majority
of the tribes that of the people, and so with _curiæ_ and centuries.
This custom was good as long as honesty was triumphant among the
citizens, and each man was ashamed to vote publicly in favour of an
unjust proposal or an unworthy subject; but, when the people grew
corrupt and votes were bought, it was fitting that voting should be
secret in order that purchasers might be restrained by mistrust, and
rogues be given the means of not being traitors.

I know that Cicero attacks this change, and attributes partly to it the
ruin of the Republic. But though I feel the weight Cicero's authority
must carry on such a point, I cannot agree with him; I hold, on the
contrary, that, for want of enough such changes, the destruction of the
State must be hastened. Just as the regimen of health does not suit
the sick, we should not wish to govern a people that has been corrupted
by the laws that a good people requires. There is no better proof of
this rule than the long life of the Republic of Venice, of which the
shadow still exists, solely because its laws are suitable only for men
who are wicked.

The citizens were provided, therefore, with tablets by means of which
each man could vote without any one knowing how he voted: new methods
were also introduced for collecting the tablets, for counting voices,
for comparing numbers, etc.; but all these precautions did not prevent
the good faith of the officers charged with these functions[2] from
being often suspect. Finally, to prevent intrigues and trafficking in
votes, edicts were issued; but their very number proves how useless
they were.

Towards the close of the Republic, it was often necessary to have
recourse to extraordinary expedients in order to supplement the
inadequacy of the laws. Sometimes miracles were supposed; but this
method, while it might impose on the people, could not impose on those
who governed. Sometimes an assembly was hastily called together,
before the candidates had time to form their factions: sometimes a
whole sitting was occupied with talk, when it was seen that the people
had been won over and was on the point of taking up a wrong position.
But in the end ambition eluded all attempts to check it; and the most
incredible fact of all is that, in the midst of all these abuses,
the vast people, thanks to its ancient regulations, never ceased to
elect magistrates, to pass laws, to judge cases, and to carry through
business both public and private, almost as easily as the senate itself
could have done.


[1] I say "in the Campus Martius" because it was there that the comitia
assembled by centuries; in its two other forms the people assembled
in the _forum_ or elsewhere; and then the _capite censi_ had as much
influence and authority as the foremost citizens.

[2] Custodes, diribitores, rogatores suffragiorum.




