CHAPTER XI

THE DEATH OF THE BODY POLITIC


Such is the natural and inevitable tendency of the best constituted
governments. If Sparta and Rome perished, what State can hope to endure
for ever? If we would set up a long-lived form of government, let us
not even dream of making it eternal. If we are to succeed, we must not
attempt the impossible, or flatter ourselves that we are endowing the
work of man with a stability of which human conditions do not permit.

The body politic, as well as the human body, begins to die as soon as
it is born, and carries in itself the causes of its destruction. But
both may have a constitution that is more or less robust and suited to
preserve them a longer or a shorter time. The constitution of man is
the work of nature; that of the State the work of art. It is not in
men's power to prolong their own lives; but it is for them to prolong
as much as possible the life of the State, by giving it the best
possible constitution. The best constituted State will have an end;
but it will end later than any other, unless some unforeseen accident
brings about its untimely destruction.

The life-principle of the body politic lies in the sovereign authority.
The legislative power is the heart of the State; the executive power
is its brain, which causes the movement of all the parts. The brain
may become paralysed and the individual still live. A man may remain
an imbecile and live; but as soon as the heart ceases to perform its
functions, the animal is dead.

The State subsists by means not of the laws, but of the legislative
power. Yesterday's law is not binding to-day; but silence is taken for
tacit consent, and the Sovereign is held to confirm incessantly the
laws it does not abrogate as it might. All that it has once declared
itself to will it wills always, unless it revokes its declaration.

Why then is so much respect paid to old laws? For this very reason. We
must believe that nothing but the excellence of old acts of will can
have preserved them so long: if the Sovereign had not recognised them
as throughout salutary, it would have revoked them a thousand times.
This is why, so far from growing weak, the laws continually gain new
strength in any well constituted State; the precedent of antiquity
makes them daily more venerable: while wherever the laws grow weak as
they become old, this proves that there is no longer a legislative
power, and that the State is dead.




CHAPTER XII

HOW THE SOVEREIGN AUTHORITY MAINTAINS ITSELF


The Sovereign, having no force other than the legislative power, acts
only by means of the laws; and the laws being solely the authentic acts
of the general will, the Sovereign cannot act save when the people is
assembled. The people in assembly, I shall be told, is a mere chimera.
It is so to-day, but two thousand years ago it was not so. Has man's
nature changed?

The bounds of possibility, in moral matters, are less narrow than
we imagine: it is our weaknesses, our vices and our prejudices that
confine them. Base souls have no belief in great men; vile slaves smile
in mockery at the name of liberty.

Let us judge of what can be done by what has been done. I shall say
nothing of the Republics of ancient Greece; but the Roman Republic was,
to my mind, a great State, and the town of Rome a great town. The last
census showed that there were in Rome four hundred thousand citizens
capable of bearing arms, and the last computation of the population
of the Empire showed over four million citizens, excluding subjects,
foreigners, women, children and slaves.

What difficulties might not be supposed to stand in the way of the
frequent assemblage of the vast population of this capital and its
neighbourhood. Yet few weeks passed without the Roman people being in
assembly, and even being so several times. It exercised not only the
rights of Sovereignty, but also a part of those of government. It dealt
with certain matters, and judged certain cases, and this whole people
was found in the public meeting-place hardly less often as magistrates
than as citizens.

If we went back to the earliest history of nations, we should find that
most ancient governments, even those of monarchical form, such as the
Macedonian and the Frankish, had similar councils. In any case, the one
incontestable fact I have given is an answer to all difficulties; it is
good logic to reason from the actual to the possible.




CHAPTER XIII

THE SAME (_continued_)


It is not enough for the assembled people to have once fixed the
constitution of the State by giving its sanction to a body of law;
it is not enough for it to have set up a perpetual government, or
provided once for all for the election of magistrates. Besides the
extraordinary assemblies unforeseen circumstances may demand, there
must be fixed periodical assemblies which cannot be abrogated or
prorogued, so that on the proper day the people is legitimately called
together by law, without need of any formal summoning.

But, apart from these assemblies authorised by their date alone, every
assembly of the people not summoned by the magistrates appointed for
that purpose, and in accordance with the prescribed forms, should be
regarded as unlawful, and all its acts as null and void, because the
command to assemble should itself proceed from the law.

The greater or less frequency with which lawful assemblies should occur
depends on so many considerations that no exact rules about them can be
given. It can only be said generally that the stronger the government
the more often should the Sovereign show itself.

This, I shall be told, may do for a single town; but what is to be
done when the State includes several? Is the sovereign authority to be
divided? Or is it to be concentrated in a single town to which all the
rest are made subject?

Neither the one nor the other, I reply. First, the sovereign authority
is one and simple, and cannot be divided without being destroyed. In th
second place, one town cannot, any more than one nation, legitimately
be made subject to another, because the essence of the body politic
lies in the reconciliation of obedience and liberty, and the words
subject and Sovereign are identical correlatives the idea of which
meets in the single word "citizen."

I answer further that the union of several towns in a single city is
always bad, and that, if we wish to make such a union, we should not
expect to avoid its natural disadvantages. It is useless to bring up
abuses that belong to great States against one who desires to see only
small ones; but how can small States be given the strength to resist
great ones, as formerly the Greek towns resisted the Great King, and
more recently Holland and Switzerland have resisted the House of
Austria?

Nevertheless, if the State cannot be reduced to the right limits, there
remains still one resource; this is, to allow no capital, to make the
seat of government move from town to town, and to assemble by turn in
each the Provincial Estates of the country.

People the territory evenly, extend everywhere the same rights, bear
to every place in it abundance and life: by these means will the State
become at once as strong and as well governed as possible. Remember
that the walls of towns are built of the ruins of the houses of the
countryside. For every palace I see raised in the capital, my mind's
eye sees a whole country made desolate.




