CHAPTER VI.--SACRED STAKES.

|MILTON {127}speaks in a famous sonnet of the time “when all our
fathers worshipped stocks and stones.&rdquo; That familiar and briefly
contemptuous phrase of the Puritan poet does really cover the vast
majority of objects of worship for the human race at all times and in
all places. We have examined the stones; the stocks must now come in for
their fair share of attention. They need not, however, delay us quite
so long as their sister deities, both because they are on the whole less
important in themselves, and because their development from grave-marks
into gods and idols is almost absolutely parallel to that which we have
already followed out in detail in the case of the standing stone or
megalithic monument.

Stakes or wooden posts are often used all the world over as marks of
an interment. Like other grave-marks, they also share naturally in the
honours paid to the ghost or nascent god. But they are less important as
elements in the growth of religion than standing stones for two distinct
reasons. In the first place, a stake or post most often marks the
interment of a person of little social consideration; chiefs and great
men have usually stone monuments erected in their honour; the commonalty
have to be satisfied with wooden marks, as one may observe to this day
at Père Lachaise, or any other great Christian cemetery. In the second
place, the stone monument is far more lasting and permanent than
the wooden one. Each of these points counts for something. For it is
{128}chiefs and great men whose ghosts most often grow into gods; and
it is the oldest ghosts, the oldest gods, the oldest monuments that are
always the most sacred. For both these reasons, then, the stake is less
critical than the stone in the history of religion.

Nevertheless, it has its own special importance. As the sacred stone
derives ultimately from the great boulder piled above the grave to keep
down the corpse, so the stake, I believe, derives from the sharp-pointed
stick driven through the body to pin it down as we saw in the third
chapter, and still so employed in Christian England to prevent suicides
from walking. Such a stake or pole is usually permitted to protrude from
the ground, so as to warn living men of the neighbourhood of a spirit.

At a very early date, however, the stake, I fancy, became a mere
grave-mark; and though, owing to its comparative inconspicuousness, it
obtains relatively little notice, it is now and always has been by far
the most common mode of preserving the memory of the spot where a person
lies buried. A good example, which will throw light upon many subsequent
modifications, is given by Mr. Wyatt Gill from Port Moresby in New
Guinea. “The body,” he says, “was buried. At the side was set up
a stake, to which were tied the spear, club, bow and arrow of the
deceased, but broken, to prevent theft. A little beyond was the grave
of a woman: her cooking utensils, grass petticoats, etc., hung up on the
stake.” Similar customs, he adds, are almost universal in Polynesia.

Though worship of stakes or wooden posts is common all over the world, I
can give but few quite unequivocal instances of such worship being paid
to a post actually known to surmount an undoubted grave. Almost the
best direct evidence I can obtain is the case of the grave-pole in Buru,
already quoted from Mr. H. O. Forbes. But the following account of
a Samoyed place of sacrifice, extracted from Baron Nordenskiold’s
_Voyage of the Vega_, is certainly suggestive. On a hillock on Vaygats
Island {129}the Swedish explorer found a number of reindeer skulls, so
arranged that they formed a close thicket of antlers. Around lay other
bones, both of bears and reindeer; and in the midst of all “the
mighty beings to whom all this splendour was offered. They consisted&rsquo; of
hundreds of small wooden sticks, the upper portions of which were carved
very clumsily in the form of the human countenance, most of them
from fifteen to twenty, but some of them three hundred and seventy
centimetres in length. They were all stuck in the ground on the
southeast part of the eminence. Near the place of sacrifice there were
to be seen pieces of driftwood and remains of the fireplace at which the
sacrificial meal was prepared. Our guide told us that at these meals the
mouths of the idols were besmeared with blood and wetted with brandy;
and the former statement was confirmed by the large spots of blood
which were found on most of the large idols below the holes intended to
represent the mouth.” At a far earlier date, Stephen Burrough in 1556
writes as follows to much the same effect in his interesting narrative
printed in Hakluyt: “There I met againe with Loshak, and went on shore
with him, and he brought me to a heap of Samoeds idols, which were in
number about 300, the worst and the most unartificiall worke that ever I
saw: the eyes and mouthes of sundrie of them were bloodie, they had the
shape of men, women, and children, very grossly wrought, and that which
they had made for other parts was also sprinkled with blood. Some of
their idols were an olde sticke with two or three notches, made with a
knife in it. There was one of their sleds broken and lay by the heape of
idols, and there I saw a deers skinne which the foules had spoyled:
and before certaine of their idols blocks were made as high as their
mouthes; being all bloody, I thought that to be the table wheron they
offered their sacrifice.”

In neither of these accounts, it is true, is it distinctly mentioned
that the place of sacrifice was a Samoyed cemetery: {130}but I
believe this to be the case, partly from analogy, and partly because
Nordenskiôld mentions elsewhere that an upturned sled is a frequent
sign of a Samoyed grave. Compare also the following account of a
graveyard among nominally Christian Ostyak Siberians, also from
Nordenskiôld: “The corpses were placed in large coffins above ground,
at which almost always a cross was erected.” [The accompanying
woodcut shews that these crosses were rude wooden stakes with one or two
crossbars.] “In one of the crosses a sacred picture was inserted
which must be considered a further proof that a Christian rested in the
coffin. Notwithstanding this, we found some clothes, which had belonged
to the departed, hanging on a bush beside the grave, together with a
bundle containing food, principally dried fish. At the graves of the
richer natives the survivors are even said to place along with food some
rouble notes, in order that the departed may not be altogether without
ready money on his entrance into the other world.”

To complete the parallel, I ought to add that money was also deposited
on the sacrificial place on Vaygats Island. Of another such sacrificial
place on Yalmal, Nordenskiôld says, after describing a pile of bones,
reindeer skulls, and walrus jaws: “In the middle of the heap of bones
stood four erect pieces of wood. Two consisted of sticks a metre in
length, with notches cut in them.... The two others, which clearly were
the proper idols of this place of sacrifice, consisted of driftwood
roots, on which some carvings had been made to distinguish the eyes,
mouth, and nose. The parts of the pieces of wood, intended to represent
the eyes and mouth, had recently been besmeared with blood, and
there still lay at the heap of bones the entrails of a newly killed
reindeer.”

Indeed, I learn from another source that “the Samoyedes feed the
wooden images of the dead”; while an instance from Erman helps further
to confirm the same conclusion. According to that acute writer, among
the Ostyaks {131}of Eastern Siberia there is found a most interesting
custom, in which, says Dr. Tylor, “we see the transition from the
image of the dead man to the actual idol.” When a man dies, they set
up a rude wooden image of him in the yurt, which receives offerings
at every meal and has honours paid to it, while the widow continually
embraces and caresses it. As a general rule, these images are buried
at the end of three years or so: but sometimes “the image of a shaman
(native sorcerer),” says Tylor, “is set up permanently, and remains
as a saint for ever.” For “saint” I should say “god”; and we
see the transformation at once completed. Indeed, Erman adds acutely
about the greater gods of the Ostyaks: “That these latter also have a
historical origin, that they were originally monuments of distinguished
men, to which prescription and the interest of the Shamans gave by
degrees an arbitrary meaning and importance, seems to me not liable to
doubt.”

With regard to the blood smeared upon such Siberian wooden idols, it
must be remembered that bowls of blood are common offerings to the dead;
and Dr. Robertson Smith himself, no friendly witness in this matter,
has compared the blood-offerings to ghosts with those to deities. In the
eleventh book of the Odyssey, for example, the ghosts drink greedily of
the sacrificial blood; and libations of gore form a special feature in
Greek offerings to heroes. That blood was offered to the sacred stones
we have already seen; and we noticed that there as here it was specially
smeared upon the parts representing the mouth. Offerings of blood to
gods, or pouring of blood on altars, are too common to demand particular
notice; and we shall also recur to that part of the subject when we come
to consider the important questions of sacrifice and sacrament. I will
only add here that according to Maimonides the Sabians looked on blood
as the nourishment of the gods; while the Hebrew Jahweh asks indignantly
in the fiftieth {132}Psalm, “Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink
the blood of goats?”

To pass on to more unequivocal cases of stake-worship, where we can
hardly doubt that the stake represents a dead man, Captain Cook noticed
that in the Society Islands “the carved wooden images at burial-places
were not considered mere memorials, but abodes into which the souls of
the departed retired.” So Ellis observes of Polynesians generally that
the sacred objects might be either mere stocks and stones, or carved
wooden images, from six to eight feet long down to as many inches. Some
of these were to represent “tu,” divine manes or spirits of the
dead; while others were to represent “tu,” or deities of higher
rank and power. To my mind, this is almost a distinction without a
difference; the first being ghosts of recently deceased ancestors, the
second ghosts of remoter progenitors. The ancient Araucanians again
fixed over a tomb an upright log, “rudely carved to represent the
human frame.” After the death of New Zealand chiefs, wooden images,
20 to 40 feet high, were erected as monuments. I might easily multiply
instances; but I refrain lest the list grow tedious.

Dr. Codrington notes that the large mouths and lolling tongues of many
New Zealand and Polynesian gods are due to the habit of smearing the
mouth with blood and other offerings.

Where men preserve the corpses of their dead, images are not so likely
to grow up; but where fear of the dead has brought about the practice of
burial or burning, it is reasonable that the feelings of affection
which prompted gifts and endearments to the mummy in the first stage
of thought should seek some similar material outlet under the altered
circumstances. Among ourselves, a photograph, a portrait, the toys of
a dead child, are preserved and cherished. Among savages, ruder
representations become necessary. They bury the actual corpse safely
out of sight, but make some rough wooden imitation to represent {133}it.
Thus it does not surprise us to find that while the Marianne Islanders
keep the dried bodies of their dead ancestors in their huts as household
gods, and expect them to give oracles out of their skulls, the New
Zealanders, on the other hand, “set up memorial idols of deceased
persons near the burial-place, talking affectionately to them as if
still alive, and casting garments to them when they pass by,” while
they also “preserve in their houses small carved wooden images, each
dedicated to the spirit of an ancestor.” The Coast Negroes “place
several earthen images on the graves.” Some Papuans, “after a grave
is filled up, collect round an idol, and offer provisions to it.” The
Javans dress up an image in the clothes of the deceased. So, too, of the
Caribs of the West Indies, we learn that they “carved little images in
the shape in which they believed spirits to have appeared to them; and
some human figures bore the names of ancestors in memory of them.”
From such little images, obviously substituted for the dead body which
used once to be preserved and affectionately tended, are derived, I
believe, most of the household gods of the world--the Lares and Penates
of the Romans, the huacas of the Peruvians, the teraphim of the Semites.

How absolutely image and ancestor are identified we can see among the
Tenimber Islanders, with whom “the _matmate_ are the spirits of their
ancestors which are worshipped as guardian spirits or household gods.
They are supposed to enter the house through an opening in the roof, and
to take up their abode temporarily in the skulls, or in images of wood
or ivory, in order to partake of the offerings.”

A few more facts in the same direction may help to bring out in still
stronger relief this close equivalence of the corpse and the image. A
New Guinea mother keeps the mummied body of her child, and carries it
about with her; whereas a West African mother, living in a tribe where
terror of the dead has induced the practice of burial, makes {134}a
little image of her lost darling out of a gourd or calabash, wraps it in
skins, and feeds it or puts it to sleep like a living baby. Bastian saw
Indian women in Peru, who had lost an infant, carrying about on their
backs a wooden doll to represent it. At a somewhat higher level, “the
spiritual beings of the Algonquins,” says Dr. Tylor, to whom I owe
not a few of these instances, “were represented by, and in language
completely identified with, the carved wooden heads” (note this
point) “or more complete images, to which worship and sacrifice were
offered.” In all these instances we see clearly, I think, the course
of the genesis of household deities. In Siam, the ashes of the dead are
similarly moulded into Buddhist images, which are afterwards worshipped
as household gods.

Mr. Herbert Spencer has collected several interesting examples some of
which I will borrow, as showing incidentally how much the growth of the
idol or image depends upon such abstraction of the real body for burial
or its equivalent. While a deceased king of Congo is being embalmed, a
figure is set up in the palace to represent him, and is daily furnished
with meat and drink. When Charles VI. of France was buried, “over the
coffin was an image of the late king, bearing a rich crown of gold and
diamonds, and holding two shields.... This image was dressed with cloth
of gold.... In this state was he solemnly carried to the church of Notre
Dame.” Madame de Motteville says of the father of the great Condé,
“The effigy of this prince was waited upon for three days, as was
customary”--forty days having been the original time during which food
was supplied to such effigies at the usual hours. Monstrelet describes
a like figure used at the burial of Henry V. of England: and the
Westminster Abbey images already noticed belong to the same category.

As in the case of sacred stones, once more, I am quite ready to admit
that when once the sanctity of certain stakes or wooden poles came to be
generally recognised, it {135}would be a simple transference of feeling
to suppose that any stake, arbitrarily set up, might become the shrine
or home of an indwelling spirit. Thus we are told that the Brazilian
tribes “set up stakes in the ground, and make offerings before them
to appease their deities or demons.” So also we are assured that among
the Dinkas of the White Nile, “the missionaries saw an old woman
in her hut offering the first of her food before a short thick staff
planted in the ground.” But in neither of these cases is there
necessarily anything to show that the spot where the staff was set up
was not a place of burial; while in the second instance this is even
probable, as hut interments are extremely common in Africa. I will quote
one other instance only, for its illustrative value in a subsequent
connexion. In the Society Islands, rude logs are clothed in native cloth
(like Monigan’s idol) and anointed with oil, receiving adoration and
sacrifice as the dwelling-place of a deity. This custom is parallel to
that of the Caribs, who took a bone of a dead friend from the grave,
wrapped it up in cotton, and enquired of it for oracles.

Mr. Savage Landor, in his interesting work _The Hairy Ainu_, figures and
describes some curious grave-stakes of those Japanese aborigines. The
stakes on the men’s graves are provided with a phallic protuberance;
those on the women’s with an equally phallic perforation. This
fact helps to illustrate the phallicism of sacred stones in Syria and
elsewhere.

Among the Semitic peoples, always specially interesting to us from their
genetic connexion with Judaism and Christianity, the worship of stakes
usually took the form of adoration paid to the curious log of wood
described as an _ashera_. What kind of object an _ashera_ was we learn
from the injunction in Deuteronomy, “Thou shalt not plant an _ashera_
of any kind of wood beside the altar of Jahweh.” This prohibition is
clearly parallel to that against any hewn stone or “graven image.”
But the Semites in general worshipped as a rule at a rude stone altar,
{136}beside which stood an _ashera_, under a green tree,--all three
of the great sacred objects of humanity being thus present together.
A similar combination is not uncommon in India, where sacred stone and
wooden image stand often under the shade of the same holy peepul tree.
“The _ashera_,” says Professor Robertson Smith, “is a sacred
symbol, the seat of the deity, and perhaps the name itself, as G.
Hoffmann has suggested, means nothing more than the ‘mark’ of the
divine presence.” Those who have followed me so far in the present
work, however, will be more likely to conclude that it meant originally
the mark of a place where an ancestor lay buried. “Every altar,”
says Professor Smith, again, “had its _ashera_, even such altars as in
the popular preprophetic forms of the Hebrew religion were dedicated to
Jehovah.”

The Semitic sacred pole was treated in most respects like the other
grave-stakes and idols we have hitherto considered; for an Assyrian
monument from Khorsabad, figured by Rawlinson, represents an ornamental
pole, planted beside an altar; priests stand before it engaged in an act
of worship, and touch the pole with their hands, “or perhaps,” says
Professor Smith, “anoint it with some liquid substance.” That the
_ashera_ was also draped, like the logs of the Society Islanders, or
Monigan’s Irish idol, we learn from the famous passage in Second Kings
(xxiii. 7) where it is said that the women “wove _hangings_ for
the _ashera_.” Dr. Robertson Smith illustrates this passage by the
parallel of the sacred _erica_ at Byblus, which was “a mere dead
stump, for it was cut down by Isis and presented to the Byblians wrapped
in a linen cloth and anointed with myrrh like a corpse. It therefore
represented the dead god” (Osiris, or rather in its origin Adonis).
“But as a mere stump, it also resembles the Hebrew _ashera_.” So
near may a man come to the perception of a truth, and yet so utterly may
he miss its actual import.

I will dwell no longer upon these more or less remote derivatives of the
grave-stake. I will only say briefly that in {137}my opinion all wooden
idols or images are directly or indirectly descended from the wooden
headpost or still more primitive sepulchral pole. Not of course that
I suppose every wooden image to have been necessarily once itself a
funereal monument. Donatello’s Magdalen in San Giovanni at Florence,
the blue-robed and star-spangled Madonna of the wayside shrine, have
certainly no such immediate origin. But I do believe that the habit of
making and worshipping wooden images arose in the way I have pointed
out; and to those who would accuse me of “gross Euhemerism,” I would
once more remark that even in these highest Christian instances the
objects of veneration are themselves in the last resort admitted to have
been at one time Galilean women. Nay, is not even the wayside shrine
itself in most Catholic countries more often than not the mortuary
chapel erected where some wayfarer has died a violent death, by murder,
lightning, accident, or avalanche?




