CHAPTER V.--SACRED STONES.

|I {093}mentioned in the last chapter two origins of Idols to which, as
I believed, an insufficient amount of attention had been directed by Mr.
Herbert Spencer. These were the Sacred Stone and the Wooden Stake which
mark the grave. To these two I will now add a third common object of
worship, which does not indeed enter into the genesis of idols, but
which is of very high importance in early religion--the sacred tree,
with its collective form, the sacred grove. All the objects thus
enumerated demand further attention at our hands, both from their
general significance in the history of religion, and also from their
special interest in connexion with the evolution of the God of Israel,
who became in due time the God of Christianity and of Islam, as well as
the God of modern idealised and sublimated theism.

I will begin with the consideration of the Sacred Stone, not only
because it is by far the most important of the three, but also because,
as we shall shortly see, it stands in the direct line of parentage of
the God of Israel.

All the world over, and at all periods of history, we find among the
most common objects of human worship certain blocks of stone, either
rudely shaped and dressed by the hand, or else more often standing alone
on the soil in all their native and natural roughness. The downs of
England are everywhere studded with cromlechs, dolmens, and other
antique megalithic structures (of which the gigantic trilithons of
Stonehenge and Avebury are the best-known examples), {094}long described
by antiquaries as “druidical remains,” and certainly regarded by
the ancient inhabitants of Britain with an immense amount of respect
and reverence. In France we have the endless avenues of Carnac and
Locmariaker; in Sardinia, the curious conical shafts known to the local
peasants as _sepolture dei giganti_--the tombs of the giants. In Syria,
Major Conder has described similar monuments in Heth and Moab, at Gilboa
and at Heshbon. In India, five stones are set up at the corner of a
field, painted red, and worshipped by the natives as the Five Pandavas.
Theophrastus tells us as one of the characteristics of the superstitious
man that he anoints with oil the sacred stones at the street corners;
and from an ancient tradition embedded in the Hebrew scriptures we learn
how the patriarch Jacob set up a stone at Bethel “for a pillar,” and
“poured oil upon the top of it,” as a like act of worship. Even in
our own day there is a certain English hundred where the old open-air
court of the manor is inaugurated by the ceremony of breaking a bottle
of wine over a standing stone which tops a tumulus; and the sovereigns
of the United Kingdom are still crowned in a chair which encloses under
its seat the ancestral sacred stone of their heathen Scottish and Irish
predecessors.

Now, what is the share of such sacred stones in the rise and growth of
the religious habit?

It is hardly necessary, I suppose, to give formal proof of the familiar
fact that an upright slab is one of the commonest modes of marking the
place where a person is buried. From the ancient pillar that prehistoric
savages set up over the tumulus of their dead chief, to the headstone
that marks the dwarfed and stunted barrow in our own English cemeteries,
the practice of mankind has been one and continuous. Sometimes the stone
is a rough boulder from the fields; a representative of the big block
which savages place on the grave to keep the corpse from rising:
sometimes it is an oblong slab of slate or marble; sometimes, and
especially among the more advanced races, it is {095}a shapely cross or
sculptured monument. But whenever on earth interment is practised, there
stones of some sort, solitary or in heaps, almost invariably mark the
place of burial.

Again, as presents and sacrifices are offered at graves to the spirits
of the dead, it is at the stone which records the last resting-place of
the deceased that they will oftenest be presented. As a matter of fact
we know that, all the world over, offerings of wine, oil, rice,
ghee, corn, and meat are continually made at the graves of chiefs or
relations. Victims, both human and otherwise, are sacrificed at the
tomb, and their blood is constantly smeared on the headstone or boulder
that marks the spot. Indeed, after a time, the grave and the stone get
to be confounded together, and the place itself comes to have a certain
sacredness, derived from the ghost which haunts and inhabits it.

Four well-marked varieties of early tombstone are recognised in the
eastern continent at least, and their distribution and nature is thus
described by Major Conder: “Rude stone monuments, bearing a strong
family resemblance in their mode of construction and dimensions, have
been found distributed over all parts of Europe and Western Asia, and
occur also in India. In some cases they are attributable to early
Aryan tribes; in others they seem to be of Semitic origin. They include
_menhirs_, or standing stones, which were erected as memorials, and
worshipped as deities, with libations of blood, milk, honey, or water
poured upon the stones: _dolmens_, or stone tables, free standing--that
is, not covered by any mound or superstructure, which may be considered
without doubt to have been used as altars on which victims (often human)
were immolated: _cairns_, also memorial, and sometimes surrounding
menhirs; these were made by the contributions of numerous visitors
or pilgrims, each adding a stone as witness of his presence: finally
_cromlechs_, or stone circles, used as sacred enclosures or early
hypæthral temples, often {096}with a central menhir or dolmen as statue
or altar.”

There can be very little doubt that every one of these monuments is
essentially sepulchral in character. The menhir or standing stone is
the ordinary gravestone still in use among us: the dolmen is a chambered
tomb, once covered by a tumulus, but now bare and open: the cairn is a
heap of stones piled above the dead body: the stone circle is apparently
a later temple built around a tomb, whose position is marked by the
menhir or altar-stone in its centre. And each has been the parent of
a numerous offspring. The menhir gives rise to the obelisk, the stone
cross, and the statue or idol; the dolmen, to the sarcophagus, the
altar-tomb, and the high altar; the cairn, to the tope and also to the
pyramid; the cromlech, or stone circle, to the temple or church in one
at least of its many developments.

Each of these classes of monuments, Major Conder observes, has its
distinctive name in the Semitic languages, and is frequently mentioned
in the early Hebrew literature. The _menhir_ is the “pillar” of
our Authorised Version of the Old Testament; the _dolmen_ is the
“altar”; the _cairn_ is the “heap”; and the stone circle appears
under the names Gilgal and Hazor. The significance of these facts will
appear a little later on when I reach a more advanced stage in the
evolution of stone-worship.

In the simplest and most primitive stage of religion, such as that pure
ancestor-cult still surviving unmixed among the people of New Guinea or
the African tribes whose practice Mr. Duff Macdonald has so admirably
described for us, it is the corpse or ghost itself, not the stone to
mark its dwelling, which comes in for all the veneration and all
the gifts of the reverent survivors. But we must remember that every
existing religion, however primitive in type, is now very ancient; and
it is quite natural that in many cases the stone should thus come itself
to be regarded as the ghost or god, the object to which veneration is
{097}paid by the tribesmen. In fact, just in proportion as the ghost
evolves into the god, so does the tombstone begin to evolve into the
fetish or idol.

At first, however, it is merely as the rude unshapen stone that the idol
in this shape receives the worship of its votaries. This is the stage
that has been christened by that very misleading name fetishism, and
erroneously supposed to lie at the very basis of all religion. Here are
a few interesting samples of this stage of stone-worship, taken from the
very careful Samoan collection of Mr. Turner, of the London Missionary
Society:

“Fonge and Toafa were the names of the two oblong smooth stones
which stood on a raised platform of loose stones inland of one of the
villages. They were supposed to be the parents of Saato, a god who
controlled the rain. When the chiefs and people were ready to go off for
weeks to certain places in the bush for the sport of pigeon-catching,
offerings of cooked taro and fish were laid on the stones, accompanied
by prayers for fine weather and no rain. Any one who refused an offering
to the stones was frowned upon; and in the event of rain was blamed
and punished for bringing down the wrath of the fine-weather god, and
spoiling the sports of the season.”

Here, even if one doubts that Saato was a deceased Weather-doctor, and
that Fonge and Toafa were his father and mother (which I do not care to
insist upon), it is at least clear that we have to deal essentially with
two standing stones of precisely the same sort as those which habitually
mark sepulture.

Of the gods of Hudson’s Island, Mr. Turner gives this very interesting
and suggestive account:

“Foelangi and Maumau were the principal gods. They had each a temple;
and under the altars, on which were laid out in rows the skulls of
departed chiefs and people, were suspended offerings of pearl-shell and
other valuables. Foelangi had an unchiselled block of stone to represent
him--something like a six feet high gravestone.... {098}Offerings of
food were taken to the temples, that the gods might first partake before
anyone else ate anything.... Husked cocoanuts were laid down, one before
each skull.”

And of St. Augustine Island he writes: “At the Temple of Maumau there
stood a nine feet high coral sandstone slab from the beach.... Meat
offerings were laid on the altars, accompanied by songs and dances in
honour of the god.”

Similarly, about one of the Gilbert Group, Mr. Turner says:

“They had other gods and goddesses, and, as was common in this group,
had sandstone slabs or pillars set up here and there among the houses.
Before these shrines offerings of food were laid during the day, which
the priests took away stealthily by night and made the credulous believe
that gods and not mortals had done it. If the stone slab represented a
_goddess_ it was not placed erect, but laid down on the ground. Being a
_lady_ they thought it would be cruel to make her stand so long.”

In these cases, and in many others, it seems to me clear that the
original gravestone or menhir itself is the object of worship, viewed as
the residence of the ghost or god in whose honour it was erected. For in
Samoa we know that the grave “was marked by a little heap of stones, a
foot or two high,” and at De Peyster’s Island “a stone was raised
at the head of the grave, and a human head carved on it”--a first
step, as we have already seen, towards the evolution of one form of
idol.

Similar instances abound everywhere. Among the Khonds of India, every
village has its local god, represented by an upright stone under the
big tree on the green, to use frankly an English equivalent. (The full
importance of this common combination of sacred stone and sacred tree
will only come out at a later stage of our enquiry.) In Peru, worship
was paid to standing stones which, says Dr. Tylor, “represented the
penates of households {099}and the patron-deities of villages”--in
other words, the ghosts of ancestors and of tribal chiefs. “Near
Acora,” says the Marquis de Nadaillac, “the bodies were placed under
megalithic stones, reminding us of the dolmens and cromlechs of Europe.
One vast plain is covered with erect stones, some forming circles, some
squares, and often covered in with large slabs which entirely closed
round the sepulchral chamber.” In Fiji the gods and goddesses “had
their abodes or shrines in black stones like smooth round milestones,
and there received their offerings of food.” An immense number
of similar instances have been collected by Dr. Tylor and other
anthropologists.

But when once the idea of the sacredness of stones had thus got firmly
fixed in the savage mind, it was natural enough that other stones,
resembling those which were already recognised as gods, should come to
be regarded as themselves divine, or as containing an indwelling ghost
or deity. Of this stage, Mr. Turner’s Samoa again affords us some
curious instances.

“Smooth stones apparently picked up out of the bed of the river were
regarded as representatives of certain gods, and wherever the stone was,
there the god was supposed to be. One resembling a fish would be prayed
to as the fisherman’s god. Another, resembling a yam, would be the yam
god. A third, round like a breadfruit, the breadfruit god--and so on.”

Now, the word “apparently” used by this very cautious observer in
this passage shows clearly that he had never of his own knowledge seen a
stone thus selected at random worshipped or deified, and it is therefore
possible that in all such cases the stone may really have been one of
sepulchral origin. Still, I agree with Mr. Spencer that when once the
idea of a ghost or god is well developed, the notion of such a spirit as
animating any remarkable or odd-looking object is a natural transition. *

     * The whole subject is admirably worked out in The
     Principles of Sociology, § 159.

Hence I incline {100}to believe Mr. Turner is right, and that these
stones may really have been picked out and worshipped, merely for their
oddity, but always, as he correctly infers, from the belief in their
connexion with some god or spirit.

Here is another case, also from Polynesia, where no immediate connexion
with any particular grave seems definitely implied:

“Two unchiselled ‘smooth stones of the stream’ were kept in a
temple at one of the villages, and guarded with great care. No stranger
or over-curious person was allowed to go near the place, under penalty
of a beating from the custodians of these gods. They represented good
and not malicious death-causing gods. The one made the yams, breadfruit,
and cocoanuts, and the other sent fish to the nets.

“Another stone was carefully housed in another village as the
representative of a rain-making god. When there was overmuch rain, the
stone was laid by the fire and kept heated till fine weather set in.”

Further instances (if fairly reported) occur elsewhere. “Among the
lower races of America,” says Dr. Tylor, summarising Schoolcraft,
“the Dakotahs would pick up a round boulder, paint it, and then,
addressing it as grandfather, make offerings to it, and pray it to
deliver them from danger.” But here the very fact that the stone
is worshipped and treated as an ancestor shows how derivative is the
deification--how dependent upon the prior association of such stones
with the tomb of a forefather and its indwelling spirit. Just in the
same way we know there are countries where a grave is more generally
marked, not by a stone, but by a wooden stake; and in these countries,
as for instance among the Samoyedes of Siberia, sticks, not stones, are
the most common objects of reverence. (Thus, again, stick-worship
is found “among the Damaras of South Africa, whose ancestors are
represented at the sacrificial feasts by stakes cut from trees or bushes
consecrated to them, to which stakes the meat is first {101}offered.”)
But here, too, we see the clear affiliation upon ancestor-worship; and
indeed, wherever we find the common worship of “stocks and stones,”
all the analogies lead us to believe the stocks and stones either
actually mark the graves of ancestors or else are accepted as their
representatives and embodiments.

The vast majority, however, of sacred stones with whose history we are
well acquainted are indubitably connected with interments, ancient
or modern. All the European sacred stones are cromlechs, dolmens,
trilithons, or menhirs, of which Mr. Angus Smith, a most cautious
authority, observes categorically, “We know for a certainty that
memorials of burials are the chief object of the first one, and of
nearly all, the only object apparently.” So many other examples will
come out incidentally in the course of the sequel that I will not labour
the point any further at present. Among the most remarkable instances,
however, I cannot refrain from mentioning the great Sardinian sacred
stones, which so often occur in the neighbourhood of the _nuraghi_, or
ancient forts. These consist of tall conical monoliths, rough and unhewn
in the oldest examples, rudely hewn in the later ones, and occasionally
presenting some distant resemblance to a human face--the first rough
draft of the future idol. “Behind the monolith lies the burial-place,
ten to fourteen yards long by one or two in width.” These
burial-places have been examined by the Abbate Spano.

“He was satisfied that several bodies had been buried together in the
same tomb, and that these were therefore family burial-places. When
the death of one of the members of the tribe occurred, one of the great
transverse stones which covered the long alley built behind the monolith
was removed, and then replaced until the time came for another body
to claim its place in the tomb. The monolith, called by the Sardinian
peasants _pietra dell&rsquo; altare_, or altar-stone, because they believe
it to have been used for human sacrifice, always faces the south or
east.”

Such {102}a surviving tradition as to the human sacrifices, in an island
so little sophisticated as Sardinia, has almost certainly come down to
us unbroken from a very early age.

I have already stated that the idol is probably in many cases derived
from the gravestone or other sacred stone. I believe that in an immense
number of cases it is simply the original pillar, more or less rudely
carved into the semblance of a human figure.

How this comes about we can readily understand if we recollect that by a
gradual transference of sentiment the stone itself is at last identified
with the associated spirit. Here, once more, is a transitional instance
from our Polynesian storehouse.

The great god of Bowditch Island “was supposed to be embodied in a
stone, which was carefully wrapped up with fine mats, and never seen
by any one but the king” (note this characteristic touch of kingly
priesthood), “and that only once a year, when the decayed mats were
stripped off and thrown away. In sickness, offerings of fine mats were
taken and rolled round the sacred stone, and thus it got busked up to
a prodigious size; but as the idol was exposed to the weather out of
doors, night and day, the mats soon rotted. No one dared to appropriate
what had been offered to the god, and hence the old mats, as they were
taken off, were heaped in a place by themselves and allowed to rot.”

Now the reasonableness of all this is immediately apparent if
we remember that the stones which stand on graves are habitually
worshipped, and anointed with oil, milk, and blood. It is but a slight
further step to regard the stone, not only as eating and drinking, but
also as needing warmth and clothing. As an admirable example of the same
train of thought, working out the same result elsewhere, compare this
curious account of a stone idol at Inniskea (a rocky islet off the Mayo
coast), given by the Earl of Roden, as late as 1851, in his _Progress of
the Reformation in Ireland_: “In {103}the south island, in the house
of a man named Monigan, a stone idol, called in the Irish ‘Neevougi,&rsquo;
has been from time immemorial religiously preserved and worshipped. This
god resembles in appearance a thick roll of home-spun flannel, which
arises from the custom of dedicating a dress of that material to
it whenever its aid is sought; this is sewn on by an old woman, its
priestess, whose peculiar care it is. Of the early history of this idol
no authentic information can be procured, but its power is believed to
be immense; they pray to it in time of sickness; it is invoked when a
storm is desired to dash some hapless ship upon their coast; and, again,
the exercise of its power is solicited in calming the angry waves, to
admit of fishing or visiting the mainland.”

Nor is this a solitary instance in modern Europe. “In certain mountain
districts of Norway,” says Dr. Tylor, “up to the end of the last
century, the peasants used to preserve round stones, washed them every
Thursday evening,.... smeared them with butter before the fire, laid
them in the seat of honour on fresh straw, and at certain times of the
year steeped them in ale, that they might bring luck and comfort to the
house.”

The first transitional step towards the idol proper is given in some
rude attempt to make the standing stone at the grave roughly resemble
a human figure. In the later Sardinian examples, two conical lumps,
representing the breasts, seem to mark that the figure is intended to
be female--either because a woman is buried there, or to place the spot
under the protection of a goddess. From this rude beginning we get every
transitional form, like the Hermæ and the archaic Apollos, till we
arrive at the perfect freedom and beauty of Hellenic sculpture. Says
Grote, in speaking of Greek worship, “their primitive memorial erected
to a god did not even pretend to be an image, but was often nothing
more than a pillar, a board, a shapeless stone, or a post [notice the
resemblance to ordinary grave-marks] receiving care and decoration from
the {104}neighbourhood as well as worship.” Dr. Tylor, to whose great
collection of instances I owe many acknowledgments, says in comment on
this passage, “Such were the log that stood for Artemis in Euboea;
the stake that represented Pallas Athene ‘sine effigie rudis palus,
et informe lignum;’ the unwrought stone at Hyethos, which ‘after the
ancient manner’ represented Heracles; the thirty such stones which the
Pharæans in like fashion worshipped for the gods; and that one which
received such honour in Boeotian festivals as representing the Thespian
Eros.” Such also was the conical pillar of Asiatic type which stood
instead of an image of the Paphian Aphrodite, and the conical stone
worshipped in Attica under the name of Apollo. A sacred boulder lay in
front of the temple of the Trœzenians, while another in Argos bore
the significant name of Zeus Kappotas. “Among all the Greeks,”
says Pausanias, “rude stones were worshipped before the images of the
gods.” Among the Semites, in like manner, Melcarth was reverenced at
Tyre under the form of two stone pillars.

Intermediate forms, in which the stone takes successively a face, a
head, arms, legs, a shapely and well-moulded body, are familiar to all
of us in existing remains. The well-known figures of Priapus form a
good transitional example. “At Tâbala, in Arabia,” says Professor
Robertson Smith, “a sort of crown was sculptured on the stone
of al-Lat to mark her head.” Indeed, to the last, the pillar or
monolithic type is constantly suggested in the erect attitude and
the proportions of the statue among all except the highest Hellenic
examples. I may add, that even in Islam itself, which so sternly forbids
images of any sort, some traces of such anthropomorphic gravestones may
still be found. I noticed in the mosque of Mehemet Ali at Cairo that
the headstones of the Vice-regal family were each adorned with a fez and
tassel.

It is worth noting that the obelisk, also, doubtless owes its origin to
the monolith or standing stone. Whatever fresh {105}sacredness it may
later have obtained from the associations of sun-worship, as a solar
ray, cannot mask for any wide anthropological enquirer the fact that it
is by descent a mere shapeless head-stone, with a new symbolic meaning
given to it (as so often happens) in a new religion. The two obelisks&rsquo;
which stand so often before Egyptian temples are clearly the analogues
of the two pillars of Melcarth at Tyre, and the sacred pair at Paphos,
Hera-polis, and Solomon&rsquo;s temple. In the same way, the Indian tope and
the pyramid are descendants of the cairn, as the great stone-built tombs
of the Numidian kings in Algeria seem to be more advanced equivalents of
the tumulus or round barrow. And let me clear the ground here for
what is to follow by adding most emphatically that the genesis of
stone-worship here sketched out precludes the possibility of phallic
worship being in any sense a primitive form of it. The standing stone
may have been, and doubtless often was, in later stages; identified with
a phallus; but if the theory here advocated is true, the lingam, instead
of lying at the root of the monolith, must necessarily be a later and
derivative form of it. At the same time, the stone being regarded as
the ancestor of the family, it is not unnatural that early men should
sometimes carve it into a phallic shape. Having said this, I will say
no more on the subject, which has really extremely little to do with the
essentials of stone worship, save that on many gravestones of early
date a phallus marked the male sex of the occupant, while breasts, or a
symbolical triangle, or a mandorla, marked the grave of a woman.

Sometimes, both forms of god, the most primitive and the most finished,
the rude stone and the perfect statue, exist side by side in the same
community.

“In the legendary origin of Jagannath,” says Sir William Hunter,
“we find the aboriginal people worshipping a blue stone in the depths
of the forest. But the deity at length wearies of primitive jungle
offerings, and longs for the cooked food of the more civilised Aryans,
upon {106}whose arrival on the scene the rude blue stone gives place
to a carved image. At the present hour, in every hamlet of Orissa, this
twofold worship coexists. The common people have their shapeless stone
or block, which they adore with simple rites in the open air; while
side by side with it stands a temple to one of the Aryan gods, with its
carved idol and elaborate rites.”

Where many sacred stones exist all round, marking the graves of the
dead, or inhabited by their spirits, it is not surprising, once more,
that a general feeling of reverence towards all stones should begin to
arise--that the stone per se, especially if large, odd, or conspicuous,
should be credited to some extent with indwelling divinity. Nor is it
astonishing that the idea of men being descended from stones should
be rife among people who must often, when young, have been shown
headstones, monoliths, boulders, or cromlechs, and been told that the
offerings made upon them were gifts to their ancestors. They would
accept the idea as readily as our own children accept the Hebrew myth
of the creation of Adam, our prime ancestor, from “the dust of the
ground”--a far less promising material than a block of marble or
sandstone. In this way, it seems to me, we can most readily understand
the numerous stories of men becoming stones, and stones becoming men,
which are rife among the myths of savage or barbarous peoples.

Fernandez de Piedrahita says that the Laches “worshipped every stone
as a god, as they said they had all been men.” Arriaga tells us the
Peruvians paid honour to “very large stones, saying that they were
once men.” In the American _Report of the Bureau of Ethnology for
1880_, several stories are told of metamorphosis of men into stones
from the Iroquois legends. According to Dorman, the Oneidas and
Dakotahs claim descent from stones, to which they ascribe animation. An
interesting intermediate form, which shows the growth of this idea, is
given in Arriaga’s statement that the Marcayoc, or idol worshipped
in {107}Peru as the patron of the village, “is sometimes a stone and
sometimes a mummy”: in other words, it depended upon circumstances
whether they reverenced the body itself or the gravestone that covered
it. Among the Coast Negroes, when a person dies, a stone is taken to a
certain house--the village valhalla--to represent his ghost; and among
the Bulloms, women “make occasional sacrifices and offerings of rice
to the stones which are preserved in memory of the dead.” At Tanna,
in the New Hebrides, Mr. Gray, a missionary, found “a piece of sacred
ground, on which were deposited the stones in which they supposed
the spirits of their departed relatives to reside”; and Commander
Henderson, commenting upon a similar case from Vati Island, says these
“were the only form of gods the natives possessed, and into them they
supposed the souls of their departed friends and relatives to enter.”
Some of them “had a small piece chipped out on one side, by means of
which the indwelling ghost or spirit was supposed to have ingress or
egress.” Of a third sort, rudely fashioned by hand, Captain Henderson
says acutely, “these, it seemed to me, were the beginnings of a graven
image--a common stone, sacred as the dwelling-place of an ancestral
ghost.” *

     * I owe this and several other references to Mr. Spencer’s
     Appendix, as I do some of my previously cited cases to Mr.
     Lang or Dr. Tylor.

Classical and Hebrew literature are full of examples of such stones,
believed to have been once human. Niobe and Lot’s wife are instances
that will at once occur to every reader. In Boeotia, Pausanias tells
us, people believed Alkmene, the mother of Herakles, was changed into a
stone. Perseus and the Gorgon’s head is another example, paralleled by
the Breton idea that their great stone circles were people, who, in the
modern Christianised version of the story, were turned into stone for
dancing on a Sunday. (About this Christianisation I shall have a word
to say further on; meanwhile, observe the similar name of the Giant’s
Dance given to the great Stonehenge {108}of Ireland.) In the same way
there is a Standing Rock on the upper Missouri which parallels the story
of Niobe--it was once a woman, who became petrified with grief when
her husband took a second wife. Some Samoan gods (or ancestral ghosts)
“were changed into stones,” says Mr. Turner, “and now stand up in
a rocky part of the lagoon on the north side of Upolu.”

On the other hand, if men become stones, stones also become men, or at
least give birth to men. We get a good instance of this in the legend of
Deucalion. Again, by the roadside, near the city of the Panopoeans, lay
the stones out of which Prometheus made men. Manke, the first man
in Mitchell Island, came out of a stone. The inhabitants of the New
Hebrides say that “the human race sprang from stones and the earth.”
On Francis Island, says Mr. Turner, “close by the temple there was
a seven-feet-long beach sandstone slab erected, before which offerings
were laid as the people united for prayer”; and the natives here
told him that one of their gods had made stones become men. “In
Melanesia,” says Mr. Lang, “matters are so mixed that it is not easy
to decide whether a worshipful stone is the dwelling of a dead man’s
soul, or is of spiritual merit in itself, or whether the stone is the
spirit’s outward part or organ.” And, indeed, a sort of general
confusion between the stone, the ghost, the ancestor, and the god,
at last pervades the mind of the stone-worshipper everywhere. “The
curious anthropomorphic idea of stones being husbands and wives, and
even having children,” as Dr. Tylor calls it--an idea familiar to the
Fijians as to the Peruvians and Lapps--is surely explicable at once by
the existence of headstones either to men or women, and the confusion
between the mark and the ghost it commemorates.

An interesting side-point in this gradual mixing up of the ghost and the
stone, the god and the image, is shown in a gradual change of detail
as to the mode of making offerings at the tomb or shrine. On the great
trilithon in Tonga, {109}Miss Gordon-Cumming tells us, a bowl of kava
was placed on a horizontal stone. Here it must have been supposed that
the ghost itself issued forth (perhaps by night) to drink it, as the
serpent which represented the spirit of Anchises glided from the tomb
to lick up the offerings presented by Æneas. Gradually, however, as the
stone and the ghost get more closely connected in idea the offering
is made to the monument itself; though in the earlier stages the
convenience of using the flat altar-stone (wherever such exists) as a
place of sacrifice for victims probably masks the transition even to the
worshippers themselves. Dr. Wise saw in the Himalayas a group of stones
“erected to the memory of the petty Rajahs of Kolam,” where “some
fifty or sixty unfortunate women sacrificed themselves.” The blood,
in particular, is offered up to the ghost; and “the cup-hollows which
have been found in menhirs and dolmens,” says Captain Conder, “are
the indications of the libations, often of human blood, once poured on
these stones by heathen worshippers.” “Cups are often found,” says
a good Scotch observer, “on stones connected with the monuments of the
dead, such as on the covering stones of kistvaens, particularly those of
the short or rarest form; on the flat stones of cromlechs; and on stones
of chambered graves.” On the top of the cairn at Glen Urquhart, on
Loch Ness, is an oblong mass of slate-stone, obviously sepulchral, and
marked with very numerous cups. When the stones are upright the notion
of offering the blood to the upper part, which represents the face or
mouth, becomes very natural, and forms a distinct step in the process of
anthropomorphisation of the headstone into the idol.

We get two stages of this evolution side by side in the two deities of
the Samoyed travelling ark-sledge, “one with a stone head, the other a
mere black stone, both dressed in green robes with red lappets, and
both smeared with sacrificial blood.” In the Indian groups of standing
stones, representing the Five Pandavas, “it is a usual practice,”
{110}says Dr. Tylor, “to daub each stone with red paint, forming, as
it were, a great blood-spot where the face would be if it were a shaped
idol.” Mr. Spencer, I think, hits the key-note of this practice in an
instructive passage. “A Dakotah,” he says, “before praying to a
stone for succour paints it with some red pigment, such as red ochre.
Now, when we read that along with offerings of milk, honey, fruit,
flour, etc., the Bodo and Dhimals offer ‘red lead or cochineal,&rsquo; we
may suspect that these three colouring matters, having red as their
common character, are substitutes for blood. The supposed resident ghost
was at first propitiated by anointing the stone with human blood; and
then, in default of this, red pigment was used, ghosts and gods being
supposed by primitive men to be easily deceived by shams.” It
is possible, too, that with the process of idealisation and
spiritualisation it might be supposed a substitute would please the gods
equally well, or that redness generally was the equivalent of blood, in
the same way as the Chinese burn paper money and utensils to set free
their ghosts for the use of ancestral spirits.

In any case, it is interesting to note that the faces of many Hindu gods
are habitually painted red. And that this is the survival of the same
ancient custom we see in the case of Shashti, protectress of children,
whose proper representative is “a rough stone as big as a man’s
head, smeared with red paint, and set at the foot of the sacred
vata-tree.” Like customs survived in Greece down to the classical
period. “The faces of the ancient gilded Dionysi at Corinth,” says
Mr. Lang, quoting Pausanias, “were smudged all over with cinnabar,
like fetish-stones in India or Africa.” In early South Italy, too,
the Priapus-Hermes, who protected the fields, had his face similarly
“daubed with minium.” Is it possible to dissever these facts from
the cannibal banquets of the Aztec gods, where the images had lumps of
palpitating human flesh thrust into their lips, {111}and where their
faces were smeared with the warm blood of the helpless victims?

Only in one instance, however, have I been able to trace the custom of
painting with red directly back to cannibalism, and that is among the
man-eaters of the New Hebrides, where, when a man died, and his body was
laid out in a piece of thick native cloth, “the face was kept exposed
and painted red.” I believe with this practice must ultimately be
correlated the red-painted faces of the Corinthian Dionysi.

Another point of considerable interest and importance in the evolution
of stone worship is connected with the migration of sacred stones. When
the Israelites left Egypt, according to the narrative in Exodus, they
carried the bones of Joseph with them. When Rachel left her father’s
tent she stole the family teraphim to accompany her on her wanderings.
When Æneas flew from burning Troy, he bore away to his ships his
country’s gods, his Lares and Penates. All of these tales, no doubt,
are equally unhistorical, but they represent what, to the people who
framed the legends, seemed perfectly natural and probable conduct. Just
in the same way, when stone-worshippers migrate from one country to
another, they are likely to carry with them their sacred stones, or at
least the most portable or holiest of the number.

Here is a very good illustrative case, once more from that most valuable
storehouse, Turner’s _Samoa_. The Fijian gods and goddesses we saw,
according to Tylor, “had their abodes or shrines in black stones like
smooth round millstones, and there received their offerings of food.”
But on a certain Samoan island, says Mr. Turner, “In a district said
to have been early populated by settlers from Fiji, a number of fancy
Fijian stones were kept in a temple, and worshipped in time of war. The
priest, in consulting them, built them up in the form of a wall, and
then watched to see how they fell. If they fell to the westward, it was
a sign that the enemy there was to be {112}driven; but if they fell to
eastward, that was a warning of defeat, and delay in making an attack
was ordered accordingly.”

I cannot find room here for many detailed instances of similar
migrations; but there are two examples in Britain so exceedingly
interesting that even in so hasty a notice I cannot pass them by without
a brief mention. The inner or smaller stones at Stonehenge are known to
be of remote origin, belonging to rocks not found nearer Salisbury
Plain than Cumberland in one direction or Belgium in the other. They are
surrounded by a group of much larger stones, arranged as trilithons, but
carved out of the common sarsen blocks distributed over the neighbouring
country. I have tried to show elsewhere that these smaller igneous
rocks, untouched by the tool, * were the ancient sacred stones of an
immigrant tribe that came into Britain from the Continent, probably
over a broad land-belt which then existed where the Straits of Dover now
flow; and that the strangers on their arrival in Britain erected these
their ancestral gods on the Plain of Amesbury, and further contributed
to their importance and appearance by surrounding them with a circle of
the biggest and most imposing grey-wethers that the new country in which
they had settled could easily afford.

     * So Moses in the legend commanded the children of Israel to
     build “an altar of whole stones, over which no man hath lift
     up any iron”; and so of the boulders composing the altar on
     Mount Ebal it was said, “Thou shah not lift up any iron tool
     upon them.” The conservatism of religion kept up the archaic
     fashion for sacred purposes.

The other case is that of the Scone stone. This sacred block, according
to the accredited legend, was originally the ancestral god of the Irish
Scots, on whose royal tumulus at Tara it once stood. It was carried by
them to Argyllshire on their first invasion, and placed in a cranny of
the wall (say modern versions) at Dunstaffnage Castle. When the Scotch
kings removed to Scone, Kenneth II. took the stone to his new lowland
residence. Thence Edward I. {113}carried it off to England, where it has
ever since remained in Westminster Abbey, as part of the chair in
which the sovereigns of Britain sit at their coronation. The immense
significance of these facts or tales will be seen more clearly when we
come to consider the analogies of the Hebrew ark. Meanwhile, it may help
to explain the coronation usage, and the legend that wherever the Stone
of Destiny is found “the Scots in place must reign,” if I add a
couple of analogous cases from the history of the same mixed Celtic
race. According to Dr. O&rsquo;Donovan, the inauguration stone of the
O’Donnells stood on a tumulus in the midst of a large plain; and on
this sacred stone, called the Flagstone of the Kings, the elected chief
stood to receive the white wand or sceptre of kingship. A cylindrical
obelisk, used for the same purpose, stands to this day, according to Dr.
Petrie, in the Rath-na-Riogh. So, too, M’Donald was crowned King of
the Isles, standing on a sacred stone, with an impression on top to
receive his feet. He based himself, as it were, upon the gods his
ancestors. The Tara stone even cried aloud, Professor Rhys tells us,
when the true king placed his feet above it. The coronation stone exists
in other countries; for example, in Hebrew history, or half-history, we
learn that when Abimelech was mads king it was “by the plain of
the pillar that was in Shechem”; and when Jehoash was anointed by
Jehoiada, “the king stood by a pillar, as the manner was.” In front
of the church of Sant’ Ambrogio at Milan stands the stone pillar at
which the Lombard kings and German emperors took the coronation oath,
under the ancient lime-trees which overshadow the piazza.

Now, it is quite true that Mr. Skene, the best authority on Celtic
Scotland, rejects this story of the Stone of Destiny in most parts as
legendary: he believes the Scone stone to have been merely the sacred
coronation-block of the Pictish Kings at Scone, and never to have
come from Ireland at all. Professor Ramsay thinks it is a piece of red
{114}sandstone broken off the rock of that district of Scotland. Even
Professor Rhys (who gives a most interesting account of the Tara Stone)
seems to have doubts as to the migration. But, true or not, the story
will amply serve my purpose here; for I use it only to illustrate the
equally dubious wanderings of a Hebrew sacred stone, at which we will
arrive in due time; and one legend is surely always the best possible
parallel of another.

In the course of ages, as religions develop, and especially as a few
great gods grow to overshadow the minor ancestral Lares and spirits,
it often comes about that sacred stones of the older faith have a new
religious significance given them in the later system. Thus we have seen
the Argives worshipped their old sacred stone under the name of Zeus
Kappotas; the Thespians identified theirs with the later Hellenic Eros;
and the Megarians considered a third as the representative of Phoebus.
The original local sacred stone of Delos has been found on the spot
where it originally stood, beneath the feet of the statue of the Delian
Apollo. And this, I am glad to see, is Mr. Andrew Lang’s view also;
for he remarks of the Greek unwrought stones, “They were blocks which
bore the names of gods, Hera, or Apollo, names perhaps given, as De
Brosses says, to the old fetishistic objects of worship, _after_
the anthropomorphic gods entered [I should say, were developed in]
Hellas.” So, too, in India, the local sacred stones have been
identified with the deities of the Hindu pantheon; Mr. Hislop remarks
that in every part of the Deccan (where Hinduism is of comparatively
late introduction) four or five stones may often be seen in the ryot’s
field, placed in a row and daubed with red paint, which the peasants
call the Five Pandavas; but, says Dr. Tylor, “he reasonably takes
these Hindu names to have superseded more ancient appellations.”
Islam, in like manner, has adopted the Kaaba, the great black stone
of the Holy Place at Mecca; and the Egyptian religion gave {115}a
new meaning to the pillar or monolith, by shaping it as an obelisk to
represent a ray of the rising sun-god.

Sometimes the sanctity of the antique stones was secured in the later
faith by connecting them with some legend or episode of the orthodox
religion. Thus the ancient sacred stone kept at Delphi--no doubt the
original oracle of that great shrine, as the rude Delian block was the
precursor of the Delian Apollo--was explained with reference to the
later Hellenic belief by the myth that it was the stone which Kronos
swallowed in mistake for Zeus: an explanation doubtless due to the fact
that this boulder was kept, like Monigan’s Irish idol and the Samoan
god, wrapped up in flannel; and in the myth, Rhea deceived Kronos by
offering him, instead of Zeus, a stone wrapped in swaddling-bands.
There is here indeed food for much reflection. The sacred stone of the
Trœzenians, in like manner, lay in front of the temple; but it was
Hellenised, so to speak, by the story that on it the Trœzenian elders
sat when they purified Orestes from the murder of his mother.

In modern Europe, as everybody knows, a similar Christianisation of holy
wells, holy stones, and holy places has been managed by connecting them
with legends of saints, or by the still simpler device of marking a
cross upon them. The cross has a threefold value: in the first place,
it drives away from their accustomed haunts the ancient gods or spirits,
always envisaged in early Christian and mediæval thought as devils or
demons; in the second place, it asserts the supremacy of the new faith;
and in the third place, by conferring a fresh sanctity upon the old holy
place or object, it induces the people to worship the cross by the
mere habit of resorting to the shrine at which their ancestors so long
worshipped. Gregory’s well-known advice to St. Augustine on this
matter is but a single example of what went on over all Christendom.
In many cases, crosses in Britain are still found firmly fixed in old
sacred stones, usually recognisable by their unwrought condition. The
finest {116}example in Europe is probably the gigantic monolith of
Plumen in Brittany, topped by an insignificant little cross, and still
resorted to by the peasants (especially the childless) as a great place
of worship. The prehistoric monuments of Narvia in the Isle of Man have
been Christianised by having crosses deeply incised upon them. Other
cases, like the Black Stones of Iona, which gave sanctity to that Holy
Isle long before the time of Columba, will doubtless occur at once to
every reader. With many of the Scotch sculptured stones, it is difficult
to decide whether they were originally erected as crosses, or are
prehistoric monuments externally Christianised.

I have thus endeavoured briefly to suggest the ultimate derivation of
all sacred stones from sepulchral monuments, and to point out the very
large part which they bear in the essential of religion--that is to say,
worship--everywhere. There is, however, one particular application to
which I wish to call special attention, because of its peculiar
interest as regards the origin of the monotheistic god of Judaism and
Christianity. Hitherto in this chapter, I have intentionally made but
very few allusions to the faith and the sacred stones of the Hebrews,
because I wished first to give a general view of the whole ramifications
and modifications of stone-worship before coming down to the particular
instance in which we modern Europeans are most deeply interested. I will
now, however, give a brief summary of what seems to me most suggestive
and important in the early Semitic stone-cult. These results are no
doubt already familiar in outline to most cultivated readers, but it
is possible they may appear in a somewhat new light when regarded in
connexion with the general history of stone-worship as here elucidated.

That the Semites, as well as other early nations, were stone-worshippers
we know from a great number of positive instances. The stone pillars of
Baal and the wooden Ashera cones were the chief objects of adoration in
the Phoenician religion. The Stone of Bethel was apparently a menhir:
{117}the cairn of Mizpeh was doubtless a sepulchral monument. The
Israelites under Joshua, we are told, built a Gilgal of twelve standing
stones; and other instances in the early traditions of the Hebrews will
be noticed in their proper place later on. Similarly, among the Arabs of
the time of Mohammed, two of the chief deities were Manah and Lât,
the one a rock, the other a sacred stone or stone idol: and the Kaaba
itself, the great black stone of local worship, even the Prophet was
compelled to recognise and Islamise by adopting it bodily into his
monotheistic religion.

The stone worship of the Semites at large, though comparatively
neglected by Professor Robertson Smith, must have played a large part
in the religion of that race, from which the Hebrews were a special
offshoot. “In Arabia,” says Professor Smith, “where sacrifice by
fire was almost unknown, we find no proper altar, but in its place a
rude pillar or heap of stones, beside which the victim is slain, the
blood being poured out over the stone or at its base.” To the great
orientalist, it is true, the sacred stone or altar, like the sacred
tree and the sacred fountain, are nothing more than “common symbols
at sanctuaries”; he thinks of them not as gods but merely as
representatives of the god, arbitrarily chosen. After the evidence
I have already adduced, however, I think it will be seen that this
position is altogether untenable; indeed, Dr. Smith himself uses many
phrases in this connexion which enables us to see the true state of the
case far more clearly than he himself did. “The sacred stones [of the
Arabs], which are already mentioned by Herodotus, are called _ansab_,
i.e., stones set up, pillars. We also find the name _ghariy_,
‘blood-bedaubed,&rsquo; with reference to the ritual just described [of
sacrifice at the _nosb_ or sacred pillar]. The meaning of this ritual
will occupy us later: meantime the thing to be noted is that the altar
is only a modification of the _nosb_, and that the rude Arabian usage
is the primitive type out of which all the elaborate altar ceremonies
of the {118}more cultivated Semites grew. Whatever else was done in
connexion with a sacrifice, the primitive rite of sprinkling or dashing
the blood against the altar, or allowing it to flow down on the ground
at its base, was hardly ever omitted; and this practice was not peculiar
to the Semites, but was equally the rule with the Greeks and Romans, and
indeed with the ancient nations generally.”

“It is certain,” says Professor Smith again, “that the original
altar among the Northern Semites, as well as among the Arabs, was a
great stone or cairn, at which the blood of the victim was shed.”
There is no difference, he declares, between the Hebrew altar and the
Arabian standing stone. “Monolithic pillars or cairns of stone are
frequently mentioned in the more ancient parts of the Old Testament as
standing at Sanctuaries, generally in connexion with a sacred legend
about the occasion on which they were set up by some famous patriarch
or hero. In the biblical story, they usually appear as mere memorial
structures without any definite ritual significance; but the
pentateuchal law looks on the use of sacred pillars as idolatrous. This
is the best evidence that such pillars held an important place among the
appurtenances of Canaanite temples; and as Hosea speaks of the pillar
as an indispensable feature in the sanctuaries of Northern Israel in
his time, we may be sure that by the mass of the Hebrews the pillars of
Shechem, Bethel, Gilgal, and other shrines were looked upon, not as mere
memorials of historical events, but as necessary parts of the ritual
apparatus of a place of worship.... From these evidences, and especially
from the fact that libations of the same kind are applied to both, it
seems clear that the altar is a differentiated form of the primitive
rude stone pillar. But the sacred stone is more than an altar, for in
Hebrew and Canaanite sanctuaries the altar, in its developed form as a
table or hearth, does not supersede the pillar; the two are found side
by side at the same sanctuary, the altar as a piece of sacrificial
apparatus, and the pillar as a visible symbol or embodiment of the
{119}presence of the deity, which in process of time comes to be
fashioned and carved in various ways, till ultimately it becomes a
statue or anthropomorphic idol of stone, just as the sacred tree or post
was ultimately developed into an image of wood.”

In spite of much obvious groping in the dark in this and other passages
of the _Religion of the Semites_, it is clear that the learned professor
recognised at least one central fact--“the sacred stone at Semitic
sanctuaries was from the first an object of worship, a sort of rude idol
in which the divinity was somehow supposed to be present.” Again, he
notes that “Jacob’s pillar is more than a mere landmark, for it is
anointed, just as idols were in antiquity, and the pillar itself, not
the spot on which it stood, is called ‘the house of God,’ as if the
deity were conceived actually to dwell in the stone, or manifest himself
therein to his worshippers. And this is the conception which appears to
have been associated with sacred stones everywhere. When the Arab daubed
blood on the _nosh_, his object was to bring the offering into direct
contact with the deity; and in like manner the practice of stroking the
sacred stone with the hand is identical with the practice of touching or
stroking the garments or beard of a man in acts of supplication before
him.” Elsewhere he says: “So far as evidence from tradition and
ritual goes, we can only think of the sacred stone as consecrated by the
actual presence of the godhead, so that whatever touched it was brought
into immediate contact with the deity.” And he quotes a line from an
Arab poet in which the Arabian gods are expressly described as “gods
of stone.”

It is thus clear that sacred stones were common objects of worship with
the Semites in general, and also with the Hebrew people in particular.
But after the exclusive worship of Jahweh, the local Jewish god,
had grown obligatory among the Jews, it became the policy of the
“Jehovist” priests to Jehovise and to consecrate the sacred stones
of Palestine by bringing them into connexion {120}with the Jehovistic
legend and the tales of the Patriarchs. Thus Professor Cheyne comments
as follows upon the passage in Isaiah where the prophet mocks the
partizan of the old polytheistic creed as a stone-worshipper--“Among
the smooth stones of the valley is thy portion: They, they are thy lot:
Even to them hast thou poured a drink offering: Thou hast offered a meat
offering: “The large smooth stones referred to above were the fetishes
of the primitive Semitic races, and anointed with oil, according to a
widely spread custom. It was such a stone which Jacob took for a pillow,
and afterwards consecrated by pouring oil upon it. The early Semites and
reactionary idolatrous Israelites called such stones Bethels.... i.e.,
houses of _El_ (the early Semitic word for God) *.... In spite of the
efforts of the ‘Jehovist’ who desired to convert these ancient
fetishes into memorials of patriarchal history, the old heathenish use
of them seems to have continued especially in secluded places.”

     * Say rather, &ldquo;for a god.”

Besides the case of the stone at Bethel, there is the later one (in our
narrative) when Jacob and Laban made a covenant, “and Jacob took a
stone, and set it up for a pillar. And Jacob said unto his brethren,
Gather stones; and they took stones and made an heap: and they did eat
there upon the heap.” So, once more, at Shalem, he erects an altar
called El-Elohe-Israel; he sets a pillar upon the grave of Rachel, and
another at the place at Luz where God appeared to him. Of like import is
the story of the twelve stones which the twelve men take out of Jordan
to commemorate the passage of the tribes. All are clearly attempts to
Jehovise these early sacred stones or local gods by connecting them with
incidents in the Jehovistic version of the ancient Hebrew legends.

That such stones, however, were worshipped as deities in early times,
before the cult of Jahweh had become an exclusive one among his
devotees, is evident from the Jehovistic {121}narrative itself, which
has not wholly succeeded in blotting out all traces of earlier religion.
Samuel judged Israel every year at Bethel, the place of Jacob’s sacred
pillar: at Gilgal, the place where Joshua’s twelve stones were set
up; and at Mizpeh, where stood the cairn surmounted by the pillar of
Laban’s covenant. In other words, these were the sanctuaries of the
chief ancient gods of Israel. Samuel himself “took a stone and set it
between Mizpeh and Shem and its very name, Eben-ezer, “the stone of
help,” shows that it was originally worshipped before proceeding on
warlike expeditions, though the Jehovistic gloss, “saying, Hitherto
the Lord hath helped us,” does its best, of course, to obscure the
real meaning. So at Peran, in New Guinea, Mr. Chalmers saw “a large
peculiarly-shaped stone,” by name Ravai, considered very sacred.
Sacrifices are made to it, and it is more particularly addressed in
times of fighting. “Before setting forth, offerings are presented,
with food,” and the stone is entreated to precede the warriors into
battle. Wherever a stone has a name, it is almost certainly of mortuary
origin. It was to the stone-circle of Gilgal, once more, that Samuel
directed Saul to go, saying, “I will come down unto thee, to offer
burnt-offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace-offerings.”
It was at the cairn of Mizpeh that Saul was chosen king; and after the
victory over the Ammonites, Saul went once more to the great Stonehenge
at Gilgal to “renew the kingdom,” and “there they made Saul
king before Jahweh in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of
peace-offerings before Jahweh.” This passage is a very instructive and
important one, because here we see that in the opinion of the writer at
least Jahweh was then domiciled at Gilgal, amid the other sacred stones
of that holy circle.

Observe, &ldquo;however, that when Saul was directed to go to find his
father’s asses, he was sent first to Rachel’s pillar at Telzah, and
then to the plain of Tabor, where he was to meet “three men going up
to God [not to Jahweh] at Bethel,” {122}evidently to sacrifice, “one
carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of bread,
and another carrying a bottle of wine.” These and many other like
memorials of stone-worship lie thickly scattered through the early books
of the Hebrew Scriptures, sometimes openly avowed, and sometimes cloaked
under a thin veil of Jehovism.

On the other hand, at the present day, the Palestine exploration has
shown that no rude stone monuments exist in Palestine proper, though
east of the Jordan they are common in all parts of the country. How,
then, are we to explain their disappearance? Major Conder thinks that
when pure Jehovism finally triumphed under Hezekiah and Josiah, the
Jehovists destroyed all these “idolatrous” stones throughout the
Jewish dominions, in accordance with the injunctions in the Book of
Deuteronomy to demolish the religious emblems of the Canaanites. Jahweh,
the god of the Hebrews, was a jealous God, and he would tolerate no
alien sacred stones within his own jurisdiction.

And who or what was this Jahweh himself, this local and ethnic god of
the Israelites, who would suffer no other god or sacred monolith to live
near him?

I will not lay stress upon the point that when Joshua was dying,
according to the legend, he “took a great stone” and set it up by
an oak that was by the sanctuary of Jahweh, saying that it had heard all
the words of Jahweh. That document is too doubtful in terms to afford
us much authority. But I will merely point out that at the time when we
first seem to catch clear historic glimpses of true Jahweh worship, we
find Jahweh, whoever or whatever that mystic object might have been,
located with his ark at the Twelve Stones at Gilgal. It is quite clear
that in “the camp at Gilgal,” as the later compilers believed,
Jahweh, god of Israel, who had brought his people up out of Egypt,
remained till the conquest of the land was completed. But after the end
of the conquest, the {123}tent in which he dwelt was removed to Shiloh;
and that Jahweh went with it is clear from the fact that Joshua cast
lots for the land there “before Jahweh, our God.” He was there still
when Hannah and her husband went up to Shiloh to sacrifice unto Jahweh;
and when Samuel ministered unto Jahweh before Eli the priest. That
Jahweh made a long stay at Shiloh is, therefore, it would seem, a
true old tradition--a tradition of the age just before the historical
beginnings of the Hebrew annals.

But Jahweh was an object of portable size, for, omitting for the present
the descriptions in the Pentateuch, which seem likely to be of late
date, and not too trustworthy, through their strenuous Jehovistic
editing, he was carried from Shiloh in his ark to the front during the
great battle with the Philistines at Ebenezer; and the Philistines were
afraid, for they said, “A god is come into the camp.” But when the
Philistines captured the ark, the rival god, Dagon, fell down and broke
in pieces--so Hebrew legend declared--before the face of Jahweh. After
the Philistines restored the sacred object, it rested for a time
at Kirjath-jearim, till David, on the capture of Jerusalem from the
Jebusites, went down to that place to bring up from thence the ark of
the god; and as it went, on a new cart, they “played before Jahweh
on all manner of instruments,” and David himself “danced before
Jahweh.” Jahweh was then placed in the tent or tabernacle that David
had prepared for him, till Solomon built the first temple, “the house
of Jahweh,” and Jahweh’s ark was set up in it, “in the oracle of
the house, the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.”
Just so Mr. Chalmers tells us that when he was at Peran, in New Guinea,
the peculiarly-shaped holy stone, Ravai, and the two wooden idols, Epe
and Kivava, “made long ago and considered very sacred,” were for the
moment “located in an old house, until all the arrangements necessary
for their removal to the splendid new dubu prepared for them are
completed.” And so, too, at the opposite end of the scale of
civilisation, as Mr. {124}Lang puts it, “the fetish-stones of Greece
were those which occupied the holy of holies of the most ancient
temples, the mysterious fanes within dark cedar or cypress groves, to
which men were hardly admitted.”

That Jahweh himself, in the most ancient traditions of the race, was
similarly concealed within his chest or ark in the holy of holies,
is evident, I think, to any attentive reader. It is true, the later
Jehovistic glosses of Exodus and Deuteronomy, composed after the
Jehovistic worship had become purified and spiritualised, do their best
to darken the comprehension of this matter by making the presence of
Jahweh seem always incorporeal; and even in the earlier traditions, the
phrase “the ark of the covenant of Jahweh” is often substituted for
the simpler and older one, “the ark of Jahweh.” But through all the
disfigurements with which the priestly scribes of the age of Josiah and
the sacerdotalists of the return from the captivity have overlaid the
primitive story, we can still see clearly in many places that Jahweh
himself was at first personally present in the ark that covered him.
And though the scribes (evidently ashamed of the early worship they
had outlived) protest somewhat vehemently more than once, “There was
nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone which Moses put there
at Horeb, when Jahweh made a covenant with the children of Israel, when
they came out of the land of Egypt,” yet this much at least even they
admit--that the object or objects concealed in the ark consisted of a
sculptured stone or stones; and that to dance or sing before this stone
or these stones was equivalent to dancing or singing before the face of
Jahweh.

The question whether the mysterious body concealed in the ark was or was
not a lingam or other phallic object I purposely omit to discuss here,
as not cognate to our present enquiry. It is sufficient to insist that
from the evidence before us, first, it _was_ Jahweh himself, and second,
it was an object made of stone. Further than that ’twere {125}curious
to enquire, and I for one do not desire to pry into the mysteries.

Not to push the argument too far, then, we may say this much is fairly
certain. The children of Israel in early times carried about with them
a tribal god, Jahweh, whose presence in their midst was intimately
connected with a certain ark or chest, containing a stone object or
objects. This chest was readily portable, and could be carried to the
front in case of warfare. They did not know the origin of the object in
the ark with certainty, but they regarded it emphatically as “Jahweh
their god, which led them out of the land of Egypt.” Even after its
true nature had been spiritualised away into a great national deity, the
most unlimited and incorporeal the world has ever known (as we get him
in the best and purest work of the prophets), the imagery of later times
constantly returns to the old idea of a stone pillar or menhir. In the
embellished account of the exodus from Egypt, Jahweh goes before the
Israelites as a pillar or monolith of cloud by day and of fire by night.
According to Levitical law his altar must be built of unhewn stone,
“for if thou lift up thy tool upon it thou hast polluted it.” It is
as a Rock that the prophets often figuratively describe Jahweh, using
the half-forgotten language of an earlier day to clothe their own
sublimer and more purified conceptions. It is to the Rock of Israel--the
sacred stone of the tribe--that they look for succour. Nay, even when
Josiah accepted the forged roll of the law and promised to abide by
it, “the king stood by a pillar (a menhir) and made a covenant before
Jahweh.” Even to the last we see in vague glimpses the real original
nature of the worship of that jealous god who caused Dagon to break
in pieces before him, and would allow no other sacred stones to remain
undemolished within his tribal boundaries.

I do not see, therefore, how we can easily avoid the obvious inference
that Jahweh, the god of the Hebrews, who later became sublimated and
etherealised into the God {126}of Christianity, was in his origin
nothing more nor less than the ancestral sacred stone of the people of
Israel, however sculptured, and perhaps, in the very last resort of all,
the unhewn monumental pillar of some early Semitic sheikh or chieftain.




