CHAPTER II.--RELIGION AND MYTHOLOGY.

|At {020}the very outset of the profound enquiry on which we are now
about to embark, we are met by a difficulty of considerable magnitude.
In the opinion of most modern mythologists mythology is the result of
“a disease of language.” We are assured by many eminent men that the
origin of religion is to be sought, not in savage ideas about ghosts
and spirits, the Dead Man and his body or his surviving double, but in
primitive misconceptions of the meaning of words which had reference
to the appearance of the Sun and the Clouds, the Wind and the Rain, the
Dawn and the Dusk, the various phenomena of meteorology in general. If
this be so, then our attempt to derive the evolution of gods from the
crude ideas of early men about their dead is clearly incorrect; the
analogy of Christianity which we have already alleged is a mere will
o’ the wisp; and the historical Jesus himself may prove in the
last resort to be an alias of the sun-god or an embodiment of the
vine-spirit.

I do not believe these suggestions are correct. It seems to me that
the worship of the sun, moon, and stars, instead of being an element in
primitive religion, is really a late and derivative type of adoration;
and that mythology is mistaken in the claims it makes for its own
importance in the genesis of the idea of a God or gods. In order,
however, to clear the ground for a fair start in this direction, we
ought, I think, to begin by enquiring into the relative positions of
mythology and religion. I shall therefore {021}devote a preliminary
chapter to the consideration of this important subject.

Religion, says another group of modern thinkers, of whom Mr. Edward
Clodd is perhaps the most able English exponent, “grew out of fear.”
It is born of man’s terror of the great and mysterious natural agencies
by which he is surrounded. Now I am not concerned to deny that many
mythological beings of various terrible forms do really so originate. I
would readily accept some such vague genesis for many of the dragons and
monsters which abound in all savage or barbaric imaginings--for
Gorgons and Hydras and Chimæras dire, and other manifold shapes of the
superstitiously appalling. I would give up to Mr. Clodd the Etruscan
devils and the Hebrew Satan, the Grendels and the Fire-drakes, the
whole brood of Cerberus, Briareus, the Cyclops, the Centaurs. None of
these, however, is a god or anything like one. They have no more to do
with religion, properly so called, than the unicorn of the royal arms
has to do with British Christianity. A god, as I understand the
word, and as the vast mass of mankind has always understood it, is
a supernatural being to be revered and worshipped. He stands to his
votaries, on the whole, as Dr. Robertson Smith has well pointed out, in
a kindly and protecting relation. He may be angry with them at times, to
be sure; but his anger is temporary and paternal alone: his permanent
attitude towards his people is one of friendly concern; he is worshipped
as a beneficent and generous Father. It is the origin of gods in this
strictest sense that concerns us here, not the origin of those vague
and formless creatures which are dreaded, not worshipped, by primitive
humanity.

Bearing this distinction carefully in mind, let us proceed to consider
the essentials of religion. If you were to ask almost any intelligent
and unsophisticated child, “What is religion?” he would answer
offhand, with the clear vision of youth, “Oh, it’s saying your
prayers, and heading your Bible, and singing hymns, and going to church
{022}or to chapel on Sundays.” If you were to ask any intelligent
and unsophisticated Hindu peasant the same question, he would answer in
almost the self-same spirit, “Oh, it is doing poojah regularly,
and paying your dues every day to Mahadeo.” If you were to ask any
simple-minded African savage, he would similarly reply, “It is giving
the gods flour, and oil, and native beer, and goat-mutton,” And
finally if you were to ask a devout Italian contadino, he would
instantly say, “It is offering up candles and prayers to the Madonna,
attending mass, and remembering the saints on every festa.”

And they would all be quite right. This, in its essence, is precisely
what we call religion. Apart from the special refinements of the
higher minds in particular creeds, which strive to import into it all,
according to their special tastes or fancies, a larger or smaller dose
of philosophy, or of metaphysics, or of ethics, or of mysticism, this
is just what religion means and has always meant to the vast majority
of the human species. What is common to it throughout is Custom
or Practice: a certain set of more or less similar Observances:
propitiation, prayer, praise, offerings: the request for divine favours,
the deprecation of divine anger or other misfortunes: and as the outward
and visible adjuncts of all these, the altar, the sacrifice, the temple,
the church; priesthood, services, vestments, ceremonial.

What is not at all essential to religion in its wider aspect--taking
the world round, both past and present, Pagan, Buddhist, Mohammadan,
Christian, savage, and civilised--is the ethical element, properly so
called. And what is very little essential indeed is the philosophical
element, theology or mythology, the abstract theory of spiritual
existences. This theory, to be sure, is in each country or race closely
related with religion under certain aspects; and the stories told about
the gods or God are much mixed up with the cult itself in the minds
of worshippers; but they are no proper part of religion, strictly
so called. In a single word, I contend that religion, as such,
is essentially {023}practical: theology or mythology, as such, is
essentially theoretical.

Moreover, I also believe, and shall attempt to show, that the two have
to a large extent distinct origins and roots: that the union between
them is in great part adventitious: and that, therefore, to account
for or explain the one is by no means equivalent to accounting for and
explaining the other.

Frank recognition of this difference of origin between religion and
mythology would, I imagine, largely reconcile the two conflicting
schools of thought which at present divide opinion between them on this
interesting problem in the evolution of human ideas. On the one side,
we have the mythological school of interpreters, whether narrowly
linguistic, like Professor Max Müller, or broadly anthropological, like
Mr. Andrew Lang, attacking the problem from the point of view of myth or
theory alone. On the other side, we have the truly religious school of
interpreters, like Mr. Herbert Spencer, and to some extent Mr. Tylor,
attacking the problem from the point of view of practice or real
religion. The former school, it seems to me, has failed to perceive
that what it is accounting for is not the origin of religion at all--of
worship, which is the central-root idea of all religious observance, or
of the temple, the altar, the priest, and the offering, which are its
outer expression--but merely the origin of myth or fable, the mass
of story and legend about various beings, real or imaginary, human
or divine, which naturally grows up in every primitive community. The
latter school, on the other hand, while correctly interpreting the
origin of all that is essential and central in religion, have perhaps
underestimated the value of their opponents&rsquo; work through regarding it
as really opposed to their own, instead of accepting what part of it
may be true in the light of a contribution to an independent but allied
branch of the same enquiry.

In short, if the view here suggested be correct, Spencer and {024}Tylor
have paved the way to a true theory of the Origin of Religion; Max
Müller, Lang, and the other mythologists have thrown out hints of
varying value towards a true theory of the Origin of Mythology, or of
its more modern equivalent and successor, Theology.

A brief outline of facts will serve to bring into clearer relief
this view of religion as essentially practical--a set of observances,
rendered inevitable by the primitive data of human psychology. It will
then be seen that what is fundamental and essential in religion is the
body of practices, remaining throughout all stages of human development
the same, or nearly the same, in spite of changes of mythological or
theological theory; and that what is accidental and variable is the
particular verbal explanation or philosophical reason assigned for the
diverse rites and ceremonies.

In its simplest surviving savage type, religion consists wholly and
solely in certain acts of deference paid by the living to the persons of
the dead. I shall try to show in the sequel that down to its most highly
evolved modern type in the most cultivated societies, precisely similar
acts of deference, either directly to corpses or ghosts as such, or
indirectly to gods who were once ghosts, or were developed from ghosts,
form its essence still. But to begin with I will try to bring a few
simple instances of the precise nature of religion in its lowest
existing savage mode.

I might if I chose take my little collection of illustrative facts from
some theoretical writer, like Mr. Herbert Spencer, who has collected
enough instances in all conscience to prove this point; but I prefer
to go straight to an original observer of savage life and habit, a
Presbyterian missionary in Central Africa--the Rev. Duff Macdonald,
author of _Africana_--who had abundant opportunities at the Blantyre
Mission for learning the ideas and practice of the Soudanese natives,
and who certainly had no theoretic predisposition towards resolving all
religious notions into {025}the primitive respect and reverence for the
dead or the worship of ancestors.

Here, in outline, but in Mr. Macdonald’s own words, are the ideas and
observances which this careful and accurate investigator found current
among the tribes of the heart of Africa. “I do not think,” he says,
“I have admitted any point of importance without having heard at least
four natives on the subject. The statements are translations, as far as
possible, from the _ipsissima verba_ of the negroes.”

The tribes he lived among “are unanimous in saying that there is
something beyond the body which they call spirit. Every human body at
death is forsaken by this spirit.” That is the almost universal though
not quite primitive belief, whose necessary genesis has been well traced
out by Mr. Herbert Spencer, and more recently in America with great
vigour and clearness by Mr. Lester Ward.

“Do these spirits ever die?” Mr. Macdonald asks. “Some,” he
answers, “I have heard affirm that it is possible for a troublesome
spirit to be killed. Others give this a direct denial. Many, like
Kumpama, or Cherasulo, say, ‘You ask me whether a man’s spirit ever
dies. I cannot tell. I have never been in the spirit-world, but this I
am certain of, that spirits live for a very long time.’”

On the question, “Who the gods are?” Mr. Macdonald says: “In
all our translations of Scripture where we found the word God we used
_Mulungu_; but this word is chiefly used by the natives as a general
name for spirit. The spirit of a deceased man is called his Mulungu,
and all the prayers and offerings of the living are presented to such
spirits of the dead. It is here that we find the great centre of the
native religion. The spirits of the dead are the gods of the living.

“Where are these gods found? At the grave? No. The villagers shrink
from yonder gloomy place that lies far beyond their fields on the bleak
mountain side. It is only {026}when they have to lay another sleeper
beside his forefathers that they will go there. Their god is not the
body in the grave, but the spirit, and they seek this spirit at the
place where their departed kinsman last lived among them. It is the
great tree at the verandah of the dead man’s house that is their
temple; and if no tree grow here they erect a little shade, and
there perform their simple rites. If this spot become too public,
the offerings may be defiled, and the sanctuary will be removed to a
carefully-selected spot under some beautiful tree. Very frequently a
man presents an offering at the top of his own bed beside his head. He
wishes his god to come to him and whisper in his ear as he sleeps.”

And here, again, we get the origin of nature-worship:

“The spirit of an old chief may have a whole mountain for his
residence, but he dwells chiefly on the cloudy summit. There he sits
to receive the worship of his votaries, and to send down the refreshing
showers in answer to their prayers.”

Almost as essential to religion as these prime factors in its
evolution--the god, worship, offerings, presents, holy places,
temples--is the existence of a priesthood. Here is how the Central
Africans arrive at that special function:

“A certain amount of etiquette is observed in approaching the gods.
In no case can a little boy or girl approach these deities, neither can
anyone that has not been at the mysteries. The common qualification
is that a person has attained a certain age, about twelve or fourteen
years, and has a house of his own. Slaves seldom pray, except when they
have had a dream. Children that have had a dream tell their mother,
who approaches the deity on their behalf. (A present for the god is
necessary, and the slave or child may not have it.)

“Apart from the case of dreams and a few such private matters, it
is not usual for anyone to approach the gods except the chief, of the
village. He is the recognised high priest {027}who presents prayers and
offerings on behalf of all that live in his village. If the chief
is from home his wife will act, and if both are absent, his younger
brother. The natives worship not so much individually as in villages or
communities. Their religion is more a public than a private matter.”

But there are also further reasons why priests are necessary.
Relationship forms always a good ground for intercession. A mediator is
needed.

“The chief of a village,” says Mr. Macdonald, “has another title
to the priesthood. It is his relatives that are the village gods.
Everyone that lives in the village recognises these gods; but if anyone
remove to another village he changes his gods. He recognises now the
gods of his new chief. One wishing to pray to the god (or gods) of any
village naturally desires to have his prayers presented through the
village chief, because the latter is nearly related to the village god,
and may be expected to be better listened to than a stranger.”

A little further on Mr. Macdonald says: “On the subject of the village
gods opinions differ. Some say that every one in the village, whether a
relative of the chief or not, must worship the forefathers of the chief.
Others say that a person not related to the chief must worship his own
forefathers, otherwise their spirits will bring trouble upon him. To
reconcile these authorities we may mention that nearly everyone in the
village is related to its chief, or if not related is, in courtesy,
considered so. Any person not related to the village chief would be
polite enough on all public occasions to recognise the village god:
on occasions of private prayer (which are not so numerous as in
Christendom) he would approach the spirits of his own forefathers.
Besides, there might be a god of the land. The chief Kapeni prays to his
own relatives, and also to the old gods of the place. His own relatives
he approaches himself; the other deities he may also approach himself,
but he often {028}finds people more closely related and consequently
more acceptable to the old gods of the land.”

The African pantheon is thus widely peopled. Elimination and natural
selection next give one the transition from the ghost to the god,
properly so called.

“The gods of the natives then are nearly as numerous as their dead. It
is impossible to worship all; a selection must be made, and, as we have
indicated, each worshipper turns most naturally to the spirits of his
own departed relatives; but his gods are too many still, and in farther
selecting he turns to those that have lived nearest his own time.
Thus the chief of a village will not trouble himself about his
great-great-grandfather: he will present his offering to his own
immediate predecessor, and say, ‘O father, I do not know all your
relatives, you know them all, invite them to feast with you.&rsquo; The
offering is not simply for himself, but for himself and all his
relatives.”

Ordinary ghosts are soon forgotten with the generation that knew them.
Not so a few select spirits, the Cæsars and Napoleons, the Charlemagnes
and Timurs of savage empires.

“A great chief that has been successful in his wars does not pass out
of memory so soon. He may become the god of a mountain or a lake, and
may receive homage as a local deity long after his own descendants have
been driven from the spot. When there is a supplication for rain the
inhabitants of the country pray not so much to their own forefathers as
to the god of yonder mountain on whose shoulders the great rain-clouds
repose. (Smaller hills are seldom honoured with a deity.)”

Well, in all this we get, it seems to me, the very essentials and
universals of religion generally,--the things without which no religion
could exist--the vital part, without the ever-varying and changeable
additions of mere gossiping mythology. In the presents brought to the
dead man’s grave to appease the ghost, we have the central element of
all worship, the practical key of all cults, past or present.

On {029}the other hand, mythologists tell us nothing about the origin of
prayer and sacrifice: they put us off with stories of particular gods,
without explaining to us how those gods ever came to be worshipped. Now,
mythology is a very interesting study in its own way: but to treat as
religion a mass of stories and legends about gods or saints, with hardly
a single living element of practice or sacrifice, seems to me simply to
confuse two totally distinct branches of human enquiry. The Origin of
Tales has nothing at all to do with the Origin of Worship.

When we come to read Mr. Macdonald’s account of a native funeral,
on the other hand, we are at once on a totally different tack; we can
understand, as by an electric flash, the genesis of the primitive acts
of sacrifice and religion.

“Along with the deceased is buried a considerable part of his
property. We have already seen that his bed is buried with him; so also
are all his clothes. If he possesses several tusks of ivory, one tusk or
more is ground to a powder between two stones and put beside him. Beads
are also ground down in the same way. These precautions are taken to
prevent the witch (who is supposed to be answerable for his death) from
making any use of the ivory or beads.

“If the deceased owned several slaves, an enormous hole is dug for a
grave. The slaves are now brought forward. They may be either cast into
the pit alive, or the undertakers may cut all their throats. The body of
their master or their mistress is then laid down to rest above theirs,
and the grave is covered in.

“After this the women come forward with the offerings of food, and
place them at the head of the grave. The dishes in which the food was
brought are left behind. The pot that held the drinking-water of the
deceased and his drinking-cup are also left with him. These, too, might
be coveted by the witch, but a hole is pierced in the pot, and the
drinking calabash is broken.

“The {030}man has now gone from the society of the living, and he is
expected to share the meal thus left at his grave with those that have
gone before him. The funeral party breaks up; they do not want to visit
the grave of their friend again without a very good reason. Anyone found
among the graves may be taken for a cannibal. Their friend has become
a citizen of a different village. He is with all his relatives of the
past. He is entitled to offerings or presents which may come to him
individually or through his chief. These offerings in most cases he will
share with others, just as he used to do when alive,” Sometimes the
man may be buried in his own hut.

“In this case the house is not taken down, but is generally covered
with cloth, and the verandah becomes the place for presenting offerings.
His old house thus becomes a kind of temple.... The deceased is now in
the spirit-world, and receives offerings and adoration. He is addressed
as &lsquo;Our great spirit that has gone before.’ If anyone dream of him. it
is at once concluded that the spirit is &lsquo;up to something.’ Very likely
he wants to have some of the survivors for his companions. The dreamer
hastens to appease the spirit by an offering.”

So real is this society of the dead that Mr. Macdonald says: “The
practice of sending messengers to the world beyond the grave is found on
the West Coast. A chief summons a slave, delivers to him a message, and
then cuts off his head. If the chief forget anything that he wanted to
say, he sends another slave as a postscript.”

I have quoted at such length from this recent and extremely able work
because I want to bring into strong relief the fact that we have here
going on under our very eyes, from day to day, _de novo_, the entire
genesis of new gods and goddesses, and of all that is most central
and essential to religion--worship, prayer, the temple, the altar,
priesthood, sacrifice. Nothing that the mythologists can tell us about
the Sun or the Moon, the Dawn or the Stormcloud, {031}Little Red Riding
Hood or Cinderella and the Glass Slipper, comes anywhere near the Origin
of Religion in these its central and universal elements. Those stories
or guesses may be of immense interest and importance as contributions
to the history of ideas in our race; but nothing we can learn about the
savage survival in the myth of Cupid or Psyche, or about the primitive
cosmology in the myth of the children of Kronos, helps us to get one
inch nearer the origin of God or of prayer, of worship, of religious
ceremonial, of the temple, the church, the sacrifice, the mass, or any
other component part of what we really know as Religion in the concrete.
These myths may be sometimes philosophic guesses, sometimes primitive
folk-tales, but they certainly are not the truths of Religion. On the
other hand, the living facts, here so simply detailed by a careful,
accurate, and unassuming observer, strengthened by the hundreds of
similar facts collected by Tylor, Spencer, and others, do help us at
once to understand the origin of the central core and kernel of religion
as universally practised all the world over.

For, omitting for the present the mythological and cosmological
factor, which so often comes in to obscure the plain religious facts
in missionary narrative or highly-coloured European accounts of
native beliefs, what do we really find as the underlying truths of all
religion? That all the world over practices essentially similar to those
of these savage Central Africans prevail among mankind; practices whose
affiliation upon the same primitive ideas has been abundantly proved
by Mr. Herbert Spencer; practices which have for their essence the
propitiation or adulation of a spiritual being or beings, derived from
ghosts, and conceived of as similar, in all except the greatness of
the connoted attributes, to the souls of men. “Whenever the [Indian]
villagers are questioned about their creed,” says Sir William Hunter,
“the same answer is invariably given: ‘The common people have no
idea of religion, {032}but to do right [ceremonially] and to worship the
village god.”

In short, I maintain that religion is not mainly, as the mistaken
analogy of Christian usage makes us erroneously call it, Faith or Creed,
but simply and solely Ceremony, Custom, or Practice. And I am glad to
say that, for early Semitic times at least, Professor Robertson Smith is
of the same opinion.

If one looks at the vast mass of the world, ancient and modern, it
is quite clear that religion consists, and has always consisted, of
observances essentially similar to those just described among the
Central African tribes. Its core is worship. Its centre is the God--that
is to say, the Dead Ancestor or Relative. The religion of China is
to this day almost entirely one of pure ancestor-cult. The making of
offerings and burning of joss-paper before the Family Dead form its
principal ceremonies. In India, while the three great gods of the
mystical Brahmanist philosophy are hardly worshipped in actual practice
at all, every community and every house has its own particular gods and
its own special cult of its little domestic altar.

“The first Englishman,” says Sir William Hunter, “who tried
to study the natives as they actually are, and not as the Brahmans
described them, was struck by the universal prevalence of a worship
quite distinct from that of the Hindu deities. A Bengal village has
usually its local god, which it adores either in the form of a rude
unhewn stone, or a stump, or a tree marked with red-lead. Sometimes
a lump of clay placed under a tree does duty for a deity, and the
attendant priest, when there is one, generally belongs to one of the
half-Hinduised low-castes. The rude stone represents the non-Aryan
fetish; and the tree seems to owe its sanctity to the non-Aryan belief
that it forms the abode of the ghosts, or gods, of the village.”

Omitting the mere guesswork about the fetish and the gratuitous
supposition, made out of deference to the dying creed of Max-Müllerism,
that ancestor-worship must necessarily {033}be a “non-Aryan” feature
(though it exists or existed in all so-called Aryan races), this simple
description shows us the prevalence over the whole of India of customs
essentially similar to those which obtain in Central Africa and in the
Chinese provinces.

The Roman religion, in somewhat the same way, separates itself at once
into a civic or national and a private or family cult. There were the
great gods, native or adopted, whom the State worshipped publicly, as
the Central African tribes worship the chiefs ancestors; and there were
the Lares and Penates, whom the family worshipped at its own hearth, and
whose very name shows them to have been in origin and essence ancestral
spirits. And as the real or practical Hindu religion consists mainly
of offering up rice, millet, and ghee to the little local and family
deities or to the chosen patron god in the Brahmanist pantheon, so,
too, the real or practical Roman religion consisted mainly of sacrifice
done at the domestic altar to the special Penates, _farre pio et
saliente mica_.

I will not go on to point out in detail at the present stage of our
argument how Professor Sayce similarly finds ancestor-worship and
Shamanism (a low form of ghost-propitiation) at the root of the religion
of the ancient Ac-cadians; how other observers have performed the same
task for the Egyptians and Japanese; and how like customs have been
traced among Greeks and Amazulu, among Hebrews and Nicaraguans, among
early English and Digger Indians, among our Aryan ancestors themselves
and Andaman Islanders. Every recent narrative of travel abounds with
examples. Of Netherland Island I read, “The skulls of their ancestors
were treasured for gods of the New Hebrides, “The people worshipped
the spirits of their ancestors. They prayed to them, over the kava-bowl,
for health and prosperity.” In New Caledonia, “Their gods were their
ancestors, whose relics they kept up and idolised.” At Tana, “The
general name for gods seemed to be _aremha_; that means a _dead man_,
and hints,” {034}says the Rev. George Turner, with pleasing frankness,
“alike at the origin and nature of their religious worship.” When
the chief prayed, he offered up yam and fruits, saying, “Compassionate
father, here is some food for you; eat it. Be kind to us on account of
it.” Those who wish to see the whole of the evidence on this matter
marshalled in battle array have only to turn to the first volume of
Mr. Herbert Spencer’s _Principles of Sociology_, where they will find
abundant examples from all times and places gathered together in a vast
and overwhelming phalanx.

What concerns us in this chapter a little more is to call attention
by anticipation to the fact that even in Christianity itself the
same primitive element survives as the centre of all that is most
distinctively religious, as opposed to theological, in the Christian
religion. And I make these remarks provisionally here in order that the
reader may the better understand to what ultimate goal our investigation
will lead him.

It is the universal Catholic custom to place the relics of saints or
martyrs under the altars in churches. Thus the body of St. Mark the
Evangelist lies under the high altar of St. Mark’s, at Venice; and
in every other Italian cathedral, or chapel, a reliquary is deposited
within the altar itself. So well understood is this principle in the
Latin Church, that it has hardened into the saying, “No relic, no
altar.” The sacrifice of the mass takes place at such an altar, and
is performed by a priest in sacrificial robes. The entire Roman Catholic
ritual is a ritual derived from the earlier sacerdotal ideas of ministry
at an altar, and its connection with the primitive form is still kept up
by the necessary presence of human remains in its holy places.

Furthermore, the very idea of a church itself is descended from the
early Christian meeting-places in the catacombs or at the tombs of
the martyrs, which are universally allowed to have been the primitive
Christian altars. {035}We know now that the cruciform dome-covered plan
of Christian churches is derived from these early meeting-places at the
junction of lanes or alleys in the catacombs; that the nave, chancel,
and transepts indicate the crossing of the alleys, while the dome
represents the hollowed-out portion or rudely circular vault where the
two lines of archway intersect. The earliest dome-covered churches
were attempts, as it were, to construct a catacomb above ground for the
reception of the altar-tomb of a saint or martyr. Similarly with
the chapels that open out at the side from the aisles or transepts.
Etymologically, the word chapel is the modernised form of _capella_,
the arched sepulchre excavated in the walls of the catacombs, before the
tomb at which it was usual to offer up prayer and praise. The chapels
built out from the aisles in Roman churches, each with its own altar and
its own saintly relics, are attempts to reproduce above ground in the
same way the original sacred places in the early Christian excavated
cemeteries. We will recur to this subject at much greater length in
subsequent chapters.

Thus Christianity itself is linked on to the very antique custom of
worship at tombs, and the habit of ancestor-worship by altars, relics,
and invocation of saints, even revolutionary Protestantism still
retaining some last faint marks of its origin in the dedication of
churches to particular evangelists or martyrs, and in the more or less
disguised survival of altar, priesthood, sacrifice, and vestments.

Now, I do not say ancestor-worship gives us the whole origin of
everything that is included in Christian English minds in the idea
of religion. I do not say it accounts for all the cosmologies and
cosmogonies of savage, barbaric, or civilised tribes. Those, for the
most part, are pure mythological products, explicable mainly, I believe,
by means of the key with which mythology supplies us; and one of them,
adopted into Genesis from an alien source, has come to be accepted by
modern Christendom as part of {036}that organised body of belief which
forms the Christian creed, though not in any true sense the Christian
religion. Nor do I say that ancestor-worship gives us the origin of
those ontological, metaphysical, or mystical conceptions which form
part of the philosophy or theology of many priesthoods. Religions, as
we generally get them envisaged for us nowadays, are held to include the
mythology, the cosmogony, the ontology, and even the ethics of the race
that practises them. These extraneous developments, however, I hold to
spring from different roots and to have nothing necessarily in common
with religion proper. The god is the true crux. If we have once
accounted for the origin of ghosts, gods, tombs, altars, temples,
churches, worship, sacrifice, priesthoods, and ceremonies, then we have
accounted for all that is essential and central in religion, and may
hand over the rest--the tales, stories, and pious legends--to the
account of comparative mythology or of the yet unfounded science of
comparative idealogy.

Once more, I do not wish to insist, either, that every particular and
individual god, national or naturalistic, must necessarily represent
a particular ghost--the dead spirit of a single definite once-living
person. It is enough to show, as Mr. Spencer has shown, that the idea
of the god, and the worship paid to a god, are directly derived from
the idea of the ghost, and the offerings made to the ghost, without
necessarily holding, as Mr. Spencer seems to hold, that every god is and
must be in ultimate analysis the ghost of a particular human being. Once
the conception of gods had been evolved by humanity, and had become
a common part of every man’s imagined universe--of the world as it
presented itself to the mind of the percipient--then it was natural
enough that new gods should be made from time to time out of
abstractions or special aspects and powers of nature, and that the same
worship should be paid to such new-made and purely imaginary gods as
had previously been paid to the whole host of gods {037}evolved from
personal and tribal ancestors. It is the first step that costs: once you
have got the idea of a god fairly evolved, any number of extra gods may
be invented or introduced from all quarters. A great pantheon readily
admits new members to its ranks from, many strange sources. Familiar
instances in one of the best-known pantheons are those of Concordia,
Pecunia, Aius Locutius, Rediculus Tutanus. The Romans, indeed, deified
every conceivable operation of nature or of human life; they had gods or
goddesses for the minutest details of agriculture, of social relations,
of the first years of childhood, of marriage and domestic arrangements
generally. Many of their deities, as we shall see hereafter, were
obviously manufactured to meet a special demand on special occasions.
But at the same time, none of these gods, so far as we can judge, could
ever have come to exist at all if the ghost-theory and ancestor-worship
had not already made familiar to the human mind the principles and
practice of religion generally. The very idea of a god could not
otherwise have been evolved; though, when once evolved, any number of
new beings could readily be affiliated upon it by the human imagination.

Still, to admit that other elements have afterwards come in to confuse
religion is quite a different thing from admitting that religion itself
has more than one origin. Whatever gives us the key to the practice of
worship gives us the key to all real religion. Now, one may read through
almost any books of the mythological school without ever coming upon
a single word that throws one ray of light upon the origin of religion
itself thus properly called. To trace the development of this, that,
or the other story or episode in a religious myth is in itself a very
valuable study in human evolution: but no amount of tracing such stories
ever gives us the faintest clue to the question why men worshipped
Osiris, Zeus, Siva, or Venus; why they offered up prayer and praise to
Isis, or to Artemis; why they made sacrifices of oxen to Capitolian
Jove {038}at Rome, or slew turtle-doves on the altar of Jahweh, god
of Israel, at Jerusalem. The ghost-theory and the practice of
ancestor-worship show us a natural basis and genesis for all these
customs, and explain them in a way to which no mythological enquiry can
add a single item of fundamental interest.

It may be well at this point to attempt beforehand some slight
provisional disentanglement of the various extraneous elements which
interweave themselves at last with the simple primitive fabric of
practical religion.

In the first place, there is the mythological element. The mythopoeic
faculty is a reality in mankind. Stories arise, grow, gather episodes
with movement, transform and transmute themselves, wander far in
space, get corrupted by time, in ten thousand ways suffer change and
modification. Now, such stories sometimes connect themselves with living
men and women. Everybody knows how many myths exist even in our own
day about every prominent or peculiar person. They also gather more
particularly round the memory of the dead, and especially of any very
distinguished dead man or woman. Sometimes they take their rise in
genuine tradition, sometimes they are pure fetches of fancy or of the
romancing faculty. The ghosts or the gods are no less exempt from
these mythopœic freaks than other people; and as gods go on living
indefinitely, they have plenty of time for myths to gather about them.
Most often, a myth is invented to account for some particular religious
ceremony. Again, myths demonstrably older than a particular human
being--say Cæsar, Virgil, Arthur, Charlemagne--may get fitted by later
ages to those special personalities. The same thing often happens also
with gods. Myth comes at last, in short, to be the history of the gods;
and a personage about whom many myths exist, whether real or imaginary,
a personification of nature or an abstract quality, may grow in time to
be practically a divine being, and even perhaps to receive worship, the
final test of divinity.

Again, {039}myths about the gods come in the long run, in many cases,
to be written down, especially by the priests, and themselves acquire a
considerable degree of adventitious holiness. Thus we get Sacred Books;
and in most advanced races, the sacred books tend to become an important
integral part of religion, and a test of the purity of tenets or
ceremonial. But sacred books almost always contain rude cosmological
guesses and a supernatural cosmogony, as well as tales about the doings,
relationships, and prerogatives of the gods. Such early philosophical
conjectures come then to be intimately bound up with the idea of
religion, and in many cases even to supersede in certain minds its
true, practical, central kernel. The extreme of this tendency is seen in
English Protestant Dissenting Bibliolatry.

Rationalistic and reconciliatory glosses tend to arise with advancing
culture. Attempts are made to trace the pedigree and mutual relations
of the gods, and to get rid of discrepancies in earlier legends. The
Theogony of Hesiod is a definite effort undertaken in this direction for
the Greek pantheon. Often the attempt is made by the most learned
and philosophically-minded among the priests, and results in a
quasi-philosophical mythology like that of the Brahmans. In the
monotheistic or half-monotheistic religions, this becomes theology. In
proportion as it grows more and more laboured and definite the attention
of the learned and the priestly class is more and more directed to
dogma, creed, faith, abstract formulae of philosophical or intellectual
belief, while insisting also upon ritual or practice. But the popular
religion remains usually, as in India, a religion of practical custom
and observances alone, having very little relation to the highly
abstract theological ideas of the learned or the priestly.

Lastly, in the highest religions, a large element of ethics, of
sentiment, of broad humanitarianism of adventitious emotion, is allowed
to come in, often to the extent of obscuring the original factors of
practice and observance.

We are {040}constantly taught that “real religion” means many things
which have nothing on earth to do with religion proper, in any sense,
but are merely high morality, tinctured by emotional devotion towards a
spiritual being or set of beings.

Owing to all these causes, modern investigators, in searching for the
origin of religion, are apt to mix up with it, even when dealing with
savage tribes, many extraneous questions of cosmology, cosmogony,
philosophy, metaphysics, ethics, and mythology. They do not sufficiently
see that the true question narrows itself down at last to two prime
factors--worship and sacrifice. In all early religions, the practice is
at a maximum, and the creed at a minimum. We, nowadays, look back upon
these early cults, which were cults and little else, with minds warped
by modern theological prejudices--by constant wrangling over dogmas,
clauses, definitions, and formularies. We talk glibly of the Hindu
faith or the Chinese belief, when we ought rather to talk of the Hindu
practice or the Chinese observances. By thus wrongly conceiving the
nature of religion, we go astray as to its origin. We shall only get
right again when we learn to separate mythology entirely from religion,
and when we recognise that the growth and development of the myth have
nothing at all to do with the beginnings of worship. The science of
comparative mythology and folk-lore is a valuable and light-bearing
study in its own way: but it has no more to do with the origin of
religion than the science of ethics or the science of geology. There are
ethical rules in most advanced cults: there are geological surmises
in most sacred books: but neither one nor the other is on that account
religion, any more than the history of Jehoshaphat or the legend of
Samson.

What I want to suggest in the present chapter sums itself up in a few
sentences thus: Religion is practice, mythology is story-telling. Every
religion has myths that accompany it: but the myths do not give rise
to the religion: {041}on the contrary, the religion gives rise to the
myths. And I shall attempt in this book to account for the origin of
religion alone, omitting altogether both mythology as a whole, and
all mythical persons or beings other than gods in the sense here
illustrated.




