CHAPTER III.--THE LIFE OF THE DEAD.

|The {042}object of this book, we saw at the beginning, is to trace the
evolution of the idea of God. But the solution of that problem implies
two separate questions--first, how did men begin to frame the idea of
a god at all; and second, how did they progress from the conception of
many distinct gods to the conception of a single supreme God, like the
central deity of Christianity and of Islam. In other words, we have
first to enquire into the origin of polytheism, and next into its
gradual supersession by monotheism. Those are the main lines of enquiry
I propose to follow out in the present volume.

Religion, however, has one element within it still older, more
fundamental, and more persistent than any mere belief in a god or
gods--nay, even than the custom or practice of supplicating and
appeasing ghosts or gods by gifts and observances. That element is the
conception of the Life of the Dead. On the primitive belief in such
life, all religion ultimately bases itself. The belief is in fact the
earliest thing to appear in religion, for there are savage tribes who
have nothing worth calling gods, but have still a religion or cult
of their dead relatives. It is also the latest thing to survive in
religion; for many modern spiritualists, who have ceased to be theists,
or to accept any other form of the supernatural, nevertheless go on
believing in the continued existence of the dead, and in the possibility
of intercommunication between them and the living. This, therefore,
which is the earliest manifestation of religious thought, {043}and
which persists throughout as one of its most salient and irrepressible
features, must engage our attention for a little time before we pass on
to the genesis of polytheism.

But the belief in continued life itself, like all other human ideas,
has naturally undergone various stages of evolution. The stages glide
imperceptibly into one another, of course; but I think we can on the
whole distinguish with tolerable accuracy between three main layers or
strata of opinion with regard to the continued existence of the dead.
In the first or lowest stratum, the difference between life and death
themselves is but ill or inadequately perceived; the dead are thought
of as yet bodily living. In the second stratum, death is recognised as
a physical fact, but is regarded as only temporary; at this stage, men
look forward to the Resurrection of the Body, and expect the Life of the
World to Come. In the third stratum, the soul is regarded as a distinct
entity from the body; it survives it in a separate and somewhat shadowy
form: so that the opinion as to the future proper to this stage is not a
belief in the Resurrection of the Body, but a belief in the Immortality
of the Soul. These two concepts have often been confounded together by
loose and semi-philosophical Christian thinkers; but in their essence
they are wholly distinct and irreconcilable.

I shall examine each of these three strata separately.

And first as to that early savage level of thought where the ideas of
life and death are very ill demarcated. To us at the present day it
seems a curious notion that people should not possess the conception of
death as a necessary event in every individual human history. But that
is because we cannot easily unread all our previous thinking, cannot
throw ourselves frankly back into the state of the savage. We are
accustomed to living in large and populous communities, where deaths
are frequent, and where natural death in particular is an every-day
occurrence. We have behind us a vast and long history of previous ages;
and {044}we know that historical time was occupied by the lives of many
successive generations, all of which are now dead, and none of which
on the average exceeded a certain fixed limit of seventy or eighty odd
years. To us, the conception of human life as a relatively short period,
bounded by a known duration, and naturally terminating at a relatively
fixed end, is a common and familiar one.

We forget, however, that to the savage all this is quite otherwise. He
lives in a small and scattered community, where deaths are rare, and
where natural death in particular is comparatively infrequent. Most of
his people are killed in war, or devoured by wild beasts, or destroyed
by accidents in the chase, or by thirst or starvation. Some are drowned
in rapid rivers; some crushed by falling trees or stones; some poisoned
by deadly fruits, or bitten by venomous snakes; some massacred by
chiefs, or murdered in quarrels with their own tribesmen. In a large
majority of instances, there is some open and obvious cause of death;
and this cause is generally due either to the hand of man or to some
other animal; or failing that, to some apparently active effort of
external nature, such as flood, or lightning, or forest fires, or
landslip and earthquake. Death by disease is comparatively rare; death
by natural decay almost unknown or unrecognised.

Nor has the savage a great historic past behind him. He knows few but
his tribesmen, and little of their ancestors save those whom his parents
can remember before them. His perspective of the past is extremely
limited. Nothing enables him to form that wide idea of the necessity and
invariability of death which to us is so familiar. That “all men are
mortal” is to civilised man a truism; to very early savages it would
necessarily have seemed a startling paradox. No man ever dies within his
own experience; ever since he can remember, he has continued to exist
as a permanent part of all his adventures. Most of the savage’s family
have gone on continuously living with him. A death has been a rare and
startling occurrence. {045}Thus the notion of death as an inevitable end
never arises at all; the notion of death as due to natural causes seems
quite untenable. When a savage dies, the first question that arises is
“Who has killed him?” If he is slain in war, or devoured by a
tiger, or ripped up by an elephant, or drowned by a stream in spate, or
murdered by a tribesman, the cause is obvious. If none of these, then
the death is usually set down to witchcraft.

Furthermore, the mere fact of death is much less certain among primitive
or savage men than in civilised communities. We know as a rule with
almost absolute certainty whether at a given moment a sick or wounded
man is dead or living. Nevertheless, even among ourselves, cases of
doubt not infrequently occur. At times we hesitate whether a man
or woman is dead or has fainted. If the heart continues to beat, we
consider them still living; if not the slightest flutter of the pulse
can be perceived, we consider them dead. Even our advanced medical
science, however, is often perplexed in very obscure cases of catalepsy;
and mistakes have occurred from time to time, resulting in occasional
premature burials. The discrimination of true from apparent death is not
always easy. Vesalius, the eminent anatomist, opened a supposed corpse
in which the heart was seen to be still beating; and the Abbé Prévost,
who had been struck by apoplexy, was regarded as dead, but recovered
consciousness once more under the surgeon’s scalpel. Naturally, among
savages, such cases of doubt are far more likely to occur than among
civilised people; or rather, to put it as the savage would think of it,
there is often no knowing when a person who is lying stiff and lifeless
may happen to get up again and resume his usual activity. The savage
is accustomed to seeing his fellows stunned or rendered unconscious by
blows, wounds, and other accidents, inflicted either by the enemy, by
wild beasts, by natural agencies, or by the wrath of his tribesmen; and
he never knows how soon the effect of such accidents may pass away, and
the man may recover his {046}ordinary vitality. As a rule, he keeps and
tends the bodies of his friends as long as any chance remains of their
ultimate recovery, and often (as we shall see in the sequel) much
longer.

Again, in order to understand this attitude of early man towards his
wounded, his stricken, and his dead, we must glance aside for a moment
at the primitive psychology. Very early indeed in the history of the
human mind, I believe, some vague adumbration of the notion of a soul
began to pervade humanity. We now know that consciousness is a function
of the brain; that it is intermitted during sleep, when the brain rests,
and also during times of grave derangement of the nervous or circulatory
systems, as when we faint or assume the comatose condition, or are
stunned by a blow, or fall into catalepsy or epilepsy. We also know
that consciousness ceases altogether at death, when the brain no longer
functions; and that the possibility of its further continuance is
absolutely cut off by the fact of decomposition. But these truths, still
imperfectly understood or rashly rejected by many among ourselves, were
wholly unknown to early men. They had to frame for themselves as best
they could some vague working hypothesis of the human mind, from data
which suggested themselves in the ordinary course of life; and the
hypothesis which they framed was more or less roughly that of the soul
or spirit, still implicitly accepted by a large majority of the human
species.

According to this hypothesis every man consists of two halves or parts,
one material or bodily, the other immaterial or spiritual. The first
half, called the body, is visible and tangible; the second half, called
the soul, dwells within it, and is more or less invisible or shadowy. It
is to a large extent identified with the breath; and like the breath
it is often believed to quit the body at death, and even to go off in a
free form and live its own life elsewhere. As this supposed independence
of the soul from the body lies at the very basis of all ghosts and gods,
and therefore of {047}religion itself, I may be excused for going at
some length into the question of its origin.

Actually, so far as we know by direct and trustworthy evidence, the
existence of a mind, consciousness, or “soul,” apart from a body,
has never yet been satisfactorily demonstrated. But the savage derived
the belief, apparently, from a large number of concurrent hints and
suggestions, of which such a hypothesis seemed to him the inevitable
result. During the daytime he was awake; at night he slept; yet even in
his sleep, while his body lay curled on the ground beside the camp-fire,
he seemed to hunt or to fight, to make love or to feast, in some
other region. What was this part of him that wandered from the body in
dreams?--what, if not the soul or breath which he naturally regarded as
something distinct and separate? And when a man died, did not the soul
or breath go from him? When he was badly wounded, did it not disappear
for a time, and then return again? In fainting fits, in catalepsy,
and in other abnormal states, did it not leave the body, or even play
strange tricks with it? I need not pursue this line of thought, already
fully worked out by Mr. Herbert Spencer and Dr. Tylor. It is enough to
say that from a very early date, primitive man began to regard the soul
or life as something bound up with the breath, something which could go
away from the body at will and return to it again, something separable
and distinct, yet essential to the person, very vaguely conceived as
immaterial or shadowy, but more so at a later than at an earlier
period. *

     * The question of the Separate Soul has recently received
     very full treatment from Mr. Frazer in The Golden Bough, and
     Mr. Sidney Hartland in The Legend of Perseus.

Moreover, these souls or spirits (which quitted the body in sleep or
trance) outlived death, and appeared again to survivors. In dreams,
we often see the shapes of living men; but we also see with peculiar
vividness the images of the departed. Everybody is familiar with the
frequent reappearance {048}in sleep of intimate friends or relations
lately deceased. These appearances, I fancy, are especially frequent
during the first few months of bereavement, and gradually weaken in
frequency and vividness as time goes on. The reason for both sets of
phenomena I take to be this: the nervous structures, accustomed to be
stimulated in particular combinations by intercourse with the dead
friend, miss automatically their wonted stimulation; and being therefore
in a highly nourished and unstable state, are peculiarly ready to
undergo ideal stimulation in sleep, as we know to be the case with other
well-nurtured and underworked nerve-centres. Or, to put it less
materially, the brain falls readily into a familiar rhythm. But in
course of time the channels atrophy by disuse; the habit is lost; and
the dream-appearances of the dead friend grow more and more infrequent.
The savage, however, accepts the dream-world as almost equally real with
the world of sense-presentation. As he envisages the matter to himself,
his soul has been away on its travels without its body, and there has
met and conversed with the souls of dead friends or relations.

We must remember also that in savage life occasions for trance, for
fainting, and for other abnormal or comatose nervous conditions occur
far more frequently than in civilised life. The savage is often wounded
and fails from loss of blood; he cuts his foot against a stone, or is
half killed by a wild beast; he fasts long and often, perforce, or is
reduced to the very verge of starvation; and he is therefore familiar,
both in his own case and in the case of others, with every variety of
unconsciousness and of delirium or delusion. All these facts figure
themselves to his mind as absences of the soul from the body, which is
thus to him a familiar and almost every-day experience.

Moreover, it will hence result that the savage can hardly gain any clear
conception of Death, and especially of death from natural causes. When
a tribesman is brought home severely wounded and unconscious, the
spectator’s immediate {049}idea must necessarily be that the soul has
gone away and deserted the body. For how long it has gone, he cannot
tell; but his first attempts are directed towards inducing or compelling
it to return again. For this purpose, he often addresses it with
prayers and adjurations, or begs it to come back with loud cries and
persuasions. And he cannot possibly discriminate between its temporary
absence and its final departure. As Mr. Herbert Spencer well says,
the consequences of blows or wounds merge into death by imperceptible
stages. “Now the injured man shortly ‘returned to himself,&rsquo; and
did not go away again; and now, returning to himself only after a long
absence, he presently deserted his body for an indefinite time. Lastly,
instead of these temporary returns, followed by final absence, there
sometimes occurred cases in which a violent blow caused continuous
absence from the very first; the other self never came back at all.”

In point of fact, during these earlier stages, the idea of Death as we
know it did not and does not occur in any form. There are still
savages who do not seem to recognise the universality and necessity of
death--who regard it on the contrary as something strange and unatural,
something due to the machination of enemies or of witchcraft. With the
earliest men, it is a foregone conclusion, psychologically speaking,
that they should so regard it; they could not form any other concept
without far more extended knowledge than they have the means of
possessing. To them, a Dead Man must always have seemed a man whose soul
or breath or other self had left him, but might possibly return again to
the body at any time.

Each of the three stages of thought above discriminated has its
appropriate mode of disposing of its dead. The appropriate mode for this
earliest stage is Preservation of the Corpse, which eventuates at last
in Mummification.

The simplest form of this mode of disposal of the corpse consists in
keeping it in the hut or cave where the family dwell, together with the
living. A New Guinea woman thus {050}kept her husband’s body in her
hut till it dried up of itself, and she kissed it and offered it food
every day, as though it were living. Many similar cases are reported
from elsewhere. Hut preservation is common in the very lowest races.
More frequently, however, owing to the obvious discomfort of living in
too close proximity to a dead body, the corpse at this stage of thought
is exposed openly in a tree or on a platform or under some other
circumstances where no harm can come to it. Among the Australians and
Andaman Islanders, who, like the Negritoes of New Guinea, preserve for
us a very early type of human customs, the corpse is often exposed on
a rough raised scaffold. Some of the Polynesian and Melanesian peoples
follow the same practice. The Dyaks and Kyans expose their dead in
trees. “But it is in America,” says Mr. Herbert Spencer, “that
exposure on raised stages is commonest. The Dakotahs adopt this method;
at one time it was the practice of the Iroquois; Catlin, describing the
Mandans as having scaffolds on which ‘their _dead live_ as they term
it,’ remarks that they are thus kept out of the way of wolves and
dogs; and Schoolcraft says the same of the Chippewas.” Generally
speaking, at the lowest grades of culture, savages preserve the actual
bodies of their dead above ground, either in the home itself, or
in close proximity to it. We shall recur later on to this singular
practice.

A slight variant on this method, peculiar to a very maritime race, is
that described by Mr. H. O. Forbes among the natives of Timurlaut:

“The dead body is placed in a portion of a _prau_ fitted to the length
of the individual, or within strips of _gaba-gaba_, or stems of the
sago-palm pinned together. If it is a person of some consequence, such
as an _Orang Kaya_, an ornate and decorated _prau_-shaped coffin is
specially made. This is then enveloped in calico, and placed either on
the top of a rock by the margin of the sea at a short distance from
the village, or on a high pile-platform erected on the shore {051}about
low-tide mark. On the top of the coffin-lid are erected tall flags,
and the figures of men playing gongs, shooting guns, and gesticulating
wildly to frighten away evil influences from the sleeper. Sometimes the
platform is erected on the shore above high-water mark, and near it is
stuck in the ground a tall bamboo full of palm-wine; and suspended over
a bamboo rail are bunches of sweet potatoes for the use of the dead
man’s _Nitu_. When the body is quite decomposed, his son or one of the
family disinters the skull and deposits it on a little platform in his
house, in the gable opposite the fireplace, while to ward off evil from
himself he carries about with him the atlas and axis bones of its neck
in his _luon_, or _siri_-holder.”

This interesting account is full of implications whose fuller meaning we
will perceive hereafter. The use of the skull and of the talisman bone
should especially be noted for their later importance. For skulls are
fundamental in the history of religion.

Cases like these readily pass into the practice of Mummifying, more
especially in dry or desert climates. Even in so damp a tropical country
as New Guinea, however, D’Albertis found in a shed on the banks of the
Fly River two mummies, artificially prepared, as he thought, by removal
of the flesh, the bones alone being preserved with the skin to cover
them. Here we have evidently a clear conception of death as a serious
change, of a different character from a mere temporary absence. So, too,
Mr. Chalmers says of the Koiari people in the same island, “They treat
their dead after this fashion. A fire is kept burning day and night at
the head and feet for months. The entire skin is removed by means of
the thumb and forefinger, and the juices plastered all over the face
and body of the operator (parent, husband, or wife of the deceased).
The fire gradually desiccates the flesh, so that little more than the
skeleton is left.” But mummification for the most part is confined to
drier climates, where it is artificially performed {052}down to a very
evolved stage of civilisation, as we know well in Peru and Egypt.

One word must be said in passing as to the frequent habit of specially
preserving, and even carrying about the person, the head or hand of
a deceased relative. This has been already mentioned in the case of
Timurlaut; and it occurs frequently elsewhere. Thus Mr. Chalmers says
of a New Guinea baby: “It will be covered with two inches of soil, the
friends watching beside the grave; but eventually the skull and smaller
bones will be preserved and worn by the mother.” Similarly, in the
Andaman Islands, where we touch perhaps the lowest existing stratum of
savage feeling, “widows may be seen with the skulls of their deceased
partners suspended round their necks.” The special preservation of the
head, even when the rest of the body is eaten or buried, will engage our
attention at a later period: heads so preserved are usually resorted to
as oracles, and are often treated as the home of the spirit. Mr. Herbert
Spencer has collected many similar instances, such as that of the
Tasmanians who wore a bone from the skull or arm of a dead relation.
He rightly notes, too, that throughout the New World “the primitive
conception of death as a long-suspended animation seems to have been
especially vivid;” and we find accordingly that customs of this
character are particularly frequent among American savages. Thus, to
draw once more from his great storehouse, the Créés carried bones
and hair of dead relations about for three years; while the Caribs and
several Guiana tribes distributed the clean bones among the kinsmen of
the deceased. In the Sandwich Islands, also, bones of kings and chiefs
were carried about by their descendants, under the impression that the
dead exercised guardianship over them.

At this stage of thought, it seems to me, it is the actual corpse that
is still thought to be alive; the actual corpse that appears in dreams;
and the actual corpse that is fed and worshipped and propitiated with
presents.

Ceremonial {053}cannibalism, which will be more fully considered
hereafter, appears in this stratum, and survives from it into higher
levels. The body is eaten entire, and the bones preserved; or the
flesh and fat are removed, and the skin left; or a portion only is
sacramentally and reverently eaten by the surviving relations. These
processes also will be more minutely described in the sequel.

The first stage merges by gradual degrees into the second, which is that
of Burial or its equivalent. Cave-burial of mummies or of corpses forms
the transitional link. Indeed, inasmuch as many races of primitive men
lived habitually in caves, the placing or leaving the corpse in a cave
seems much the same thing as the placing or leaving it in a shed, hut,
or shelter. The cave-dwelling Veddahs simply left the dead man in the
cave where he died, and themselves migrated to some other cavern. Still,
cave-burial lingered on late with many tribes or nations which had
for ages outlived the habit of cave-dwelling. Among the South
American Indians, cave-burial was common; and in Peru it assumed high
developments of mummification. The making of an artificial cave or vault
for the dead is but a slight variant on this custom; it was frequent in
Egypt, the other dry country where the making of mummies was carried
to a high pitch of perfection. The Tombs of the Kings at Thebes are
splendid instances of such artificial caves, elaborated into stately
palaces with painted walls, where the dead monarchs might pass
their underground life in state and dignity. Cave-tombs, natural or
artificial, are also common in Asia Minor, Italy, and elsewhere.

During the first stage, it may be noted, the attitude of man towards his
dead is chiefly one of affectionate regard. The corpse is kept at home,
and fed or tended; the skull is carried about as a beloved object. But
in the second stage, which induces the practice of burial, a certain
Fear of the Dead becomes more obviously apparent. Men dread the return
of the corpse or the ghost, and strive to keep {054}it within prescribed
limits. In this stage, the belief in the Resurrection of the Body is the
appropriate creed; and though at first the actual corpse is regarded
as likely to return to plague survivors, that idea gives place a little
later, I believe, to the conception of a less material double or spirit.

And here let us begin by discriminating carefully between the
Resurrection of the Body and the Immortality of the Soul.

The idea of Resurrection arose from and is closely bound up with the
practice of burial, the second and simpler mode of disposing of the
remains of the dead. The idea of Immortality arose from and is closely
bound up with the practice of burning, a later and better innovation,
invented at the third stage of human culture. During the early
historical period all the most advanced and cultivated nations burnt
their dead, and, in consequence, accepted the more ideal and refined
notion of Immortality. But modern European nations bury their dead,
and, in consequence, accept, nominally at least, the cruder and grosser
notion of Resurrection. Nominally, I say, because, in spite of creeds
and formularies, the influence of Plato and other ancient thinkers, as
well as of surviving ancestral ideas, has made most educated Europeans
really believe in Immortality, even when they imagine themselves to be
believing in Resurrection. Nevertheless, the belief in Resurrection is
the avowed and authoritative belief of the Christian world, which thus
proclaims itself as on a lower level in this respect than the civilised
peoples of antiquity.

The earliest of these two ways of disposing of the bodies of the dead is
certainly by burial. As this fact has recently been called in question,
I will venture to enlarge a little upon the evidence in its favour. In
point of time, burial goes back with certainty to the neolithic age, and
with some probability to the palaeolithic. Several true interments in
caves have been attributed by competent geologists to the earlier of
these two periods, the first for which we {055}have any sure warranty
of man’s existence on earth. But, as I do not desire to introduce
controversial matter of any sort into this exposition, I will waive the
evidence for burial in the palaeolithic age as doubtful, and will merely
mention that in the Mentone caves, according to Mr. Arthur Evans, a
most competent authority, we have a case of true burial accompanied by
neolithic remains of a grade of culture earlier and simpler than any
known to us elsewhere. In other words, from the very earliest beginning
of the neolithic age men buried their dead; and they continued to bury
them, in caves or tumuli, down to the end of neolithic culture. They
buried them in the Long Barrows in England; they buried them in the Ohio
mounds; they buried them in the shadowy forests of New Zealand; they
buried them in the heart of darkest Africa. I know of no case of burning
or any means of disposal of the dead, otherwise than by burial or its
earlier equivalent, mummification, among people in the stone age
of culture in Europe. It is only when bronze and other metals are
introduced that races advance to the third stage, the stage of
cremation. In America, however, the Mexicans we*re cremationists.

The wide diffusal of burial over the globe is also a strong argument for
its relatively primitive origin. In all parts of the world men now bury
their dead, or did once bury them. From the Tombs of the Kings at Pekin
to the Pyramids of Memphis; from the Peruvian caves to the Samoyed
graveyards, we find most early peoples, most savage peoples, most
primitive peoples, once or still engaged in one or other form of
burying. Burial is the common and universal mode; burning, exposure,
throwing into a sacred river, and so forth, are sporadic and
exceptional, and in many cases, as among the Hindus, are demonstrably of
late origin, and connected with certain relatively modern refinements of
religion.

Once more, in many or most cases, we have positive evidence that where a
race now burns its dead, it used once {056}to bury them. Burial preceded
burning in preheroic Greece, as it also did in Etruria and in early
Latium. The people of the Long Barrows, in Western Europe generally,
buried their dead; the people of the Round Barrows who succeeded them,
and who possessed a far higher grade of culture, almost always cremated.
It has been assumed that burning is primordial in India; but Mr. William
Simpson, the well-known artist of the _Illustrated London News_, calls
my attention to the fact that the Vedas speak with great clearness of
burial as the usual mode of disposing of the corpse, and even allude to
the tumulus, the circle of stones around it, and the sacred _temenos_
which they enclose. According to Rajendralala Mitra, whose high
authority on the subject is universally acknowledged, burial was the
rule in India till about the thirteenth or fourteenth century before
the Christian era; then came in cremation, with burial of the ashes, and
this continued till about the time of Christ, when burial was dispensed
with, and the ashes were thrown into some sacred river. I think,
therefore, until some more positive evidence is adduced on the other
side, we may rest content with our general conclusion that burial is the
oldest, most universal, and most savage mode of disposing of the remains
of the dead among humanity after the general recognition of death as a
positive condition. It probably took its rise in an early period, while
mankind was still one homogeneous species; and it has been dispersed,
accordingly, over the whole world, even to the most remote oceanic
islands.

What is the origin of this barbaric and disgusting custom, so repugnant
to all the more delicate sentiments of human nature? I think Mr. Frazer
is right in attributing it to the terror felt by the living for the
ghosts (or, rather, at first the corpses) of the dead, and the fear that
they may return to plague or alarm their surviving fellow tribesmen.

In his admirable paper on “Certain Burial Customs as Illustrative of
the Primitive Theory of the Soul,” Mr. Frazer points out that certain
tribes of early men paid great {057}attention to the dead, not so much
from affection as from selfish terror. Ghosts or bodies of the dead
haunt the earth everywhere, unless artificially confined to bounds, and
make themselves exceedingly disagreeable to their surviving relatives.
To prevent this, simple primitive philosophy in its second stage has hit
upon many devices. The most universal is to bury the dead--that is to
say, to put them in a deep-dug hole, and to cover them with a mighty
mound of earth, which has now sadly degenerated in civilised countries
into a mere formal heap, but which had originally the size and dignity
of a tumulus. The object of piling up this great heap of earth was to
confine the ghost (or corpse), who could not easily move so large a
superincumbent mass of matter. In point of fact, men buried their dead
in order to get well rid of them, and to effectually prevent their
return to light to disturb the survivors.

For the same reason heavy stones were often piled on the top of the
dead. In one form, these became at last the cairn; and, as the ghosts
of murderers and their victims tend to be especially restless, everybody
who passes their graves in Arabia, Germany, and Spain is bound to add
a stone to the growing pile in order to confine them. In another form,
that of the single big stone rolled just on top of the body to keep
it down by its mass, the makeweight has developed into the modern
tombstone. In our own times, indeed, the tombstone has grown into a mere
posthumous politeness, and is generally made to do duty as a record of
the name and incomparable virtues of the deceased (concerning whom,
_nil nisi bonum_); but in origin it was nothing more than the big, heavy
boulder, meant to confine the ghost, and was anything but honorific in
intention and function.

Again, certain nations go further still in their endeavours to keep the
ghost (or corpse) from roaming. The corpse of a Damara, says Galton,
having been sewn up in an old ox-hide is buried in a hole, and the
spectators jump backwards {058}and forwards over the grave to keep the
deceased from rising out of it. In America, the Tupis tied fast all the
limbs of the corpse, “that the dead man might not be able to get up,
and infest his friends with his visits.” You may even divert a river
from its course, as Mr. Frazer notes, bury your dead man securely in
its bed, and then allow the stream to return to its channel. It was thus
that Alaric was kept in his grave from further plaguing humanity; and
thus Captain Cameron found a tribe of Central Africans compelled their
deceased chiefs to “cease from troubling.” Sometimes, again, the
grave is enclosed by a fence too high for the dead man to clear even
with a running jump; and sometimes the survivors take the prudent
precaution of nailing the body securely to the coffin, or of breaking
their friend’s spine, or even--but this is an extreme case--of hacking
him to pieces. In Christian England the poor wretch whom misery had
driven to suicide was prevented from roaming about to the discomfort of
the lieges by being buried with a stake driven barbarously through him.
The Australians, in like manner, used to cut off the thumb of a slain
enemy that he might be unable to draw the bow; and the Greeks were wont
to hack off the extremities of their victims in order to incapacitate
them for further fighting. These cases will be seen to be very
luminiferous when we come to examine the origin and meaning of
cremation.

Burial, then, I take it, is simply by origin a means adopted by the
living to protect themselves against the vagrant tendencies of the
actual dead. For some occult reason, the vast majority of men in all
ages have been foolishly afraid of meeting with the spirits of the
departed. Their great desire has been, not to see, but to avoid seeing
these singular visitants; and for that purpose they invented, first of
all, burial, and afterwards cremation.

The common modern conception of the ghost is certainly that of an
immaterial or shadowy form, which can be seen but not touched, and which
preserves an outer semblance {059}of the human figure. But that idea
itself, which has been imported into all our descriptions and reasonings
about the ghost-beliefs of primitive man, is, I incline to think,
very far from primitive, and has been largely influenced by quite late
conceptions derived from the cremational rather than the burial level
of religious philosophy. In other words, though, in accordance with
universal usage and Mr. Frazer’s precedent, I have used the word
“ghost” above in referring to these superstitious terrors of early
man, I believe it is far less the spirit than the actual corpse itself
that early men even in this second stage were really afraid of. It is
the corpse that may come back and do harm to survivors. It is the corpse
that must be kept down by physical means, that must be covered with
earth, pressed flat beneath a big and ponderous stone, deprived of its
thumbs, its hands, its eyes, its members. True, I believe the savage
also thinks of the ghost or double as returning to earth; but his
psychology, I fancy, is not so definite as to distinguish very
accurately between corpse and spirit. The accurate differentiation of
the two belongs rather, it seems to me, to the post-cremational and more
spiritual philosophy than to the primary or preservative, and the
secondary or inhumational.

Anybody who looks at the evidence collected by Mr. Frazer will see for
himself that precautions are taken rather against the return of the
actual physical body than against the return of the ghost or spirit. Or
perhaps, to be more precise, the two are hardly thought of at this early
stage in separation or antithesis.

If we look at the means taken to preserve the body after death among the
majority of primitive peoples, above the Tasmanian level, this truth
of the corpse being itself immortal becomes clearer and clearer. We are
still, in fact, at a level where ghost and dead man are insufficiently
differentiated. In all these cases it is believed that the dead body
continues to live in the grave the same sort of life that it led
above ground; and for this purpose it is provided {060}with weapons,
implements, utensils, food, vessels, and all the necessaries of life for
its new mansion. Continued sentient existence of the body after death
is the keynote of the earliest level of psychical philosophy. First, the
corpse lives in the hut with its family: later, it lives in the grave
with its forefathers.

But side by side with this naïve belief in the continued existence
of the body after death, which survives into the inhumational stage of
evolution, goes another and apparently irreconcilable belief in a future
resurrection. Strictly speaking, of course, if the body is still alive,
there is no need for any such special revivification. But religious
thought, as we all know, does not always pride itself upon the temporal
virtues of logic or consistency; and the savage in particular is not
in the least staggered at being asked to conceive of one and the same
subject in two opposite and contradictory manners. He does not bring
the two incongruities into thought together; he thinks them alternately,
sometimes one, sometimes the other. Even Christian systematists
are quite accustomed to combine the incongruous beliefs in a future
resurrection and in the continued existence of the soul after death,
by supposing that the soul remains meanwhile in some nondescript limbo,
apart from its body--some uncertain Sheol, some dim hades or purgatory
or “place of departed spirits.” The savage is scarcely likely to be
more exacting in this matter than our doctors of divinity.

It is the common belief of the second or inhumational stage, then, that
there will be at some time or other a “General Resurrection.” No
doubt this General Resurrection has been slowly developed out of
the belief in and expectation of many partial resurrections. It is
understood that each individual corpse will, or may, resurge at some
time: therefore it is believed that all corpses together will resurge
at a single particular moment. So long as burial persists, the belief
in the Resurrection persists beside it, {061}and forms a main feature in
the current conception of the future life among the people who practise
it.

How, then, do we progress from this second or inhumational stage to the
third stage with its practice of burning, and its correlated dogma of
the Immortality of the Soul?

In this way, as it seems to me. Besides keeping down the ghost (or
corpse) with clods and stones, it was usual in many cases to adopt
other still stronger persuasives and dissuasives in the same direction.
Sometimes the persuasives were of the gentlest type; for example, the
dead man was often politely requested and adjured to remain quiet in the
grave and to give no trouble. But sometimes they were less bland; the
corpse was often pelted with sticks, stones, and hot coals, in order to
show him that his visits at home would not in future be appreciated. The
ordinary stake and mutilation treatment goes, it is clear, upon the same
principle; if the man has no feet or legs of his own, he cannot very
well walk back again. But further developments of the like crude idea
are to cut off the head, to tear out the heart, to hack the body in
pieces, to pour boiling water and vinegar over the dangerous place where
the corpse lies buried. Now burning, I take it, belonged originally
to the same category of strong measures against refractory ghosts or
corpses; and this is the more probable owing to the fact that it is
mentioned by Mr. Frazer among the remedies recommended for use in the
extreme case of vampires. Its original object was, no doubt, to prevent
the corpse from returning in any way to the homes of the living.

Once any people adopted burning as a regular custom, however, the
chances are that, _cœteris paribus_, it would continue and spread. For
the practice of cremation is so much more wholesome and sanitary than
the practice of burial that it would give a double advantage in the
struggle for existence to any race that adopted it, in peace and in
war. Hence it is quite natural that when at a certain grade of culture
certain races happened to light upon it {062}in this superstitious way,
those races would be likely to thrive and to take the lead in culture as
long as no adverse circumstances counteracted the advantage.

But the superstitions and the false psychology which gave rise at first
to the notion of a continued life after death would not, of course,
disappear with the introduction of burning. The primitive cremationists
may have hoped, by reducing to ashes the bodies of their dead, to
prevent the recurrence of the corpse to the presence of the living; but
they could not prevent the recurrence of the ghost in the dreams of the
survivors; they could not prevent the wind that sighed about the dead
man’s grave, the bats that flitted, the vague noises that terrified,
the abiding sense of the corpse’s presence. All the factors that go
to make up the ghost or the revenant (to use a safe word less liable to
misinterpretation) still remained as active as ever. Hence, I believe,
with the introduction of cremation the conception of the ghost merely
suffered an airy change. He grew more shadowy, more immaterial, more
light, more spiritual. In one word, he became, strictly speaking, a
ghost as we now understand the word, not a returning dead man. This
conception of the ghost as essentially a shade or shadow belongs
peculiarly, it seems to me, to the cremating peoples. I can answer for
it that among negroes, for example, the “duppy” is conceived as
quite a material object. It is classical literature, the literature of
the cremating Greeks and Romans, that has familiarised us most with the
idea of the ghost as shadowy and intangible. Burying races have
more solid doubles. When Peter escaped from prison in Jerusalem, the
assembled brethren were of opinion that it must be “his angel.” The
white woman who lived for years in a native Australian tribe was always
spoken of by her hosts as a ghost. In one word, at a low stage of
culture the _revenant_ is conceived of as material and earthly; at a
higher stage, he is conceived of as immaterial and shadowy.

Now {063}when people take to burning their dead, it is clear they will
no longer be able to believe in the Resurrection of the Body. Indeed, if
I am right in the theory here set forth, it is just in order to prevent
the Resurrection of the Body at inconvenient moments that they take to
burning. To be sure, civilised nations, with their developed power of
believing in miracles, are capable of supposing, not only that the
sea will yield up its dead, but also that burnt, mangled, or dispersed
bodies will be collected from all parts to be put together again at
the Resurrection. This, however, is not the naïve belief of simple
and natural men. To them, when you have burnt a body you have utterly
destroyed it, here and hereafter; and we know that mutilation and
burning were employed for this very purpose in the case of vampires and
other corpses whose total suppression was desirable. Sepoys were
blown from the guns in the Indian mutiny for the express reason
that, according to the Hindu belief, that method of disposing of them
destroyed not only the body but the soul as well--got rid of them
entirely. The ordinary human idea is that when you burn a body you
simply annihilate it; and on that very account early Christians
preferred burial to cremation, because they thought they stood thereby
a better chance at the Resurrection. It is true they allowed that the
divine omnipotence could make new bodies for the martyrs who were burnt;
but for themselves, they seem to have preferred on the average to go on
afresh with their old familiar ones.

Naturally, therefore, among cremating peoples, the doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Body tended to go out, and what replaced it was the
doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul. You may burn the body, but the
spirit still survives; and the survival gives origin to a new philosophy
of ghosts and _revenants_, a new idea of the inner nature of ghosthood.
Gradually the spirit gets to be conceived as diviner essence, entangled
and imprisoned, as it were, in the meshes of the flesh, and only to be
set free by means {064}of fire, which thus becomes envisaged at last as
friendly rather than destructive in its action on the dead body. What
was at first a precaution against the return of the corpse becomes
in the end a pious duty; just as burial itself, originally a selfish
precaution against the pranks and tricks of returning corpses, becomes
in the end so sacred and imperative that unburied ghosts are conceived
as wandering about, Archytas-wise, begging for the favour of a handful
of sand to prevent them from homeless vagabondage for ever. Nations
who burn come to regard the act of burning as the appointed means for
freeing the ghost from the confining meshes of the body, and regard it
rather as a solemn duty to the dead than as a personal precaution.

Not only so, but there arises among them a vague and fanciful conception
of the world of shades very different indeed from the definite and
material conception of the two earlier stages. The mummy was looked
upon as inhabiting the tomb, which was furnished and decorated for its
reception like a house; and it was provided with every needful article
for use and comfort. Even the buried body was supplied with tools
and implements for the ghost. The necessities of the shade are
quite different and more shadowy. He has no need of earthly tools or
implements. The objects found in the Long Barrows of the burying
folk and the Round Barrows of the cremationists well illustrate this
primordial and far-reaching difference. The Long Barrows of the Stone
Age people are piled above an interment; they contain a chambered tomb,
which is really the subterranean home or palace of the body buried in
it. The wives and slaves of the deceased were killed and interred with
him to keep him company in his new life in the grave; and implements,
weapons, drinking-cups, games, trinkets, and ornaments were buried with
their owners. The life in the grave was all as material and real as
this one; the same objects that served the warrior in this world
would equally serve him in the same form in the next. {065}It is quite
different with the Round Barrows of the Bronze Age cremationists. These
barrows are piled round an urn., which determines the shape of the
tumulus, as the chambered tomb and the corpse determine the shape of
the earlier Stone Age interments. They contain ashes alone; and the
implements and weapons placed in them are all broken or charred with
fire. Why? Because the ghost, immaterial as he has now become, can no
longer make use of solid earthly weapons or utensils. It is only their
ghosts or shadows that can be of any use to the ghostly possessor in the
land of shades. Hence everything he needs is burnt or broken, in order
that its ghost may be released and liberated; and all material objects
are now conceived as possessing such ghosts, which can be utilised
accordingly in the world of spirits.

Note also that with this advance from the surviving or revivable
Corpse to the immortal Soul or Spirit, there goes almost naturally and
necessarily a correlative advance from continued but solitary life in
the tomb to a freer and wider life in an underground world of shades and
spirits. The ghost gets greatly liberated and emancipated. He has more
freedom of movement, and becomes a citizen of an organised community,
often envisaged as ruled over by a King of the Dead, and as divided into
places of reward and punishment. But while we modern Europeans pretend
to be resurrectionists, it is a fact that our current ghostly and
eschatological conceptions (I speak of the world at large, not of mere
scholastic theologians) have been largely influenced by ideas derived
from this opposite doctrine--a doctrine once held by many or most of
our own ancestors, and familiarised to us from childhood in classical
literature. In fact, while most Englishmen of the present day believe
they believe in the Resurrection of the Body, what they really believe
in is the Immortality of the Soul..

It might seem at first sight as though a grave discrepancy existed
between the two incongruous ideas, first of burying {066}or burning your
dead so that they may not be able to return or to molest you, and second
of worshipping at their graves or making offerings to their disembodied
spirits. But to the savage mind these two conceptions are by no means
irreconcilable. While he jumps upon the corpse of his friend or his
father to keep it in the narrow pit he has digged for it, he yet brings
it presents of food and drink, or slays animals at the tomb, that the
ghost may be refreshed by the blood that trickles down to it. Indeed,
several intermediate customs occur, which help us to bridge over the
apparent gulf between reverential preservation of the mummified body,
and the coarse precautions of burial or burning. Thus, in many cases,
some of which we shall examine in the next chapter, after the body has
been for some time buried, the head is disinterred, and treasured with
care in the family oratory, where it is worshipped and tended, and where
it often gives oracles to the members of the household. A ceremonial
washing is almost always a feature in this reception of the head; it
recurs again and again in various cases, down to the enshrinement of the
head of Hoseyn at Cairo, and that of St. Denis at the abbey of the same
name, to both of which we shall allude once more at a far later stage of
our enquiry. For the present, it must suffice to say that the ceremonial
and oracular preservation of the head--the part which sees, and speaks,
and eats, and drinks, and listens--is a common feature in all religious
usages; that it gives rise apparently to the collections of family
skulls which adorn so many savage huts and oratories; that it may be
answerable ultimately for the Roman busts and many other imitative
images of the dead, in which the head alone is represented; and that
when transferred to the sacred human or animal victim (himself, as we
shall hereafter see, a slain god), it seems to account for the human
heads hung up by the Dyaks and other savages about their houses, as also
for the skulls of oxen and other sacred animals habitually displayed on
the front of places of {067}worship, whose last relic is the sculptured
oxen’s heads which fill the metopes in some Greek and most Roman
temples. Much of this, I admit, will be little comprehensible to the
reader at the present stage of our argument: but I beg him to bear in
mind provisionally this oracular and representative value of the head or
skull from this point forth; he will find, as he proceeds, its meaning
will become clearer and ever clearer at each successive stage of our
exposition.

I ought also to add that between complete preservation of the corpse
and the practice of burial there seems to have gone another intermediate
stage, now comparatively rare, but once very general, if we may judge
from the traces it has left behind it--a stage when all the body or part
of it was sacramentally eaten by the survivors as an act of devotion.
We will consider this curious and revolting practice more fully when we
reach the abstruse problem of sacrifice and sacrament; for the present
it will suffice to say that in many instances, in Australia, South
America, and elsewhere, the body is eaten, while only the bones are
burned or buried. Among these savages, again, it usually happens
that the head is cleaned of its flesh by cooking, while the skull is
ceremonially washed, and preserved as an object of household veneration
and an oracular deity. Instances will be quoted in succeeding chapters.

Thus, between the care taken to prevent returns of the corpse, and the
worship paid to the ghost or shade, primitive races feel no such sense
of discrepancy or incongruity as would instantly occur to civilised
people.

The three stages in human ideas with which this chapter deals may be
shortly summed up as corpse-worship, ghost-worship, and shade-worship.




