CHAPTER VIL--SACRED TREES.

|The {138}sacred tree stands less obviously in the direct line of
ancestry of gods and of God than the sacred stone and the sacred
stake which we have just considered. I would willingly pass it over,
therefore, in this long preliminary inquisition, could I safely do so,
in order to progress at once to the specific consideration of the God
of Israel and the rise of Monotheism. But the tree is nevertheless so
closely linked with the two other main objects of human worship that I
hardly see how I can avoid considering it here in the same connexion:
especially as in the end it has important implications with regard
to the tree of the cross, as well as to the True Vine, and many other
elements of Christian faith and Christian symbolism. I shall therefore
give it a short chapter as I pass, premising that I have already entered
into the subject at greater length in my excursus On the Origin of
Tree-Worship, appended to my verse translation of the _Attis_ of
Catullus.

The worship of sacred trees is almost as widely diffused over the whole
world as the worship of dead bodies, mummies, relics, graves, sacred
stones, sacred stakes, and stone or wooden idols. The great authorities
on the subject of Tree-Worship are Mannhardt’s _Baumkultus_ and Mr.
J. G. Frazer’s _The Golden Bough_. Neither of those learned and acute
writers, however, has fully seen the true origin of worship from funeral
practices: and therefore it becomes necessary to go over the same
ground again briefly here from the point of view afforded us by the
corpse-theory and {139}ghost-theory of the basis of religion. I shall
hope to add something to their valuable results, and also incidentally
to show that all the main objects of worship together leads us back
unanimously to the Cult of the Dead as their common starting-point.

Let us begin in this instance (contrary to our previous practice) by
examining and endeavouring to understand a few cases of the behaviour of
tree-spirits in various mythologies. Virgil tells us in the Third Æneid
how, on a certain occasion, Æneas was offering a sacrifice on a tumulus
crowned with dogwood and myrtle bushes. He endeavoured to pluck up some
of these by the roots, in order to cover the altar, as was customary,
with leaf-clad branches. As he did so, the first bush which he tore up
astonished him by exuding drops of liquid blood, which trickled and fell
upon the soil beneath. He tried again, and again the tree bled human
gore. On the third trial, a groan was heard proceeding from the tumulus,
and a voice assured Æneas that the barrow on which he stood covered the
murdered remains of his friend Polydorus.

Now, in this typical and highly illustrative myth--no doubt an ancient
and well-known story incorporated by Virgil in his great poem--we
see that the tree which grows upon a barrow is itself regarded as the
representative and embodiment of the dead man&rsquo;s soul, just as elsewhere
the snake which glides from the tomb of Anchises is regarded as the
embodied spirit of the hero, and just as the owls and bats which haunt
sepulchral caves are often identified in all parts of the world with the
souls of the departed.

Similar stories of bleeding or speaking trees or bushes occur abundantly
elsewhere. “When the oak is being felled,&rdquo; says Aubrey, in his
_Remains of Gentilisme_, “it gives a kind of shriekes and groanes that
may be heard a mile off, as if it were the genius of the oak lamenting.
E. Wyld, Esq., hath heared it severall times.&rdquo; Certain Indians, says
Bastian, dare not cut a particular plant, because there comes out of
it a red juice which they take for its blood. {140}I myself remember
hearing as a boy in Canada that wherever _Sanguinaria Canadensis_, the
common American bloodroot, grew in the woods, an Indian had once been
buried, and that the red drops of juice which exuded from the stem when
one picked the flowers were the dead man’s blood. In Samoa, says Mr.
Turner, the special abode of Tuifiti, King of Fiji, was a grove of large
and durable afzelia trees. “No one dared cut that timber. A story is
told of a party from Upolu who once attempted it, and the consequence
was that blood flowed from the tree, and that the sacrilegious strangers
all took ill and died.” Till 1855, says Mannhardt, there was a sacred
larch-tree at Nauders in the Tyrol, which was thought to bleed whenever
it was cut. In some of these cases, it is true, we do not actually know
that the trees grew on tumuli, but this point is specially noticed about
Polydorus&rsquo;s dogwood, and is probably implied in the Samoan case, as I
gather from the title given to the spirit as king of Fiji.

In other instances, however, such a doubt does not exist. We are
expressly told that it is the souls of the dead which are believed to
animate the speaking or bleeding trees. “The Dieyerie tribe of South
Australia,” says Mr. Frazer, “regard as very sacred certain trees
which are supposed to be their fathers transformed; hence they will not
cut the trees down, and protest against settlers doing so.” Some of
the Philippine Islanders believe that the souls of their forefathers
inhabit certain trees, which they therefore spare. If obliged to fell
one of these sacred trunks, they excuse themselves by saying that it was
the priests who made them fell it.

Now, how did this connexion between the tree and the ghost or ancestor
grow up? In much the same way, I imagine, as the connexion between the
sacred stone or the sacred stake and the dead chief who lies buried
beneath it. Whatever grows or stands upon the grave is sure to share the
honours paid to the spirit that dwells within it. Thus a snake or other
animal seen to glide out of a tomb is {141}instantly taken by savages
and even by half-civilised men as the genius or representative of the
dead inhabitant. But do trees grow out of graves? Undoubtedly, yes.
In the first place, they may grow by mere accident, as they might grow
anywhere else; the more so as the soil in such a case has been turned
and laboured. But beyond this, in the second place, it is common all
over the world to plant trees or shrubs over the graves of relatives or
tribesmen. Though direct evidence on this point is difficult to obtain,
a little is forthcoming. In Algeria, I observed, the Arab women went
on Fridays to plant flowers and shrubs on the graves of their immediate
dead. I learned from Mr. R. L. Stevenson that similar plantings take
place in Samoa and Fiji. The Tahitians put young casuarinas on graves.
In Roman Catholic countries the planting of shrubs in cemeteries takes
place usually on the _jour des morts_, a custom which would argue for it
an immense antiquity; for though it is a point of honour among Catholics
to explain this _fete_ as of comparatively recent origin, definitely
introduced by a particular saint at a particular period, its analogy to
similar celebrations elsewhere shows us that it is really a surviving
relic of a very ancient form of Manesworship.

In Græco-Roman antiquity it is certain that trees were frequently
planted around the barrows of the dead; and that leafy branches formed
part of the established ceremonial of funerals. I cannot do better than
quote in this respect once more the case of Polydorus:=

```Ergo instauramus Polydoro funus, et ingens

```Aggeritur tumulo tellus; stant Manibus aræ,

```Cæruleis mœstæ vittis atraque cupresso.=

Suetonius again tells us how the tumulus of the divine Augustus was
carefully planted; and the manner in which he notes the fact seems to me
to argue that some special importance was attached to the ceremony. The
acacia is one of the most sacred trees of Egypt; and Egyptian monuments,
with their usual frankness, show us a sarcophagus {142}from which an
acacia emerges, with the naïve motto, “Osiris springs forth.”,

An incident which occurred during the recent Sino-Japanese war shows how
easily points of this sort may be overlooked by hasty writers in formal
descriptions. One of the London illustrated papers printed an account of
the burial of the Japanese dead at Port Arthur, and after mentioning the
simple headstone erected at each grave volunteered the further statement
that nothing else marked the place of interment. But the engraving which
accompanied it, taken from a photograph, showed on the contrary that a
little tree had also been planted on each tiny tumulus.

I learn from Mr. William Simpson that the Tombs of the Kings near Pekin
are conspicuous from afar by their lofty groves of pine trees.

Evergreens, I believe, are specially planted upon graves or tumuli
because they retain their greenness throughout the entire winter, and
thus as it were give continuous evidence of the vitality and activity of
the indwelling spirit. Mr. Frazer has shown in _The Golden Bough_
that mistletoe similarly owes its special sanctity to the fact that it
visibly holds the soul of the tree uninjured in itself, while all the
surrounding branches stand bare and lifeless. Accordingly, tumuli are
very frequently crowned by evergreens. Almost all the round barrows in
southern England, for example, are topped by very ancient Scotch firs;
and as the Scotch fir is not an indigenous tree south of the Tweed,
it is practically certain that these old pines are the descendants of
ancestors put in by human hands when the barrows were first raised over
the cremated and buried bodies of prehistoric chieftains. In short,
the Scotch fir is in England the sacred tree of the barrows. As a rule,
however, in Northern Europe, the yew is the species specially planted
in graveyards, and several such yews in various parts of England and
Germany are held to possess a peculiar sanctity. The great clump of very
ancient yews in {143}Norbury Park near Dorking, known as the Druids’
Grove, has long been considered a holy wood of remote antiquity. In
southern Europe, the cypress replaces the yew as the evergreen most
closely connected with tombs and cemeteries. In Provence and Italy,
however, the evergreen holme-oak is almost equally a conventional
denizen of places of interment. M. Lajard in his able essay _Sur le
Culte du Cypres_ has brought together much evidence of this worship of
evergreens, among the Greeks, Etruscans, Romans, Phoenicians, Arabs,
Persians, Hindus, Chinese, and American nations.

Sacred trees, especially when standing alone, are treated in many
respects with the same ceremonial as is employed towards dead bodies,
mummies, graves, sacred stones, sacred stakes, and carved idols or
statues. In other words, the offerings to the ghost or god may be made
to the tree that grows on the grave just as well as to any other of the
recognised embodiments of the indwelling spirit. Darwin in the _Voyage
of the Beagle_ describes how the Indians of South America would greet
with loud shouts some sacred tree, standing solitary on some high part
of the Pampas; libations of brandy and maté were poured into a hole at
its base to gratify the soul of the deity who dwelt there. One of these
tree-gods had a name, Walleechu. The Congo people, again, put calabashes
of palm-wine at the foot of “trees treated as idols.” In other
cases, blood is smeared on the tree; or oil is offered to it. Mr.
Duff Macdonald’s Central Africans kill chickens at the foot of the
“prayer tree,” and let its blood trickle down to the roots. Oldfield
saw at Addacoodah fowls and many other articles of food suspended as
offerings to a gigantic tree. Sir William Hunter mentions that once a
year at Beerbhoom the Santals “make simple offerings to a ghost who
dwells in a Bela tree.” In Tonga, the natives lay presents of food
at the foot of particular trees which they believe to be inhabited by
spirits. I need not multiply {144}instances; they may be found by the
hundred in Dr. Tylor and other great anthropological collections.

Furthermore, the sacred tree is found in the closest possible connection
with the other indubitably ancestral monuments, the sacred stone and the
idol. “A Bengal village,” says Sir William Hunter, “has usually
its local god, which it adores either in the form of a rude unhewn
stone, or a stump, or a tree marked with red lead”; the last being
probably a substitute for the blood of human or animal victims with
which it was once watered. “Sometimes a lump of clay placed under a
tree does duty for a deity; and the attendant priest, when there is
one, generally belongs to one of the half-Hinduised low castes. The rude
stone represents the non-Aryan fetish; and the tree seems to owe its
sanctity to the non-Aryan belief that it forms the abode of the ghosts
or gods of the village.” That is to say, we have here ancestor-worship
in its undisguised early native development.

I may mention here in brief that, as we shall hereafter see, this
triple combination of stone, log, and tree forms almost the normal or
invariable composition of the primitive shrine the whole world over.

The association of the sacred tree with actual idols or images of
deceased ancestors is well seen in the following passage which I quote
from Dr. Tylor: “A clump of larches on a Siberian steppe, a grove
in the recesses of a forest, is the sanctuary of a Turanian tribe.
Gaily-decked idols in their warm fur coats, each set up beneath its
great tree swathed with cloth or tinplate, endless reindeer-hides and
peltry hanging to the trees around, kettles and spoons and snuff-horns
and household valuables strewn as offerings before the gods--such is the
description of a Siberian holy grove, at the stage when the contact of
foreign civilisation has begun by ornamenting the rude old ceremonial
it must end by abolishing. A race ethnologically allied to these
tribes, though risen to higher culture, kept up remarkable relics of
tree-worship in Northern Europe. In {145}Esthonian districts, within the
present century, the traveller might often see the sacred tree,
generally an ancient lime, oak, or ash, standing inviolate in a
sheltered spot near the dwelling-house; and the old memories are handed
down of the time when the first blood of a slaughtered beast was
sprinkled on its roots, that the cattle might prosper, or when an
offering was laid beneath the holy linden, on the stone where the
worshipper knelt on his bare knees, moving from east to west and back,
which stone he kissed when he had said, ‘Receive the food as an
offering.&lsquo;” After the evidence already given, I do not think there can
be a reasonable doubt, in such a combination of tree and stone, that we
have here a sacrifice to an ancestral spirit.

Similarly, in the courtyard of a Bodo house is planted the sacred
euphorbia of Batho, the national god, to which a priest offers prayer
and kills a pig. In the island of Tjumba, in the East Indies, a
festival is held after harvest, and vessels are filled with rice as a
thank-offering to the gods. Then the sacred stone at the foot of a palm
tree is sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed animal, and rice is
laid on the stone for the gods. When the Khonds settle a new village, a
sacred cotton tree must be planted with solemn rites, and beneath it is
placed the sacrificial stone which embodies or represents the village
deity. Among the Semites, says Professor Robertson Smith, “no
Canaanite high place was complete without its sacred tree standing
beside the altar.” We shall only fully understand the importance of
these facts, however, when we come later to consider the subject of the
manufacture of gods by deliberate process, and the nature of the bloody
ceremonial which always accompanies it.

In some of the above instances it is incidentally mentioned that the
trunks of sacred trees are occasionally draped, as we saw to be also
the case with sacred stones, sacred stakes, idols, and relics. Another
example of this practice is given in the account of the holy oak of
Romowe, venerated {146}by the ancient Prussians, which was hung with
drapery like the _ashera_, and decked with little hanging images of the
gods. The holy trees of Ireland are still covered with rag offerings.
Other cases will be noticed in other connexions hereafter.

Once more, just as stones come to be regarded as ancestors, so by a like
process do sacred trees. Thus Galton says in South Africa, “We passed
a magnificent tree. It was the parent of all the Damaras.... The savages
danced round it in great delight.” Several Indian tribes believe
themselves to be the sons of trees. Many other cases are noted by Mr.
Herbert Spencer and Dr. Tylor. I do not think it is necessary for our
argument to repeat them here. Sometimes, however, especially in later
rationalising times, the sacred tree is merely said to have been planted
by the god or hero whom it commemorates. Thus the cypresses of Herakles
at Daphne were believed to have been set on the spot by that deity,
while the tamarisk at Beersheba was supposed to have been placed there
by Abraham.

I hope it is clear from this rapid _resume_ that all the facts about the
worship of sacred trees stand exactly parallel to those with regard to
the worship of graves, mummies, idols, sacred stones, sacred stakes,
and other signs of departed spirits. Indeed, we have sometimes direct
evidence of such affiliation. Thus Mr. Turner says of a sacred tree on a
certain spot in the island of Savaii, which enjoyed rights of sanctuary
like the cities of refuge or a mediæval cathedral: “It is said that
the king of a division of Upolu, called Atua, once lived at that spot.
After he died, the house fell into decay; but the tree was fixed on as
representing the departed king, and out of respect for his memory it was
made the substitute of a living and royal protector.” By the light
of this remark we may surely interpret in a similar sense such other
statements of Mr. Turner’s as that a sweet-scented tree in another
place “was held to be the habitat of a household god, and anything
aromatic {147}which the family happened to get was presented to it as
an offering;” or again, “a family god was supposed to live” in
another tree; “and hence no one dared to pluck a leaf or break a
branch.” For family gods, as we saw in a previous chapter, are really
family ghosts, promoted to be deities.

In modern accounts of sacred trees much stress is usually laid upon the
fact that they are large and well-grown, often very conspicuous,
and occupying a height, where they serve as landmarks. Hence it has
frequently been taken for granted that they have been selected for
worship on account of their size and commanding position. This, however,
I think, is a case of putting the cart before the horse, as though one
were to say that St. Peter&rsquo;s and Westminster Abbey, the Temple of Karnak
or the Mosque of Omar, owed their sanctity to their imposing dimensions.
There is every reason why a sacred tree should grow to be exceptionally
large and conspicuous. Barrows are usually built on more or less
commanding heights, where they may attract general attention. The ground
is laboured, piled high, freed from weeds, and enriched by blood and
other offerings. The tree, being sacred, is tended and cared for. It is
never cut down, and so naturally on the average of instances grows to be
a big and well-developed specimen. Hence I hold the tree is usually big
because it is sacred, not sacred because it is big. On the other hand,
where a tree already full-grown is chosen for a place of burial, it
would no doubt be natural to choose a large and conspicuous one. Thus I
read of the tree under which Dr. Livingstone’s heart was buried by his
native servant, “It is the largest in the neighbourhood.”

Looking at the question broadly, the case stands thus. We know that in
many instances savages inter their dead under the shade of big trees.
We know that such trees are thereafter considered sacred, and worshipped
with blood, clothes, drapery, offerings. We know that young shrubs
{148}or trees are frequently planted on graves in all countries. We know
that whatever comes up on or out of a grave is counted as representative
of the ghost within it. The presumption is therefore in favour of any
particular sacred tree being of funereal origin; and the onus of proving
the opposite lies with the person who asserts some more occult and less
obvious explanation.

At the same time I am quite ready to allow here, as in previous
instances, when once the idea of certain trees being sacred has grown
common among men, many trees may come to possess by pure association
a sanctity of their own. This is doubtless the case in India with the
peepul, and in various other countries with various other trees. Exactly
the same thing has happened to stones. And so, again, though I believe
the temple to have been developed out of the tomb or its covering, I
do not deny that churches are now built apart from tombs, though always
dedicated to the worship of a God who is demonstrably a particular
deified personage.

Another point on which I must touch briefly is that of the sacred grove
or cluster of trees. These often represent, I take it, the trees planted
in the _temenos_ or sacred tabooed space which surrounds the primitive
tomb or temple. The _koubbas_ or little dome-shaped tombs of Mahommedan
saints so common in North Africa are all surrounded by such a walled
enclosure, within which ornamental or other trees are habitually
planted. In many cases these are palms--the familiar sacred tree of
Mesopotamia, about which more must be said hereafter in a later chapter.
The well-known _bois sacré_ at Blidah is a considerable grove, with
a _koubba_ in its midst. A similar _temenos_ frequently surrounded the
Egyptian and the Greek temple. I do not assert that these were always of
necessity actual tombs; but they were at any rate cenotaphs. When once
people had got accustomed to the idea that certain trees were sacred to
the memory of their ancestors or their gods, it would be but a slight
step to plant such trees {149}round an empty temple. When Xenophon, for
example, built a shrine to Artemis, and planted around it a grove of
many kinds of fruit trees, and placed in it an altar and an image of the
goddess, nobody would for a moment suppose he erected it over the body
of an actual dead Artemis. But men would never have begun building
temples and consecrating groves at all if they had not first built
houses for the dead god-chief, and planted shrubs and trees upon his
venerated tumulus. Nay, even the naïve inscription upon Xenophon’s
shrine--“He who lives here and enjoys the fruits of the ground must
every year offer the tenth part of the produce to the goddess, and out
of the residue keep the temple in repair”--does it not carry us back
implicitly to the origin of priesthood, and of the desire for perpetuity
in the due maintenance of the religious offices?

I shall say nothing here about the evolution of the great civilised
tree-gods like Attis and Adonis, so common in the region of the eastern
Mediterranean, partly because I have already treated them at some length
in the essay on Tree-Worship to which I have alluded above, and partly
because they would lead us too far afield from our present subject. But
a few words must be devoted in passing to the prevalence of tree-worship
among the Semitic peoples, intimately connected as it is with the rise
of certain important elements in the Christian cult.

“In all parts of the Semitic area,” says Professor Robertson Smith,
“trees were adored as divine.” Among the species thus honoured he
enumerates especially the pines and cedars of Lebanon, the evergreen
oaks of the Palestinian hills, the tamarisks of the Syrian jungles, and
the acacias of the Arabian wadies. Most of these, it will be noted, are
evergreens. In Arabia, the most striking case on record is that of the
sacred date-palm at Nejran. This was adored at an annual feast, when it
was “all hung with fine clothes and women’s ornaments.” A similar
tree existed at Mecca, to which the people resorted annually, {150}and
hung upon it weapons, garments, ostrich eggs, and other offerings. In a
sacred acacia at Nakla a goddess was supposed to live. The modern
Arabs still hang pieces of flesh on such sacred trees, honour them with
sacrifices, and present them with rags of calico and coloured beads.

As regards the Phoenicians and Canaanites, Philo Byblius says that
plants were in ancient times revered as gods, and honoured with
libations and sacrifices. Dr. Robertson Smith gives several instances.
Christianity has not extinguished the veneration for sacred trees in
Syria, where they are still prayed to in sickness and hung with rags.
The Moslems of Palestine also venerate the sacred trees of immemorial
antiquity.

In the Hebrew scriptures tree-worship constantly appears, and is frankly
dwelt with by Professor Robertson Smith, who does not refuse to connect
with this set of beliefs the legend of Jahweh in the burning bush. The
local altars of early Hebrew cult were habitually set up “under green
trees.” On this subject I would refer the reader to Dr. Smith’s own
interesting disquisition on p. 193 of The Religion of the Semites.

With regard to the general sacredness of vegetation, and especially of
food-plants, such as corn, the vine, and the date-palm, I postpone that
important subject for the present, till we come to consider the gods
of cultivation, and the curious set of ideas which gradually led up to
sacramental god-eating. In a theme so vast and so involved as that of
human religion, it becomes necessary to take one point at a time, and to
deal with the various parts in analytic isolation.

We have now examined briefly almost all the principal sacred objects of
the world, according to classes--the corpse, the mummy, the idol, the
sacred stone, the sacred stake, the sacred tree or grove; there remains
but one other group of holy things, very generally recognised, which I
do not propose to examine separately, but to which {151}a few words may
yet be devoted at the end of a chapter. I mean, the sacred wells. It
might seem at first sight as if these could have no possible connection
with death or burial; but that expectation is, strange to say, delusive.
There appears to be some reason for bringing wells, too, into the
widening category of funereal objects. The oxen’s well at Acre, for
example, was visited by Christian, Jewish, and Moslem pilgrims; it was
therefore an object of great ancient sanctity; but observe this point:
there is a _mashhed_ or sacred tomb beside it, “perhaps the modern
representative of the ancient Memnonium.” Every Egyptian temple had
in like manner its sacred lake. In modern Syria, “cisterns are always
found beside the grave of saints, and are believed to be inhabited by a
sort of fairy. A pining child is thought to be a fairy changeling, and
must be lowered into the cistern.” The similarity of the belief about
holy wells in England and Ireland, and their frequent association with
the name of a saint, would seem to suggest for them a like origin.
Sacred rivers usually rise from sacred springs, near which stands a
temple. The river Adonis took its origin at the shrine of Aphaca: and
the grave of Adonis, about whom much more must be said hereafter, stood
near the mouth of the holy stream that was reddened by his blood. The
sacred river Belus had also its peculiar Memnonium or Adonis tomb. But I
must add that sacred rivers had likewise their annual god-victims, about
whom we shall have a great deal to say at a later stage of our enquiry,
and from whom in part they probably derived their sanctity. Still, that
their holiness was also due in part, and originally, to tombs at their
sources, I think admits of no reasonable doubt.

The equivalence of the holy well and the holy stone is shown by the fact
that while a woman whose chastity was suspected had to drink water of a
sacred spring to prove her innocence, at Mecca she had to swear seventy
oaths by the Kaaba.

Again, {152}sacred wells and fountains were and are worshipped with just
the same acts of sacrifice as ghosts and images. At Aphaca, the pilgrims
cast into the holy pool, jewels of gold and silver, with webs of linen
and other precious stuffs. A holy grove was an adjunct of the holy
spring: in Greece, according to Botticher, they were seldom separated.
At the annual fair of the Sacred Terebinth, or tree and well of Abraham
at Mamre, the heathen visitors offered sacrifices beside the tree, and
cast into the well libations of wine, with cakes, coins, myrrh, and
incense: all of which we may compare with the Ostyak offerings to
ancestral grave-stakes. At the holy waters of Karwa, bread, fruit, and
other foods were laid beside the fountain. At Mecca, and at the Stygian
Waters in the Syrian desert, similar gifts were cast into the holy
source. In one of these instances at least we know that the holy well
was associated with an actual burial; for at Aphaca, the holiest shrine
of Syria, the tomb of the local Baal or god was shown beside the sacred
fountain. “A buried god,” says Dr. Robertson Smith quaintly, in
commenting on this fact, “is a god that dwells under ground.” It
would be far truer and more philosophical to say that a god who dwells
underground is a buried man.

I need not recall the offerings to Cornish and Irish well-spirits, which
have now degenerated for the most part into pins and needles.

On the whole, though it is impossible to understand the entire genesis
of sacred founts and rivers without previous consideration of deliberate
god-making, a subject which I reserve for a later portion of our
exposition, I do not think we shall go far wrong in supposing that
the sacred well most often occurs in company with the sacred tree,
the sacred stone or altar, and the sacred tomb; and that it owes its
sanctity in the last resort, originally at least, to a burial by its
side; though I do not doubt that this sanctity was in many cases kept up
by the annual immolation of a fresh victim-god, of a type whose genesis
will hereafter {153}detain us. Indeed, Dr. Robertson Smith says of the
Semitic worship in general, “The usual natural symbols are a fountain
or a tree, while the ordinary artificial symbol is a pillar or pile of
stones: but very often all three are found together, and this was the
rule in the more developed sanctuaries.” I cannot agree with him on
the point of “symbolism”: but the collocation of objects is at least
significant.

Thus, in ultimate analysis, we see that all the sacred objects of the
world are either dead men themselves, as corpse, mummy, ghost, or god;
or else the tomb where such men are buried; or else the temple, shrine,
or hut which covers the tomb; or else the tombstone, altar, image, or
statue, standing over it and representing the ghost; or else the stake,
idol, or household god which is fashioned as their deputy; or else the
tree which grows above the barrow; or else the well, or tank, or spring,
natural or artificial, by whose side the dead man has been laid to rest.
In one form or another, from beginning to end, we find only, in Mr.
William Simpson’s graphic phrase, “the Worship of Death,” as the
basis and root of all human religion.




