Project Gutenberg's The Evolution of the Idea of God, by Grant Allen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Evolution of the Idea of God
       An Inquiry into the Origins of Religions

Author: Grant Allen

Release Date: July 25, 2018 [EBook #57581]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EVOLUTION OF THE IDEA OF GOD ***




Produced by David Widger from page images generously
provided by the Internet Archive








THE EVOLUTION OF THE IDEA OF GOD

AN INQUIRY INTO THE ORIGINS OF RELIGIONS

BY GRANT ALLEN

AUTHOR OF “PHYSIOLOGICAL ÆSTHETICS” “THE COLOURS OF FLOWERS”
“FORCE AND ENERGY” ETC

LONDON: GRANT RICHARDS 1897




PREFACE

|TWO main schools of religious thinking exist in our midst at the
present day: the school of humanists and the school of animists. This
work is to some extent an attempt to reconcile them. It contains, I
believe, the first extended effort that has yet been made to trace the
genesis of the belief in a God from its earliest origin in the mind of
primitive man up to its fullest development in advanced and etherealised
Christian theology. My method is therefore constructive, not
destructive. Instead of setting out to argue away or demolish a
deep-seated and ancestral element in our complex nature, this book
merely posits for itself the psychological question, “By what
successive steps did men come to frame for themselves the conception of
a deity?”--or, if the reader so prefers it, “How did we arrive at
our knowledge of God?” It seeks provisionally to answer these profound
and important questions by reference to the earliest beliefs of savages,
past or present, and to the testimony of historical documents and
ancient monuments. It does not concern itself at all with the validity
or invalidity of the ideas in themselves; it does but endeavour to show
how inevitable they were, and how man’s relation with the external
universe was certain _a priori_ to beget them as of necessity.

In so vast a synthesis, it would be absurd to pretend at the present day
that one approached one’s subject entirely _de novo_. Every enquirer
must needs depend much upon the various researches of his predecessors
in various parts of his field of enquiry. The problem before us divides
itself into three main portions: _first_, how did men come to believe
in many gods--the origin of polytheism; _second_, how, by elimination
of most of these gods, did certain races of men come to believe in one
single supreme and omnipotent God--the origin of monotheism; _third_
how, having arrived at that concept, did the most advanced races and
civilisations come to conceive of that God as Triune, and to identify
one of his Persons with a particular divine and human incarnation--the
origin of Christianity. In considering each of these three main problems
I have been greatly guided and assisted by three previous enquirers or
sets of enquirers.

As to the _origin of polytheism_, I have adopted in the main Mr. Herbert
Spencer’s remarkable ghost theory, though with certain important
modifications and additions. In this part of my work I have also been
largely aided by materials derived from Mr. Duff Macdonald, the able
author of _Africana_, from Mr. Turner, the well-known Samoan missionary,
and from several other writers, supplemented as they are by my own
researches among the works of explorers and ethnologists in general. On
the whole, I have here accepted the theory which traces the origin
of the belief in gods to primeval ancestor-worship, or rather
corpse-worship, as against the rival theory which traces its origin to a
supposed primitive animism.

As to the _rise of monotheism_, I have been influenced in no small
degree by Kuenen and the Teutonic school of Old Testament criticism,
whose ideas have been supplemented by later concepts derived from
Professor Robertson Smith’s admirable work, _The Religion of the
Semites_. But here, on the whole, the central explanation I have to
offer is, I venture to think, new and original: the theory, good or bad,
of the circumstances which led to the elevation of the ethnical Hebrew
God, Jahweh, above all his rivals, and his final recognition as the only
true and living god, is my own and no one else’s.

As to the _origin of Christianity_, and its relations to the preceding
cults of corn and wine gods, I have been guided to a great extent by
Mr. J. G. Frazer and Mannhardt, though I do not suppose that either the
living or the dead anthropologist would wholly acquiesce in the use I
have made of their splendid materials. Mr. Frazer, the author of that
learned work, _The Golden Bough_, has profoundly influenced the opinions
of all serious workers at anthropology and the science of religion, and
I cannot too often acknowledge the deep obligations under which I lie to
his profound and able treatises. At the same time, I have so transformed
the material derived from him and from Dr. Robertson Smith as to have
made it in many ways practically my own; and I have supplemented it
by several new examples and ideas, suggested in the course of my own
tolerably wide reading.

Throughout the book as a whole, I also owe a considerable debt to Dr. E.
B. Tylor, from whom I have borrowed much valuable matter; to Mr. Sidney
Hartland’s _Legend of Perseus_; to Mr. Lawrence Gomme, who has come
nearer at times than anyone else to the special views and theories
here promulgated; and to Mr. William Simpson of the _Illustrated London
News_, an unobtrusive scholar whose excellent monographs on _The Worship
of Death_ and kindred subjects have never yet received the attention
They deserve, at the hands of unprejudiced students of religion. My
other obligations, to Dr. Mommsen, to my friends Mr. Edward Clodd,
Professor John Rhys, and Professor York Powell, as well as to numerous
travellers, missionaries, historians, and classicists, are too frequent
to specify.

Looking at the subject broadly, I would presume to say once more that
my general conclusions may be regarded as representing to some extent
a reconciliation between the conflicting schools of humanists and
animists, headed respectively by Mr. Spencer and Mr. Frazer, though with
a leaning rather to the former than the latter.

At the same time it would be a great mistake to look upon my book as
in any sense a mere eirenicon or compromise. On the contrary, it is in
every part a new and personal work, containing, whatever its value, a
fresh and original synthesis of the subject. I would venture to
point out as especially novel the two following points: the complete
demarcation of religion from mythology, as practice from mere
explanatory gloss or guesswork; and the important share assigned in the
genesis of most existing religious systems to the deliberate manufacture
of gods by killing. This doctrine of the manufactured god, to which
nearly half my book is devoted, seems to me to be a notion of cardinal
value. Among other new ideas of secondary rank, I would be bold enough
to enumerate the following: the establishment of three successive stages
in the conception of the Life of the Dead, which might be summed up as
Corpse-worship, Ghost-worship, and Shade-worship, and which answer
to the three stages of preservation or mummification, burial, and
cremation; the recognition of the high place to be assigned to the
safe-keeping of the oracular head in the growth of idol-worship; the
importance attached to the sacred stone, the sacred stake, and the
sacred tree, and the provisional proof of their close connection with
the graves of the dead; the entirely new conception of the development
of monotheism among the Jews from the exclusive cult of the jealous god;
the hypothesis of the origin of cultivation from tumulus-offerings,
and its connection with the growth of gods of cultivation; the wide
expansion given to the ancient notion of the divine-human victim; the
recognition of the world-wide prevalence of the five-day festival of
the corn or wine god, and of the close similarity which marks its
rites throughout all the continents, including America; the suggested
evolution of the god-eating sacraments of lower religions from the
cannibal practice of honorifically eating one’s dead relations; * and
the evidence of the wide survival of primitive corpse-worship down to
our own times in civilised Europe. I could largely increase this rapid
list of what I believe to be the new contributions here made to the
philosophy of religious evolution; but I purposely refrain. I think
it will be allowed that if even a few of these ideas turn out on
examination to be both new and true, my book will have succeeded in
justifying its existence.

     * While this work was passing through the press a similar
     theory has been propounded by Mr. Flinders Petrie in an
     article on “Eaten with Honour,” in which he reviews briefly
     the evidence for the custom in Egypt and elsewhere.

I put forth this work with the utmost diffidence. The harvest is vast
and the labourers are few. I have been engaged upon collecting and
comparing materials for more than twenty years. I have been engaged in
writing my book for more than ten. As I explain in the last chapter, the
present first sketch of the conclusions at which I have at last arrived
is little more than provisional. I desire in my present essay merely to
lay down the lines of the general theory which after so many years of
study I incline to accept. If my attempt succeeds in attracting public
attention, I hope to follow it up by several other volumes in which
the main opinions or suggestions here set forth may be reinforced and
expanded by copious collections of evidence and illustrations. If it
fails to arouse public attention, however, I must perforce be satisfied
with this very inadequate preliminary statement. I should also like to
add here, what I point out at greater length in the body of the work,
that I do not hold dogmatically to all or to a single one of the ideas
I have now expressed. They are merely conceptions forced upon my mind by
the present state of the evidence; and I recognise the fact that in so
vast and varied a province, where almost encyclopaedic knowledge would
be necessary in order to enable one to reach a decided conclusion, every
single one or all together of these conceptions are liable to be upset
by further research. I merely say, “This is how the matter figures
itself to me at present, on the strength of the facts now and here known
to us.”

A few chapters of the book were separately published in various reviews
at the time they were first written. They were composed, however, from
the outset, as parts of this book, which does not therefore consist
of disconnected essays thrown into line in an artificial unity. Each
occupies the precise place in the argument for which it was first
intended. The chapters in question are those on “Religion and
Mythology,” and “The Life of the Dead,” contributed under
the titles of “Practical Religion” and “Immortality and
Resurrection” to the _Fortnightly Re-view_; that on “Sacred
Stones,” contributed under the same name to the same periodical;
and that on “The Gods of Egypt,” which originally appeared in the
_Universal Review_. I have to thank the proprietors and editors of those
magazines for permission to print them in their proper place here. They
have all been altered and brought up as far as I could bring them to
the existing state of our knowledge with regard to the subjects of which
they treat.

In dealing with so large a variety of materials, drawn from all times
and places, races and languages, it would be well-nigh impossible
to avoid errors. Such as my own care could discover I have of course
corrected: for the rest, I must ask on this ground the indulgence of
those who may happen to note them.

I have endeavoured to write without favour or prejudice, animated by a
single desire to discover the truth. Whether I have succeeded in that
attempt or not, I trust my book may be received in the same spirit in
which it has been written,--a spirit of earnest anxiety to learn all
that can be learnt by enquiry and investigation of man’s connection
with his God, in the past and the present. In this hope I commit it to
the kindly consideration of that small section of the reading public
which takes a living interest in religious questions.




THE EVOLUTION OF THE IDEA OF GOD.




CHAPTER I.--CHRISTIANITY AS A RELIGIOUS STANDARD.

|I propose in this work to trace out in rough outline the evolution of
the idea of God from its earliest and crudest beginnings in the savage
mind of primitive man to that highly evolved and abstract form which it
finally assumes in contemporary philosophical and theological thinking.

In the eyes of the modern evolutionary enquirer the interest of the
origin and history of this widespread idea is mainly psychological. We
have before us a vast and pervasive group of human opinions, true or
false, which have exercised and still exercise an immense influence upon
the development of mankind and of civilisation: the question arises, Why
did human beings ever come to hold these opinions at all, and how did
they arrive at them? What was there in the conditions of early man which
led him to frame to himself such abstract notions of one or more great
supernatural agents, of whose objective existence he had certainly
in nature no clear or obvious evidence? Regarding the problem in this
light, as essentially a problem of the processes of the human mind, I
set aside from the outset, as foreign to my purpose, any kind of enquiry
into the objective validity of any one among the religious beliefs thus
set {002}before us as subject-matter. The question whether there may
be a God or gods, and, if so, what may be his or their substance and
attributes, do not here concern us. All we have to do in our present
capacity is to ask ourselves strictly, What first suggested to the mind
of man the notion of deity in the abstract at all? And how, from the
early multiplicity of deities which we find to have prevailed in all
primitive times among all human races, did the conception of a single
great and unlimited deity first take its rise? In other words, why did
men ever believe there were gods at all, and why from many gods did
they arrive at one? Why from polytheism have the most advanced nations
proceeded to monotheism?

To put the question in this form is to leave entirely out of
consideration the objective reality or otherwise of the idea itself.
To analyse the origin of a concept is not to attack the validity of the
belief it encloses. The idea of gravitation, for example, arose by slow
degrees in human minds, and reached at last its final expression in
Newton’s law. But to trace the steps by which that idea was gradually
reached is not in any way to disprove or to discredit it. The Christian
believer may similarly hold that men arrived by natural stages at the
knowledge of the one true God; he is not bound to reject the final
conception as false merely because of the steps by which it was slowly
evolved. A creative God, it is true, might prefer to make a sudden
revelation of himself to some chosen body of men; but an evolutionary
God, we may well believe, might prefer in his inscrutable wisdom to
reveal his own existence and qualities to his creatures by means of
the same slow and tentative intellectual gropings as those by which
he revealed to them the physical truths of nature. I wish my enquiry,
therefore, to be regarded, not as destructive, but as reconstructive.
It only attempts to recover and follow out the various planes in the
evolution of the idea of God, rather than to cast doubt upon the truth
of the evolved concept.

In{003} investigating any abstruse and difficult subject, it is often
best to proceed from the known to the unknown, even although the unknown
itself may happen to come first in the order of nature and of logical
development. For this reason, it may be advisable to begin here with
a brief preliminary examination of Christianity, which is not only the
most familiar of all religions to us Christian nations, but also the
best known in its origins: and then to show how far we may safely use
it as a Standard of Reference in explaining the less obvious and certain
features of earlier or collateral cults.

Christianity, then, viewed as a religious standard, has this clear and
undeniable advantage over almost every other known form of faith--that
it quite frankly and confessedly sets out in its development with the
worship of a particular Deified Man.

This point in its history cannot, I think, be overrated in importance,
because in that single indubitable central fact it gives us the key to
much that is cardinal in all other religions; every one of which, as I
hope hereafter to show, equally springs, directly or indirectly, from
the worship of a single Deified Man, or of many Deified Men, more or
less etherealised.

Whatever else may be said about the origin of Christianity, it is at
least fairly agreed on either side, both by friends and foes, that
this great religion took its rise around the personality of a certain
particular Galilean teacher, by name Jesus, concerning whom, if we know
anything at all with any approach to certainty, we know at least that
he was a man of the people, hung on a cross in Jerusalem under the
procuratorship of Caius Pontius Pilatus. That kernel of fact--a man, and
his death--Jesus Christ and him crucified--is the one almost undoubted
historical nucleus round which all the rest of a vast European and
Asiatic system of thought and belief has slowly crystallised.

Let us figure clearly to ourselves the full import of these truths.
{004}A Deified Man is the central figure in the faith of Christendom.

From the very beginning, however, a legend, true or false (but whose
truth or falsity has no relation whatever to our present subject),
gathered about the personality of this particular Galilean peasant
reformer. Reverenced at first by a small body of disciples of his
own race and caste, he grew gradually in their minds into a divine
personage, of whom strange stories were told, and a strange history
believed by a group of ever-increasing adherents in all parts of the
Græco-Roman Mediterranean civilisation. The earliest of these stories,
in all probability--certainly the one to which most importance was
attached by the pioneers of the faith--clustered about his death and its
immediate sequence. Jesus, we are told, was crucified, dead, and buried.
But at the end of three days, if we may credit the early documents of
our Christian faith, his body was no longer to be found in the sepulchre
where it had been laid by friendly hands: and the report spread abroad
that he had risen again from the dead, and lived once more a somewhat
phantasmal life among the living in his province. Supernatural
messengers announced his resurrection to the women who had loved him: he
was seen in the flesh from time to time for very short periods by one
or other among the faithful who still revered his memory. At last,
after many such appearances, more or less fully described in the crude
existing narratives, he was suddenly carried up to the sky before the
eyes of his followers, where, as one of the versions authoritatively
remarks, he was “received into heaven, and sat on the right hand of
God”--that is to say, of Jahweh, the ethnical deity of the Hebrew
people.

Such in its kernel was the original Christian doctrine as handed down to
us amid a mist of miracle, in four or five documents of doubtful age and
uncertain authenticity. Even this central idea does not fully appear
in the Pauline epistles, believed to be the oldest in date of all our
Christian {005}writings: it first takes full shape in the somewhat
later Gospels and Acts of the Apostles. In the simplest and perhaps the
earliest of these definite accounts we are merely told the story of the
death and resurrection, the latter fact being vouched for on the
dubious testimony of “a young man clothed in a long white
garment,” supplemented (apparently at a later period) by subsequent
“appearances” to various believers. With the controversies
which have raged about these different stories, however, the broad
anthropological enquiry into the evolution of God has no concern. It is
enough for us here to admit, what the evidence probably warrants us in
concluding, that a real historical man of the name of Jesus did once
exist in Lower Syria, and that his disciples at a period very shortly
after his execution believed him to have actually risen from the dead,
and in due time to have ascended into heaven.

At a very early date, too, it was further asserted that Jesus was in
some unnatural or supernatural sense “the son of God”--that is to
say, once more, the son of Jahweh, the local and national deity of
the Jewish people. In other words, his worship was affiliated upon the
earlier historical worship of the people in whose midst he lived, and
from whom his first disciples were exclusively gathered. It was not, as
we shall more fully see hereafter, a revolutionary or purely destructive
system. It based itself upon the common conceptions of the Semitic
community. The handful of Jews and Galileans who accepted Jesus as a
divine figure did not think it necessary, in adopting him as a god,
to get rid of their own preconceived religious opinions. They believed
rather in his prior existence, as a part of Jahweh, and in his
incarnation in a human body for the purpose of redemption. And when his
cult spread around into neighboring countries (chiefly, it would seem,
through the instrumentality of one Paul of Tarsus, who had never seen
him, or had beheld him only in what is vaguely called “a vision”)
the cult {006}of Jahweh went hand in hand with it, so that a sort of
modified mystic monotheism, based on Judaism, became the early creed of
the new cosmopolitan Christian church.

Other legends, of a sort familiar in the lives of the founders of creeds
and churches elsewhere, grew up about the life of the Christian leader;
or at any rate, incidents of a typical kind were narrated by his
disciples as part of his history. That a god or a godlike person should
be born of a woman by the ordinary physiological processes of humanity
seems derogatory to his dignity--perhaps fatal to his godhead: *
therefore it was asserted--we know not whether truly or otherwise--that
the founder of Christianity, by some mysterious afflatus, was born of a
virgin. Though described at times as the son of one Joseph, a carpenter,
of Nazareth, and of Mary, his betrothed wife, he was also regarded in an
alternative way as the son of the Hebrew god Jahweh, just as Alexander,
though known to be the son of Philip, was also considered to be the
offspring of Amon-Ra or Zeus Ammon. We are told, in order to lessen
this discrepancy (on the slender authority of a dream of Joseph’s),
how Jesus was miraculously conceived by the Holy Spirit of Jahweh in
Mary’s womb. He was further provided with a royal pedigree from the
house of David, a real or mythical early Hebrew king; and prophecies
from the Hebrew sacred books were found to be fulfilled in his most
childish adventures. In one of the existing biographies, commonly
ascribed to Luke, the companion of Paul, but supposed to bear traces of
much later authorship, many such marvellous stories are recounted of
his infantile adventures: and in all our documents, miracles attest his
supernatural powers, while appeal is constantly made to the fulfilment
of supposed predictions (all of old Hebrew origin) as a test and
credential of the reality of his divine mission.

     * On this subject, see Mr. Sidney Hartland’s Legend of
     Perseus, vol. i.

We {007}shall see hereafter that these two points--the gradual growth
of a myth or legend, and affiliation upon earlier local religious
ideas--are common features in the evolution of gods in general, and of
the God of monotheism in particular. In almost every case where we can
definitely track him to his rise, the deity thus begins with a Deified
Man, elevated by his worshippers to divine rank, and provided with a
history of miraculous incident, often connected with the personality of
preexistent deities.

In the earlier stages, it seems pretty clear that the relations of
nascent Christianity to Judaism were vague and undefined: the Christians
regarded themselves as a mere sect of the Jews, who paid special
reverence to a particular dead teacher, now raised to heaven by a
special apotheosis of a kind with which everyone was then familiar. But
as the Christian church spread to other lands, by the great seaports, it
became on the one hand more distinct and exclusive, while on the other
hand it became more definitely dogmatic and theological. It was in
Egypt, it would seem, that the Christian Pantheon (if I may be allowed
the expression in the case of a religion nominally monotheistic) first
took its definite Trinitarian shape. Under the influence of the old
Egyptian love for Triads or Trinities of gods, a sort of mystical triune
deity was at last erected out of the Hebrew Jahweh and the man Jesus,
with the aid of the Holy Spirit or Wisdom of Jahweh, which had come
to be regarded by early Christian minds (under the influence of direct
divine inspiration or otherwise) as a separate and coordinate person of
this composite godhead. How far the familiar Egyptian Trinity of Osiris,
Isis, and Horus may have influenced the conception of the Christian
Trinity, thus finally made up of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we shall
discuss at a later stage of our enquiry; for the present, it may suffice
to point out that the Græco-Egyptian Athanasius was the great upholder
of the definite dogma of the Trinity against opposing (heretical)
Christian thinkers; and {008}that the hymn or so-called creed known by
his name (though not in all probability of his own composition) bears
the impress of the mystical Egyptian spirit, tempered by the Alexandrian
Greek delight in definiteness and minuteness of philosophical
distinction.

In this respect, too, we shall observe in the sequel that the history of
Christianity, the most known among the religions, was exactly parallel
to that of earlier and obscurer creeds. At first, the relations of the
gods to one another are vague and undetermined; their pedigree is often
confused and even contradictory; and the pantheon lacks anything like
due hierarchical system or subordination of persons. But as time goes
on, and questions of theology or mythology are debated among the priests
and other interested parties, details of this sort get settled in the
form of rigid dogmas, while subtle distinctions of a philosophical or
metaphysical sort tend to be imported by more civilised men into the
crude primitive faith. The belief that began with frank acceptance of
Judaism, plus a personal worship of the Deified Man, Jesus, crystallised
at last into the Catholic Faith in one God, of three persons, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Quibbles are even made, and discussions raised at last as to the
question whether Father and Son are “of one substance” or only “of
like substance”; whether the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and
the Son, or from the Father only; and so on _ad infinitum_.

It was largely in other countries than Judæa, and especially in Gaul,
Rome, and Egypt, too, as I believe, that symbolism came to the aid of
mysticism: that the cross, the tau, the labarum, the fish, the Alpha
and Omega, and all the other early Christian emblems were evolved and
perfected; and that the beginnings of Christian art took their first
definite forms. Such forms were especially to a great extent evolved
in the Roman catacombs. Christianity, being a universal, not a local or
national, religion, has {009}adopted in its course many diverse elements
from most varied sources.

Originally, it would seem, the Christian pantheon was almost exclusively
filled by the triune God, in his three developments or “persons,”
as thus rigorously conceived by the Alexandrian intelligence. But from
a very early time, if not from the first dawn of the Christian cult, it
was customary to reverence the remains of those who had suffered for the
faith, and perhaps even to invoke their aid with Christ and the Father.
The Roman branch of the church, especially, accustomed to the Roman
ancestor-worship and the Roman reverence for the Du Manes, had its
chief places of prayer in the catacombs, where its dead were laid.
Thus arose the practice of the invocation of saints, at whose graves
or relics prayers were offered, both to the supreme deity and to the
faithful dead themselves as intercessors with Christ and the Father. The
early Christians, accustomed in their heathen stage to pay respect
and even worship to the spirits of their deceased friends, could not
immediately give up this pious custom after their conversion to the
new creed, and so grafted it on to their adopted religion. Thus the
subsidiary founders of Christianity, Paul, Peter, the Apostles, the
Evangelists, the martyrs, the confessors, came to form, as it were, a
subsidiary pantheon, and to rank to some extent almost as an inferior
order of deities.

Among the persons who thus shared in the honours of the new faith,
the mother of Jesus early assumed a peculiar prominence. Goddesses
had filled a very large part in the devotional spirit of the older
religions: it was but natural that the devotees of Isis and Pasht, of
Artemis and Aphrodite, should look for some corresponding object of
feminine worship in the younger faith. The Theotokos, the mother of
God, the blessed Madonna, soon came to possess a practical importance
in Christian worship scarcely inferior to that enjoyed by the persons of
the Trinity themselves--in certain southern countries, indeed, actually
superior {010}to it. The Virgin and Child, in pictorial representation,
grew to be the favourite subject of Christian art. How far this
particular development of the Christian spirit had its origin in Egypt,
and was related to the well-known Egyptian figures of the goddess
Isis with the child Horus in her lap, is a question which may demand
consideration in some future treatise. For the present, it will be
enough to call attention in passing to the fact that in this secondary
rank of deities or semi-divine persons, the saints and martyrs, all
alike, from the Blessed Virgin Mary down to the newest canonised among
Roman Catholic prelates, were at one time or another Living Men and
Women. In other words, besides the one Deified Man, Jesus, round whom
the entire system of Christianity centres, the Church now worships also
in the second degree a whole host of minor Dead Men and Women, bishops,
priests, virgins, and confessors.

From the earliest to the latest ages of the Church, the complexity thus
long ago introduced into her practice has gone on increasing with every
generation. Nominally from the very outset a monotheistic religion,
Christianity gave up its strict monotheism almost at the first start by
admitting the existence of three persons in the godhead, whom it vainly
endeavoured to unify by its mystic but confessedly incomprehensible
Athanasian dogma. The Madonna (with the Child) rose in time practically
to the rank of an independent goddess (in all but esoteric Catholic
theory): while St. Sebastian, St. George, St. John Baptist, St.
Catherine, and even St. Thomas of Canterbury himself, became as
important objects of worship in certain places as the deity in person.
At Milan, for example, San Carlo Borromeo, at Compostella, Santiago, at
Venice, St. Mark, usurped to a great extent the place of the original
God. As more and more saints died in each generation, while the cult of
the older saints still lingered on everywhere more or less locally,
the secondary pantheon grew ever fuller and fuller. Obscure personages,
{011}like St. Crispin and St. Cosmas, St. Chad and St. Cuthbert rose
to the rank of departmental or local patrons, like the departmental and
local gods of earlier religions. Every trade, every guild, every nation,
every province, had its peculiar saint. And at the same time, the
theory of the Church underwent a constant evolution. Creed was added
to creed--Apostles’, Nicene, Athanasian, and so forth, each embodying
some new and often subtle increment to the whole mass of accepted dogma.
Council after council made fresh additions of articles of faith--the
Unity of Substance, the Doctrine of the Atonement, the Immaculate
Conception, the Authority of the Church, the Infallibility of the Pope
in his spiritual capacity. And all these also are well-known incidents
of every evolving cult: constant increase in the number of divine
beings; constant refinements in the articles of religion, under the
influence of priestly or scholastic metaphysics.

Two or three other points must still be noted in this hasty review of
the evolution of Christianity, regarded as a standard of religion; and
these I will now proceed to consider with all possible brevity.

In the matter of ceremonial and certain other important accessories of
religion it must frankly be admitted that Christianity rather borrowed
from the older cults than underwent a natural and original development
on its own account. A priesthood, as such, does not seem to have formed
any integral or necessary part of the earliest Christendom: and when
the orders of bishops, priests, and deacons were introduced into the
new creed, the idea seems to have been derived rather from the existing
priesthoods of anterior religions than from any organic connexion
with the central facts of the new worship. From the very nature of the
circumstances this would inevitably result. For the primitive temple
(as we shall see hereafter) was the Dead Man’s tomb; the altar was
his gravestone; and the priest was the relative or representative who
continued for him the customary gifts to the ghost {012}at the grave.
But the case of Jesus differs from almost every other case on record of
a Deified Man in this--that his body seems to have disappeared at an
early date; and that, inasmuch as his resurrection and ascension into
heaven were made the corner-stone of the new faith, it was impossible
for worship of his remains to take the same form as had been taken in
the instances of almost all previously deified Dead Persons. Thus, the
materials out of which the Temple, the Altar, Sacrifices, Priesthood,
are usually evolved (as we shall hereafter see) were here to a very
large extent necessarily wanting.

Nevertheless, so essential to religion in the minds of its followers
are all these imposing and wonted accessories that our cult did actually
manage to borrow them readymade from the great religions that went
before it, and to bring them into some sort of artificial relation with
its own system. You cannot revolutionize the human mind at one blow.
The pagans had been accustomed to all these ideas as integral parts
of religion as they understood it: and they proceeded as Christians
to accommodate them by side-issues to the new faith, in which these
elements had no such natural place as in the older creeds. Not only did
sacred places arise at the graves or places of martyrdom of the saints;
not only was worship performed beside the bones of the holy dead, in the
catacombs and elsewhere; but even a mode of sacrifice and of sacrificial
communion was invented in the mass,--a somewhat artificial development
from the possibly unsacerdotal Agape-feasts of the primitive Christians.
Gradually, churches gathered around the relics of the martyr saints: and
in time it became a principle of usage that every church must contain
an altar--made of stones on the analogy of the old sacred stones;
containing the bones or other relics of a saint, like all earlier
shrines; consecrated by the pouring on of oil after the antique fashion;
and devoted to the celebration of the sacrifice of the mass,
which became by degrees more and more expiatory and sacerdotal in
{013}character. As the saints increased in importance, new holy places
sprang up around their bodies; and some of these holy places, containing
their tombs, became centres of pilgrimage for the most distant parts of
Christendom; as did also in particular the empty tomb of Christ himself,
the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem.

The growth of the priesthood kept pace with the growth of ceremonial in
general, till at last it culminated in the mediaeval papacy, with its
hierarchy of cardinals, archbishops, bishops, priests, and other
endless functionaries. Vestments, incense, and like accompaniments of
sacerdotalism also rapidly gained ground. All this, too, is a common
trait of higher religious evolution everywhere. So likewise are fasting,
vigils, and the ecstatic condition. But asceticism, monasticism,
celibacy, and other forms of morbid abstinence are peculiarly rife in
the east, and found their highest expression in the life of the Syrian
and Egyptian hermits.

Lastly, a few words must be devoted in passing to the rise and
development of the Sacred Books, now excessively venerated in
North-western Christendom. These consisted in the first instance
of genuine or spurious letters of the apostles to the various local
churches (the so-called Epistles), some of which would no doubt be
preserved with considerable reverence; and later of lives or legends of
Jesus and his immediate successors (the so-called Gospels and the Acts
of the Apostles). Furthermore, as Christianity adopted from Judaism
the cult of its one supreme divine figure, now no longer envisaged
as Jahweh, the national deity of the Hebrews, but as a universal
cosmopolitan God and Father, it followed naturally that the sacred books
of the Jewish people, the literature of Jahweh-worship, should also
receive considerable attention at the hands of the new priesthood. By a
gradual process of selection and elimination, the canon of scripture
was evolved from these heterogeneous materials: the historical or
quasi-historical and prophetic Hebrew {014}tracts were adopted by the
Church, with a few additions of later date, such as the Book of Daniel,
under the style and title of the Old Testament. The more generally
accepted lives of Christ, again, known as Evangels or Gospels; the Acts
of the Apostles; the epistles to the churches; and that curious mystical
allegory of the Neronian persecution known as the Apocalypse, were
chosen out of the mass of early Christian literature to form the
authoritative collection of inspired writing which we call the New
Testament. The importance of this heterogeneous anthology of works
belonging to all ages and systems, but confounded together in popular
fancy under the name of the Books, or more recently still as a singular
noun, the Bible, grew apace with the growth of the Church: though the
extreme and superstitions adoration of their mere verbal contents has
only been reached in the debased and reactionary forms of Christianity
followed at the present day by our half-educated English and American
Protestant dissenters.

From this very brief review of the most essential factors in the
development of the Christian religion as a system, strung loosely
together with a single eye to the requirements of our present
investigation, it will be obvious at once to every intelligent reader
that Christianity cannot possibly throw for us any direct or immediate
light on the problem of the evolution of the idea of God. Not only
did the concept of a god and gods exist full-fledged long before
Christianity took its rise at all, but also the purely monotheistic
conception of a single supreme God, the creator and upholder of all
things, had been reached in all its sublime simplicity by the Jewish
teachers centuries before the birth of the man Jesus. Christianity
borrowed from Judaism this magnificent concept, and, humanly speaking,
proceeded to spoil it by its addition of the Son and the Holy Ghost, who
mar the complete unity of the grand Hebrew ideal. Even outside Judaism,
the selfsame notion had already been arrived at in a certain mystical
{015}form as the “esoteric doctrine” of the Egyptian priesthood;
from whom, with their peculiar views as to emanations and Triads, the
Christian dogmas of the Trinity, the Logos, the Incarnation, and the
Holy Ghost were in large part borrowed. The Jews of Alexandria, that
eastern London, formed the connecting link between Egyptian
heathenism, Hellenic philosophy, and early Christianity; and their
half-philosophical, half-religious ideas may be found permeating the
first writings and the first systematic thought of the nascent church.
In none of these ways, therefore, can we regard Christianity as
affording us any direct or immediate guidance in our search for the
origin and evolution of the concepts of many gods, and of one God the
creator.

Still, in a certain secondary and illustrative sense, I think we are
fully justified in saying that the history of Christianity, the religion
whose beginnings are most surely known to us, forms a standard of
reference for all the other religions of the world, and helps us
indirectly to understand and explain the origin and evolution of these
deepest among our fundamental spiritual conceptions.

Its value in this respect may best be understood if I point out briefly
in two contrasted statements the points in which it may and the points
in which it may not be fairly accepted as a typical religion.

Let us begin first with the points in which it may.

In the first place, Christianity is thoroughly typical in the fact that
beyond all doubt its most central divine figure was at first, by common
consent of orthodox and heterodox alike, nothing other than a particular
Deified Man. All else that has been asserted about this particular
Man--that he was the Son of God, that he was the incarnation of the
Logos, that he existed previously from all eternity, that he sits now on
the right hand of the Father--all the rest of these theological stories
do nothing in any way to obscure the plain and universally admitted
historical fact that this Divine Person, the Very God of Very God, being
of one {016}substance with the Father, begotten of the Father before all
worlds, was yet, at the moment when we first catch a glimpse of him
in the writings of his followers, a Man recently deceased, respected,
reverenced, and perhaps worshipped by a little group of fellow-peasants
who had once known him as Jesus, the son of the carpenter. On that
unassailable Rock of solid historical fact we may well be content to
found our argument in this volume. Here at least nobody can accuse us
of “crude and gross Euhemerism.” Or rather the crude and gross
Euhemerism is here known to represent the solid truth. Jesus and his
saints--Dominic, Francis, Catherine of Siena--are no mere verbal myths,
no allegorical concepts, no personifications of the Sun, the Dawn, the
Storm-cloud. Leaving aside for the present from our purview of the Faith
that one element of the older supreme God--the Hebrew Jahweh,--whom
Christianity borrowed from the earlier Jewish religion, we can say at
least with perfect certainty that every single member of the Christian
pantheon--Jesus, the Madonna, St. John Baptist, St. Peter, the Apostles,
the Evangelists--were, just as much as San Carlo Borromeo or St. Thomas
of Canterbury or St. Theresa, Dead Men or Women, worshipped after their
death with divine or quasi-divine honours. In this the best-known of
all human religions, the one that has grown up under the full eye of
history, the one whose gods and saints are most distinctly traceable,
every object of worship, save only the single early and as yet
unresolved deity of the Hebrew cult, whose origin is lost for us in the
mist of ages, turns out on enquiry to be indeed a purely Euhemeristic
god or saint,--in ultimate analysis, a Real Man or Woman.

That point alone I hold to be of cardinal importance, and of immense or
almost inestimable illustrative value, in seeking for the origin of the
idea of a god in earlier epochs.

In the second place, Christianity is thoroughly typical in all that
concerns its subsequent course of evolution; the gradual {017}elevation
of its central Venerated Man into a God of the highest might and
power; the multiplication of secondary deities or saints by worship or
adoration of other Dead Men and Women; the growth of a graduated and
duly subordinated hierarchy of divine personages; the rise of a legend,
with its miracles and other supernatural adjuncts; the formation of a
definite theology, philosophy, and systematic dogmatism; the development
of special artistic forms, and the growth or adoption of appropriate
symbolism; the production of sacred books, rituals, and formularies;
the rise of ceremonies, mysteries, initiations, and sacraments; the
reverence paid to relics, sacred sites, tombs, and dead bodies; and the
close connexion of the religion as a whole with the ideas of death,
the soul, the ghost, the spirit, the resurrection of the body, the last
judgment, hell, heaven, the life everlasting, and all the other vast
group of concepts which surround the simple fact of death in the
primitive human mind generally.

Now, in the second place, let us look wherein Christianity to a certain
small extent fails to be typical, or at least to solve our fundamental
problems.

It fails to be typical because it borrows largely a whole ready-made
theology, and above all a single supreme God, from a pre-existent
religion. In so far as it takes certain minor features from other cults,
we can hardly say with truth that it does not represent the average run
of religious systems; for almost every particular new creed so bases
itself upon elements of still earlier faiths; and it is perhaps
impossible for us at the present day to get back to anything like a
really primitive or original form of cult. But Christianity is very far
removed indeed from all primitive cults in that it accepts ready-made
the monotheistic conception, the high-water-mark, so to speak, of
religious philosophising. While in the frankness with which it exhibits
to us what is practically one half of its supreme deity as a Galilean
peasant of undoubted humanity, subsequently deified and etherealised,
it allows us to get down at a single {018}step to the very origin of
godhead; yet in the strength with which it asserts for the other half
of its supreme deity (the Father, with his shadowy satellite the Holy
Ghost) an immemorial antiquity and a complete severance from human life,
it is the least anthropomorphic and the most abstract of creeds. In
order to track the idea of God to its very source, then, we must apply
in the last resort to this unresolved element of Christianity--the
Hebrew Jahweh--the same sort of treatment which we apply to the
conception of Jesus or Buddha;--we must show it to be also the
immensely transfigured and magnified ghost of a Human Being; in the
simple and forcible language of Swinburne, “The shade cast by the soul
of man.”

Furthermore, Christianity fails to be typical in that it borrows also
from pre-existing religions to a great extent the ideas of priesthood,
sacrifice, the temple, the altar, which, owing to the curious
disappearance or at least un-recognisability of the body of its founder
(or, rather, its central object of worship), have a less natural place
in our Christian system than in any other known form of religious
practice. It is quite true that magnificent churches, a highly-evolved
sacerdotalism, the sacrifice of the mass, the altar, and the
relics, have all been imported in their fullest shape into developed
Christianity, especially in its central or Roman form. But every one
of these things is partly borrowed, almost as a survival or even as
an alien feature, from earlier religions, and partly grew up about the
secondary worship of saints and martyrs, their bones, their tombs, their
catacombs, and their reliquaries. Christianity itself, particularly when
viewed as the worship of Christ (to which it has been largely reduced in
Teutonic Europe), does not so naturally lend itself to these secondary
ceremonies; and in those debased schismatic forms of the Church which
confine themselves most strictly to the worship of Jesus and of the
supreme God, sacerdotalism and sacramentalism have been brought down to
a minimum, {019}so that the temple and the altar have lost the greater
part of their sacrificial importance.

I propose, then, in subsequent chapters, to trace the growth of the
idea of a God from the most primitive origins to the most highly evolved
forms; beginning with the ghost, and the early undeveloped deity:
continuing through polytheism to the rise of monotheism; and then
returning at last once more to the full Christian conception, which we
shall understand far better in detail after we have explained the nature
of the yet unresolved or but provisionally resolved Jehovistic element.
I shall try to show, in short, the evolution of God, by starting with
the evolution of gods in general, and coming down by gradual stages
through various races to the evolution of the Hebrew, Christian, and
Moslem God in particular. &lsquo;And the goal towards which I shall move will
be the one already foreshadowed in this introductory chapter,--the proof
that in its origin the concept of a god is nothing more than that of
a Dead Man, regarded as a still surviving ghost or spirit, and endowed
with increased or supernatural powers, and qualities.




